L2131 E560_14 99864015 116233
The Legall Fundamentall LIBERTIES OF THE PEOPLE of ENGLAND Revived, Asserted, and Vindicated. OR, An EPISTLE written the eighth day of June 1649, by Lieut. Colonel JOHN LILBƲRN (Arbitrary and Aristocratical prisoner in the Tower of London) to Mr. William Lenthall Speaker to the remainder of those few Knights, Ci∣tizens, and Burgesses that Col. Thomas Pride at his late purge thought convenient to leave sitting at Westminster (as most fit for his and his Masters designes, to serve their ambitious and tyrannical ends, to destroy the good old Laws, Liberties and Cu∣stoms of England, the badges of our freedom, (as the Declaration against the King, of the 7 of March 1648, pag. 23. calls them) and by force of arms to rob the peo∣ple of their lives, estates and properties, and subject them to perfect vassalage and sla∣very, as he cleerly evinceth in his present Case &c. they have done) who (and in truth no otherwise) pretendedly stile themselves (the Conservators of the peace of England, or) the Parliament of England, intrusted and authorised by the consent of all the people thereof, whose Representatives by election. (in their Declaration last mentio∣ned, pag. 27. they say) they are; although they are never able to produce one bit of a Law, or any piece of a Commission to prove, that all the people of England, or one quarter, tenth, hundred, or thousand part of them authorised Thomas Pride, with his Regiment of Souldiers, to chuse them a Parliament, as indeed he hath de facto done by this pretended mock-Parliament: And therefore it cannot properly be called the Nations or Peoples Parliament, but Col. Pride's and his associates, whose really it is; who, although they have beheaded the King for a Tyrant, yet walk in his oppres∣singest steps, if not worse and higher. JOHN 7. 51. Doth our Law judge any men, before it hear him, and know what he doth? ACTS 24. 23. And he commanded a Centurion to keep Paul, and to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister, or come unto him, (although in ver. 5. he was accused for a most pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition throughout all the world.) ACTS 25. 27. For it seemeth to me unreasonable (saith the heathen Judge) to send a pri∣soner, and not withall to signifie the crimes laid against him. ACTS 28. 30. And Paul (IN HIS IMPRISONMENT AT ROME UN∣DER THE HEATHEN PERSECUTORS) dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him. LONDON, Printed in the grand yeer of hypocriticall and abominable dissimulation. 1649.
SIR, FOr distinction sake, I will  stile you Mr. SPEAKER, although it be but to Col. Pride's  Parliament, sit∣ting at Westminster, (not the Nation's, for they never gave him Authority to issue out Writs, elect or constitute a Par∣liament for them) and you being their mouth, I could not think of any man to whom I could better direct my Lines at  (in my grt Oppressions by You and your Lord and Master CROMVVEL) then your self: And therefore cannot now chuse but put you in minde, That the 4th. April, 1648. when I was like unjustly to be destroyed by Mr. Oliver Cromwell in my late unjust and tyrannicall Impri∣sonment in the Tower; I writ you a large Epistle, and stiled it in print, The prisoners Plea for a Habeas corpus; in the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 pages of which, I positively accuse Mr. Oliver Cromwell for a wilfull murderer, and desire you there to acquaint your House therewith (who then had some little face of a Parliament stamp upon it) and, That I would engage upon my life to prove him to be so by Law: You your selves in your Declaration of the 4th. March, 1647. in answer to the Scotch-Commissioners Papers Declare p. 5. 16. that the subduing the enemies forces in the Nation, (which then were, as you there say, wholly subdued & suppressed) though the Parliament keep up an Army, in a time of peace, when all the ordinary Courts of Justice were open, where only and alone, all Law and Justice ought to be dispensed to all Englishmen in all cases whatsoever, yea, even to Soldiers as well as others; as in the aforesaid pages, and in Mr. Overtons and My printed Epistle to the Generall (in Mr. Lockiers behalf) of the 27 April, 1649. is by Law undeniably proved; which Epistle you may read at the last end of the second Edi∣tion of my Pictur of the  to of State: And yet about or upon the 15 Nov. 1647. your Wre in Hertford-shire, He,  wilfully and ofet-malice murdered Rich. Arnell, a freeborn Englishman; and so shed the bloud of War in the time of Peace, which was Joabs case in reference to Abner and Amasa, 2 Sam. 3. 27. and 20. 10. of whom when David delivered his charge to his son Salomon, he saith thus, Moreover, thou knewest also what Joab the son of Zervich did to me, and what he did to the two Captains of the best of Israel,  Abner the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of Jother, whom he slew, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle that was about his loins; and in his shos that were on his feet: Doe therefore (saith he) recording to thy wisdom, and he not his bory head get down to the grave in peace, 1 Kings 2. 5, 6. which charge he accordingly performed; and so deli∣vered himself and his Fathers house from the guilt of innocent blood, ver. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. And you may also remember that upon the 19 of Jan. 1647, at your Barr I openly delivered a formal charge or impeachment of high Treason (according to your own Ordinances) against the foresaid Mr. Oliver Cromwell, and his sub∣til machevilian son-in-Law Mr. Henry Iveton, for their notorious doing that in reference to the King; for but the petty acting of which in comparison to theirs, they impeached Mr. Denzill Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, &c. of high Treason, (as appeareth in their own Book of Declarations, pag. 81, 82. Article 2 & 3.) and forcibly expunged them your House as Traytors therefore. And in the foresaid pages of my plea for a Habeas Corp, I truly acquaint you with the plot and design, Master Cromwell laid to take away my life, for but a little opposition to the King, whose professed and avowed  he and his
The PLEA it self thus followeth. May it please this Honourable Committee, I Was commanded by you, upon Tuesday the 13 day of this present June 1648, to bring in an Answer this day to the Petition and complaint of Henry Wollastone Kepeer of the prison of Newgate, in which Petition he complains that I have brought an action at the common Law against him, for detaining me in safe custody according to his duty, by vertue of a Warrant from the House of Lords; and therefore prayes indemnity for his acting therein in obedience to the Authority of Parliament, and his trebble damages, and that at common Law there may be no further proceedings in the said Action. And being demanded by the then Chairman of this Committee whether I had caused such an Action to be commenced, yea or no, I positively declared, I had, and that I had very good ground in Law so to do, considering that the Law of England (which is my Birth-right and Inheritance) requires, That I shall not be deprived of my Liberty but by due processe of Law, ac∣cording to the Laws of the Land; and that if any shall detain my body in prison without legall Authority, he is liable in Law to make me satisfaction therefore: but Mr. Wollastone had kept me in prison divers weeks by vertue of a pretended Warrant of the single House of Lords, who in Law, I will main∣tain it, have not the least power in the World to commit my body to prison: yet they did (upon the tenth day of June 1646, laying no crime to my charge) command me to be kept for all my short eternity in this world; for the Warrant is, during their pleasures: and then by another illegall Warrant, within fourteen dayes after, dated the 23 of June 1646, they (for no cause in the world) commit me close prisoner, and command that I be not permitted to have pen, ink nor paper, and that none shall have acceffe unto me in any kinde, but onely my Keeper, untill the Lords otherwise please. Which most illegall Warrant Mr. Wollastone executed upon me with a great deal of se∣veritie and barbarism, not permitting my Wife to come into the prison yard to speak with me at a distance out of my grates, nor suffering me to receive either meat, drink, or money, or any other necessaries from the hands of my
Wife, servant, or friends, nor suffering me to see their faces when they sent me in my diet: All which usages are against the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom; and therefore I have cause and ground enough in Law, to seek for my remedy in Law against the said Mr. Wollastone; and I hope the Mem∣bers of this Committee have taken too many Oaths to maintain the fundamen∣tall Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the People, then now to go about to deprive me of the benefit of them. It is true, you sit here by verue of an Ordinance of both Houses, to in∣demnifie all those that have acted or done, or commanded to be acted ordone, any thing by sea or land, by the Authority, or for the service or benefit of this present Parliament: But under the favour of this Committee, I do conceive, That the said Ordinance, which is your Commission, doth not in the least authorise you to meddle with my present case; forasmuch as I do not prose∣cute Mr. Wollastone for actions done by the Command and Authority of Par∣liament, but for actions done directly against their Authority publickly de∣clared in the Laws of the Kingdom, and their own Declarations: and I hope this Committee will not so much undervalue their own House, as to adjudge the House of Lords singly to be the Parliament of England, nor their single Order to be the Parliaments Authority of England: and if not, then I cleerly conceive, that upon your own principles, you have nothing to do with my bu∣siness before you; neither can I conceive, that you can in the least judge Mr. Wollaston's illegal and barbarous actions done upon me, to be for the service and benefit of the Parliament, but rather the quite contrary, by rendering them odious and adominable in the eyes of the people, if they shall  such tyrannicall doings, after they have taken so many Oathes  the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and caused so much English bloud to be shed pretendedly therefore. Whereupon, after a little debate amongst the members of this Committee by themselves, my L. Munson the Chairman thereof was pleased to tell me, then the business was weighty, and did concern the Priviledges of the Lords Houses; and therefore they judged it convenient to put it off till this day, and to acquaint the Lords with it, that so, if they pleased, some of them might here be present: and you also ordered me to fit my self with a formall Answer to the Petition, which accordingly I have done, and with the favour of this Committee, gi∣ving me free leave to speak, I am ready to deliver unto you, and do deliver it unto you thus. My Lord, I read in the Statutes of 4. Edw. 3. ch. 4. and 36. Edw. 3 ch. 10. and in the tyrannical Act made this Parliament 16 C. R. and in the 4 part Cooks Instit. fol. 9 11. 37. 38. 39. 41. 42. and 1 part Book Decl. pag. 701, 702. that Par∣liaments are principally called for the maintenance of the Laws, and for the re∣dresse of divers mischiefs and grievances that daily happen; and sutable to this are the ends contained in the Writs that summon them, and the intentions of those that chuse the Members and send them. And if Parliaments be principally called for the maintenance of the Laws, and redresse of mischiefs and grievances, then not for the destruction of the Laws, not for the increase of mischiefs and grievances. And therefore when this present Parliament in the dayes of their verginity and primitive puritie, in their Actions, Declarations, and Remonstrances expressed much zeal,
for accomplishing of those ends for which they were trusted in providing for the safety of the Kingdom, and peace of the people, which you call God to witness is your only aime, protesting in the presence of the all seeing deity, that the foresaid ends is the only end of all your counsels and indeavours, wherein you are resolved to continue freed, and inlarged from all private aims, personall respects or passions whatsoever, and persevere in the vigorous inde∣voring to preserve the Laws and Liberties of this Land, though you should pe∣rish in the work, 1 Part. Book Dec. pag. 172, 195, 214, 281, 342, 464, 494, 497 498, 663, 666, 673, 750. calling upon God, that sees your innocency; and that you have no aims but at his glory & the publick good for protection in your straits; I say yet notwitstanding all this, the King to make you odious, and to be de∣serted of the people, in several of his Declarations Declares that all these were but guilded dissimulations, it being your reall intentions to destroy Liberty and property, meum and mum, and to subvert the Lawes and introduce new forms of arbitrary government, and to introduce Anarchy, a paritie and confu∣on by levelling of all degrees & conditions, and to monopolise into your hands all the rich and great places in the Kingdom, for your own particular advantage and profit; and to get such a power into your hands, as thereby to enable you inevitably to destroy all that opposed you; and that the maintenance and ad∣vancement of Religion, Justice, Liberty, Propertie, and peace, are really but your stalking horses, and neither the grounds of the war, nor of your demands; and that for all your fair pretences to the people, you will extirpate the Law, root, and branch, alter the whole frame of Government, and leave not any thing like Law, Liberty or Property, introduce Democracy and Parity, and leave nether King, nor Gentlemen; and so the people will too late discover all this to their costs, that they have undone themselves with too much discretion, and obtained nothing by their compliance with you, and adherence to you, but to be destroyed last, 1 part Book Declar. pag. 284, 285, 298, 316, 320, 334, 378, 514, 515 520, 521, 530, 539, 543, 550, 558. 2 Part, pag. 100, 102, 112, 113, 117. In answer unto all which, to disprove what he saith, and keep up your re∣reputations amongst the people for a company of honest men, that really sought their good, and always intended to be as good as their words, promises, and engagements, in your declarations of the 19 of May 1642. 1 Part, Book Decl. Pag 207. you repeat your votes, against which the King excepts, the weight of which lieth in these words: That the Kingdom hath been of late, and still is in so eminent danger, both from enemies abroad, and a popish discontented party at home; that there is an urgent and an inevitable necessity, for puting the Kingdom into a posture of defence, for the safegard thereof; and that in this case of extreme danger, and his Majesties refusall, the Ordinance of Parliament agreed upon by both Houses for the Militia, doth oblige the peo∣ple, and ought to be obeyed, by the fundamentall Lawes of this Kingdom. By all which (say you) it doth appear, That there is no colour of this tax, that we go about to introduce a new Law; much less to exercise an Arbi∣trary power, but indeed to prevent it; for this Law (say you) is as old as the Kingdom, That the Kingdom must not be without a means to preserve it self and in the conclusion of the same Decl. Pag. 214. speaking of the many difficulties you grapple with, the many hazards you undergo in your places, you conclude thus, yet we doubt not but we shall overcome all this at last, if
the people suffer not themselves to be deluded with falfe and specious shewes, and so drawn to betray us to their own undoing, who have ever been willing to hazard the undoing of our selves, that they might not be betrayed by our neg∣lect of the trust reposed in us; but if it were possible the Kings party should prevail, herein yet (say you) we would not fall, through Gods grace still to persist in our duties, and to look beyond our own lives, estates and advan∣tages, as those who think nothing worth the enjoying without the libertie, peace, and fafety of the Kingdom; nor any thing too good to be hazarded in discharge of our consciences, for the obtaining of it; and shall always repose our selves upon the protection of the Almighty, which we are confident shall never be wanting to us (while we seek his glory.) And in your Declaration of the 26 of May 1642, which is an answer to the Kings Declaration of the 4 of May, a out the business of Hull, in the 1 Part Decl. pag. 263. speaking of the new engine of the Malignant party about the King, to beget and increase distrust, and disaffection between the King, the Parliament, and the People; We cannot (say you) be so much wanting to our own innocency, or to the duty of our trust, as not to clear our selves from those false aspersions, and (which is our chiefest care) to disabuse the peoples minds, and open their eyes that under the false shews and pretexts of the Laws of the Land, (frequently inter∣woven in his Majesties foresaid Declaration) and of their own Rights and Li∣berties, they may not be carried into the road-way that leadeth to the utter ruine and subversion thereof, and to destroy them both with their own hands, by taking their Lives, Liberties, and Estates out of their hands whom they have chosen and entrusted therewith, and resigning them up unto some evil Counsellors about his Majestie, who can lay no other foundation of their own greatness, but upon the ruine of this Parliament; and in it of all other Parliaments, and in them of the freedom of this Nation: And these are the men that would perswade the people that both Houses of Parliament contain∣ing all the Peers, & representing all the Commons of England, would destroy the Lawes of the Land, and Liberties of the People; wherein besides the trust of the whole, they themselves in their own particulars have so great an interest of honour and estate, that we hope it will gain little credit with any that have the least use of reason, that such as must have so great a share in the misery, should take so much paines in the procuring thereof, and spend so much time and run so many hazards to make themselves slaves, and to destroy the property of their estates. But remarkable are your words in the same De∣claration pag. 267. where you say, You have given no occasion to his Majestie to declare his resolution with so much earnestness, that he will not suffer ei∣ther or both Houses by their votes without or against his consent to injoyn a∣ny thing that is forbidden by the Law, or to forbid any thing that is injoyned by the Law; for our votes (say you) have done no such thing, and as we shall be very tender of the Law (which we acknowledg to be the safegard and custo∣dy of all publick and private interests, &c.) And in the same declaration having argued it soundly against the King, for the calumniations and aspersions call upon you as you are pleased to call them in; p. 270. you have these words, All this considered, we cannot but wonder, that the contrivers of the aforesaid message, should conceive the people of this land to be so void of common-sence,
as to enter into so deep a mistrust of those that they have, and his Majestie ought to repose so great a trust in, as to dispair of any security in their private estates, by dissents, purchases, assurances, or conveyances, unless his Ma∣jestie should by his vote, prevent the prejudice they might receive therein by the votes of both Houses of Parliament, as if they who are especially chosen and intrusted for that purpose, and who themselves must needs have so great a share in all grievances of the Subject, had wholy cast off the care of the Subjects good, and his Majestie had soly taken it up. And in your most notablest of Declarations, made about Agust 1642. 1 Part Book Decl. pag. 491. wherein you indeavour to give an account to the world of the justice of your proceedings, in being necessitated to take up armes against his Majesty, who you say was then in armes against you and the Kingdom, for the suppression of the Lawes and Liberties thereof; which you say every honest man is bound to defend, especially those that have taken the late Protestation, in which Declaration you declare, that the long designe which hath been carried on to alter the frame and constitution of the Govern∣ment of the Kingdom, from Law and Liberty, to slavery and vassaladge, is now come to ripeness; there you go on to declare an Epitome of the Kings dealings with the Kingdom before this Parliament; in which time you say the Lawes were no defence nor protection of any mans right; all was subject to will and power, which imposed what payment they thought fit, to drain the Subjects purse of, and supply those necessities which ill councels had brought upon the King, or gratifie such as were instruments in promoting those ille∣gall and oppresive courses. They who yeelded and complyed, were counte∣nanced and advanced, all others disgraced and kept under, that so mens mindes made poor and base, and their Liberties lost and gone, they might be ready to let go their Religion, whensoever they should be resolved to alter it; and then ennumerate divers strange actions of his done to the Kingdom since this Parliament; and in pag. 494. you declare, that after his ill councel had got him from the Parliament, then they doc work upon him and upon the Queen, and perswade her to retire out of the Kingdom, and carry him fur∣ther and further from the Parliament, and so possess him with a hatred of it, that they cannot put words bitter enough into his mouth, to express upon all occasions; they make him cross oppose and envy upon all the proceedings of Parliament, incourage and protect all those that will affront it, take away all power and authority from it to make it contemptible, and of less esteem then the meanest Court, draw away the members, commanding them to come to him to York, and insteed of discharging their duty in the service of the Parli∣ament, to contribute their advice, and assistance to the destruction of it. in∣deavouring an arbitrary Government, a thing (say you) which every honest Morall man abhors; much more the Wisdom, Justice, and Piety of the two Houses of Parliament; and in truth such a charge as no rational man can beleeve is, it being unpossible so ma∣ny several persons at the Houses of, Parliament consist of about 600; and in ei∣ther House all of equall power, should all of them, or at least the major part, agree in Acts of will and Tyranny, which makes up an arbitrary Government; and most improbable that the Nobility and chief Gentry of this Kingdom, should conspire to take away the Law by which they injoy their estates, are protected
from any act of violence and power, and differenced from the meanest sort of people, with whom otherwise they would be but fellow servants; so having given an answer to his charges laid upon you in pag. 496. you vehemently pree the people to come in to the help of the Parliament (against the Kings forces) And save themselves their Laws and Liberties, and though both they and we (say you) must perish, yet have we discharged our consciences, and delivered our soules, and will look for a reward in heaven; should we be so ill required upon earth, as to be deserted by the people, whom in the next page you tell, nothing will satisfie the King and those evill men with him, but the destructi∣on of this Parliament, and to be Masters of Religion and Liberties, to make us Slaves, and alter the Government of this Kindom, and reduce it to the condition of some other Countryes which are not governed by Parliaments, and so by Laws, but by the will of the Prince, or rather of those who are about him; And thersore in the zeal of your Spirits, you declare your resolved resolutions to continue firme to maintain the Laws and Liberties of your Country, according to your duty; saying, Woe be to us if we do it not, at least doe our utmost endeavours for the discharge of our duties, and the saving of our souls, and leave the successe to God Almighty; and you conclude with these words; and therefore we do here require all who have any sence of piety, honour, or compession, to help 2 distressed State, and to come in to our aid and assistance. And in your reply to the Kings Answer of yours, of 26 May 1642. 1 par. Book Declar. pag. 693. you declare with indignation your abhorrance of the Kings charging you by your votes to dispose of the peoples lives, liberties and estates,  to the Law of the Land, & throw back the Charge upon himself and those that are about him. And in the next page you say thus; and for that concerning our inclination to be slaves it is affirmed, that his Majestie said nothing that might imply any such inclination in us, but sure, what ever be ovr inclination, slavery would be our con∣dition, if we should go aboue to overthrow the Laws of the Land, and the propritey of every mans estate, and the liberty of his person; for therein we must needs be as much Patients as Agents, and must every one in his turn suffer our selves, what ever we should impose upon others as in nothing we have laid upon other we haue ever refused to do or suffer our selves, and that in a high proportion And then when you come in the next page to speake of the Kings, charging of you that you afect to be Tyrants, because you will admit no rule to Govern by but your own wills, yea worse then those thirty most perfect Tyrants of Athens, spoken of by Sir Walter Rawley in his third Book of the History of the world, Chap. Sect. 2. you abhor the charge with the height of detestation, and therefore in the next page unto it, being page 696 you say We do still ac∣knowledg that it were a very great crime in us, if we had or should do any thing whereby the title and interest of all the Subjects to their lands were de∣stroyed; which I say of necessitie must be, if they be deprived of the benefit of the Law, which is all I crave at your hands, and which I hope you will not deny me; especially considering in your Declaration of the 10 of June 1642, 1 par. Book Decla. pag. 342, for bringing in mony and plate, you positively declare, that whatsoever is brought in, shall not at all be imployed about any other occasion, then to the purposes aforesaid, which amongst others, are principally for destroying Tyranny, maintaining of Liberty and Propriety,
the free Course of Justice according to the known Laws of the Land; but Propriety cannot be maintained, if Liberty be destroyed; for the Liberty of my Person is more neerer to me then my Propriety, or goods; and he that contrary to Law and Justice, robs or deprives me of the Liberty of my Person, the nighest to me, may much more by the some reason, rob and deprive me at his will and pleasure of my goods and estate, the further of from me, and so Propriety is overthrowne and destroyed; and this if done avowedly by you, is distructive to your honours and engagements; yea, & in an absolute violation of all your Oaths and Promises; whereby you will be rendred, by your own actions, in the eyes of the people that trusted you, the basest and worst of men, fit for nothing but desertion, opposition and distruction; Again how can Law be maintained, when the free execution of Justice in the ordinary course thereof shall be hin∣dered by you? which you in your Declaration 23 of October 1642. 1 par. Book. Declar pag. 656) call the soule and life of all-Laws, which ordinary course of Jestice, you in your first Remonstrance page 7 call the common birth-right of the Subject of England; And therefore 1 par. Book Decl. pag. 660 you own it as your duty, to use the best of your endeavours that the meanest of the Commonalty may enjoy their own birth-right, freedom and liberty of the Lawes of the Land, being equally intitled thereunto with the greatest subject; and if so? how can you in justice and honour or conscience, deprive and ebe∣reave me of my birth right? the benefit of the Law of the Land, in the ordi∣nary course of Justice in the Judicatures thereof? who have done no actrons either by Sea or Land, but what doth become an honest, true-bred English∣man and constantly in the midst of many deaths, maintaining the Laws i and Liberties of my Native Country, which actions are consonant to the Authori∣ty of Parliament, and for the service and benefit thereof; and therfore I ought not to be molested and troubled therefore; especially by you, who in your De∣clarations in the case of the Five Members, declare 1 par. Boo. Decl. pa. 39. you are very sensible that it equally imports you, aswell to see Justice done against them that are criminous, as to defend the just rights and Liberties of the Sub∣jects and Parliament of England; but if you shall stop my proceedings at Com∣mon Law against Master Wollaston the Jaylour of Newgate, for keeping me there against Law by the Lords Order, You are so far from punishing the crimi∣nous, that you justifie the wicked, and condemn the righteous, break all your Oaths, Protestations and Covenants, that you have taken to maintain the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and dissolve the whole frame and constituti∣on of the Civill Policy and Government of this Kingdom into the originall Law of Nature, which crime you taxe the King with, 1 par. Book. Decl. pag. 690. yea, and thereby become destructive to the being of the Common∣wealth, and the safety of the people, the preservation of which is the chief end of the Law, the institution of all Government, as you declare in your Declara∣tions of the 6 of May 1643 & 17 April 1647. 2 part. Book. Decla. fol. 95. 879. For the Illustration of which I desire to observe this Method. First. I averre that the House of Lords have not the Least Jurisdiction in the world over me in the case in controversie betwixt us; and I am ready upon my life to make this good by the Laws of the Kingdom against all the Judges and Lawyers in England; but I conceive, I have already so fully done it in my
three pleas against the Lords, that they are unanswerable, viz. First in my Plea before the Committee of the House of Commons, where Master Henry Martin had the Chaire 6 Novemb. 1646. And Secondly in my Plea the 20 of October 1647. before another Committee of the House of Commons, where M. Iohn Maynard had the Chaire; And Thirdly, in my Plea before the Judges of the Kings Bench, the 8 of May 1648. all three of which I desire to com¦municate unto your consideration. And if the Lords by Law have no originall Jurisdiction over me, then no power to summon me, nor no power to try me nor commit me; Wherefore M. Wollaston by Law ought to have refused to have received my body, or de∣tained it in prison, by vertue of their illegall warrant, which being both illegall in the power that made it, & in the forme of drawing it up, he is liable to make me satisfaction in Law for executing it, which at present I illustrate out of your own Declarations, which are the most unanswerable arguments against you that I can use, Acts 17 26. Titus 1. 12. And first in your Declaration of the 17 of January 1641. 1 par. Book. Decl. pag. 38. 39. where speaking of the Five Members, you say his Majestic did is∣sue forth severall warrants to divers Officers, under his own hand for the ap∣prehension of the persons of the said Members, which by Law he cannot do, there being not all this time any legall charge or accusation, or due pro∣cesse of Law issued against them, or any pretence of charge made known to the House of Commons; all which are against the Fundamentall Liberties of the Subjects, and the Rights of Parliament; Whereupon we are necessiti∣ted according to our duty to declare, That if any person shall arrest M. Ho, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Master Pym, Master Hamden, Master Strode, or any of them, or any Member of Parliament, by pretence or colour of any warrant issuing out from the King onely, is guilty of the breach of the Liberty of the Subject, and of the Priviledges of Parliament, and a publick enemy to the Common-wealth; and that the arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or any Members of Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a legall proceeding against them, and without consent of that House, whereof such a person is a Member, is against the Libertie of the Subject, and a breach of Priviledge of Parliament: and the person which shall arrest any of these per∣sons, or any other Member of the Parliament, is declared a publick enemy of the Common-wealth. Yea, and upon the 15 of January 1641, you voted and ordered a Charge to be brought in against Mr. Atturney General Herbert, to require of him satisfaction for his great injury and scandal that particularly be had done to the said Mr. Hollis, &c. and generally to the publick Justice of the Kingdom, in so illegally accusing the foresaid five Gentlemen, without due processe of Law, as appears in your first part Book Declarat. pag. 53. And therefore in your Petition of the 2 Feb. 1641. 1 part. Book Decl. 67. you rel the King, It is your duty to tell him of the injustice done unto the five Members, for impeaching them without due processe of Law, and to require reparations for them. And therefore in your second Petition of the same month, 1 par. Book Decl. pag. 76. 77. you tell the King again, notwithstanding all your im∣portunity, the said five Members and the Lord Kimbolton still lie under that heavie charge of Treason, to the exceeding prejudice not onely of themselves,
but also of the whole Parliament. And whereas by the expresse Laws and Statutes of this Realm, that is to say, by two Acts of Parliament, the one made in the 37, and the other in the 38 year of the reign of your most noble Progenitor King Edward the 3 its said, If any person whatsoever make suggestion to the King himself of any souls committed by another, the same person might to be sent with the suggestion before the Chancellor, or Keeper of the great Seal, Treasurer, and the great Councel, there to finde Surery to pursue his suggestion: which if he cannot prove, he is to be imprisoned till he hath satisfied the party accused of his dammages and stan∣der, and made Fine and Ransom to the King: The benefit of these Laws you claim at the Kings hand, and there tell him, he ought not of right and justice to deny it to you. And also in 1 part Book Decl. pag. 101, speaking to the King, you say Your Majesty lays a generall tax upon us; if you will be gra∣ciously pleased to let us know the particulars, we shall give a cleer and satis∣factory Answer: But what hope can we have of ever giving your Majestic sa∣faction, when those particulars which you have been made beleeve were true, yet being produced and made known to us, appeared to be false? and your Majestic notwithstanding will neither punish, nor produce the Authors, but go on to contract new jealousies and fears, upon generall and uncertain grounds, affording us no means or possibilitie of particular answer, to the cleering of our selves. For proof whereof we beseech your Majestic to con∣sider; The heavie charge and accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Mem∣bers of the House of Commons, who refused no Triall or Examination which might stand with the Priviledge of Parliament: yet no Authors, no Witnesses produced, against whom they may have reparation for the great in∣jury and infamy cast upon them, notwithstanding three severall Petitions of both Houses, and the Authority of two Acts of Parliament vouched in the last of those Petitions. And in a fourth Petition about the same business, 1 part Book Decl. pag. 123. We beseech your Majesty (say you) to remember, that the Govern∣ment of this Kingdom, as it was in a great part mannaged by your ministers before the beginning of this Parliament, consisted of many continued and multiplied acts of violation of Laws, the wounds whereof were scarcely beal∣ed, when the extremitie of all those violations was far exceeded by the late strange and unheard of breach of our Laws in the accusation of the Lord Kim∣bolton and the five Members of the Commons House, and in the proceedings thereupon; for which we have yet received no full satisfaction. And in your Declaration of the 19 of May 2642, 1. par. Book Dec. p 200. 201. you are very re∣markable, and fly, The accusation of the L. Kimbolton, and the 5 Members of the House of Cōmons, is called a breach of Priviledge; and truly so it was and a very high one, far above any satisfaction that hath yet been given: How can it be said to be largely satisfied, so long as his Majestic laboured to preserve his Atturney from punishment, who was the visible Actor in it? so long as his Majestic hath not onely justified him, but by his Letter declared, that it was his duty to accuse them, and  he would have punished him if he had not done it; so long as those members have not the means of cleering their inno∣cency, and the authors of that malicious Charge undiscovered, though both
Houses of Parliament have severall times petitioned his Majestie to disco them; and that not onely upon grounds of common Justice, but by Act of Parliament his Majestie is bound to do it; so long as the King great such to passe a Bill for their discharge, alledging, that the Natitive in that Bill i a∣gainst his Honour; whereby he seems still to ow the matter of that false and scandalous Accusation, though he deserts the Prosecution, offering to passe a Bill for their acquital; yet with intimation, that they trust desert the avowing their own innocency, which would more wound them in , that secure them in Law. And in vindication of this great Priviledge of Parliament, we do not  that we have invaded any Priviledge belonging to his Majesty, as is alledged in his Declaration. But we look not upon this onely in the notion of a breach of Priviledge, which might be, though the Accusation were true or false; but under the na∣tion of an hainous crime in the Attourney, and all other Subjects, who had a hand in it, a crime against the Law of Nature, against the Rules of Justice, that innocent men should be charged with so great an offence as Treason, is the face of the highest Judicatory of the Kingdom, whereby their , and estates, their bloud and honour are in danger, without witnesse, without is∣dence, without all possbility of reparation in a legall course; yet a  of such a nature, that his Majesties Command can no more warrant, then it can any other act of injustice. It is true that those things which are evil in the can nature, such as a false testimony, or a false accusation, cannot bothe subject of any Command, or induce any obligation of obedience upon any man, by a∣ny Authority whatsoever; therefore the Attourney in this case was b to refuse to execute such a Command unlesse he had had some such evidence or testimony as might have warranted him against the parties, and  make satisfaction if it should prove false. And further, to prove that  liable to punishment, that puts in execution the Kings illegall Commands, is must excellently proved, and largely evident from your own words in  Book Decl. pag. 259. 260. 276. 279. 280. 721. 722. 723. 727. 803.  largely declare, that Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Ve  Irland, &c. were executed in Richard the Second's time as Traytors, for  in execution the commands of the King against the Law; and if they are pu∣nishable that execute the commands of the King the Primitive, against Law: then much more by Law is Mr. Wollaston punishable for executing the com∣mands of the single House of Lords the Derivative, against Law: and if in my own defence, when I was in Mr. Wollaston's custody, I had served him, for his actions done to me in pursuance of the Lords single illegall commands, 4 Simson of Northampton-shire did Johnson in the 42 of Elizabeth for his doing a∣ctions in pursuance of the Queens Letters Patents, contrary to Law, in en∣deavouring by a Warrant (flowing from the High Commission, which was established by Act of Parliament, and had legall cognizance of any facts in Controversie grounded thereupon) to imprison his body: for doing of which, Simson (in his own defence, and his Liber) slew the said Johnson: For which he was justified by the Judges of Affie, and all the Judges of England, as you may read in Sir Edward Cook 4. part Iustitutes, fol. 333. 334. and in my
Plea before the Judges of the Kings Bench, called The Laws funerall, page 214. 25. I say in case I had in my own defence, and the defence of my legall Liber∣ties slain Wollaston &c. for executing the Lords single illegall Orders upon me for any thing I can read in the Law, he had his mends in his own hands. But to come more close upon your own principles, to prove that a single Order of the Lords cannot stand in competition with the Law, I do it, thus; In all your Declarations you declare, that binding and permanent Laws ac∣cording to the Constitution of this Kingdom, are made by King, Lords, and Commons, and so is the opinion of Sir Ed. Cook whose Books are published by your own Order, and who in the 2 part of his Institutes, fol. 48. 157 and 3 part fol. 22. and 4 part fol. 23. 25. 48. 292. saith that Act that is made by King and Lords, in Law binds not, nor by King and Commons binds not, or by Lords and Commons binds not in Law; if so, then much more invalid is the single Order of the Lords made against Law, and can indemnifie no man that acts by vertue of it, and your Ordinances made this Parlia∣ment in time of extream necessitie, during denounced Wars, are by your selves in abundance of your own Declarations, esteemed, adjudged, declared but temporary and invalid as durable Laws, which is evidently cleer out of the 1 par. Book Decl. p. 93. 102. 112. 142. 143. 150. 171. 173. 179. 207. 208. 267. 277. 303. 305. 382. 697. 705. 709. 727. your expressions in the last page are, we did and doe say that the Soveraign power doth reside in the King and both Houses of Parliament, and that his Majesties Negative voice doth not import a Liberty to deny things as he pleaseth, though never so requisite and necessary for the Kingdom, and yet we did not nor do say, that such bills as his Majestie is so bound both in Conscience and Justice to passe, shall not∣withstanding be law without his consent, so far are we from taking away his Negative voice. And if such Ordinances and Bills as passe both Houses are not Lawes by your own Doctrine, without the Kings Consent; then, much∣lesse can the Order of the single House of Lords be Lawes or supersedeaes to the Lawes; And besides, when divers honest and well-affected Citizens, it may be out of a sensible apprehension of the mischiefs that acrue to the King∣dom by having the Supream authority lodged in three distinct Estates, which many times so falls out, that when two Estates grant things essentially good for the wellfare of the Kingdom, the third Estate opposeth it, and will not passe it, which many  occasions war and bloud-shed, to the hazard of the being of the Kingdom; for the preventing of which, they framed a Petition to your House, Entitling it, To the Supream Authority of this Nation, the Commons as∣sembled in Parliament; in which they intreat you to be careful of the mischief of Negative Voices in any whomsoever; which said Petition your House upon the 20 of May 1647. Voted to be burnt at the Exchange and Westminster by the hands of the Common Hangman, and lately as I am informed, there was a Petition of Master John Mildmans presented to your House, and it was rejected by them, for no other cause, but because it had the foresaid title; and therfore you your selves, having rejected to be stiled the Supream Autho∣rity of this Nation; I can see no ground or reason, how you can upon your own Principles, grant a supersedeas to Master Wollaston to overule my acti∣on at law against him; and so de facto exercise the Supream Authority, which in
words, you would have the Kingdom beleeve you abhorre; neither can I i reason or Justice conceive, that if now you should own your selves for the Su¦pream Authority of the Nation, and the single and absolute Law-Repealers, and Law-Makers thereof, how you can deprive me of the benefit of those just Laws, viz. Magna Charta, Petition of Right, and the Act that abolished the Star-Chamber, that you have not avowedly and particularly declared to be void, null and vacated, as never to be in use any more in England; Again, yet in your Protestation, in your Vote and Covenant, and in your League and Co∣venant, swore to maintain the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom with your estates and lives, and make the Kings Person and Authority but subservient thereunto, or dependant thereupon; And you have been so zealous to make Votes to disfranchise all those that will not take your Covenant, as unfit to bear any Office in the Common-wealth, or to give a Vote to chuse an Offi∣cer, and can it stand with your Justice and Honour to deny me the benefit of that (viz the Law) which you have been so zealous in forcing the People of England to swear to maintain? or can you in Justice and Honor, be angry with me for standing for that (viz.) the Laws and Liberties of England,) which you have ingaged, incited and forced, thousands and ten thousands of the peo∣ple of England, to loose their Lives and Blouds for, which I amongst others have upon zealous and true principles, as hazardously ventured my life for as any man in England? O let such an abominable thing be farre from men of honour, conscience and honesty, and let the fearfull judgments that befell the Hungarians, as it were, from God from heaven for breaking, violating and falling from their faith and Covenant, made with Amurah the Second, the Sixt Emperor of the Turkes Recorded in the Fourth Edition of the Turkes History sol. 267. 269. 273. 277 deterr all Covenant Makers, and Covenant takers from breach of their Oaths, Covenants, and Contracts, the breaking of which is highly detested and abhorred of God as a thing that his soul loathe as he declares in Scripture, as you may read Exo. 20. 7. Lev. 19. 11, 12. Deut. 23. 21, 22, 23. Psal. 15. 4. Eccels. 5. 45. Ezek. 17. 13, 14, 15. 10. 17, 18. . 5. 3, 4 & 8. 16. 17. Yea I say let the fearfull judgements, wrath and ven∣geance Recorded by Sir Walter Rawley in his excellent preface to his history of the World that befell Tyrants and Oppressors, whoafter they had broke their Oaths, Faith, Promises and Lawes made with the People, and then turned Tyrants, deterr you from such practises, but especially the fearfull judgments of God that befel the most execrable thirty Tyrants of Athens, who after the people of that City had set them up for the Conservators of their Laws and Liberties, and who did many things well til they had got power into their own hands which they had no sooner done, but they turned it poin blank against the people, and fell a murthering, robbing, spoyling and destroying the innocent people, and raised a Guard of three or foure thousand men of their own Mercenary faction, whose destruction was fatall by the steeled re∣solution and valour of seventy faithfull and brave Citizens, as you may ad in Sir Walter Rawleys History Lib. 3. Ch. 9. sec. 2 & 3. Yea the Tyranny of Duke d' Alva cost his Master the King of Spaine the revolt of the Hollanders to his un∣imaginable losse. But to returne, did not you and the Lords the other day pass Votes and Communicated them to the Common Councel of Lon∣don
to declare to them and the whole Kingdom, you would continue the Go∣vernment, by King, Lords and Commons? and can it new stand with your Honour and Justice, to goe about to advance a single, illegall Order of the Lords above all the Laws made joyntly by you the Lords and King, and to make Ciphers of your selves and your House as well as of the King? which un∣deniably you do, if you indemnifie Master Wollaston by superseding my action at Common Law against him; Again, have you not in your Declaration of the 15 of June 1647. (in which is contained your Votes, to lay the King aside and make no more applications or addresses unto him) declared to preserve un∣to the people their Laws, and to governe them thereby? sure I am these are your own words, having received an absolute denyall from his Majesty: The Lords and Commons do hold themselves obliged to use their utmost endea∣vous speedily to settle the present Government in such a way as may bring the greatest security to this Kingdom, in the enjoyment of the Laws and Liber∣ties thereof: And can it now stand with your honour and Justice to fall from this and all other your publique Declarations, by denying me the benefit of the Law against Master Wollaston, that unjustly imprisoned me, and Tyranni∣cally and closly imprisoned me, to the hazard of my life and being, and that by an illegall warrant of the Lords, who have no power in Law to commit me, or so much as to summon me before them, in reference to a tryal? much lesse when I do come at their Bar, to deal with me like a Spanish Inquisition, by exami∣ning me upon Interrogatories to insnare my self, and refuse to let me see ei∣ther accuser, prosecutor, indictment, charge or impeachment: but presse me againe and again to answer Interogatories against my self, and so force me to deliver in a Plea, according to my priviledg and the Laws of the Land, a∣gainst their illegall dealings with me, and then to wave all pretence of any foregoing crime, and commit me the 11 July 1646 to Master Wollaston to New-gate prison during their pleasure for delivering in that my very Plea, which hath not a word in it but what is justifiable by Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; and then when I am at Newgate, by pretence of a Warrant of the 22 of June after, for Master Wollaston to cause his servants to break into my Chamber and by force and violence to carry me before the Lords, who had, nor have no more Jurisdiction over me by the Laws of England to try me, passe upon me, or condemn me, then so many Turks have: and when I come there, they only look upon me, but lay nothing to my Charge, neither by word of mouth, nor writing but passe an Order in these very words, Die Martis 23. Junij. Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliamen, That Iohn Lilburn shall stand Com∣mitted close Prisoner in th Prison of Newgate, And that he be not permitted to have pen, ink or paper, and none shall have accusse unto him in any kind, but his Keeper, untill this Court doth take further . And that is when they  and just, which I do confidently beleeve  never be; here is illegall  illegality, and Tyranny upon the neck of that, and yet Master Wollastone and that Barish fellow Briscoe, executed it to the height without any scruple of conscience, although they might have as well by vertue of the same Warrant have cut my throat, as have used me as they did, till the 11 of July 1646. at and upon which day they by force of armes, with
thirty or forty of the hangmans guard of Halberteers, and against all Law and Justice, carried me before the Lords, upon pretence to hear my Charge read, although the Lords had not, nor have not in Law the least power in the world to try me or to summon me, as hath been notably and undeniably proved in the Case of Sir Iohn Maynard and the four Aldermen, in the relea∣sing of whom as the Lords have done, if ever they had any Jurisdiction over Commoners in any kind whatsoever, they have now  given it away; for they were all impeached by the House of Commons, and their impeh∣ments transmitted from them before ever they medled with them, which I ne∣ver was, and yet flew as high in their Protestations and Declarations against the Lords Jurisdiction over them as ever I did, whom notwithstanding for all this, without stooping, submitting, or so much as petitioning, the Lords re∣leased, and of their own accord took all their proceedings against them off the file, thereby declaring to the whole Kingdom, that their own conscience told them they had no Authority in Law to go about to try them, being  of their Legall Judges, though they were impeached by the House of Com∣mons, and that they had done nothing but their duty in protesting against them, and their Jurisdiction over them. Therefore (my Lord Munson) can it stand with the Justice and  of your House, in your first Remonstrance to the Kingdom, pag. 6. to cry  so bitterly as you do against the Kings Ministers, who durst be so bold and presumptuous to break the Laws, and suppresse the Liberties of the Kingdom, after they had been so solemnly and evidently declared by the Petition of Right, by committing divers free men of England to prison for refusing to stoop unto the Commission of Loan, whereby many of them contracted such sicknesses as cost them their lives, and detaining others close prisoners  many months together, without the liberty of using Books, pen, ink, or p∣per, denying them al the comforts of life, all means of preservation of  nor permitting their Wives to come unto them: And for the compleating of that cruelty, after yeeres spent in such miserable durance, to keep them still in their oppressed condition, not admitting them to be bailed according to Law, and oppressing and vexing them above measure; and the ordinary course of Justice (the common birth-right of the Subjects of England) wholly ob∣structed unto them: and divers others oppressed by grievous Fines, Impri∣sonments, Stigmatizings, Mutilations, Whippings, Pillories, Gaggs, Con∣finements, Banishments after so rigid a manner, as hath not onely deprived men of the society of their friends, exercise of their professions, comfort of books, use of paper or ink, but even violated that neer union which God hath established betwixt men and their wiv, by forced Was this wicked and il∣legall in the King? and can your denying my wife (as in my pre∣sent imprisonment you have don) so much as to see me, or speak with me, or bring me food to preserve me alive, be legall, just, and righteous in you? Let God and all righteous men judge betwixt you and  in this particular. and constrained separation, whereby they have been bereaved of the comfort and ∣versation one of another. Can all these doings be criminous and wicked in the King's Mini∣sters? and can your denying of justice for seven yeers together to me, that suffered the grievous∣nesse of these very torments, be just and righ∣teous? Let God and the world judge, whether
you by your actions do not justifie all the fore∣going unjust proceedings, nay, and out-strip them, in that you your selves do, or suffer to be done (when you have power enough in your hands to remedy, but will not) divers of the very self same things to some of the very self same men, after (in obedience to your commands, in the sincerity of their souls) they have freely adventured their lives (and so carried themselves in all their actions to∣wards you, that all their adversaries are not able, nor ever were, to lay in law my crime to their charge) for the redresse of all the foresaid grievances? and yet the best recompence you your selves give unto them, is, to toffe and tumble them yeer after yeer, from Gaol to Gaol (without laying any crime unto their charge) denying them the benefit of their Birth-right, the Law of the Land, keeping thousands of pounds of their own from them, and endeavouring in their long impri∣sonments to starve and murder them, their Wives and Children, by being worse then the King was to your Members, (who al∣lowed them three, foure, and five pounds a man weekly, notwith∣standing their own great estates to live upon) in allowing them never a pen∣ny to live upon, endeavouring to protect all those unrighteous As particularly that old guilty Traytor Sir Henry Vane, who was one of the principall men that passed that bloody murdering Sentence in the Star chamber against me, in the yeer 1637: and whose power (by his crafty Machiavel Sons interest, young Sir Henry) kept me above eight yeers together in suit in the House of Commons, that I could not get one dram of Justice, or reparation against my Star-chamber Judges; although the purfuing of that Suit one way and other, cast me above a thousand pound: Yet at lest, when I got a Ordinance for 3000 li. for reparation (me from those that did me wrong, but from the Common-wealth's Sequestrations) yet in the passing of that Ordinance, steps up John Blackston in the House, (one of Vane's creatures, for the many thousand pounds sake of the Com∣mon-wealths money he hath helps him to) and he gets all confideration of interest for the forbearance of the money, cut off; so that it would be many yeers before the whole sum abhorted would come in: onely there was a thou∣sand or fifteen hundred pounds worth of wood feld of Sir Henry Gibs in Brandsborth Park which Sir Henry Vane by his pounds, in the Knights absence and mine both, gets an Order to possesse, although he hath no right unto it: so that my 3000 l. will be well nigh this ten yeers before the annuall rent of the Lands allotted will bring it in: which will scarce be Use for the Principall. Of all which usage, when I come out of the North to the Citie, (immediately after the execution of the King)  compined to Sir Arthur Hasterig, (then my familiar friend) and begg'd of him to deliver a Message for me to Lieut. Gen. Cromwel; in which I acquinted him step by step, how old  Henry Vane had without cause, for this twelve yeers together sought my bloud, and had got a good part of it; and I knew that Litus. Gen. Cromwel had (by his son's similiarity with him) been of late the staffe and stay of the old Traytor: and therefore I desired him to tell him, I thought  had been out-folling enough be∣twixt Cromwel and me already, occasioned by himself; but for my part, I desire to have no more jarring betwixt us, and therefore did earnestly in∣treat him to let old Henry Vane and me alone instand or sally our selves: For seeing he would never give over the pursuing of my lifes: I must be for∣ced to have much to his; for I told Sir Arthur, I was resolved either to impeach him or indict him for a Traitor in betraying all the North of Eng∣land to the Earl of Newcastle and sending his Magazine of Arms to him to Newcastle from Raby Castle, assuring him moreover that if L. G. Cromwel would yet protect him, for all his greatnesse  would try another fall with him, cast i what it would; but as if it were the highest treason in the world for any  in England, but he that is a Parliament man, to say that blacks the eye of any man in that House, old Sir Henry and young Sir Henry Vane are both endeavoured by King Nol to be brought in a∣gaine to the House (having been formerly excluded for three quarter Cavaleers) and to be  Members of the New Councell of State, and King Nol by his Beagles at the Counsel of War  Vote to passe to desire him to get a saw made by the House to authorize that bloudy and  Councell to hang poor peal-garlick or any other that they should judge worthy of ; so that here was a fine morse-trap for old and young Vane to catch poor John in, not obtained  doubt of the greatest engagement in the World to be King Nols Slaves & Vassals, to ingage with him, and drive on any interest be would have them, for his so seasonable help of them at this  great time o need, against furious Iohn (as they call him) who in Feb. last offered a  of Parliament (where S. Arthur then sate Chairman) upon his life upon the Authority of that own Ordinances to prove old Sir Henry & his son Sir George Vane both Traytors, & to y them to transport their souldiers for Ireland (out of their states & their trayterous Confederates in the County of Durham) 50000l. and earnestly begd of S. Arthur & the Committee to  the House herewith; but the next news I hear King Olivers paws was laid upon poor Iohn  he and his Cozen Prince Arthur come to burn their fingers before they and John hath  Oli∣ver thanke himself, and leave Trayterous old Sir Henry Vane and his wicked sons to  their own legs without the help of his Crutches the next time. men that (contrary to Law) have endea∣vouted to murder and destory them, and take away their lives and beings from the earth. And all this is my own case and suf∣ferings from you your selves. There∣fore Hear, O Hea∣vens! and give ear, O Earth! and the
righteous God, and all just men judge betwixt . And therefore if there be any truth or resolutions in you to stand to any thing that you say and declare, I challenge at your hands the benefis of all your Declarations and Remonstrances, which are all of my side; and particular∣ly the notablest of Declarations of the 6 of May 1643, and 17 April 1646. which was made before my contest with the Lords, in which you declare (2 par. Book De. fo 95. & 879) that although the necessity of war have given some di∣sturbances to loyall proceedings, stopped the usuall course of justice,  the Parliament for the preservation of this right to impose and require many great and unusual payments from the good Subjects of this Kingdom, and to take extraordinary wayes for the procuring of monyes for their many pressing occasions; It having pleased God to reduce our affaires into a more  condition then heretofore: We do declare, that we will not, nor any by co∣lour of any authority derived from us, shall interrupt the ordinary course of Justice in the severall Court of Judicatures of this Kingdom, not intermed∣dle incases of private interest otherwhere determinable, unlesse it be in case of male administration of Justice, wherein we shall so provide, that right be done, and punishment inflicted as there shall be occasion according to the Law of the Kingdom, and the trust reposed in us. Therefore seeing that you that stile your selvs the fountain and conserva∣ry of the Law, first par. Book Declar. pag. 272 have declared in answer to the Kings Complaint against scandalous pamphlets (which was the originall pre∣tence of the Lords quarrelling with me) that you know the King hath wayes e∣nough in his ordinary Courts of Justice to punish such seditious  and Sermons, as are any way prejudiciall to his rights, honour, and authority,
pag. 208. and if the King the Superior or Creator of the Lords, must be tyed in this case to the ordinary Courts of Justice, according to the Laws of the King∣dom, then much more the Lords the creature or inferiour to the King; And therefore I hope you will not be angry with me for refusing obedience to the illegall commands of the single Lords, the inferious, or hinder me from ob∣taining Justice, according to Law, upon those that most barbarously executed them upon me, seeing you and the Lords themselves have taught me, and all the people of England, disobedience to the illegall commands of the King the greater, as cleerly appears by your Declarations of July the 12, & July 26, 1642. 1 par. Book Decl. p. 201. 458. 483. The words of which last are, That the Lords and Commons in Parliament do Declare, That it is against the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, that any of the Subjects thereof should be com∣manded or compelled by the King to attend him at his pleasure, but such as are bound thereunto by speciall service; And if any Messengers or Officers shall by colour of any command from his Majesty, or Warrant under his Ma∣jesties hand, arrest, take, or carry away any of his Majesties Subjects to any place whatsoever, contrary to their wils, that it is both against the Law of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject, and it is to the disturbance of the publick Peace of the Kingdom; and any of his Majestie's subjects so arrested may law∣fully refuse to obey such Arrests and Commands. To the same purpose you also were and declare, in pag. 93. 95. 112. Therefore, seeing the Law of the Land is so often by you declared to be the undoubted Birth-right of me, as well as the greatest Lord in England, or Parliament man whatsoever, I earnestly crave, and challenge at your hands, as much for my self, as you did at, and from the hands of the King, for the Lord Kimbolton and the five Members, Sir John Ho∣than, and the Lord Maior Pennington, Alderman Foulke, Col. Vean, and Col. Manwaring, viz. the benefit of the Law of England in the ordinary Courts of Justice; which is, not to be taken, or imprisoned, pass'd upon, nor con∣demned but by due Processe of Law, before a Justice of Peace, according to the Law of the Land, and not to be imprisoned but for a particular crime in Law, expressed in the Commitment, by those that have power in Law to com∣mit me; nor to be tried or condemned, but by presentment, &c. before a Ju∣ry of twelve men of my Peers or equals of the same Neighbourhood where the fact was committed; which is, as you declare by Sir Edward Cook in 4 part Institutes fol. 41. the ancient and undoubted Birth-right of all the Subjects of England, and to have my remedy at Law, against all those that shall deal with me contrary to Law. And that you challenged all these things for them before∣mentioned, you may read in your own Declarations, pag. 7. 38. 39. 41. 53. 67. 77. 101. 123. 140. 162. 201. 203. 208. 210. 245. 277. 278. 459. 660. 845. All which I cannot doubt but you will grant unto me, because it cannot rationally enter into my brest to conceive, that you your selves can judge it consonant to Justice to set me, and thousands, and ten thousands of the people of the Kingdom to fight at your command for the preservation of our birth-right the Law, and then for you to deny it unto us, and deprive us of it, and to recompence us with slavery, which we are in, when we lose the benefit of the Law. Surely, this cannot in honour and justice become you, that call your selves the Conservators of the Law. But if you shall avowedly deny me the
benefit of the Law, you frustrate your end in making Judges to be in West∣minster Hall to execute the Law, and put a mock upon the people, and dissolve the whole frame and constitution of the civill Policy of the Government of this Kingdom into the originall law of Nature, and leave every man to judge within his own brest what is just and righteous, and thereby  me, whether I will or no, to do that in reference to you, which you in your great straits, did in reference to the King; viz. Appeal to the righ Judge of all the would, and the judgment of the people to decide the contro∣versie betwixt you as appears in your own Declarations, 1. part Book Doc. p. 192 196 214. 263. 278. 464 491 495. 496 498. 629. 636. 666. 690. 639. 701. 908. and if I perish, I perish. For what greater tyranny can there be in the world,  what greater straits can a man be put to, then to delayed justice, (which is worse than to be denyed) for above seven yeers together, by those that have raised a bloudy war, and pretended for justice: and then, after I have spent above 1000 li. in endeavouring to obtain Justice and my own at your  and after I have served you faithfully, and adventured my life in the field for you, and undergone multitudes of other hardships and hazzards at  for you, and carried my self in all my actions towards you unspotted, and that upon you own declared principles: and after all this, to be toss'd and tumbled by you from Gaol to Gaol, year after year, for nothing but my ho∣nesty; and can come to no legall tryall, although I have endeavoured it with all my might; and to have by you thousands of pounds of my own kept from me, and not a penny in all my captivitie allowed me to live upon, but in the eye of reason exposed to famish and sterve, or to eat my Wife and Children O monstrous and unnaturall cruelty! which I will maintain upon my life, it not to be parallell'd in all Queen Marie's dayes, nor in the worst of King Charles his Reign. So (my Lord) I have done with my PLEA, and take leave to remain a true hearted Englishman, JOHN LILBURN. NOw Master Speaker, having finished my Plea to the Committee of In∣demnity; I must acquaint you that I brought it to the said Com∣mittee, with whom I had some verball expostulations, after which I began to open my Plea, having it fair writ in my hand, which the Committee no soo∣ner saw but presently they left (me according to my desire) to the ordinary course of the Law, where I was necessitated at present to cease prosecution of Wollston, because I was continually in expectation of my Liberty from the Lords, and therefore judged it but wisdom in me not to provoke them, and also for perfecting of my Ordinance, for my long sought, dear bought, and hard suffered for reparatious, from old Sir H. Vane and the rest of my cru∣el Star-Chamber Judges; which Ordinance with much adoe was as last con∣cluded, though to little purpose as before truly is noted in p. 15, 16. And for my
Liberty, I was chiefly beholding for that to my friends in London, who in seven dayes got eight or nine thousand hands to a Petition for me, in the day of your straits by the Cavaleers, and presented it to your House, which my true friend, and faithfull and couragious fellow sufferer Sir Iohn Maynard took the advantage of, and improved the utmost of his interest, and thereby be∣came principally instrumentall both in your House and in the House of Lords for my Liberty then, unto whom I must and do returne the chiefest thanks for it. But now Sir, seeing my life (for nothing but my honesty, and because I will not be a slave to mens lusts) is so strongly sought for to be taken away by those that have made the largest pretences and promises, that can be made in the world to deliver this Nation from thraldom, bondage, vassallage and slavery; and seeing they are such painted Sepulchers that they are like to co∣zen all the honest men in England with religious cheaters, such as Master Edmond Rozer, with whom as teacher to the Congregation where I was a Member, I walked many yeares in fellowship, and Master William Kiffin who was once my servant, and unto both whom the indearedest of my affecti∣ons run out unto; to either of which I never gave a provocation to, nor wronged in all my dayes to my knowledge, neither of which (although the first of them and I have been familiar together for almost twenty years) I am confident of it, in reference to my actings to the sons of men, are able to my face to say black is my eye, yet for these men so high and mighty in their pretence of religion, and in their former familiarity and friendship to me, to persecute me bitterly, and write reproachfull books &c against me and in the day of my calamity (when the great men of the Nation make deep furrows upon my back for nothing) when I am as it were in the Kennell, and my hands and feet tied, then to beat, buffe, wound me, and pursue my very life; O the height not only of unchristianity, but even of unmanhood it selfe! such actions differing nothing in beastlinesse and brutishnesse from the bru∣test of Beasts themselves; if it had been enemies (as David did in the like case Ps. 55. 12, 13, 14. that had done it, I could have born it; but for my familiar, bosome, indeared friends, to deal thus with me, and that in the day of my adversity, when my life is hunted for like a Partridge upon the mountains, in this they are more unnaturall then the very Pagans and heathens themselves; for saith Isaiah, cha. 21. 14. The Inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled; and for their maling a frothy light, giddy headed fellow of me in their late book called Walwyns wyles, easily deluded and drawn aside, being of no depth in my self; I am confident there is no two men in England that know me, whose consciences are more perswaded of the falsity of that their own assertion in every particular then M. Rozer, and Master Kiffin are, if they would speak the truth from their very hearts, the whole stream of my actions extraordinarily well known to both of them for these twelve or thirteen years together, being as a large demonstration that I understand the things I goe about; and am not to be biased with favour, flattery, frowns, nor hard usage; (but act singly and nakedly upon my own principles that I beleeve God distills into my soul) I beleeve as the actions of any man upon the face of the earth are, having never forsaken nor changed my prin∣ciples
from better to worse the space of one hour from the day  fatherly discovering, and distinct, and assured making known of his turnall, ever∣lasting and unchangable loving kindnesse in the Lord Jesus unto my soul, to this day, although I am confident it is now above 13 years, since I know God at my  and reconciled father, that had particularly wasted and clensed my soul with the  bloud of Jesus Christ, and had cansed the grace of God to appear in my soul, to  me (as a reciprecall duty spread abroad in my heart by the overflowings of the fountaine of love within me) to abstaine from all ungodlinesse and worldly best, and to live soberly and righteously, in this present evill world, doing good to all, his es∣pecially to the houshold of Faith, Ingraving with his Spirit upon my heart as with a point of a Diamond those Divine Laws, viz. to doe to all men as I would they should do to me, and in all the carriages of my life to be watchfull over my actings, and not to be evill that good may come of it, and thirdly that seeing that I am bought with a pri by Redemption, that therefore I should not be the servant of men (to serve their best and wills) but entirely and solely the servant of God, to glorifie him with my body, in right∣ous and just actions amongst the sons of men, as well as in my soul, in speculation, im∣gration or adoration; and so at present I leave them to the reflections of their own consciences, if the vanity of the world and the fadeing promotions there∣of hath not eat out the life and sensible part of them; into whose secrets  let not my soul (O Lord) enter into. But as for the rest of their subscribing Comrades, being in all six or seven, I know not some of them, only  Price, and Richard Arnold I know to be men fitly to deserve the name of  Baristors, or known Eves-dropers, so detestable and abominable therefore to all truly & really honest unbialed men that know them, that a man shal but defile himselfe to touch them with a paire of tongs, deserving no other answer from me for their indefatigable and restlesse pains to bespatter and destroy me, but either the highest of scorn, or a good cudgell in due time; and so at pres I leave them to the serious perusal of their own ugly forms and shapes, lively pic∣tured out in that most excellent and masculine Anatomy of them, by Doct. Brooks in his Law Book entituled the Charity of Churchmen, or a Vindication of (my most choice and honest Comrade and Fellow-sufferer) Master William Wal∣wyn. But in regard my grand adversaries, and their little Boagles in London, doe continually report me to be a man of contention, and one that is never  from broyls, nor never content with any Government; but full of self ∣ceitedness, malice and revenge; it will be very necessary for me to return a effectuall answer to this, before I come to the main thing I intend. And therefore in the first place, When I was a childe (as Paul saith) I thought as a childe, I did as a childe; but after I came to have any discretion, well ngh twenty years agoe, my Father brought me to London, and bound me Apprendes to Mr. Thomas Hewson near London-stone; whom I served as faithfully about six years, as every Apprentice served a Master: And though he had no more but my self, and had many thousands of Pounds went through my hands, driving a large Whole-sale trade; yet directly, nor indirectly, I cannot remember that ever I wronged him of a Groat, or the value of it; or that ever all the  I was with him, I was ever branded or taxed with one bafe visible action; or that I either gave or took a box on the eare, or any thing like it, or ever quar∣relled
with any Flesh alive all the time I was there, (although I had then as much mettle, life and spirit as most young men in London had) only I must confess, my old Master offered me sometimes some abuse, for which I carryed him before the Chamberlain of London, and ever after lived in peace with him: And after that, in all the dayes of my calamity by the Bishops, had the truest and cordiallest friend of him, that ever servant had of a Master in the day of his tryall. And though in his service (keeping only a Ware-house) severall days in the week I had spare time enough, yet I never misspent it, but continually spent it in reading the Bible, the Book of Martyrs, Luthers, Calvins, Bezaes, Cartwrights, Perkins, Molins, Burtons, and Rogers Works, with multitude of other such like Books that I had bought with my own money; till the foresaid Mr. Edmond Rozer, my familiar friend and neighbour, and fellow-professor of Religion, (conversant at my Masters house from the beginning of my coming to him) brought me in anno 1636. acquainted with Dr. Bastwick then prisoner in the Gatehouse, whom after I visited constantly, and for whose service I could have laid down my life; and for my true affection to him, I was forced by the Bishops and their Catchpoles to fly into the Low-Countreys for refuge, just about the time of his Banishment, where I was divers months, and where the Kings Ambassador, Sir VVilliam Boswell, laid for me (as I was informed) seve∣rall designes to put me a Ship board, and send me over to England to the Bi∣shops here, for my visible activity there against them, which forced me con∣tinually to wear my sword about me; yet in all my time there, I never gave nor took a box on the eare, nor had so much as a single quarrell; and at my coming to England I was in danger enough, and therefore went like a swagge∣rer disguised, and yet was betrayed by my pretended bosome friend, John Chilliburn servant to old Mr. VVharton in Bow-lane, and so fell into the de∣vouring clutches of the High-Commission, Councell-board, and the Star-Chamber, all three of which had a sting at me: But in all my troubles and tryals by them for divers years together, I never saw or heard of any other prose∣cutor, but only two most desperate, forsworn, false Oaths of my then familiar acquain∣tance, Edmond Chillington then Button seller in Cannonstreet, and now a forsworn lieutenant in Colonell Whaleys Regiment of Horse: which false Oaths he was hired unto by the Bishops and their Chaplins, Mr. Baker, &c. and by means of which he got his own Liberty, and this he did for my curtesie and kindnesse to him in his then captivity, &c. owing me at this day, I am confident of it, upon that account well nigh 30 pounds: by meanes of which Oathes, I had above 500 stripes with knotted cords, given me by the bloody decree ofold Sir Henry Vane, &c. and endured a world of other unheard of miseries and barbarous cruelties for three yeers together: and at my deliverance by the Parliament, I could have had his eares for perjury, as easily as to have kissed my hand, if I had been re∣vengefull; but so far was I from that, that I never questioned him for it, but contrarily I requited him good for evill, when he was prisoner in Oxford Ca∣stle with me, and ready to starve, being destitute both of money and friends there; and to save him alive, I readily lent him both gold and silver, as he very well knowes, by the same token I was without my money long enough; and in the day of his prosperity here, I was fain to ask often enough for it, before I could get it again.
So here it is true, I was in contestation with the High  Board, and Star-chamber, but they began with me, and not I  story of which you may read in my book called the Christian mans , for Mr. VVill. Larner) It is true also, I had in them sufferings,  contestations with Gaolers, but it was to preserve my life, when they  to Law would have murdered me; but with all my fellow-prisoners, &c. I lived as peaceably, as lovingly and friendly as any man in the world did; and all this contestation was but for the maintaining my legall rights due to me by the Na∣tion of Right, which before the beginning of those troubles I had read, and a little understood: In which contest this Parliament in its Primitive  hath justified me, in not only by abolishing the foresaid unjust Courte by Act of Parliament; but also in and by their Votes of the 4th. May, 164. which thus followeth; Resolved upon the Question. That the sentence of the  chamber given against John Lilburne, it illegall, and against the liberty of the sub¦ject; and also bloody, wicked, cruel, barbarous & tyrannicall. Resolved  on the Question, That reparations ought to be given to Mr. Lilburn, for his  forment, sufferings and losses sustained by that illegall sentence; Which I could I never got to this day, but had been a rich and happy man in reference  world, if it had been voted I should never have expected any; for then might I have spent my eight years time in my trade beyond sea, that I have in a  spent in following these Votes; and one way or other 1000 or 1500  to boot; with seven or eight imprisonments besides for nothing. Well, after this I fought with C. Lunsford, and divers others at Westminster, (who drew first) with my sword in my hand', to save the Parliament  throats from being out, conscienciously judging nothing that I had too good to hazard for so just an Authority as I then judged them to be; & they have  well rewarded me for my pains, with 7 or 8 cruell imprisonments, and  told me nor any body else to this hour wherfore, with many strong endeavour to take away my life in the said imprisonments unjustly; but I hope, they p∣cially will justifie me in that contest; however, I from my heart beseech the righteous Lord of Heaven and Earth to judge righteously and impartially be∣twixt them and me, and to manifest his Righteous judgment betwixt to visi∣bly to the world, that so the sons of men may see it, and behold it, and fear, and tremble before him. Well, in the next place the Wars begun betwixt them and the Kings and truly having seriously read all their primitive most excellent Declaration, and sufficiently my self smarted under the Kings irregular government, in the violating of the Laws of England, the compact betwixt him and his people; which he in my judgment had then notably violated; And not in the least doub∣ting but they would be as good as their words and Declarations, which were to se∣cure the Peoples Lawes and Liberties to them, and not in the least to seek them∣selves; to provide for their weale, but not for their woe: and reading in the Scripture, Rom. 13. that the end of the institution of all Magistracy in the world, is for a terror to evill doers, and for a praise to those that doe well; the ∣ous consideration of which, wrought out something in reason in my one thoughts, to ballance the letter of those Laws, (which I then knew were abso∣lutely for the King) somthing like those generall rules or maximes in Law,
recorded by that most excellent of English Lawyers, Sir Edw. Cook in his 4 part. Institut. fol. 330. which are, That although the Law (of England) speak in generall terms, yet it is to be bound up, or accepted, but where reason cau∣seth, there the law ceaseth; for seeing reason is the very life and spirit of the Law is self, the Law giver it not to be eseemed to respect that which hath no reason, although the generality of the words at the first sight, or after the Letter seem otherwise: And it, in my reason, could not be rationall for any men to appoint a com∣pact to be betwixt two parties, but to bind both equally alike, King as well as People; and not to keep the people bound to the expresse letter of the Kings part, or any others, when the King or that other, shall break his or theirs in twenty particulars, as by Ship-money, Projects, &c. And further, saith Cook, fol. 328. ibid. Such an interpretation of ambiguous things (in Law) it always to be made, that absurdities and inconveniences may be avoyded: but ab∣surdities and inconveniences cannot be avoyded, if the express and single let∣ter of any Law, in reference to a King or Parliament, shall tie or bind me to cut my own throat, or any other wayes destroy my self, or my companions, brethren, or neighbours, which is irrationall or unjust for me to do: 1 Part. Book Decl. p. 150. So upon these or the like grounds, I took up arms in judgment and conscience against the King, and contested with his misgovernment in subduing my legall and native Rights, and in my sufferings and arraignment at Oxford therefore, carried my self with a great deal of resolution and un∣dauntednesse of spirit; for which the Parliament by speciall Declaration of the 17 of December 1642, justified me: which Declaration you may see 1 part Book Decl. pag. 802, 803. yea, and exchanged me very honourably, high above my quality and condition; and at my coming home, some of them that were no mean ones, proffered my wife a place of honour and profit for me, then re∣puted worth about 1000 l. per annum: which I conscientiously scorned and slighted, professing unto my wife, to her extraordinary grief, that I must rather fight (though it were) for 8 pence a day, till I see the liberties and peace of England set∣led, then set me down in a rich place for mine own advantage, in the midst of so many grand distractions of my native Country as then possessed it: and so I left old Essex, that had been so generous unto me in giving me almost 300 l. ready money at my deliverance, as Colonel Flettwood and Colonel Harrison very well know: But him for all that (I say) I left, for his persecuting for non-taking the Co∣venant, and down to Lincolnshire I posted, to my then two Darlings and familiar Friends, Monchester and Cromwel; where I engaged heartily, [and spent all Essex his money freely] and contiued in many a desperate service, till Manchester visibly degenerated, and would have hanged me, for being over∣honest, and over active in taking in Tikel Castle too soon: which with his visible turning knave, and apparantly betraying his trust at Dennington, in defigning his Army, or the best part of it, a sacrifice to the Kings fury, made me engage against him and others of his Associates, with Cromwel, who there∣unto sollicited me, and also threw up my Commission; and so his basenesse spoyled a Souldier of me, that I could never fight as a Souldier since; although Cromwel by himself face to face, and by his Agents (I am confident of it) hath from time to time much, and as earnestly solicited me, as is possible for a man to be solicited, to take up command in Fairfax his Army. But no
sooner was I by the ears with Manchester, who first began with me, but Mr Prynn wrote his desperate invective Books against us all that would not be conformable to the Covenant (that Cheat,) and the Scots Presbytery (that every thing and nothing;) and would have bad us all destroyed, or banished the Land of our Nativity: so in conscience to God, and safety to myself and brethren (Mr Edmund Roser, my present unworthy Antagomst, being that my pastor or teacher) I was inwardly compelled to deal with him, that then sought to destroy the generation of the righteous; and accordingly I wrote him a sharp Epistle, now in print, dated 7 Jan. 1644. which brought upon  back a whole sea of troubles; and a Vote or Votes in the House of Commons past against me: whereupon, without any more a doe, black Corbet and the Committee of Examinations makes me a Prisoner, and tosseth and umbleth me to the purpose: So before him, upon the 13 of June 1645, was I forced of give in my reasons (now in print) wherefore I wrote that excellent and seasonably Epistle (which was the first avowed publick Cannon I know of in England, discharged against the then insulting Presbyter, for the liberty of the con∣sciences of my present bloudy and malicious persecutors, that now stile them∣selves the Pastours and Leaders of the Churches of God; but do indeed and in truth, by their unnaturall, unchristian, and unjust actions deserve no other stile, but men fit for nothing but to be the Pastors and Leaders of the Synagague of a∣tan.) The whole story of which contest with Mr Prynn, you may read at large in the beginning of my Book, called innocency and Truth justified shal I hope my present Adversaries, who pretend themselves to be Leaders in the Churches of God, will justifie and acquit me from guilt or crime in these contests; especially considering that they themselves (that now are so vio∣lent in hunting after my bloud, and the bloud of my Associates, in the day of our trouble and calamity, now we are under hatches) durst then do not thing manlike for themselves; but sate in silence like a company of  without souls or hearts. And then before I well got rid of this broyl, you your self got the House of Commons the 19 day of July 1645. to fall upon my bones, and Vote  prison I know not wherefore, unlesse it were for riding post from Summerset-shire through twenty dangers to bring you the first news of the Lord Gorings  being routed at Lampert; for you never told me other to this hour; but yet I was toed by your own means, from Hunt your Serjeants hands, to the hands of Knight his Deputy; and from thence the 9 of August to Newgate, by that old Patentee Monopolizer Lawrence Whittaker, then Chairman to the Committee of Exami∣nation; and when you had got me to Newgate, then you got your Bull-dogs in the House to bait me to the purpose, and also turn'd me over to be araigned at the sessions in Old-hatly and so to be hanged at Tyburn; for you appointed Bradshaw your bloody and unjust Lord President, Master Seale and Walker &c. to prosecute me for my life; But after I had sufficiently baited both you and your unjust house; you sent me to Newgate a hundred pound in mony, I thinke to get me to hold my peace, and the 14 of October 1645. most honorably Voted me out of Prison, and so your self being my accuser, prosecuter and Judge, Justified me in this contest, the relation of which you may at large read in that notable book called Englands Birth-right, and in my Epistle of two sheets of pa∣per
in print dated 25. July 1645. but especially in my Large Book  and called Innocency and Truth Justified; and in this contest with you, any old acquaintance Doctor Bastwick, (for whose sake in the Bishops days I un∣derwent more sorrows then is to be found in any ordinary death) fell upon me also, so that likewise I was faine to contest a little with him, but he begunne first. And after this, viz. upon the 14 day of April 1646. Colonel Edward King arrests me in an Action of 2000 l. at Westminster for calling him Traitor, which was only in truth, for discharging my duty in prosecuting him, for be∣traying his trust to the Kings Party, while he was my Colonel in Lincoln∣shire, and in this contest abundance of your own Ordinances justified me: which while I pleaded them in my Epistle to Judg Reeve of the 6 of June 1646 now in Print, before whom Kings action were dependent; the guilty con∣scioned Judge grew as angry with me therefore, as the Lawyers in Christs time did at him, for reproving the hypocrisie of the Scribes and Pharisees, al∣though nominally he medled not with them, yet their own guilty consciences did inwardly accuse them, which made one of them say, Master, in saying then, thou reproachest us also, Luke 11. 45. unto whom Christ replyes and saith, vers. 46. &c. Wo unto you also ye Lawyers; for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be  and you yourselves touch not the burthens with one of your fingers. Wo unto you for you build the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and your Fathers killed them. Truly ye bear witnesse that ye allow the deeds of your Fathers: for they indeed killed them, and you build their Sepulchers. Therefore also said the wisdom of God. I will send them Prophets and Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute; That the bloud of all the Prophets which was shed from foundation of the world may be required of this Generation, from the bloud of Abel unto the bloud of Zacharias, which perished be∣tween the Altar and the Temple: Verily I say unto you it shall be required of this Ge∣neration. Woe unto you Lawyers for ye have taken away the key of knowledg; ye entred not in your selves, and them that were entring in you hindred. And accordingly Judge  being wounded within at the down-right truth of my forementioned Epistle or Plea. that lasheth the base and abomi∣nable coruptions of him and the rest of his Brother-Judges, then and now Ad∣ministrators of the Law; and finding something in it that brands Manchester for an unjust man in his late Generalship, who then was Speaker of the House of Pees, away to him trudgeth the Judge in all post haste with my Book, to get him by his power to be revenged of me which he was easily provoked and perswaded too and accordingly the 10 of June 1646. He gets an Order to passe the Lords House, To summon me up to the Lords Bar to answer to such things as I stood Charged before their Lordships with, concerning the writing the fore∣said Letter or plea, and when I came to their Bar they dealt with me like a Spa∣nish Inquisition, in examining me against my selfe, which forced me then at the Bar to deliver in my plea in Law, to prove that by the Laws of England they had no Jurisdiction over Commoners, to try them either for life, limb, liberty, or estate, which you may read in my Printed Book, called The Freemans freedom vindicated, which plea and protestation made them mad, and for which they sent me to Newgate, from whence upon the 16 of June I sent my appeal for Justice to the House of Commons against them, which made the Lords
madder, whereupon they upon the 12 of June 1646. issurred  bring me to their Bar again, where in contempt of their Jurisdistion,  to kneel, for which they committed me to the foresaid Wollastone  of Newgate, to be kept close Prisoner without pen, inke or paper, the  or any other friend, which was with rigour sufficiently exercised upon me, till the  of July 1646. which day they issued our another Order to bring me again to their Bar, at which when I came, in the height of contempt of their Jurisdicti∣on, I marched in amongst them with my bat or, & not only refused to kneel at these Bar, But also with my fingers stops both my ears when they went about to read my ∣tended Charge, for all which they fined me 4000 l. to the King, and for∣ther sentenced me to be a prisoner seven yeares, or during their pleasure, in the T∣er of London, to be for ever disfranchised of being capable to bear any  Military or Civill Government, in Church or Common-wealth; and according∣ly I was committed to the Tower, where I was in the nature of a close pri∣soner, divorced from the society of my Wife, till the 16 of September  Whereupon a strong warre was made upon the Lords and their Jurisdiction, by the Authors of those two notable Books, called Vane plebis, and Royall, and I also paid them prety well my self, in my two large books, Called, Londons Liberty in chaines discovered, and Londons Charters, and by a large  of my Wives, and accompanied at the delivery of it with divers of  friends, I got my business to the examination of a Commities of the House of Commons, before whom I appeared, and pleaded the 9th. No∣vember, 1646. and had fair play, but waited month after month, and  get no report of it made by reason of the swoy and power that Mr. Denail , Sir Philip Stapleton, & the rest of their Associates had bene in the House of , who were then strong confederates with the Lords in their unjust , and my then professed enemies, in keeping me from Justice, the  of the Law and my right: whereupon I was compell'd and necessitated by a hard, long. and almost starving imprisonment to engage against them; which I did to the purpose, as you may read in my Books, called, The oppressed  oppressions declared; The out-cryes of oppressed commons; The resolved man reso∣lution; and Rash-Oaths. And then the Army turned up the chief of  heels, by a trick of Hōr Porus, alias, An IMPEACHMENY; And the up got Mr. Oliver Cromwall my pretended friend, with whom, and in whose quarrel (for the Liberties of the Common-wealth (as he pretended) at his earnest follcitation of my wife in London, to send for me from the  then at Crowland; (and by his message delivered unto me for that end, by his brother-in-law Major Desborough, near Sir Will. Russels in Cambridg-shire) I engaged against the Earl of Manchester, &c. and was one of the first vi∣dences that gave in my testimony against him, before Mr. Lisle then  to that committee, where Manchesters impeachment did then depend; but alass, Mr. Oliver impeached him only for this end, (as the fequel fully ) not in the least for Justice-sake, but only to get him, &c. out of his command) that so he might get in a friend of his own into it that he could rule, and it may be in time himself; both of which he hath compleatly done: but I say Mr. Oliver; by the help of the Army at their first Rebellion against the Parliament, their Lords and Masters, was no sooner up, but like a most perfidious base un∣worthy
man, he turned my enemy and Jaylor, and was as great with Manche∣ster in particular as ever; yea, and the House of Peers were his only white Boyes; Being more then his drudges, and more conformable to his will then the House of Commons it self; and who but Oliver (that before to me had called them in effect both tyrants and usurpers) became their Proctor where ever he came, yea, and sot his son Ireton at work for them also, insomuch as at some meetings with some of my Friends at the Lord Whartons lodgings, he clapt his hand upon his breast, and to this purpose, professed as in the sight of God, upon his conscience, That the Lords had  a right to their Legislative and Jurisdictive power over the Commons, as he had to the coat upon his back; and he would procure a friend, viz. Mr. Nath. , should argue and plead their said right with any friend I had in England; and not only so, but did he not get the Generall and councell of War as Windsor (about the time when the Votes of no more Addresses were to pass) to make a Declaration to the whole Kingdom, declaring the legall Rights of the Lords House, and their fixed Resolu∣tions to maintain and uphold it? which, as I remember was sent by the General, &c. to the Lords by Sir Hardiasse VValler; and to indear himself the more unto the Lords (in whose House without all doubt he intended to have fate himself;) he required me evil for good, and became my enemy to keep me in prison, out of which I must not stir, unless I would stoop and acknowledge the Lords jurisdiction over commoners, (and for that end he set his Agents and Instruments at work to get me to doe it;) And it became the above∣board work of him and his son-in-law, after a little under-hand working, to make all means gone about in the Army for my liberty, ineffectuall, or a seate to me; so that I was pinched and forced for my own preservation, to fall about Olivers eares, and his Sons both, to discover their depth of  by themselves and agents in their base dealing with me, (who was them almost destroyed in prison by their villany) as you may partly read in my Books, called, The Juglers discovered; Jonah's cryes out of the Wholes holly; The Peoples Prerogative; My additionall Plea before Mr. John Maynard of the House; and my Whip for the present House of Lords. But to fill up the measure of his malice against me, after by my own in∣duttry and importunity, I had got a little Liberty, in spite of him and his fa∣ction, from your House, he and his Faction got your House again to commit me and Mr Wildman prisoners as Traytors, upon 19. Jan. 1647. for but mannaging an ho∣nest Petition, that did but a little touch upon the Lords power: And yet this ve∣ry Mr. Oliver hath since been the principall Instrument to pluck up the House of Lords by the roots, as usurpers and encroachors, because they would not joyn with him to cut off the King's head (for that which he is as guilty of himself) and so take him out of his way, that he might be absolute King himself, as now he is, and more then ever the King was in his life: for he can, and hath taken severall free men of England by the shoulders at the House door, and in Westminster-hall, and by his will, without any ne processe of Law, commited them prisoners to his mercinary Janisaries, (as lately he hath done to honest Cornet Chesman, (not of the Army) for but deliuering a Letter of his unjustly imprisoned Captains, Cap. Bray, to the Speaker, and soliciting him for an Answer to it:) The like of which Tyranny the King never did in his Reign; and yet by Saint
Oliver's means, lost his head for a Tyrant. But the thing that I principally  at here, is, to declare, that Oliver and his Parliament now  (for the Nations it is not) having pluck'd up the House of Lords by the roots, as usurped, tyrannicall, and unjust, hath thereby himself justified not in all my contests with them, in denying their Jurisdiction over Common by Law. And although Oliver had his hands full with Poyer, Goring, Holland, Ha∣milton and Langdale the last yeer; but especially with the generall  was then in both Houses against him; upon the notable Impeachment of his Major Huntington, and I then by my absolute freedom was a little up, and could have at my pleasure been revenged of him, if I had so pleased, either by divisions in his Army, which was easily then in my power; or by joying in impeaching him with Major Huntington; which I had matter enough to do, and was earnestly solicited to it again and again, and might have had  enough to bost in my then low and exhausted condition: yet I scorned it, and ra∣ther applyed my hand to help him up again, as not loving a Scotch Interest, it is very well and fully known to his present darling Mr Cornelius Holland, and also to Colonel Ludlow, and Mr Thomas Challoner, with other Members that I could name; and which was demonstrated to himself by a Letter I sent him by Mr Edw. Sexby, whom on purpose I procured to go down to him: the true Copy whereof thus followeth: SIR. WHat my Comrade hath written by our trusty Bearer, might be sufficient for us both; but to demonstrate unto you that I am no staggerer from my first principles that I engaged my life upon, nor from you, if you are what you  to be, and what you are strongly reported to be; although, if I prosecuted  de∣sired revenge for an hard and almost sterving imprisonment, I could have had of late the choice of twenty opportunities to have payd you to the purpose; but I  it, especially when you are low: and this assure your self, that if ever my band he upon you, it shall be when you are in your full glory, if then you shall decline from the righteous wayes of Truth and Justice: Which, if you will fixedly and impartially prosecute, I am Yours, to the last drop of my heart bloud, (for all your late severe hand towards me) JOHN LILBƲRN. From Westminster the 3 of August 1648, being the second day of my Freedom, Which Letter &c. as I have been told by the Bearer, was not a little welcome. But his dealings with me now manifest that Proverb to be very true,  Save a Thief from the Gallows, and for your requitall, he will be the first shall have you. But to this I shall say no more but what the Spirit of truth saith in . 17. 13. That he that rewards evill for good, evill shall not depart from his . And being at liberty, not liking in the least the several juglings I observed in
divers great ones in reference to the personall Treaty, and that there was no∣thing worth praising or liking thought of or presented by the Parliament in reference to the Peoples Liberties or Freedoms, (especially considering their late large expences and hazards for the procurement of the settlement of them) I was compelled in conscience to have a hand in that most excellent of Petitions of the 11 of Septemb. 1648. which (I am sure) was no small piece of ser∣vice to Cromwel and his great Associates: though his Church-men, now my chie∣fest Adversaries, durst not joyn in it, nor own it for very fear. And hauing been in the North about my own business, where I saw Cromwel, and made as dili∣gent scrutinies into things about him, as I could; which I then to my self judg∣ed, savoured more of intended self-exalting, then any thing really and heartily (of what before I had strongly heard of him) to the through advancement of those things that were worthy to be accounted indeed the Liberties and Free∣doms of the Nation. And being come to London, my self and some other of my friends, by two Messengers, viz. Mr. Hunt one of Cromwel's creatures, and another, sent a Message down to him to Pomfret, to be delivered to himself, and to debate it with him, and bring his expresse Answer back again speedily: the effect of which Message was, That to our knowledge, God had caused him to understand the principles of a just Government, under which the glory of God may shine forth by an equall distribution unto all men. That the obtaining of this was the sole intended end of the Warre: and that the Warre cannot be justified upon any other account, then the defence of the peoples right, unto that just Government, and their Freedom Ʋnder it. His Answer to which Message by Mr. Hunt was principally directed to the Independents; some of whom appointed a meeting at the Nags-head Tavern by Blackwell-Hall, and invited M. Wildman and my self, &c. thither, whether we went accordingly, and where: wee met with Colonel Tihburn, Col. Jhn White, Dr. Parker, Mr Taylor, John Price, and divers others; where we had a large debate of things, and where the just ends of the War were as exactly laid open by Mr. VVildman, as ever I heard in my life. But towards the conclusion, they plainly told us, The chief things first to be done by the Army, was first To cut off the Kings Head, &c. and force and throughly purge, if not dissolve the Parliament: All of which we were all against, and press'd to know the bottom of their center, and in what they would absolutely rest for a future Settlement: and I plainly told them in these words, or to this effect. Its true, I look upon the King as an evill man in his actions, and divers of his party as bad: but the Army had couzened  the last year, and fallen from all their Promises and Declarations, and therefore could not rationally any more be trusted by us without good cautions and security: In which regard, although we should judge the King as arrant a Tyrant as they supposed him, or could imagine him to be; and the Parliament as bad as they could make them; yet there being no other balancing power in the Kingdome against the Army, but the King and Par∣liament, it was our interest to keep up one Tyrant to balance another, till we cer∣tainly knew what that Tyrant that pretended firest would give us as our Free∣doms; that so we might have something to rest upon, and not suffer the Army (so
much as in us lay) to deceive all the Government of the Kingdom into their  and  (which were two things we nor no rationall man  and leave no persons nor power to be a counter ballance against them: And if  should do this, out slavery for future (I told them) might probably be gron that ever it was in the Kings time, and so our last errour would be greater then our first and therefore I pressed very hard for an Agreement amongst the People first, ut∣terly disclaiming the thoughts of the other, ill this was done. And this (I told them) was not onely my opinion, but I beleeue it to be the unanimm opinion of all my friends with whom I most constantly conversed. At which the Gentlemen Independents were some of them most desperate∣ly cholerick: But my opinion being back'd with the Speeches of some  of my Friends, we came calmly to chuse out four and four of a side to  and conclude of some Heads towards the accomplishment of an Agreement of the People: and (as I remember) their four were Colonel  Col. White, Dr Parker, and Jo. Price; and our four were M. William Walwyn, Li∣nant-Col. Wetton, M. John Wildman, and my Self. But John Price seat some of the company to tell us (after we were parted, and some of us drinkings  of wine below) he would not make one, if Mr Walwyn was one, for he had a prejudice against him. Unto which I replyed, M. Walwyn had were  and integrity in his little finger, then John Price had in all his body; and therefore No meeting for me, seeing John Price was so base, unlesse Mr VValwyn as one, though we had but two of a side: but the businesse being much de∣bated and expostulated, Mr. VValwin and John Price both (for peace sake) were at present laid aside: and according to appointment (as I remember) all the other six met the fifteenth of Novemb. 1648, being Wednesday, at the fore-mentioned Nage head; and there, after some debate, unanimously a∣greed in these words, viz. That in our conceptions, the onely way of So∣ment is, 1. That some persons be chosen by the Army to represent the whole Body: Act that the well affected in every County (if it may be) chuse some persons to repress them: And those to meet at the Head-Quarters. 2. That those persons ought not to exercise any Legislative power, but only to  up the foundations of a just Government, and to propound them to the well-official people in every County to be agreed to: Which Agreement ought to be about Law; and therefore the bounds, limits and extent of the people's Legislative Deputies in Par∣liamens, contained in the Agreement to be drawn up into a formall contract, to be Mu∣tually signed by the well-affected people and their said Deputies upon the days of their E∣lection respectively. 3. To prevent present confusion, the Parliament (if it be possible) may not be by force immediately dissolved; but that the day of its dissolution be inserted in that A∣greement, by vertue whereof it shall be dissolved. 4. That this way of Settlement, (if it may be) should be mentioned in the Arm's first Remonstrance. 5. That the matter of the Petition of Septemb. 11. be the matter to be setled. Which Agreement of ours (as I remember) was immediately some away, to the Head Quarters at St. Alban's by Mr Hila of Southwark, where (to it was afterwards told us, it was very well accepted and approved of by the
great ones there; whose high and  Declarations  by  Windsor, when he pretended to lay down his Commission) against the King coming to our view, we made divers objections against many passages in it, but especially at divers lashes that excitely at the beginning of is  us: which we told some of their friends, could not be put in with a spirit of peace towards us, or intention of good to the Nation, in those good things we desired and propounded for it: But it was with many fair expressions salved up by them; upon which we judged it requisite for some of us to go to Windsor, to speak with Mr  the S-man himself; and accordingly (as I remember) Lieut. Colonel VVeiton, Mr Petty, Mr VVildman, and my Self met there; and having drawn up our thoughts in writing, we communi∣ted them to Col. Tychburn, Col. VVhite, M. Moyer, and divers others of the Independent Party, who went with us to the Governours house, where we met with Mr Peters, the grand Journey- Hakney-man of the Army; and after we had acquainted him with out windes, we delivered him a copy of our Paper, containing distinctly the Heads of what we desired, and in∣treated him to deliver them to Commissary Ireton, with whom we desired to discourse about them; who sent us word, at such an hour be would come to our Ion at the Garter, to speak with us about them; and accordingly he did, accompanied with a whole Train of Officers; and a large and sharp dis∣course we had; our principall difference lying at his desire in the too strict restraining liberty of conscience, and in keeping a power in the Parliament to punish where no visible Law is transgressed; the unreasonablenesse of which was much spoken against by divers of the principall Officers with him, but especially by Col. Harrison, who was then extreme (air and gilded: And so little satisfaction had we at that meeting, from Ireton (the Army's Alpha and Omega) that we despaired of any good from them, and were in a manner resolved to come away in haste to London, and acquaint our friends with our conceptions, and so improve our Interests forcibly, as much at we could, to oppose their sounded designes. But Colonel Harrison coming to us again it ten a clock, according to our desire, we had a private and large discourse with him, and fully and effectually acquainted him with the most desperate mischie vousnesse of their attempting to do these things, without giving some good security to the Nation for the future settlement of their Liberties and Freedoms, especially in frequent, free, and successive Representatives, ac∣cording to their many Promises, Oathes, Covenants and Declarations; or else is soon as they had performed their intentions to destroy the King, (which we fully understood they were absolutely resolved to do, (yea, as they told us, though they did Mutiall Law) and also totally to oot up the Parliament, and invite so many Members to come to them as would joyn with them, to manage businesses, till a new and equall Representative could by an Agreement be setled; which the chiefest of them protested be∣fore God, was the ultimate and chiefest of their  and desires) I say, we press'd hard for security, before they  these things in the least lest when they were done; we should he solely left to their wills and swords; by which, we told them, they might rule over us  Laws, as a  people, and so deal with us as  slavish peasants
France and deale with, who enjoy nothing that they in call their . All besides, we plainly valid we would not trust their bare  rall onely, for they had broke their promise once already, both with  the Kingdom; and he that would break once, would make no conscience of breaking twice, if it served for his ends, and therefore they must come to some absolute particular compact with us, or else, some of us told him, we would post away to London, and stir up our Interest against them, yea and spend our blouds to oppose them. To which he replyed to this effect, he was true in what we said; for he must ingenuously confesse, they had ones  with us and the Kingdom, and therefore acknowledged it was dangerous sting them upon Generals again: Bursaith he, we cannot slay so long from going to  with the Army as to perfect an Agreement; and without our speedy going, we  unavoydably destroyed: For (saith he) we fully understand, that the Treaty  the King and Parliament is almost concluded upon; at the conclusion of which  shall be commanded by King and Parliament to disband, the which if we  unavoydably destroyed for what we have done already: and if we do not  will by Act of Parliament proclaim us Traytors, and declare in to be the onely  of setling peace in the Nation; and then (saith he) we shall never be  with both the Interest of King and Parliament: so that you will be destroyed it well as we: sor we certainly understand that Major Generall Brown &c.  hand preparing an Army against us. And therefore I professe, I confesse,  not well what to say to your Reasons, they are so strong; but our Necessities  that we must speedily go, or perish; and to go without giving you some content, is ∣able too. Well Sir, (said we) we have as much cause to distrust the Parliament , as we have to distrust you; for we know what and how many large  they have made to the Kingdom, and how little they have performdely  we also know what a temptation Honour, Power, and profit are even to this spirits that were pretty ingenuous and honest before; and when you have done your work, and got, as you pretend, forty or fifty of the honestest Mem∣bers of the House to you; alas, (said we) it will be a mock Power; yet they may finde, such sweetnesse and delight in their pretended power, that they may sly to your swords for their protection; and bid us go shake our  our Agreement, and go look it where we can catch it. And therefore we will trust generals no more to your forty or fifty Members of Parliament, then to you: for it's possible, if we leave the Agreement to their , they may frame us such a one as will do us no good, but rather make  by our own consents, if signed by us: and therefore we pres'd him that we might agree upon a finall and absolute Judge of the matter and  the Agreement, that so we might not spend months and yeers in dispute a∣bout it. And therefore we would propound this unto him, That if  ∣nest friends in the Parliament, as they called them, would-use  amongst themselves, and the Army four from amongst themselves, and  Independents four from amongst themselves; we that were  Lvellers, would chuse four from among ourselves; and  dra p the Agreement finally, without any more appeal to any  for our parts, so far as all our Interest in England extended,
willing to acquiesce in, and submit to the determinations of them 16, or the major part of them: And we would be willing the Presbyterian party should bevied and desired to chuse four more to be of equall authority with the other sixteen. Provided, they did it by the first day we should appoint to meet upon. Which Poposition he approved of extraordinary well, and said, It was  just, as rationall, and as equitable as possibly could be; and said, He doubted not but all Interests would center in it, and ingaged to acquaint them with it: and so we parted, very glad that we were likely to come to some fixed agreement for the future enjoyment of our dear bought, and hard purchased Fredoms. And the next morning we went to the Gentlemen Independents, that lay the next door to us, who were almost ready to horse for London, and we ac∣quainted them with it, who liked it very well, and with whom we fixed a night for severall distinct meetings in London, to chuse our retpective trustees for this work, and also appointed a day to meet at Winsor again about it, and from them we went to Master Holland, who then was the chief stickler, for those they called honest men in the House of Commons, and as I remember we et Colonel Harison, Master Holland, and Captaine Smith a Member, and his Son in Law in the Street, and Master Holland seemed exceedingly to rejoyce at the Proposition. Colonel Harison having told him of it before, which we repeated over distinctly to him, that so in conclusion we might not be gulled through pretence of mistakes or misunderstandings; which we were continu∣ally aaid we should meet with; so we went all together to Commissary Generall Irons chamber to have his concurrence, which of all sides was taken for the concurrence of the whole Army, or at least for the powerfull and govening part of it; he being in a manner both their eyes and ears: so when we came to his Chamber in the Castle, he was in Bed with his Wife, but sent us out word by Colonel Harison as he averred to us that he did absolutely and hetily agree to the foresaid Proposition, which to avoid mistakes, was again repeated, so we seemed joyfull men of all sides, and apointed a day speedily to meet at Winsor, about it, Master Holland againe and againe engaging for four Parlsament men, and Colonel Harison, with Commissary Ireton for four of the Army, as we Londoners had done for each of our tribe; and so to horse we went, and I overtook upon the road the whole gang of Independants, with whom I discoursed again, and acquainted them all fully with the absolutenes of our agreement, which they acquainted their friends with in London, who chose Colonel Tichburn, Colonel Iohn White, Master Daniel Taylor, and Ma∣ster Price the Scrivener; And for our party, there was by unanimous consent of the Agents from our friends in and about London, at a every large meeting chosen Master William Walwyn, Master Maximilian Pey, Master Iohn Wildman and my Self, and for the honest men of the Parliament as they were called, they had severall meetings at the Bell in Kings-street, and at Summerset-house, where as I was informed, they chose Colonel Heny Martyn, Colonel Alexander Rigy, Master Thomas Challi and Master Sct, with one or two more to sup∣ply the places of those of them that should be absent at any time about their: oc∣casios; so when we cam to Winsor the Army men had chosen Commissary Generall Iret, Sir William Constable, and as I remember Colonel Tomlinso,
Colonel Baxster, Lieutenant Colonel Kelsey, and Captain Par,  two of the which last 4 should alwayes make up the number; so we had a ∣ting in their Councel-Chamber at the Castle, where we were all of all  present, but only the Parliament men, for whom only Colonel M app∣ed, and after a large discourse about the foundations of our agreement, we de∣parted to our Lodging, where Colonel Martyn and we four nic-named Lo∣vellers, lockt our selves up, and went in good earnest to the consideration of of our Agreement, but much was not done in it there, because of their ha  London to force and breake up the Parliament (which Journy at all▪ was very much opposed by M. Wawyn, and many reasons he gave against their   London at all) the absolute desolution of which their friends in the  would no ways admit of, although Ireton, Harison &c. commonly stiled it  a Parliament that had forfeited its trust, a mock Parliament, and that if they did not totally dissolve it, but purge it, it would be but a mock Parliament, and  mockpower however; for where have we say they either law, warrant or  purge it, or cn any thing justifie us in the doing it; but the height of  to  the Kingdom from a new war, that they with the conjunction with the  will presently vote and declare for, and to procure a new and free representative  successive and frequent free Representatives, which this present Parliament  never suffer, and without which the freedoms of the Nation are lst , and  doing of which can only justifie before God and man ou pres  formr extraordinary actings with, and against legall Authority, and so all our fighting fruitlesse; and this was their open and common discourse,  more of the like nature; and to those that objected against their totall ∣ving or breaking the House, (and the illegalitie of their intended and  trying of the King, which also was opposed by us, till a new and unquesti∣ble Representative was sitting;) as I am able sufficiently by pluralitie of ∣nesses to prove and justifie, yea when they were come to London, , &c. and some Members of the House (in a Chamber neer the long Gallery i VVhite-hall,) had a large conference, where and to whom he stifly  the same to their faces, calling this Purg'd Parliament, a mocks power and  Parliament, which Members I beleeve if there were a necessiry of it, I could produce to justifie it; for I am sure one of them told me the substance of all the discourse immediatly after it happened; So that if it be treason to  a Pretended Parliament, a mockpower, a mock Parliament, yea and to say in  English, that it is no Parliament at all, then they themselves are the pr, the  and originall trayto▪ and if this be true, as true it is; then there  Legall Judges, nor Justices of Peace in England; and if so; then all those  executed at Tiburne, &c. by their sentences of condemnations given against them,  meerly marthered and the Judges or Justices that condemned the  liable in   (and that justly) therefore, for acting without a just and gall ∣mission either from true Regall, or true Parliamentary power; see for this purpose the notable arguments in the 13▪ 14, but especially 15 page of the second Edition of my late picture of the Councell of State: But to  to our acting to compleat the Agreement, all parties chosen of all sides ∣stantly mett at White-hall after the Army came to town, saving the Parlia∣ment men failed, only Master Mortin was most commonly there, and a long and dious ug we had with Commissary Generall  only, yea
whole nights together, Principally about Liberty of Csci, and  Parlia∣ments punishing where no law provides, and very angry and Lordly in his debates many times he was; but to some kind of an expedient in the first, for peace sake we condescended in to please him, and so came amongst the major part of the 16 Commissioners, according to our originall Agreement, to an ab∣solute and finall conclusion; and thinking all had been done as to any more debate upon it, and that it should without any more doe be promoted for subscriptions, first at the Councell of Warre, and so in the Regiments, and so all over the Nation; but alas poor fools we were meerly cheated and cozened (it being the principall unhappinesse of some of us (as to the flesh) to have our eyes wide open to see things long before most honest men come to have their eyes open; and this is that which turns to our smart and reproach) and that which we Commissioners feared at the first, viz. (that no tye, promises not ingagements were strong enough to the grand Juglers and Leaders of the Army, was now made cleerly manifest, for when it came to the Councel, there came the Generall, Crumwell, and the whole gang of creature Colonels and other Officers, and spent many dayes in taking it all in pieces) and there Ireton himself shewed himself an absolute King, if not an Emperor, against whose will no man must dispute, and then ittlecock  their Scout, Okey, and Major Barton (where Sir Hardrese VVaer sate President) begun in their open Councell to quarrell with us by giving some of us base and unwor∣thy language, which procured them from me a sharpe retortment of their own basenesse and unworthinesse into their teeth, and a CHALLENG from my selfe into the field besides seeing they were like to fight with us in the room, in their own Garison, which when Sir Hardresse in my eare reproved me for it, I justified it and gave it him again for suffering us to be so affronted: And within a little time after I took my leave of them for a pack of dissembling juggling Knaves, amongst whom in consultation ever thereafter I should scorn to come (as I told some of them;) for there was neither saith, truth, nor common honesty amongst hem: and so away I went to those that chose and trusted me, and gave publikely and effectually (at a set meeting appointed on purpose) to divers of them an exact account how they had dealt with us, and couzened and deceived us; and so absolutely discharged my self for medling or making any more with so perfidious a ge∣neration of men as the great ones of the Army were, but especially the cun∣ningest of Machiavilians Commissary Henry Ireton: and having an exact copy of what the greatest part of the foresaid sixteen had agreed upon, I one∣ly mended a clause in the first Reserve about Religion, to the sense of us all but Ireton, and put an Epistle to it, of the 15 of December 164, and printed it of my own accord, and the next day it came abroad; about which Mr Price the Scrivener and my self had a good sharp bout at Colonel Tbburn's house within two or three dayes after, where I avowed the pub∣lishing of it, and also putting my Epistle to it of my own head and accord. And after that I came no more among hem, but with other of my friends, prepared a complaint against their dealing with us, and a kinde of Protest against their proceedings; which with my own had I presented to the Ge∣nerals own hands at the News, the 28 of December 1648, being accompa∣nied with Major Robert Cobbet, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. George
Mr. Robert Davies, Mr. Richard Overton, Mr. Edward ech, Mr. Dil Li∣ton, Mr. William Bottom, Mr. John Harris, Mr. Thomas Dafferne, Mr. Thomas Goddard, Mr. Samuel Blaiklock, Mr. Andrew Dednm, Mr. John Walters, and Mr. Richard Pechel; and which was immediately printed by Ja. and Jo. Moxon, for William Larner, at the signe of the Black Moor neer Bishops-gate: within two or three dayes of the delivery of which, I went towards my Journey to Newcastle; and about five weeks after my arrivall in those parts, I heard that the General and his Councel had presented their Agreement to your House: which, when I read the title page of it, I found it to be upon the 20 of January 1648, which is compleat 35 dayes after my publishing of that which is called ours. And yet in the third and fourth pages of a Declaration of the proceed∣ings of the General in reducing the late revolted Troops, appointed by his Excellncy and his Councel of VVar to be printed and published May 22 1649, and signed by their Order, Richard Hater Secretary, and first printed at Oxford, and then re-printed at London May 23▪ 1649. I finde these very words, viz. The grounds and manner of the proceedings of these men that have so much pre∣tended for the Liberty of the people, have been as followeth: There was a paper stiled the Agreement of the people, framed by certain select persons, and debated at a generall Councel of Officers of the Army, to be tendered to the Parliament, and to be by them commended over to the people of the Nation: It being hoped, that such an Expedient, if assented unto, at least by the honest part of the people that had appeared for this common Cause, to which God hath so witnessed, it would have tended much to settlement, and the composing of our differences; at les have fixed honest men to such grounds of certainty as might have kept them firm and entire in opposing the common enemy, and stand united to publick Interest. The generall Councell of the Army, and the other sorts of men, going then under the name of Levellers (so baptized by your selves at Putney) who (by their late actings have made good the same which we then judged but an imputation) had (as now it appears) different ends and aims, both in the matter and manner of their proceedings: That which was intended by those men, was to have somewhat ∣dred as a test and coertion upon the people, and all sorts of men and Authorities in he Land: That which these, to wit, the Councell of the Army aimed at, was to make an humble Representation of such things as were then likely to give satisfaction, and unite, and might be remitted to MENS JUDGMENTS, to be owned or dis∣owned as men were satisfied in their consciences, and as it should please God to le men SEE REASON for their so doing; that so it might not be onely called  Agreement, but through the freedom of it, be one INDEED, and RECEIVE IT'S STAMP OF APPROBATION FROM THE PARLIA∣MENT TO WHOM IT WAS HUMBLY SUBMITTED. HEREUPON THOSE OTHER MEN TOOK so much DISSA∣TISFACTION, that they forthwith printed and spread abroad their paper, which was different from that of the Army; using all possible mans to make the same to passe: but with how little effect, is very well known. And finding by the Armie's applica∣tion to the PARLIAMENT, that they were likely, according to their duty, to STAND BY AND OWN THEM AS THE SUPREME AU∣THORITY OF THE NATION, they have by all means assayed to vi∣pend
that Authority, presenting them to the people (in printed Libls, and otherwise) as worse Tyrants then any who were before them. In which passage of the Generals and his Councel, I shall desire to ob∣serve these things, which plainly to me are in the words: and if they can make it appear that I mistake their words as they are laid down, I shall cry them mercy. First, That they give a false and untrue Narrative of the original occasion of that Agreement, to which by our importunate importunity they were necessita∣ted, and drawn unto that little they did in it as a Bear to the stake, as is truely by me before declared; and which, as the sequell shews, they undertook meerly to quiet and please us (like children with rattles) till they had done their main work; (viz. either in anhilating or purging the House to make it fit for their purpose, and in destroyng the King; unto both which they ne∣ver had our consents in the least) that so they might have no opposition from us, but that we might be lull'd asleep in a fools paradise with thoughts of their honest intentions, till all was over; and then totally lay it aside, as they have done, as being then able to do what they pleased whether we would or no: for if they ever had intended an Agreement, why do they let their own lie dormant in the pretended Parliament ever since they presented it? seeing it is obvious to every knowing English eye, that from the day they presented it to thi our, they have had as much power over their own Par∣liament now sitting, as any School-master in England ever had over his Boys. But to them it was presented (who scarce ought to meddle with it) on pur∣pose, that there, without any more stir about it, it might be lodged for ever: For alas, an Agreement of the People is not proper to come from the Parlia∣ment, because it comes from thence rather with a command then any thing else; so that its we, and not they that really and in good earnest say, it ought not to do, but to be voluntary. Besides, that which is done by one Parliament, as a Parliament, may be undone by the next Parliament: but an Agreement of the People begun and ended amongst the People can ne∣ver come justly within the Parliaments cognizance to destroy: which the Generall and the chief of his Councel knew well enough; and I dare safely say it upon my conscience, that an Agreement of the People upon foundati∣ons of just freedom gon through with, is a thing the Generall and the chief∣est of his Councel as much hates, as they do honesty, justice and righteous∣nesse, (which they long since abandoned) against which in their own spirits they are absolutely resolved (I do verily beleeve) to spend their heart blouds, and not to leave a man breathing in English air, if possibly they can, that throughly and resolutely prosecutes it; a new and just Parliament being more dreadful to them, then the great day of Judgement spoken so much of in the Scripture. And although they have beheaded the King, yet I am confidently perswaded their enmity is such at the Peoples Liberties, that they would sooner run the hazard of letting the Prince in to reign in his Fathers stead, then further really a just Agreement, or endure the sight of a new Parliament rightly constituted. Secondly, Its plain to me out of their words, That they positively aver, that their Agreement was presented to the Parliament before ours was pub∣lished
in print; which I must and do here tell both the  Councel, is the arrantest lie and falshood under the cope of heven: for I have truely before declared, and will justifie it with my life, that ours  printed above thirty dayes before theirs was presented; yea, it was printed before theirs was half perfected. But it is no wonder, when men tn their backs of God, of a good conscience, of righteousnesse and common hony a∣mongst men, and make lies and falshoods, oppression and bloody cruelty their sole confidence and refuge, that then they say or swear any thing; all which, if the Generall and his Councel had not done, they would have scorned and abhorred, in the face of the Sun, to have affirmed and printed so many lies, as in their foregoing words is literally (without wresting) contained. Thirdly, They positively hint, our dissatisfaction was taken at them for presenting theirs to the Parliament; which is also as false as the former:  1. Our dissatisfaction was above a month before declared in their open Coun∣cel by my self, &c. as Sir Hardresse Waller and divers others of them  but justifie. 2. Our dissatisfaction was long before taken, upon the grounds by me before specified: the manifestations of which dissatisfaction I pre∣sented to the Generals own hands the 28 of December 1648, acco and subscribed with my own name, and fifteen more of my Coes, i behalf of our selves, and all our friends that sent us, which we also ∣ately caused to be printed. And their Agreement, as th itle of it decl▪ was not presented till the 20 of Jan. after. Fourthly, They say, VVe used all possible means to make ours passe;  how little successe, they say, is very well known. If they mean, we used all ps∣sible means to make ours passe with them, it's true; but the reason i  better effect, was because they had no minde to it, it was too hoct for : and I am sure, in the very Epistle to it, it is declarared, That the  reason of the printing of it, is, that the people might have  opportity  the equitie of it, and offer their reasons against any thing therein . And  was all the means, after the printing of it, we used to make it passe. Ae, we knew the Armies swords were longer then ours, and would by force  in pieces all our endeavours that we should use against their minds and , by reason of the peoples cowardlinesse; and therefore we let ours rest, and were willing to sit still to see them perfect theirs, and never did any thing in it since amongst the people to make it passe, that I know of. Fifthly, They say, VVe were troubled at their doing their dty, in  to authority, and owing the Parliament a the Suprm Authoritie of the : When as alas, it is as visible as the Sun when it shines in its glory and splen∣dour, That CORAH, DATHAN and ABIRAM of old were never such Rebels against Authoritie as the General and his Councel are,  Anabapts at Mnser with JOHN of LEYDON and NEPERDULLI∣ON were never more conteers of Authority; nor JACK STRAW, nor WAT TILER, nor all those faomous men mentioned with a black pen in our Hi∣stories, and called Rebels and Traytrs, can never be put in any seale of equll balance, for all manner of REBELLIONS and TREASONS  all sorts and kindes of Magistracy, with the Generall and his Councell: And I will under take the tk upon my life, to make good every particular of this I  say, to
the Gl's face. For did any, or all of them  mentioned,  against their Advancers, Promotors and Ceators, as those have done two severall times? Did ever any, or all of them chop off (without all  of Law) a KING's and NOBLES HEADS? rvish and  a Parliament twice? nay, raze the foundation of a Parliament to the ground? and under the notion of performing a trust, break all Oathes, Co∣nts, Protestations and Declarations, (and make evidently void all the declared ends of the War) which was one of Strafford's principal Treasons, and which is notably aggravated against him by M. Pym in his fore-mentioned Speech against him? pag. 9. 11. and under pretence of preserving their Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms, destroy, annihilte, and tread under their feet all their Laws, Liberties, Freedoms and Properties (although they could cite against Srord the precedent of Trilian chief Justice, who lost his life for delivering of opinions for the subversion of the Law, as S. John's Argument of Law against him, pag. last but one declares; yea, and against the Ship-money Judges, and also the Precedent of Judg Belknap in King Richard the Second's time, who was by the Parliament banished for but subscribing an opinion against Law, though forc'd by a dagger held to his brest, thereto; yea, and cie also the precednt against him, which was against Justice Thorp in Edward the Third's time, who was by the Parliament condemned to death for bribery: the reason of which Judgment, they say, was, because he had broken the Kings Oath, that solemn and great Obligation (as Mr. Pym ibid. calls it) which is the security of the whole Kingdom.) All which forementioned, either with pen or tongue by dispute, I wil particularly maintain and make good upon my life, publickly, before the face of the Kingdom, against the stoutest and ablest of their Cham∣pions in all their pretended Churches of God, either Independent or Anba∣ptistical; and that they are altogether unsavoury salt, good for nothing but to be abominated, and thrown out to the dunghil, as fit for nothing but the in∣dignation of God, and the peoples wrath. And as for their stiling this their own Jto the supreme Authoritie; I know the time not long since, when that stile to be given to the House of Commons single, was accounted an abominable wickednesse in the eye of the chiefest of them: Yea, I also know the time, and am able sufficiently to justifie and prove it, that they were absolutely resolved and determined to pull up this their own Parliament by the roots, and not so much as to leave a shadow of it (frequently then calling it a MOCK-POWER, and a MOCK-PARLIAMENT:) yea, and had done it, if we, and some in the House of our then friends, had not been the principall instruments to hinder them; we judging it then, of two evils the least, to chuse rather to be governed by the shadow of a Parliament, till we could get a reall and true one (which with the greatest protestations in the world they then promised and en∣gaged with all their might speedily to effect) then simply, solely and onely by the wil of Sword-men, whom we had already found to be men of no very tender consciences: But to me it is no wonder, that they own this for the supreme Pow∣er, seeing they have totally in Law, Reason and Justice broke the Parliament, and absolutely, by the hands of Tho. Pride, set up indeed a MOCK-POWER, and a MOCK-PARLIAMENT, by prgig  all those  they
way jeolous of, would not vote as they would have them, and suffering and  none to sit but (for the major part of the) a company of absolute School boys, the will, like good boyes, say their lessons after, them their Lords and Masters, and  they would have them; and so be a screen (as yong H. Vane used to call the King) betwixt them and the pople, with the name of Parliament, and the  and imperfect image of legal and just Authority, to pick their pockets for the by Assessments and lxions; and by their arbitrary and tyrannicall Courts  Committees, (the best of which is now ecome a perfect Star chamber, High-Commission and Councel board)  them their perfect slaves and  their constant and cotinuall breaking and abasing of their spirits; a thing so much complained of against the Erl of Strafford, by the late Parliament  his tryal, especially in M. Pym's notable Speech against him, pag. 7 as it is printed 1641, at he latr end o a book called Speeches and Passages: where speaking against Oppression, and the exercise of a tyrannicall and arbitrary pow, (the Earl of Stafford, sins, which now are become more the great mens of the Army) e saith, It is inconfistent with the peace, the wealth, the prosperity of a Nation, it is destructive to Justice, the mother of peace; to Inductry, the spring of wealth;  Valour, which is the active vertue whereby the prosperity of a Nation can  be procured, confirmed, and inlarged. It is not only ape to take away Peace, and so intangle the Nation with Wars;  doth corrupt Peace, and puts such amalignitie into it, as produceth the effects of War, as he there instanceth in the Earl of Straffords Government. And as for Industry and Valour, Who will take pains for that (saith he) which when he  gotten, is not his own? or who will fight for that wherein he hath no other intest, but such as is subject to the will of another? The ancient incouragement to  that were to defend their Countries was this, That they were to hazard their per∣sons, pro aris & socis, for their Religion, and for their houses; But by this arbi∣trary way, which was practised (by the Earl) in Ireland and counselled here;  man had any certainty, either of Religion, or of his House, or any thing else to be his own: But besides this, such arbitrary courses have an ill operation upon the courage of a Nation, by IMBASING THE HEARTS OF THE PEOPLE; A servile condition doth for the most part beget in men a slavish temper and disposition. Those that live so much under the Whip and the Pillry, and such SERVILE engines, as were frequently used by the Earl of Straf∣ford, they may have the dregs of valour, sullenness, and stubbornness, which may make them prone to mutinies and discontents; But thse nobie and gallant affe∣ctions which put men on rave designes and attempts for the preservation or inlarge∣ment of a Kingdom, they are hardly capable of: Shall it be treason to embase the Kings coin, though but a piece of Twelve-pence or Six-pence; and must it  needs be the effect of a greater reason, to EMBASE THE SPIRITS of his Subjects, and to set a stamp and CHARACTER OF SER∣VITUDE upon them, when by it they shall be disabled to doe any thing for the service of the King or Common wealth? O most excellent and transcen∣dent saying! worthy to be writ in a able of gold in every English∣mans house.
But Sir, I say, No wonder, all the things foregoing rightly    own you (now as Thom Pride hath made you) for the  of the Nation, although before they would neither submit to the Kings not the Parliament, when it was a thousand times more unquestionably  Law and Reason, then now you are; but fought against both King and Parlia∣ment, their setters up, conquered them, repelled them, subdued them, and broke them both; and so pull'd up by the roots all the legall and visible Ma∣gistracy and Authority in the Nation, and thereby left none but themselves, who stand in parallell to none (as they have manage  their businesse) but to a company of murderers, theeves and robbers, who may justly be dispossessed by the first force that are able to do it (as Mr. Py undenyably and fully proves in the foresaid Speech pag. 3. 9. 11.) no pretended Authority that they of themselves and by their swords can set up, having in the sight of God or man, either in Law or Reason, any more just Authority in them, then so many Argier Pirats and Robbers upon the Sea have. And so much in answer at present to the forementioned part of the Generals Declaration. But now to return back, after this necessary Digression, to my own Sy of going down into the North, where &c. I received of my 3000 l. allotted me, for my hard suffered for, deer purchased, and long expected Reparati∣ons, 400 l. of Sir Arthur Hasterig, for sequestred Coles and Iron, of Mr. Bowes's, and got besides betwixt 100 and 200 l. in Rents, Free-quarter and Taxes having eat out the bowels, soul and life of them, being served in the wood allotted me, (the principall thing in my ee, by old Sir Henry Van my old blody enemy) as is in part declared before in page 15 and 16. who hath Treason and crimes enough upon him, not onely to throw him out of the House, if it were any, but also to send him to a Scaold or Gallows, as is very notably declared in print in England's Birth right, pag. 19. 20. 21. in which pages you may read his Charge of High Treason exhibited against him to the Earl of Essx in anno 1643. by severall Gentlemen of the County of Darham; for his trayterous betraying their Country (and so consequently all the North) to the Earl of Newcastle; for which &c. e better deserved in Law, equiry and reason to lose his head, then either Hmbleton, or stout Capel did for theirs, they having betrayed no trust (but had the letter of the Law of England &c, to jstifie them in what they did) as e most palpably hath done. And as for his breaking up the little Parliament, his Star chamber wicked∣nesse, and his desperate Gun-powder Monopoly, with his and his so Sir Geoge Vane's late jugglings in the County of Durham▪ I have pretty well a∣natomised in my book called The resolved mans resolution, page 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. his very having a hand in the Gunpowder Monopoly alone being suf∣ficient long since to throw him out of your House, as being uncapable to be  Member therein, as cleerly appears by your Votes and Orders of the 19. and 25 of Nov. 1640. one of which, as it is printed in the foresaid Speech and Passages, pag. 329. thus followeth: It is ordered upon the Question, That all Projectors and Monopolizers whatsoever; or that have had any share in any Monopolies, or that receive, or  re∣ceives any benefit by any Monopolies or Patent, or that have procured any Warrant
or Command for the restrain or molesting of any that have refused  them∣selves  any Proclamation or project, are disabled by Order of this House, to be  Member thereof, and shall be dealt with as a stranger, that hath no power to sit there. In the compase of which Order is oth Sir Henry Milore and Law VVhittaker, and ought in justice, for their noorious Monopolising, to be both long since thrown out of the House. But again to return: After I had done as much in the North as I could  present do about my own businese, I came again to London, where I fixed up my resolution wholly to devote my self to provide for the future well∣being of my wife and children, and not without the extraordinariest neces∣sity engage in any publick contests again, making it my work to enquire into the true estate of things with the great men that st at the elm, and whether the bent of their spirits now after they had taken off the King, was to set the Nation free from Tyanny, as well as from some they called principal Ty∣rants; and whether or no the drift of all their actions were but a meer chan∣ging of persons, but not of things or tyranny it self: and truly my observations and inquiries brought me in so little satisfaction in the visible intention of the ruling men, for all their many solemn Ingagements to the contrary, th I looked cleerly at the whole tendency of their wayes, to drive at a greater Ty∣ranny then ever, in the worst of the Kings Reign, (before the Parliament) was exercised: at which I bit my lip, but said little, and went to no meeting; which made many of my old faithfull friends be jealous of me, some of whom gave out some private hints, that I had now served my self by my pretended Reprations, and I was thereby quieted, and was become like all the rest of the world, and so there was an end of me. But I confesse, I was in a kinde of deep muse with my self, what to do with my self; being like an old weather-beaten ship, that would fain be in some harbour of ease and rest, and my thoughts were very much bent of going into Holland, where I conjectured I should be out of harms way, and get a little repose. And while I was thus musing, I heard from thence of a most transcendent eight and rage that the Kings party there were in, especially about the beheading the late King; so that I judged there was no safety for me there, especially when I called to minde what the Post-master of Brrow-brigs and others in York-shire told me as I came up from Newcastle, which was, that the C∣liers in those parts were most desperate mad at me in particular, about the be∣heading of the late King: although I were as far as Newcastle when it was done, and refused to give my consent to be one of his Judges, although I was solicited so to be before I went out of London; yea, although I ∣edly declared my self at Windsor against the manner and time of their in∣tended dealing with him; arguing there very stifly, that upon their own principles, which led them to look upon all legall Authority in England  now broken, they could be no better then murderers in taking away the King life though never so guilty of the crimes they charged upon him: for as ju∣stice ought to be done, especially for bloud, which they then principally charged upon him; so said I, and still say, It ought to be  justly:  in case another man murder me, and a day, a week, or a yeer after my brother or friend that is no legall Magistrate, execuces him▪ therefore, yet this is ∣der
in the eye of the Law, because it was done by a hand had no Authority to do it. And therefore I pressed again and again, seeing themselves confess'd all legal Authority in England was broke, that they would stay his tryall till a new and equal free Representative upon the Agreement of the well-assected people, that had not fought against their Liberties, Rights and Freedoms, could be chosen and sit, and then either try him thereby, or else by their Judges sitting in the Court called Kings Bench. But they at Windsor ask'd me how by Law I could have him tryed: I told them, the Law of England expresly saith, Whosoever rders or kils another shall die; it doth not say, ex∣cepting the King, Queen, or Prince, &c. but indefinitely, whosoever murders shall e; and therefore where none is excepted, there all men are included in Law: But the King is a man: Ergo, he is included as well as I. Unto which it was objected, that it would hardly be proved, that the King with his own hands kill'd a man: To which I answered, by the Law of England, e that counsels or commissionates others to kill a man or men, is as guilty of the fact, as he or they that do it: And besides, the advantage of rying of the King by the rules of the Law, would be sufficient to declare, that no man is born (or justly can be made) lawlesse, but that even Magistrates as well as people are subject to the penall part of the Law, as well as the directive part: And besides, to try him in an extraordinary way, that hath no reall footsteps nor paths in our Law, would be a thing of extraordinary ill Pre∣cedent; for why not twenty upon pretended extraordinary cases, as wel as one? and why not a thousand as wel as twenty▪ and extraordinary cases are easily made and pretended by those that are uppermost, though never so unjust in themselves. And besides, to try him in an extraordinary way, when the Law hath provided all the essentials of justice in an ordinary way, (and meerly wants nothing (if it do want) but twelve Kings as his Peer or Equals) will nourish and increase in men that erroneous conce, That Ma∣grates by the Law of God, Nature, and Reason, are not, no nor ought not to be sub∣ject to the penal part of the Laws of men, as well as the directive part of it, which is the bane, ruine and destruction of all the Common-wealths in the world. I say, the confideration of the things fore-mentioned put me off the thought of going to Holland my self: and then I put the query to my self, What course I should (being now a free man) take for my livelihood: for if I and my family lived upon the main stock, which was not very much, (now that I had paid almost all my debts) that would soon waste and be gone; and to take a place for my future livelihood, as I have been offered often, and that  considerable one; that I could not do, for these reasons: First, because I was not satisfied in the present power or Authority to act under them; and so if I should, I should be a supporter of so unjst and illegal a fabrick as I judged an everlasting Parliament (prged twice by force of Arms by the hands of their meer mercenary servants) to be; who were principally raised, bired and paid to kil those they esteemed and judged Bears, Wolves,  and Pkass: that took up Arms against the true, chast and legally co∣tued Representative of the Nation, being not in the least bir or raised to be the Masters of their Masters, or the Lawgivers to the legal Law▪kers of the Nation in case of necessity. And that an everlasting Parliamnet is do∣structive
to the very life and soul of the Liberties of this Nation, I  prove; first by Law, and secondly by Reason. And first by Law: The Law Books do shew, That a Parliament (which in its own institution is excellent good physick, but never was intended, no safely can be used for diet, because it is so unlimited and arbitrary) was called and held somtimes twice a yeer before the Conquest, as is declared by Lambert, in his Collection of Laws before the Conquest, amongst the Laws of Edgar, chap. . and by Sir Edward Cook▪ in his margent in the ninth page of his par 4. Inst. in the Chat. of High Court of Parliament: which with other of the Liberties of England being by force of arms subdued by the Bastard Norman Con∣quetor, although he three severall times took his oath after his being owned for King, to maintain their Laws and Liberties, as being not able, nor judg∣ing his Conquest so good, just and secure a Plea to hold his new got Crown by, as an after mutuall compact with the people, or their Representatives over whom he was to rule: and therefore, as Cok in the foresaid Chapt. pag. 12. declares, a Parliament, o a kinde of one, was held in his time. See also 21 Edw. 3 fol 60. and 1 part. Institut. lib. 2. chap. 10. Sect. 164. fol. 110. a. and came to be more frequently used in his Successors time; yea, even to be  in two years in Edward the First or Second's time; at which notwithstanding the people grumbled, as being an abridgment of their ancient and undoubted Li∣bertie, to meet more frequently in their National and publick assemblies, to treat and conclude of things for their weal and better being; the want of which, of ancient time lost this Island to the Romans, as Cok declares, 4 part. . fol. 9. out of Taitus in the Life of Agricola, pag. 306. whereupon it was n∣acted in full Parliament in Edw. the Thirds time, That the King (who is their Officer of trust) should assemble and call them together once every yeer, or more often if need require; as appears by the Statute of 4 Edw. 3. 14. But because this was not constantly used by that King, but there sometimes was intervals of three or four yeers betwixt Parliament and Parliament, which was a dimi∣nution of the soul and life of all their Liberties, viz frequent and often  Parliaments; therefore in the 36 yeer of his Reign annuall Parliaments are provided for again, and also the causes of their assembling declared in these very words: Item, For maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and redresse of divers mischiefs and grievances which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every yeer, as another time was ordained by a Statute of 4. Edw. 3. chap. 14. But King Charles exceedingly breaking his trust, in the frequent calling of Parliaments, and dissolving them at his pleasure, when they came to treat of any thing that he liked not, and so made them uselesse to the Nation; both which was against his trust, as you notably declare in your Declaration of Novemb. 2. 1642. 1 part Book Decl. pag. 701, 702. And of which you most bitterly com∣plain in your first Remonstrance, 1 part Book Decl. pag. 5. 6. 11. and in pag. 10. 11 ibidem you declare, That his destroying of these two grand Fr∣dms of the People, viz. Frequent, successive Parliaments, and free Daes there∣in, bad corrupted and distempered the whole frame and Government of the King, and brought in nothing but wayes of destruction and Tyranny. For the preventing of which for the future, you got an Act to passe in the sxteth yeer of the late
King, and the first yeer of this long-winded Parliament, to  of the two forementioned Acts for an annuall Parliament: And further there say thus: And whereas it is by experience found, that the not holding of Parliaments accor∣ding to the two forementioned Acts, hath produced sundry and great mischiefs and in∣conveniences to the Kings Majesty, the Church and Common-wealth; For the pre∣vention of the like mischiefs and inconveniences in time to come, Be it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, with the consent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall. and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That the said [LAST FOREMENTIONED] Laws and Statutes be from henceforth duely kept and observed. And you there go on and enact, that in case the King perform not this part of his trust in calling annuall Parliaments, that then a Trienniall one shall be CALLED BY THE LORD KEEPER, &c. whether the King will or no. And there being no provision in this Act, but that the King might break up this Parliament at his pleasure, as before he used to do, and so dis-inable you to discharge your trust and duty to the people, in providing fit remedies for those many grievances then extraordinarily spread over the whole Na∣tion, that the long intermission of Parliaments had occasioned; you there∣fore presse the King to grant an Act, that the two Houses might not be dis∣solved but by your own consents; which the King condescended unto the rather, because the Scotch Army was then in the Kingdom, which he longed to be rid of, and which you pretended you could not pay without such an Act; these being the true declared and intended causes of it, both in King and Parliament: There being not one word in the Act that authoriseth the two Houses to be a constant and perpetuall Parliament, which was never so much as intended nor pretended; and which if in the Act it had been absolutely declared, it had been a void and a null Act in it self, as being both against the nature of the Kings trust and Yours: which (as in your Book of Decl. part 1. pag. 150. you declare) is, to provide for the peoples weal, but not for their woe; for their better being, but not for their worse being. For, your Interest and the Kings both being Interests of Trust, as your Declarations do plentifully and plainly declare, 1 part Book Decl. pag. 206. 266. 267. 382. but especially your present Junto's late Declaration, against the late beheaded King, and Kingly Government of the 17 of March 1648. pag. 2. 11 13. 15. 16. compared with 24. 25. 27. And all Interests of trust whatsoever are for the use of others, and can∣not, nor ought not to be imployed to their own particular, nor to any other use, saving that onely for which they are intended, according to the condition and true intent thereof, 1 part Book Dec. pag. 266. 267. 700. And your trust is onely for the good of the Nation; which is the principall, or onely end of all Go∣vernment in the Nation; as you confesse in your foresaid Declaration of March 17, pag. 6. and in 2 part Book Decl. pag. 95. 879. And therefore, if you had put the King upon such an Act as the establishing of a perpetuall Parliament, you had thereby destroyed frequent, successive and annually chosen Parliaments; for which you had been Taytors in the highest nature to your trust, in destroying the very PILLARS, LIFE, MARROW and SOUL OF ALL THE PEOPLES LIBERTIES, for the presentation of which
they chose you, and which would shortly bring in (as is too evident  this day) greater disorders, confusions, and tyrannies then ever were in all the Kings Reign before; and so wholly and fully make your selves guilty of that which he was but in part (viz. the establishing of a perfect Tyranny by Law) an everlasting Parliament being ten thousand times worse then no Parlia∣ment at all; for no such slavery under the cope of heaven, as that which is brought upon the people by pretence of Law, and their own voltary ; and no greater Treason can there be in the world committed, then for  i∣teressed Power to keep their Commission longer then by the letter, equitie or intention of their Commissions their Masters really intended they should; especially when it is kept by force of Arms, to the Masters hurt, and the dan∣ger of his total destruction, for the meer advancement of their servants and their Associates: all which is the case of your pretended Parliament, where∣of you are now Speaker, and that you were never intended to sit so long as you have done, nor to be everlasting. I shall here recite the Act it self ∣batim, the onely and alone pretence of a Commission you have, and then take it in pieces by paraphrasing upon it. The Act it self thus followeth: Anno XVII CAROLI Regis. An ACT to prevent inconveniences which may happen by the untimely Adjourning, Pro∣roguing, or Dissolving of this present PARLIAMENT. WHereas great Summs of money must of necessity be speedily advanced and provided for the relief of his Majestie's Army and people in the Northern parts of this Realm, and for the preventing the imminent danger this Kingdom is in, and for supply of other his Majesties present and urgent occasions, which cannot be so timely effected as is requisite, without credit for rai∣sing the said moneys; which credit cannot be obtained, until such obstacles be first removed as are occasioned by fears, jealou∣sies, and apprehensions of divers of his Majesties loyall Subjects, that this present Parliament may be adjourned, prorogued, or dis∣solved BEFORE JUSTICE SHALL BE DULY EXECU∣TED UPON DELINQUENTS, publick Grievances redressed, a firm Peace betwixt the two Nations of England and Scotland concluded, and before sufficient provision be made for the repay∣ment of the said moneys so to be raised: All which the Co in this present Parliament assembled having duly considered, do
therefore humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, that it may be declared and enacted, And be it declared and enacted by the King our Soveraig Lord, with the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That this present Parliament now assembled, shall not be dissolved, un∣lesse it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; nor shall be at any time or times during the continuance thereof, pr∣rogued or adjourned, unlesse it be by Act of Parliament to be like∣wise passed for that purpose: And that the House of Peers shall not at any time or times during this present Parliament, be ad∣journed, unlesse it be by themselves, or by their own Order: And in like manner, That the House of Commons shall not at any time or times during this present Parliament, be adjourned, unlesse it be by themselves, or by their own Order; and that all and every thing or things whatsoever done or to be done, for the adjourn∣ment, proroguing, or dissolving of this present Parliament con∣trary to this present Act, shall be utterly void, and of none effect. The true intent and meaning of this Act in the Framers, Makers, and Contrivers of it, was meerly to secure their sitting for some reasonable time, that so they might be able to apply fit plasters to the great sores of the Nation, and not be broken up suddenly, before they had applyed them to the soes, and laid them on; and their fear was, the King would, as he used to do, dissolve them suddenly; security from which was their onely end in pro∣curing this Act, and not in the least to make this a perpeuall Parliament; which I demonstrate thus: First, A perpetual Parliament is repugnnt to the Act made this Parlia∣ment for a Triennial Parliament (which in your Declarations is so highly extolled after the making of both the Acts▪) for how can every three yeers a Parliament be begun, if this be perpetuall? which by the Act may be so, if the two Houses please. But in all the Act there is not one word of the anii∣lating or repealing of the Act for a Tiennall Parliament; which, if it had been intended, it would have mentioned, and not left such a businesse of conse∣quence in any doubtfulnesse whatsoever: and the not mentioning of it, is a cleer declaration to all the Readers of it, That their designe solely in the last Act▪ was onely to secure themselves from the Kings sudden and quick dissol∣ving them at his wil and pleasure. And therefore, Secondly, In Law, according to the constitution of ou Parliaments, an Adjournment of the Parliament makes no Session; howbeit, before the Ad∣journment the King gives his affent to some Bis; as is plain out of Cook▪ 4 Instit. chap. High Court of Parliament, fol. 27. authorised to be printed by th late Parliament, in its purest purity for good Law.
Thirdly, In Law there is no Session in a prgation or  the Parliament; they are the words of Cook himself, fol. 27. ibid. Fourthly, This Parliament, as appears by the Act for not dissolving  of, before mentioned, cannot be prorogued by the King, but by Act of Parlia∣ment: but there hath been as yet no Act of Parliament in that behalf▪ and therefore all the Acts of this Parliament are in law Acts of one Session,  pears by Plod Com. 33. H. 8. B . relation 3. . Parl. 6. Di 1. . 8. Fifthly, In Law, all Acts of one Session, relate to the first day of the Par∣liament, and all the Acts of such a Parliament are Act▪ of one day; so the  for the Triennial, and the Act for this perpetual Parliament, are two Acts of one day, by the Law. Sixthly, the 4 Edw. 3. chap. 14. & 36. Edw 3. chap. 10. forementioned,  claes that a Parliament ought to be holden once every year, and mo  need be, those very Acts are every clause of them confirmed this Parliament, which also provides, that in case the King break those Laws, and do not annu∣ally call Parliaments, as is before declared, that then the Lord Keeper, whether he will or no, shall call a triennial one. Now I would fain know of any i∣onal man, How an everlasting Parliament doth agree with a Parliament  yeer, o oftner if need require, or with the intention of those Laws? And  doth a Parliament every three years (provided for as sure as its possible for Law to provide, (in case the King annually should not cal one) agree with a Parliament for ever, which may be by the letter of the perpetual Act,  the two Houses please? The conclusion of all is this, that at one day in law, the late Parliament passed two Acts, (for, howbeit the one was in the 16 of the King, and the other in the 17 year of the King: yet both in law are Acts of one  the one saith, the King shall call a Parliament once a year, after the sitting of this Parliament, and in case he doth not, the Lord Keeper, &c. shall  Parliament three years after the sitting of this Parliament. The other  in the letter, or litterall construction of it, saith, this Parliament shall  ever if the two Houses please. The one will have a Parliament with an  the other a Parliament without an end: Now the question is, which of these two was the true intent and meaning of the Makers of this Act: for as L∣ned Cook rationally and well observes in his excellent exposition of the 1 Eli chap. 1. 4. part. Institut. fol 328. (which Act established the power of the High-Commission, that by colour of this Statute did many  illegall things) such an interpretation of ambiguous and doubtfull things is  be made, that absurdities and inconventences may be avoyded; but the highest ∣dities and inconveniences in the world would follow, if this last Sar  be taken according to the literall construction of it, and not according to the equity and true intent and meaning of the makers of it, which was not to  this everlasting if they pleased, and so totally to destroy annuall Parliament, or in the Kings default of calling them, then trienniall Parliaments whether he would or no, but only to secure them from the Kings sudden bre them up at his pleasure: that so they might sit some reasonable short  dispatch the great business of the Nation; and that reasonable time  by any words (or the true meaning of any) in either of the Statutes,
to be above  at most, especially from the  of the  (in the right and true meaning) notwithstanding the last Act, were y  in force to binde the King to call Annuall Parliaments; but two Parliaments by Law cannot sit together: but without two Parliaments should sit together, (viz. An everlasting one, and an anll one, which is our right by Law)  enjoy the benefit of those good and excellent Laws, for Annuall Parliaments or oftner if need require. And therefore to take the utmost extent of the length of that time, the two Houses were enabled to sit by vertue of the force and power of the last Act, it could not be above a year at most, from the day of the date of it, and yet they have sate almost eight since, by vertue and colour of that alone, and of nothing else in law, having no other visible Commission under the Sun, to authorise them to destroy our undoubted naturall and legal Rights, of having often and frequent successive Parliaments totally new, which they have done by their long and unwarrantable sitting, principally to enrich the most of themselves, and enslave our spirits. And that an everlasting Parliament was never intended by that Act, I think their own words printed in December, 1641. which was immediately after the passing that Act, will easily decide the controversie. And in their or your first Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, after excusing of your selves from any invasion of the rights of the Crowne, 1 Part. Book Declar. pag. 1, 17. there is these very expression, viz. The trienniall Parliament, for the matter of it, doth not extend to so much as by law we ought to have required, there being two Statutes still in force, for a Parliament to be once a year: And for the manner of it, (viz. THE TRYENNIALL PARLIAMENT) it is in the Kings power, that it shall never take effect,  by a timely summons shall prevent any other way of assembling. In the  for continuance of this present Parliament, there seems to be  of reall power in dissolving of Parliaments, not to take it out of the Crown, but to suspend the execution of it for THIS TIME AND OCCASION ONLY, which was not necessary for the Kings own security, and the publique peace that  it we could not have undertaken any of these great charges, two must have left both the Armies to disorder and confusion, and the whole Kingdom to  and apine. Which words are a  and , That the  of the makers of the foreid Act was never to make this a perpetuall Parliament, but onely for  the King's sudden breaking them up when he pleased; whose  from by this Act: which thing onely is and was the clear meaning of the makers of it. And that the generall words of a Law, or the literal sense of  ld forth absurdities, and inconveniences, and visible mischiefs, a  by interpreted and controuled by the intent of them that made it, is clear, from their own Oracle Sir Edw. Cook▪ who in his exposition of the  of 1 Eliz. chapt. 1. in his 4 part : Nw that divers and many other Acts of Parliament (BESIDES THIS OF ELIZ.) which are generall in words, have, upon consideration of
the mischief, and all the parts of the Act, (for the avoyding of the  absurdity that might follow) received a particular interpretation, is  ks in cases of far lesse inconvenience and absurdity. Plo. Com. in Stowels Case fol. 369. The Preamble is to be  it is the key to open the meaning of the makers of the Act, and mischief  intend to remedy. The Judges of the Law have ever in such sor  the in∣tents of the meaning of the makers of such Acts of Parliament, as they  ∣pounded Acts gnerall in words to be particular, where the intent  been  (Which are the words of the Book) And therefore upon that rule i is there adjudged, That where the Statute of 7. Edw. 6. i generall, IF ANY RECEIVER OR MINISTER ACCOƲNTANT &c, RECEIVE O ANY PERSON ANY SƲM OF MONEY FOR PAYMENT O ANY FEES, &c. HE SHALL FORFEIT vis. viii d. FOR EVERY PEN∣NY. That this do not extend, according to the generality of the words, to the Re∣ceiver of common persons, because these words subsequent be added (otherwise  be lawfully may by former Laws and Statutes.) Now the Judges restrined the generality to a particular, to the Kings Receiver onely; for that no Law  ∣tute was formerly made concerning common persons Receivers, &c. But i the Case in question, as well the precedent clause of Restitution, as the  expressing offences in particular, and the words in the same generall sentence, viz. ƲNDER YOUR HIGHNESSE, &c. and principally the cause of the  of this Act do qualifie the generality of the words. And yet notwithstanding  was resolved by all the Court in the said case of Stradling, fol. 0.  Receiver of common persons were within the words of the said  it is said, that if a man consider in what point the mischief was before the  and what thing the Parliament meant to redresse by this, be shall  intent of the Makers of the Act, was to punish onely the Ministers of the King  a little after the Judges say, That the stile of this Act is, AN ACT FOR  TRUE ANSWER OF THE KINGS REVENUES. And by this  intent of the makers of the Act is to be collected; and these be the words of the  which is a far stronger case, then the case in question. 4 Ed. 4. fol. 4. & 12. Every Statute ought to be expounded according  intent of them that made it, where the words thereof are doubtfull and , and according to the rehearsall of the Statute; and there a generall Stat ∣strued particularly, upon consideration had of the cause of making of the Act,  the rehearsall of all the parts of the Act. To conclude this point with a generall Rle allowed by all Laws  ∣struction of Statutes, viz. Although the Law speak in generall terms,  o be bound up or accepted, That WHERE REASON CEASTH, TH TH LAW CEASETH: FOR, SEEING REASON IS THE VERY LIFE AND SPIRIT OF THE  IT SELF, the Law giver is not to be esteemed to respect th which  Reason; although the generality of the words at the first sight, or after the  otherwise. Mark, I intreat you, these last words well, for they are  and full.
And much more i there to this purpose: for he is  said Statute of 1 Eliz. 1. And that this equitable and intentionall  of ex∣pounding Laws in dubious eases, or where absurdities or mischiefs do depend upon the taking of it in the litteral sens, is justifible, legall and good, is unquestinably de∣monstrated out of your own 1 part Book Dec. pag 50.  these very weeds, viz. That there is in the Laws an equitable and literall sense. His Majestie (et it he granted)  in∣trusted by Law with the Militia; but 'tis for the good and preservation of the Republique, against forraign Invasions and domestick Rebellions: For it cannot be supposed that the Parliament would ever by Law intrust the Militia against themselves, or the Common-wealth that intrusts them to provide for their WEALE, NOT FOR THEIR WOE. So , when there is certain appearance, or grounded suspicion, that the letter of the Law shall be improved against the equity of it, (that is, the publick good, whether of the body reall, or representative) then the commander going against its equity, gives liberty to the commanded to refuse obedience to the letter: For the Law taken abstract from its originall reason and end, i made a shell without a kernell, a shadow without a substance, and a body without a soul: t is the execution of Laws according to their equity and reason, which (as I may say) is the spi∣rit that giveth life to Authority, the letter kils. Nor need this equity be expressed in the Law, being so naturally implyed and supposed in all Laws that are not meerly Imperiall, from that analogie which all Bodies politick hold with the naturall, whence all Government and Governours borrow a propoionall respect. And therefore when the Militia of an Army is committed to the Generall, it is not with any ex∣press condition, that he shall not turn the outhes of his Canons against his own souldiers; for that is so naturally and necessarily implyed, that its needlesse to be expressed; insomuch a if be did attempt or command such a thing, against the nature of his trust and place, it did  facto estate the Army in a right of disobedience, except we think that obedience binds  to cut their own throats, or at least their companions. Yea, the very title of the Act in hand literally declares, it was never intended to be perpetuall; no, nor to extend to so long a time as to be michievous to the Common∣wealth, by subduing the SOUL of all our Liberties, frequent  Parliaments▪  wholly and ; for it is called, An Acto prevent inconvenientes which may happen by the  adjourig,  or dssoing of this present Parliament. Mark the words well, and it puts all out of dispute, that th Act was at meerly done to tie the Kings hands for a certain reasonable time, that so it should not be dissolved u∣timely: and the Title declares, it was made to avoid Inconveniences, and therefore  to beget and increase them; which it must needs do as is already fully proved, if it  frequent, successive,  Parliaments. But yet once again more fuller; Reason and Nature it self sai, yea and the Law of England saith, That when  Act of Parliament is against  Right, or Reason, or , or impossible to be performed or kept, the common Law shall  it, and adjudge this Act to be void: they are the words of the Law, 1 pars Dr. Boam's Case, fol. 118. & 8. Ed. 3. fol. 3. 30. 33. E. cessvil 3. & 27. H. G.  41, & 1 Eliz. Dier 313. & 1 part Cooks Institutes lib. 3. chap. 11. . 209. fol. 140. 2. An Act of Parliament that a man shall be a Judge in his own case, is a void Act in Law, Hubbert fol. 120. and the  part Cooks Reports in Dr. Bohams case. See the Army Book Declarat. pag. 35. 9. 61. 63. 143. First therefore let us begin with Common Right; and we shall easily see this per∣petuall Act is against that. For it is against common Right, that indebted men (as most, if not all Parliament men ar) should not pay their debts. Or that, if any Member of ∣liament do any of the People of England wong (as daily they do) by unjust and
rble  of him o them of hi lad, or dispssessing him of his goods,  of his fame, or doing violence to his person by beating, wounding, or imprisoning, &c. that ∣sons, during their lives, by a priviledge of Parliament (that was intentionally  and just in its institution, when Parliaments were often and short) should be  and sred from all manner of question at the Law, by any parties so wronged by them, is absolutely against common Right. Nay, and more, That this should extend  lti∣tudes of persons besides, that are their servants or attendants; and also that any, o all of these shall have the benefit of the Law in any Court of Justice in England at their pleasure, against any man whom they shall pretend wrongs them, are such transde and grievous enormities, that common Right abhors; and yet this, with a thousand  as much more as bad as these, are the fruits of a perpetuall Parliament, if they please; which tends to the utter destruction of all mens Actions, reall, personall, or mixt, who have o do with Parliament men; as appears expresly by the Statute of Limitations of the a of James, chap. 16. which strictly confines all manner of Suits to be commenced within  after the occasion given. Secondly, For common Reason: Parliaments were ordained and instituted (as is before truly and legally declared) for remedies to redresse publick and capitall grievces th  where else could be redressed: but it is against reason (and the very end of the Institution of Parliament) that Parliaments should make and create multitudes of publike and in∣sufferable grievances; The law of the Land allowes no protection for any ma i∣ployed in the service of the Kingdom, but for a yeer at most, as to be free from Suis; and in many Suits none at all, howbeit he be in such services. But a perpetuall  may prove a protection (in all manner of wickednesse and misdeaeanours  against other men, not of the Parliament, amongst any of whom they may pik and chuse whom they please, to ruinate and destroy) and that no for a yeer, but for ever; which is against all manner of Reason, or the shadow or likenesse of it. And therefore, a  Sir Henry Vane said against Episcopal Government in the beginning of his larg  of the 11 of June 1641 now in print, at a Committee for passing the Bill against ∣pall Government, so say I of an everlasting, or of any Parliament that shall do  you have done, in largely sitting beyond the time of your Commission▪ &c. That  thing is destructive to the very end for which it should be, and was constituted to be;  onely so, but does the quite contrary (as your House in every particular doth) ceraily, we have cause sufficient enough to lay it aside; and not onely as uselesse, in that it  its end; But is dangerous, in that it destroyes and contradicts its end. Thirdly, For Impssibilitie: The death of th King in law undisputably dissolves the Parliament, spoken of in the foresaid act, which is pretended to be perpetull; for  Writ of Summons, that is directed to the Sheriffs, by vertue of which, Parli  are chosen, runs in these words: King Charles being to have conference and , &c upon such a day, about or concerning (as the words of the Tieial Act hath it) the high and urgent affairs concerning his Majestie (and he writes US) the State, and the  of the Kingdom and Church of England. But I would fain know how it's possibl for a Parliament to confer or treat with King CHARLES now he is dead: it's impossible. Se 2 H. 5. Cook in. Parl. 3. part. And therefore the whole current of the Law of Eng∣land (yea, Reason it self) from the beginning to the end, is expresly, That the Kings death doth ipso facto dissolve this Parliament, though it had been all the time before  so intire and unquestionable to that very hour; and it must needs be so, he being in Law, yea, and by the authority of this very Parliament stled, the head, the begiing, and end of Parliments: See Coks 4 part Institutes fol. 1. 3. Mr. Py's for  Straord pag. 8. S. John's forementioned argument against Strafford, pag. 42. And
therefore as a Parliament in lw  begin without the  in it,  person  representatives, Cook ibid. so. 6. so it is posively  by his ;  thereby not only the true declared, but intended end of their assembling (which   and confer with King CHARLES) is ceased, and thereby a final nd is put  the means that are appointed to attain unto that end: And therefore it is as  for this Parliament, or any Parliament to continue as long as they please, a for a Parlia∣ment to make King Charles alive again. Fourthly, For Repugnancy: That which is but for a time, cannot be affirmed to have continuance for ever [it is repugnant:] but this Parliament in the intention of the makers of the Act, was to be but for a time, not above a yeer at most, after the de of the Act▪ as is before proved and declared from their own words; And therefore it cannot be reputed perpetual, for there is a repugnancy betwixt them. Again, The King's Writ that summoned this Parliament, is the Basis in law, an Foundation of this Parliament: If the Foundation be destroyed, the Parliament falls: But the Foundation of it, in every circumstance thereof, is destroyed: And therefore the thing built upon that Foundation must needs fall. It is both a Maxim in Law and Reason. But if it be objected, The Law of Necessity requires the continuance of the Parlia∣ment against the letter of the Law. I answer, First, Its necessrry to consider whether the men that would have it con∣tinue as long as they please, be not those that have created the necessities on purpose, that by the colour thereof they may make themselves great and potent; and if so, then that Objection hath no weight, nor by any rules of Justice can they be allowed to gain this advantage by their own fault, as to make that a ground of their justification, which is a great part of their offence. And that it is true in it self, is so obviou to every unbiased knowing eye, it needs no illustration: but if it shall be denyed by any of their pens, if God please to give further opportunity, I shall prove it to the full. Secondly, I answer, There can no necessity be pretended that can be justifiable for breach of trusts that are conferred on purpose for the redresse of mischiefs and grievan∣ces, when the trust is perverd to the quite contrary end, to the increase of mischiefs and grievances, yea, to the subversion of Laws and Liberties. I am sure, Mr. Pym by their command and order, told the Earl of Strafford so, when he objected the like, and that he was the King's Counsellor, and might not be questioned for any thing he advised according to his conscience. But aith Mr. Pym pag. 11. He that will have the priviledge of a Counsellr, must keep within the just bounds of a Counsellour. Those matters are the poper subjects of Counsel, which in their times and occasios may be good or beneficiall to the King or Common-wealth. But such Treasons a thse, the subversion of the Laws, violation of Liberties, they can never be good or justifiable by ny circumstance or occasion; and therefore (saith he) his being a Counsellour makes his fault much more , o being committed against a GREA∣TER TRUST. And in pag. 12. he answers another excuse of his, which was, That what he did he did with a good intention. Its true, saith Mr Pym, Some mers tfull and dangerous, may be accompanied with such circumstances, as may mke it appear use∣full and convenient; and in all such cases, good intention will justifie  unsell. But where the matters propounded are evill in their own nature, such a the matters are with which the Earl of Strafford is charged viz. To BREAK A PUBLICK FAITH, to sub∣ert Laws and Government, they can never be justified by any intentions, h specious or good sver they pretended. And that they have perverted the ends of their Trust more then eve Strord did, I ll instance at present but in 3 partilars, the main  of their  the
People f their grievances; and what their Grievances were,  in the Parliaments first Restrance of the stte of the Kingdom: First, destruction of  Trades by Monopolize, &c. Secondly, exhausting of their estates to maintain and pro∣mote pernitious designes to their destruction. Thirdly, their essentiall Liberties  Freedoms quite destroye: Where is the remedy now▪ hath not the Parliament con∣traty to that excellent Law against Monopolize, of the 21 Jame▪ Chap. 3. of  erected Monopolise by Odinances, Orders and Votes, (although in the first month of your sitting, you made Orders to throw down Monopolizers out of your House:) as particularly, Whale Oyle, White sine, Wyer, Tyn, with many others; yea, ad coining of the old Monpolies, Merchants, Companies that Trade beyond se; yea, and set up for  that Monopoly of all Monopolies, the Excise; the bare endevouring of which▪ they call unjust and pernitious attempt in the King in the fore-mentioned, Declar. pag. 6. And then for exhausting of their estates, the King did it by a little Shipmony and Monopolies &c but since they begun they have raised and extorted more mony from the people and nation then halfe the Kings from the Conqueror ever did, as particular∣ly, 1 By Excise. 2 Conttbuions. 3 Sequestrations of lands to an infinite, value. 4 Fifth Pts. 5 Twenty parts. 6 Mealnony 7 Sale of plundered goods. 8 Loanes. 9 Benevoknces. 1 Collections upon their sost dayes. 11 New Impositions or Customes upon Merchandse. 12  maintained upon the charge of pate men. 13 Fifty Subdies at one time. 14  with Delinquents to an infinit value. 15 Sale of Bishops Land. 16 Sale of Da and Chapters Lands, and now after the wars are done. 17 Sale of King, Queen, Prine, Duke, and the rest of the Cildrens revenue 1 Sale of their rch goods which cost an infinite sur. And 19 To conclude all a txtion of ninety thousand pound a moth, and when they have gathered it pretendedly for the Common-wealthes use, divide it by thousands and ten thousands, apeece amongst themselves; and wipe their mouths after it like the impudent Haot as though they had done no evill; and then purchase with it publique lands at small and triviall values; O Brave Trustees! that have protested before God and the wrd, againe and a∣gaine in the day of their staits, they would never seck themselves, and yet besides all this  all the chiefest and profitblest paces of the Kingdom mongst themselves; And then thirdly; what regulating of Courts of Justice, and abridging of delayes, and charges of Law  have they performed as in their first Remonstrance they promised? Nay are they  worse then they were before the wars, and besides, then High-Commssion, Star-Chamber and Counsel board were all downe; and have they not now made a Star-Chamber, High-Commission and Councel-Board of most of their petty Committees? but most dread∣full ones of the House and their New-Councel of State? as is evident to be seen in my Comrades and my illegall and arbitrary imprisonment, and cruel close imprisonment Thirdly, Nay have we at all any Law left Master Peters your grand Teacher  lately to my face we have none?) but their meer wils any pleasures; saving Fells La, or Matiall law, where men-Butchers are both informers, Parties, Jury-men and Judges; who have had their hands imbred in bloud for above this seven yeares together, having served  ∣tship to klling of men, for nothing but mony, and so are moe bloudier then Butchers th  and calve for their own livelihood, who yet by the Law of England, are net    of any Jury false and death, because they are conversant in shedding of bloud of beasts  thereby, through a habit of it, may not be so tender of the blood of men; as the  f England, eason and Justice would have men to be. Yea, do not these men by their swo, being but servants, give what law they please to their Masters: the pretended Law-makers of your house, now constituted by as good and egall a power as he that rb or kils a man upon the high-way. But to conclude this tedious point, I shall end it with such an Authority, as to th
ruling men in your House must needs knock the Nail on the ead, and that is with the Declaration of the Army, (Your Lords, Msters, Lw givers, and ) who in their most excellent of Declaratrons of the 14 of June, 1647. About the just and fundamentall rights and liberties of themselves and the Kingdom, page 40, 41, 42. of their book of Declarations, after they have sufficiently cryed out of Stapleton and his party, for abusing, deluding and over-swaying the house from their true end for which they were assembled together: say thus, But yet we are so far from designing or complying to have an absoute or arbitrary power fixed or settled for continuance, in any persons whatsoever; a that (if we might be sure to obtain it) we  wish to have it so in the persons of any whom we could must confide in; or who should appear mo of our own opinions and principles, or whom we might have most personall assurance of, or interest in, bt we do, and shall mch rather wish, That the Authority of this Kingdom in Parliament (rightly constituted, that is▪ freely, equally and successively chosen, according to its orteinall intention) may ever stnd and ave its ourse. And therfore we shall apply our selves chiefly to such things  (by having Parliaments setled in such a right constitution) nay give most hope of Justice and Rightousnesse, to flow down equally to all, in that its Ancient chnell, without any overtures, tending either to OVERTHROW that undation of Order and Government in this Kingdom, or TO INGROSS THAT POWER FOR PERPETUITY INTO THE HANDS OF ANY PARTICULAR PERSONS, OR PARTY WHATSOEVER. And for that purpose though (as we have found it doubted by many men, minding sincerely the publique good, but not weighing so fully the consequences of things) it may and is not unlike to prove, that, the ending of this Parliament, and the election of a New, the constitution of succeeding Parliaments, (as to the persons Elected) may prove for the worse many weyes; ye since neither in the present purging of this Parliament, nor in the Election of a New, we can promise to our selves or the Kingdom, and asurance of Justice, or other positive good from the bands of men; but those who for present appear most righteous, and most for common good (having an unlimited power fixed in them duing life or pleasure) in time may be∣come corrupt, or settle into parties, or factions; or, on the otherside in case f new Elections▪ those that should succeed, may prove as bad or worse then the former. We therefore humbly co∣ceive that (of two inconveniences the lesse being to be chosen) the main thing to be intended in this case (and beyond whih humane providence cannot reach, as to any assurance of positive good) seem to be this, viz▪ to provide, that however unjust or corrupt the persons of Parlia∣ment men, in present, or future may prove, or whatever ill they may doe to particular parties (or to the whole in particular ngs) during their respective termes or periods, yet they shall not have the temptation of an imited power fixt in them during ther owne pleasures, whereby to perpetuate injustice or oppression upon any (without end or remedy) or to advance and uphold any one particular party, faction or interest▪ whatsoever, to the oppression or prejudice of the Community, and the enslaving of the Kingdom unto all posterity, but that te people may have an equall hope or possibility, if they have made an ll choice at one time, to mend it in another, and the Members of the House themselves may be in a capacity to taste subjection as well as rule▪ and may be so inclined to consider of other mens cases, as what may come to be their own. Thus we speake in relation to the House of Commons, as being intrusted on the Peoples behalfe, for their interest in that great and supreme power of the Com∣mon wealth (viz.) the Legislative power with the power of finall Judgement) which being in its own nature so arbitrary, and in a manner unlimited, (unlesse in point of
) is most unit and dangerous (as o the peoples interest) to be  in the  the sae men, during life or their own pleasures. Neither by the originall  of this State, was it, of ought to continue so, nor does it (wherever it is,  continues soe) render that stae any better then a mee tyranny, or the people subjected to it, any better then vassals; But in all States where there is any f of common freedom, and particlarly in this State of England (as it is most evid  many positive laws and ancient constant custome) the people have a right to  successive Elections, unto that great and supream trust, at certain  time, which is so essentiall and fundamentall to their freedom, as it is, ∣not or not to be denied them, or witheld from them, and without which the House of Commons is of very little concernment to the interest of the Commons of England. Yet in this we could not be understood in the least to blame  worthies of both Houses, whose zeale to vindicate the Liberties of this Nation, did  that Act for the continuance of this Parliament; wherby it was secured from  dissolved at the Kings pleasure, (as former Parliaments had been) or reduced to  a certainy as might enable them the better to assert and vindicate the Li∣berties of this Nation, (immediately before so highly invaded▪ and then also so  ∣dangered) and those we take to be the principll ends and grounds for which  exigency of time and affairs it was procured, and to which we acknow∣ledge it hath happily been made use of; but we cannot thinke it was by those Worthies intended, or ought to be made use of to the perpetuating of th ∣pream trust and power into the persons of any during their owne , or deb arring of the people from their right of elections totally new. But it here it should be objected although the King be dead, yet the Parliament  altered the Government into a Common-wealth, and so may if they please chae the Constitution of Parliaments. To which I answer, Fist, that those company of men at Westminster, that ge Commission to the High Court of Justice to try and behead the King, &c. were o more a Parliament by Law, nor a Representative of the people, by the rules of Justice and Reason, then such a company of men are a Parliament, or Representative of the People, that a company of armed Theeves chuse and set apart to try, judge, , hang, o behead any man, that they please, or can prevail over by the power of their swords, to bring before them by force of arms, to have their lives taken away by prece of Justice, grounded upon rules meerly flowing from their wils and swords; for I would fain know any Law in England, that authoriseth a company of Servants to punish o correct their Masters, or to give a Law unto them, or to throw them at their pleasure out of their power, and set themselves down in it, which is the Armies case wi e Parliament, especially at THO. PRIDES late Purge; which I call (and will  to be) an abslute dissolution of the very essence and being of the House of ▪ and I would fain see any Law or Reason in Writing or Print to justifie th a ▪ upon my other aunt, then in hindering them from raising a new Warr, and fro de∣stroying he peoples Liberties by their eternall sitting, seeing they keep their power ∣ger by fa then their Masters, or impowers the people intended they should, and also employ it to their mischief by hindering them, (I mean those that had not acted agai the Liberties of the Parliament) entering into a mutuall engagement to appoint  whereby to chuse (seeing they cannot all meet in one place themselves) and ipower new Trustees Commissioners, or Representos, to make equall and just Lawes to bi all, and provide for their future well-being, there being no other may justly, either in
Law or Reason; to settle this Nation in peace and quietness, but by one of these two means: First, either by admitting the King in again upon terms: or else, secondly, to lay foundations of a just Government, by an Agreement made amongst the generality of the people capable of it: and if any man upon earth can either by Law or Reason shew me a third way, that hath any more shadow of Justice in it, then for William the Conqueror, or the great Turk by their swords to give a Law unto this Nation, I will forfeit my life. But secondly I answer, the main end of the peoples chusing of the Members of the House of Commons was not to come to Westminster to set up a common-wealth, espe∣ciall to invest all power in themselves, and with that at their pleasure rob and take away (by the rules of their wills) the liberties and lives of those that chuse them, and be un∣accountable as long as they live, although they do what they please; therefore I would fain see any bit or shadow of a pretended Commission to this end, either in writing, or acitly in intention; nay, or so much as in the thoughts of the major part of the Mem∣bers themselves, when they were impowered; I am sure all their Declarations declare the contrary. And therefore I say, and will make it good against all the tyrannicall Sophisters in England, in a Publique dispute before the People, That the m end where∣fore they were sent, was to treat and confer with King Charles, and the House of Peers, about the great affaires of the Nation, &c. and therefore are but a third part, or a third estate of that Parliament, to which they were to come and joyn with; and who were legally to make permanent and binding laws to the people of the Nation▪ and therefore ha∣ving taken away two of the three Estates, (through a pretended necessity, for a preten∣ded good end, the accomplishment of which can only justifie this act) that they were chosen on purpose to joyn with to make Laws; the end both in reason and Law of the Peoples trust is ceased; for a Minor joyned with a Major for one and the same end, cannot play Lord paramount over the Major, and then doe what it please; no more can the Minor of a Major, viz. one estate of three legally or justly, destroy two of three without their own consents, or the Authority of a higher power, then all given and deligated for that end intended and declared, which is the People, the fountain and originall of all just power, which they never did in their lives; and therefore the whole power of all is returned to them singly and alone, (but if an part of it is yet inherent in any, then it is in PRINCE CHARLES as Heir▪apparent to his Fathers Crown and Throne) over whom I mean the people) no persons nor power on earth can now set no change of Government whatever, but what is done by their own mutuall con∣sent by AGREEMENT AMONGST THEMSELVES, but with as reall a face of Tyranny, as ever was acted by any Conqueror o Tyrant in the world; unto which whosoever stops and supports it, is as absolute a Traytor both by Law and reason, as ever was in the world, (if not against the King, yet against the Peoples Majesty▪ and Soveraignty, the fountain of all power on earth;) and the present setters up of this Tyrannicall new Commonwealth, considering their many Oaths, Covenans, Pro∣mises, Declarations and Remonstances to the contrary, (with the highest promises and pretences of God for the People and their declared Liberties, that ever was made by men) are the most perjure, pefidio, falle Faith and Trust breakers and Tyrants at ever lived in the world; and ought by all rationall and honest men to be the most de∣tested and abhorred of all men that ever breathed, by how much the more under the pretence of friendship and brotherly kindness they have done all the mischief they have done in destroying our Law and Liberties, &c. Is any Treason like Juda his Treason▪ who betrayed his Lord and Master with a kisse: Is any murder in the world, like that of Joab coied upon Aer and Amasa? who while he kissed and embred them with the highest
declarations of friendly and brotherly affection, stabbed them nder the fifh Rib, 2 Sam. a▪ 29. & 10. 9, 10. Is any wrong or mischief done unto an ingenuous spirit, so bitter to his soul, as the treachery and baseness of a pretended and familiar friend? No undoub∣tedly, for against a professed enemy a man hath a fence, for he will not trust him, but is alwayes jealous of him: but against a pretended friend he hath none, for e lyes in his bosome, from whom he feas no ill, but sleeps in security, in the height of which he is inted and destyed: which kinde of dealing was most bitter to Davids soule▪ whh made him say, Palm 55. 12, 13. 14, 15. For it was not an ENEMY h re∣prahed re, then I could have brn it: neither was it he that HATED me, that  magnifi mself against me then I would have hid my self from him. But it was thn, , mine equll, MY GUID; MINE ACQUAINTANCE. We tk SWET COUNELL together, and walked into the house of God in COMPANY▪ Let death seiz upon them, and let them go domn quick into hell, for wickednsse is in their d∣ling, and among them▪ and let the pesent generation of swaying men▪ that under the pretence of good, kindness and friendship, have destroyed and trod under their feet all the Liberties of the Nation (and will not let us have a new Parliament) and set up by the Sword their own unsufferable, unsupportable Tyrannicall Tyranny; consider the ends of JWDAS and JOAB, and they shall finde, that for their treachery and blood; the one Hanged himself, and the other was executed in the Tabernacle of the Lord,  the horns of the Altar, whether he fled for refuge and sanctuary, 1 Kings 2. 30, 31. yea, also remember Cains treachery to his innocent brother Abel, Gen 4. 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Thirdly and lastly, I answer, the House of Commons sitting freely within its limit∣ted time, in all its splendor of glory, without the awe of armed men, never in Law, nor in the intention of their chuses were not a Parliament; and therefore of themselves alone, have no pretence in Law to alter the constitution of Parliaments, especially as to free and successive Elections totally and wholly new; neither if ever it had been in the power of a true and reall House of Commons; Yet this present preended One now sitting at Westminster is now a true House of Commons; as the Armies anciet Declarations doe notably prove; see their Book, Declar pag. 125, 127, 134, 135, 13, 139, 140, 141, 14▪ For I would fain know in Law, where Col. THOMAS PRIDE was authorised to chuse the people of England a Parliament; or to purge away at his pleasure by his sword three quarters of four of the House of Commons, (and so committed the affairs of Parliament to a few, which was never intended by the i∣powerers, but hath always been holden to be against the honor and dignity of a Parli∣ment, and that no such Commission can or ought to be granted, no not by a egall Ah∣rity if self▪ see 4 part. Cooks Institutes, fol 42. chap. High court of Parliament▪) and send whom of them he pleaseth to prison, without charge or declared crime, and to stand at the House door in a warlike posture, with Swords and Muskets to keep ou whomsoever he pleased, against the Law and constitutions of Parliaments, which ught  Sit free from the force of Armed men, 4 part. Institut▪ and let none goe into the House, b only those that he knew, or did beleeve would vote AS HE AND HIS Masters WOULD HAVE THEM; For shame let no man be so audaciously and sottishly void of reason, as to call Tho. Prides pittifull Juno a Parliament, especially those that called▪ avowed▪ protested and declared again and again those to be none, tht sate at Westminster the 26 and 27, &c. of July, 647. when a few of their Members were seared away to the Army, by a few houres Tumult of a ompany of a few disordred Apprentices: And being no Representative of the people, no nor so much as a tha∣dow of it, much lesse a PARLIAMENT, with pretence in Law, reason, Justice or Nae
can there be for them to alter the constitution of successive and frequent Parliaments, and force upon the people the shew of their own wils, lusts, and pleasures, for Laws and rules of Government, made by a pretended▪ everlasting, nulled Parliament, a Councel of State, or Star-chamber, and a Councel of War, or rather by Fairf, Cromwell and Ireton. And so much for my unsati ednesse in the present Authoritie. But secondly, In case the Justices either in Law, or by reason of the power that now rules England, had to my understanding been a thousand times lesse unquestion∣able then it is, and had neither against the rules of reason ejected two parts of three to set up themselves, nor outstrip'd its Commission in sitting longer then they should, nor never had been forced one by the Apprentices, which the Army called and declared Treason, nd thse that remained a mock and pretended Parliament; and if so, the it was dissolved, ing sine die▪ and could legally meet no more at all: nor once forced by the Army; and then the second time not onely forced, but pick'd and culled, and one of four left behinde, by means of which it was totaly dstroyed and annh lated, and none left in a manner but such as ould d what those that left them would have them: I say, if none of all this had been, I could not with freenesse of my own spirit live upon the sweat of poor peoples brows, by a large Salary for my place, who are in (now their Trades are gone, their estates spent for the in∣ted recovering of their freedoms (of which notwithstanding they are cheated, and that by their pretended friends) and a famine come upon some parts of the Land, and thou∣sands ready to starve) to pay taxations and Excise for the small beer they drink, and the poor clothes they wear, thousands of Families having never a penny in the world to buy bread for them, their wives and children, but what they earn with the sweat of their brows, and notwithstanding are almost as much without work, as without it: and yet out of the bowels, and pining bellies of these poor people, in this sad and deplorable con∣dition must my salary have come, in case I had taken a publick place upon me: There∣fore when I seriously consider how many men in the Parliamen▪ and else-where of their associates (that judge themselves the onely Saints and godly men upon earth) that have considerable (and some of them vast) estates of their own inheritance, and yet take five hundred, one, two, three, four, five, six thousand pounds per annum salaries, and o∣ther comings in by their places, and that out of the too much exhausted publick Trea∣sury of the Nation, when thousands, not onely of the people of the world, as they call them, but also of the precious and redeemed Lambs of Christ, are ready to sterve for want of bread, I cannot but wonder with my self, whether they have any conscience at all within them or no, and what they think of that saying of the Spirit of God: That who∣so hath this worlds good, and seeth his brother hath need, and shutteth up his bowles of compas∣sion from him, (which he absolutely doth, that any way takes a little of his little from him) how dwelleth the love of God in him? 1 John 3. 17. These actions and practice are so far from being like the true and reall children of the most high, that they are the highest oppression, theft and murder in the world, thus to rob the poor people in the day of their great distresse, by Excise, Taxations, &c. to maintain their pomp, superuities, and debauchery; and many of those from whom they take it, do perish and sterve with want and hunger in the mean time; and be deaf and adamant hearted to all their TEARS, CRYS, LAMENTATIONS and MOURNFUL HOWLING GROANS; with∣out all doubt these pretended godly, religious men have got a degree beyond those A∣theists or fools, that say in their hearts, There is no God, Psal. 14. 1. and 53. 1. And these are my reasons (with my resolvednesse of walking by a known rule amongst men, the declared Law of England) for not taking a publick place upon me, though I have of∣ten been profered considerable ones, yea, that very fore-noon the Votes of Treason passed in the House against that honest Book or Addresse for which I am imprisoned,
called, THE SECOND PART OF ENGLAND's NEW CHAD DISCOVERED. In the third place, I considered with my self, that seeing I could do neither of those, then I must do one of these two; first, ither ollow a Trade; or else, Go and by,  farme some Land in the Country: and when I considered the grand oppressions there, as by Tythes, which is not onely annually the tenth part of the Husband mans proft to the lazy, antichristian, time observing Priests; but annually the fourth part of his in∣crease, labour, hzards, yea, and stock too; which Tythes I should sooner  then pay: and not onely so, but also the Taxations and Excise, with that un  gulf of free-quarter, by means of which a great Officer that bore me a spleen (amongst whom I have enemies enough) with a Pegiment, or more, or fewer, in two or three nights (with free-quarter) might eat me (by force of arms) out of house and home and so not only waste the increase, but also destroy the principall. And so for these ∣sons I was bloct ost from going to live in the Country. Then secondly, for a Trade, I must either follow it in London, or in some other Cor∣poration: and in another Corporation (although the King the root and  of them be destroyed, and although I am not onely a Native and free Denizen of Eng∣land, and served many yeers to learn a Trade in London, yet in any considerable Cor∣poration in England) can I not with indrustry be suffered to follow a Trade or Mer∣chandizing to get me bread, unlesse I be a Free man thereof; yea, Newcastle, the chief∣est place in my eye, being nigh the aboad of my Father and kindred, is so grand i∣haunsing a Monopolzer, that it monopoliseth the River of Time, yea, and the  for seven miles distance; although it can produce neither Law nor Reason therefore,  onely a large bribing purse of the whole Corporation; which they in that Town say, is so heavie, it will break any private particular mans back: which yet I should  have feared, had there been any equall Law to have been had from the Administration thereof in any of the Courts of Justice in England, being as well able (at least in my own thoughts) to plead my own case in Law at any Bar against an inhaunsing Cor∣poration, or a Patentee Monopolizer (both of which are against the fundamentall Law and Liberties of England, as is notably proved by Cook in his exposition of the  of Monopolies, 3 part Instit. fol. 181. 182. &c.) as any Lawer in England, it being  undoubted right both by Law (See 28. Ed. 1. chap. 11. and the Statute that abolished the Star-chamber) and Reason, to plead mine own cause, or any of my friends that will  and trust me;  any Barristers in the Nation, which I will publickly dispute with  any day in the week; and for the unjustnesse of Corporations and Monopolies,  are both sons of one father, read my forementioned Book, called, Innocency and Truth j∣stified, from the 46 page to the 63. and my book called, Londons Liberties in  covered, but especially pag. 21. 22. 36. 38. 41. 43. 44 45. to 58. And my second part of it, called Londons Charters, pag. 36. 37. to 64. So being for the foregoing reasons block'd off from following a Trade any where else but in or about London, where I had the choi of three things. First, Either to set up a Shop in the City; which I was staved off from, for these Reasons: First, Because the Court of Aldermen are so oppressive in their Government of the City, setting up their own wills, humours, and irrational ridiculous Customs above both the Law, Reason and their own Charters; which I knowing so well as I do, (and which is pretty well anatomized in my foresaid Books) I should never bear, and so e continually in broils, which was my earnest desire to avoid. Secondly, A man cannot well keep any considerable Trade i a Shop, but he mst
trust much; which I man many times hazard the losse of; especially in these impo∣ishing times, or else to Lw for it, which I never loved (never having had two Sits in my life, that I can remember) not onely for the jngling part of it, but also for the tedious, chargeable, intricate, hazardous uncertainty of the proceedings therein, as the Judges on purpose have made it to get money; for being often in company with an able, and a very honest man for a Lawyer, with other understanding friends, where we  ouble discourses of the abuses of the Law, which were particularly instanced to be many, I took special notice▪ of two things he often averred (to his praise I spe it) besides the proceeding for the most part in an unknown tongue, and an unlegible hand as write, &c. which two things were these, that he would make good; First, According to the practice in Westminster Hall, If a man lent another man 100 l. 500 l. or 1000 l. &c. and had as good security as any in England can give; yet when the day of payment comes, if the party be a crafty bffling man, and have a good purse, he shall keep a man in the Courts in Westminster Hall three or four yeers in suit, let him do the worst he could, before he could get his money; nay, nor never shall get it neither, unlesse he have a purse also able in some reasonable measure to bold pace with him: but in case in any of that time (by sicknesse, losse or other csua∣ties) he happen to fall poor, and so not able in money to pay fees, &c. its lost for ever: besides all this, the hzards he runs (are sufficient) by being betrayed, bought, and sold by his Solicitor or Atturney, &c. Besides the danger of common Knights of the post, to swear the money's paid, &c. Secondly, He did averre, that he would make it good before the Speaker at the Bar of the House of Commons upon his life; that for the Chancery (which trades men upon book accounts &c. are subject often to use, and there is not a decree of 100l. from one yeares end to the other made in that Court, but jumbling all the decrees together one with another, some suits holding 10, 15, 20, 30 yeares, nay some above, but first and last it costs the Pintief 500l. for eveey hundred pound decreed one with another; O brave, honest and reforming Parliament who in three dayes might mend all this easily and plainly, by a County record, by which a Suit never need to be of a months continuance, and for which thy have often been Petitioned, but yet will not, but suffer it to continue worse then they found it, for all their great promises in their first Remonstances, &c. to the contrary; yea and give their Judges their places freely, and 1000l. per annum out of the Co∣mon-wealths mony, besides all their illegall and unfdomable fees; whereas in the Kings time they had but 200 l. per annum sallery and their fees; and most commonly paid 5, 6, 7, 8, 9000 l for their places, an[yet were every whit as just as these are, for any thing that o∣ver I could hear of to to the contrary, and I think I have enquired as diligently into both as any one private man in England hath done; so for these reasons I durst not med∣dle with a shop in London. And then in the next place, having multitudes of acquaintance both in City and Country, I had thoughts out of the Cities Freedom to turn Soap-boyler, being a good trade and most vendible for ready mony, and in it I met with these discouragements; viz. First, That there are new Monopolies upon some of the principall materials that makes them double prised to what they used to be, which most commonly are all im∣ported from beyond seas, as oyl, tallow and pot-ashes, for which is paid both custome and Excise, yea and for the very coles that boyles them 4 or 5s. in a Chaldron; and scarce any thing free from Excise that belongs to it, or to the backs or bellies of the men that work it, but the very water; and yet notwithstanding when it is boyled and all ha∣zard run, as spoyling or breaking of vessels, falling of the price of sope, or none vend∣ing of it, besides many other acidentall casualties, yet out of the very set of his brows
and the industry and labour of the very fingers ends, there must Excise be paid of so much a Barrell; and that which is worst of all is this, my House which used to be my Castle, and so it is by Law, night or day must be at the Knave Excise mans pleasure, to search and break open for unsealed soape when he pleaseth; nay, notwithstanding all this I must be had to take my oath (after they will not trust me, but have searched what they can) at the Excis Office, that I have made no more but so and so, and it may be I judge such an Oath altogether unlawfull, and therefore cannot take it, and therefore to prison without any more adoe I goe, and must be fined at the will of the chief Excisers, and pay a noble a day to the Serjeant at Armes, besides his mans fees; and if I do take my oath can forswear my self, I hazard the Pillory for perjury besides the wounding of my conscience; but if I be consciencious that I cannot set my conscience upon the ten∣ter-hooks by forswearing of my self; then I am destroyed in my trade by others that will undersell me by this stealing Excise, and swearing soundly to the contrary too, judging i (with Cromwell as Major Huntington in his impeachment of him declares) no sinne in may be to deceive the deiver or oppressy and all this lyes upon us; in the first year of Englands Freedom by the Conservators of the Liberties thereof, who yet ealously and for the peoples welfare chopt of the Kings head for tyranny & oppression, although his oynes were never so heavy as their little finger is, O brave, unerring, unsin∣ning, and everlasting, none such Parliamen; And therefore last of all I had thoughts towards Winter to buy of my Unkle at S∣derland to lay up some coals at my habitation in Winchester-house, to fell in Janua∣ry and February, and in the meaime to lay out my mony in some adventure for Hol∣land, and there I met with these difficulties: First▪ although, I was as wary as any man in England could be, to see that Master Devenish title to the house was good in Law, and so I might justly and quietly expect the injoyment of my bargaine from him; And thereby I see First his deeds, and the Parliaments Ordinances thereupon, and Secondly I went and spoke with Master Iohn Cook the Lawyer, who drew up the conveyances be∣twixt Master Devenish and Master Young, of whom Master Devenish for his life bought all Winchester House in Southwak; by all which, but especially from Mster Cooks owne mouth, I cleerly and evidently found Master Levenish had as good a right in all Win∣chester house, for Master Youngs life both by Law and Ordinance, as its possible for a∣ny man in England to have to the cloaths he wears, or any thing else that he possesseth, although he takes the advice of twenty Lawyers in the buying and purchasing▪ of them▪ which incouraged me to strike a bargaine with him for three years, for as much of the House as I am to pay annually almost 20l. and yet since a Committee of Members with the Trustees of Bishops Lands will needs turne me and the honest man (by force of Armes) out of his Legall possession without any valuable consideration, or rendring at the least any reason wherefore, but only their Soveraigne wills and pleasures. O BRAVE PARLIAMENT JUSTICE! without all doubt this is the liberty of the people, and the Law of the Land, that we have been contesting and fighting for these seven yeers toge∣ther, or at least as much as they intend (now they have conquered us with our own mo∣ny and our own hands) we shall possesse and enjoy this unrighteous molestation, which with their illegall imprisoning of me hath spoyled a coal-Merchant of me for the present. And in the second place, as my adventuring to Holland, when I came to inquire after the nature of that, I found these difficulties therin, First, A strict Monpoly, that none whatsoever shall ship any white cloth for that place but the Monopolisers themselves, and Secondly a general monopoly upon woollen commodities whatsoever, that unlesse you do as good as tell a lye; I found merchants still continued to be the chief customers, who it
seems have a trick to steal whole ship loads of custome for their own use, by mean of which they undersell any other merchant, yea and thereby break the backs of new beginners; for being at my first inquiring thereinto with Master William Kiffin my quondam servant, though now my profst and blood thirsty enemy, he told me a little before, he was one day at the Custome-house, and the chief men there had catcht a poor man that had stolne some custome, for which they were about fining and punishing him, why Master faith he to one of them in Kiffins hearing as he averred to me) will you be so angry with me, and so harsh to punish me for a small oy, when I am but your own scholler, for I am sure its but the o∣ther day fine by your own directions I help you to steal in a manner a whole ship load of uncusto∣med good: and you being so well pleased with that, my thinks you should not be so angry with me for stealing a little custome for my self. But then Fourthly, The Prince was Master of the Sea then, so that I durst not ven∣ture it in a English bottom, some of which had laid in the Thames divers weeks loaded and dust not stirre out for want of convoy, which they had fought much for then to the Parliament, but could get none; and to ship it in a Dutbh bottom, it did not only give the traid of shipping to the Dutch, and so destaoy our English Mainers, but also by law to ship it in Duth bottom, it is consiscated or at least must pay the custome of Aliens or strangers as appeares by the statutes of 5 R 2. ch. 3 & 6 K 2 cha. 8. & 4 H. 7 b 10. & 5. & 6. E. 6 cha. 18. & 1 H. 13. But having bought some cloth and stuffs I was neces∣sitated to run the hazard of hipping them in Dutch bottom; but English woollen com∣moditie; being so great a drug in Holland as they are by reafon of the merchant monopo∣lisers, alias merchat adventurers, that ingrosse the trade to themselves, and buy their cloth here at what rates they please and sell it in Holland as dear a list; and so care not how lit∣tle they vend so they get mony enough by that they sell and disable all others from tray∣ding, by meanes of which the poor people here that depend upon cloth-making, wanting work are necessitated to leave the land of their nativity and goe to Holland to make cloth for the dutchmen to get bread to keep them alive; whereby they have almost got the Eng∣lish cloth making traid, and our wise▪ just and long winded arliament, are willing thershould so do, or else almost in nine years time they would have given some satisfactory effectu∣all answer in those multitudes of Petitions that have year after year been preferred to them, complaining of these unsufferable and destroying grievances and yet they can assume to themselves a stile of the Conservators of the Leberties of England in the firs year of Freedom, but I wonder where it is, for my eyes can see none at all in any kind, but ra∣ther more bondage then ever, witnesse now their Treason-trap, &c. So English cloath being so great a drugg there, that little profit could I expect by my adventure, unless I laid out in the return most of my mony in such Commodities as are monopolized by new Patents, Ordinances, against the Laws and Liberties of England▪ and if I so did, when they come here (if the Monopolizers catch them) they are all lost; so here is our Freedom, but yet notwithstanding, I did order my factor to lay out the most of my mony there, in such commodities only, being resolved as soon as I could here of the ships arrival in the river of Thames, to boord her with half a dozen lusty resolved blades; and with my own hand to give the chief Monopolizer's a bace of pistoll bullts in his guts, or a prick with my Rapier or dager, in case he came to take away my goods from me; and then to run the hazard of a tryal at common Law, to see whether by the Law of God, and of England; I could not justifie the preservation of my self and my goods, from any that come to rob me of them, and rather kill him or them, that would assault me and them, then suffer him or them to take away by force my livelyhood, and so by conse∣quence the life of me and my family, but the counsell of States robbing me of my liberty, by my close imprisonment in the Tower hath frustrated my marchandizing hopes, yea
and it may be thereby break me to the bargin, but if they do, when they have serious∣ly cast up their gains by it, they will not be six pence the richer, though my wi and ∣tle babe may be much more the poorer: But to turn back again to my coming out of the North, besides the thoughts of my future substance, in some honest industr calling or other, I spent some time at Westminster, to see and satisfie my own under∣standing how the te sail of things stood at the helm, I mean with the three great me of the Army, viz. FAIRFAX. CROMWELL, and IRETON; and whether I could finde out they had any real thohts to prosecute their OWN AGREEMENT, that so we might have a new, equal and just representativ, which I upon my principles (now they had laid Kingly Government aside) look'd upon as the only and alone earthly sal to heal and cue the wounds of this distacted and dying Nation, and to make it flourish once again in peace, Trade and all kinde of outward prosperity, and without which our wounds could never be heaed r cured by any other means that could be invented o contid, looking in my own thoughts upon the then smal sitting remnant of the last Parliament, as a quite contrary inteest to the peoples good or welfare; distributive Justice and uni∣versall righteousness, being their bane, and that which would be the unavoydable ruine by reason of that horrible gilt they have contracted by their self-seeking unjust wayes upon themselves; th great bug-bear the King being now gone, they would be ne∣cessarily ld, for the supportation of themselves in the evill of their wayes, and con∣tinuance of their intended perpetual Greatnesse, to court, support, and make much of the chief Supporters of all the remaining corrupt Interest in England, as the Priests, and their robbing Tythes, the banc of industry; the Laywers, and their monopolizing pleadings, and all their old and base inslaving corruptions in the execution of the Laws, as bad in a manner as the old bondage of Egypt; and of old and illegall Charter-mongers, the inhaunsers, engrossers, and Monopolizers of Trade, and all the base bondages there∣unto belonging; the peoples freedoms and liberties being the onely thing now dreaded by them  the only engine to pull down all the steps they have long laid for their elective Kingship, and the single injoyment amongst themselves alone (and their vassals, slaves and creatures) of all the great places thereunto belonging, and thereupon depending, which yet they must not im∣mediately do, but go about it gradually, and first get the power of seeming legall autho∣rity, into a narrower compasse then it was, in their purged House of Commons; that so that might rule, counsel and direct their mock▪Parliament; and the Councel of the Army ight rule that; by means of which (what with the service of Irelan, &c.) they might so mo∣lize their Army, that it in due time might totally become slavish by obeying without dis∣pute what ever their great Officers command them, and so unanimously elect, and im∣pose upon the people their present generall for their King, as the onely fit, able, and best de∣serving man in England for that soveraign Place; provided, under-hand he would in∣gage too high and mighty Oliver, and his Son in law Henry Ireton, to be sure to do a they would have him, and in his Kingship to promote those that they would have ad∣vanced, that so one of them might not fail after his decease to succeed him; and so in time, with their long continued power and wils, keep it in their Line, as the onely deserving Family in this Nation, who saved it from its enemies (for their own ends) in the day of its distresse; whose battels it fought pretendedly for the Liberties of England, cry∣ing out Jehu like, 1 Kings 10. 16. Coe, See my zeal therefore in cutting off the Kings head, &c. and razing out his Family: And undoubtedly it is of the Lord, for he hath prospered me in it (and so he did Judas in betraying Christ) and noe hath been able to stand before me, When as, alas, all this successe may be no more but the rod of God to chastise a then more wicked Family, designed by God to that destruction; for the transgressions, sin, or blood thereof; Yet for all this, the heart may be no more upright then John's was, which
vantingly lifted up by his great sucss, & took no beed at all to walk in the Law of (JUSTICE, TRUTH, and OBEDIENCE) the Lord God of Israel with all his heart, but followed after (MANS INVENTIONS and DEVICES) JEROBOAM'S wickedness, to win the golden calfs in DAN and BETHEL; for which wickedness and pride of his spirit, (after all his success in fulfilling the express will and command of God in cutting of from the earth Ahabs family, for the transcendent wickedness thereof) yet God be∣gun to plague him, and in those daies cut ISRAEL sho, ye and afterward for the pride and wickedness of his posterity (unto whom to the fourth generation God gave the Crown of Israel) for JEHU doing well in executing that which was right in his eyes, in ut∣ty ing of the house of AHAB for their lodtiry wikedness, according to the heart and mi of God, vers. 13. brought such plagues upon him and his people, that they became a spoil to all their neighbours, which made their afflction very bitter; insomuch that there was not any shut up,  any left, nor any helper for Israel, chap. 14. 26. And as JEHU to the eyes of men conspired against his Master and killed him, being but a Captain in Isral; so Sha∣lum the son of JABESH conspied against the last of his race, and smote him before the people and slw him, and raigned in his stead, Chap. 15. 10. but because those that followed after took no waning by the righteons and grievous punishment of their predecessors for their wickenesse, to wlk righteously and justly before the Lord; Therefore he made thei Rignes very mort, and full of blood and bitter affliction; and brought their heads to their graves most commonly by Conspiracy, and that many times of their SERVANTS & CAPTAINS; as the sequel of the Story shews. And in my Observations and private discourses at Westminster, I apparently found it to be as I feaed, their main endevours being closely carryed on to perpetuate this Parliament for ever, and by it, a new (and then) endevoured to be erected Councell of State, and the Councell of Warr, for the future (by the rules of their wills) to go∣vern this declared Free Nation arbitrarily; and to make some Grnd examples of error, as that none for time to come should dare to stir; Which I there clealy saw, to my vex∣ation and trouble, but was inwardly forced to bite my lip and be silent: but that which perplexed me most was that I found promotion and promised hopes of honour and gain had very much changed the principles, and cool'd the zeal of three or four of my familiar acquaintance and bosome friends, at not long before had been visibly and frequently the valia west, stoutest, ablest Champions▪ for Englands Libeies and Freedomes that I know in the Nation; some of whom very fairly and smoothly dealt often with my self, to be as prudent and wise in acceptation of the favours, and familiar respects of great men, as they had done; and at my coming to town Duke Hamilton, and the stout Lord Capel &c. had newly entred upon the stage for the tryal of their lives, and I confess, I was exceeding curious, in satisfiing my self about the manner of dealing with them, and so up into the court I got and heard the begining of their defence, nd afterwards went and spoke with them, looking upon them as part of the people of England, unto whom if any injustice was done, it became a pesident to destroy me, or the most righteous man in England, if the swaying faction pleased, and seng thesmna knowledg themselves subject  the penal part of the Law, as well as the directive part (which the King never did but to his dying hour maintained, those two most ABOMINABLE AND ALL HUMAINE SOCIETY-destoing  viz. that he was acco∣table to no power on earth, (but God a one) as to punishment for any of his actions, though ne∣ver so wicked: And secondly that the eople have no share n Government, I thought my self and the liberties of my native Country concerned in the manner of their trial ▪though I neither the nor now liked the cause in whih they igaed) as knowing and seeing very well when the hedges and freedoms of our liberties and freedoms have but a gape broken
downe in them, it is likely in time not only to become a path, but  high , to let in such an inundation of illegalities and arbitrarits as shall overow all and  downe all underfoot, which is plainly to be read in Sit Walter Kleys  Hstory of the Thirty grand Tyrants of Athens, in his History of the World, lib. chap. 9. . 2. ol. And which in time might become a meanes to pervert all the whole  of the whole English Government, of which my mind being full, I argued th with my sle. be these mens lives they would have right or wrong, then they should have killed them in the heat of bloud and not have given them quarter, or after quarter given  notwithstanding broke, and so have dispatched them by shooting or otherwise killing them in their Chambers or the like; but to reserve them many months together alive, and bing them out in the face of the Sunne, pretening to take away their lives by the rules of Justice and Law. Well then what is done unto them in this case, must be  in the meanes and method of Justice as well as in the end, and the Law of England  their bthight and inhritane in every punctiio of it as well as mine or any mans in the Nation, and indeed the end of the making of the Law is for transgressors, by the  of which their actions ought to be measared, the priviledges and benefit of which all their  ought not to be denied (nay if they be ignorant of their legall priviledges, the Judge ought to instruct and inform them thereof) nay or any stander by else that is present at the tryal, and the law renders this reason, lest the prisoner at the Bar should unjustly  his life by the errors of the proceedings of the Court, 3. p. insti. fol. 29. 137. , for a righteous man the Law was never made for him, neither hath he any need to claime the benefit of the severall priviledges of it, because he doth not transgresse it; but because so much malice and wickednesse is in the hearts of the sons of men, that many times the wicked and guilty accuseth the righteous and innocent, therefore the wisdom of our fore▪∣thers, and the righteousnesse of the Laws they made for us and have left unto s is such that no man though never so notorious in publick fame, is to be esteemed or  i guilty man or transgressor (in the eye of the law) till he be legally and duly convided of the crime laid unto his charge by the rules and methods of the Law:the law of Eng∣land is as much to be magnified, as Sir Edward Cock often stiles it, being a Law of , 2 par. insti. fol. 315. favours much the life of man, because of all things in the world it is most precious,  fol. ibid 30 see his exposition of magna charta in 2 par. inst but especi∣ally fol. 42. 43. 46, 47. 51. 56. but above all read that most excellentest of all his discour∣sesupon the righteousnesse, equity, safety, and justnesse of the tryall by Juries of 12 (iber  legais home) free and legall men (NEXT) of the neighbourhood in his 1 pa. Insti. ib.  chap. 12 Sect. 234. which Parliaments cannot destroy nor change, be∣cause it is impossible for them to find out a juster or better way of tryall and they  to provide for our weale, but not for or woe,  par▪ book. Doc. p. 150. and  doe what they list but what they ought 1 par. ook dee. p. 172. 205. 214. 266. 267.  494. 497 499. 656. 660. 666. 696. 706. 707.  2 par. fol. 95. & Declarat 17 March 164 p. 6. 21, 28, 27. For all the idle pratings of any new upstart 'SONS OF BELIAL a∣mongst us, such as the Author of the late abominable Book called the DISCOVERER which is commonly reported to be partly Master Frosts Secretary to the  calld the  of , and pincipaly that Apostate, IOHN CAN law if , and now of the Parish of Bw, whose conscience by that appeares so bread  it will without doubt lead him to worship with the Turks Alkeron if it were in , and fat livings to be got by so doing; But let all men in Authority and great place  value thei own heads and lives; Remember Dudly and Epsons punishments Privy Co∣cellors to Hny the eve, for proceeding by the rules of their discretion i
, laying aside the tryals by Juries of twelve men, the ancient and undoubted birthright of the Subject 4 part inst. fol. 41. for which they lost their heads as Traytors for subvertng the fundamentall Liberties of the people, although they had an Act of Parliament (viz. 11 Hen. 7. ch. 3. recorded 4 par. inst. ol. 40) made by as unquestiona∣ble power in Law as ever was in being in England, in a free and full Parliament, c∣sisting of King, Lords Spiituall and Temporll, and Commens; to authorise and beat them out in what they did, of whom you may read most excellently in Cooks inst. viz. 2 par. fol. 51 & 4 par. fol. 41. 197, 198. 199. And in my musing with my self of their conditionn, my thoughts were something to this purpose the actions done and acted by them, were either crimes or no crimes, crimes as to men they could not be, unlesse they were transgressions of a knowne and declared law in being in the Nation before their acts were done, (for saith the Spirit of Truth, Where there is no Law there can be  transgession, Rom. 4. 15.) and if so then to punish them for their acts (or facts) any other wayes, or by any other rules, manner or methods then is by those Laws against which they had transgressed, is expressed and pre∣sibed, is very grand injustree▪ and the most righteous and justest men in the world, (un∣der such practises) can never be safe or secure, but are alwayes liable in liberty, estate and life, to be levelld and destroyed by the will, mallice and pleasure, of the present saying grand faction, in which condition a man differs nothing from a brute beast, but in shape; But the High Court of Justice, erected to try them, was a pretended Court of Justice, not knowne to the visible and declared law of England (being in its constitution altogether against all the English Rules of justice, No nor in being when their facts were committed; And therefore had no pretence at all being but a new constitution to meddle with Jud∣ging of their facts committed before it had a being, or was brought forth into the world. Besides the erection of it (I mean a High Court of Justice) to try men for siding with the King in? the late warrs against the Parliament is a meer and cleer giving away, and surrendring up the legallity of their cause in o the Kings hands, telling the people in effect hereby, its true we have waged warre against the King, but if his sword had been as long as ours he might easily if he had pleased have hanged us all by the rules of Justice for transgressing  lw in being.
But we having by the chanc of war prevailed against him alass, we have no law of our sides, by the rules of which we can hang any of his party, but must be forced to take away their lives by the rules of our own wills and power, by rules of pretended Law mde after their facts committed, and for the demonstrating of this unto all that have adhered unto us, we Erect a New High Court of Justicely new rules never known in England to try them, that so our friends that have adhered to us, may see where they are, and betimes provide for their own safety, and never trust or beleeve OUR DECLARATIONS AND REMONSTRANCES ANY MORE; for though we formerly told you we had the Law of our sides; yet by our setting up this High Court of Justice, to be both parties, Jury and Judges, we plainly tel you there was no such thing, but that then what we told you was lyes and falshood and that you should beleeve us no more: for though then we told you we would maintaine the Law, especially of Liberty and Propriety, and that it was  transcenden wickednesse in us to destroy it, and by our votes at our wills and pleasures to disposeor levell all the peoples estates, liberties and properties; yet now we iell you, we never in our hearts intended any such thing, but that our designe was totally (if we did overcome) never to keep any of our promises: but absolutely to destroy all Law, and by our absolute will, by all manner of new erected engins, to debase and breake the peoples Spirits, and to dispose of their liberties, estates and lives by the absolute rule of their own wills, and as a cle demonstration to your understanding that we never intended other∣wise,, we erect this HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE, composed of suck  we know will obey and execute the absolute dictats of our wills, e they , without ever examining whether our commands be consonant to law, reason, eqity, justice or conscience, being of as absolute implicite faith in belclering of us (because we have promised they shall aign with us or under us) as ever any papish in the world were believing the Pop. Thirdly, Admit this had been an unquestionable (representative of the people) Parliament, who by ve thf hath had a power to levy what mony they had judged convennt upon the peopl b neral tax for the common safety of the Nation, which act both by law, and reason hy may do; yet they cannot in law, equity or reason, lay all tha tax upon thee o four men alone, and make them bear all the charges of the publick; evn so, although the Parliament may erect Courts of Justice, for the good of the people, to administer Law in esinitely to all the people of England alike without exepion of perons; yet they can neither by Law, nor Reason, erect a Court of Justice on purpose to try three or four individual persons, and no more because it is a∣gainst common equiy,  Englishmen o people being all born free alike, and the li∣berties thereof equally intasted to all alike;and therefore in common equity and ju∣stice, three or four individual persons ought not to be burthened with an iron yoake, when the universal are only brthened with a wooden one; and therefore in this srt is my judgment. that that high Court of Justice was altogether unlawfull in case thse that set it up had been an unquestionable representative of the people, or a legall Parlia∣ment, neither of which they are not in the least; but as they have managed their busi∣ness in opposing all their primitive declared just ends, a pack of trayterous, self seeking tyranical men, usurpers of the name and power of a Parliament. I say considering with my self some such things as these are, I was something diligent at the beginning of their tryal to see and hear all; yea and ofen converse with thmselve, but when I came to hear stut CAPEL make his defence for himself, (which was before he had any counsel assigned) and so GALLANTLY and acutely to plad the Law, and demand the benefit of it; which he did as acutely in my judgment, as ever I did hear any  an in his own case in my life, alledging fiftly the Statue of 25. Ed 3. chap. . and cited the very word of those  notable Statuts for his benefit, of the 1 n 4. chap. 10. and 11 Hen. 7. chap▪ 1. the last of which indemnifies the Kings followers i wars, and also cited the first and se∣cond of P. and M. chap. 10. and pressed therefrom that ll treasons should be tryed by the les of the common Law and not by extadinry ays and means according to the declared Laws in being citing the petition of right for the proof of that, looking round about him, and saying I am an English man, and the Law is my inheritance, and the benefit of the petition of right my birth right, if so then saith he lking upon the president,  my Jury. I see none of my Iury, that is to pass upon me▪ I demand the sight of  Jy legally pannelled, as my right by Law, without the verdict o whom I cannot in Law be c∣demned, and when it ws eplyd upon him by the predent, that the members of the Court was the Jury; he most glanly and resoluly answered to this effect, I  you will not deny me the bene of the Law, which you etend you have sought this Seve years to maintain: I hope, Sir, You will not deny m the benefit of the Declarations of those by whose power you sit: And producing e Declaration (of the pretended House) made the 9th Fbr. 1648▪ To maintain the Fundamentall LAVVES of the Nation; he held i forth, and desired it to be read, which was refused by the President, telling him, They knew it well enough: Well then saith he, Here's a Declaration made but the other day, wheein the Parliament declareth, That they are fully resolved to maintain, and shall and will up hold, preserve and keep the Fundamental Lawes of
this Nation; for, and concerning the preservation of the Lives, Properties, and Liberties of the People, with all things incident thereunto▪ with the altertions touching Kings, and House of Lords already resolved in this present Parliament, FOR THE GOOD OF THE PEOPLE: And saith he, It is one of the Fundamentall Liberties of the Subjects of this Kingdom, to be tryed by JURIES; and I hope you wil not deny me the benefit of the Parliaments Declaration, and so break it as soon as it is made: but all was to no purpose▪ he must have no Jury, but Councell, if he would; at the denyall of which unto him, I confesse my heart was ready to sk within me, and my spirit was inwardly fill'd full of fire at these wretched men, whose now declaed deigs was cleer to tread under their feet all the Liberties of Eng∣land, notwitstanding a their oathes and promises to the contrary; and then in that y in y own thougs I clarly bid adieu unto all Englands glorious (amongst men) Libties and dea-bought Feedoms, and much adoe had I in the open Court to con∣taine my self fom an awed dteation of their A BOMINABLE WICKEDNES, my heat was so full; but being withdrawne I was something free in my discourse in all companies I came in▪ but yet upon the principles of the Law and their own Declarati∣ons, as being almost overwheled to see what I then saw; and severall discourses I had with the prisones, and divers of my books and law pleas, with Sir Iohn Maynards and the foure Impeached Aldermen I sent them, and much pressed some of them to put their lives upon the hazard of a Plea and protestation against the Jurisdiction of the Court, telling them if they dyed upon that score, they would not only dy as lovers of the King their principall, but also of their Country, as brave Englishmen in the eyes of the peo∣ple; whereas if they stooped finally to their Jurisdiction, they might easily percive they were resolved to sacrifice them, and if they so died they dyed upon a poor and beg∣parly score; ye in a manner upon the deniall of their own principals; but the Gentle∣men having as o me appeared, large promises of their lives upon conformity to the Juris∣diction of the ourt were meerly gulld thereby of their lives, and could scarce ever be∣leeve the should dye till the house of death came upon them. And yet notwithstanding this, some of them sent to me, to desire me to be one of their Councell, to plead for them in matter of Law; unto whose friends I returned an Anser to this effct, That I could not be o unworthy in my own estiation, as to plead any plea they could plead for a justifiation of their ctions (though I confssed there were much in Law to be said for them; f eally, as the case stood with them) unlesse it were a plea and protestation against their Jurisdicton; and so procrastina  tryall, if it were a possible till a new Parliament; upon whih plea, I ould willingly have vetred my heart blood for thm, because my intrst, and the interst of all the free and honest men in Enlnd was as much concerned in that fall president of that abhominable and wicked Court, a Cpell or Hambletos life, &c. was; but they would not venter there, and so I declined them: And when HOLLAND came to it, a Lady, and some other of his friends came to me, to my house about hi; but I was still upon the same string, yet sent him word of severall particulars, in reference to my Tryall and arrigament at Oxford, that was very ma∣teriall to his present cause, and if he would call me in the open Court, as a Witnesse; he should se I would speak my minde freely and effectually, although I smarted for so doing; and he appointed a day to call me; whereupon, I went into the Court, and conveyed wrd to him, I was there, but whether his heart failed him or no, I know not, but he never called me; so when I understood they were all in the way of condemna∣tion, I took the thid part of Cooks Institutes under my arme to the house doore, and made seve∣rall Aplitions to some of their Judges, and some Parliament men for them, and par∣ticularly with Colonel Temple▪ Governour of the Fort near Graves End, and del with
him upon their own Principals, as the most probablest to doe the Prisoners good▪ and to save their lives, which I confest I much laboured for, and my Discourse with him  to this ffect at the House doore: Sir, I beseech you, let me ak you one question, What's that saith he? It is whe∣ther you think you House intend in good earnest to ake away the lives of the Lord Capel &c? or whether they have only caused them to be condemned in terrorum? without all controversie said he, they intend to take away their lives, and it is but just they should, and doe not you believe so, No indeed Sir doe I not, and  you please, I will give you some part of my Reasons therefore; I pray let me have them, Well then Sir said I, to say nothing of the Jurisdiction of the Court by which they were tryed (which is very questionable to me) no of the power of a Parliament to erect such a one, nor yet of the questionablenesse of the legality of your single House, nor of the clearnesse of the letter of th Law o their sides; which now the King being gne, might put you o of feare of the future power of these men, and make you now  at your mercy, and you out of fear of present hurt by them; seriousl to weg the Quaell betwix you and the in an equall and just balance; which if you do, I am sure you will  it very dispeable in Law, and something in Reason too, considering many of you late actions; especially if you consider, you ever avowedly nor throughly stated your Cause; but begun it upon Commissions for King and Parliament, force  people to take the Oath of Al∣legiance and Supremacy, Protestation, and two Covenants,  all which you force the people to swear to maintain the Kings Person, Crown and Greatnesse: and this  the Wars begun, letting all Writs and Processe of Law  in his Name, and thereby your selves mke him as it were Alpha and Omega to the pople; yea, and in severall of your Declarations fince the quarrell, you call him the fountain of Honour, and a∣verr he can do no wrong: See 1 part Book Decl. pag. 199. 304. All which doings of yours are enough to make men si with the King, especially those that have great E∣states, if it be for nothing but safetie's ske alone: But I will la all these aside, and argue with you more closely, upon principles that you cannot dispute against. 1. And therefore in the first place, The Law of England plished by your selves, saith expresl, No man of England in things concerning lif shall be judged tw for one fact; but if once judiciall tryed and acquitted, he never more by Law can be questioned again for that crime, though indeed and in truth he be never so guilty of it, and though it be never so criminous in it self; otherwise there would never be end nor safety: And for the proof thereof I then ired  YERS Case, at the Sessions of the Peace holden at Norwich in the 32 yeer of Qeen Elizabeth, and the Judge o∣pinions thereupon, which is notably recorded in Cooks 3 put Institutes chap. 104. of falsifying of Attainders, fol. 230. And my own Case at Oxford, which was to this effect: Being at the Fight at Brainford (which was upon the 12 of Novemb. 1642) taken priso∣ner in Arms against the King and his party, I was carried captive to Oxford Castle▪ where not long after my arrivall, the Lord Dunsmore, the Lord Matrevers, the Lord Newark▪ and the Lord Adver came to the Castle to me from the King, as they said, and prof∣fered me from himself great matters, so I would crave his don for the treason I had com∣mitted against him, in being in arms against him, and fosake the traiterous Parliament, and return to my obedience (as they called it) to the King: but being then as able in my own thoughts, as any private man in England to argue the equi and Justice of the Parliaments Cause, I was then knowingly ingaged in by the hopes of the performance of their many gallant promises to make people of England free and happy (their then on∣ly declared am and end) nd in whose quarrell I would then have laid down a thousand lives, (if I had had them) and for the greatest part of an hour together, by din of Ar∣gument,
grounded upon Law and Reason, scning and  all  of Honour, Riches, and Greatnesse, I eld them in play so holy, that they ll  with me, and gave up their disputing bulers; teatning to hang me  for a grand Traitor, without any more adoe. At which I laughed, and desired their  to tell me which way they would go to work to take away my life, now they had given me quarter. Well, say they, We have two strings to our bow, And in the first place, we will arraigne you for a Traytor, for being the chief or Generall of the Preutit, that ce d to Westminster and White Hall, and forced the House of Pers, and drove away the King from his Parliament, and so begun the Warrs. Unto which I replyed, Alsse, my Lords, you will be far mistaken there. And I cannot but wonder, that your Lordships should so un∣dervalue your own Honours and Reputations, as so much as once now to mention this. Why Sirrah? said one of them. Why, my Lord? Because your Lordships may remember, that the 3 of May, 1641. the King caused Warrants to issue out to apprehend me as a Tray∣tor for this very thing, and others depending upon it; and as a traytor I was apprehended by his Messengers, one of which that night kept me prisoner as a Traitor: and the next morn∣ing I being 4 of May 1641, as a Traytor I was brought by him to White Hall, where, (a I remember) old Sir Henry Vane and Mr. Nicholas were appointed by the King himself to carry my Impeachment to the House of Peers, at whose Br I that day appeared (not then understanding their Jurisdiction) and was there that day in your way arraigned for my life, and one Littleton the Lord Keepers Kinsman, swore most biterly against me: but upon further examination of witnesses, and hearing with patie my own Defence for my self, I was by your whoe House (who lookd upon themelves as the highest Judicatory in England) honourably and nobly , a  ¦nocent and fe of the Kings accusation: of which, my Lords, (said I then) let me plainly tell yu, if I were guilty, you were a company of righteous and unjust Judges for freeing me from that Accusation: but, my Lords, being judicially tryed therefore, and acquitted by your selves, (who, if my memory fail me not, I aw all at that Tryall) and by your whole House (then extraordinary  as ever I saw i) who judge your selves the highest Judicature in England, I am acquitted thereby (my Lords) by the Law of England, from any more question about that , although it should be granted, I was never so guilty of it. Unto which they replyed (to my re∣membrance) in these words, A pox on you, for a cunning subtill Rogue, are you so cun∣ning in the Law, that we cannot lay hold of you here? but yet for all your parts, we will have you to the gallows, for leavying Warr upon the traiterous commands of the Parlia∣ment against the King: And here (aid they) wee are sure the aw will reach you. Whereupon I was immediately ater laid intons, and brought to the Bar before the Lord Chief Justice Heath, Sir Thomas Garded Recorder of London, &c. and by Indict∣mt, aoding to the rules of the Common Law, arigned for a traytor for levying War in Ox∣fdshe against the King. But my Plea to the businesse of Wstminstr▪ and the Pen∣ti was admitted for good law▪ That being once judiciall ed and acquited, I could no more be troubled therefore: neithr indeed was . But according to the punctlies of the Law, they gave me all the lair play▪ in the world that the Law would allow me, sffering me to say for my self at the Bar what I pleased, releasing me of my close impri∣sonment and ions, and allowed me pen, ink and paper (which the Jaylor kept from me) upon my pleading before the Judge; such usages being altogether contrary to law: and that no such usage, ought to be exercised in the least upon any prisoner whatsoever,
that w  bealy rude in his implonment; and that no supposed raitore  by law could be put to any pa or tormnt before coriction. And truly, Colonel Tele, I shoud be very sorry, and blush for shame,  considering my rong zeal in the Parliaments cause, to see the day that the Parliament of England (a least thse that so stile themselves) that hath pretended so much righ∣ness and justice, should be no more just to the Covaliers (against whom they have fought for injustice and and oppression) in denying them the benefit of the Law hn they are in their power and mercy, then the Kings Jadges were to me, and other of your prisone, when their lives were in their power and mercy, in the hight of War, and of their  prosperity, and yet granted us the benefit of Law in all things we claimed it in, as Capt. Vivers of Bnury, arraigned with me, can witnesse as well as my self. Now Sir, to make application: the Parliament not long since, when in its poe it was more aunntly unquestionable then now it is, (after its new force) conded CAPEL, HAMBLETON, HOLLAND &c. to banishment, for the very  now to their charge; an threfore in Justice and Law cannot a second time cause them to be ad∣judged to die for the vey same things. Its nothing to me, nor to the Kingom, for you to say, that when that Jdgment pass'd they had so many friends sitting in the House as over-voted the honest Common-wealth's-men to the prjudice thereof; for the majr part is Parliament, or else thre s no parliament: Therefoe Sir, I reason thus: E∣ther that wherein that Judgment pass'd was a parliament, or no Parliament; if a Par∣liament, then their judgment (s to themselves especially) was binding, and the be∣nefit of it they ought not to deny to them whose live are consrved in it;  it were unjust in it self  to the Nation: But if you, or any other man shall say, it was no Parliament, as having forfeited their trust in treating with the King again, and so their Judgnt not valid, then with much more confidence say I, this that now fits is no Parliament, and so by consequence, the High Court of Justice no Court of Justice at all? and if for then to execute them upon their Judgment, is absolute Mur∣der. But I would fain see that honest and valiant man in your House that dust pre∣test against them for no Parliament. But Sir, besides this, mark the consequence of it to all we Parliamenteers that have acte under you, and by vertue of your commands, by these Proceedings▪ First, You have sold the Bishops Lands, and given them th bought them, as they suppose, good security for their quiet enjoyment of their Prchass: I, but within a little whle after, part of the very same Parliament alters their mindes, and being be∣comth maor part by forcible Purgations, illegall new Recruits, or by any other ricks  vies, and they vote, all those bargins are unjust, and the Purchasers ought to lose both er Land and Mny: where is then that stable security of Parliaments? And yet such doings would be as just as your present dealings with CAPEL, &c. whose pre∣ceden  a precedent for that, and much more of the same nature. Bt secondly, The sam Parliament that condemded Capel &c. to Bnishment, pass'd mulitudes of Compositions with severall Cavlier, as guilty of Teason in the  of it, s they: And by the same ruleo now condn CAPEL, & ; after you have judged them to banishment, you y adjudge all the compounding Cveers to  ange, after you have adjudged them to composition, and so put the Kingdom (by  people desperate) in an everlasting flame that never will have end, becse  is o certainty in any of your proceedings, but are s changeable as the wind th , Thirdly, and most principally it is a common maxim in Law and Reason,
both, and so declared by your selves, 1 part Book Declarat. page 281. That those that shall guide themslves by the judgment of Parliament, ough (what-ever happen) to be secure and free from all account and penalties. Bt divers honest men (as you now judge them) ave acted and guded themselves by the judgment of Parliament, as they account yu, in taking away the King's life; and yt by your dealings with CA∣PEL, &c. they are liable to be hanged as rayt s  a major part of your very House, by force, or other , shall vote that act , and all the A∣ctors therein Traitors: So that, Sir, if I have any judgn in e, by his very single act towards them, you shake the vry tondation of the validity of all the Parliamnts Decrees and Judgments at once, and mke  all the Seuriy and ndemnity that those (in qty) ought to enjoy, that have acted by you commands, ad guided themselves by the judgment o Parliament: By mea of which you will finde in time, you have demolished your own Bulwarks, an destroyed your own Fences. And for time to come, for my part, I shall be a thosand times more wary how I obey all your Commands, then ever I was in my life; seing yo are so fickle and unstable, that no man knows rationally where to find you, or fixedly to what to hold you. But if you shall object (as some do) That that judgment of Bnishment was onely in ference to the peace with the King, and that being broke, yo are absolved from that judgment, and not bound by it. To which I answer no more but this; That was a Judgment upon sious and solid debate, of long continuance, at the passing of which you acted as individually, and as independently from the King, as ever you did before or since: and therefore in Law, Justice and Cnscience you ought to stand to it, and make it good to the Prisoners con∣cerned in it; especially, considering they desie it. But having in length outstriped an ordinary epistle, and having much matter remain∣ing, jdging it more then time this that I have here writen to you, should come to pub∣lick view, (although I perish for so doing) I am forced and necessitated abuptly here to break of; and leave the remaining part for a second part to the same tune if God spare me life and health, and give opportunity, although I be cut in ten thousand peece therefore; for if every hair of CROMWEL, FAIRFAX, IRFTON, HASLERIG, BRADSHAW, and HARISONS head, were a Regi∣ment or Legion of armed men, I would by Gods ssulance in the present righteous caue in which they have deeply imba qud me, (by their lawless Cruelty and Tyranny) ear them no more then so many butterslyes or motes in the sun; for behold, God  my salvaon, I will trast and not be asaid, fo the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength, and my song, he also is (long since) become m Salvation, Isa. 12. 2. Therefore will  sing ejoye nd b mry, for he hath fitted me for all manner of deaths; in inabling me through his strength pwer and presence, any time this twelve years together to carry my life in my hand, and to be al∣ways eve since in readiness at a quarter of an hours warning to lay it down; whih  shall s freely  (as eat) in tis just and righteous quarrel, viz. THE LIBERTIES OF THE LAND OF MY NATIVITIES AGAINST THE APOSTA∣CIES AND TYRANNIES OF HER MOST PERFIDIOUS AND TREACHEROUS PROFESSED FRIENDS and the holding out of Gods Soveraignty amongst the son of mn, as being that one, single,  LONE (either in heaven or earth) that is to raign, rule,, govern, and give a law by his will and pleasure to the sons of men; the absolute workmnship of his hands or power; And therefore to thee O CROMWEL, O FAIRFAX, O IRETON, O HASLERIG, &c. in the power, might and strength of the Lord God Omniptent and Almighty,
that Rais and shall Rule for ever and ever; before whom the  doe quake and tremble; and before whom You are all of you as inconsiderable  Sun, as the dust of the ballance, or the smallest drop of the bucket: To you, I say, in my present condition, as Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego in their great  the outward man, Dan 3.) said once to your brother Tyrans Nebuchadzz;  unto you, that for all your power and worldly greatnesse (with all your ) that I fear you not, not a carefull to answer you in the matter in  us; for the God whom (with my soul and body) I serve (with uprightness of ) is able to deliver me, from the burning fiery fornace, (your cruell close , Banishment, Dungeons, or Death it self) yea, an  hewill deliver me out of your  hands, O (perfidious cruel) Tyrants. But if he will not, Be it known unto you, O (apostatised) Tyrants, that I will  serve  (stoop or submit unto you) nor worship your I doll or golden Image that you have set up (your Arbitrary power and unlimited greatnesse.) But least God should give or permit you a larger power over me then he did the De∣vil over JOB to murther me before I can write the second part hereof; therefore I shal now give you the heads of my intentions, and so conclude. First, From the perplexitie of my spirit with the unjust dealings with CAPEL, &c. I left Westminster and retired home, resolved in solitarinesse there to abide, whered was grievously tormented with the cryes of poor people who came to me in multitudes for advice in their tedious suits of Law, whose complaints without any hopes of remedy that I could give them, made my house a place of torment to me, which forced me to vi∣sit Westminster againe, where 2ly, I heard the certainty of Husons, Whaleys and Major Bertons desperat height at their Councel of Wa at Whhall, at or neer upon the 22 of Feb. 1648. to ingage that Councel (vi & nis) to proure by Cromwels means a Law at their pleasure to dispatch me and my honest friends the Whalboneers; which when I examined from friend to friend, and some it to be very true by the attestation of plurality of their own Officers, my spirit was all on fire, (and no Lyon o the Army to me then so full of dread, but I durst inco with) to consider with my self that all our Liberties and large expectations must  in this, That now our lives must be at the absolute wil and pleasure of a company of BLOUDY and INHUMANE Butcherers of men, that had served seven yeers apprentiship to that bloudy and wicked trade of cutting of mens throats for money, and nothing else; who never had kept faith or troth with any sorts of men they dealt with, and yet must now become our Accusers, Prosecuters, Witnesses, Parties, Jury, Judges, and Executioners: At the very thoughts of which I was even conounded in my spirit, and which justly and throughly ingaged me in the chief ma∣naging of the first and second part of ENGLANDS new Chains discovered: The first of which I presented at the Commons Bae, with a speech to it, the 26 Febr. 1648. the second pat of which I, &c. had got divers thousands of hands to: the truth of  ne of which, (or all its declared treasonable) I will seal with my heart blood; and ∣dertake before a new Representative (TO WHOM I HEREBY AGAIN APPEAL) to prove every charge in it upon my Life. I shall also give the Reaso wherefore I have flown so high, as I have done, which is, because they have thought  just in them to acuse the King, the supreme Magistrate, of Treason; and yet  thought and declared it Treason in me, &c. to goe about the doing of any such thing to Mr. OLIVER, that I will maintain it upon my life, more (comparatis ) legally deserves it then ever the King did; And yet though I, &c.  in the very
that they themselves (I mean both Parliament and Army)  out unto : viz. by Pition, ( 1 pae Book Declar. pag. 123, 101, 202, 548, 720. and Armies Book, Declar. page 17, 33, 35, 44, 60, 61. yea, see page 83. and you shall there finde in the fifth Article, they impeached Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Mr. Cly for Traytors, For obstructing and prejudging of publique Petitions to the Parliament; and yet they adjudged and  me, &c. for a Traytor therefore, without so much as  hearing me to speak for my self; and then after they had condemned me, went about at the Kings. Bench-Bar to try me for my life; unto whom, if I stooped, I was sure to be gone, being already pre∣judged: Again, I shall also acquaint you with the severall Discourses Mr. Hollan, Mr. Hunt &c. had with me about these Businesses, and the large proffers I had from them, yes, and from Mr. Alexander Rigby as the mouth of Sir Henry Mild may the  Agent, who had Commission (as he said) to proffer e and my Comrades ge places and prefor∣ments; so we would sit still, and let the Grandces goe on with their work: Which I with detestation refused at the house doore, the very FORENOON, I was adjudged a Treytor, and thereupon the same day in the Afternoon, the Votes of Treason past against me, &c. and my Second part of Englands New-chairs discovered. And seeing the Businesse of Scro's men is wrongfully father'd upon me, who never will incite Souldiers nor others to declare upon any thing else but our printed Agree∣ment of the 1. May 1649. and that when they do draw their Swords against their Ge∣neral, &c. they shall throw away their Scabbards, and rather fight with him, then treat with him, without either resolving to give or take Quarter; yet I say, seeing this is put upon my scoe, I hope I shall evidently make it appear (comparatie compara)" That I am able to give 99 in the handred to any Champion the Generall hath in England, and from Scripture, Law, Reason, and their own Declarations, to make their action appear more just  the Generals severall Rebellions against the Parliament, his Creators, and extraordinary good Benefactors; or his Rebellion and the Parliaments against the King in the love Warrs. And lastly, I shall shew the falseness and malignity of the late DISCOVERERS de∣signe, of fathering upon me, &c. all the erronicus tenents of the poor Diggers at George hill in Surey, laid down in their late two avowed Books, called, The true Lvellors Standard, and The new law of Righteousnesse, to which they have have annexed their names: The Radr taking notice of which alone, may be an answer to all that abominable lying late Book, called, The DISCOVERER. And so, Mr. SPEAKER, thanking you for some late kindnesses in your House, I received from you, I take leave to subscribe my self An honest and true▪bred, free Englishman; that neve in his life feared a Tyrant, nor loved an Oppressor. JOHN LILBURN. From my close, unjust, and causelesse Captivity, without allowance, (the legall right of all men in my case) in the Tower of London, this 8. of June 1649. The first yeer of England's declared Freedom, by the lying and false pretended Conservators thereof, that never intended it. FINIS.
