N613 E146_9 99860725 112850
A NEVV DECLARATION Of the last affairs in Jreland, shew∣ing the great overthrow given to the Irish Rebels. Also in what estate that Kingdome now stands. Read in the House of Commons, and orde∣red forthwith to be printed. Die Lunae 2, of May, 1642. It is ordered by the House of Commons that this be forth-with printed. H. Elsyinge. Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed by A. N. for John Franck, 1642.
The Declaration of a great overthrow given to the Irish Rebels. SAturday, the second of Aprill, the Earle of Ormond Lievtenant Generall with three thousand foot, and five hundred horse, with five field-Pieces, marched from Du∣blin, and quartered that night at Racoole. Sunday morning the third, after Prayers, the Army marched towards the Naase, burning several Villages of the Rebels in their march. Within a mile of the Quarter Captaine Armestrong (Quarter-Master Generall of the horse,) broughtword, that in a Castle (called Tipper, be∣longing to one Sutton, a Collonel (as they call them) amongst the Rebels; where the said Armstrong intended to quarter a horse troop, there were some Rebels: Wher∣upon the Lievtenant Generall, sent thither Sir George Wentworth's horse-troope then commanded by Captaine Thomas Harman, with direction to surround the Castle, and one of the Trumpetters approaching neerer to the Castle then he had direction, was slain by a shot from the Castle. The Lievtenant Generall upon notice thereof, sent a party of foot under the command of Sir Charles Coot, who blew up the Castle, and therein a Popish Priest, uncle to the said Sutton, and some others, so retur∣ned back to the Quarter. Monday the fourth, the Army marched to Kilcullin, burning in their march, the Villages in the way which belonged to the Rebels, and quartered at Kilcullin that night.
Tuesday the fifth, the Army marched from thence to Athy and in their way burnt the Castle, and Towne of Kilrush, belonging to one Fitz Gerald, (a Collonell also amongst the Rebels) and relieved some Englishmen which had been long prisoners with the Rebels, one of them being an aged man, and a Minister. The Army came that night to Athy, before they got thither the Townsmen (not knowing they were so neer them) and fearing the approach of the Rebels (who had the day before assaulted the Town) burnt the most part of the houses of the Town, lest comming into the hands of the Rebels, they should thereby be the better ena∣bled to annoy the Castle. Wednesday the sixth, the Army rested at Athy, and the Lievtenant Generall sent four troops of horse to re∣lieve the Castles of Caterlagh, and Cloughgrenan, viz. his Lordships troop commanded by Sir Patrick Wymes, Sir George Wentworth's troops commanded by Captain Har∣man, Captaine Tho. Armstrong's troop commanded by himself, and part of Sir Charles Coot. When they came within sight of the Town, the Rebels observing their ap∣proach set the Town on fire and fled. Whereupon Cap. Harman (best knowing that Countrey, and which way they would take) did with his hors-troop pursue them, and killed 50 of them, the rest escaping into a Bog, brought in good store of cattle, and relieved the Castle, where there were 500 persons, who were exceedingly distressed having beene a long time besieged by the Re∣bels, the troops returned that night to their quarter, ha∣ving relieved both the Castles. The same day Sir Charles Coot was sent forth with a party of horse and foot, and relieved Cap. George Gre∣ham's Castle (called Ballylenon) wherein there were 300 persons. Castle Rebon was relieved the same day, by the
Lord Lievtenant's and Sir Thomas Luca's troops, and a Castle neere it called Bert, taken in, and eight Rebels found in it who were immediatly hang'd. Thursday the seventh, the Lievtenant Generall mar∣ched from Athy to Stradbally, and left at Athy Collonell Crauford and his Regiment, and Sir George Wentworth's Hors-troop for the Guard of the Town being a passage over the River of Barrow. Friday the eighth, the Army marched from Stradbal∣ly towards his Majesties Fort of Maryburrough; That day Sir Thomas Lucas (Commissary Generall of the horse) accompanied with Sir Charles Coot, together with foure troops of horse commanded by the Lord Lievte∣nant Lord Lisle, Sir Tho. Lucas, and Sir Charles Coot were sent to relieve Ballynekill Castle, with ammunition. In their march thither there sallied out of one of the Demp∣sie's Castles (called Knockardnegurragh 300 of the Re∣bels Captain Treswel commanding the Lord Lisles troop charged them and kill'd 60 of them, and put the rest to flight. In that service there was a Gentleman of the Scottish Nation (called Master Calvil) shot in the arme. Some Armes were then taken from the Rebels, which were left with the Earle of Londonderry's Uncle, at Bally∣nekil; that night those troops returned back to the Fort of Maryborrough. Saturday the ninth, the whole Army rested at the Fort of Maryborrough. Easterday the tenth, Sir Thomas Lucas Commissary Generall of the horse, accompanied with Sir Charles Coot together with six Horse troops, viz. The Lord Lievtenants, Sir Thomas Lucas, Sir Charles Coot, Sir Ri∣chard Greenvile, Captain Armstrong, and Captain Schout's were sent with ammunition to relieve the Castles of Burros, Knoknemease, and Burr.
In which days march, passing the river of the Noare, the Rebels shot at our Troops, but some of the horse beat them out of the woods, and killed some of them. Neere the Castle of Florence Fitz Patrick, there was a stone cau∣sway through a Bog, where but two horses could march in front, where the Rebels had cast up a ditch on each side of the Causway, and cut off some two yards in the length, at the entrance on the causway, so to hinder our mens passage; which when our men observed, although the Rebels stood in their view, ready to play upon them with their shot, yet our men remayning resolute in the service they went about, deserted not that place, but a∣lighted from horsback; and Sir Charles Coot in his owne person with thirty of the Dragoons, (then become Mus∣quetiers) did on foot charge the Rebels, so to force their passage, and did force it, being seconded therein by 30 of Sir Tho. Lucas horse, the rest of the horse comming on softly after. In that conflict, and execution done by the Horse, hee that there commanded the Rebels in chiefe was slain, with forty of the Rebels. Captain Armstrong was slightly shot. The passage being so gain'd, the troops marched to Burros, the Duke of Buckingham's Castle, and there relieved al the English being in number about 300, who had beene for a long time besieg'd by the Rebels, and were almost starved. From thence the troops mar∣ched forwards to the Bur, and in their way relieved the Castle of Knocknemease, and got to Bur about three of the clock in the morning, and relieved the Castle, and foure o 500 English therein, who had endured a long siege by the Rebels. Monday the eleventh, the troops in their return back marched through O Dunn's Country, and burnt all the Country untill they came to Castle Cuff, from thence
marching to Portnchinch through Woods, and Bogs, the Rebels fell upon them, and Captaine Yarner was shot in the fore-head (of which shot he is well recovered) some of the troopers were hurt, and divers of their horses kil∣led, and the passage of Portnchinch, was possessed by the Rebels, so that the troops were forc'd to swim the Ri∣ver of the Barrow. The Lievtenant Generall knowing that the troops were to return that way, and considering that it is a dangerous passage (he being himselfe indispo∣sed by reason of sicknesse all Saturday and Sunday) sent thither 500 foot commanded by Collonell Monck, and the Lord Lisle's hors-troop commanded by Capt. Tres∣well, who burnt all the Countrey, and kept the Rebels so busie in fight, who had intrencht themselves upon that passage, as gave our troops opportunity to passe safe over another passage, but were so ill guided in the night through the Bogs, that they were constrained to stay all that night in the Bogs untill morning, and in this hard journey there were lost and made unserviceable above 100 horse, the horsmen having sate 48 houres on hors∣back, before they came back to the fort at Maryburrough. Also the Lievtenant Generall, upon Easter-day, sent his owne hors-troope commanded by Sir Patrick Wymes to Ballinekill, to relieve the English that were there, who were in great distresse for want of victuals, where the troop quartered that night. Monday morning the eleventh, Sir Patrick gave dire∣ctions, that all the carts and horses that could be found there, should be made ready to bring in corn for the re∣lief of the Castle, and with his troop brought in unto them 80 barrels of wheat and beere belonging to one Dempsie a notorious Rebell, which they tooke within Musket shot of his Castle.
About five a clock in the afternoon there were 1000 of the Rebels, and two troops of horse that shewed themselves upon a Hill (called Ballyoskill) within two Muskets shot, and did not advance. Sir Patrick Wymes burnt all the Villages belonging to Dempsie, and returned back that night with the troop to the Fort of Marybur∣rough. That night the Lievtenant Generall received intelli∣gence by Letters from Coll. Crauford, That the Rebels with about forty Colours were incamped on both sides of the River of Barrow, and were there making up the bridge of Magainy, which had been in the beginning of the Rebellion broken by order from the State. Tuesday the twelfth, the whole Army lay still at the Fort of Maryborrough, to give rest to the troops, the bet∣ter to prepare and enable them for service, seeing there was advertizement of the Rebels being incampt, so as might give them fight in their return. Upon Wednesday the 13, the Army marcht through to Athy, and burnt a great part of the Territory of Clam∣nalcero, a Countrey belonging to the Lord Dempsie in re∣bellion. Thursday the fourteenth, the Army continued at A∣thy, the Rebels quartering on both sides the River at the Bridge of Magainy, within foure miles of Athy, with a∣bout 7000 foot, and 200 horse amongst whom were (as we understood by some prisoners taken in the fight) the Lord Viscount Mount Garret, the Lord Viscount Ikerin, the Lord Baron of Dunboyne, the Baron of Loghmoe, and most of the principall rebels of the Counties of Wickloe, Wexford, Caterlagh, Kildare, Kilkenny and Queen's County, who drew up a part of their forces to a place called Tanckardstowne, neer Grange Mellon, a Castle defended by
Mistris Burroughs, and some Warders, which had beene long besig'd by the Rebels, where the Lievtenant Ge∣nerals hors-troop commanded by Sir Patrick Wymes, and Captain Armstrong's troop were quartered. From which Castle in the morning by directions from the Lievte∣nant Generall Cornet Butler, and Cornet Magragh, were sent to discover the Rebels; but they observing that part of the troops were a forraging sent over a troop of horse, each horsman carrying behind him a Musquetier, who crost the River thinking to cut off both the Cor∣nets, which Sir Patrick Wymes, and Captain Armstrong, be∣ing upon the top of the Castle observing, did in preven∣tion thereof get together so many of the horsmen as were in the quarter, and charg'd the Rebels then in skir∣mish with two Cornets, and forced them back over the River, kill'd one of their horsmen, hurt divers of the rest, kill'd all the foot, and some were drowned in swim∣ming back again. In this service Sir Patrick Wymes had his horse kill'd under him, and two of the Lievtenant Generals troop were then shot. The same same day in the afternoone the Lievte∣nant Generall accompanied with Sir Charles Coot, Sir Thomas Lucas, Collonel Crauford, Collonel Monck, and other Commanders: and divers Voluntiers with 200 horse went to view the strength of the Rebels, and in what manner they lay. Upon his Lordships returne to Athy, he then immediatly called a Councell of Warre: and having there imparted his observation concerning the Rebels, it was debated in Councell, what resoluti∣on was fittest to be taken. And considering that our hor∣ses were exceedingly harased in their former long and troublesome marches for reliefe of the severall places
formerly mentioned; that many of the souldiers were sicke; that our victuals were well neere spent; that our store of munition was much exhausted in furnishing the severall places we had relieved; that wee had not heard from Dublin, nor they from us since we marched thence, by reason that all the ways were shut up by the Rebels that therefore we knew not but there might be cause for hastning thither, to prevent any inconvenience there that we were much  with the multitude of our carriages increased necessarily for carrying the Muniti∣on sent for relief of the said severall Castles, and for car∣rying of our own provision of bread, lest the want there of might distresse us abroad where wee were not sure to be sufficiently provided, and for carrying our sick men, and many poore unserviceable English, whom wee brought away from the Castles relieved, that the forces of the Rebels loy upon a great advantage, and might at their pleasure get from us into a Bog, or Wood, both which lay very neere them; that they might easily break down the bridge of Magainy, formerly mentioned, which they had newly made up, and lay betweene both parts of their forces: It was therefore resolved in Councell that we would not goe to seek out an enemy, especially they being so numerous, and having those other advan∣tages of us, but would rather bend our course towards Dublin, yet for as if they hindred our march wee would not dishonour his Majesties army so, as to fly from those Rebels, but would endeavour (by the assistance of Al∣mighty God) to force our passage in despight of them, with what hazard soever. In put suit of that resolution taken in the Councell of War, we murched from Athy, on Friday the fifteenth of this moneth by six of the clocke in the morning: Our
numbers of able fighting men (by reason of those wee had disposed in severall needfull, and apt Garrisons, and by reason of our sick men) not exceeding 2400 foot, and about 400 horse who upon the first setting forth were put into this Order of marching. First, Corner Pollard with 30 horse, and 40 fire-locks as a Vant Currlers and for∣lorn hope. In the next place the baggage belonging to the horse, then six troops of horse led by Sir Tho. Lucas Commissary Generall of the Horse in two Divisions; then followed the baggage of the foot Vivres, and the animunition waggons. After it the Lievtenant Generall with a troop of Vo∣lunteers commanded by Cap. Edmund Matthew wherein were the Lord Dillon (eldest son to the Earle of Rosco∣mon) the Lord Brabaon (eldest sonne to the Earle of Meath) Sir Robert Farrar, Colonell Iohn Barry, Serjeant Major John Ogle, and divers other Gentlemen of good quality. After him followed foure Divisions of foot, Each consisting of about 300, then marched the Artille∣ry, and the Amunition belonging to it. After them four other Divisions of foot, of 300 each. Then three troops of horse commanded by Sir Richard Greenvile; the Rear of the foot was commanded by Sir Charles Coot. When wee had marched about a mile in this order, we discovered the Rebels on the right hand of Us, with all their strengh of horse and foot, making all possible haste to overtake Us; or to prepossesse a passage neere to Balsonnan, some five miles from Athy, which passage wee could not avoid, having resolved to quarter at Con∣nell. Whereupon the Lievtenant Generall caused the Pioners to make ways into the inclosed grounds, that so the foot might march in the Flanck of the baggage, as∣well for the security of it; as to avoid the cumber there∣of,
in case the light arm'd Rebels should fall suddenly upon us, and commanded out Cornet Magragh with 0 horse, and directions carefully to observe the Rebels march, and then he gave order to Sir Thomas Lucas, with all the hors-troops that marched in the Van (except his Lordships own troop, and the Volunteers) and a party of Fire-locks to possesse the foresaid passage, and to make it good till all the troopes should come thither. Then his Lordship sent out other Scouts to bring in continuall notice of the motions, and approach of the Rebels. By that time wee had marched about two miles further, the Scouts came in, and brought in intelligence, that the Rebels were on the otherside of a Hill that had for a good while hindred our sight of them, and that they made extraordinary haste to overtake us, or to pos∣sesse themselves of the passage before us. Hereupon the Lievtenant Generall hastned on the baggage, and gave the Conductors order to make no stand, till it were got∣ten beyond that passage. Presently after this Order given, hee discovered di∣vers of the Rebels Colours drawn up upon a Hill on the right hand; whereupon hee instantly made a stand with the first foure Divisions of foot, drew them up in order to fight, and faced the Rebels within two Muskets shot of them, leaving room for the other troops of horse and foot according to the ground, and the order he had de∣signed to draw them up in, having formerly sent for them upon the first notice of the Rebels being so neere us. In this order, and in expectation of the other troops wee stood awhile; The Rebels likewise in the meane time drawing up, and ordering their troops. At length Sir Charles Coot, Sir Thomas Lucas, and Sir Richard Green∣vile came with the troops under their commands (ha∣ving
by their diligence, and circumspection prevented the Messengers whom the Lievtenant Generall had pro∣vidently, and with good judgment sent for them) and were by his Lordship immediatly put into order descri∣bed in the inclosed Card. In which order wee advanced towards the Rebels till by the interposition of a hedge and hollow way, some of the Troops were forced to goe about, and then drew up again in the same order, on the otherside of the Hedge, within almost Musket shot of the Rebels: Then were sent out parties of Fire-locks, and Mus∣quetiers to begin the fight. After they had given fire for a good space upon the Rebels, and the Rebels upon them Sir Thomas Lucas with all the Troopes on the left wing, (viz.) his owne Troope Captaine Armestrong's and the Earle of Ormond's, (which last was commanded by Sir Patrick Wymes) and were led by Sir Thomas Lucas, the other division followed wherein were Sir George Wentworths commanded by Captain Harman, Sir Char∣les Coot's, by Lievtenant Devalier, and the Lord Lievtenant's by Captaine Yarner, who commanded that Division, marched up in order towards two bo∣dies of the Rebels consisting of three thousand, with a Troope of Horse on each Wing of the Rebels Divi∣sions, they in the meane time giving fire in his face, and the other two bodies that were on their right Wing consisting of foure thousand doing the like in his left Flancke, when hee was gotten within lesse then Car∣bin shot of them, divers of our Horse and Men, that were within being hurt he hastened, and charged them upon a good round Trot, and in the end routed them, and forced them to betake themselves to flight towards a Bog, they leaving behind them divers of their Co∣lours
and Armes; Sir Richard Greenvile then with three Troopes (viz.) The Lord Lisle's, commanded by Cap∣taine Trswell, his owne Troope, and Captaine Schout's charged the left wing of the Rebels. Horse who were routed also, and betooke themselves to flight as the o∣thers had done; During all which time our Foote gal∣lantly advancing, gave fire incessantly upon the Re∣bels, our Horse then followed the execution bravely. And then also our foot still continued to give fire upon those routed men, which they did exceedingly well, un∣till by the mingling of our men with theirs, in the pur∣suit, it became necessary (for the preservation of our own men so mingled with the Rebels) to forbeare. And there∣fore the Lieutenant Generall commanded them to for∣beare, which then (and not before) they did according∣ly. In all that time the body of 4000. of the Rebels, which was the right wing of their Army stood fast and moved not. In which wing the Lord Mount Garret, and Collonel Hugh Birne, and divers others of the principall Rebels were (as was told us by some Prisoners taken in the fight) Against that body; the Lieutenant Generall, with his Troope of Voluntiers, and Sir John Shirlock, Lieutenant Collonel of the Lord Lamberts Regiment, with a division of 300. foot advanced, and sent out sixtie Musquetiers, who gave fire upon the Rebels, and the Rebels on them, and on the Lieutenant Generall with the Voluntiers. But in conclusion, that body which of all the Rebels had the confidence to stand longest, having seene all the residue of their Army routed, and the execution so sharp∣ly followed, they began to breake, but being by their Officers rallied againe, they gave fire againe on the Lieu∣tenant Generall, and those 300. foot of ours, who retur∣ned
backe to the Rebels such volleys of shot, as gave them little comfort to stand longer; but they chose rather to betake themelves to flight, yet disguising it by a seeming Retreate, vntill they got to the top of a Hill neere them, and then they began to run with all speed possible to save their lives, to a bogge not farre from thence, whither all the rest of the Rebels formerly Routed had betaken them∣selves, and where their Horsemen had run their Horses into the Bogges, an there for looke them, and betooke them to their heeles, and thither they were pursued most fiercely by our horse and foot, who were so forward and fierce in following the execution, as the Lieutenant Ge∣nerall had much difficulty to keepe them from following even into the Bogge, and no lesse difficulty to get them to retreate, so earnestly did they all desire to have the kil∣ling of more of the Rebels; But in the end they were perswaded to retreate. And then the Lieutenant Gene∣rall assembling the Army, commanded them to prayer, And his Lordship (as did also all the rest) gave God publicke thankes for that Victory, which God in mercy had given us against those Rebels, whose numbers did as farre exceed ours, as our men did theirs in judgement, vallour, and resolution. In that Battell were slaine of the Rebels above 700. and amongst them many Collo∣nels and Captaines, and Men of qualitie, and about 20. of our men were slaine, and about 40. hurt, some of whom have died since. Nor may it be omitted to doe the Lieutenant Gene∣rall, that right which is due to him in this important service that he did in his owne person, order the Battell and manner of fight in all the parts of it, and did it with very great judgement, layd hold quickly, and seasonably
on all opportunities of advantage that could be gained, and spared not resolutely to expose his own person to ha∣zard, equally with any other Commander. Sir Thomas Lucas manifested great courage, and very judicious Conduct, and the Officers led by him gave good Testimonies of alacrity, and undaunted resolution, As also did Sir Charles Coote, Collonel Crauford, Collonel Monck, Lievtenant Collonel Lofius; Serjeant Major Warren, Serjeant Major Pageat, Serjeant Major Willough∣by, that led on the Foot. And likewise Sir Richard Green∣vile, that Commanded the right wing of the Horse, and the Officers under his command, and indeed all the Offi∣cers, and even the common Souldiers acquitted them∣selves exceedingly well and commendably. Die Lunae 20 Maij 1642. It is Ordered by the House of Commons, that this be forthwith printed. H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
