N967 E148_10 R3366 99872358 156692
Newes from Holland: OF THE ENTERTAINMENT OF THE QUEENES Most Excellent MAIESTIE OF GREAT BRITAINE, THE Young Princesse MARIE, THE Prince and Princesse of ORANGE, WITH The young Prince their Sonne, and most part of the Nobility at Amsterdam; Invited thither by the Lords Estates of that City: Where in a Barge they were conveyed into the City by divers living Swans fastned to her Barge; With divers Triumphs both by water and land. ALSO Divers other remarkable passages from Liepsich, Erford, Collen, Wessell, and divers other places. LONDON, Printed for Ed. Blackmore, May the 20th. 1642.
Newes from Holland, OF THE Entertainment of THE QVEENES most excellent MAIESTIE OF GREAT BRITAINE. From the Hague, May 20. 10. 1642. UPon munday the 19. 9. of May, the Queenes most excellent Majesty of great Britaine, the young Princesse Mary, the Prince and Princesse of O∣range, with the young Prince their Sonne, and most part of the Nobility in the Hague
went to Amsterdam; being invited by the Lords Estates of that City: where by their appointment upon her arrivall, there met her upon the water a most rich and costly Barge, in which her Majesty being entred, without help of Oares or Sailes shee was conveyed into the City by divers living Swans which were fastned to the foresaid Barge; and as she passed along, was entertained with divers tri∣umphs upon the water: Likewise when she landed, as shee passed the streets, divers Pageants and other Showes did present themselves unto her, which for cost and magnificence, the like was never seene in Holland before. Thursday the 27. of May, the Prince of Orange intends to go into the field with all his Forces: The report goes, hee resolves to besiege the City of Gelders, but as yet the certainty of it is not known, though the speech of most is to that effect, the ra∣ther because hee may bee neere unto the French and Weymarish Army, that now lies quartered in the Bishoprick of Collen; so that being neere-one unto the other, they may receive the speedier help one from another if occasion should serve.
Leipsich 24. April. 4. May. TOrshenson hath sent word to the Peers of upper Lusatia, desiring them to provide necessaries for his Army; which if they refuse to doe, hee threatneth to use them as enemies. The 29. of April, he broke up with his whole army from Spremberg, and advanced toward Scraw, afterward hee went to besiege great Glogaw, he hath in his Army 4000 dismounted horsemen. The foure Saxons Companies of Dragoners, and three Com∣panies of horse, that lay in Guben, were forced to take pay under the Sweds. The Imperiall Cavale∣ry, marcheth from all places towards Silesia to the Duke of Saxen Lawenburg. And at Anslow a Dyet is summoned; and the sith man of the Inhabitants is raised to oppose the Swedish. Leipsich 26. April. 6 May. The 19. 29. April, the City of Guben after two dayes siege was surrendred upon composition to Generall Torshenson; who hath kept rendevouz at Spottaw, and found his Army compleat 20000. strong. The Castle of Sagon is left by the Impe∣rialists; Soraw, Colaw, and other places have yeelded to the Sweds. The Swedish parties straggle to the very Gate of Lignitz: now they batter the Castle of Sonnenwald. Torshenson hath his Quarter now at Sternberg: Generall Major Stolhans hath mustred at Crossen 8000 men. The Imperiall and Saxon soul∣diers runne in great number to the Swedish.
Erford. 11.1. Our Governour Colonell Goldstein having heard that the Imperiall Colonell Wolfromsdrof and Colonell Craft with their two Regiments of horse lay in Ruttelstad, he commanded Colonell Lievte∣nant Linden with 400 Musquetiers and all the horsemen thither, which arrived there about four of the clock in the morning, and found the Imperialists in alarum; Wolffromsdrof fought stoutly, but at last our Musquetiers forced him to retire, and left his Lady prisone, from whom Colonell Linden took 8000 rich dollers, store of Plate and costly clothes, and so sent her away: in this action our men put to the sword fifty horsemen, took thirty Prisoners, with all their baggage and five hundred horse, which they brought hither. The Magistrates and Towns-men of Hildesheim have agreed not to take in any Imperiall Garrison, therefore they are excluded from the concluded Treaty; and Duke Ludwy hath put more Luniburgish Forces in∣to it, and disarmed the Citizens. Leipsich. 11. 1. From Dresden and Lubenthall they write, that on Sunday last the Swedish took by assault the Ab∣bey at great Glogaw, and three houres after they took the City also, and put to the sword them which they found in armes, and took the rest, saving some Officers which retired into the Castle, but they are not able to keep it. In this City lay foure Regi∣ments under Colonell Rochaw, and Colonell
Shnaugen, in foure thousand strong, three thou∣sand whereof they put to the sword, one thousand they took: The Swedish got in it forty Canons fourteene whereof are of Brasse, and got such store of provision in it, which might have served for a long time for the whole Imperiall Army. The Swedish parties straggle as farre as Breslaw; it is feared that they will master that Abbey too. Duke Saxon Lawenburg hath kept rendevouz be∣twixt Munsterburg and Frankensteim, and found his Army in sixteene thousand strong; as soone as the nine Imperiall Regiments are joyned with him, then he is to oppose the Swedish. Collen 14. 4. May. From Frankford they write, that after the Bavarian Forces have received some pay, and kept at Duty∣bach generall rendevouz, they received order to break up withall speed, and to succour the Elector of Collen, they are to take their quarters at Mulle and the next places to it, fully to consume there, what the Hatsfeldians have left. Wesell 15. 5. May. The City of Lechinich is quite burnd down, and the Governour retired into the Castle with five hundred men, which the Weymarish batter: The Governour hath sent to his Elector, that he could hold it eight dayes longer, but if nosuccour did come in that time, then he will be forced to yeeld. From Holland they write, that fifty Companies of Germans of the States Army are to joyn with
the Weymarish, whereof three Companies under the command of Colonell Marten Van Ighan, are gone already from Emmerick thither, and the rest of the Companies have order to march with speed to that Army. At Vliessingen are arrived foure thou∣sand French souldiers comming from Diepe, which are to joyn with the Weymarish. In Holland are arrived six ships from Brazeill with three thousand six hundred Chests of sugar; wih newes also, that the Portugall in the Bay keep goo correspondence with the Hollanders there. The Queen of England was roally entertained at Amsterdam the 20. 10 of May The Generall and Officers of the traine of the States Army, together with the Commissioners, are departed from the Prince of Orange with their Commissions to cause the garrisons to march, their rendevouz is at Lit, and the sconce Tervoren. From Paris they write, that Gustavus Horn, and Duc du Boulloin are arrived at Lions, Horn goeth to the King, and Duc du Boulloin to his Army in Pie∣mont, with Don Francisco della Marca generall Pay∣master of the Spanish Army, who was taken priso∣ner in the last battel in Catolonia, where were found 60000. Spanish duplons, which were divided amongst the French Souldiers. Monsieur du Hallier hath order to recover those places in Lorrayn, which the Duke of Lorrayn hath in possession. From Antwerp, Don Francisca du Melo is said to have besieged Arras, and the French to have blockt up Cambroy, but neither is believed. FINIS.
