O80 E330_16 R200720 99861386 159627
AN OATH TO BE ADMINISTRED Unto all Officers, Souldiers, and such other persons as are or shall be within the Garrison of OXFORD. Published by Authority. Printed at Oxford by Leonard Litchfield, Printer to the University. And reprinted at London for Matthew Walbancke. 1646.
An Oath to be administred unto all Of∣ficers, Souldiers, and such other per∣sons as are or shall bee within the Garrison of Oxford. I A. B. doe freely and from my heart sweare, vow, and protest in the presence of Almighty God, That I doe beleeve, and am in my heart and conscience perswaded that Robert Earl of Warwick, Ferdinan∣do Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fair∣fax, Sir William Waller, and Richard Brown Citizen and Woodmonger of London (commonly called Colo∣nell Brown;) as likewise the Earl of Leven (commonly called Generall Lesle) and all other of the Scottish
nation who have invaded this King∣dom, are all and every of them Trai∣tors and Rebels against his Majesty and the Crown of this Realm: And that the Forces raised and serving un∣der them, every, or any of them, or any Commission from one or both Houses at Westminster (commonly called the Houses of Parliament) are Traiterous and Rebellious Armies and Forces; And that I will faith∣fully endeavour to resist and destroy the said Armies and Forces, and all other Armies and Forces now rai∣sed or to be raised by both or either of the said Houses, or any Member thereof, without his Majesties im∣mediate authority: And also to pre∣serve, defend, and uphold (as much as in me lieth) his Majesties sacred Person, his Royall Issue, Crowne
and Dignity, the true Religion esta∣blished by Law, and just Priviledges of Parliament, against all attempts of the said persons and Forces, or any other. Also that I will use my faithfull endeavour for the preserva∣tion and defence of this City and Garrison, and all other of his Maje∣sties Forts and Garrisons, or Armies where I shall happen to be present, against the said rebellious persons and Forces, and against all other Forces whatsoever endeavouring in any hostile or warlike manner, to at∣tempt, take, or enter into, or destroy his Majesties Garrisons or Forces, or any of them. And I doe also swear that I will neither directly nor indi∣rectly give any intelligence, or di∣vulge or communicate any thing to the said Rebels or their adherents,
that may hinder or prejudice the de∣signes of his Majestie or his Armies, or that may any waies advantage or further the designes of the said Re∣bels, but immediatly to reveale and discover to some of his Majesties Privy Councell, or to some of the Commanders in Chiefe in the Gar∣rison where I am or shall be, all Plots, Conspiracies, Practices or attempts which have or shall come to my knowledge against his Majestie or Royall Issue, or any of his Majesties Forts, Garrisons, or Armies: land also to detect all Traytors and Re∣bels of whom I shall have knowledge or probable suspition to have beene aiding or assisting to the Rebels in this unnaturall Rebellion, and shall faithfully endeavour to apprehend
and bring to condigne punishment all such Traitors and Rebels: And all this I do swear unfainedly, accor∣ding to the true and literall sence hereof, without any equivocation, evation, or mentall reservation what∣soever. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book. FINIS.
