P141 E341_17 R200907 99861528 159758
P. RUPERTS Marching out of OXFORD. With the names of the most emi∣nent Persons with him. ALSO A List of the strength and Forces of Oxford, and severall Votes of the Councell of war. And Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX his Passes to Knights, Colonels, and others, and the severall proceedings about the surrender of Oxford to Sir Thomas Fairfax yesterday, Wednesday, June 24. 1646. These are Copied out of the Originall Papers (sent from his Excellencies Quarters) commanded to be Printed, and are published by Order of PARLIAMENT. LONDON: Printed for E. P. Iune 25. 1646.
The Copie of a Letter from his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAXS his Quarters. SIR, THe Generall considering, that the Reducing of this Citie of Oxford to be of great con∣cernment to the whole Kingdome, and of great use to the peace thereof, it being the mother▪ seat to hold up the spirits of the Enemie; The taking whereof, his Excellencie prosecuted with much wise∣dome and gallantie: His Excellencie searched into the strength and condition of the Garrison, that so he might accodingly proceed in the taking in there∣of, a worke of greater consequence then any action since the Warres began. His Excellency therefore called a Councell of warre, consisting of the chiefest of his Officers, who making all diligent enquiy into the state of Oxford, held many debates about the same, and upon their consultations thereon, found as followeth: 1. Rsolved upon the Question. That the City of Oxford is furnished with Victuals and provisions for 6. months.
2. Resolved upon Question. That the City of Oxford is furnished with Ammu∣nition sufficient to serve for their defence during the said 6. months. 3. Resolved upon the Question. That there are neer 5000 Horse and Foot upon con∣stant dutie to defend the Citie and Workes of Oxford against his Excellency. 4. Resolved upon the Question. That there is a Regular Line without the Workes of the Citie of Oxford, to the strengthning of the North-side, whereof it reacheth from Isis to Charwell, it is flanked with good Bulwarkes, the Grasse very deepe and broad, the Counter-scarp stockadoed, the Rampart high and pallizadoed within. 5. Resolved upon the Question. That there is a very defencible Line, and behind that the Wall of the Citie of Oxon. 6. Resolved upon the Question. That on that side which S. Clement stands, without Maudlin bridge, the Worke of the Garrison of the Citie of Oxford, are as strong, or stronger, then in a∣ny other part of the Citie; and that in case it should be gained by storme, there would the greatest difficul∣tie remaine to enter the Citie on that side, by reason that the Bridge is in the Enemies power, and the Ri∣ver under their command. 7. Resolved upon the Question That the South, and the West parts of the Citie of Oxon, have strong Workes and Regular, and also the benefit of the Rivers, the Medowes being deepe with waters, that are floated for their defence.
These, and all other considerations being had, and the Councell of Warre further considering, that we had but little advantage of any approaches that we had or could make, being much upon Causey-wayes, and the neerest in places so low, that our men could not goe on without danger of being surrounded, in cafe they should attempt upon us by a sally from Ox∣ford. Therefore the Councel of War, consulting what to doe, it was debated: 1. Question. Whether any attempt might be made against Ox∣ford by a storme? 1. Resolved upon the Question. The storming of Oxford is a thing for the present not adviseable. 2. Question. Whether the starving of the Citie be most conve∣nient for the reducing of Oxford. 2. Resolved upon the Question. That in regard there is six moneths provisions in the Citie (of victualls) the starving of Oxford is not most convenient. 3. Question. Whether it be adviseable to proceed by approa∣ches, for the taking of the Citie of Oxford? 3. Resolved upon the Question. Yea. This way (therefore) being found most adviseable, was at first intended, in regard that we were necessita∣ted to go on, all being resolved to follow it with all faithfulnesse and diligence; yet considering afterwards this way (though the speediest in wisedome to tke it by force▪ might take up as many moneths as starving the Citie, and being labourers for the peace of the Kingdome, as you may see by this following Paper.
A Paper upon the Result of the Councell of Warre. 1. IT will be necessary not only to privide money to pay the Army, according to the establishment, in regard the countrey is already exhaust, and not able to beare free quarter, nor will Victuall be brought to the Leaguer, except there be money to pay for it, but also, that considerable summes of money be alwayes in hand for Approaches, Mines, Bridges, Galleries, Forts, Batteries, and many other contingent char∣ges which will arise in the carrying on a worke of this nature, 2. Sufficient proportions of Powder, Match, Ball, Granadoes, Spdes, Shovels, Pickaxes, Spikes, Nayles, &c. and these to be brought to Reading, to be in readinesse, as wee shall have occasion to use them. 3. That care be taken to provide victuals for the Foote, which doe daily walke by sicknesse and o∣therwaies; It being the opinion of the Officers, that the numbers of the Foote must be held up, being alreadie upon hard duty▪ to carry on the worke at present, which will be much more increased as the approaches come nearer to the Enemies works.
All which must have beene continued, had they gone on to take Oxford by  therefore they were resolved to provide in the Treaty which according∣ly was done, and concluded on Saturday night last. On Monday there marched out of Oxford Prince Ru∣pert, Prince Maurice, the Lord Hanly, the Lord Ger∣rard, and all about 70. with their Horses, Carria∣ges, &c. are gone to Gilford in Strey: Many others come out, many Knights, Colonels, and others have had their passes: We have had very sufficient Ho∣stages, to assure us that we shall to morrow enter Ox∣ford according to the Articles, and then you shall have the particulars from Your Servant, N. T. Water-Eatn,  the 23. of June, 1646. The Parliament considering the many gal∣lant actions done for this Kingdome by his Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairfax, and particu∣larly this against Oxford, made these Votes:
Die Martis, 23 Junii, 1646. 1 Resolved upon the Question. That this House doth approve of the Proceedings of the Generall in the making of these Articles, for, and concerning the rendring of the Garrisons of OXFORD and FARRING∣DON, and in the performing of them. 2 Resolved, &c. That these Articles, for, and con∣cerning the rendring of the Garri∣sons of OXFORD and FARINGDON, be forthwith Printed. FINIS.
