P1846 E461_1 R205155 99864592 162157
A PETITION Presented to the Honourable House of Commons, the 22. of August, 1648. of one hundred forty odd Feild Officers, and fifteen hun∣dred Commission Officers and others, many of them being Citizens of quality. With the names of the persons who presented the Petition, who were twice called into the House, by the Serjeant at Armes with the Mace. The Speech which Lievt. Col. Beecher made to the Speaker at the delivering of the said Petition. And the noble Answer which Mr. Speaker gave to the Gentleman, and the gallant sence of the House upon their Petition. With the names of the Gentlemen who are in∣trusted with the managing of the same. London, Printed by T. P. 1648.
To the Honourable House of Commons assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the Reduced Officers, and our Soldiers, who have faithfully served in the great Cause, which by Gods per∣mission they will never desert,, and are not in the Petition presented the 8. Aug. of this present moneth intituled the humble Petition of the Reduced Officers and Soldiers that have faithfully served &c. Humbly Sheweth, THat this Honourable House, having taken into consideration the aforesaid Petition, did referre it to a Committee wherof Mr. Knightley had the Chayre for the finding out some meanes, to satisfie the desires of the Petitionets; we hope & humbly con∣ive that it is not the intent of this Honourable ouse to exclude any that have faithfully served
Parliament, though no subscribed to the fore∣mentioned Petition. Wee therefore humbly pray, that your honours would be pleased to take your Petitioners into equall consi∣deration, only in point of Arreares and indempnity with the rest of the Officers that have subscribed the former Petition, your Petitioners being still ready to serve you with their Lives, and For∣tunes, according to their first Engagement. And wee shall ever pray, &c. This Petition was presented by, Lievt. Col Beecher. Maior Coshe. Maior Zanche▪ Maior Lomgeishe. Capt. Hull. Capt. Spering. Capt. Iudd. Leivt. Col. at the delivery addressed himself to Mr. Speaker, and delivered himself in these words. Mr. Speaker, these Gentlemen, together with
my self are elected to present an humble Petition to this Honourable House, signed by many hun∣dred Feild Officers and others, which have faith∣fully served the Parliament, Mr. Speaker, we doubt not but this honourable house hath had some ex∣perience of the faithfullnesse, integrity, and con∣stancy of many of the Petitioners to the Parlia∣ment, and their iust cause, and we hope that all the subscribers doe really intend heartily to per∣forme, that which they have by their subscripti∣ons ingaged themselves unto. The further consi∣deration of this petition, we humbly tender to this honourable House.
Die Martis 22. Augustii 1648. THe House being informed that the Reduced Officers and Soldiers were at the doore, they were called in, and then presented their Petition, which after the Petitioners were withdrawn, Was read, and was Intituled, The humble Petition of many reduced Offi∣cers and Soldiers, who have faithfully served in the great Cause, which by Gods permission they will never desert, and are not in the Petition presented the 8. of this present moneth. Entituled, the humble Petition of the Reduced Of∣ficers and Soldiers that have faithfully served the, &c. Resolved, That the Petitioners as to their Arrears and In∣dempnity, be put into the same condition that the other Reduced Officers and Soldiers who formerly petitioned are according to the desire of their Petition.
The Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker by command of the House gave them this Answer. The House has read your Petition, and they have commanded me to give you their sence thereupon. They have taken notice of your modest and discreet demeanors, and also of the manner, be∣ing presented by you in a civill and faire way, and command me to let you know, that they have granted your desire, that you be put into the same condition, that the former reduced Officers and Soldiers that petitioned are in. They doe take notice of your affections formerly shewn, and now largely expressed in your Petition, and have commanded me to give you very hearty thanks. H. Elsing Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. The names of the Gentlemen intrusted for the managing the Petition.
Adjutant Generall Gray. Maior Waraford. Lievt. Col▪ Beecher. Lievt. Col. Sadler. Maior Zanche. Maior Coshe. Maior Lomgrish. Maior Huste. Maior Warren. Capt Lomgrish. Capt. Evans. Capt. Hull. Capt. Spering. Capt. Awder. Capt. Judd. FINIS.
