p2511 e1026_1 99867668 119989
A PLEA FOR MINISTERS IN SEQUESTRATIONS; WHEREIN Mr. Mossom's Apology for the Sequestred Clergy, is duly Considered and Discussed. Justitia Legis, et Lex reipublicae basis. Prov. 18.17. A man that is first in his own Cause seemeth just, till his neighbour com∣eth and searcheth him. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the three Crowns against the lower Conduit in Cheapside, 1660.
Mr: Mossom's Apology, FOR THE Sequestred Clergy, Duly considered and discussed, &c. TIS easie to accuse any sort of men, and if accusation were enough none should be in∣nocent, but we say one mans tale is good till another be told: or rather (as we read in Scripture, Pro. 18.17.) A man that is first in his own cause seemeth just, till his neighbour cometh and searcheth him. I have seen an Apology (or rather an Alogy) for the Sequestred Clergy (a plaster too too little for the sore) whom I had rather see to be an apologie, then make an apologie, yet the latter, if not injurious and defamatory to others, would do very well. I thought some fit and experienced might make some timely reflections upon that Apology, but seeing yet nothing abroad, I remembred the saying, Pudet haec opprobria nobis, sic dici potuisse, &c. And resolved (since there is leave and freedom for a just defence) with young Elihu, I will answer my part: I al∣so will shew mine opinion, Job 30.17. In the Apology therefore I shall consider the Apologists reasons for themselves; 2. His weak objections for us (which are framed by him proportionable to what he would fain answer);
3. I shall shew him some Reasons on our part; and lastly give him my advise. First, Therefore if we consider the complaint, upon which the strength of all his Reasons lye: The complaint is won∣drous compassionable, That they have been Sequestred for no other crime but acting in their callings according to the dictate of their consciences; discharging their Ministry according to the rule of our established Lawes: Page 5. Answ. That some have suffered unjustly for not taking late engagements, and not owning unjust though prevailing interests, is manifest to all, and in part redrest. But where are the many of those black swans, that have suffered for no other crimes then a conscientious acting in their calling; I would be glad to see the Printed century of that truly estimable Fraternity, but men may plead high, when almost all witnesse and evidence against their crimes, are dead and forgotten. Apol: Page 5. We conceive that the occasion of our Seque∣stration is removed. Answ. He doth not tell us the occasion of their Sequestr: but leaves us plainly to conjecture, and the world that now is beleeveth, and the former times clearly proved, that gene∣rally the crimes, scandals, or superstitions of their lives, were the occasion of their Sequestration, and if that occasion be indeed removed, and the Godly and sober in their Con∣gregations doe beleeve that they have renounced their for∣mer scandalous conversation, we would submit freely to be thankfully and honourably dismissed, for their sakes. Apol: Page 7. This. President we have (viz: of resto∣ring the Fathers and Pastors of the Church) from Zeno the Emperour, &c. Answ. The Apologist need not have gone so far back as Zeno for an example of just restitution, our late Honourable Parliament hath restored the Reverend and Famous Reinolds, and many other Worthy Pastors, and 'tis our great desire that all found and pious Divines should be restored. But will the Apologist on the other hand, remember later
Presidents then the thirty Tyrants, even the Known, sad, and dismal ruin of so many scores of Godly Ministers, silenced and Sequestred (ab officio et beneficio) only in the Diocesse of Dr. Wren, late Prelate of Norwich (and if they did so much there, what was done in all the rest of the Kings Provinces) which some alive can testifie to their irreparable losse at this day. Where were Mr. Mossom's Articuli Cleri that he speaks of in those dayes? what Apologie or Plea might abide and stand in our defence, either from Magna Charta or any other Law or priviledge? In what corner could we hide our selves from the cloud and tempest of the maliciousness of Bishop Lad, what with him was the highest cognizance of (not the scanda∣lous but scandaled) Puritan Ministers, but the brand of Raschals. Apol: Page 9, 10, 11. The Apologist calls upon the Ju∣stice of the Parliament, to restore their Sequestrations as their indubitable right. Answ. This earnest pretender unto such undoubted right saith much but proves nothing (either by the Law of God or man) to exemplifie the same, but if indeed their right were so absolute and indubitable, that a Parliament might not question their Title, nor censure their actions; I confesse their right was indubitable enough. But de facto, the Parliament did question and censure some of them; (as in the years 1642 1643, and some I think after) now must we beleeve the Parliament guilty of high illega∣lity and injustice against these mens indubitable right? or these men guilty of crimes justly censurable by so high a Court? And if the Apologist will give us leave; we will rather adhere to the Parliament to repute them (as they were) a just and honourable Court, then to unbeleeve the crimes of those they censured, and our selves knew some of them to be notorious offenders. If that Parliament were unjust, Let a Parliament censure the action; and if they were unjust, why did the Sequestred Ministers leave their charges many of them, before ever they felt their injustice, and never returned in almost 20 years to their stations againe; and if they were unjustly driven away why did they not return to their Flocks, as to the exercise of a Ministry amongst them in spight of injustice, and all danger, as we have in the examples
of the Primitive Doctors, and in some of our own Faithful Pa∣stors in the Bishops dayes, or why do they accuse us as intruders and injust, unlesse they would have their Congregations lefe de∣stitute of Ministerial supply? or had it been just, (as it use to be done with their poor Curates,) that we should have fed the Flock and they have taken the Profits? We have judged that the exercise of our Ministry in this kind was charitable, and our possession just, there being no grea∣ter Law amongst us then Parliament Law received in this Nation. But let us quaery (good Mr. Mossom) if the Parlia∣ment by injustice cast out those, (whom upon proofe and experi∣ence they judged to be scandalous or superstitious men): by what did the Prelates cast out those Godly and blamelesse Ministers, in the dayes of their severity, if what the High-Court of Parlia∣ment therefore did were such injustice as is pretended, and ex∣claimed on, how shall we judge any thing by a due standard of right and justice hereafter? Apol: Page 8. We desire no more but the benefit of the known Law. Answ. 'Tis pity this Law and benefit of it was not known, when Bishop Wren and that gang were in all their Ruff. O that Austins sentence you speak of, (prated all to peices and never practised) had then been effectually minded, (non dimittitur pec∣catum nisi restituatur oblatum,) when so many Ministers of the Gospel were sequestred for such pitiful trifles. No question but the Law is indeed the known Law to many of the Sequestred Clergy, and they made it practically known to their people, (and their smartful experience speaks it enough,) but the known Gospel would have done well to have been practi∣cally made known by them rather, yet even the Law saith (amongst them that know the Law) that the complainams have lapsed their Livings; at lest, by never offering to serve the cure, in almost 20 years. But now (O Infalix evum pecus) The be∣nefit and insultation over their flocks; and hope of returning to their old sport again, makes them pretend a huge just Title, and all (but they) must be intruders and themselves the Judges.
Is it not well known to the Grave and Learned in the Law and Ecclesiastick concernments, what Jus Patronatus truly was, and what (Residentia in cura, or) pastorall incumbency ought to be? I would willingly submit the later disputes and lazie controversies of Pluralists and non residents, to the True and Faithfull sentence of the Learned and Impartiall. And perso∣nally I would acquiesce in the Judicious and most elaborate knowledge of Mr. Prin; (Artifex credendus in arte suâ) whose proficiency in the Law and Antiquity, speakes him acceptable and honourable to all men. Apol: Page 8. The Apologist frameth some trifling objecti∣ons; as it were to help us at a dead lift, but indeed he framed them for easines of answer, that he might at least seem (ro some) to have said something. He Objecteth (in our behalfe forsooth) that Learned and Godly men will be unprovided for if sequestrations be resto∣red. Answ. That is not our care; who Remember, and in some measure understand the Doctrin of the Loaves, and of the Thou∣sands, Math. 16. Apolog: Page 8. The Apologists Answer to his own Objecti∣on is full, (that is to say full mouthed enough) wherein he bringeth Learned and Godly into no better then an Ironicall di∣minution. But magnifies the sequestred Clergy, to be the Lear∣nedest that ever England had. Saying Page 8. The learnedest Clergy that ever England had was that Sequestred Clergy: (if he had added that were sequestred and suspended by the Prela∣ticall faction; he had been nearer the marke, for as learned men (but Learnedest is an odious Comparison) as ever England bred were sequestred, displaced, silenced, or persecuted by the Prelates. Apol: ib: He saith further; This learnedest Clergy was un∣provided for almost twenty years. Answ. How can that be so? That Godly and learned (nay he saith learnedest) Ministers should be so long unprovided for? I never yet in all the Bishops dayes (much lesse since)
have seen the righteous Ministers forsaken, or long unprovided for. But I see the Apologer counteth nothing provision, nothing tendernesse, or compassion towards the now sequestred Clergy: except that we will doe the work and give them the wages; and that not of our Courtesie, but Duty. Apol: Page 10. Another Objection that he supposeth and inventeth for us is this. That the Restorement of the seques;tred Clergy, will disturbe the Calmnesse of the State. Answ. This Objection proceedeth from the evill boading of his Conscience; perhaps too truly foredeeming their own tur∣bulent subsequent actions, if they regain their power. For we have sadly seen what a stir many of them made, to the disquiet of Church and State with their superstitious Trampery; (Trou∣blers of England indeed) that would have had the very propha∣nation of the Sabbath, and many knacks of their old Mumpsimus established by Law. But then, when a Sequestration is establi∣shed upon that: they cry out, O this is to establish iniquity by a Law! But if the Apologist feareth disturbance from us we shall quietly resolve them on the contrary; for we have not only Learned obedience from what we have some of us formerly and later suffered; but can (I beleeve and truly feel it in my heart) say with honest Mephibosheth, Let them take all; (if that were all,) since our Gracious King is returned in peace; with that Olive Branch, of the unfading purposes of establishing Housnesse, and Justice; (to his immortall glory and happinesse,) in these Nations. Apol: Page 11. He serves us with another unserviceable Objection from the Purchasers of Church Lands, (Thank him Bishops!) where he finds an appearance of equity, and can dis∣pense with a Rule of the Civill Law for them, partly to cast an Odium the more on us, and a little to favour (as he could) his friends and Relations, perhaps concern'd in such Bargains: upon which (few, or I think) none of us ever durst venture. Apol: Page 12. He fits us yet further: Imagining this to be an Objection on our parts; That all must be content, to be loosers.
Answ. No not all Loofers, nor all content, yet many sequest∣red Ministers were better provided after their Sequestration then ever before, and that out of the Livings, and Goods of some of us (yet feeling the losse, but not at all content) I could instance in some Intruders, to their dread and shame, that had need put in an Apology for such plunders, spoiles, and unlawfull possessions, if the Oxford articles should fail them, as far, as they would have the Acts and Ordinances of the former Parliament failus. But I hope 'tis as honest and comely, for a poor blameless Minister, commanded to serve the cure of a deserted Parish, for the good of their soulès (more then the profit of his purse:) to say, I have an order of Parliament to defend me; as for a violent Intruder upon us to plunder and destroy even a man and his house, and possesse his place (as some have done) and say in his defence, I have the Oxford Articles to shew, and I plead the benefit of the Oxford articles. Must all be content to be loosers! Infandum Mossome jubes re∣novare dolorem. O how wounding a remembrance is it to think of those (so many Learned and Reverend Ministers) that were as great loosers by the Bishops, by confiscation, sequestrings, silencing, or persecuting, as any have been in these times, and they were indeed sequestred, and for no other cause, but acting in their callings according to the Dictate of their conscience, and discharging their Ministry according to the rules both of Law and Gospel. How sad was it that Ministers (of approved abilities for higher work) might not be suffered so much as to School a child or two in a privat family, nor to pray in a friend or brothers house; but it did incur the danger of being presented as an unlawful conven∣ticle, therefore if (as learned Hooker in his Eccl. Pol. in Pref.) as well how to want, as to abound, be the empresse of a Bishop. Surely we may claime the cognizance, if loosers may have leave to speak; But though loosers, not lost, (blessed be God) that is alwayes seen in the Mount, that then provided for persecuted Mi∣nisters, and hath in the midst of all our necessities, followed us and our preservers, with abundance of mercies. Apol: Page 9. Thirdly, For the Ironicall and bespatte∣ring expressions of the Apologist, who calls us (amongst other
ill names, as Intruders and the like) Pretended Godly Ministers. Page 9. Answ. We answer first, He cannot deny us to be pretenders (and intenders too) to Godliness, which must be denied to very many of his Sequestred Clergy, as having neither name, nor thing, of any pretence to Godlinesse at all. And why must pretended Godly be the Larva that he will put upon us, but to have us devoured as reputed hypocrites, but as for themselves I pity them, (so well are those trees known by their fruits,) that we can say, but of few, that they are so much as hy∣pocrites, or pretenders to Godlinesse, it being (as Greg. Naz. saith) the only Godlinesse of these men, to find out something, whereby to judge others ungodly. Apol: Page 8. The Apologist enforceth his incredible scan∣dal upon us with this (as he supposeth) undeniable question; how are they Godly who will knowingly add sin to sin? Answ. This Physitian should begin his charitable disquisition at home, looking into the hindermost end of their owne wallet, and inquire (as others alas inquire for them) what eminent godli∣nesse they shewed in their stations! (yea, or do now shew!) How are they Godly, that never shewed any repentant remorse for their sins against God, and the Nations peace! that never bewailed their Sabbath breaking, Alter worship, & persecution! How were they Godly, that added sin to sin; in proclaiming, and encouraging others in the prophanation of the Sabbath! They that breake the command of God, and teach men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdome of Heaven; Matth. 5. How were they Godly, that took away consciencious and frequent preaching, and brought in a heap of Cerimonies, all the trash and trumpery that Rome could spare: We may say long enough, how were they Godly that did not only possess our Livings, but plundred our dearest Libra∣ries, and mocked at all our suffering? Apol: Page 10. The Apologist chargeth our consciences, and beseecheth us to consider, how we will answer it at the dreadful day of judgement. Answ. Blessed be God we can (for this that we have done) cheerfully remember that day: yea, and long for, and hasten to the
coming of the Lord, knowing that Christ will acknowledge what we have done, in feeding, visiting, and comforting, the least flock that belongs to him, he will accept of it, for inasmuch; as we have done it to the least of these, we have done it unto him. We can return to God with a more happy effect of our Ministry then the Apologists ever could; we can say (of the blessing of God upon our preaching) here are we and the children that God hath given us, as begotten by the Gospel. We have endeavoured faith∣fully to discharge our Ambassage, and hope to render our ac∣count with Joy, having fed the Flock that Jesus Christ hath redee∣med with his own blood, and can say (in some measure) with Paul I have fought the good fight and finished the faith. Neither are we ashamed or afraid, (in just vindication of ourselves we may speak it modestly,) either before God or man, to be weighed, and compared number for number with the Sequestred Clergy, which are the worthier instruments in Christs worke, and detur digniori, Let the fittest take it with all our hearts. But to return to the Apologist. I also beseech the Sequestred Clergy (can I say those Godly Ministers scoffingly, as he doth, I dare not say it) but I beseech them, such as they are; to advise before hand concerning that fearful day! will prophanations of the Sabbath, censuring, sequestring, persecuting Gods Ministers; will bowing at the Altar, will making Ceremonious pomp and for∣mality, to be of the very essence of worship: will starving the souls of poor people, (and yet courting and excommuni∣cating them for breaking Pasture (or Pinfold rather) to get some small feeding elsewhere; will these things stand in the judge∣ment with all the rest written in the book and books forever against them? then let us fall; but as Eccl. 3.17. I have said in my heart, surely God will judge the righteous, and the wicked, for there is time there for every purpose, and for every work. What will those Ministers say, when God shall inquire where is the Flock thy beautiful Flock? Woe unto the Pastors that destroy, and scatter the sheep of my pasture, saith the Lord. Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel, against the Pastors, that feed my peo∣ple, ye have scattered my flock and driven them away, and have not visited them, behold I will visit upon you the evil of your doings,
saith the Lord. Vid. Jer. 23. from 1. to 7. vers. Wee be to the Sheepheards of Israel, that do feed themselves▪ should not the sheep∣heards feed the flock? the diseased you have not strengthned, nei∣ther have you healed that which was sick, neither have you bound up that which was broken, neither have you brought again that which was driven away, neither have you sought that which was list, but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them, and they were scattered because there is no sheepheard, and they became meat to all the beasts of the field when they were scattered, my sheep wandred through all the mountains, and upon every high hill, yea my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them. Therefore ye sheepheards hear the word of the Lord: As I live saith the Lord God, surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no sheepheard, neither did my sheep∣heards search for my flock but the sheepheards fed themselves, and fed not my flock: Therefore O ye sheepheards, hear the word of the Lord, behold I am against the sheepheards, and I will require my flock at their hands, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock neither shall the sheepheards feed themselves any more, for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them. Ezek. 34. I wish these men, that talk of the judgement day in the mouth, would think of it in their heart, and some of their Learnedest Clergy (as they are called in the Apology) would shew the fruit of the meditation, in a sound Commentary upon this Chap: which I beleeve few Pluralists, non Residents, or Sequest∣red, dare read and expound thorowly. The Reasons on our part, why they ought not to be restored and we dismissed, might be many (if we would speak all we can in our own cause (as they have done) but what I shall say is only what swayes with me, as to warrant my present inoumbency as to my conscience. Most of them were guilty of great and scandalous crimes in their places, as is notoriously known and proved by the oaths and testimonies of sufficient witnesse, and that before the highest Court in England, that had power and right to plead the cause of God and the people.
And further for the Power that expelled them: have not for∣mer Parliaments done the like? and may not future Parliaments doe the same? Why should not we judge their ejection by Par∣liament as Just and Lawfull, as they judged ours by the Bishops? and in many things (jam sumus pares) we are proportioned, we would not take the Bishops Oath, (called ET CETERA) nor admit the whole heape of Ceremonies, and so were put out, or kept out, and on their part, they would not take the Nationall Covenant (approved by King (I meane his Gracious Ma∣jesty that now is) and Kingdomes) but stood for prophanesse and superstition, and so they were kept out on the other parts prevailing; Now who were the sufferers (if the cause makes the Martyr) to be most pitied, I leave to all wise and godly to Judge and censure. The Sequestred Clergy generally left the pastoral charge, and care of their people, and fled, and took other charges else∣where, where some of them (to our sad experience) ceized up∣on the Livings, & Estates of Godly Ministers; and that in such a cruel manner, that the Long Parliament was necessitated, to set up a Committee for relief of plundered Ministers: by whom some Congregations have been supplied with faithful Ministers from thence; (in the valley ef Achor a door of hope) and those of us, that upon intreaty, and command, and of conscience, assumed the charge of deserted congregations, whither our Labor hath not been more then our Hire, and our pains then our profits; we dare leave (generally) to our enemies to judge, only we have this de∣pendance in what we have done, our labor is with the Lord and our reward with our God. The Sequestred Ministers never attempted to return to the Pastorall care and charge of their flocks, for these many many yeares. Not Redde Peculium, but pecuniam, was their cry; they Thirsted more after the Livings of the places, then the living souls of the people. Their Congregations desire them not (except here and there a few ungodly at lest loos-professors, and they rather for envy to some neighbours, then of sober affection to the sequestred Mini∣ster.) I say their Congregations affect them not, though (as the Devout wolfe to the sheep in the true fable) they professe
to love them in their very bowells, yet their people fear, (cor tibi rest at idem non tibi presto fidem,) tis the great Godlinesse of gain, that moves them so exceedingly▪ more then the gain of godlinesse. And truly I think, (as I should also do in sum case) Though they have repented; (a thing that I would gladly beleeve but never saw it in them,) yet their reformation would be better received, and credited elsewhere, then amongst their former congregations, where there will be on all hands, suspicion, supposi∣tion of injury and strife, and perhaps revenge; imbittering the Spirit and hindring their Ministry. Lastly for our Selves; our Innocency and Labors are our grea∣test Arguments. Our labours have been great; and (all things considered) our successe in our Ministry happy; Light and know∣ledge is encreased. I remember a Christian told me, speaking of the encrease of knowledge, that he had heard more sermons in his parrish Church in one moneth, then his father before him had heard, or could hear in 30 yeares. But some of the Sequestred Ministers envying the work, found wayes (like those that hin∣dred the rebuilding of Jerusalem,) by envious reproaches and scandall to retard and hinder our successe. These perswade our Congregations to tax us heavily; To pay tithes slowly; These create false reports of us; and if they perceive but the lest spark of heat or prejudice between Minister and people, they are at hand to blow up a fire, and to applaud the fact: Favouring Qua∣kers, sabbath-breakers, any thing against us. Yea, their envy hath driven some of them so far, that they exposed the Kings Friends and Intrests to publick dishonour: to bring some of our persons thereby into snares and dangers. Yet now, After all our hard service; If we may not be owned for Pastors, and True and Rightfull Ministers by Law in our places, by King and Parliament: but those our spirituall sons and daughters, (begotten by the Gospell thorow our Ministry) must be left and forsaken. We can but Protest to God and man, that (though 'tis our Duty to submit, yet) tis our grief to part (not with the pittance of our means, but) with the dear society of be∣loved souls; more precious unto us then our benefits or lives. And to them it will be occasion of too much sorrow: that (as Pastors,
and Fathers,) they shall see our face no more! Finally, To conclude my work. I will add a word or two of Advice, and friendly Counsell to Mr. Mossom, and his num∣ber. First, To mend his principles, and not take up his Axioms on bare trust (as that from J. C. in his Title page) Lex justitie, Justitia reinpublieae basis; whereas indeed (and right) it should be as I have fixed it, inserted, in my Title page: Justitia Legis, et Lex reipublicae basis. For Justice is the first foundation of all Law, and government, for a Law may be altered and reduced to Justice, but not Justice altered and subdued to a Law. 2. Again, I desire him a little to sweep before the doors of his own party, and move them to restore what they have unjustly taken; and cruelly plundered: and then expect in charity, what we can spare them out of what we have saved of the reward of our Labours. I could affix names, But I am not willing to blurre any mans name; but admonish his Conscience. But if any such outrages have been committed by any of us, let us be named, and shamed, and refund; and themselves readmitted in those places, as more righteous then we. I would further have Mr. Mossom (who vilifies us as necessi∣tous) and all his Learnedest Clergy know, that we have fed the starved Congregations they have deserted, (and from which by Parliament they were sequestred,) not for morsells; but of Chari∣ty, and Conscience: Tis well known that many of us need not, (and I pray God we may never feel Prelatical compassion to us and our families,) nor did need their estates for a subsistence, the greater number of us (thorow the mercy of God) could boast of as great birth, estate, friends, and offers of preferments, as they. We having many of us our selves, Livings and preferments to bestow (and some bestowed) upon deserving men, yet what is gain to us we can (I hope) account losse for Christ. And if some of us were reduced from the deepest of neeessities, as he saith, we were induced first into those necessities by the Prelates or late Plundring, or such wayes. And if we were originally poor, and so still, we need not be ashamed that God hath taken the poor even from the Dunghil: the earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof,
and we in our poverty well know, how the Sequestred Clergy, some of them, attained their plentifull full estates: But of this thus much shall suffice for this Time. Only this, Let not Mr. Mossom glory, in being of the number of the Sequestred Clergy, but if he be now a good man, let him teach those of his culpable fraternity, that suffer for their faults, to say, as the good thief on the Crosse, Luke 23. We are justly here, for we receive the due reward of our deeds, and my prayer with him, and for them (and him if need be) shall be that God may give them repentance, pardon, and grace for Time to come: AMEN. FINIS.
