P294 E355_19 R201120 99861676 113817
PAPERS FROM THE Scots Quarters, CONTAINING, The substance of two Votes made by the Estates at Edenburg  at their generall Meeting this present Septemb. 1646. CONCERNING Their Armies marching home, and delivering up their Garrisons; As also, concerning, the Peace and Union of the Kingdomes: With some other Passages concerning the King; and other matters of Note. AND king of Cry Castle and securing other Parts in the North of Scotland by Major-Generall Middleton. Printed and published according to Order, and for generall satisfaction. LONDON Printed for E. E. Anno Dom. 1646.
The Copyes of two LETTERS FROM NEW CASTLE.; Published for generall satisfaction. Noble SIR, YOurs of the 15. Instant came safe to my hands with the papers inclosed. For news he it is in briefe thus. There are letters come from Edenbo∣rough, advertising us that there hath been a long debate by the Estates; (who met at E∣denborough Thursday the 1. of this present Sep∣tember, to consider what Instructions and power to give to their Commissioners; to Capitulate with the Parliament of England; And what course to take to preserve the Kings Honour, and to keepe the Covenant of the Kingdoms, and the oath which y tooke in Parliament.
In which they have proceeded thus far, It was first debated, Whethee or no they should adhere to what the Scots Commissioners had agreed with the Parliament of England, And after a long debae a∣bout the same came to this Resolution. Resolved upon the Question, 1 That the Scottish Armie now in England shall march home into the Kingdom of Scotland, and deliver up the Garisons propounded to be delivered up (by the Parliament of England) so soon as the money shall be paid to them, agreed on between the Parliawent of Eng∣land, and the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland. 2 That all possible meanes shall bee used to pre∣serve the Union so happily begun between the two Kingdomes. The King is as merry as ever he was, and looks as well, As concerning the Committee that is here now at present, I shall forbear to write any thg, and rest Newcastle the 24. of Septemb. 1646. Your Servant, N. E. SIR, THE Committee of Estates met at Edenburgh on Thutsday Septemb. 17. as I told you was appointed in my last, and have had many long de∣bates allout the King; as also concerning power to be given to their Commissioners with you at Lon∣don for carrying on the capitulation with the Parla∣ment of England, Mony they want. Mai. Gen. Mid∣dleton hath been towards the Veil of Spey in Mur∣rey and secured divers places in those pars about
Badgenorth, and Anan Sarschioch, and hath taken in a Castle neer Firth River, called Castle Carie, with some other places towards the Lake. Anim fortifies himself, and som of the Gourdons stil op∣poe him. Mon is said▪ (after he took shipping) met with such troublesome stinking weather, that (as yet) it is not heard what became of him. Divers of his Officers that thought to have p with him are returned, and ma∣ny of his other Officers and Souldiers are gone to joyn with the El o Antrim. Montrill the French Agent is not come hither, neither is be landed any where in Scotland that we can hear of: It is supposed he hath some design to passe through the Parlia∣ments Quarters, or else to go over into Ireland. For newes here, it is full of the sad groanes of the Coun∣try, because of their long and still continued oppressions, ma∣ny complaints being made both from this County, and also from the Bishoprick and Yorkshire; the Country prote∣sting that they are not able to beare the quarters of the Scots,; the charges of the English, and the burden of the Malignants; all which still continve upon them. There are many malignants that lye between the Kings Lodgings at Gateside, and use much to that side of the Town about Pandon Gate; some quarter in Redhugh, and Fellin; b they use not about the To of Walker, Wamson, and gton; ut the Earl of even useth meanes to coole them and keepe them at as far a distance from the Court as conveniently his Excellency can. The Country long to heare t generall disanding of all these Forces, and the Scots going home; to which the Estates at Edenburgh have agreed, o they have the money first, and are to debate further con∣cerning the King: After which you shall heare further from Newcastle the 24. of September 1646. Your humble Servant E. A.
The Oath taken by all the Lords, Ba∣rons, and Burgesses of the Kingdom of Scotland in Parliament VVEE under subscribers,  every one of us, do in the presence of Almighty God, promise and vow that in this present Parlia∣ment.
1. That we shall faithfully and freely speake, answer, and expresse our selves upon all and every thing, which is, or shall be propounded, so far as we think in our conscience, may conduce to the glory of God, the good and peace of the Church, and state of this Kingdome: And imploy our best endeavours to pro∣mote the same: And shall in no wise advise voice, nor consent to any thing which to our best knowledge, we think not most expient and con∣able thereto. 2. That we shall maintaine and desend with our lives, power, and estate, His Majesties royall Person, Honour, and Estate, as is exprest in our nationall Covenant: And like∣wise▪
to the power and priviledges of Par∣liaments, and the lawfull Rights and Li∣berties of the Subjects. 3. That we shall by all good meanes and wayes, oppose & endeavour to bring to exact tryall all such as either by force, practise, Councel, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise, have done, or shall do, any thing in prejudice of the purity of Religion, the Lawes, Liberties, and Peace of the King∣dome. 4. That we shall in all just and honou∣rable wayes endeavour to preserve union, and peace betwixt the three Kingdoms, Scotland, England, and Ireland. 5. That we shall neither for hope, feee, nor other respect relinquish this vovv and promise. Subscribed by all the Members of the PARLIAMENT of Scotland. FINIS.
