P603 E595_10 R206935 99866022 165572
A PARTICULAR RELATION OF The present Estate and Condition OF IRELAND: Manifested by severall Letters, sent from thence by Persons of Worth WITH A TRUE ACCOMPT OF ALL SUCH Garrisons as have been taken in, and recovered since Christmas last, in the County of Kildare. By the Lord Leivtenant CROMWEL Generall of all the Parliaments Forces in IRELAND. Dublin,   the 11. of March. THE 25. of February, our Governour drew out towards the Naas, with 2500. Foot, and 1000. Horse, with which he marched toward the Fort and Castle of Bellisonan, where he arrived the first Instant, summoned the place, upon re∣susall, planted his Guns, made a breach, was ready to storme, the Besieged send to parley, and
afterward surrender upon Articles, That they should march away with their Armes, and each of them a pound of Pouder, and proportionable Match, which was accor∣dingly performed, and a Garrison of ours setled there. The next day hee rested his Men; and at midnight marcht to Castle Dermot, and from thence sent a Party to Athye, a Passe upon the Barrow, of great concernment, and surprized it, wherein were taken severall Tories, wherein he hath put a Garrison of Horse and Foot; he hath also taken the Castles of Tymolyn, Ballebeyg, and Kilrush, where∣in he hath also placed severall Garrisons, as also in Kil∣malacke, being the Castle of the Bogg of Allen, which the Enemy had burnt, and endeavoured to have slighted, up∣on the rumour of advance from hence, but now is made tenable. Upon Saturday last the Governour returned hither a∣gaine with his owne Troop alone, having disposed his Forces in our Quarters; our Forces about Wexford have re∣covered Iniscorthy, and have taken Brownswood by storme, and put all to the Sword. The Enemies in the North are very quiet in their Quar∣ters, notwithstanding the trouble their Freinds are in here, and they stir not to their assistance; they have appointed to chuse a Generall upon the seventeenth instant, but I doubt not but Sir Charles Coot wil visit their Quarters before that time, and I presume he had before this time done it, had not somethings wanting hindred him. Dublin,  16. February, 1649. Right Honourable, MY last unto your Lordship of the 31. of January last, wherein I gave your Lordship an account of the then state of Affaires here.
Upon Wednesday the sixt Instant (information being given that five Companies of the Eenemys Foot were come to Roores Court, about eight Miles from hence, on Wick∣low side) a Party was sent from this place under the Com∣mand of Sir Theophilus Jones, to beate them out, or fight them, but before our party got thither, they demolisht all the Buildings, pull'd downe the very Walls, and fled away into the Woods: We could not leave any Garrison there, be∣cause there is no matter of shelter for our men. The tenth Instant, Letters from Sir Charles Coote at Belfast, brought the Newes of the reducing of Castle-Doe, in the North-West of Ireland. The plague continues at Galway, most of their Gentry have there perished by it, amongst the rest Jefferay Browne, heretofore a practisor at Law in England, and Sir Richard Blayne, both prime actors and chiefe in the supreame Coun∣cell at Kilkenney; and eminent contrivers of the Rebellion are dead. Ormond was lately at Portumny with the Earle of Clanric∣kard in Connought. Captaine Mollineux is arrived here from Wexford, who brings Newes of our taking of the Fort of Ballihaet, over a∣gainst passage Fort, whereby all Trade by Sea to Waterford is cut off. There is a very great jealousie betweene the Townes∣men of Waterford and the Souldiers there. The Plague is exceeding hot in Kilkenney. The To∣ries have so barbarously behaved themselves towards their owne party, that the Fryars and Preists have excommuni∣cated them. May it please your Lordship: THe Lord Lievtenant hath lately taken many considera∣ble places from the enemy, as Callan within six miles of
Kilkenny, just beyond it, and Cnocktogher, eight miles East from it. Hee hath also possest himselfe of Roscrea, and Thurls, since he tooke Casshall, and now the head Quarter is at Fedard in the very bowels of the enemy. The plague is very hot in Kilkenny. Collonell Hewson the Governour of this place is mar∣ched to the siege of Bellisonan, with a very Gallant party, he hath about a 1000 Horse, and 2500 Foote, besides Offi∣cers, he hath taken with him a Demy Cannon, a culver∣in, and a Demyculverinand a Morter-peece. The Enemy were so frightned with the reports of the Ordnance that they have burnt the Castle in the Island of Allon, Athy, and Mariburg. If God give him successe in this expedition, and that he take Bellisonan, he will put some men into Athy, and so gaine a passage over the River of Barrow, by which meanes he may joyne with my Lords Army at pleasure; for Ros∣cra is but twenty Miles from Athy, and no place betweene them to hinder a conjunction. Since the taking of Ballihac in the County of Wexford, Enishkorsee Mr. Wallops house is also yeelded up to the Go∣vernour of Wexford by the same knave that betrayed it to the Irish. The Lord of Ormond hath left Leinster to the care of the Lord Castlehaven, and is gone over the Shanon into Con∣naught. Castlehaven is drawing together all the force he can to relieve Belisonan. I heard lately from Sir Charles Coote, all is well and quiet there. Since the writing here of I have received Letters from the Governour that Bellisonan was yeelded to him on Fri∣day night the first of this moneth, and he is marched to∣wards Kilkena and Athy: my Lord Lievtenant has taken Cahir Castle lately, and has laid siege to Tinan Castle; he has blockt up Clonmel at a distance, by putting in Gar∣risons into all the places about it.
I have been too troublesome to your Lordship, for which he humbly begs pardon, who is Your most humble servant. Dublyn 4. March. 1649. My Lord, I have formerly communicated to your Lordship my surprising the strong Fort of Blacke-Ditch on the Boy of Allen, and tooke and garrisoned divers other places there∣abouts in the County of Kildare. The latter end of the last moneth wee marched out with what Forces could be spared from the Garrisons here∣about to reduce Kilmag Castle in the Island of Allin, Bel∣lisonan and divers other Garrisons in the County of Kil∣dare, which in a short time by the help of God was effected, the enemy upon my motion fiered Kilmaoy, Athy, and the Fort of Lease, but my men at Rabride and Blacke-ditch put out the fire seasonably at Cilmaoy, that much hurt is not done, where now I have a Garrison, and hope to make it tenable in short time; I marched forward to the strong Fort and Garrison of Bellisonan with two Guns and a Mor∣ter peece, when I came there I had Intelligence of the Earl Castlehaven being at Laughland bridge with foure thousand foote, and eight hundred horse, intending, within twenty foure houres to relieve Bellisonan, that night I planted my Guns and Morter-peece against the Fort, and the next mor∣ning earlie, began to play about two of the clock, having prepared for to storme, and drawne up our Forces to that end, the Governour desired to parley, and upon conditi∣on
to march out with their armes, delivered me up imme∣diatly his strong Garrison, wherein I found foure hun∣dred Bushels of Corne, and six barrels of Beife, 7 barrels of powder with bullet and Match proportionable. Having placed there a Garrison, I sent a Party to Kilrush who presently submitted. Another Party I sent to the strong Castle of Tully, who yeil∣ded likewise after some small assault. I likewise dispatched a Party of foote to Athy, and put a Garrison in the Abbie there, which I understood was tena∣ble, and not demolished, and divers other places in that County being Garrisoned, and my fortnights provision be∣ing spent which I tooke out with me, and the wasted Coun∣trey affording no reliefe, I returned to Dublin the ninth instant. Thus my Lord you have an account of the goodnesse of God going forth with your Forces in these parts, if wee were but supplyed with men, money, provisions, and Am∣munition (all which is wanting) I doubt not, by the blessing of God, but this Summer would end your Irish Warrs. Since Christmas you have recovered and garrisoned in the County of Kildare, Kilmaoy Castle. Blackwood Castle. Black-ditch Fort, all in and about the Bog of Allin, as also, Raibride. Ponsiers-Grange. Kildare, Tully, Grange-begg Bellisonan, Bellisax, Kilrush and Athy. Al these considerable Garrisons, so that now your Interest
that way is as larrge and larger than in Lievt. Generall Jones time, thus farre hath the Lord gone along with your Forces, whose presence will scatter your enemies, and give you rest whilst his Tabernacle is pitched among you, and his goodnesse goe before you, his name is neare, his won∣drous workes declares: that his presence may still abide with you and your Forces, shall be the dayly prayers of, Your most faithfull Servant. Dated at Dublin, March 19. 1649. Licensed by Gualter Frost Esquire, Secretary to the Councell of State, according to the direction of the late Act.
Thursday the 14. of March, 1649. By the Trustees appointed by Act of Parliament for the sale of the Fee Farme Rents, la∣ing to the late King, Qee,  Pr at Worcester-House in the Strand. ACCORDING to the directions of the sayd Act, the sayd Trustees, doe hereby Declare, That they intend upon Munday the first day of Aprill next, to put to sale all the Fee-Farme Rents, Tenths, or Rents reserved, dry Rents, Hundreds, Liberties, Bailywricks, Reservations, Conditions, Franchises, and Pensions, late belonging to the late King, Queen, and Prince, unto the immediate Tenant, or Tenants of the Premises. And after the expiration of the thirty dayes allowed the sayd Tenant to be accounted from the sayd first of Aprill, the sayd Trustees will expose to sale the sayd Fee-Farme Rents, &c. to a∣ny Purehasor, or Purchasors, as shall desire to buy the same. Clement Baker, Clerke to the sayd Trustees. London, Printed by M. Simmons, 1650.
