P611 E180_15 99859318 111392
VVorse and worse NEVVES FROM IRELAND BEING THE COPPY OF A Letter read in the House of Parliament, the 14. of this in∣stant Moneth of December, 1641. Wherein is contained such unheard-of Cruelties, committed by the Papists against the Protestants, not sparing Age nor Sex, that it would make a Christians heart to bleede. LONDON, Printed for Nath: Butter. 1641.
A COPY OF A LETTER. Read in the House of Parli∣ament, the 14. of this Instant Moneth of December 1641. SIR, ALL I can tell you is the mise∣rable estate wee continue under, for the Rebels day∣ly increase in men and mu∣nition, in all parts, except the Province of Munster, exercising all man∣ner of cruelties, and striving who can be most barbarously exquisite in
tor∣menting the poore Protestants, where∣soever they come; Cutting off their privie members, eares, fingers, and hands, plucking out their eyes, boyling the heads of little Children before their Mothers faces, and then ripping up their Mothers Bowels; stripping women na∣ked, and standing by them being na∣ked, whilest they are in Travell, killing the Children as soone as they are borne, and ripping up their Mothers bellies, as soone as they are delivered; driving men, women, and children, by hun∣dreds together upon Bridges, and from thence cast them downe into Rivers, such as drownd not, they knocke their braines out with Poles, or shoot them with Muskets, that indeavour to escape by swimming out; ravishing wives be∣fore their husbands faces, and Virgines before their Parents faces, after they have abused their bodies, making them renounce their Religion, and then mar∣ry them to the basest of their fellowes:
Oh that the Lord, who hath moved the Kingdomes of England and Scotland, to send reliefe to these afflicted Prote∣stants, would likewise stirre them to ef∣fect their undertaking, with all possible expedition, least it be too late. Some of the persons particularly mentioned to have suffered, who are knowne unto you, are, Master German, Minister of Brides, his Body mangled, and his members cut off, Master Ful∣lerton Minister of Lughall, Simon Hastings his eares cut off, Master Blandry Mini∣ster, hanged, his flesh pulled off from his bones, in the presence of his wife, in small pieces, he being hangd two dayes before her, in the place where shee is now prisoner. Abraham Iames of New∣towne, in the Diocesse of Clohor, cut in pieces, and it is reported that the Bi∣shop of Clohor is turned to the Re∣bels, thus moving pardon in presu∣ming to trouble you at this time in your
publicke imployments, doe with hum∣ble remembrance of his best respects to you, and your vertuous Lady, remaine Novemb. 27. 1641. Your Servant to Command, THOMAS PARTINGTON.
THis Letter was read in the House of Co∣mons, upon the 14. day of this Moneth, and also read againe before the Lords, at a Co∣mittee of both Houses, and humbly prayd to have the same entred in the Iournals of both Houses. The said House of Commons likewise de∣sired the Lords to joyne with them, to petiti∣on his Majestie, to take off the reprieve from the seven condemned Priests, and that they might be forthwith executed according to their Iudgement, and the Law
