p989 e931_2 99866694 118978
THE GREAT CASE OF TYTHES Truly stated, clearly opened, and fully resolved. By a Countrey-man, A. P. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle neer the West end of Pauls. MDCLVII.
To the Countrey-men, Farmers, and Husbandmen of England. IT is for your sakes that this small Treatise is sent abroad, that in a matter wherein you are so much concern'd, you might be truly informed: And because there are many differing opinions, and of late yeers have been great disputes concerning the right of Tythes, which makes the case seem difficult to be resolved, I have given you the substance of all that e∣ver I could finde written, or hear discoursed touching that point; and for more then two yeers last past I have made much enquiry into it; and if there be a∣ny who have something to say for them, which is not herein touched, or in some generall head compre∣hended, it shall be acceptable to me to receive it. The Method of the Discourse. First, I have begun with tything amongst the Jewes, which either in precept or example, is the foundation for all others.
Secondly, I have given you a short view of the Do∣ctrines, Opinions, Decrees and Practises of the Pri∣mitive Church concerning them, and from thence-downward untill this day, which is enough to clear the whole point. Thirdly, Out of which having made some short Observations, I state the case, as it concerns us in England. Fourthly, And then hearing what every one hath to say for them, and giving them particular An∣swers, Fifthly, I proceed to satisfie some great Objecti∣ons, and so conclude the whole in as much brevity, as the variety of the subject would permit. A. P.
OF TYTHING Amongst the IEWES. GOD having chosen Aaron and his sons for the Office of the Priest∣hood, and the rest of the Tribe of Levi for the service of the Ta∣bernacle, he gave unto the Levites all the tenth in Israel for an inheri∣tance for their service, and they were to have no inheritance among the children of Israel. And the Levites out of their Tythe were to offer up an Heave-offering of it for the Lord, even the tenth part of the tythe, and give it unto Aaron the Priest for himself and his sons; and no other portion had the Priests out of the tythes, but they were for the Levites that did the common services of the Tabernacle, for the strangers, for the father∣less and the widowes. Besides the tenth of the tythe, the Priests had the first ripe fruits of the ground, of Wheat, of Barley, of Figs, of Grapes, of Olives, of Pomgranates and Dates, at what quantity the owner pleased;Deut. 18.4. Ezek. 45.13 a Heave-offering also of corn, wine, oyl, fleece and the like were given to the Priests at the 60. part, sometimes at the 50. or more, at the devotion of the owner. Of Cattel also the first-born were the Lords, paid to the Priests, of clean beasts in kinde, of unclean in money, with a fifth part added: Also divers parts of the sacrifices were appointed for the Priests.Exod. 13.2. But no tythes did the Priests receive of the people; for those belonged to the Levites that were appointed over the tabernacle, and the instru∣ments thereof to bear it, to take it down and set it up, to serve Aaron
and his sons, and to do the Services of the tabernacle, and keep the in∣struments thereof, and their service chiefly was upon removing of the Host; for better ordering whereof, and every ones service, they were divided into three parts, the Koathites, the Gerthonites and the Mararites, and these received tythes of the people, and out of them a tenth part they delivered to the Priests. Afterwards, when Solomon had builded a temple, and placed the Ark therein, other offices were appointed for the Levites; one part of them were to be singers, another to be porters, and take the charge of the gates of the Temple; another to be keepers of the treasury: others of them also were placed abroad in the country,2 Chron. 26.30. & 32. on the West side of Iordan 1700. and on the East side 2700. By this time also the posterity of Aaron being much increased, the Priests were divided into 24 ranks or courses, according to the names of their Families, and every ones attendance was required by turns; and hereupon Zacharias is said to be of the course of Abiah, and to execute the Priests office, and burn incense as his turn came, Luk. 1. and the first of the first rank had the pre-eminence and was the High Priest, and so every one according to their precedency were preferred. The Levites that were singers were divided as the Priests into 24. ranks or courses; the porters into five parts, one part to every of the four gates of the temple, and the five to Asuppim, i.e. the Councell-house. The treasury was generally committed to one, as the chief; but under him to two sorts of other officers; one to keep the treasures of the House of the Lord, and those things that were offered to the Lord; and the other to keep the dedicate things: In these treasuries were put the second tythes, the offerings of all sorts of people, which were for the uses and services of the temple, for the fatherless, the stranger and the widow. After the captivity and new dedication of the temple, it appears that in many particulars their Laws, Ordinances and Customs were very much changed, especially in this of tything: But not being much per∣tinent to this discourse, I shall pass them over; onely from these short hints let the Reader understand, that though the Priests and Levites were both of the tribe of Levi, yet was the priesthood setled in the sons of Aaron, and the offices of the priests were quite different from the Levites, and so was their maintenance distinct, as before is herein plain∣ly shewed. These Priests and Levites being separated for the work of the Lord, in the tabernacle and in the temple they ministred according to the Or∣dinances of the first Covenant, which were figures for the time then present, and shadows of good things to come.
A view of the Doctrines, Decrees and Practises of TYTHING, from the Infancy of the Christian Church untill this day. BVt in the fulness of time God raised up another Priest, Christ Jesus, who was not of the Tribe of Levi, nor consecrated after the order of Aaron; for he pertained to another tribe, of which no man gave at∣tendance at the Altar, who (having obtained a more excellent Ministe∣ry of a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not of the former build∣ing, being the sum and substance of all the patterns of things under the first Covenant) put an end to the first priesthood, with all its shadowes, sigures and carnall ordinances, and changing the priesthood which had a command to take tythes of their brethren, there was made of necessi∣ty also a change of the Law, and a disannulling of the commande∣ment going before, which was but imposed untill the time of reforma∣tion. And the Apostles and Ministers of Christ Iesus, when he had finished his Office upon earth, by offering up himself through the eternal Spi∣rit, a sacrifice without spot unto God, did not look back to the Ordi∣nances of the former Priesthood, but testified an end was put unto them, and witnessed against the temple wherein the priests ministred, for which Stephen was stoned to death, against circumcision, saying, It was not that of the flesh; against the Passeover, priests, &c. and preached up Christ Jesus and his Doctrine, the new and living way, which was not made manifest while as the first tabernacle was standing: Nor did they go about to establish the Law by which tythes were given in the former Priesthood, but freely they preached the Gospel which they had received, and did not require any setled maintenance, but lived of the free offe∣rings and contributions of the Saints, who by their Ministry were turn∣ed to Christ Iesus. At Jerusalem and thereabouts, such was the unity of heart amongst the Saints in the Apostles time, that all things were in common,Acts 4.3, 4. and none wanted; and as many as were possessors of Lands or Houses sold them, and brought the price and laid it down at the Apostles feet, and it was distributed unto every man according as he hast need. So the Church gathered by Mark at Alexandria in Aegypt, follow∣ed the same rule as the Saints did at Ierusalem,Hieron. in vita Marc. having all things in com∣mon: And Philo Iudeus a famous Author of that time reporteth, that not onely there, but in many other provinces, the Christians lived toge∣ther in societies. In the Churches at Antioch, the Saints possessed every man his own estate; so likewise in Galatia and Corinth, where the Apostle ordained that weekly offerings for the Saints should be made by every one as God had blessed him;Acts 11.29. and by these offerings (which were put into
the hands of the Deacons of the Churches) were all the services and needs of the Church supplied.1 Cor. 16.2. By example of these the course of monethly offerings succeeded in the next Ages,Vide Synod. Gangr. Can. 60. not exacted, but freely given at the bounty of every man, as appears plainly by Tertullian in Apologet. ch. 39. where upbrai∣ding the Gentiles with the pietie and devotion of Christians, he saith, Whatsoever we have in the treasury of our Churches, is not raised by taxation, as though we put men to ransome their Religion, but every man once a moneth, or when it pleaseth himself, bestoweth what he thinks good, and not without he listeth; for no man is compelled, but left free to his own discretion: and that which is given is not bestowed in vanity, but in relieving the poor, and upon children destitute of parents, and maintenance of aged and feeble persons, men wracked by Sea, and such as are condemned to the Mettal-mines, banished into Islands, or cast into prison, professing the true God and the Christian Faith. And this way of contribution continued in the Church till the great persecution under Maximinian and Dioclesian about the yeer 304. as Eusebius testifieth,Euseb. lib. 4. ch. 22. which also appears by the writings of Tertullian, O∣rigen, Cyprian and others. About this time also some lands began to be given to the Church, and the revenue of them were brought into the treasury of the Church, and belonged to the Church in common, and was distributed as other offerings, by the Deacons and Elders; but the Bishops or Ministers medled not therewith: for Origen saith, It is not lawful for any Minister of the Church to possess lands (given to the Church) to his own use; And cal∣led to the Ministers, Let us depart from the Priests of PHAROAH, who injoy earthly possessions, to the Priests of the Lord who have no portion in the earth.16 Homily upon Genesis, fol. 26. ch. 3. And in another place he saith, It behoveth us to be faithfull in disposing the rents of the Church, that we our selves devour not those things which belong to the widows and the poor, and let us be content with simple dyet and necessary apparel. And Vrban Bishop of Rome Anno 227. did de∣clare, That the Church might receive Lands and Possessions offred by the faithfull,Vrban 1. in E∣pist. c. 12. q. 1. e. 161. but not to any particular mans benefit, but that the Revenues there∣of should be distributed as other offerings, as need required. Cyprian,Cyprian Epist. 27.34.36. Bishop of Carthage, about the year 250. also testifieth the same, and sheweth that the Church maintained many poore, and that her own Dyet was sparing and plain, and all her expences full of fru∣gality. Prosper also saith,Lib. 21. de vita contemplativa. That a Minister able to live of himself, ought not to participate of the goods of the Church; for saith he, They that have of their own, and yet desire to have somewhat given them, do not receive it without great sin. The Council at Antioch,Con. Ant. cap. 25. Anno 340. (finding that much fault had been amongst the Deacons to whom it properly belonged) did ordain
hat the Bishops might distribute the Goods of the Church, but required that they took not any part to themselves, or to the use of the Priests and brethren that lived with them, unlesse that necessity did justly re∣quire it, using the words of the Apostle, Having Food and Rayment, be therewith content. In these times,Hom. 11. in Acta. Tom. 6. e∣dit. Savili∣ana, pag. 897. in many places the Christian Converts joyned them∣selves in Societies and chose a separated life, selling what they had, and living together in common after the example of the former Saints a∣bout Jerusalem, as Chrysostome notes, who lived about the yeer 400. by whose writings it also appears, that there was not the least use or pra∣ctise of the payment of tythes in these former Ages. The Church now living altogether by free offerings of Lands, mo∣ney, and goods, the people were much pressed to bountiful Contribu∣tions for holy uses, as may be seen by the Writings of Hierome,Homil. 43. ad Epist. 1. ad Co∣rinth, in▪ cap. 16. & Chryso∣stome, who brought the Jewish liberality in their payments of tenths, for an example, beneath which they would not have Christians determine their charity, where Chrysostome sayes, he speaks these things not as com∣manding or forbidding that they should give more, yet as thinking it sit that they should not give lesse then the tenth part. Hierome also doth earnestly admonish them to give bountifully to the poore,Ad cap. 3 Malachia. and double honor to him that labors in the Lords work; not binding at all to offer this or that part, leaving them to their own liberty, but pressing they might not be more short then the Jews were. Ambrose who was Bishop of Milan about the year 400. preached up tenths to be offered up for holy uses,Tom. 5. Serm. fer. 2. post dom. 1. quadragesi∣ma; & vide Serm. in A∣scens. Danivi. (as the phrase then was) as may be seen in his Sermon of Repentance, but his Authority he produceth wholly from Moses writings, and quotes divers sentences, and threa∣tens the people that if they would not pay their renths, God would re∣duce them to a tenth. In like manner Augustine Bishop of Hippo hath a whole Homily for the right of eythes,In Serm. de temp. in Tom. i Hoec est (saith he) Domini justissimae consuetudo, ut si tu illi dicimam non dederis, tu ad decimam revoceris. And afterwards with much earnest∣nesse, Decimae ex debit requiruntur▪ & qui as dare noluerit, res alienas in∣vasit; & quanti pauperes in ocis ubā ipse habitat, illo decimas non dante, fa∣me mortui fueriut, tantorū homicidi∣rū reus ante Tribunal aeterni judici apparebit, quia à Domiuo pauperibus delegatīs suis usibus reservavit. Qui er∣go sibi aut praemiū comparare, aut pec∣caterum desiderat indulgentiam prome∣reri, reddat decimam. who calls upon those that have no fruits of the earth, to pay the tenth of whatsoever they live by; and saith, the neglect of payment of tythes is the cause of sterility and blasting; & agrees with Ambrose in his threats, That God would reduce them to a tenth; & tells them, that not paying their tythes they shall be found guilty at Gods Tribunal, of the death of all the poor that perish through want in the pla∣ces where they dwell; and bids them that would either get reward, or desire the pardon of their sins, to pay their tythes. These two great Bishops agree, and from the Law given to the Israclites, take their whole Doctrine, and their own opini∣on impose with so heavy penalties: But yet take notice to what end they required them, That the
poor might not want, and saith that God hath reserved them for their use. Leo, (called the great) who was Pope from 440. to 460. was likewise very earnest and large in stirring up every mans devotion to offer to the Church part of his received fruits, but speaks not a word of any certain quantity, as may appeare by his Sermons De jejunio decimi miusis & Eleemosynis. Severin also, about the year 470. stirred up the Christians in Panonia, who in example of his bounty, gave the tenth of their fruits to the poor. Gregory not onely admonisheth the payment of tythes from Moses Law,Hom. 16. in E∣vang. & dist. 5. de consecrat. c. 16 Vt in lege jube∣mur Domino de∣cimā rerum dare but also the observing the time of Lent, consisting of six Weeks, out of which take the Sundayes, and there remains thirty six dayes, the tenth part of the year, fractions of dayes omitted; this tenth of time he would have given to God, saying, We are commanded in the Law to give the tenth of all things unto God. And from the Opinions of these and other ancient Fathers, who took their ground from the Law, Tythes, Easter, Pentecost, and other things, came to be introduced and brought into the Church.As is testified by Agobard Bish. of Lyons, a highly esteemd man, in his Trea∣tise De dispen∣satione, &c. con∣tra Sacrilegos, pag. 276. But notwithstanding the Doctrine and hard threats of some of the great Bishops of that time, it was not a generally received Doctrine that tythes ought to be paid, nor till about the year 800. was any thing by the then Church determined or ordained touching the quantity that should be given, though (no doubt) in many places amongst the offer∣ings of the devouter sort, tenths, or greater parts of their annual encrease were given, according to the Doctrine of Ambrose, and others. The offerings of the Church in these Ages were received and dispo∣sed of in maintainance of the Priests, and relief of those that were di∣stressed;Be not offend∣ed at the word Priest; no other can be given to this age; for the title as then 'twas given to them, so it was owned by them. neither had the Priests such a particular interest in the profits re∣ceived, as of late time they have usurped; all that was received where∣soever in the Bishoprick, was as a common Treasury, and was dispensed one fourth part to the Priests, out of which every one had his portion; another fourth part to the relief of the poor, sick, and strangers; a third to the building and repairing of places for publique meetings, called Churches & the fourth to the Bishop. And generally, then the Bishop lived in some Monastery, and his Clergy with him, from whence he sent them out to preach within the Countryes in his Diocesse, and there they re∣ceived such offerings as were made, and brought them to the Treasu∣ry.I call it Church because it was then so esteem∣ed; I must use such words as may give the Reader a know∣ledge of what I say. And though divers of the Fathers, Popes and Bishops, did declare that tythes were due, and ought to be paid, none of the first eight gene∣ral Councils of the Church did ever so much as mention the Name of Tythes, or declare them a duty. The nineth held at Lateran, under P. Ca∣lixtus the second, about the year 1119. mentions tythes, but speaks onely of those which had been given to the Church by special consecration; so doth also the Council held under P. Alexander the third, An. 1180.
but that onely inhibits appropriations to religious Houses, without as∣sent of a Bishop; for at that time people being led to believe that their tythes ought to be given for the use of the poor, did chiefly dispose them to the Heads and Governors of religious Houses, who kept open Hos∣pitality for the poor, and entertainment of strangers, and were esteem∣ed holy, as good Treasurers for the needy, who took care of distribu∣tion of them, as is testified by Cassian the Hermit. But that Council see∣ing much given to the poor, little to the Priests, made that Decree to re∣strain the peoples freedom; and indeed, by this time much wickednesse was crept into these Houses, as Histories relate. Nor was any Law, Canon, or Constitution of any general Council as yet found, that purposely commanded the payment of tythes, nor a∣ny that expresly supposed them a duty of common right, before the Council of Lateran, held in the year 1215. under P. Innocent the third, about which time the Popes Authority was grown powerful, and the Canons more received into practice that before were little, especially herein obeyed. About the yeers 800, 900, 1000. and after, Tythes were called the Lords goods,Res dominicae, dominica substantia, Dei census, Patrimonia pauperum, tributa egentium animarum, stipen∣dia pauperum, hospitum peregrinorum. the patri∣mony of the poor, &c. Whence also the Coun∣cil at Nants declared the Clergie was not to use them as their own, but as commended to their trust; and they were not then given for the Cler∣gy, but to be disposed of for the uses of the poor.Non quasi suis, sed quasi commenda∣tis, non ab hominibus, sed ab ipso Deo sunt institutae. And at this time no regard was had to the nature of the increase; but whatsoever did arise in profit, whether by trade, merchandize, or husbandry, the tenth was required to be paid for tythes. He preaching on Zacheus charity, sayes, Dedit proprium, & reddiic alienum. Graviter ergo peccant qui decimas & primitias non reddunt Sa∣cerdotibus, sed eas pro voluntate distri∣buunt indigentibus.But still the people had more minde to give them for the poor rather then the priests, as may be understood by the complaint of Pope Inno∣cent the third, who cryed out against those that gave their tythes and first fruits to the poor, and not to the priests, as haynous offenders; his own words take in the margin. Also a generall Council held at Lyons under Pope Gregory the tenth in the yeer 1274.Vt nulli hominum deinceps liceat de∣cimas suas ad libitum ut amea ubi vellet assignare, set Matrici Eccle∣siae omnes decimas persolverent. it was constituted, that it should not thenceforth be law∣ful for men to give their tythes of their own plea∣sure where they would, as it had been before, but pay all their tythes to the Mother Church. By these it may be seen, that though the people, who then generally were Papists, did believe they ought to pay them,
yet were they free to dispose them where they pleased, till these Popish Councils restrained their librrty. Non sunt ferendi qui vaerijs artibus decimas Ecclesiis obvenientes substra∣here moliuntur, ant qui ab aliis solven∣das temere occupant, & in rem suam vertunt, cum decimarum solutio debita sit Deo, & qui eas dare noluerins, aut dantes impediunt, res alienas inva∣dunt: Praecipit igitur sancta Syno∣dus, omnibus cujuscun{que} gradus & conditionis sint, ad qus decimarum so∣lutio specta, ut ea (ad quas dejure te∣mentur) in posterum Cathedrali aut quibuscun{que} aliis Ecclesiis vel perso∣nis, quibus legitime debentur, inte∣grepersolvant: Qui vero cas aut substa∣hunt, aut impediunt, Exoommunicen∣ur: Nec ab hoc crimine, nisi plona restitutione secuta absolvantur.But the great Decree which speaks most plain, and till which nothing was given foath which did-directly constitute them, but rather still supposed them as due by some former right, was made at the Council of Trent, under Pope Pi∣us the fourth, about the year 1560. And yet that great Council followed the Doctrine of their Father, and said they were due to God, and had no new Authority for their great Decree which they command to be obeyed under the penalty of excommunication. Having thus briefly run over the Ecclesiasti∣cal State abroad, from the Infant-purity of the Church, to the height of the Papal Dominati∣on, and given a small glimpse through every Age to the point in hand, I shall now more par∣ticularly return to what may concern this Nati∣tion. I shall not trouble the Reader with a relation of Ioseph of Arimathea and his eleven Disciples coming into Britaine, sent by Philip the A postle in the reign of Arviragus, as Histories re∣port; nor of the conversion of King Lucius afterwards, who is said to give great endowments to the Church: Nor of the British Christians, nothing at all appearing of the payment of tythes in their dayes: But passing by them, and those many years wherein the barbarous Saxons o∣ver-ran this Nation, exercising most cruel persecutions, till the very name of Christian was blotted out, and those Heathens seated in the quiet possession of a sevenfold Kingdom in this Land. About the year 600. or soon after, Gregory the first new Pope of Rome, sent over Augustine the Monk into England▪ by whom Ethelbert King of Kent was converted, and by him and his followers in processe of time, other parts of the Nation, and others of the Kings were also brought to their faith. This Augustine was a Canon Regular, and both he and his Clergy for long time after followed the example of former Ages, living in common upon the offerings of their Converts; & those that received them were joined in societies in imitation of the primitive practice, ha∣ving such direction sent him by Pope Gregory, that in the tendernesse of the Saxon Church he & his Clergy should still imitate the community of all things used in the prituitive times, under the Apostles, that they might not make their Religion burthensom. But afterwards, having brought a great part of the Nation to their faith, they began to preach up the old Roman Doctrine, That tythes
ought to be paid; and having taught the people that the pardon of sin might be merited by good works, and the torments of Hell be avoided by their charitable deeds, it was no hard matter when that was believed, to perswade them not onely to give their tythes, but also their Lands, as the outward Riches of those called Religious Houses then, here and elsewhere may testifie; for in this Nation they and the Clergy had almost gotten the third part of the whole Land; and so besotted were the poor ignorant people, that had not a Law against Mortmain prevented it, a far greater part of the Nation had been in their hands. As conceruing Laws and Canons for tythes amongst the Saxons, it is reported, That in the year 786. two Legates were sent from Pope Ha∣drian the first, to Offa K. of Mercland, and Aelfwolfe K. of Northumber∣land, who made a Decree that the people of those two Kingdoms should pay tythes. Also that Aethelulph K. of the West-Saxons, in the year 855. made a Law, That the tythe of all his own Lands should be given to God and his servants, and should be enjoyed free from all taxes: Great difference is amongst Historians about this Grant, few agreeing in the words or substance of it, as Selden shews, some restraining it to the tythe of his own Demesne Lands; others to the tenth part of his Land; others to the tythe of the whole Nation. At that time the Nation being under groat and heavy pressures by Danish irruptions, intestive wars,Promeae reme∣dio animae & Regni & popu∣li. great spoiles and miseries, he called a Council, where were present Bernredus▪ K. of Mercia, and Edmund K. of East-Angles, and they to remove the heavy judgements then over them, grants the tythe of all their Land to God and his servants. K. Athelstone, about the year 930. K. Edmund, about the year 940. K. Edgar, about the year 970. K. Ethelred about the year 1010. K. Knute about the yeare 1020. Edward the Consessor, and others of the Saxon Kings, made several Laws for tythes, as Histories report. Quoniam Divina Misrecordia pr∣vidente cognovimus esse dispositum, & longe lati{que} praedicante Ecclesia, sonac omnium auribus divulgatum. Quod, Eleemosynarum largitione possunt ab∣solvi vincula peccatorū, & adquiri Cae∣lestium praemia gaudiorū: Ego Stepha∣nus Dei gratia Anglorum Rex, partē habere voleus cū illis qui felici commer∣cio Caelestia pro terrenis Commutant, Dei amore cōpunctus, & pro salute, a∣nimae meae, & patris mei Matris{que} meae, & omniū parentū meorum, & antecess rū, &c. And so he goes on, & cōfirms divers things that divers had grāted to the Ch. as tythes, & other things.The Normans afterwards entring this King∣dom, and subduing it to themselves, William the Conqueror confirmed the Liberties of the Church; so did H. the first, H. 2. K. Stephen, and it may be others of the succeeding Kings did the like. Some Episcopal Constitutions also have been made to the same effect by Robert Winchelsey Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and others. That the Reader may understand the Princi∣ciples upon which these men acted, and the Do∣ctrine then preached amongst them, and recei∣ved and believed, I have inferted in the Margin the Preamble of a Grant of King Stephens.
Porvenie ad audientiam nostram, quod Mults in Diocessitua, decimas su∣as integrasvel duaspartes ipsarum non  Ecclesiis in quarum parchiis hae∣bitant, vel ubi predia habent, & à qui∣bus Ecclesiastica praecipiunt Sacramen∣ta prslvunt, sed eas aliis, pro sua di∣stribuunt voluntate: Cum igitur in∣conveniens esse videatur & à ratione dissimile, ut Ecclefiae quae spiritualia seminant, metere non debeant a suis pa∣rochianis temporalia & habere, frater∣nitatituae Authoritate praesentium in∣dulgemus ut liceat tibi super hoc non obstante contradictione vel appell atiene cujuslibet, seu consuetudo hactenus ob∣servata, quod Canonicum fuerit, ordi∣nare & facere, quod Statueris per cen∣suram Ecclesiasticam firmiter obligare. Nullt ergo, &c. Confirmationis, &c. Datum Lateran 11. Nonas Iulii.But notwithstanding the many Laws, Canons, & Decrees of Kings, Popes, Councils & Bishops, that every man ought to pay the tenth part of his encrease, yet was it left to the owner to con∣fer it where he pleased, which made so many rich Abbies and Monasteries; and till the year 1200. or thereabouts, every one gave their tythes at their own pleasure, which made Pope Innocent the third send his Decretal Epistle to the Bishop of Canterbury, commanding him to enjoyn eve∣ry man to pay his temporal Goods to those that ministred spiritual things to them, which was enforced by Ecclesiastical censures; and this was the first beginning of general Parochial payment of tythes in England: I have inserted the Popes own words in the Margin, as they are recorded by Cook in the second part of his Institutes, who saith, That because the Popes Decree seemed reasonable, it was admitted and enjoyned by the Law of the Nation, King and people being then papists. This Decree of the Pope receiving all possible assistance from the Bishops and the Priests, in whose behalf it was made, did not onely in a short time take away the peoples then desired Right to give their tythes to those that best deserved them, but did also so much corrupt the Clergy, that in the time of R. the second, Wick liffe our famous Reformer did make a heavy complaint to the Parliament, which in his own words I have inserted for the Readers better satisfacti∣on: Ah Lord God! where this be reason to constrain the poor people to finde a worldly Priest, sometime unable both of life and ounning, in pomp and pride, covetise and envy, gluttoness, drunkennesse, and letchery, in simony and heresie, with fat horse and jolly, and gay Saddles and Bridles ringing by the way, and himself in costly clothes and pelure, and to suffer their Wives and Children, and their poor Neighbors perish for hunger, thirst, and cold, and other mischiefs of the world: Ah Lord Iesu Christ, sith within few years men paid their tythes and offerings at their own will, free to good men, and able to great Worship of God, to profit and fairness of holy Church fighting in earth; why it were lawful and needful that a worldly Priest should destroy this holy and approved custom, constraining men to leave this freedom, turning Tythes and Offerings unto wicked uses. That the meaning of these, and the practice of this Nation in this matter may the better be understood, it is needful to inform the Rea∣der that when the Popes Doctrine was received in a Nation, that Nation was divided into so many Bishopricks as were needful, and every Bishop∣rick into so many parishes as were thought convenient, and parishes are but of late erection, and till then most Preachers were sent out of tho
Monasteries, and religious (so called) Houses, and the people did at their own free will give their tythes and offerings where they pleased, which liberty they enjoyed till about the year 1200. And though it was generally believed that tythes ought to be paid, yet did no man claim any property therein, but every owner of the nine parts was required to give the tenth part to the Priest or poor, as due unto God. But now the Pope having set up Parishes, did enjoyne that a Secu∣lar priest canonically instituted, should attend the service of each pa∣rish; and that where tythes were not already setled, they should be paid to the Parish-Priest, notwithstanding any custom to the contrary; the people then generally being Papists, did yeild obedience, as they durst not do otherwise; and it may easily be supposed, that having perswaded the people to pay tythes, it was no hard matter to appoint the person to whom they should be given. Parishes being set up, Priests appointed, and tythes paid to them after fourty years possession, what before was owned as the gift, was now claimed as a debt; and prescription was pleaded by the priests as their just title; the people then seeing themselves in a snare, began to con∣tend; but the imperious Pope (now in a great height of pride and inso∣lence to uphold his Creature-Clergy) thundred out his Interdict a∣gainst this Nation, excommunicaeted the King, frighted the Subjects with his Bulls stuft with Commination, and that against the very point of Arbitrary disposal of tythes: And Rome now grown formidable, did highly insult over Kings and Princes; winesse Frederick, Barbarossa, Hen. the 6th. and other Princes of the Empire; and the Stories of our H. 2. and K. Iohn, are obvious: And our Rich. the first to gratifie the Clergy for their exceeding liberality in contributing to his ransom from captivity, with great favour gave them an indulgent Charter of their Liberties, and in this advantage of time the Canon-Laws gained such force, that Parochial-payment came generally to be setled. Yet notwithstanding our English Parliaments not willing wholly to forget the poor, for whose sake tythes were chiefly given, did make di∣vers Laws that a convenient portion of the tythes should be set apart for the maintenance of the poor of the parish for ever, R. 2.15.6. 4 H. 4. as the Statutes at large do witnesse. The Pope having by these means brought in tythes, and made a pre∣tended title by prescription, set up Courts to recover them, which were called Ecclesiastical Courts, where his own creatures were Judges, and here the poor people might easily understand what they might expect from them; yet he that did not pay, no great punishment could they in∣flict on him, but excommunication out of their Church. The Pope by all means willing to favour his chiefest props, notwith∣standing his general Decree, could tell how to dispense with his own Lands at his pleasure, and therefore frequently did grant exemptions
to divers Orders to free them from payment of tythes; witnesse the Hos∣pitallers, Cistercians, Templers, and generally to all I ands held in the occupation of the called religious Persons and Houses, which is the ground of all those mens claims who have bought the Lands of dissol∣ved Monasteries, &c. and say they are tythe-free. When the Pope by colour of the Jewish Laws (by which tythes were given to the Levitical Priesthood) had gained an universal payment of tythes to all his Clergy, in further imitation of that earthly Tabernacle▪ he sets up a new building after the former pattern, and therefore to himself he claims first-fruits and tenths as a Successor of the Jewish High-Priest; fins also he undertook to pardon. Cardinals also he appoints as Loa∣ders of their Families; Myters they were on their heads, as Aaron, did; Synagogues they build, with Singers, Porters, &c. and into the sorm of the Levitical Priesthood they transform themselves, thereby wholly denying Christ Jesus the end of Types and Figures, to be come in the flesh. Afterwards H. 8. King of England being a Papist, and believing the Popes Doctrine, as also did his Parliament, that tythes were due to God and Holy Church, made a Law that every one should set out and pay his tythes. And seeing this is the great Law, and the first of our Parliament-Laws for tythes, and that upon which the rest are grounded, I shall here insert the Preamble of it. Forasmuch as divers numbers of evil-disposed persons, having no respect to their dutyes to Almighty God, but against right and good conscience have at∣tempted to substract and with-hold in some places the whole, and in some places great parts of their Tythes and Oblations, as well personal as predial, due unto God and Holy Church, &c. A second Law in his time was also made to the like purpose, and in pursuance of the former; and great reason he had, and need there was for them; for having dissolved many Monasteries who had many tythes and Rectories appropriated to them, and either had them in his own hands, or sold them to others, to be held as lay-possessions, and they ha∣ving no Law whereby to recover them, the Popes Laws not reaching to Lay-persons (so called) he was necessitated to make new Laws to en∣force the payment of them, which the better to colour over the matter, he makes in general terms, but still restrains the tryal of tythes to the Ecclesiastical Courts. After him Edw. the sixth, in pursuance of his Fathers Laws, and upon the same grounds makes another Law for the payment of predial and personal tythes, under penalty of trebble damages, who also re∣strains the tryal to the Ecclesiastical Courts. These Laws suppose, that
tythes were due to God and Holy Church, and therefore they require that every man do yeild and set out his tythes, as had been accu∣stomed. In pursuance of these Laws some Ordinances were made in the time of the long Parliament, in the Exigences of the War, because the Courts of Justice were obstructed. And these are the substance of all our English Laws concerning Tythes. Having thus generally and briefly run over the Laws and practices of tything, both abroad, and in this Nation, I shall give some hints of the Opinions of former times concerning tythes. About the yeare 1000. and 1200. after Christ, when tythes were generally preached up and claimed, great controversie did arise between the Canomists and the Clergy by what immediate Law tythes were payable. The Canonists generally ground themselves upon the Decrees and Canons of the Church, (so called) and on the Writings of Augustine, Ambrose, and the rest of the ancient Fathers, who say they are due by Divine Right. The Clergy of those times were at difference amongst themselves, some of them saying, That tythes, quoad quotam partem, or as it is a de∣termined part, is due onely by positive and Ecclesiastick Law; but quoad substantiam suam, or as it devotes a competent part to be allowed for the maintenance of the Ministry, is due by Divine Law; and that the tenth part was decreed by the Church, per vim ejus exemplarem, or by imitati∣on of the Jewish State, and not per vim obligativam, or any continuing force of it under the Gospel; and that the Church was not bound to this part, but freely might as wel have ordained the payment of a 9th. or 8th. according to the various opportunity. This was taught by Hales, Aqui∣nas, Henricus de Grandavo, Ride Media villa, Cardinal Cajian, Io. Mayer, Snarez, Malder, and others, who say it is the common Opinion of the greatest part of the Clergy of that time, and that the tenth part was rather ceremonial then moral. Here also was made a distinction, and many said that predial and mixt tythes were due by the divine Ecclesiastick Law; but personal tythes on∣ly by the Decrees of the Church; but Hales said that tythes, as well personal as predial, are in the precept Quoad substantiam, but neither Quoad quotam; and therefore in Venice and other Cities, where no pre∣dial tythes are, a personal tythe is required by the positive Law of the Church, by vertue of the substance (not ceremony) of the Com∣mand. Another Opininion (and that owned by many) was drawn from the former Doctrine, which concluded, That seeing tythes as the quota pars, were not enjoined by the command of God, therefore they were meer Alms, or as what debito Charitatis, not debito justiciae, was to be dispensed.
Of this Opinion were the Dominicans and Franciscans, who both began about the year 1210. and by their Doctrine got many tythes to be given to their Monasteries, and that whatsoever was given to the four Orders of Mendicant Fryars, was a sufficient discharge from the Priest. And our famous Reformers, Iohn Wickliffe, Walter Brute, Will. Thorp, and others, whose Arguments are at large in Fox his Acts and Monu∣ments, did in their dayes bear their testimony against tythes, for which some of them suffered in flames. Agreeing herewith are the Articles of the Bohemians published near 300. years since, wherein a divine right to tythes since the Gospel is de∣nyed; whereupon also long since they took all their temporalties from their Ministers; And before Wickliffes time Gerardus Sagarellus was of the same mind. And the great Erasmus also said, That the common ex∣acting of tythes by the Clergy of his time, was no better then Ty∣ranny. Having thus briefly run over the Doctrines, Decrees, Practices and Opinions concerning tythes; I shall make some short observations there∣upon, that the Reader may understand whereunto they tend, and then proceed to the matter as it concerns us at this day, wherein he will finde the knowledge of these▪ things will be useful. First, That amongst the Jews tythes were paid to the Levites that did the common services of the Tabernacle and Temple, and not to the sons of Aaron, the priests; for they had onely a tenth part out of the tythes; and therefore he that pleads for tythes from the Mosaical Laws of tything, had need consider how the payment of tythes to Ministers, suc∣ceeds to the payment of tythes to the Levites, who were not priests, nor were to touch or meddle with that holy Office, least they dyed. 2. That amongst the Jews no outward Law was appointed for the re∣covery of tythes, but he that did not pay them robbed God, and by him onely was punished. 3. That the tythes were not for the Levites onely, but for the stran∣ger, the fatherlesse, and the widow, who were to eat thereof, and be sa∣tisfied. 4. That when the Levitical priesthood was changed by the coming of Christ Jesus, the law for tything was also changed, as Paul writ to the Hebrews; for it is evident, that in the beginning of the Church, for the first 300. years, while the purity and simplicity of the Gospel was re∣tained, no tythes were paid amongst Christians. 5. That as the mysterie of iniquity began to work, and mens imagi∣ginations were taught instead of the Doctrine of Christ, divers men fet∣ching their ground from Moses writings, began to preach that tythes again ought to be paid. 6. That those that first preached up tythes, pressed the payment of of them, not for the maintenance of a Ministry onely, but chiefly for provision for the poor and needy.
7. That in the first practice of the payment of tythes, they were not paid as tythes, but as free offerings at the bounty of the giver, and not as answering any law that required the tenth part, and so more proper∣ly were called offerings, then tythes. 8. That notwithstanding any Doctrines preached, it was not a recei∣ved Doctrine that tythes ought to be paid till about the year 1000. that the Pope had set up his Authority, and usurped Dominion over the grea∣test parts of Europe, and almost all Emperors, Kings, and Princes brought in subjection to him and his innovated superstirions. 9. That notwithstanding the strict commands of the Pope, no out∣ward compulsary Law was made by the Pope or his Councils to en∣force any to pay tythes, but onely their excommunication. 10. That tythes were alwayes accounted an Ecclesiastical duty, and therefore by Ecclesiastical Courts were tryed and judged; and til the dissolution of Abbeys, &c. were never called a Civil Right. 11. That tythes were brought in as a duty owing unto God, and were so required and enforced; and therefore all laws made for the payment of tythes, takes that for their ground, and not any civil property or right in him that claims them. 12. That till the year 1200. or thereabouts, it was the common pra∣ctice for every one to bestow his tythes where he pleased. 13. That from such Arbitrary dispositions, Abbeys and Monasteries came to be so richly endowed with Tythes and Rectories. 14. That all exemptions from payment of tythes came from the Pope. 15. That first fruits and tenths are but a late innovation, and claimed by the Pope as Successor to the Jewish High-Priest, as Cook in the third part of his Institutes also testifies 16. That tythes are the same thing, whether claimed by an Abbey, or Impropriator, or a Priest, and stand upon the same ground and foun∣dation, and differ nothing but in the person that possesseth them. 17. Here also the declining State of the Church to corruption & error may be clearly discerned & traced; for as the power of truth was lost, so was the fruit thereof, which caused such earnest pressing to needful con∣tributions, & when that would not serve, Laws & Decrees were made to force them: But in the beginning it was not so; for while the purity and simplicity of the Gospel was retained, there needed no pressing; for their charity then abounded not onely to the tenth part, but far greater parts, as the needs of the Church required. 18. That the right of tythes was never cleared, but remained in con∣troversie even amongst the greatest Papists, and in all ages there were those that withstood the payment of them: And many of the Martyrs for that, amongst other things, suffered in flames.
These things thus premised, I shall briefly state the great Case and Question at this day chiefly controverted concerning tythes, as claimed and paid in England. The Case. Whether any person have a true and legal property in the tenth part of ano∣ther mans encrease, now commonly called tythes? The terms are plain, and need no opening; yet it is needful to declare why the Case is thus stated; for the great Question rather seems to be, Whether tythes be not due at this day? That may be due to another wherein yet he may have no legal pro∣perty, as Custom, Tribute, Taxes, which are to be paid because com∣manded by the State; and though Law and Equity obliges the payment, yet is no distinct property in him that commands; and so tythes may be supposed to be due, because so many Laws have been made for pay∣ment of them, though the person that claims them may have no parti∣cular interest or property therein, other then is derived from the com∣mand. But now in England tythes are not onely claimed by vertue of divers Laws, but also as being a distinct property, severed from the property of the nine parts. And if this could clearly be evinced, all scruples of conscience were answered; for if a true and legal property be in another person to the tenth part of any encrease, I ought in conscience to yeild and set it forth, because it is not mine; and then the Name of tythe, as having in any measure relation to the Jewish priesthood or popish Clergy, were at an end, but as a debt it ought to be truly paid to the proprietor. Many things have been said, and much written to prove such a pro∣perty, the substance whereof, as far as hath come to my knowledge, I shall briefly sum up under these general Heads; as also the grounds of those who claim them to be due, and yet plead no property, which be∣ing the lesser, may be fully included and answered in the other. Several Claims made for tythes, and a legal property therein, set down and answered. 1. The first claims tythes to be due jure divine, and produce the Law of Moses for it it. 2. Others say, that as to the quota pars, (viz. the tenth part) tythes are not now due by the Law of God: onely the equity of the Law is still of force, which obligeth to afford a competent maintenance for the Mi∣nistry, but doth not bind to the certain quantity. 3. Others there are who plead the Decrees, Canons, and Constituti∣ons of General Councils, Popes, Bishops, Convocations, and these
say that tythes are due jure Ecclesiastico. Vnder these several Claims, or some of them, have tythes been de∣manded and paid, since the dark night of Apostacy overspread the earth under the Papal power, till the Popes Supremacy and Religion was cast off in England; and where the popish Religion is professed, they are now by the same demanded and paid. But now of late in England now Claims are made, and the old pre∣tences seem too much to savour of the popish Leven, and therefore a humane right is pleaded, which I shall briefly bring under these few heads. 1. Some plead the gifts of Kings and Princes, who were Rulers of the people, as Ethelwosph, &c. 2. Others plead the temporal Laws of Kings, Parliaments, &c. 3. Others plead the particular gifts, appropriation, consecration, or donation of those who were former owners of the Land. 4. Others plead prescription and a legal right by their possession. 5. Others plead a legal right by purchase. And besides these, I never heard or read of any other pretence for tythes, though I have diligently for two years, and more, laboured to inform my self fully what could be alledged for them. To begin with the first, Those that say tythes are due by Divine Right. Some of them say, That the Law given to Israel for payment of tenths to the Tribe of Levi, doth also oblige Christians to pay tenths to their Ministers, as succeeding in the Priests Office. Ans. To such it is clearly answered, That the priesthood which had a commandment to take tythes being changed by Christ Jesus, there is made of necessity also a change of the Law; and now the priesthood is no more committed to the natural off-spring of Levi, or any other tribe, but to Christ Jesus the unchangeable priesthood, whose Kingdom stands not in figures and carnal Ordinances, but is the Substance of what that was but a figure: And it is clear the primitive Church were assur'd of it, who for some hundreds of years, and till the mysterie of Iniquity began to work, never called for the payment of tythes, as is before plain∣ly proved. And how doth a Gospel Ministry succeed to the Levites, who recei∣ved tythes but were not priests; much more colour had the Quiristers, Singing-men, and the rest of the Rabble brought into the late Cathe∣drals, to claim them, and onely to pay out a tenth part to the priests, as the Levites did. Others say, That Abraham paid tythes to Melchisedec, which was before the Levitical Priesthood; and Christ Iesus is made a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec.
Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, was met by Melchisedec, who brought him bread and wine, and Abraham gave him the tenth of the tythes, but what is this to the payment of tythes, un∣lesse it oblige the Souldiers? for it doth not appear that Abraham paid the tenth part of his own increase; nor doth it appear that Abraham gave the tenth part at any other time; and how will this prove a yearly payment of tythes to Ministers? And what if Iacob gave tythes? how are either of these examples more binding then any other of the good acts that either of these holy men did? Object. If it be said, that Jesus Christ said, ye tythe min, &c. these things ye ought not to leave undone. It's answered, that Jesus Christ then spoke to the Jewes in the time when the Levitical priesthood was not ended, who were bound by the Law so long as it was of force, till he was offered up, and said, It is fi∣nished. But though Divine Right hath been of long pretended, few are now left who will onely stand to it, and the generalitie both of Lawyers, Priests and people are of a contrary minde. For if Tythes be absolutely due by the Law of God, no custome, u∣sage, prescription, priviledge, or popish dispensation, can acquit from payment of the utmost peny of the tenth part; but scarce the tenth per∣son in England payeth Tyth in kinde, and many plead they are tythe-free, and pay none at all, and others very small matters; and so the greatest part of the people of England deny Tythes to be due by Gods Law. Again, if Tythes be due by the Law of God, then is it to the end for which they were commanded, for the Levites, the Strangers, the Father∣less, and the Widows; all therefore who plead for Tythes by Divine Right, must not pay them to an Impropriator; for by Gods Law he can∣not claim, neither ought any Impropriator of that minde to receive them. And of late yeers, it was by Rolls, Chief Justice, adjudged in the Vp∣per Bench, That Tythes are not now due by the Law of God. 2. To the next, those that plead the Equity of the Law is still of force. These plead not for Tythes properly, but for a comfortable mainte∣nance, and by way of Tythes, as they suppose most convenient, &c. And these bring many Scriptures in the New Testament, that he that labors is worthy of his hire; he that preacheth the Gospel ought to live of the Gospel; let him that is taught communicate to him that tea∣cheth, and the like.
And to such I say, that not onely the Equitie of the Leviticall Law for Tything, the Doctrine of Christ Jesus and his Apostles do binde, but even from natural thinge we are largely taught our duty therein; No man muzleth the mouth of the Oxe, and no man goeth a warfare at his own charge; and he that plants a vinyard, eats the fruit thereof: And herein it is agreed, that the Ministers of Christ Iesus, who are called to his service and labour in the Word, ought to be comfortably provided for, that they go not a warfare at their own charge. But this doth not require that the world (which lies waste as a Wil∣derness, and is not of the Vinyard) should contribute, much less be com∣pelled to give a certain portion of the fruits of their labours towards the maintenance of Christs Ministers. And these grant, that every man is the sole owner of his own labour and possession; and though by another he may not be compelled, for such sacrifice God abhors, yet ought every one freely to glorifie God with his substance, to strengthen the weak hands, and feeble knees, and to give to him that teacheth, those things that are needfull, and such cheerfull givers God accepts. And this leaves every one free to give to him that teacheth, not bind∣ing to the maintenance of those who have lesse need then the giver, or of those who are transformed as Apostles and Ministers of Christ, who have the form, but want the power, who teach for filthy lucre, keeping ever learning, but cannot bring to the knowledge of the truth. And of such as Christ Jesus sent forth, he alwayes took care, and they never wanted, but they reaped the fruits of their labour, and eat the fruits of their own Vinyards which they had planted, & by the Churches who were gathered out of the world, were they maintained to preach the Gospel to th world, unto whom they would not make the Gospel chargeable or burthensom, which was their glory and their Crown. And herewith let all our now called Churches be proved and tryed, who separate from the world, and yet many of them receive pay and wages for their teachers from the world, who send none at their own cost to preach to the world. And here our Rulers should learn wisdom to with-hold their hands from upholding any with their worldly Sword, and compelling others to maintain them, and to leave Christs Kingdom to his own Rule; who is Lord of the Harvest, and sends forth labourers, and hath spirit to put upon them; who sends forth the-Fisher-men, the Shepherds, the Herds∣men, the tillers of the ground, and the keepers of flocks, who speake plain words that wise men cannot understand who are wise in the worlds wisdom, gathered in Schools, whither they are sent to learn a trade, thereby to get their livings; and in the time of popery they studyed the popish Doctrine, and then preached them to others; and in the time of prelacy they changed to a new form: And when that was laid aside,
Presbytery was set up, and then such the Vniversities sent forth; and since Independency was preferred, great store of them are spread abroad; and look what pleaseth them best that have the greatest livings in dis∣pose, that is the most cryed up, and most studyed and preached; and here is the spring of our Teachers, the Vniversities; and these say that Greek and Hebrew are the original, which they go thither to learn, that they may understand what Christ spoke, and the Apostles preached: But the Hebrews and Greeks who heard them speake in their own Language, could not understand their Doctrine, for it seemed foolishnesse to them; and these by their original are in no better state, nor nearer to the know∣ledge of the Gospel: And let our Rulers consider, that Christs love to the world, for whom he dyed, is not abated; neither is his spirit dimi∣nished; nor his powde shortened, that he will not, or cannot, send forth, and fit Ministers for his service, or that he needs Vniversities to instruct, or Magistrates to provide maintenance for those he sends forth. And let them look to their own kingdom, the world, therein to punish & restrain the evil, & to encourage & protect the good; & then all would be agreed, and the Nation kept in peace, every one enjoying his true liberty and freedom: For in this it is assented, that the Ministers of Christ Jesus who sowe unto us spiritual things, should reap of our temporals: But here is the difference; first, That our consciences must be our judge who those Ministers are, and no other mans direction; for to the conscience were Christs Ministers alwayes made manifest, and not approved with the reason and wisdom of man. Secondly, That our gift must be free, and by no mans compulsion. Would not this ease the Magistrate of much trouble that he makes to himself, and be more acceptable to God and man? for who hath made him a Judge in these things? A third sort plead the Decrees, Canons, Constitutions of General Councils, Popes, Bishops, Convocations. To such I shall onely say, that for the first 800. years after Christ, no Canon or Decree was made by general Council, nor was it then deter∣mined by the Church (as 'twas called) what part every man should pay. And the first eight General Councils do not so much as speak of the name of tythes, and that was till about 1000. years; and then about that time it came to be received and believed that tythes ought to be paid; yet in England, as well as other Nations, every man might have given his tythe where he pleased, till about the year 1200. as is already proved. But I need not say much to these, few being of this mind, but those who own the Pope for their Head, we having in England denyed and cast off his Supremacy, though in this matter of tythes, and many other things, we still feel his power amongst us.
And now having briefly gone over the substance of what is pleaded for a Divine of Ecclesiastick right, I come next to what is pretended for a humane Right. And the first sort pleads the gifts of Kings, as Ethelwolph, &c. To these I answer, If they could prove the whole Land had been the particular possession of any such King, they said something, though that would not justifie the taking tythes from all the people, as shall be more fully proved hereafter. But by what right could he give the tenth part of the encrease and fruits of the labours of all the people of his Domini∣ons, who had no legal property therein? It was an easie matter when the Popes Emissaries had taught the people that tythes were due to God and them, and had perswaded Kings and Nobles that Heaven might be purchased by then works, to procure from them the gift of that which was not theirs, the poor peoples tythes; especially considering the peo∣ple were of the same mind, and as zealous of all the popish superstiti∣ons as themselves, and every one striving who should therein most excel; witnesse those many rich Abbeys and Monasteries lately in this Land. But if that K. Ethelwolphs Grant be the foundation of tythes, then how many succeeding Kings, and Bishops, and others, have violated his Deed by appropriating them to Abbeys, Monasteries, and such like Houses? And how hath all Ages since Ethelwolphs, taken upon themselve the dis∣position of tythes, without any relation to what he did? which shewes clearly, That neither Kings, Parliaments, nor prople did ever take them∣selves bound by his Grant: But the folly and vanity of this Argument will more plainly appear hereafter. The next, and those which seem to have the strongest plea, do urge the temporal Laws of Kings and Parliaments, and say, by the Law they have as good property in tythes, as any man hath in his Lands. Ans. To such I say, The Law doth not give any man a property ei∣ther in land, or tythes, or any other thing, but onely doth conserve to every man his property which he hath in his land and possessions, either by gift, purchase; or discent, and secure him from the injury or violence of another. But let us not be deceived with a new pretence, lately taken up to delude the simple minds of a legal property, and a civil right, for that is but a shift; and it matters not what any say, or now pretend concerning the right of tythes, when they see their other claims will not serve the turn; but let us hear what the Makres of the Laws say of them, those from whom they claim; and passing by the Saxon times, and K. Stephen, and the rest of those who were in the mid-night of popery, let us come to H. 8. who cast off the Pope, and upon whose Law all others that were since made are builded; and in the preamble of the Act it is decla∣red, That tythes are due to God and holy Church, and they blame men for being so wicked as not to pay them; and therefore that Law is made, and
here is the ground of the Law, not any property or civil right in priests or others; and therefore if the Law require them as due by Divine Right, he that saith they are onely due by humane right, cannot claim them, nor ought to recover them by that law, for he claims them by another right; and for any man to claim that by humane right, from humane law, which commands them as due by divine right, is but a meer deceit. And that law of H. 8. and the rest, did upon any civil ground set up, or constitute the payment of tythes, but takes it for granted, that tythes are due to God and holy Church; and therefore the foundation of the law being taken away, that they are not due to God and holy Church, the law falls to the ground; for the law not making them due, but supposing them due by a former right, if they were not so due, the law cannot be binding. That tythes were never till now of late pretended a civil right, is plain; for as they were imposed by the Pope, so were they tryable in his courts; and those very laws made by late Parliaments, did appoint them to be tryed in the Ecclesiastical courts, and restrained the temporal Jurisdicti∣on, as the Acts themselves testifie. But what is the property that is now claimed? is it in a person? that cannot be, for the priest hath them not till he enter his Office, and when he parts with that, he loseth his tythes: So the priest hath no property, but his Office; and what is that? it was a popish Office when tythes were first paid to it, and how comes the property to continue now the Office is laid aside, and the Pope that set them up? But how can a civil right or property be pretended, when the Author was the Pope? The end for a called spiritual Office, and recovered in an Ecclesiastical called Court, are not these covers grown too short? And in the Act of 32 H. 8. tythes are called Spiritual Gifts: and there of impropriate tythes sold after the dissolution, its said, they are now made temporal: And before that time it was never heard that tythes were called a temporal right. But it's further said, These Laws were made by Parliaments, the Represen∣tatives of the people: And though tythes were not due before, yet they might give tythes, because their own, they being the body of the people. This would suppose a particular consecration, or donation of the people, not onely as in their Legislative capacity, to bind themselves by a Law, but by a particular Act of Free-gift: but it's plain, the Act ne∣ver intended any such thing, for it gives nothing, but commands what was before. And as to the Law it self, and all other Laws of Kings, Parliaments, Popes, Councils, Bishops, and what ever else was by any man made for the payment of tythes since Christ Jesus came in the flesh, joyned all to∣gether, how do they all, or any of them bind the conscience? for if
tythes be not due by the Law of God, as is herein proved, and almost generally granted: Who hath set them up? the law of man at best; And who is man that makes a law in the place where God disan∣nulled his own command? is it better to obey man then God? or is man grown wiser then his Maker? Who put this power into the hand of man to raise a compulsary maintenance for Ministers? That any Par∣liament have power to make any binding law for the maintenance of those they call Ministers, for doing a work which they call Worship of God, and force the people to submit to it, the clear light of this age doth generally condemn; for they are much more like to set up and maintain those who are contrary to Christ, then Christs Ministers, who never looked for, nor durst own such a way of provision. Will any say they have power? from whom had they it? Is it derived from the peo∣ple? that cannot be. Have they any other power committed to them? how is it? as they are Magistrates; If so, the Turk, and all infidel Ma∣gistrates have the like? Or is it as they are Christian Magistrates? then may not France, Spain, &c. claim the same? for what Nation in Eu∣rope will not say they have a Christian Magistracy, though far the greater part of them be Papists? And may not a Papist by as good right require and compel maintenance for his Ministers, as H. 8. or any other could, or can do? But that I may not be mistaken, as if I went about to take a∣way the Magistrates power to raise Taxes, Sessements, or other charges, for the service and defence of the Nation, it is needful to distinguish be∣tween those things that are called civil, and such as are called spiritual: For civil ends and uses the people may give power to their Representa∣tives to raise moneys, or any other civil thing, because in such things they are their own Masters: But in matters of Religion and spiritual things, no man can give power unto another to impose any thing upon himself, or his neighbor, for in those things every one is to be accounta∣ble unto God, and to stand and fall to his own Master. And thus we give unto God the things that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that are his, paying tribute to whom tribute is due. But as for all laws made in the will of man, in the things of God, and their heavy punishments in∣flicted upon such as cannot for conscience sake conform unto them, they reach not the conscience, and therefore make no sinne against God. And as concerning the laws of K. H. 8. and Edw. 6. it may be consi∣dered some of them were made by a Popish King and Parliament, and the rest, in the glimmerings of light, when men were but seen as trees; and therefore to make their laws a Rule for this day of clear and Sun∣shine light, savours too much of the old Popish Spirit, and is a shame to our reformation: And if it be said Papists might, and did make good laws; It's true, in temporal things they did, but not in things of Religi∣on, wherein they are differenced from us, because Papists.
But were the law just in commanding tythes, can it be equal to give double or trebble damage where they are not paid? If any man be oweing a just and due debt, no more by law can be recovered, but what the Debt is, besides the charges of the law: How cruel therefore are these Laws and Ordinances, which in a matter of so much just scruple, require and impose the double or trebble value? And how unrighteous are all such persons, as by force of such laws receive them? for if tythes were due, is therefore the trebble value due, because the law hath made that penalty? Where is equity or justice in either? The Pope and his Adherents did onely excommunicate the refuser till he conformed; and till these late laws, such penalties as imprisonment and trebble damage were never known. And here what was by our forefathers superstition (whom we look back at as afar off, and pitty) begun in ignorance, we build up, and confirm with tyrannie, and instead of their Rods, make to our selves Scorpions. But herein is not all, but the law requires every man to set out the tenth, and so makes him a voluntary Agent in that against which his conscience testifies, which is most cruel and unrighteous; and he that cannot do so, they sue and hale before Courts and Magistrates, and there they get judgement of trebble damage, and by that judgement frequent∣ly take five-fold, yea sometime ten-fold the value: Shall not these things render this age which so much pretends to reformation, contemptible to future generations? and for these things shall not even Papists rise up in judgement against us, and condemn us? But how is it that any law for tythes is now executed? do not all laws and statutes for tythes restrain the tryal of them to the Ecclesiastical Courts, and prohibit the temporal Courts from medling with them. And since the Ecclesiastical Courts are destroyed, who have power to give judgement for tythes? no temporal Judge proceeding according to the laws for tything: How is it then that so many persons are sued, prosecuted, and unjustly vexed for tythes in all the Courts at Westminster, and not onely so, but in the Sherifts Court, and other pet∣ty Courts in the countrey. Obj. If it be said, The Statute gives double damages and costs, and no Court being appointed where that shall be recovered, it must be supposed to be the Common-Law Courts. I answer, by asking of what must they give the double or trebble da∣mage, seeing they are restrained from trying for the single value? if they cannot judge the one, how can they award the other? will they condemn an accessary before they try the principal? what is this but to make the law a Nose of Wax, or any thing, to uphold another un∣righteous Kingdom.
Obj. It will be said, Iustices of Peace have power: It may be so by an Ordinance, but no Act of Parliament, which is the Law of England; and that they do it, many poor people feel; for generally they give treb∣ble damages for all manner of tythes, when as the Statute gave but double, and costs, and that onely for predial tythes: And they usually execute their precepts by such persons as will do it effectually, who take generally five times more then the value, which they prize, and sell far under the worth; and he that cannot comply with their cruelty, and confesse their judgement just, by accepting back what they will return, doth frequently suffer five or six-fold, yea often ten-fold damage? And here the fingers of the Justices are too often found by consciencious men, far more heavy then the loynes of the Law, nay more then of the old Ecclesiastical Courts, or the Pope himself, who hath no such penal∣ties. I write what I can prove by manifold instances. Though these oppressions be many and great, yet are they not all that this age exercises; for by a new device, under pretence that Priests are not able to pay tenths to the Protector, unlesse every man pay them their tythes, they sue men for all manner of tythes by English Bill in the Ex∣chequer, and there would force them upon their oaths to declare what tythes they have, when as in the Ecclesiastical Courts the Ordinary might not examine a man upon his own oath concerning his own tythe: And here such as either make conscience of swearing, which Christ for∣bids, or cannot themselves tell what tythe they had, are cast into prison for contempt, where they may lie as long as they live, no Law in the Nation reaching them any relief: And divers upon this account have long lain in the Fleet, & yet are there; and I believe above a hundred suits are in the Exchequer depending, and proceedings stopt at this point, the hearts of the very Officers of the Court relenting with pitty towards such numbers of poor men brought thither very Term from the most remore parts of the Nation, and some of them not for above twelve pence; such mercilesse cruelty lodges in the hearts of many, if not the most of our pretended Gospel Ministers. Oh shameful reformation! What! compel a man himself to set out the tythe of his own Goods to maintain a Hireling-Priest, it may be one openly prophane, and so make him sin against his own conscience, or take from him thrice, or rather five times as much! and not onely so, but to force him to swear what tythes he had, or commit him to prison, there to lie without hope of relief; doth not the cry of these abomina∣tions reach through Palace-Walls, and enter Parliament-doors? sure∣ly they reach the Gates of Heaven: And though man have forgotten his fair promises, God will in due time break these bands, and send re∣lief another way. Oh cursed first fruits and tenths, the superstitious re∣lique of Popery, and wages of unrighteousnesse, the cause and cover of all these Exchequer Suits, and of most of these mischiefs! Must we
still have Priests and tythes? then may we not wish for old Priests, and old Ecclesiastical Courts? for much more moderation was in them, and even Papists would blush at our cruelties. Did but the Magistiate see what havock is made in the North, what driving of Goods, the Ox∣en out of the plow, the Cows from poor and indigent children, what carrying of Pots, Pans, and Kettles, yea and fetching the very clothes of poor peoples Beds, he would either be ashamed of such Justices, or such Priests, or Tythes, or of them all. Such instances I could give as would make the Readers ears to tingle; and he that cannot believe me, let him send into Cumberland, and he shall meet with sew that cannot inform him of it; or do but let him go a little after Harvest, and he may find the Justices so busie, as if they had little other work to be doing. But whither have I digressed? let me return to heare what the next can say. 3. And these plead the gift of those that were formerly possessors of the Land, and say, Those that pay tythes, do but that which their Ancestors justly charged upon them. To such I answer, That it's true, many Ancestors gave tythes which of them were required, as before hath been declared; but what is that to us? or how are we thereby bound? Did ever any man in any Deed or con∣veyance of his Land, expresse any such gift, or made any exception of tythes? I never saw or heard of such a thing; and let those who can find such reservations, make their claim; but I believe it will not be in England. That which this sort pleads, seems to make a ground for a di∣stinct property; for if there be a property, it must of necessity arise from him that was the true owner, and had power to charge himself and his posterity; and these say they have as good right to the tenth part as the owner hath to the nine, and that he never purchased it, and the like. Vnto all which I answer, That though it were true, & could be proved that mine Ancestors gave tythes, and that for ever, yet am I not thereby bound to pay them, or stand any way chargeable with them. It's true, when they were owners of Land they might themselves yeild and set forth what part of their encrease they pleased, or might have given the tenth, or a∣ny other part of their Land, as they would, or they might have charged upon the Land what Rent they liked; but they could not charge their posterity with that which was no way theirs, nor which in any true sence, construction, or understanding, they could be said to have any property in, and which is not paid by reason of that which is derived from them; for tythe is neither paid of I and, nor by reason of the Land, but is paid by reason of the encrease or renewing, and therefore the Doctrines of the old Fathers, the Statute of Edw. 6. and so the Popish Laws for tythes do as well require the payment of the tenth part of mens profits and gain, whetherby Trade, Commerce, or Merchandize, as of the fruits of the earth, yea the tenth part of wages and all personal ∣crease,
though not raised immediately by Land: And surely no man will say that he payes tythe of these because his Ancestor charged him with them; nor will any man allow that another person by any gift of his Ancestor, can have another distinst property in the tenth part of the fruit of his labours; and the case is the same as to all tythes, whether predial, personal, or mixt; if I sit still and plough not, no Corn will grow: If I sit still, and work not, no profit will rise; so that it's my labour, my dili∣gence, and industry that raiseth the tythe, and in my power it is to make it lesse or more; and sometimes, yea often it falls out, that the tythe of Corn is thrice more worth then the yearly value of the Land on which it grows; and herein tythe of Corn is far more hard and unequal then personal tythes; for the one payes but the tenth, all charges deducted; the other payes the tenth of charges and all. Mine Ancestor could not charge me with that which doth not accrue by reason of that which I have from him; nor am I bound because mine Ancestor left me Land, to pay tythe, which is not paid by reason of the Land, but of the encrease, unto which I am no more tyed by Law, then he is who hath encrease without Land. If I have Land, and no in∣crease, I pay no tythes: If I have encrease, though no Land, I ought by Law to pay tythes. If I husband my Land so as the encrease of it is not to be severed, no tythe can be recovered of it; and therefore if I pa∣sture my Land, no tythe shall be paid for the grasse which is eaten unse∣vered, but onely a rate-tythe for that which doth depasture on it, which makes it plain, that tythe is not paid by reason of the Land, but of the Stock; and in that also it lies in my power to make the tythe much, lit∣tle, or nothing, if I plow and sowe Corn, the tenth part of the encrease is generally more worth then the Land on which it grows, which comes by the Land which descends from the Ancestor, but because of the en∣crease, won by the great charge, industry, and labour of the Husband∣man. If I pasture my ground with Sheep that yeilds a Fleece, the tythe will be considerable, though not so much as by Corn. If I pasture with Cows or breeding Cattle, a much-lesse tythe is paid: And if I eat with Horses and barren Cattle, a small and inconsiderable rate is onely required▪ though in few places of the Nation would that be recovered in the times of greatest height of popish Laws. But if I plant Wood, and let it stand for Timber; or if I store my Land with Beasts which be ferae naturae, wherein there is no personal property, no tythe shall be paid. Or if I will let my Land lye waste, (which may be supposed, because it may be done) or will eat my Meadow, or Corn standing, no tythe can be required. All these instances manifest that tythe hath still relation to tlie stock and personal estate, and not to the Land; and is paid by reason of the stock, and not the Land; and so no Ancestor could lay and per∣petuate such a charge as tythe upon it, nor could he bind his successor to it. If by my Ancestor I am bound to pay tythes, ratione tenuree, or in
consideration of the Land which he leaves me, to what value must it be? I may yearly pay more then the Land he leaves me is worth: If I keep it in tillage, and if I pasture it, I need not pay the twentieth part; have not I herein (without fraud to my Ancestors) power to pay much or little? how is this like a Rent-charge certain, which is by some ob∣jected? If tythes were paid by reason of the Land, surely there is most reason, that the tenth part of the grasse renewing upon all pasture-grounds, should be paid; for the Land still brings that with it, and it's easily divideable by Rent, or let by moneth. If another hath as good right to the tenth part of the encrease as the owner hath to the nine, why can he not take it without the owners seuing it out, or recover it by Action of Debt or Trespasse? But it is clear there is no title till it be set forth, and then if the owner carry it away, an Action of Trespasse lies, because he had set it out, and given it to another, and so altered his property, as one man doth by marking his Cattle for another man; and therefore it is that the Law which commands tythes doth not give power to any to take the tythe, because he had no title, but enjoynes the own∣er to set it forth, and so make it anothers by his own consent. If any man claim tythes by my Ancestors gift, may I not ask him, to whom, and for what my Ancestors gave them? And it is plain, beyond denial, that all those gifts of Lands or Tythes in Englard since Augu∣stine the Mouk planted the popish faith, and preached up the new pay∣ment of tythes, were given to popish Priests for saying prayers for the souls of the givers, and their deceased Ancestors, as old Consecrations do witnesse▪ And therefore in reason, if the consideration and service be ceased, so ought also the wages; for no man in law or equity ought to claim wages when he will not do the work for which it was given; and seeing those popish Priests and Prayers are laid aside, the gift (if any such there were, and could be binding) ought to return to the Donor, and may not without his consent be perverted to another use. Tythe was never claimed in respect of any ownership in the Land, but ex debito,SHEPHERD. by the Law of God, for substraction whereof no remedy lay at the common-Law; and therefore if a Parson let a Lease of his Glebe to another, with all the Appurtenances, yet he himself shall have tythe of it. Terrae non sunt decimbiles; and therefore neither Mynes nor Quaryes of Iron,COOK. Brasse, Tin, Lead, Coles, Stones Tile, Brick, or Lime are tytheable, ner Houses,Consimilar is felony & tres∣passe between free-hold & moveable goods. nor Trees, nor Grasse, or Corn, till they be severed from the Land, the real Estate which descends by inheritance from the Ancestor, and made a distinct personal possession. And therefore tythe is not paid of Land, nor by reason of the Land, nor is it a charge upon Land, like a Rent-charge, nor was it ever so claimed, till of late that the popish covers were not broad enough. Obj. But some object, and say, When I bought my Land, I bought not the tythe, nor paid any thing for it.
Ans. I answer, That I and all men bought all our Land, and that without any charge of tythe upon it; and therefore in all Conveyances it's still said, All that, &c. and never any covenant for, or exemption of a tenth part, either of land or encrease; and he that saith the seller or his Ancestor charged it with tythes, as a Rent, I say, Where a Rent is charged, it's still expressed; and finde any such exception or covenant, and I will freely pay them as a just debt. And is it not ridiculous for a∣ny to talk of parchasing his tythe? for with his labour, charge and hus∣bandry he payes deere enough for his whole encrease. Obj. Another objects, That though I bought all my Land, yet I bought it cheaper (because it was supposed that it ought to pay tythes) then I could have bought such Land as was known to be tythe-free; and therefore having a cheaper bargain, I am bound in equity to pay tythes. Ans. I answer, That I have already proved all Land is tythe-free, and the charge of tythe is upon the stock and personal Estate, and not upon the Land. And the strength of this objection lies in comparing those that pay tythes with those that are free; they that buy lands tythe-free are eased of this oppression, and are in no hazard; and though all others ought to be so, yet being a question whether they can ease them∣selves of the burthen, they buy under a hazard, and as subject to such a charge; but if they can cast off the yoke, they get but what is their own: And seeing we have denyed the Popes Authority and Supremacie, we may so soon as we can, wholly cast off the burthens which he laid on us. And thus he that buyes Land in yeers of trouble and heavy taxes, may perhaps buy much cheaper then when none, or little is paid; shall he therefore alwaies be required to pay taxes when others are discharged? or shall he that bought cheap pennyworths on the borders between England and Scotland, when those parts were insected with Mosse-Troo∣pers, alwaies maintain, or pay tribute to thieves and robbers? We bought Land when the Popes yoke was upon our necks, and if we can cast it from us, we may by as good reason be eased of our tythes, as they of their taxes. But if I bought cheaper, what is that to the State, or to a Priest? If in equity I be bound to pay any more, it is must just that he have it of whom I bought my Land, and not another. There are others who plead a legal right by prescription, and that they have a good right because they have so long possessed them. This was the old device, first to preach that tythes were due, and then to limit them to the Parishes, and when fourty yeers was past, to claime that as a debt which before was paid as charity, or ar most, as a free-will-offering of the owner. And thus the Pope got first fruits, and tenths, and
Peter-pence, and many great sums out of this and other Nations, which long continued; and he might as well have pleaded his prescription, as any of his branches now can do.In temp. H. 3. the Pope had above 120000. l. per. an. out of this Nation, which was then more worth then the Kings revenue. Is any so blind as not to see what poor shifts are now made to uphold so great an oppression, which can find no better ground for its support then this, that it hath been so long continued? But shall the continuance of an oppression give right to per∣petuate the grievance? How many great and heavy pressures in other things did long lye on this Nation, of customs and practices of former times, which daylie were, and still have been abolished, as light did more and more encrease? witness those many Laws and Statutes made, and now in force, abolishing the usages and customs of former ages; but yet this is a great mistake; for by the Common-Law (and the old popish Ecclesiastick Law is out of doors) no man can prescribe to have tythes, though many may prescribe to be free from tythes, or part thereof; for he that claims tythes, (except Impropriators, to whom I shall speake hereafter) must claim them as a Parson, Vicar, or other called Eccle∣siastick Officer, and (as I have hinted before) he claims them not as such a person, but as such an Officer, and the prescription (if any were) is to his Office. Now if no such Office be in being, his claim is at an end: That there is now no such Office, is plain; for when H. 8. renoun∣ced the Pope, he was declared by Act of Parliament (which was as∣sented to by all the Clergy in their Convention) to be the Head of the Church; and all Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and all others in Ecclesiastical Orders, were no longer to hold of the Pope, but of the King; and not to claim their Benefices by title from the Pope, but of the King, by vertue of that Act of Parliament. And here the Succession from the Pope was cut off, and discontinued, and the King by his new Authority, as Head of the Church, made Bishops, and gave them power to make Parsons, Vicars, and others called Ecclesiastick Officers. Afterwards as the King renounced the Pope, so the Parliament of England laid aside Kings, who had assumed the Title and Stile of Head of the Church, and also aboli∣shed Arch-Bishops and Bishops, and all their dependancies, root and branch; and here the whole Ecclesiastick state was dissolved, and the Body fell with the Head, and the Branches with the Root, both Parsons, Vicars and Curates, and all the whole progeny and off-spring, and so all their right, title, and claim to tythes was, and is at an end, as is more plainly and more fully set forth in a late printed paper, by Ier. Benson, to which I refer. And now I come to the last, those that claim by purchase, and these are the Impropriators, and they say they have bought them of the State, and have paid great summes of money for them, and many of them have no other sub∣sistance.
To these I answer, That I have shewed before, that in the root all tythe is alike, whether it be now claimed by a Priest or an Impropriator, and both must fall together. And seeing those that sold them had no good title, neither can theirs be made good which is derived from them: But seeing it was the State that sold them, and that the whole Nation had the benefit of their moneys, it is equal and just when they cannot have what is sold, that their moneys be repaid; to which point I shall speak more fully hereafter, in answer to an objection which I meet with in my way, needful to be resolved. And thus I have briefly gone over the whole matter, and heard what every one can say, and have returned them answers, by which it doth plainly appear, That no man at this day can claim tythe of another, ei∣ther by divine, or humane right; and that tythes are neither due by the express Law of God, nor by the equity of that Law, nor by the Decrees of the Church, nor grants of Kings, nor Laws of Parliaments, nor gifts of the people, nor prescription of the possessors, nor the purchase of Impropriators. It now onely remains that I answer some general objections, which I shall do in as much brevity at I can, and so leave the whole to the Rea∣der. The first is made by the State. The second by Impropriators. And the third by Parish-Ministers. And all these together object, and say, That though it should be granted that the right of tythes cannot be proved, yet if it be found that taking of them away will bring great losse to the Publique Revenue, much damage, if not ruine, to many particular persons and families, and great hazard of bringing confusi∣on to the Nation by such a great alteration after so long a settlement, and en∣danger the very publike professien of Religion by taking away Ministers main∣tenance, and consequently Ministry it self, it is not prudence for satisfying some, to bring so many and great inconveniences upon the Nation. These objections plead not for the right of tythes, but against the re∣moving of them, to prevent inconvenience; and if the one be granted, that tythes are an innovated popish exaction and oppression, and nei∣ther due by law of God or man, such considerations as these ought not to obstruct the removal of so heavy a grievance and oppression, but that which is just ought to be done, which is a general good to the whole bo∣dy, and almost every individual member, and then such parts as are sound grieved may be afterwards eased and relieved; and though all these should in some measure suffer, it were but just, seeing their compli∣ance with the oppressor hath brought such a general yoke and barthen
upon the whole body, and now they are become the onely obstructions of the general easement and publike freedom. And yet a few words I shall answer to every one, and first to the State which complains of a great losse by taking away first fruits and tenths, which are paid out of tythes. When the Pope had established the payment of tythes, and set up a new Hierarchie after the pattern of the Jewish Priesthood he tooke up∣on on himself to be Successor to the Jewish High-Priest,Ierom in Ezek. ch. 44. v. 28. &c. and claimed tenths from all his inferior priests, jure divino; and in processe of time he got to himself by the like colour first fruits also; and though it was long ere he brought his work to pass in England, yet at last it was effected: you may by these following instances know how much our English Nation strug∣led against them. The King forbad H. P. the Popes Nuntio te collect first fruits.2 Ed. 3. Rol. Claus. M. 4. Parl. 1 Ri. 2. Nu. 66. Rol Parl. 4 R. 2. Nu. 50. The Popes Collector was willed no longer to gather the first fruits, it being a very novelty, and no person was any longer to pay them. The Commons Petition that provision may be made against the Popes Col∣lectors for levying of first fruits. The King in Parliament answers, There shall be granted a prohibition in all such cases where the Popes Collectors shall attempt any such Novel∣ties. Vpon complaint made by the Commons in Parliament,Rol. Parl. 6. R 2. N. 50. the King willeth that Prohibitions be granted to the Popes Collectors for receiving of first fruits. First fruits by Arch-Bishops and Bishops to the Pope, were termed an hor∣rible mischief,6 H. 4. Rol. Parl. 9 H. 4. N. 43. and damnable custom. The Popes Collector, were required from thenceforth not to levy any money within the Realm for first fruits. The Pope thus claiming first fruits and tenths as annexed to his Chair, Successor to the Jewish High-priest, and Head of the Church, continu∣ed to collect them till H. 8. discontented with the Pope, though him∣self was a papist, renounceth the Popes Supremacy, and assumes it to himself, and by Act of Parliament in 16. of his reign, got first fruits and tenths annexed to his Crown, as Head of the Church, and so him∣self became worse then the Pope, taking the wages, but not doing the Popes work; and that which before by Parliaments in height of popery was declared a damnable custom, was now in the beginning of refor∣mation made a foundation-stone to support the greatness of the new made Head. Afterwards Q. Mary not daring to assume the Head-ship of the Church, did relinquish, and by Act of Parliament wholly took away first fruits and tenths, she doing no work to deserve such wages. And what a shame is this to our Nation, and our great professions, after so long talk of reformation, now to plead for such wages of unrighteous∣nesse,
first exacted by the Pope, and then by such as assumed to them∣selves the stile of Head of the Church, upon that very account had them annexed to the Crown? And shall we now who pretend to have cast off the Pope, and left the Head-ship of the Church unto Christ, (worse like then Queen Mary) uphold such wicked oppressions, which are the ground of a great part of goods mens sufferings for tythes this day? for the pretence of paying tenths is the ground of the many suits for tythes in the Exchequer, where otherwise by law they could not, nor ought to be recovered. And as to the Publique Revenue, I am informed they add not much thereunto, but all, or a great part of them are give in augmentations to Priests, who no doubt will receive them without scru∣ple, though I know many of them not long since did complain against them as a popish oppression. But take away tythes, and there are as many Glebe-Lands' will fall to the State as will fully make up that losse, which they may as well take away as their predecessors did the Revenues of Abbeys and Monasteries; and when the people are ea∣sed of tythes, they will be better able, and more willing to enlarge the Publique Treasury if it be sound wanting. But it's hoped our State rather looks at the freedom of the people, then the encrease of the Revenue, seeing so lately they took away the profits of the Court of Wards, which was a much better and greater in∣come, and granted many great men such freedom for nothing, as they could neither in right claim, nor in reason expect without a very great sum, their Estates being given to them to hold by such services; and sure∣ly they will not deny the poorer sort of people their own and deer-bought encrease. Secondly, To Impropriators, and such as have more lately bought Tythe-Rents. And to these I say, Though it be a general Rule, Caveatemptor, yet seeing the ignorance of former dayes (but peeping out of popery) did take it for granted (both Buyer and Seller) that the title was good; and since the purchasers did pay great sums of money for them to the State, which went to the bearing and defraying the publike charge of the Nation, it is just that they have a moderate price for them, with which I believe most (if not all) of them would be well pleased and content; onely in the estimate of that rate they must consider that they bought no more but what the Abbey, Monastery, or other dissolved House had; and these Houses out of their appropriate tythes were to find a sufficient Priest or Curate, Canonically instituted, which was to have allowance at the discretion of the Bishop of the Diocess, and also a convenient portion of the tythe was to be set apart for the yeerly maintenance of the poor of the parish for ever, as is provided by divers
Acts of Parliament. And after the dissolution and sale of tythes, the like charge was and ought to be continued upon them, as at large is pro∣ved in a Treatise, called The poor Vicars Plea; and let but such purcha∣sers look to their original Grants, & they shall find that the yeerly value was but little, and the rate small after which they paid for them; and in regard of the charges and hazards upon them, they were seldom or ne∣ver esteemed more worth then ten years purchase and that rate at an in∣different yeerly value, may well beaccepted for them. This Answer will please the Impropriator well, who hath not been without his fears to lose his tythes, and get little or nothing for them; and it cannot much displease others because it is equal and just, that see∣ing he cannot have what is bought, he have his money returned with∣out losse. But the great difficulty seemeth the raising of so great a sum of mo∣ney, and who shall pay it; for first, There are many who plead, Our Lands are wholly tythe-free: Others say, We pay a Rate, or small prescrip∣tion-Rent, or have a modus decimandi, and our tythe is very small, though our Lands be of good value. Others say, We have converted our Lands into Pastures, and pay little tythe; and therefore it seems not equal that we should pay as much as those whose Lands consist of Tillage, whose tythes are often as much worth as the Land. I answer, That the raising of this sum is not to follow the Rate of tythe, nor hath it any relation to tythe; for if it had, many would as just∣ly scruple the payment of any thing towards it, as they do the payment of tythes; but the case must be thus considered: At the dissolution, Tythes of Abbeys, Monasteries, &c. were taken into the hand of the State, they sold them, and the money raised went to the defraying and carry∣ing on the great charge then upon the Nation, as it was of late in our dayes, when tythe-Rents were sold, and at that day there were wars with France and Scotland, and many great Exigences of State, as the Sta∣tutes for the ground of the dissolution shews: And in the service and use of these moneys, the whole Nation, and every man therein, had his share; and so far as those moneys went, the people were spared, as the Case was with us of late; and so he that had Land tythe-free, and he that paid onely a small rate for tythes, and he that hast pastures and no tillage, all these shared in the sum, yea and the very Impropriator himself, and not according to the proportion of tything, but according to the value of their Estates in Lands or Goods, by which they had been otherwise chargeable: And so the Impropriator depositing so much money upon a pledge, the one being required, the other must be return∣ed, and by a general tax it must be raised, wherein every one must bear his proportion, the very Impropriator himself.
But then comes in he that bought the Lands of Abbeys, &c. which he saith, The Pope had made tythe-free, and that when he bought his Land, he also paid for the tythe, and so he must either be freed from paying to the Impro∣priator, or must have his money returned as well as he. I answer, Though there are many such purchasers, yet I believe to the freeing the Nation from this great and long-continued oppression, they, or most part of them, would be content to contribute without any such demand: But if any stand upon it, let him shew what he paid for his tythe, & he shall have it, which was not a penny; for search the Court of Augmentations, and it will be found that there was not in the value of Land the least difference made between tythe-free, and that which paid tythes, as there was not of late in the sale of Bishops, and Dean and Chapters Lands, many of which also were as much tythe-free; and so if they bought Land tythe-free as cheap as if they had paid tythes, they have had profit enough, and may now well afford to pay with their neighbors. Thirdly, To Parish-Ministers. And with these I desire a little to expostulate the matter, first, as tou∣ching the end of their work; and secondly, as to the way of their main∣tenance. Their work, as they pretend, is to preach the Gospel, and to propagate Religion: Now I would ask them, why they suffer (not on∣ly so many Villages, Countrey-Towns, and Parishes, but) even great and populous Cities and Market-Towns, and whole corners of coun∣treys to lye destitute, who never could get any other Minister then a poor Vicar, or Reading Curate; they will presently answer me, There is no maintenance, without that they cannot live. If I ask them further, Why there is no maintenance; they will tell me, It is either a City or Market-Town to which there belongs no Land, and so no tythes, or it is an Impropriation, and payes onely a small stipend, or the Lands are tythe-free, or claim customs and prescriptions, and onely pay small rates for tythes, or otherwise the people have converted their arable Lands into pastures, and their tythe is of small value, and will not afford a maintenance. I would yet ask them again, Is not a third part of the Nation in this condition? and must they never have an able Mi∣nister? have they no share in your Gospel because they have no main∣tenance? Are none of your called to such places? Or hath Christ no Seed of Election amongst them? If this be not your Doctrine, yet your practice preacheth it: And if you were really for spreading your Gospel, and enlarging profession, you would forthwith throw away tythes; for so long as they continue, there can never be any possibility of raising maintenance in such places.
And secondly, As to their Maintenance, is there any indifferency, equality, proportion, or justice in their present way of tything? One man pleads he is to pay nothing to a Minister, because the Pope hath gi∣ven him a dispensation, and made his Land tythe-free. Another man saith, he hath a prescription to pay but a penny (it may be) for the value of a shilling. Another saith, he hath converted his Lands into pastures, and hath by his Artifice so ordered it, that little is due for tythes. Ano∣ther saith, he dwells in a City or Market-Town, and hath no Land, though it's like he gains more by trade then ten poor countrey-men that pay tythes, do by their Lands. Another saith, he payes tythe to an Im∣propriator, and he cannot afford to pay both him and a Minister. Is this your equal way of maintenance so long upheld and pleaded for? And have you not a more righteous Rule? The rich generally payes lit∣tle, and the poor Husbandman bears the burthen, even he that supplies the Nation, with the staffe of Bread, who is notwithstanding, at more charge in his Husbandry then any other; and out of the tythe of such countrey-parishes of Tillage, generally great sums are paid for Augmen∣tations to Cities and Market-Towns, when the Inhabitants that have far greater gains by trading go free. For shame at length follow the exam∣ple of your neighboring reformed Churches, and throw away tythes as an old relique of Popery, and no longer halt between two, and be∣take your selves to a more Gospel-like way of maintenance; for light now breaks forth, and pretences will no longer cover. It's like you wil answer, We confesse the present way of maintenance by tythes is very unequal, unless the whole Nation could be brought to quit all their customes and prescriptions, and pay tythe in kind; and also all Merchants and Tradesmen would pay the tenth part of their gains, as was by the Pope en∣joyned; but that will never be done, and therefore its better to hold some, then lose all; for we know not what better way would be provided: But thew us how we may have a comfortable and certain maintenance, and more like the Gospel, and we shall most willingly quit the one, and embrace the other. To this I answer, That there is a way which as it would establish the Nation upon a sure foundation of true freedom (as to the conscience) giving content to all separated Congregations, Societies and persons, so would it upon the same Basis of Liberty hold forth full satisfaction to all people of the Nation, both as to Ministry and Maintenance, and would be as acceptable to every one as the taking away tythes. But I have said enough at once, and when this is a little digested, the other will be more fit to be proposed. Onely to such as fear confusion, or trouble, or losse to the Nation by taking away tythes, I would say a few words: Do but look into almost
every Country Town, and there shall you find debate, strife, and va∣riance, either between man and man, or between Parishes and their Mi∣nisters, either about tythe it self, the quantity, or the setting it out; look into Courts, and there you shall find Suit upon Suit; and at Assizes, and before Justices of Peace, multitudes of Tryals and Judgements about them: Look into Prisons, and there you shall find not a few restrained, and lying under great oppressions because they cannot pay them: And these suits and troubles are daylie encreasing, and the number of those that will not pay them, and these are no small confusions in our State; for it is evident, there are more suits, and strife, and difference about tythes, then any one thing whatsoever in the Nation; and how soon might all these be ended, and every one satisfied, by taking away tythes? And then do but look upon the many Moores, Commons, and Wastes in the Nation, amounting to a full third part of the whole, as hath been computed, to the many great Pastures and Meadows decayed for want of tillage, to the many countreys which are turned into Pastures and Meadows because of the great charge of tillage, husbandry, and the unreasonable payment of a clear tenth part, which in most places is half the profit, and it will be found, nothing doth so much hinder the improvement of the Nation, which would ease the publike burthens, and would soon be of more advantage then first fruits and tenths. No∣thing so much hinders Tillage, which often puts the Nation upon ha∣zard of ruine, and forceth us to seek bread out of other Countreys at immoderate rates, when as this Nation is generally so fit for Corn, that it might be as a rich Granary, not onely for our own supply, but reliefe of our Neighbors when they want. I might say a great deal more up∣on this subject, but much to this purpose hath been said by others, and therefore I shall conclude. And let no man henceforth think it strange that any should refuse to pay tythes, but rather wonder that any will do it.
THis is not written for them that know the truth, but for them which know not the truth, that they might be informed from the Light which sees the truth through the Reason, to the same in the world, that the truth they may see and understand in their own language. FINIS.
