P646 E116_22 99860571 112694
THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT TO AN HONOURABLE Lord, by Doctor Paske, Subdeane of CANTERBƲRY. London printed, September 9. 1642.
THE COPIE OF A Letter sent to an Honourable LORD. My ever honoured Lord, DId it not conduce unto the Publique, I should not presume to interrupt your Lordships weighty affaires, but the long experience of your Lordships zeale for Religion, and vigilancy for your University of Cambridge, hath assured me of your Lordships Patronage of our whole Church in generall, and (as the case now stands) of this Mother-Church in particular: Wee expected peace, but have found much trou∣ble from the Troopers sent among us: With what barbarousnesse they have behaved them∣selves at Rochester, and in other parts of this County, I leave to the Relation of others, and beg your Lordships patience only to be informed what hath hapned here with us, and wherein I am more neerely concerned by mine office in the absence of our Deane.
Colonell Sandis arriving here with his Troops on Friday night, presently caused a strict Watch, and Sentinels to be set, both upon the Church, and upon our severall houses, to the great affright of all the Inhabitants. This done, Serjeant Ma∣jor Cockaine came to me, and in the name of the Parliament, demanded to see the Armes of the Church, and the Store-powder of the County, which I presently shewed him, when he posses∣sed himselfe of the Keyes, and kept them in his owne custody. The next morning we were ex∣cluded the Church, and might not be permitted to enter, for the performance of our Divine ex∣ercises, but about 8. of the Clock, Sir Michael Linesey, attended with many Souldiers, came un∣to our Officers, and commanded them to deliver up the Keyes of the Church to one of their com∣pany, which they did, and thereupon he depart∣ed: When the Souldiers entring the Church and Quire, Giant-like began a fight with God him∣selfe, overthrew the Communion Table, toare the Velvet Cloth from before it, defaced the goodly Skreen, or Tabernacle worke, violated the Monuments of the dead, spoiled the Organs, brake downe the ancient Railes and Seates, with the brazen Eagle that did support the Bible, forced open the Cupboords of the Singing men, rent some of their Surplices, Gownes, and Bi∣bles, and carryed away others, mangled all our Service-bookes, and Books of Common-prayer,
bestrowing the whole Pavement with the Leaves thereof; A miserable spectacle to all good eyes: But as if all this had been too little to satisfie the fury of some indiscreete Zealots among them (for many did abhorre what was done already) they further exercised their malice upon the Arras hangings in the Quire, representing the whole Story of our Saviour; wherein observing divers figures of Christ (I tremble to expresse their Blasphemies) One said, here is Christ, and swore that he would stab him; another said, here is Christ, and swore that he would rip up his bowels, which they did accordingly, so farre as the Figures were capable thereof, besides ma∣ny other villanies: And not content therewith, finding another Statue of Christ in the Frontis∣piece of the South-Gate, they discharged against it, forty shot at the least, triumphing much when they did hit it in the head or face, as if they were resolved to Crucifie him againe in his Figure, whom they could not hurt in Truth. Nor had their fury been thus stopped, threat∣ning the ruine of the whole Fabrick, had not the Colonell, with some others come to the reliefe and rescue. The Tumults appeased, they presently depart∣ed for Dover, from whence we expect them this day, and are much afraid, that as they have al∣ready vilified our Persons, and offered extreame indignity to one of our Brethren, so they will
plunder our houses at their returne, unlesse the care of the Maior, the Colonell, and some Mem∣bers of the House of Commons (Sir Edward Ma∣sters, and Captaine Nut now with us) who have promised to present their knowledge to that Ho∣nourable House) doe prevent the same.
YOur Lordship will be pleased to pardon my hasty expressions, which proceed from a grieved heart, and I am confident the Ho∣norable Houses of Parliament being rightly in∣formed herein, will provide against the like abu∣ses and impieties in other places; In the meane time we submit with patience to the Providence of him who can and will bring good out of evill, which is the earnest Prayer of Your Lordships most obliged Servant. Christ-Church Cant. Aug. 30. 1642.
