R1156 E132_39 R21096 99869708 156381
THE RESOLUTION OF THE ROUND∣HEADS: BEING A ZEALOVS DECLARATION OF THE GRIEVANCES WHERE∣WITH THEIR LITTLE WITS ARE CONSUMED TO DESTRVCTION. AND What things they (in their Wisedome yet left them) conceive fit to be reformed. LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini, 1642.
The Round-heads Resolution. WHereas we are through our great Ignorance and obstinancy grown to a most seditious and malig∣nant head, and the hornes of that head (though of a maine length) not able to support our arrogant faction, as ap∣peares by our last being soundly slasht and bastina∣doed by a mad crew called the Cavallery; and whereas a great part of us have shut up our Shops because we could no longer keepe them open, which kinde of shutting up proceedeth, commonly, from our vast expence in White-Broaths, Custards and other luxurious Dishes provided for the Edi∣fication one of another. And whereas the Multi∣tude, called true Protestants, endeavour to hold up Bishops to maintaine good Order, Discipline and Orthodox Preaching in the Church; Learning and Arts in the Universities, and peace in the Com∣mon wealth; all which is nothing but Idolatry, Superstition, Prophanesse, and plaine Popery: and further, wheras we (who are nothing properly but Round-heads and Prickeares) are in most scan∣dalous manner tearmed Puritans, Holy Brethren, the Zealots of the Land, and which in sincerity we never were, or ever will be. And forasmuch likewise, as the prophane world of true Protestants are a stiffe-necked Generati∣on, and will not yeeld unto us the preheminence
of Doctrine and Religion, notwithstanding the many sensles two houres of those spirituall Trum∣pets of our faction the sanctified Clergie Lecturers or of their more Divine Lectures or of their Su∣preame Shee-Lecturers, whose bowells doe even earne for the getting in of the Saints unto them and have as it were even a zealous lusting after them. And for as much as the Religion professed by us is the purest and most decent, as appeares by the great love and comunity betwixt the brethren and the Sisters, the conveniency of the woods, Saw-pitts and darke places, the putting out lights and defying of those Tapers of Iniquitie, which cause us to be∣hold our owne wicked deeds, the goodlie bignes of the eare, with the shortnes of the haire, which hin∣dereth not the sound of the Sheepheards voice, but easily heareth him call to a great Feast amongst the rich Saints the length & sharpnes of the nose which not onely smelleth the sweete savours of the holy Plum-broath but also promiseth an eager apitite to some good worke towards the younger Sisters, the roundnesse of the Ruffe the length of the Dublet and the shortnesse of the Breaches, being a habit correspondent to the Pictures of the Apostles in the Geneva print, the mightinesse of our faith which is able to remove a Church into a Wood, the transpa∣rency of our charity that is so invisible that neither the right hand nor the left did ever know it, the mul∣titude of our good workes which no man living can number, the godlie works of our tautologicall pray∣ers and the zeale thereof, which brings us even to di∣vine
consumption, whereby we look like the Prodi∣gall Son at his returne home, or the Priests in the Arras, the defying of all Fathers, Bishops, and Do∣ctors, conformable Persons, Canonicall Robes, Ec∣clesiasticall Gestures and utensils, all Learning, li∣berall Arts and degrees, as the raggs of superstition, the dregs of Popery are obhominable in the goggle eyes of a right Roundhead; and yet this simple inno∣cent profession is scorned and baffiled, and by whom? but by Schollers, and such as professe Learning, which is no more necessary to Religion, then a pub∣like Church (which verily) is but a den of theeves, when we are absent. All which grievances doe stand with much rea∣son, and therefore are utterly against our tender Con∣sciences, and never were allowed by any Synod of More-field or Pimlico. That therefore which we do now resolve to main∣tains and desire to have confirmed, and never to be altered (till some new toy tickle us in the Pericrani∣um, which will be very shortly) is, 1 That our Religion, Tenants, and Mannors before mentioned be established and maintained against all Reason, Learning, Divinity, Order, Discipline, Morality, Piety, or Humanity whatsoever. 2 That the very name of Bishops, shall be a suf∣ficient Jury and Judge, to condemne any of them, without any further Evidence or Circumstance. 3 That if any man whatsoever having know∣ledge in the Latine Tungue (being a Popish Lan∣guage) shall presume to thinke he can save a Soule by Preaching, he be excommunicated both in this
World and in the World to come; unlesse it be some certain Lecturers of whose approved rayling and ignorance, we are well assured and have knowne to stand six houres on a fasting day. 4 That the Feltmaker and the Cobler, two inno∣cent Cuckolds may be instituted Primats and Me∣tropolicans of the two Arch Provinces, and the rest of the Sect preserved, according to their imbicili∣ties of Spirit, to such Bishopricks and other livings, as will competently serve to procure fat poultry for the filling of their insatiate Stomacks, in which regard, Church livings had more need to be increa∣sed then diminished. 5 That no men whatsoever, who beares the name of a Caviler, may be capable of making any of the Brethren a Cuckold, unlesse he cut his haire and altar his profession; but be excluded from the Conventicles, as the Kings friend and a Reprobate. 6 Lastly, That there be two whole daies set a part to Fast and Pray, for the confusion of all that are not thus resolved. I come to charge yee That slight the Clergie, And pull the Miter from the Prelats head; That you will be warie, Least you miscarrie, In all these factious humours you have bred, But as for Brownists wee'l have none, But take them all, and hang them one by one.
Your wicked actions, Joyn'd in factions, Are all but aymes to rob the King of his due, Then give this reason, For your treason, That you'l be rul'd, if hee'l be rul'd by you; Then leave these factions zealous brother, Least you be hanged one against another. Your Wit abounded, Gentle Round-head, When you abus'd the Bishops in a Ditty, When as you sanged, They must be hanged, A Timpinee of malice made you witty, And though your hot zeale made you bold When you are hang'd, your arse will be a cold. Then leave confounding, And expounding, The Doctrine that you Preach in Tubbs, You raise this warring, And private jarring, I doubt, in time, will prove the Knave of Clubbs. It's for your lying, and not for your Oathes, You shall be hang'd, and Greg shall have your Cloathes. FINIS.
