R2328 E448_11 99863366 161831
15 Junii, 1648. The Particulars of the FIGHT AT COLCHESTER (Sent in a Letter to the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of Com∣mons) was read in the house of Commons: In which Letter it appears, The Town is besieged, and Five hun∣dred of the Enemies were taken Prisoners, and Six hun∣dred left the Town, Sixty that were killed buried in one Churchyard, besides what was slain in the other part of the Town, Sir William Campion slain, One Knight more, Col: Cook, Major Eyres, Two other Majors, and other Officers, Mersey Fort taken, with two Culverins, two Sakers, and one Drake, and Col: Steward, Col: Thornton and Sir Bar. Scudamore taken raising forces near Newmarket. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed and pub∣lished. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. June 17. 1648.
June 15. 1648. To the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS. SIR, THe Enemy still continues in Col∣chester; The great ones had a purpose last night to escape, as we hear, for their goods are shipped, and sent a party to possess Mersey Island Fort, the better to secure their passage to Sea; but this morning early, our Horse and Dragoons possessed the Island and Fort, and so hath prevent∣ed the Enemies flight by Sea; and by Land their body cannot stir: some Horse may perchance in the night
escape, and leave the rest to slaughter. For, such is the rage of the Soldier for the loss of their Commanders, that they vvill hardly admit of quarter. Many honest people (though the meaner sort) steal out of town hourly to us; and all agree in one story, That the Enemy knows not which way to turn himself, that he is desparate, and thinks to get Conditions for them∣selves, by their having Sir William Masham, and others of the Commit∣tee prisoners. The General sent a Trumpeter to see Sir William Ma∣sham, but they yet detain the Trum∣peter. The Townsmen say, they had six hundred men run away that night the fight was; we have Five hundred prisoners, most taken from the Gates of the City: The Enemy buried of
their slain men, Sixty in one Church∣yard, besides what was slain in the other part of the Town; they say, that Sir William Campion, and one Knight more, Col: Cook and two Majors, and other Officers were slain; some priso∣ners we have taken since confess as much, and many of quality wounded; many of the prisoners of the Trained bands, (which this day the General released, being sore wounded) say, That they vvent under Col: Farre my Lord Warwicks Lieutenant Co∣lonel, that he lead them out into the field, and into Mr. Grimstons house; and when he and the men fled, being galled with our Musketiers, he got to the gate, and caused it to be shut, and left his men to be cut in pieces with∣out the wall, if our Soldiers had not
been more merciful. The General is close beleaguering the Town; this day Col: Ewers is come up with his Regiment, and all our Train: The General purposes to preserve the town from plunder and fire, if it be possible; though one Buxton, and the Leomons, and many more (as those that come out inform) encourages Goring and the Cavaliers to hold out: Many an honest body is undone by them; God is onely wise: for who could have found out such a way to unite the ho∣nest party together against this bloody and common Enemy? There are Four Colonels taken at Newmarket, about to raise men for the King, Col: sir Bar Scudamore is one of them. If the News of any Success this Army hath were acceptable, you would send one
weeks pay to an Army that hath not had a peny this Moneth. J.R. The Generals Trumpeter is return∣ed, who left Sir William Masham and the other Gentlemen in a reasonable good condition; he saith, Sir William Campion and one Col: Cook were bu∣ried this afternoon, their corps attend∣ed by the Lord Goring, Lord Capel, Lord Louthborough, Sir William Com∣pion, and divers others of quality. They much lament the loss of Major Eyres, whom they thought we had prisoner, but he was slain. Captain Zanchy, vvho took in Mersey-Fort, found two Culverins, two Sacres, and one Drake in it: Ca∣ptain
Peacock, and the Commanders of the Ships at Harwich have sent to the General to assist him, in the Har∣bour of Coln River, if the Fort at Mersey be ours, of which the General hath sent them word; Col: Stewart, and Col: Thornton were taken with Sir Barn. Scudamore. FINIS.
