R2329 E448_7 99864421 161827
The Severall FIGHTS NEERE COLCHESTER in ESSEX. A List of the names of the Knights, Collonels and chiefe Officers, taken and killed on both sides, 5 Piece of Ordnance taken, 3 Colours, and 600 Armes, 3 Lords, divers Knights and Collonels, And 4000 cooped up in COLCHESTER. ALSO Major Generall Lamberts Victories in the North, Sir Marmaduke Langdale driven out of VVestmerland. Divers prisoners taken. Penrith and Braugham Castle taken, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, with his For∣ces fled to Carlisle. Pursued by the NOR THERN FORCES. June. 17. 1648. Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbott. London Printed for Richard Smithurst, and are to be sold neer Hosier-Lane, 1648▪
A Letter from KENDALL in VVestmerland, Of the Victorious proceedings of Major Ge∣nerall Lambert, against Sir Mar∣maduke Langdale. Noble Sir, MAjor Generall Lambert being marched to the borders of Westmerland, it gave an Alarme to Sir Marmaduke-Langdale, who presently called a Councell of War, at which it was resolved to retreat towards Carlisle. Major Generall Lambert hath with him 1200 foot, and 1500 horse, The enemy are at
least 5000 with fire Armes, and nigh as ma∣ny more, some of which are armed. The Lancashire Forces are expected to come shortly to joyn with us, and I hope they will be here seasonably. The news of reducing Kent, hath quite broke the hearts of the enemy here, who are fearfull that now either the Lord Generall, or Lieutenant Generall Crumwell will march with a great strength to them. Yet it is said, that some Companies are marching o joyn with Lungdale, from Scotland, and he hath al∣ready received both Armes and money, yet the god∣y peaceable Ministers there speak their minds freely against it, and labour much to prevent new wars. Major Generall Lambert marched by Mallerstrange Forest in Westmerland towards Langdals body, and had some assistance from the Country (who are as weary of the Cavaliers, as fearfull of Scots.) Upon his approach, Langdale marched through Inglewood Forrest, and fled into Carlile, but not with∣out some losse, for wee have taken some prisoners in pursuit of his Reare. Major Generall Lambert is in Penreth, which place he hath taken from Langdale, and Braugham Castle also. They had an Alarme in Carlisle upon Langdales approach to the City, The Castle gates were shut close, and double Guard, to Caldo gate, Richard gate and Brother gate.
Langdale avoyds fighting altogether. But it is said that hee expects additionall Forces, and Ammuniti∣on from Scotland. But it is hoped that he will come short of his expectation. Kendal in Westmerland the 12 of June, 1648. To the Honorable William Lenthall Esq Speak∣er of the Honourable House of Commons. Sir, THe Enemy still continues in Colchester; The great ones had a purpose last night to escape, as we hear, for their goods are shipped, and sent a party to possesse Mersey Island Fort, the better to secure their passage to Sea; but this morning early, our Horse and Dragoons possessed the Island and Fort, and so hath prevented the Enemies flight by Sea; and by Land their body cannot stir: some Horse may per∣chance in the night escape, and leave the rest to slaughter. For, such is the rage of the Souldier for the losse of their Commanders, that they will hard∣ly admit of quarter. Many honest people (though the meaner sort) steale out of Towne hourly to us; and all agree in one story, That the Enemy knows not which way to turne himselfe, that he is desperate, and thinks to get Conditions for themselves, by their having Sir William Masham, and others of the Com∣mittee prisoners. The Generall sent a Trumpeter to see Sir William Masham, but they yet detaine the
Trumpeter. The Townsmen say, they had fix hun∣dred men run away that night the fight was; we have five hundred prisoners, most taken from the Gates of the City: The Enemy buried of their slaine, Sixty in one Church-yard, besides what was slaine in the other part of the Town; they say, that Sir William Campion, and one Knight more, Col. Cook and two Majors, and other Officers were slaine; some priso∣ners we have taken since confesse as much, and many of quality wounded; many of the prisoners of the Trained bands, (which this day the Generall releas∣ed, being sore wounded) say, That they went under Col: Farre my Lord Warwicks Lieutenant Colonell, that hee lead them out into the field, and into Mr. Grimstons house; and when he and the men fled, be∣ing galled with our Musketiers, hee got to the gate, and caused it to be shut, and left his men to be cut in pieces without the wall, if our Souldiers had not been more mercifull. The Generall is close beleaguering the Town; this day Col. Ewers is come up with his Regiament, and all his Traine. The Generall purposes to preserve the town from plunder and fire, if it be possible; though one Buxton, and the Leomons, and many more (as those that come out inform) encourages Goring and the Cavaliers to hold out: Many an honest body is undone by them; God is onely wise: for who could have found out such a way to unite the ho∣nest
party together against this bloody and common Enemy? There are four Colonels taken at Newmarket, about to raise men for the King, Col. Sir Bar. Scudamore is one of them. If the News of any successe this Army hath, were acceptable, you would send one weeks pay to an Army that hath not had a penny this Moneth. June 15. 1648. J.R. SIR, THE Generals Trumpeter is returned, who left Sir William Masham and the o∣ther Gentlemen in a reasonable good condi∣tion; he saith Sir William Campion and one Col. Cook were buried this afternoone, their corps attended by the Lord Goring, Lord Capel, Lord Louthborough, Sir William Compton, and divers other of quality. They much la∣ment the losse of Major Eyres, whom they thought we had prisoner, but he was slain. Captaine Zanchy, Who took in Mersey Fort, found two Culverins, two Sacres, and one Drake in it: Captaine Peacock, and the Commanders of the Ships at Harwich
have sent to the General to assist him in the Harbour of Coln River, if the Fort at Mersey be ours, of which the General hath sent them word, Col. Steward, and Col. Thornton were taken with Sir Barn. Scudamore. From his Excellencies Quarters before Colch. June 16 1648. J.R. A List of those particulars that were killed and taken prisoners in severall sights at Colchester and o∣ther parts in ESSEX. Of the Lord Gorings men flaine. Sir VVilliam Campion, another Knight slain also, Col: Cook, Major Eyers, a Major besides. 20 Captains, and other Officers. 150 Gentlemen and Common Soul∣diers. 400 wounded. Taken Prisoners. Sir Barn. Scudamore, Coll. Stewart, Coll. Thornton, 2 Col. more, 50 Officers and Gentle. 450 Souldiers. Taken also, 5 peece of Ordnance. 600 Armes, 3 Cou∣lours, 1000 got away by parties in the night. Hemed in, in Colchester. Lord Goring; Lord Cpell, Lord Loughborough, Sir Cha. Lucas, Sir VVil. Compton Col. Buxton Col. Far, Col Lemmon, &c. 4000 resolute Cavaliers of despe∣rate fortunes. On the Lord Generals party. Coll. Needham slain. two Captains, Cox; and another Captain, 5 Officers, 30 Souldiers, 100 wounded. FINIS.
