R71 E84_10 99859275 155648
AN EXACT And full RELATION Of all the proceedings between the Cavaliers, and the Northampton∣shire forces at Banbury. VVith the present state and con∣dition which that Country is in at this present. VVhereunto is added the Arti∣cles of agreement, made at Banbury, for a Pacification, and setling of the Peace of that County, by the Commissioners of Array and the Deputy Lieutenants of the said County. Ian. 4. Printed for I. Wright in the Old-Bailey, 1643.
A TRVE RELATION of the present Condition of BANBURY. Brother, MY desire is to let you understand the state and condition that our Countie is in at this pre∣sent. It was true that you heard, that Northamp∣tonshire men came into Banbury, but they stayed not, for the Major having yeelded the Towne before unto the King, would not shew them any countenance, and so they left the Towne presently, and went away againe the same day that they came in. And my Lord of Northamp∣ton came in upon the morrow, and tooke possession of the Towne and Castle, where he hath continued ever since, untill it was Tuesday night last 22. day, and then drew all his Forces out of the Towne towards Oxford in the night, but onely his Foot, and they went all into the Castle, and carryed in all the provision that they could come by in thither, and left the Towne open. Northamptonshire men kept themselves together all this while, and came againe to Byfield, a Towne six miles from Banbury, where they lay for a weeke: but so soone as they heard that my Lord of Northampton was gone out of Banbury, they presently advanced forward, and made for Banbury againe, and came before the Towne upon Wednesday in the afternoone about three
of the clock, and came into the Towne over the Bridge. They in the Castle having foure Peeces of Ordnance, shot at them as fast as they could all the time that they came in, but yet it pleased God to preserve them, that they came all safe into the Towne, only one Horse kild, and a man hurt, and one man kild with Musket shot ater they came into Towne. They continued in the Towne that night and all day, on the morrow they were as was supposed about foure thousand, all Countrymen, but one hundred of Sea-men: among them they brought two small Peeces into the Towne with them, and sent to Northampton for one more bigger, which came in upon Thursday about twelve a clock. They shot at the Castle with their Musketiers all day Thursday, and it was sup∣posed they kild some that were upon the walls; and like∣wise they shot from the walls all day, and with the Or∣dnance from the Castle, but kild none, but hurt two or three. And upon Thursday night they planted their great Peece against the Castle wall, and the two smaller Peeces against the Gate, but could not force it to make any en∣trance at all▪ In the meane time, my Lord of Northampton brought all the Kings strength of Horse from Oxford, and came to Dedington, within foure miles of Banbury, on Thursday night, where they lay all night in the Field: which Northampton shire men hearing and seeing they could not doe any good at the Castle, left the Towne againe, and marched away about foure a clock in the morning with their Ordnance, and the Kings Army of Horse came in on Fryday, and quaild all the Countrey over on Fryday night, but returned towards Oxford againe in the morning, onely leaving some to keepe Garrison in Babury; and so now our Condition is worse hen ever it was: for many shewed themselves
forward to joyne with Northampton shire men, And now they being gone againe, wee are in more feares then ever wee were. I pray God in mercie look upon us, and put it into the heart of our King and Parliament, that there may be an accommodation for Peace, for otherwise our Countrey will be wholly ruinated in a short time: Wee cannot enjoy any thing that is our owne. The Towne of Banbury, for the most part the chiefest men, are wholly undone all alreadie, and wee in the Countrey cannot long subsist: For wee have great Taxes layd upon us, and if wee will not pay them, our Selves and Goods are both taken away, I prayse God I have my libertie yet, but doe not know how long I shall enjoy it, for I am in great feare of my selfe. I pray you send me a Grammar for my Boy; and I would entreat you to send me word how the Citie doth stand affected: Wee heare, that it is much divided, and the greater and stronger partie is for the King, and that the Parliament is broken up. I pray you send me the truth as neere as you can of all things, as also concerning the Earle of Essex proceedings, for wee cannot heare any thing from him, which doth much discourage our County at this present. 29. Decemb. 1642. So I rest your Brother to command, S. R.
Vicesimo tertio die Decemb. 1642. An Agreement made the day above at Banbury in the County of Chester, for a Pacification, and setling of the Peace of that County, by us whose Names are subscribed, Authorised hereunto by the Lords and Gentlemen nominated, Com∣missioners of Array, and Deputie Lieutenants of the sad Countie. 1. IT is agreed that there be an absolute Cessation of Armes from henceforth within this County, and no Armes be taken up to offend one another, but by the consent of the King and both Houses of Parliament, unles it be to resist forces brought into the County. 2. That all but 200. of either side shall be disbanded to morrow, being Saturday, and on Monday all the rest on both sides, both Horse and Foote shall be disbanded. 3. That all Prisoners on both sides be enlarged, as for Master Morton, who is now Prisoner at Manchester, the Gen∣tlemen appoynted Deputy Lieutenants, doe declare, that hee was taken without their privitie, or encouragement, by some Manchester Troopes, upon a private quarell, for taking pow∣der, and other goods belonging to one of Manchester, yet they will use the utmost endeavours to procure his enlargement, and doe desire the like endeavours be used by the Lords and o∣thers,
Commissioners of Array, for enlarging Master Daniel of Dasbury. 4. That the Fortifications of Chester, Namptuich, Stpford▪ Nford, or any Towne in Cheshire, lately made by either part, be presently demolished. 5. That all Goods and Armes, taken on both sides, now re∣maining in the Countie in specie, be forthwith restored, and for all others that are taken out of the Countie, it is promised on both parts, that since the benefit of this Pacification re∣dounds to the whole Countie, that they will use their utmost endeavours for a joynt contribution of the County, towards satisfaction to the owners. 6. That the Lords and Gentlemen, Commissioners of Ar∣ray, before the eighth day of January next, procute from his Majestie a Letter, thereby declaring, That in regard a Peace is made in the Countie, he will send no Forces into this County; and if any other person shall contrary to such Declarations bring Forces into the County (passage for Forces without do∣ing any Hostile act onely excepted) the said Lords and Gentle∣men, will joyne to resist them, and if any Forces, without the consent of the King and both Houses of Parliament, shall come into this Countie (the passages Forces without doing any Hostile act onely excepted) the said Gentlemen nomina∣ted Deputy Lieutenants, will joyne to resist them, and use their utmost endeavours therein. 7. In regard by the blessing of God, there is to be a Peace within the Countie if this agreement be. It is agreed that the Commissioners of Array, shall not any further put the Com∣mission of Array in execution, nor the Genlemen nominated Deputy Lieutenants the Ordinance of the Militia, or execute their Commission. 8. Lastly, All the said parties doe agree and promise each to other, in the word of a Gentleman, as they desire to pros∣per; that as well themselves, as also all their friends, tenants, servants, and all others in whom they have any interest, shall as much as in them lyes, performe the Agreement; And it is
further desired, that all the said parties joyne in a Petition to His Mjestie, and both Houses of Parliament, for putting an end to the greatest distractions and miseries fallen upon this Kingdome, by making a speedy Peace: And it is agreed that Sir George Booth, and all others within this Countie, who have appeared as Commissioners of Array, or as Deputy Lieute∣nants, by reason of the Ordinance of Parlament, shall with all convenient speed subscribe this Agreement. Robert Kilmurrey. Orlando Brdgeman. William Marbury. Henry Mainwaring. FINIS.
