S2463C 99900236 137683
Englands Famous Discoverers Sr. Walter Raleigh. depiction of Sir Walter Raleigh Sr. Hugh Willoughby. depiction of Sir Hugh Willoughby Sr. Fran: Drake depiction of Sir Francis Drake Candes depiction of explorer ATLAS MARITIMUS or A Book of CHARTS Describeing the SEA Coasts Capes Headlands Sands Shoals Rocks and Dangers the Bayes Roads Harbors Rivers and Ports. in most of the knowne parts of the WORLD. With the true Courses and distances, from one place to another Gathered from the latest and best Discoveryes, that have bin made by divers Able and Experienced Navigators of our English Nation. Accomodated with an Hydrographicall Description of the whole WORLD. By John Seller. Hidrographer to ye Kings most Excellent Majestie. And are to be Sold by him at the Hermitage Staires in Wapping, and at his Shop in Exchange Alley Near the Royall Exchange. in London. Cum Privilegio. engraved title page
THE SEA-ATLAS: CONTAINING An Hydrographical Description of the SEA-COASTS of most of the known Parts of the WORLD. THat whole Mass of Waters which maketh up one part of this Terrestrial Globe, and is sometimes, as it were, envi∣roned with the Earth, as in Rivers, Streights, and smaller Seas; sometimes dilating it self into larger Floods, doth encompass the Earth, as in the Ocean or greater Seas, may be conveniently di∣vided, somewhat according to the four general Regi∣ons or Divisions of the Earth, into four parts: The North Sea, or Mar del Noort, comprehendeth all those Waters which, from the Pole-Artick even unto the Equator, do wash the Shores of Europe, Africa, and America: The Ethiopian Sea, or Mar d' Ethiopia, which from the Equinoctial Line northerly, the Shores of Ethiopia on the East, and the Coasts of America on the West part, runneth with unknown bounds towards the Antartick Pole. The Indian Sea, or Mar d' In∣dia, bounded on the West with the Oriental Parts of Africa; on the North, by the South Coasts of Asia; and circumvironing all the Islands of the East-India, as far as Islas de Ladronas, and Nova Guinea, hath its South parts tending towards the Antartick Pole, not yet discovered. The South Sea, called also Mar del Zur, or Mare Pacificum, runneth all along the Western Shores of America on the one side; is contiguate with the Indian Sea on the other, but hath yet found no limits towards the Artick or Antartick Poles. Which general division of the Ocean, so far as conve∣niency may admit in the succeeding breviary Descrip∣tion of the Sea-Coasts, shall be observed. The Coasts of those two famous Islands of Great Britain and Ireland, Britain. are the first that discover them∣selves to us, out of this Northern Division of the Ocean: The first whereof is not without cause esteem∣ed the Metropolitan Island of Europe, I will say (ta∣ken in all respects) of the World; It is attended by many lesser Islands, the chief whereof are Thanet, Wight, Silly, Anglesey, Man, Lewis, the Hebrides, Orknay, Shotland, and Far: Stored with plenty of Ports, Bays, Rivers, Roads, and Harbours, capable to receive Ships of great Burthen; amongst which London accounted the Mart of Christendom, the Me∣tropolis of Great Britain, conveniently seated on the River of Thames, hath the chiefest note. Next unto which, on the East side northerly, by the German Ocean, are Harwich, Yarmouth, Lin, Kingston upon Hull, New-castle, a gallant Haven, famous for its inexhaustable Cole-Mines, and Edenburgh and Dun∣dee in Scotland, &c. On the South side, between the Coasts of England and France, called the Channel, are Dover, Chichester, Portsmouth, Weymouth, Plymouth, and Dartmouth. On the West side, over against the Coasts of Ireland, in that violent and turbulent Sea, called St. George his Channel, are Bristol, Pembrook, or Milford-Haven, Che∣ster, Leverpool, Carlisle, &c. The Island (especially England) yeelding abundant plenty of Corn and Cattel, besides other Commodi∣ties, as Lead, Tin, Iron, Sea-cole, Saffron, Wooll, Cloth, Licorish, Mill-stones, and other rich Merchan∣dize; multitude of Ships being continually in the Ports, serving either to export her own, or to import other Commodities from most places of the World in lieu thereof. On the Coasts of Ireland, are Knock-fargus, Dublin, Ireland. Waterford, King-sale, Limrick, Galloway, &c. Prin∣cipally abounding in Cattel, from whence great num∣bers are yearly exported into other Countreys. Passing on northerly, just under the Artich-Circle, lyeth environed, by the Northern Ocean, Iseland. or Mare Glaciale, Iseland, or rather Iceland, first discovered by one Naddoc a Pyrat, who by a Tempest was driven to the Shores of this Countrey; which afterwards, from the coldness and store of Ice there continually found, was so named, and first inhabited by the Norvegians, now under the power of the King of Denmark; a place frequented by Danes, English, High and Low Dutch, and Biscainers, where in exchange of Bisket, Beer, Iron, Copper, Cloth, and some other Wares they bring from thence, Stock-fish, and other sorts of Fish, Train-Oyl, Skins of Foxes and other Beasts, Sulphur, and a sort of course Cloth, and Stockings, called Wad∣moll. The Ports most frequented, are Strom, Warloswick, Kebbelwick, Busland, Orbaack, Hola, and Haffenford; near unto which standeth Bellestede, the Residence of the Governour, a Dwelling sutable enough to the man∣ner and fashion of this Countrey. North-east from hence, in the Latitude of 76 and 80, lyeth Greenland, or King James his New Land; Green∣land. first found out by Sir Hugh Willowby, in the year 1553. (though the Dutch men affirm it to be discovered first by Jacob Hemskerk, William Barrentson, and John Cor∣nelius Rip, Anno 1596.) which whether it by an Island or contiguate with the main Continent of Groenland, or some other Northern Region, none have hitherto known. The Inland parts are stored with great numbers of Bears, Deer, Foxes, and such like Creatures; and the Sea-shores with multitude of Morses and Whales of incredible magnitude; for the catching whereof,
the Inhabitants of most Sea-Ports in the Northern Ocean do usually make their yearly Voyages. Not far from hence lyeth Bear Island, or rather Cherry Island, Cherry Island. so named from Sir Francis Cherry Mer∣chant, who was at the charge of the discovery thereof; whither resort great number of Sea-Horses or Morses, and Whales; the Moscovy Company once making great profit of the trade therein. Thirty degrees to the South-eastward hereof, is the Island of Nova Zemla, Nova Zemla. separated from the North Continent of Russia, by the Streights of Vaigats, alias Fretum Burrough, through which so many brave and worthy Navigators have attempted to find a passage into Scythia and China; N. E. Passage. but being obstructed by the abundance of Ice met with in those Seas, could yet discover no farther eastwards than the great River Oby, the North-west confine of the Kingdom of Tartaria, Tartari∣an Sea. though it hath been often reported by the Samoed Tar∣tars, Russes, and others that have travelled those Countries by Land, that the Tartarian Seas do at cer∣tain seasons of the year lie open, and free from such incumbrance. To return therefore by the known Parts of Russia, Russia. the Ports and Places whereof, worthy observation, and most frequented, are, first Petzora Reca, the Isle of Colgoyn, situate at the mouth of a great Bay, whence compassing Cape Candences, there is the entrance into the White-Sea, White-Sea. or Bay of St. Nicholas, which Master Richard Chanceller, in the Richard-Bonaventure, first dis∣covered, and setled a Trade with the Moscovites, or Russes, at the Town of St. Nicholas, a well known Port, situate at the influx of the River Dutna, into the Bay. But St. Michaels, on the Sea-side, common∣ly called Arch-Angel, is the Town of greatest Trade, especially by the English, who have of late there fixed their Staple. The principal Commodities they send abroad, are Rich Furs, Hemp, Flax, Fish, Train Oyl, Honey, Wax, Pitch, Rosin, and the like; receiving in re∣turn, Cloth, Silk, Tapstery, and some other Mer∣chandize. Without this Bay, Lapland. on the Coast of Lapland, Fin∣mark, and Norway, are Kola, Kegor, (near unto which Sir Hugh Willoughby, with his Company, in the Bon Esperanza, attempting first the discovery of unknown Places in this Icy Sea, were frozen to death) next are Wardhouse, and the North-Cape, so called, because it is the out-most Northern Bound of the Continent of Europe. Dronten, Norway in the Latin Nidrosia, so called, from the River Nider, on which it is seated; antiently the Me∣tropolis of Norway, but since the subjection of this Countrey to the Danes, reduced to a Burrough. Ber∣gen the principal Town of this Countrey, the ordina∣ry Residence of the Governour for the Kings of Den∣mark; strongly scituate amongst high Mountains, at the bottom of a deep Creek or Arm of the German Ocean, called Carmfunt, a safe and noted Port, much resorted to by Merchants of most European Nations, bringing thither Corn, Bread, Beer, Wine, and Bran∣dy, to supply the natural wants and defects hereof; and in exchange transporting Fish, Furrs, Boards, Cordage, Masts, and other Materials for Shipping. Then Longsound, Ansloo, Maelstrand, and Gottenburgh, noted for the multitude of Herrings thereabout. Not far from hence is the entrance into the Baltick-Sea, which beginneth at the narrow Passage called the Sound, Sound. and interlacing the Countries of Denmark, Swedland, Poland, and Germany, extending even to Livonia and Lithuania. The Islands whereof are many in number, the chief are, Zealand, Funen, Langeland, Laland, Baltick-Sea. Falstre, Alsen, Meun, Rugen, Bornholm, Oe∣land, Gothland, Osel, Dageroort, Runen, and Hooge∣land. The chief Ports and Places of note bordering on the Sea, are Elsenore, strongly seated on that narrow Streight, or Fretum, not above a Dutch mile in breadth, commonly called by the name of the Sound; Over a∣gainst which, on the other side, is Elsengburgh, a streight through which all Ships that have any trading to or from the Baltick-Sea, must of necessity take their course, all other Passages being either barred up with impassable Rocks, or otherwise prohibited by the Kings of Denmark, upon forfeiture of all their Goods. Co∣penbagen, or Haven of Merchants, placed by the Sea in the same Island of Zealand, being a convenient Port; This and the magnificent Castle of Cronenburgh near Elsenore, being the constant Residence of the Kings of Denmark. The next are Slesbourgh, Elholm, Calmar, Swed∣land. Zuidder∣coppen, Nordcoppen, Nycoppen, Stockholm, the Metro∣polis and chief trading Port of Swedland, and a place worthy observation for Merchandize; exceeding strong, both by Art and Nature, being situate in the Marishes, like Venice at the Mouth of the Lake, or River Meler; the passage to it out of the Bay being very narrow, and yet so deep withal, that the great∣est Ships of burthen may sayl up to the City; the Port within the Sreight being so safe and capacious, that it is able at one time to receive 300 Sayl, which usually ride there without Anchor. Next, upsal, an Arch-Bishops Sea and University, placed not far from the Bay of Bodnar, called also Sinus Bodicus, or the North Bottom, North-Bottom. a long and not much frequented Sea, which from the Latitude of 60, extends it self even to the Corsts of Lapland and Fin∣mark. Places of note are few worthy observation, the chief Birkara in West Bodden, betwixt the Bay and a great navigable Lake: Toronia the best place of Trade, seat∣ed at the very bottom of the Bay in North Bodden: Helsingeliac more North than that, towards the Bor∣ders of Lapland: Kerlabi in East Bodden, on the Bank of the Gulf, conveniently seated for a Town of Trade. The Countrey is but barely stored with Grain and Fruits, but full of great variety of Wild Beasts, whose Rich Furrs yeeld great profit to the Inhabitants; and by reason of the commodious situation on all sides of the Bay, well stored with Fish. At the South-east part of this Bay is the Island Erk, near to the Town Aboo, from whence all alongst the Shores Eastward, on the South side of Finland, the Coast is exceeding dangerous, and for the most part innavigable, because of the innumerable multitude of Islands, Shoals, and Rocks, the greatest of which is called the Pelting, even as far as Wyborg, a Town conveniently seated at the bottom of the Bay or Gulf of Finland, called Sinus Finnicus. Over against which is Narva, on the North Bank of Duina, where it falls into the Bay of Finland, the only place of Trade, Liesland in∣to Moscovia or Russia, through the Baltick. Revel a well traded Port, situate in the same Bay, which together with Wyborg and the Narve, are now in the possession of the King of Swedland. The next Port of note is Riga, a famous Empory, Poland. of great resort for Forreign Merchants; who carry hence Pitch, Wax, Hemp, Flax, and such other Commodities. Dantzick, seated on the Weyssel, second of the Hanse-Towns, of so great Trade, such a noted Granary for all sorts of Corn, issued from thence to supply the want of other Countreys, that 1000 measures of Wheat (besides all other Commodities proportiona∣ble) are here daily sold. Stetin once a poor Fisher-Town, now the Metropo∣lis of Pomeren. Pomeren Straelsond a Town of much Trading, and great re∣sort,
situate on the Baltick, opposite to the Isle of Rugen. Rostock next in reputation of all the Hanse-Towns, to Lubeck and Dantzick, large, rich, and much frequented by all sorts of Merchants. Wismar and Lubeck, seated on the confluence of the Trave and Billow, near the fall thereof into the Baltick, a River capable of Ships of 1000 tuns, which common∣ly they unlade at Travemond, the Port Town of the Ci∣ty, a little lower nearer the Sea, an enfranchized Town being the principal among the Hanse-Towns. On the Coasts of Jutland, Jutland. being a Peninsula, between the Baltick Sea and German Ocean on the east parts, whereof there is another passage into the Baltick Sea, called the Belt, Belt. but not so much frequented as the Sound, formerly spoken of. The chief Towns and Places are Flenborg, having a Port so deep, so safe, and so commodious, that they may lade and unlade their great Ships in a manner close by their Houses. The other are Hadersleve, Sternbergh, Sleswick, Wy∣borg, and Odensee in Funen, Arhusen, and Schagen, the most northerly point of Jutland. On the Coast of Germany, contiguate with the Oce∣an, Ham∣burgh. are first Hamburgh, on the Bill, where it falls in∣to the Elve, one of the Hanse-Towns also; having by report, as many great Ships as sayl upon the Ocean, which bring great profit, besides the resort of Merchants from most places. It was sometimes the Staple Town for the Cloth of England; on some discontent remo∣ved from thence to Stadt, a little nearer the Sea, on the same River; from thence afterwards to Holland. Next Bremen, seated on the broad and navigable Ri∣ver Weser, whence comes store of Linnen Cloth, called from a Town not far thence Osenbridge. Then Emden, a good Haven, and well traded Town, which yearly sends out 700 Busses for the Herring-fishing on the Coasts of England. Alongst the Shores, for the most part, belonging to the States of Holland, Holland. lie several Islands, the chief whereof are Ameland, Schelling, Holland, Fly-land, Texel, Weringen, Voorn, Yselmond, Overflaccee, Schowen, Duveland, Tertolen, North-Beverland, South-Beverland, and Walcheren. The chief Ports and Places, are Amsterdam, a very fair Haven, situate on the Gulf, called the Tye, and the Channel, or Dike Amstel, whence Amsterdam, built on Piles like Venice, and much resembling it both in Trade and other Things; a place stored with multitude of shipping, inhabited by Men of all Nations, and of all Religions: Grown Famous, and exceeding Wealthy, since the diverting of the Trade from Antwerp hither. Horn, Enchuisen, on the very Point of the Gulf of Zuider-Zee, opposite to Friezeland, Medemblick, Schei∣dam, Delf-haven, Rotterdam, on a Channel named the Rotter, not far from which the Leck, one of the three main Branches of the Rhine, falleth into the Maes, a strong, fair, and well-traded Port. The Brill in the Island Voorn, once Cautionary to the English, with the Town of Flushing. Bergen ap Zome, so called from the River Zome, on which it is situate, about half a league from the influx of it into the Scheld, and not far from the Sea, which gives it a reasonable good Haven. Antwerp situate on the Scheld, seventeen leagues from the Sea, of so great Trade in former times, that it was held to be the richest Empory of the Christian World; the Commodities here Bought and Sold a∣mounting to more in one month, than those of Venice in two years; the cause whereof was, that the Portugals diverting the Alexandrian and Venetian Trade to Lisbon, kept here their Factories, and sent hither their Spices, and Indian Commodities, now almost removed by the Hellander to Amsterdam; Middleburg, Flushing, Flanders. the Key of the Netherlands; Ostend, Newport, Dunkirck, Graveling, the last of Flanders. On the Coast of France, France. alongst the English Chan∣nel, are first Callice at the very entrance; Deep a Town of Trade especially for the New-found-land, Newhaven, or Haverdegrace, on the Mouth of the River Sein, be∣twixt which, and St. Maloes, close by the Hag-point, over against the Isle of Wight in England, lyeth the Islands Aldernay, (or as the French, Aurney) Jersey, Guernsey, belong to the Crown of England, and several other smaller Islands, stoared with plenty of Syder, and fine Wooll, whereof they knit store of Stockings and Wastcoates. St. Maloes, Morlais, ushant, Brest, seated on a spacious Bay of the Western Ocean, the Key and Bul∣wark of Bretaign, and the goodliest Harbour of all France. Croisse, a little Haven at the Mouth of the Loir, not far below Nants, whence store of the best and most no∣ted Brandy. Rochel a Town seated in the inner part of a fair and capacious Bay, assured by two strong Forts, betwixt which there is scarce more space than for a Ship to come in at once; Over against which lyeth Oleron, an Island yeelding great quantity of Salt, in special fame for that the Maritine Laws, which for near 500 years, have ge∣nerally been received by all the States of the Christian World which frequent the Ocean, for regulating Sea Affairs, and deciding of Maritine Controversies, were declared and established here. The Island being then in possession of the English, from thence named the Laws of Oleron: So powerful were the Kings of Eng∣land in former times to give Laws to all that traded on the Ocean. Burdeaux seated on the Garond, not far from the Sea, much frequented by English and Dutch for Gascoign Wines; Bayon the last of France on this part of the Ocean. On the Coast of Spain, St. Sebastian, Spain. a noted and well-traded Port, at the Mouth of the River Gurvineo; beautified with a fair and capacious Haven, defended with two strong Castles founded on two opposite Rocks. Bilbao situate some two leagues from the Sea, on a fair and deep Creek thereof; Biscay. this (and indeed all the Coast of Biscay) stored with such infinite quantities of Iron and Steel, that no Countrey yeeldeth better, or in greater plenty, called for this cause the Armory of Spain; exceedingly enriched by making of Armour, and all sorts of Weapons, their chief Manufacture, the Bilbao Blades, in such request, being brought from thence, besides great quantities of Wooll hence trans∣ported. Corunna, by us called the Groin, often mentioned in our story of the Wars with the Spaniard, in Queen E∣lizabeths time taken by the English, not far from the Promontorie or Cape, called Finis Terrae, Cape Fi∣nis Ter∣rae. or Cape de Finis Terre, being the most western end of the then known World. Bayon, not far from the Mouth of the River Minio, full of Red Lead; (from hence called by the Latins Minium) navigable with small Vessels 100 miles. Porto Duero, or Porto Port, Portugal at the Mouth of the Ri∣ver Duero in the Kingdom of Portugal. Lisbon, upon the great River Tagus, a famous City for Traffick; the Portugals in all their Navigations set∣ting sail from hence. 'Tis conveniently seated for Shipping, and (excepting the Court which is here kept) inhabited chiefly by Mariners and Merchants, which of their own Countrey growth, trade in Honey, Wine, Oyl, Allum, Fruits, Salt, &c. and from Brazil in America, with great quantities of best and finest Sugar, and many sorts of Drugs.
Setubal or St. Uves, South of Lisbon, situate on a Gulf of twenty miles in length, and three in breadth, a place of principal importance next to Lisbon. Not far to the North-west of Cape Vincent, there are certain Islands called the Azores, in the Atlantick Ocean, subject to the Crown of Portugal, and opposite to the City of Lisbon; from which distant 250 leagues, si∣tuate between 38 and 40 degrees of North Latitude, and one of them in the first longitude, which is com∣monly reckoned from these Islands, as being the most western part of the World, before the discovery of America: Azores. They were so called from Azor in the Spa∣nish Tongue, signifying a Goshauk, because multitudes were there at first found; The names are these, Tercera, St. Michaels, Fyal, Gratiosa, St. George, Pice, Corvo, Flores, Spain. and St. Maries; most of them stored with Flesh, Fish, and a sort of Wine not very good, nor du∣rable. But the chief Commodity they send out, is Woad for the use of Dyers. St. Lucar the Port Town of Sevil, at the Mouth of the River Betis, or Guadalquiver, where the West-India Ships many times ride. Cadiz or Gades, situate on a large Bay, and serving as a Road for the Indian Fleet; by reason whereof, and the great resort of Forreign Merchants, it is much enriched: 'Tis the chief Port and Magazine of Spain, taken notwithstanding in one day by the English, under the command of the Lord Effingham, the Earl of Essex, and Sir Walter Raleigh; the Town, Ships, and all be∣coming a prey to the English. Near to this place is that so celebrated Streight, cal∣led Fretum Herculeum, or Gaditanum, now the Streights of Gibralter, Gibralter from a place so called on the brink here∣of, being in length fifteen miles, and in breadth seven, where it is narrowest, being the Inlet or Passage from the Atlantick-Ocean, into the Mediterranean Sea. The Mediterranean Sea, within which the places most observable are, Malaga, a strong place, and an Armory for the King of Spain; exceeding great in Traffick, and of much resort, especially for Wines, Ra∣sins, Almonds, &c. Almeria, Carthagena, situate in a demy Island in the very jaws of the Mediterranean, having a good and capacious Haven. Alicant a noted Port and much used, whence our true Alicant Wines, made of the Juyce of Mulberries. Valencia, a fair, pleasant, and well-traded City. Tar∣ragona, Barcellona. The Goods and Merchandize on this side of Spain being generally Corn, Wine, Oyl; all sorts of Fruit, Salt, Corral; several sorts of Drugs and Stones, &c. Over against Valencia lie several Islands, the biggest whereof are Majorca, Majorca. the chief Town whereof is so named of the Island, yeelding sufficient quantity of Corn, Oyl, Wine, and Fruits. Minorca having three fair Harbours, Minorca. Maon, Ternessus, and Minorcas a fruitful Island, breeding great Heards of Cattel, and Mules of the largest size in Spain. Yvica, Yvica. the Inhabitants whereof make great store of Salt, wherewith they furnish, in part, not onely Spain, but Italy also. Next, France. on the Coast of France, are Narbon, Arles, Marcelles, and Tholoun. The Commodities sent from the Coasts of France, on the Meditterranean, are Corn, Wine, Oyl, Salt, Woad, Alkermes, or Grain d'Escarlate, Saffron, Rasins, Figs, Olives, Almonds, Prunes, Capers, &c. Villa Frank, and Savona, belonging to the State of Genoa. Genoa the principal Empory, Genoa. next Venice, of all Italy, having a safe and commodious Haven: The Countrey Commodities are (besides their Fruits which here are excellent) Oyl, Paper, Wines, and such abun∣dance of Silk, that it is the opinion there are 18000 per∣sons in that only City imployed in ordering and working thereof. Livorno, or Legorn, Italy. seated on the influx of the Ri∣ver Arno, so well fortified, that it is thought to be one of the strongest Cities in Christendom. To the South-West whereof, in the Ligurian Sea, Corsica. Sardinia. lye the Islands Corsica and Sardinia; the first subject to the State of Genoa, the latter to the Kingdom of Spain; abounding in pleasant Wines, Oyl, Olive, Mastick, Sulphur, Allom, Wax, and Honey. Elba an Island between Corsica and the Main, pro∣ducing Load-stones of a gray colour, but none of the best. Civita Vechia the onely useful Haven that belongeth to Rome. Tarracina, or the Bay of Mola, and Port Ostia at the Mouth of Tyber, scarce making up one good Haven. Naples the Metropolis of the Kingdom; Naples. a beautiful City seated on the Sea-shoar, and fortified with four strong Castles. This, and indeed all the Parts of Italy generally, abounding with all sorts of Silk, Cloth of Gold and Silver, made by the People without fraud, be∣cause of a strict prohibition for the Adulteration of the Threads; Tapestry, Skins bravely gilded; Earthen Vessels most curiously wrought with Images and Coats of Arms; Oyl Olive of the best sort; Saffron, Alcher∣mes, Allom, Sulphur, Vitriol, Alabaster, Rice, Mar∣ble, Wines, and Fruits of all sorts. Regium, or Rezo, on the Sea-shore, opposite to Mes∣sina in Sicilia, which is supposed to have been broken off from the Coast of Italy, a place heretofore very well traded, but since fired by the Turks, left almost deso∣late. Sicilia an Island separated from the Main Land of Ita∣ly, Sicilia. by the Strait or Fare of Messina, where the Passage is so narrow, that it exceeds not in breadth a mile and a half, and found, by diligent sounding, not above eight fathom deep; full of dangerous Rocks and Whirle∣pools: as namely Caribdis, a Gulf on Sicilia side, vio∣lently attracting all Vessels coming nigh to it, and de∣vours them; opposite whereunto stands that dangerous Rock Scylla, at the foot of which many little Rocks shoot out, these two being the occasion of many fabu∣lous Stories. In the other parts where the Sea opens, it is 300 miles over, supposed to have been once a Penin∣sula, afterwards separated from Italy by the fury of the Waves, or violence of some Earth-quakes, which are there frequent. The Island is so plentifully stored with Corn, that it heretofore obtained the name of the Granary or storehouse of Rome, and doth still furnish, not only many parts of Italy, but Spain, Barbary, Mal∣ta, and the adjacent Isles; the other Commodities are much like those of Italy, in great plenty. In this Countrey is the Hill Hybla, so famous for Bees and Honey; the Mountains Aetna, now Mont∣gibel, which continually sends forth smoak and flames of fire, to the aftonishment of beholders. The chief places are Syracuse, or Saragusa, once the Metropolis of the Island; very strong both by Sea and Land, with a beautiful and commodious Port, of greatest Trade, next to Carthage in antient times, now both destroyed. Noto, Augusta, Gergento, Palermo, Trapani, and Messina, a Port and City of great strength and beauty; peopled by the wealthiest sort of Merchants and Gen∣tlemen; having a strong and high Cittadel, well garri∣soned, and a Lanthorn with lights kept burning for di∣rection of Mariners. Sixty miles to the southward of Sicilia, towards the African Shores, lyeth Malta, Malta. an Island famous for the shipwrack of Paul; defended by the Knights of Jeru∣salem removed hither; it is wholly situate on a Rock,
having not above three foot depth of Earth, and con∣sequently of no great fertility, the want of which is sup∣plyed by the plenty of Sicilia. To return therefore to the Coast of Italy, by the Capes Spartiventi, Colonne, and St. Maries, near un∣to which is Gallipoli, noted for the excellent Oyl com∣ing from thence. Not far from whence is Cape Otranto, The Gulf of Venice the entrance in∣to the Adriatick Sea, or Gulf of Venice, and the first Town of note therein is Brindisi, or Brundusium, once glorying in the most capacious Haven of the World. Whence Pompey and Caesar took shiping with their Fleets, the one to fly, the other to pursue; at this time a mean Town, the Haven being so choked up, that a Galley can hardly enter. Next Bara, Ortna, Ancona, having a fair Haven, not so capacious, as exceeding pleasant and beautiful. Pesara, Ravenna, and in the top of the Adriatick, Venice, Venice. standing upon seventy two little Islets, but joyned together by many Bridges, which are said to be 4000 at the least, besides 10000 Boats for passage from Isle to Isle; a strong, beautiful, and famous City, once the most illustrious Empory of the World, but much decayed in its Trade since the Passage by Sea was found to Persia and India by Cape bon Esprance. On the Histrian and Dalmatian side of the Adriatick, Dalma∣tia. are these places and Sea-ports observable, Triest, or Ter∣gestum, whence the Bay adjoyning is so called; Zara in Dalmatia, enjoying a safe and large Port belonging to the State of Venice. Sebenico, Spalato, Narento, Cattaro, at the bottom of the Gulf so called. On the Coast of Greece, Grecia. over against Otranto in Italy, lieth Vellona, a Port Town, fortified with a strong Ca∣stle. Farther into the Jonian Sea lie several Islands, first Corfu, sufficiently fruitful, but of Wine especially. Caphalonia and Zant, Cepha∣lon. Zant. Islands abounding in Oyl and Wine, but especially in Currants, which is the greatest trade of these Islands. Larta, on the Grecian Shore, in a Gulf, so called, near the antient Ambracia, the Regal Seat of King Pyr∣rbus; near unto which is the Isle of St. Maure, inhabited chiefly by Jews; a little lower than which is the Gulf of Corinth, called Lepanto, from two Castles built on each side the entrance thereof, called Castelli de Lepanto, made famous by the memorable Sea-fight of the Turks and Christians. Peleponesus, Morea. now Morea, a Peninsula joyned to the Continent by a little neck of Land or Istmus, at Co∣rinth, six miles over in breadth; the pleasantest Coun∣trey of all Greece, abounding with all things necessary for life, now in possession of the Turks; and though no place hath suffered more ruine than this, yet it is still the most populous of all Greece. The chief places are, Modon, or Methone, seated on the most southern part of the Peninsula; a strong, safe, and convenient Harbour. Coron the chief Town on the Bay of Messina. Malvasia, antiently Epidaurus, noted for the abun∣dance of delicate Wines, called Malvesy, or Malmsey, sent hence into all parts. Nauplia, now Napoli, giving name to the Bay so called. To the South-east hereof lyeth that famous Island of Creet, Candia. now Candia, from the chief Town so called; abounding heretofore much more than now, in Musca∣del Wines, Oyl, Sugar, Gums, Honey, and Fruits: The People formerly good Seafaring Men, subject to the Venetians, till much rent from them by the Turk, especially of late, by the strong Town of Candia, si∣tuate on the North Coast. The next places of note, whereof are Retimo and Canea, commodious by its Haven, called Porto del Suda. In and about the Aegean Sea, lie many Istands, the most of note are, Samothrace, now Samandrachi; Thassus, or Tasso; Imbrus, now Lembro, Lemnos; the Merchandize whereof is that Mineral Earth called Terra Lemnia, and Sigillata, from the Seal or Character im∣printed on it. Eubaea, now Negropont, Archipe. lago. full of Harbours and capa∣cious Bays. Salaminis, Egina, or Engia, the Cyclades so called, because placed in a Circle; called also the Arches, the chief whereof are, Delos, Tenos, Andros, Naxos, Gya∣res, Paros, Scyros, Melos, Seriphus, Chia, and several others, in number fifty three. The Sporades, because scattered up and down the Archipelago, in number twelve. Lastly, Cythera, now Cerigo. On the other side next Asia, lie Tenedos, Lesbos or Mitilene, Chios, Samos, Coos, Icaria, Patmos now Pal∣mosa, Clares now Calamo, Carpathes, Rhodes, memora∣ble in the hard and long Siege of the Turks before it was taken. In this mentioned Sea, on the Continent Shores of Greece and Thrace, are observable first Athens, now called Setines; so famously heretofore memorable, now an ordinary Burrough. Next Thessalonica, now Salonichi, at the bottom of a great Bay so called, a beautiful wealthy City, inhabited by rich Merchants of most Nations and Religions, who drive here a great Trade. Abdera, Aenos, Lysimachia, and Philippopolis, on the River Hebrus. Selimbria, Sestos, a Peninsula in the Thracian Cherso∣nese, having a strong Castle; opposite to which there is another on the Asian Shore, called Abidos, both of them having the name of the Dardanelli, the Key and Block∣houses of Constantinople, commanding the Passage so strongly, that none may go out or in without their li∣cense. But the chief glory of this Country and of all Europe, is Constantinople, Constan∣tinople. seated in so commodious a place for Empire, that it overlooks both Europe and Asia; com∣mands not onely the Propontis and Bosphorus, but the Euxine Sea; first called Bizantium, now fince the possessi∣on of it by the Turks, Stamboldi, having a most curious Haven or Port so conveniently profound, that Ships of greatest burthen may lie at the sides thereof for receit and discharge of their Lading; so conveniently seated, that there is no Wind whatsoever but brings in some shipping; which affords a vast trade of Merchandize from all parts, and of all sorts. Beyond this is the Propontis and the Euxine, Euxine. Sea. or Black Sea, or Pontus, now Maggiore, a very dangerous Sea, full of Rocks and Sands, guarded at the entrance by the Bosphorus with two strong Castles, called the Black Towers. But to return again to the Aegean Sea, by the Coasts of Asia, the places most worthy of notice for Trade are but few, the chief Smyrna, a fair and antient City, Smyrna. on a large Bay so named, much traded and frequented at this day, especially for Chamlets, Grograms, and such like Commodities, where the English have a Con∣sul resident. Ephesus, Halicarnassus, Matari, Antioch, of no great Trade. And at the end of the Mediterranian Sea, Alexandretta or Scandarone, pretty commodious for Trade, being the nearest Haven to Aleppo, heretofore the choice Staple for all the Eastern Commodities brought to Eu∣phrates, before the Portugals discovery of the Southern Passage to India and Persia. Tyre a City in antient time of great Trade and Wealth, seated on a Rocky Island, the People whereof were sup∣posed to be the first that invented shipping, now nothing but a heap of rubbish.
Tripolis, Cyprus. over against which is the Island Cyprus, in the Syrian and Cilician Sea, abounding in Wine, Oyl, Corn, Sugar, Cotton, Honey, Wooll, Turpentine, Allom, Verdegreece, Salt, Grograms, and other Com∣modities. On the Coasts of Egypt and Barbary, Egypt. are first Alex∣andria, situate westward of Delta, over against the Ifle Pharos, at the Mouth of the River Nile; exceeding strong, inhabited by men of divers Nations, as Moors, Jews, Turks, Greeks, and almost all other Nations, for the gain they reap by trafficking in Corn, Rice, Estridge-Feathers, Gums, Drugs, Spices, Cotten-Cloth, and other rich Commodities. Tripoli in Barbary, an usual retreat for Pyrates that infest those Seas. Next Tunis, whose Commodities are chiefly Oyl, some Corn, Figs, Dates, Almonds, and other Fruits. Argiers, situate near the Sea, in the form of a Trian∣gle, with an Haven to it, a City not so large, as strong; and not so strong as famous, for being the Receptacle of the Turkish Pyrats, who domineer so infinitely over the Mediterranean, to the great dammage of Merchants that frequent those Seas. Tetuan, the last Town within the Straits on the African Shore. On the African shore without the Straits, Tanger. lyeth Tan∣ger, near Cape Spartel, a Town very antient, thirty miles distant from the Straits Mouth; belonging hereto∣fore to the Portugals, now to the Crown of England, where there is lately built a large and convenient Mole for the reception of Ships; and a strong Garrison for defence of the place, and against the incursion of the Moors. Sallee, a Town much traded formerly by Merchants of England, Flanders, Genoa, and Venice, of late made a nest of Pyrats, as dangerous to those that sayl in the Ocean, as Argier to those in the Mediterranean. South-westwards from hence are the Canaries, or for∣tunate Islands, in number seven, so called from Canaria, the principal thereof: The names are these, Canaria, Palma, Gomero, Ferro, Lancerote, Tenariff, and Forte∣ventura; called Fortunate, from their fruitfulness and other excellencies, plentiful in Woad and other Com∣modities, Canaries but especially in those rich Wines we call Ca∣naries; a sort of Wine, if not sophisticated, more plea∣sing to the Pallat, and a better Remedy for the natural weakness of the Stomach, (if moderately taken) than any other Wine whatsoever; brought hither in such a∣bundance to supply our luxury, that much more than three thousand Tuns hereof are brought yearly into England only. Next Medera, the greatest Island in the Atlantick-Sea, over against Cape Cantin in Morocco, wonderfully fruitful; abounding in Madder, Sugar, Fruits, Wines, &c. Not far from thence is the Isle Porto Sancto, very fruitful also, but much annoyed by the innumerable multitude of Conies that breed there. About Cape Blanco generally the Sea-Ports and Pla∣ces, even to the farthermost parts of Guinea, yea even of all Africa, were belonging to the Portugals, who fortified and placed Colonies in each as their trading in∣creased; as Porto de Dio, Del Rosato, Arquin, Rio de Portuguez, or Senega, betwixt which and the River Gambo, is the great westward Cape of Africa, called Cape Verde, then Rio de Sancto Domingo, and Rio Grand, &c. Now several of them are much used and frequented by Dutch, English, and French. The Commodities are chiefly Gold, Ivory, and a sort of Pepper which we call Guinea Pepper, of double efficacy to the Indian. To the Westwards of Cape Verde, The Isles of Cape Verde. lie the Islands, so called, being ten in number, St. Antonio, St. Vincent, Bona-Vist, St. Lucys, the Isle of Salt, Del Fogo, St. Nicholas, Mayo, St. Jago, and Brava. Here the continuance of this Discourse should have been broken off to have took in the Northern Tract of America, as far as the Equinoctial, so to have compleat∣ed this Hydrographical Description, according to the first division of the Ocean; but I thought it more con∣venient to go forward through the remaining part of the Ethiopian and all the Indian Seas, alongst the Shores of Africa and Asia, and having briefly spoken thereof, to comprehend all the West India or America in one Treatise. To proceed then on the Coast of Africa: from the River Gambo, to the Cape of Good Hope, are the Coasts of Malegette, the Grain Coast, Cape de Palmas, Quaqua Coast, the Gold Coast, Cape de trees Puntas, the Coast of Benin, called also the Byte or Gulf of St. Thomas, Cape Formosa; all this whole Countrey abounding in Corn, Rice, Millet, excellent Fruits; also in Gold both in Sand and Ingots, Ivory, Wax, Hides, Cotton, Ambergreece, Brasil-Wood, Pearls; which they truck for Cloth, Woollen and Linnen, Red-Caps, Guiny. Frize-Mantles, Guns, Swords, Daggers, Belts, Knives, Cop∣per-Bars, Hammers, Ax-heads, Salt, Pins, Kettles, Basons, Looking-Glasses, Beads, Tinn-Rings, and certain Shells called Gories, which passeth there instead of Money. They drive a great trade for these said Commodities with their own people, whom they sell for Slaves, the Kings selling their Subjects, Parents their Children, and indeed all whom they can take or sur∣prize, which are sent generally to the West-India Planta∣tions. To the southward hereof the Ports are divers, but lit∣tle frequented by the English. The Portugals conquer∣ing and possessing several places from the weak Native Inhabitants, all along those Shores. Much thereof be∣ing since gotten by the Dutch, some by us and others; all which do generally abound with the usual Merchan∣dize of the other western parts of Africk. Here also must not be omitted the mention of such Isles as lie in this part of the Ethiopian Sea, namely, St. Thoma, just under the Equator, inhabited now by the Dutch, Ferdinand de Poo, Princes Island, Annibon, St. Hellena, the usual place of Watering in the return of East-India Voyages, being in possession of the English East-India Company; Ascention, a barren Island, where∣unto sometimes Ships go a tortling. Cape de bon Espranza, or the Cape of Good Hope, Cape of Good Hope. was first discovered by Vasques de Gama a Portugal, Anno 1597. by which Discovery, monopolizing to themselves the wealthy Trade of India for a great while, till by one means or another communicated to others. The Cape consisteth of three Points or Head-lands, whereof that which is nearest is called as before; the middlemost, Cabofalso, because mistaken for the other by some of the Portugals in their return homwards; the other the Cape of Needles, or Cape das Agullas, by rea∣son of the sharp Points it shoots out into the Sea. On the top of this Cape is a large and pleasant plain, called the Table of the Cape, yeelding a large prospect over the Sea on all sides. Beyond which, the first Port of observable note, is Sofala, on a little Island near the great River Cuama, next Mozambique, conveniently seated on a large and capacious Haven; strongly fortified, in the hands of the Portugals, who in their going to the Indies, and re∣turning back, used to call here, and to fit themselves with all things necessary to pursue their Voyages: A Town of so great Trade and Wealth, that the Captain of the Castle, in the time of his Government, being but three years, is said to have laid up 300000 Duckets
for his lawful gains, out of the Gold, &c. there, and coming from Sofala. Over against this Port eastward, lyeth the great Island Madagascar, St. Lau∣rence. or St. Laurence, being the greatest yet known in the World; plentiful in all things for the life of man, particularly of Mill, Rice, Sugar, Honey, Wax, Cotton-Wooll, Coco-Nuts, Dates, Goats, Deer, Oxen, Sheep, Fruits, Ginger, Cloves, Sanders, Saf∣fron, Amber, Gold, Silver, Ivory, and Ebony; which they exchange for Toys and small Trifles. The Inhabitants inhospitable and treacherous. Harbours it hath many, and often frequented by Portugals, Dutch, and English. Up higher towards the Arabick-Gulf, are Melinde, Mombaza, Quiloa, Magadoza, &c. At the most eastern part of Africk, called Cape Gar∣defu, lyeth the Island Zocotora, abounding in Cinnabar, Dragons-Blood, and Alloes, hence called Aloes Soco∣trina. Here is the entrance into the Arabian-Gulf, or Red-Sea, Red-Sea. rightly so called from bordering on the Land of Edom. The chief Ports whereof are Zeila, Mazzua, on the Coast of Ethiopia. And at the very top thereof Sues, or Arsinoe, the station of the Turkish Gallies that command the Gulf, they being first framed at Cair, then taken in pieces, brought hither, and here rebuilt and joyned together. Eziongeber, the Haven of Solomons Ships, that fetcht his Gold from Ophir. Others in this Gulf, on the Coast of Arabia, are few, or no places worthy of mention, as far as Babel Mandel, where it openeth into the Southern Ocean; most part of the Persian and Indian Merchandize coming formerly this way, and so transported by Land to Cair, then to Alexandria, but now little or nothing used. A little without the Gulf standeth Aden, a gallant Haven, well traded, and seldom without store of Ship∣ping, carrying from thence Gums, Drugs, and other Merchandize. Next Oran, the Lock and Key of the Southern Oce∣an, on the Point or Promontory, at the entering into the Persian-Gulf, Persian-Gulf. or Gulf de Elcatiffe, a turbulent and unruly Sea, the Southern Ocean breaking in at one end, and the River Euphrates at the other, the continual combating and clashing of which two, makes it so un∣quiet. Places and Ports of note on the Arabian Shore, are Muscabat, Sabta, Balsara, Rhegium. But none so famous as the City of Ormus, on the Persian Shore; not so memorable for the greatness, as the wealth and conveniency of the situation thereof; built in an Island, so called, a famous Empory for Per∣sian and Indian Commodities; being hence transported and conveyed to Badgat, or Babylon, Aleppo, and Tri∣poli, not yet wholly decayed; besides plenty of other Merchandize, here are found the best and fairest Ori∣ental Pearls, which are caught in this Gulf between Ba∣sara and Ormus. The first Port on the Coast of India, India. is accounted Diu, looking towards Persia; but on the East side there∣of, near the Mouth of the River Indus, a Town of great Trade, possessed by the Portugals. Tutta on the Banks of Indus, of no less trade to the Portugals, who here receive such Indian Commodities as come down the Water from Lahore, returning Pepper in exchange, which they bring up the River from their other Factories. Madabat the chief Town of Guzarat, affirmed to be near as big as London; seldom without Merchants of all parts. Cambaia, 3 miles from Indus, and as many in compass, so populous, that it is accounted the Cair of the Indies; exceeding fruitful, abounding in Rice, Wheat, Sugar; all sorts of Spices and Fruits, Silk, Cottons; and in the Mountains thereabouts they find Diamonds, Calce∣donies, and a kind of Onyx, called Corneline, corruptly Cornelian. Swaley, in a large Bay so called, the Haven Town for Surat, about ten miles from the Road, Surat. from whence the River is Navigable only by Boats and Shallops; made of late years a Factory for the English Merchants, who have here their President, and a Magnificent House for their Reception, and Staple of their Commodities, which are chiefly Spices, Calicoes, Indico, Sarcinets, Pantadoes, &c. Bombay is a great Factory for the English East-India Company. Goa a Sea-Town, situate in a little, Goa. but most plea∣sant Island, called Ticuarinum, fifteen miles in compass, opposite to the Out-let of the River Mindano, a noted Empory, and one of the chief Keys that unlock the Indies; inhabited, besides the Portugals, by Indians, Moors, Jews, Armenians, Guzarats, Banians, Bra∣maa's, and many others, who for the cause of Trade and Gain, dwell here, without molestation for their Reli∣gion. Curwar Batticale, on the Coast of Malabar, first Co∣nonor; well built and beautified, with a very fair Haven, belonging to the Portugals, and well traded by Mer∣chants. Then Calicut, the chief of these parts, Calicut. three miles in length upon the Sea, of exceeding Trade, especially in fine Calicoes, thence so called, Ginger, Cinamon, Pepper, and Cassia. Cochin, a Sea-Town likewise, of little less Trade than Calicut. To the southward hereof is Cape Comarin, Cape Come∣rin. or Corman∣del; and a little from thence the Island Zeylan, large, and almost round, affirmed to be plentiful in Cinnamon, Ginger, Gold of the best sort, Silver, and all sorts of Mettals, Pretious-Stones, and store of the largest Ele∣phants; the chief Towns are Trinquelimale and Battica∣lo, Jaffanapatan, Colmuch now Columbo, having a fair Haven, the Royal Seat of the Kings, whence many Ships laden with Cinnamon, Gems, Elephants, and other Commodities go yearly to other places. Within the Gulf of Bengala, in the Kingdom of Gol∣kondo, are Negapatan, Madras, St. Georges Fort, Gulf of Bengala. Masu∣lapatan, Orissa, Bellesor, Angeli, &c. From all which they usually send plenty of Rice, Cotten-Cloth, a fine Stuff like Silk, made of a Grass, called there Yerva; Long-Pepper, Ginger, Mirabolans, and other Mer∣chandize. Ougely and Bengala, giving name to the great Bay, si∣tuate on a Branch of the River Ganges, a place endowed with plenty of all things fit for life, rich in Merchandize, especially Rice, Gold, Pretious Stones, Pearls, a curi∣ous sort of painted Cotten Cloth thence sent to all parts of the World. Aracan and Pegu, the glory of these parts, great; strong, and Beautiful, Rich in Gold, Gems of divers sorts, Red-Wax, &c. Lugor, on the Sea-side, near that little Istmos that joyneth the Chersonese to the main Land. Martaban, Sornaw, Queda, renowned for the best Pepper, and in most plenty, for that cause much fre∣quented by Merchants. And in the Kingdom of Siam, Siam. in the narrow Strait between the Isle of Sumatra and the Peninsula, called the Golden Chersonese, stands Malacca, for Spices, Un∣guents, Gold, Silver, Pearls, and Pretious-Stones, the most noted Empory of the East, once possest and strong∣ly fortified by the Portugals, but taken from them by the King of Achem. Next Jor, at the very Point or Promontory. Patane, where the English and Hollanders have their Factories.
Siam, at the bottom of a great Bay, a goodly Ci∣ty, and conveniently seated on the River Menam, for Trade and Merchandize, which is Precious-Stones, much Spices, &c. Champa and Cochinchina in Camboya, Cochin∣china. having store of Gold, and Lignum Aloes, valued at it's weight in Sil∣ver; Silk in abundance, Purselan Earth for the making Cups, Dishes, and other Utensils, Salt-Peter, &c. To the northward whereof lyeth the Isle of Aynan, a place of the greatest note for the Pearl-fishing. Hereabout beginneth the Kingdom of China, China. which as it is the largest, richest, and best inhabited through∣out the whole World, would require a Treatise corre∣spondent; but because they are a People forbidding Forreigners to trade amongst them, unless in some sew places, the knowledge of others coming onely by particular report, I shal only give a touch at two or three places which are most considerable for Trade; as First, Nanquin, of incredible greatness, situate in a great Gulf, so called, nine leagues from the Sea, on the great River Kiang, wherein, by report, ride for the most part no less than 10000 of the Kings Ships, besides such as belong to private Merchants. Cantan, on the Navigable River Macas, where the Portugals had once a great Factory. Fucheau, not far from the Sea, well-traded, and con∣veniently seated for conveyance of Merchandize throughout the whole Kingdom. Scianhay a Town frequented by much Shipping, not above twenty four hours sayl from Japan; the Trade whereof is chiefly Cottons. Numerous are the Ports of China besides these, which for the cause aforesaid are omitted: The general Trade whereof consists chiefly in Gold, Silver, Copper, Chi∣na-Silks in abundance; fine Purselans, Rhubarb, Musk, Civet, Amber, Camphire, Spices, Pearls, much China-Wood, and almost all sorts of Merchandize. The Islands scattered up and down the Indian Seas, are very many, and rich in Merchandize, viz. Japan the most northern Island of all, Japan. having seve∣ral fair Ports, Meaco being the chief, at this time the Empory and Staple of China, whither they bring their Commodities for forreign Trade. The Philippines, Philip∣pines. so called, in honour of Philip the Second, King of Spain, in whose time discovered, many whereof have been, or now are, under that Crown. Manillas Mattan, unfortunately remarkable for the death of Magellan, there slain in a Battle with the Na∣tives. Lequio Major, Lequio Minor, Formosa, Reix Magos, the Isles of Bandan, Moluc∣coes. Moluccoes, Ternate, Tidor, Ma∣chir, Rachian, Machian, Botone, Celibes, Gilolo, Ma∣cassar, and Amboina, where that inhumane Butchery was by the Hollanders committed upon the English, Anno 1618. Unto all which respectively, not onely the Merchants of China and India, but the Portugals, Spa∣nish, Dutch, and English, have continual recourse by Shipping, bringing from thence Gold, Silver, and other Metals; Gems, Pearls, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Ginger, Aloes, Sugar, Canes, Pepper, Drugs, Sanders white, red, and yellow, &c. Borneo, Borneo. an Island of more note, and greater than any other spoken of in the Indian Seas, just under the Equa∣tor; the greatest riches whereof are, Camphire, Aga∣rick, and Diamonds. Places of note therein are, Borneo, Sambas, Succa∣dana, Benjarmassin, &c. Sumatra, Sumatra. under the Line also, whence to the Coast of Malacca the Strait is very narrow, not above a Mus∣quet-shot in breadth; it affords great plenty of Wax, Silk, Cottons, Ginger, Pepper, Camphire, Agarick, and Cassia; rich in Mines, not onely of Tin, Iron, Sulphur, and other Minerals, but of Gold such plen∣ty, that 'tis credibly believed this was the Ophir of So∣lomon. The Inhabitants are either good Artificers, cunning Merchants, or expert Mariners. The chief Sea-Towns, Achem, the Royal-Seat; Peder, Cambar, Me∣nencabo, and Passaman. Java Major, rich in Corn, Mettals, Gems, Silks in abundance; Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, and some o∣ther Spices. The chief Towns, Palambua, Sarabaya, Tuban, Dama, Charabon, Batavia, and Bantam near the Straits of Sunda, which separate Sumatra from this Island. This place, amongst many others, being the princi∣pal Factory of the English in all that part of the In∣dies. The King of Bantam having great correspondence with, and great affection for, his Majesty of England; whereby 'tis hoped our Factory will be better setled, and our Traffick encreased in those parts, to the great advantage and profit of our English Merchants. Java-Minor, the South Coast whereof is not fully dis∣covered, and the Places and Commodities onely by conjecture, so also are many other Islands and Pla∣ces thereabouts, as Nova Hollandia, Nova Guinea, Islas de Ladronas, &c. In the Indian Sea, and Mare Pacificum, which with the Coasts of America, remains onely to be spoken of. That great Sea or Ocean, was first so named by Magel∣lan, who passing through those troublesome and tem∣pestuous Straits, that bear his name, found such a change upon his coming into this main Ocean, that he gave it the name of Mar del Zur, from the calm and peaceable temper thereof. California is the most Western part of America, America. which is washed by this Sea, once supposed to be a part of the Continent, but since discovered to be a large Island se∣parated from the Main by a narrow Sea called Mer Ver∣miglio, by some, the Gulf of California. Towns of trading here are few or none, at leastwise to us known; the Capes only observable, once coasted by Sir Francis Drake, as Cape Blanco and Mendocino in the North, and St. Lucas on the South, remarkable for the great Prize taken there from the Spaniards by Capt. Cavendish, in his Circum-navigation of the World. On the South-east hereof are the Navigable Rivers of St. Sebastian's, Rio de Spirito Sancto, Cape Corientes; the Towns of Nativitad, New Spain. pillaged and burnt by Capt. Cavendish; St. Jago, a little South of Nativitad, the Shores whereof are said to be full of Pearls. Acapulco the best Haven on the South Sea, in a safe and capacious Bay, with convenient Stations and Docks for shipping. Aguatulco a noted Port, and rich, much used in the Spanish Voyages from Mexico southward, plundered by Sir Francis Drake and Mr. Cavendish. Tacoante peque, Guatamalo, and St. Jago, Salvador, St. Michaels, Carlos, Philippina, St. Foy, where the Spaniards melt and cast their Gold into Ingots. These, and indeed all the Western Shores of Ame∣rica, subject to the Spaniards, they being very cautious and jealous of any other Countrey to trade there; many of these Countreys, especially the Valeys, exceeding fruitful in Fruits and other necessaries for life, the moun∣tainous parts being barren, but plentifully supplyed with never-perishing Mines of Silver and Gold; the o∣ther Merchandize being Cottens, Sugars, Indigo, Co∣chineel, Liquid-Amber, Mastick, Tobacco, Sulphur, Sarsaperilla, several sorts of Gums, and other Apothe∣caries Drugs. A little beyond Cape Sancta Maria, in Verugua, ly∣eth Panama, over against Porto Bell, being the narrow∣est part of that long and narrow Istmos, or Strait of Land that parteth the two Peninsula's of America, Mexi∣cana
and Peruana, called the Straits of Darien, from a Town and River of the same name; in some places not twelve miles from Sea to Sea, in many not above seven∣teen; a small Ligament for so great a Body, observa∣ble by that notable but succesless attempt of John Ox∣enham, an adventurous Englishman, one of Sir Fran∣cis Drak's Followers, who arriving with seventy of his Companions in a small Bark, a little above Nombre de Dios, the chief Town of the Istmos, or Mar del Nort side, drew his Ship on Land, covered it with Boughs, and guided by some Negroes, marched over-land with his Company, till he came to a River; there cut down Wood, made him a Pinnace, entred the South-Sea, went to the Isle of Pearls, took from the Spaniards 60000 pound weight of Gold, and 200000 pound weight of Silver, returned to Land; but through the mutiny of some of his own Company, was intercepted, and never returned to his Ship or Countrey: This Re∣corded by the Spanish Writers with great admira∣tion. The Towns and Places on the Shores of Peru, are first Bonaventura, on a Bay so called; Cape de Francisco. Puerto Vego, not far from the Sea, the first Town of these Parts possessed by the Spaniard, from whence the Trade is driven betwixt Panama and Peru, where are found very rich Emeralds. Peru. Guyaquill, in a deep Bay, a noted and much frequen∣ted Empory of the Spaniards. Payta, a small Town, but hath the safest and most fre∣quented Harbour in all this Countrey: burnt by Captain Cavendish. Lima, by the Spaniard called Cividad de los Reques, the most fruitful of all Peru, in the Latitude of 12 deg. and a half; a Town of greater wealth than bigness, the Riches of Peru passing yearly through it: sacked by Sir Francis Drake. Porto Quemado, Castro Vereyna, whence cometh that Tobacco called Right Vereynas. Ariquipa, where the Silver of Placa and Potosi are shipt for Panama. Next in Cbili are Copayago, Serena, Port val Paraiso; out of which the English under Drake took a Ship, and therein 25000 Pezoes of the purest Gold of Baldavia. Conception, Auraca, Imperial, Baldavia, Osorno, Ca∣stro, the most southern Town of all Peru. To this Southern part of Chili, there is great expecta∣tion of an English Traffick with the Inhabitants, by rea∣son of a disgust taken by the Natives against the Spani∣ards for their cruelty and infidelity. And, in order thereunto, his Majesty and Royal Highness the Duke of York, and several others of the Nobility, designed a farther discovery of those parts for procuring a Trade and Commerce with the People of that Countrey; and in the year 1669, there were two Ships sent upon the same Discovery, the one called the Sweep-stakes, under the conduct of that ingenious and venturous Commander, Capt. John Norborough; and the other the Batchelour, Capt. Humphrey Flemming Com∣mander: Both which Ships proceeded on their Voyage til they came near the Straits of Magellan, not far from Rio St. Julian, which was the appointed place of win∣tering, until an opportunity presented to pass the said Straits; near which place they lost one another: where∣upon the Batchelour returned home, with a strong ap∣prehension that his Consort was lost: But on the con∣trary, the Sweepstakes very honourable proceeded on her Voyage, and passed through the Straits into Mar-del-zur, alias, Mare Pacificum, and sayled alongst the Coast of Chili, unto a place called Baldavia, in the latitude of 39 deg. 30 min. or thereabouts, under the power and jurisdiction of the Spaniards, who have the command thereof as far as the reach of their Guns; who at first pretended a friendship with our Men, but at last be∣trayed and detained four of them, which Captain Nor∣borough very diligently endeavoured to release, but pro∣ving ineffectual, was constrained to leave them behind, and so returned back through the Straits, and in June 1671 came home, to the great satisfaction of the whole Court, giving great hopes of procuring a Trade in those Parts, that may possibly prove very advantagious to the whole Kingdom, by reason of the abundance of Gold and Silver in that Country. From Baldavia to the Straits of Magellan there are no Towns; the Capes of note are, Cabo de las Islas, Punta del Gado; and at the very entrance of the Strait, Cape de la Victoria, so called from Magellans Ship first passing this way. The West-Entrance of the Straits of Magellan, Straits of Magel∣lan. is in 53 degrees of South Latitude; and the East-Entrance lies in 52 deg. 20 m. the length 110 leagues, and the breadth in some places two leagues over, in others not fully two miles. This place was first discovered and passed through by Ferdinando Magellan a Portugal; followed by Sir Francis Drake; afterwards it grew fa∣miliar to many Seamen. There is another Passage betwixt the South-Sea and Atlantick-Ocean, to the southward hereof, Fretum le Maire. called Fre∣tum le Maire, found out, Anno 1615, by Jacob le Maire, and William Cornelison Schouten, much more conveni∣ent than the former; betwixt both which the Land is called Terra del Fugo, the South Point whereof is Cape Horn; the two Lands betwixt which they sayled when first discovered, they called States-land on the East, and on the West Mauritius-land. The next places of note on the main Continent, be∣ginning at Cape Virgines, lying at the very eastermost part of the Strait Magellan, are Rio de la Cruz, where Magellan stayed two months. Rio St. Julian, Port Desire, Rio de las Comarones, Cape Rotundo, Cape St. Antonio, at the Mouth of Rio de la Plata, a large River, and of so violent a stream, that the Sea, for many leagues together, altereth not its taste. On the North hereof is Brasil, Brasil. possessed chiefly by the Portugals; a Countrey abounding with exceeding plenty of the best Sugars; that and the great quantity of Red-Wood used for the dying of Cloth, being the chief Commodities hereof. The places of note, are Santos, St. Vincents, Saint Sebastian, at the Mouth of Rio Janeiro, Spirito Sancto, Porto Seguro, To dos los Santos, Salvador, Olinda on the River Meragnon, Cape Blanco, Pernambuco, and Augu∣stine the eastermost part of America. Paraiba, on the River so called; Rio de Grand, Para, Rio de Amazones, a River full of Islands at the entrance, broad and of a long course, the discoveries whereof are not fully made. Places to the northward are Caripo, memorable for a Colony of the English there planted by Captain Ro∣bert Harcourt, 1608. on the Bank of Wiapoco. The River Oronoque, and Sorenam, on a River so called, in the Countrey of Guiana, Guiana. not long since a thri∣ving Plantation of the English, lately delivered into the hands of the Dutch, yeelding Sugars, Cottons, To∣bacco, Wood for Dyers, and some other Commodi∣ties. St. Thoma, the onely Town of Guiana inhabited by the Spaniard. Porto de Guero, Puerto la Cabelo, St. Martha, on the Shores of the Ocean, neighboured by a safe and conve∣nient Haven: spoyled by Sir Francis Drake. Rio de La Hacha, New Salamanca, Sancta Cruz de Mopes, near the confluence of the Rivers St. Martha and Magdalena. Cathargena, situate in a Peninsula, well sortified since the taking thereof by Sir Francis Drake, who anno 1585, took it by assault, and carried from thence, be∣sides
inestimable sums of money, 240 Brass Pieces of Ordnance. Next Darien, near the Strait of Land so called, on the Bank of the River Uraba. Nombre de Dios, Nombre de Dios. conveniently seated on the upper Sea for a Town of Trade, whither the Spaniards brought their Goods from Spain for Panama, and from Panama for Spain; taken also by Sir Francis Drake. St. Philips, situate on a safe and strong Haven called Porto Bell, built in this place by the command of King Philip the Second, to be the Staple of Trade betwixt Spain and Panama, instead of Nombre de Dios, where it was before; removed partly because of the unwhol∣some Air of Nombre de Dios, but chiefly because that Town lay too open to the English Invasions; fortified with two strong Castles on each side of the Haven, yet for all that, Surprized and Pillaged by Captain Parker, Anno 1601. Baya de Cartago, Cape de Honduras, Porto de Sal, Porto de Cavallos the most noted Haven in the Gulf of Honduras; whence compassing the Peninsula of Yuca∣tan by Cape de Cotoche, Gulf of Mexico. the great Bay or Gulf of Mexi∣co openeth it self; the Ports and Places of the Shores whereof were heretofore little frequented, unless by the Spaniard: in these later times, and since the Plantati∣on of Jamaica by the English, something better, though yet not much known. The chief, and almost the onely place, is Lavera Cruz, the next Port Town to the great City of Mexico, from which it is distant about sixty leagues. The Traffick and Commodities of these Eastern parts of America being the same with those on the Shores and Coasts of Mar del Zur, spoken of before. North-eastward hereof lyeth the Coast of Florida; betwixt which, and the Coasts of Guiana, before trea∣ted of, lie scattered up and down the Sea a great num∣ber of Islands, some greater, some lesser, viz. Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Porto Rico, the Caribes, and Lucayos. Cuba a large Island, Cuba. in length from Cape Magesi near Hispaniola, to Cape St. Antonio, 230 leagues; a fertile Soyl, liberally stored with Ginger, Cassia, Mastick, Aloes, Sugar, &c. Ports of most note, St. Jago, Salvador, Sancta Cruz, Sancto Spirito, Trinidad, Port del Principe, Ba∣racoa, Matanca, and the Havana, a noted and well-traded Port, so strongly situate and fortified, both by Nature and Art, that it seems impregnable. Hispaniola, Hispani∣ola. a large Island also, but not so big as Cuba, a plentiful and pleasant Countrey, once abounding in Gold, but long since exhausted; it affords Ginger and Sugar in abundance. The Ports worthy observation, St. Domingo, the Re∣sidence of the Governor, not yet recovered of the Da∣mage done by Sir. Francis Drake, St. Salvador, Inguana, or Sancta Maria del Porto, Porto de la Plata, Azua or Compostella, &c. Jamaica, Jamaica. on the South of Cuba, from whence di∣stant twenty leagues or thereabouts, and not much more from Hispaniola; formerly possessed by the Spa∣niard, not many years ago taken by the English, who therein have began a gallant Plantation; the wholesom∣ness of the Air, and fertility of the Soyl, giving great hopes (if not assurance) of a continued encrease and improvement thereof, to the encouragement of such as are already there, or others that shall hereafter transport themselves thither. Merchandize of their own growth, are Tobacco, Sugar, Cotton, Ginger, Indigo, and several sorts of Woods serviceable for Dyers and others. Places of note are Sevilla, Melilla, Oristan, Punta Ni∣grilla, Port Royal, Port Moranto, Aguia, &c. Porto Rico, Porto Rico. something Mountainous, but indifferent fruitful, exposed sometimes to those suddain and trou∣blesome Tempests, called Hurricanes, as are the rest of these places hereabout. The Commodities, Ginger, Sugar, Cassia, and Hydes; the European Cattel so en∣creasing in most of these Islands, that they have grown wild by reason of their multitude; the inhabitants of many of the places killing thousands for their Skins on∣ly, leaving their flesh as a prey to ravenous Creatures. Places of note are, Porto Rico, Arezibo, Luysa, &c. The Caribes, or Cannibal Islands, so called in gene∣ral, because at first discovery inhabited by Cannibals, or Man-eating people, as the word imports; extended in the Sea like a Bow, of different temper and quality; the principal are these, Margerita, Trinidada, Caribbe Islands. Grana∣da, Granadilla, St. Lucies, St. Vincent, Barbadoes, a flourishing Colonie and Plantation of the English, well peopled; the Soil in shew like England but more fruit∣ful; furnished on the South side with a large and com∣modious Haven, driving a great Trade in Tobacco, Su∣gar, Cotton, Ginger, Indigo, and Logwood, &c. Next Martinico, Dominico, Mary-gallant, Dissedea, Guardalupe, Antego, Barbada, Mount-serat, St. Christo∣phers, Nevis, St. Martins, St. Bartholomew, Anguilla, Sancta Cruz, and many others of less note. The Lucaios are Mayaguana, Sumana, Yumeta, Yuma, Lucaioes Guanabani, Cygnateo, Lucanceque and Bahama, memo∣rable for giving name to the violent Current interposing betwixt it and the demy Island of Florida, of so forci∣ble a course, that no strength of Wind or Oars can pre∣vail against it, (as is commonly reported). Florida was first discovered by the English, Florida. under the command of Sebastian Cabot, Anno 1497. so called by John de Ponte, afterwards from the fresh verdure and flourishing estate in which he found it: The Ports are Sancta Lucia, St. Augustine, St. Matthews, Port Royal, Cape Feare, Port Charles, and St. Hellens, which three lie near the borders of Virginia. Virginia, a gallant Plantation of the English, Virginia having many excellent properties above other Nations, as the temperature of the Air, fruitfulness of the Soyl, com∣modiousness of situation; many great and navigable Ri∣vers, and safe and spacious Harbours. The first disco∣very hereof by the two Cabots, Father and Son, Anno 1497. did first entitle the Crown of England to this Countrey, who still possess it, having there a large and flourishing Plantation. The chief Trade, besides other Commodities, is Tobacco, where there is such abun∣dance, that no place affordeth more, or of better qua∣lity. The Rivers are, James River, York River, Po∣tomac, Rapabanock, Elizabeth River, Wicomococo, and many others, all falling into the great Bay called CHE∣SAPEACH. The two Capes, at the entrance whereof are Cape Henry, and Cape Charles. Towns of most note are, James-Town, the Seat of the Governour, and many others. Eastward of Virginia lyeth the Isles of Burmudes, so called from John Bermudes a Spaniard, by whom it was first discovered: Also called the Summer Islands, from Sir George Summer, who there suffered shipwrack; there are several of them, altogether making a body in form of a Cressant, and inclose very good Ports, as those of Southampton, Harrington, and Pagets. The Air is al∣most alwayes serene, very healthful, agreeing well with English bodies, who have here at divers times set∣led and established a fair and powerful Colonie. The healthfulness of the place inviting that famous Mathe∣matitian Mr. Richard Norwood, once Reader of Gresham Colledge in London, to make his abode here. Cocha∣neil and Tobacco, with some Pearls, Amber, and fair Oranges being their principal Riches, for which they have a good Trade. To the North-east of Virginia lyeth Mary-land, Mary∣land. and New-England, a Countrey bravely situate, and very a∣greeable
to English bodies. The Soil exceeding fruit∣ful of Natures necessities, even to excess; supplyed al∣so with many large and capacious Bayes and Rivers. The Commodities, besides store of Flesh and Corn sent abroad, are Furs, Amber, Flax, Hemp, Cedar, Pitch, Tar, New England Masts, Cables, and Timber for Shipping and o∣ther uses; in a word, whatsoever comes to England from the Sound, might be as well supplyed from hence. The chiefest Places are New-York, seated on the great River Manhattans, or Hudsons River, near its fall into the Ocean, and not far from the Isle Mattowacks, or Long-Island, over against the East end whereof the Ri∣ver Connecticot falleth into the Sea. The next Boston, Barnstaple, New-Plimouth, near un∣to which is that observable hooked Point of Land na∣med Cape Cod, with several others: And St. Georges Fort, built by the English, at the Mouth of the River Sagahadar. Adjoyning hereunto lyeth Nova Scotia, Nova Scotia. Nova Fran∣cia, or Canadie, and the small Peninsula, called Acca∣dia, betwixt the Bay of St. Lawrence; where the great River Canada falleth into the Gulf and the main Sea. The noted places are Port Royal, St. Lukes, Port au Montou, Gaspe, Gachepe, St. Croiz, Franco Roy, and St. Lewis. The Commodities are chiefly Furs, &c. Not far to the eastward hereof, lyeth the Isle of Sables. At the most Eastern part of America Septentrionalis, lyeth New-found-land, New-found-Land. an Island separated from the Main, or Terra Corterialis, by a Frith or Strait, called Gulf de Casteaux, furnished on the Sea-Coast with abun∣dance of Cod-fish, and other Fish; for the catching of which, Ships of many Countreys frequent that place; ha∣ving also many large and convenient Havens, as Rennosa, Fair-Haven, Thorn-Bay, Trinity-Bay, Bonavist, White-Bay, Port Trespass, St. Georges Bay, St. Jones, &c. The Air of this Countrey never very extream, more tempe∣rate in the depth of Winter than with us in England, the Brooks being never so frozen over that the Ice is able to bear a Dog; and those little Frosts but seldom holding three nights together. Before the Island lyeth that long Bank, extending in length some hundred of leagues; near to which are ma∣ny little Islands, called by John Cabot, Bacalos, peculiar now to one onely, from the numerous multitude of Cod-fish which swarmed hereabout. Betwixt Cape de Gumay in Terra Corterialis, and the Capes Farewel and Desolation, near Groenland, lyeth the two Sraits, named Fretum Davis, Fretum Davis. Fretum Hudson. and Fretum Hudson, so called from the first Discoverers; a Sea dilating it self much both towards the North, South, and West, giving great Hopes thereby of a Passage to China, and the East-In∣dies: And therefore notwithstanding the Ice, Fogs, and other Incumbrances searched into by many English Worthies, as Frobrsher, Davis, Weymouth, Hudson, Button, Baffin, Smith, James, Gillam, and others, who have sailed therein, some one way, and some another, and given names to many places, viz. King James his Cape, Queen-Ann's Cape, Prince Henry's Foreland, Saddel Island, Barren Island, Redgoose Island, Digs his Island, Hackluits Headland, Smiths Bay, Prince Ruperts River, Maudlin Sound, Fair-haven, and many others, even from James his Bay on the South, at the bottom whereof Hudson wintered in the latitude of 51 degrees, to Baf∣fins Bay on the North, lying in the latitude of 79 de∣grees; and to the westward, as far as Port Nelson, where Sir Thomas Button wintered, being more westerly than Mr. Hudsons Bay by 190 leagues; and near as far to∣wards the West as Cape California in Mar del Zur, where finding the Tyde continually to rise every twelve hours fifteen foot or more, and that a West Wind did make the Neap Tydes equal to the Spring Tydes; finding also the Tydes to set sometimes eastwards, sometimes west∣wards, gave good hope to Mr. Hubard (who made the Plat thereof) of a through Passage, called therefore Hubards Hope. And in the year 1667, a very honourable and worthy Design was renewed, and undertaken for the discovery of this North-West Passage, and setling a Trade with the Indians in those Parts, by several of the Nobility of England, and divers Merchants of note belonging to the City of London, who fitted out two small Vessels for that purpose, the one called the Nonsuch Ketch, Cap∣tain Zachariah Gillam Commander, the other the Eaglet Ketch, Captain Staniard Commander; the latter where∣of being by stormy Weather beaten back, returned home without success; but the other proceeding on her Voyage, in her way made the Land of Buss, lying be∣twixt Iseland and Groenland; passed through Hudsons Straits, then into Baffins Bay; from thence southerly into the Great Bay, where in the latitude of fifty one degrees, or thereabouts, in a River now called Ru∣perts River, he wintered, found a friendly correspon∣dence and civil entertainment with the Natives, traded with them in exchange of Bever-Skins, &c. for Knives, Beads, Looking-Glasses, Hatchets, and other trivial Commodities, and the next year returned with good success, and future hopes of an excellent Trade in those parts, giving invitation thereby to the aforesaid Noble∣men and Merchants to adventure again, Anno 1669. Which Voyage being not yet performed, leaves us ig∣norant both of the Places and Trade thereof (save what is already known) undiscover'd, till the conclusion of the Voyage. Groenland, called by the Natives Secanunga, Groen∣land. is that last part of America, which remains onely to be spoken of; a Countrey, as is supposed, but thinly inhabited, and by reason of the abundance of Ice, and inhospitableness of the People, little frequented, and consequently not so well known, as to give a perfect description thereof; for notwithstanding several Voyages have been made thither on purpose, many Ships have accidentally touch∣ed upon the Coasts thereof in pursuance of the N. W. Discoveries; yet for the causes aforesaid, the Countrey lies still obscured in a Northern Mist, being to us almost altogether unknown, unless the names of certain Bayes; Capes, and such like, as Whale-sound, Horn-sound, Rom∣bels-ford, Conningham, Gilberts-sound, Cocking-ford, Cape Comfort, Cape Desolation, all within the Streight; Cape Farewel, Cape Discord, Leister-point, Warwick-Foreland, Hernolds-Ness, Bereford, not far from the West part of Iseland, and several others. South-westward from Iseland, about 140 leagues, ly∣eth an Island called Buss, Buss. in the latitude of 57 degrees 35 minutes, not yet fully discovered, but only as it hath been accidentally seen by some, who upon other Dis∣coveries have occasionally passed those Seas, as Captain Gillam in his first Voyage to the North-West Passage had Soundings near unto it. From Iseland, about 135 leagues North-eastwards, in the latitude of seventy one degrees, lyeth an Island called Trinity Island, Trinity Island. the North-East Point whereof is named Youngs-Foreland, a place formerly much frequen∣ted by the Dutch for their Whale-fishing; the Land is very high, full of Rocks and Mountains, one especially much higher than the rest, called Bears Mountain. Thus briefly have I touched at, and as it were, onely named the Sea-Coasts of most of the known Parts of the World, which may serve as an entrance to the suc∣ceeding Sea-Atlas, commending the Discovery of such parts as are yet unknown to the search of Posterity.
The Discoveries that have been made within this two hundred years, by the Worthies of our own Nation, as well as Strangers. CHristopher Columbus the Genoes, first determi∣nately attempted to seek after, and in the year 1492 prosperously discovered the great Cominent of America. John Cabot a Venetian, and his Son Sir Sebastian, born in England, succeeded Columbus in that famous At∣tempt, and discovered all the North Coasts thereof, from Cape Florida to New-found-Land. But Americus Vesputius, in discovering some of the South Parts thereof, obtained the honour of having the whole Continent called by his Name America. Ferdinando Magellan, Anno 1519. was the first that found out that Strait towards the Antartick Pole, which gives a Passage between Mar del Zur and the Atlantick Ocean, called by his Name, Fretum Magellanicum. Mr. Richard Chancellor first found out the Passage by Sea to Russia, Anno 1550. Sir Hugh Willoughby first discovered Greenland, or King James his New-Land; attempted to find the North-East Passage to Cathay and China, Anno 1553, but in his return was frozen to death. Mr. Stephen Burroughs attempted the like Passage, anno 1556. discovered several places in Russia, Nova Zembla, and thereabout, to his lasting memory. Sir Francis Drake, that adventurous and valiant Eng∣lish Worthy, after a Voyage first made to Nombre de Dios, and other parts of the West Indies, in the years 1572, and 1573, having then only a sight of the South Sea, renewed in himself a noble desire of sayling there∣in; and after some hindrances at home, in Service of his Prince and Countrey, anno 1577, by gracious Com∣mission from his Sovereign, and the help of divers Friends, Adventurers, fitted himself with five Ships for his intended design, and passing through the Straits of Magellan, made many rare Discoveries there, and on the West of America; sailed thence through the South Sea to the East Indies, and steering homeward by the Cape of Good Hope, after two years and ten months spent in that Circum-navigation of the World, and ma∣ny excellents Atchievements and Discoveries there per∣formed, that worthy Knight, and most noble Neptune, happily returned to Plymouth whence he first set forth. Other Voyages be made sometime afterwards to the main Continent of America, and the Islands thereof, wherein were taken by that English Hero, the City of St. Jago, Sancto Domingo, Cartagena, with the Fort and Town of St. Augustine in Florida. Mr. Tho. Cavendish not long after followed the trace of Sir Francis through the Straits of Magellan, encom∣passed the whole circumference of the Terrestrial Globe, in the year 1587, and prosperously returned (laden with honour and applause) into his Native Coun∣trey. Several famous Men among the Netherlanders have also, to their lasting creadit, encompassed this Globe of Earth and Sea, as Olivier van de Nort, Isaac le Maire, and William Cornelison Schouten, who according to their several Courses and Voyages, made discoveries not to be forgotten by Posterity. Sir Martin Frobisher, Anno 1576, attempted the North-West Passage, sailed to the latitude of 62 de∣grees, found that great Inlet, since known by his Name, Forbishers Straits. Mr. Arthur Pett, and Mr. Charles Jackman, Anno 1580, went out in two Ships for the discovery of the River Ob, and a Passage to China, arrived at Vaigats, passed the Straits, took particular observation along the East Part of Nova Zembla, the North of Russia and Sa∣moeds Countrey, so far as the Ice would give him leave. Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Anno 1583, going for Disco∣very of the North of America, came into the great Ri∣ver St. Lawrence in Canada, setled the Government of the Fishing there. Master John Davis attempted the discovery of the North-West Passage, anno 1585; came into the latitude of 66 degrees, plyed alongst the Coast, observed the probability of a Passage there, and in the end of the year returned. The next year went again for a further Discovery, found a great Inlet betwixt the latitude of 55 and 56 degrees; Traded with the People of the Place, and so returned. In the year 1587, he took a third Voyage for disco∣very of those Parts, followed his course to the North and North-West, as far as the latitude of 76 degrees, having the Continent on the West, and Groenland (which he named Desolation) on the East; and passing on to the latitude of 86 degrees, the Passage enlarged it self so, that he could not see the Western Shoar; then he altered his course southerly to the latitude of 73 de∣grees, in a great Sea free from Ice, of an unreasonable depth; and by reason of the departure of two Ships which he left a Fishing, he returned home. This Pas∣sage (as he was the first Discoverer) he called by his own name, Fretum Davis. The Discovery of these Lands, Coasts, Islands, Straits, Havens, Bayes, Rivers, &c. with the Commo∣dities and Advantages arising from the same, in a Trea∣tise of his own, called the Worlds Hydrographical De∣scription, with his yearly Reporteries and Journals, may more largely appear. Mr. Stephen Bennet first discovered Cherry Island, Anno 1603. at the Charge of Sir Francis Cherry, and therefore beareth his name. Mr. Henry Hudson, Anno 1608, was sent to disco∣ver towards the North Pole, came to the latitude of 81 degrees, attempted the North-East Passage in two Voyages; performed one worthy discovery to the North-West into a great Bay called by his own name Hudsons Bay. Jonas Pool and Thomas Edge, made a Voyage Nor∣therly toward the Pole, first began the Whale killing in Greenland; to the eastward whereof Mr. Edge found another Island, called by his own name, Edges Island. FINIS.
NOVISSIMA TOTIUS TERRARUM ORBIS TABULA Auctore Joh: Seller Hydrographo Reg LUNAE ACIALIS. map of the world
DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms VICTORIA PULO O DEUS German blazon A Chart of the NORTH SEA By John Seller Hydrographer to the King. And are to be sold at his shop at the Hermitage in Wapping chart of the North Sea
A Draught of the SANDS, CHANNELS, BUOYES BEACONS AND SEA-MARKS upon the Coast of ENGLAND: From the Southforeland to Orfordness Discovered by Capt. Gilbert Craue, and Capt. Tho: Browne. Elder Bretheren of ye Trinity House. The Sea Coast Surveighed by Ionas Moor. Esquire. & Published by the Special License and Aproba∣tion of his Royal Highness the DUKE OF YORK. Made and Sold by John Seller. Hidrographer to the Kings most Exellent Majesty in Wapping. London TRINITAS IN UNITATE blazon or coat of arms The Names of the Sands and Shoals marked with their respective Letters a Blyth Sand b Holehaven Scarrs c Chapman d Middle ground e Nower and buoy f The Warp g Middle Middle grō h Heaps i Altar k Ridge l A Shoale m Andrews n Cutler o Middle ground p Onion q Whiteing r Kettle bottom s Quernes t White Dike u Colburn w Searn x Woolpack y Spell z Hook A Middle ground B Horse C Gilman D Girdler E Pan Sands F Cullumbine F Lamb Sclup chart of England
A Chart of the North Coast of England.  mouth to Cocket Island,  all the Roads Havens and Harbors Depthes and Soundings, the Coarses and distances of one Place from Another. Newly Corrected and Published by Iohn Seller. And are to be Sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Marriners Compass, at the Hermitage staire in Wapping. chart of England A Description of the East Coast of Scotland, Shewing all the Bayas Roads havens Harbors depths and Soundings, Courses & distances of places one the said Coasts, Neby, Corrected and Published by Iohn Seller. chart of Scotland
THE River of Humber Described by Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most excellent Majestie THE RIVER OF TYNE Described by Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie. Cum privilegio The names of the sands in the River of Tyne A Ton Shore B Riddalls Shore C Bill Shore D Ballast shore E Pace sand F South road sand G Iarro sand H Iarro middle ground I North road sand K Dirtwick sand L Coble deane M Hird sand N Bill sand O Muscle scalp I Clarke sculpsit chart of rivers Humber and Tyne
A Chart of the Seacoasts of ENGLAND FLANDERS & HOLLAND Shewing all the Sands Shoals Rocks and Dangers The Bayes Roads Harbours Buoyes Beacons and Seamarks on the said coasts. By John Seller Hydrographer in Ordinary to the King And are to be sold at his Shoppe in Excharge Ally in Cornhill and at the Hermitage in Wapping: London. Ornat mo Consult moq Viro D. JOS. WILLIAMSON Equiti Aurate, Jn Reqni Comitijs Senatori. Regia Majestati ab Archivis status, Et Sanctiori Concilio a Secretis. Tabulam hanc qualem qualem L.M.D.C.Q Jon Sellerus. chart of England, Flanders and Holland
A Chart of FLANDERS Between Ce and Walcheren with all ye sands and shoals up that coast by John Seller chart of Flanders
A Chart of the MAES and Wielingon, Showing the Chan∣nel of Brewers haven, Zierick and Viergat chart of Maes and Wielingon The Coast of HOLLAND Between the Maes and the Texel by Iohn Seller Regis Hydrog: chart of Holland
The Names of places in the Fly a the Letting b  Sloot c y• Robbe d North Letting e Kershok f Dominicus of Meinsen plaet A Chart of the SOUTH SEA Texel and Fly streame with all ye Sands Depths and Sounding by John Seller chart of the South Sea A Chart of the EEMES as the Easter and Wester Eemes Scholbalgh & the Lauwers by John Seller chart of the Friesland A Chart of the FLY and AMELANDER gat by John Seller chart of Friesland
A Chart of the EEMES ELVE Amelander gat. Lauwers Scholbalgh weser Eyder and Hever and how the  same doth bare from Hoby land by John Seller The Names of places upon the Weser marked with thee letters a Buoy before New ie b Buoy in the Vlack c The Solthorn d  Buoy on the Vlack e Buoy before Bolleney f White Buoy g Buoy before Smits street h Buoy upon the Coes i Alellm Buoy k Buoy on the Doll-ock l  Buoy on the Dolle hock m  Buoy egen't Roodesand n White Buoy o Beeh Buoy p White Buoy q  Buoy before the Balg r  Buoy before the Blag upō the clue a Schor Buoy b Cool Buoy c White Buoy on the ground d Hoeck Buoy Ros Buoy f White Buoy on street Roomrder sand gh Buoys on the Pelgrams sand upon the Eyder k Uyterste Eyder l Buoy on the Dog m Bra on the Dog n Iron Hendrick oo Bken on the Iron Hendck p Pipe beyond the clue q Hoedemer sand r Beaken on the small bull head s Hulck Isands on the bull head The Names of places in the Eemes with their respective letters a Gsks place b the New-srt c  Wolden d The New  up' Borckum e Borcker ref f uyorts place g Brwers place h Bk upon the hoge Horn i Coopers sand k Kings place l Doke gat m  riff n the Dog o the Paap p srland q Reder land r Pissu mer The Names of places  Scholalgh d the Peer e the Smn g Bosc za Legers i S of Legers gat chart of Friesland A Chart of the Coast of IUTLAND with the Adjacent Islands shoals and depthes from the Hever to the Schaw by John Seller chart of Jutland
A Chart of the BALTICK Sea With the North Bodom & Lading Described by Iohn Seller Cum Privilegio chart of the Baltic Sea
A Chart of the Coast of Russia Lapland Finmarke Nova Zemla and Greenland Described by Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty Steph Board sculp: chart of Russia
A Large Description of the two Chanells in the River Dwina goeing up to the Citty of ARCHANGEL, by John Seller chart of Dvina River
A CHART of ye NARROW SEA Newly Corrected by Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the Kings ost Excellent Majesti chart of the Irish Sea
A Chart of the BRITTISH∣CHANEL By IOHN SELLER Hy∣drographer to the Kings-Most Excellent Majesties LONDON chart of the English Channel
A Chart Of the BAY of BISCAIA By John Seller Hydrographer to the King chart of the Bay of Biscay
A Chart Of the SPAINE Perticulerly Discribing the Coasts of Biscaia Gallissia Portugal Andaluzia Granada Bco by Ioh: Seller Hidrograe to ye Kings most Excelent Majesty chart of Spain
A Chart of the Westermost Part of the MEDITERRANEAN SEA By IOHN SELLER Hy∣drographer to the King. The Names of the Islands Capes Havens &c. lying in the Westernmost part of the Mediterranean sea 1 Arboran 2 Formentera 3 Beleran 4 Comiger 5 P. Magno 6 Tagomago 7 S Hilaire 8 Porto Yica 9 Cabrera 10 I Dragoner 11 M. Colibre 12 C Formentell 13 Gd' Mcudia 14 C Lapedra 15 P. Colombi 16 Porto Pedro 17 C de Salines 18 Porto Mon 19 P. Foncelle 20 C de Baiolis 21 C. Tolon 22 I. Ribadin 23 Polcairola 24 Porto Croso 25 Bovena 26 C Vesperis 27 Malora 28 Gorgona 29 Capraia 30 Elba 31 Plariosa 32 Formiges 33 Monte Christi 34 Gigio 35 Ianuti 36 C Rivela 37 I Asinara 38 I Tolam 39 Serpentera 40 Cortelaso 41 Palma de Sol 42 S. Pedro 43 Vacca 44 Toro 45 Galita 46 Chirbial Quel 47 Zombino 48 Pantalaria 49 Lampidosa 50 Limosa 51 Goza 52 Favagnano 53 Maritimo 54 Leenizo 55 stica 56 Palmerolo 57 Pontio 58 Ventieue 59 Isia 60 Capri 61 Alicur 62 Felicur 63 Salini 64 Vulcano 65 Lipari 66 Panaci 67 Stromboli 68 Merlere 69 Fnu 70 Soaseno 71 Ie. Melanto 72 Crommo 73 Meleda 74 S. Augustino 75 Coriola 76 Agosta 77 Pelagosa 78 Gimnasi 79 S Mariaderi 80 Caetze 81 Catzola 82 Torkela 83 P Lesa 84 Pto. Palermo 85 Lisa 86 S. Andrea 87 Melisello 88 Porno 89 La. Coronat 90 I Longa 91 S Pedro: M 92 Sampontella 93 I Seerdo 94 S. Pedrode N 95 Permo la 96 Sansigo 97 Promolores 98 I Malomo chart of the Mediterranean Sea
A Chart  the  Eastern  of the MEDITERRANEAN SEA BY IOHN SELLER Hydrographer to the King London A Elba Planosa a Formiges b Monte Christi c Gigio d Sanuti e Palmerola f Pontio g Ventitocue h Ischia i Capri k Stromboli l Panaci m Lipari n Vulcano o Salini p Felicur q Alicur r Vstica s Lerenzo s Maritimo t Favagnano u Cherbial v Zombino w Pantalarie x Lampidosa y Limosa z Gozo 1 L Malomocco 2 Protres 3 Sansigo 4 Permola 5 S. Pdro Nin 6 I Serd 7 Sapontella 8 S. Pedrd Mo 9 I. Longo 10 La Coronata 11 Pom 12 Melisell 13 S. Andre 14 Lisa 15 Porto Palermo 16 P. Lesina 17 Torkela 18 Catzola 19 Catz 20 Pelagosa 21 S. Marde 22 Ginnasi 23 Agosa 24 S. Augus 25 Corsiol 26 Melea 27 Commo 28 Ide Melanto 29 Soaseno 30 anu 31 Merlere 32 Pachsu 33 Antipachsu 34 C. Ducado 35 Sialonia Pi 36 Stroffadia 37 Prodono 38 Sapienza 39 Cavrera 40 Venetiea 41 Servy 42 L. Ovo 43 Serigotto 44 Gozo 45 Calderoni 46 Christiana 47 Caxi 48 Stallida 49 Standia 50 Manfia 51 Sentorini 52 Christian 53 Nio 54 Maixa 55 Nixia 56 Paris 57 Mil 58 Annan 59 Caravi 60 Falconera 61 Bella P 62 Antimilo 63 Argentes 64 Sifanto 65 Serfou 66 Sidra 67 S. Iorge d. 68 Fermino 69 Llacronis. 70 Zea 71 Sira 72 Iura 73 S Delles 74 Micono 75 Tine 76 Andri 77 Calojera 78 Schio 79 Scoppelo 80 Siatta 81 Lanco 82 Piper 83 Monte Santo 84 Samandachi 85 Ebro 86 Tdo 87 C. Si 88 P 89 90 91 92 San 93 Nona 94 Stenosa 95 aimossa 96 Stapalia 97 Lango 98 S. Selz 99 Cophanu 100 Vizar 101 Piscopia 102 Carari 103 C. Traquilo 104 Lendige 105 Porto Rhodi 106 Polseli 107 I Cast Ros 108 Srongilo 109 Le Corenti 110 Simia 111 S. Brusia chart of the Mediterranean Sea
A Chart of the Coast of BARBARIE Gualata Arguyn & Genehoa from C Vincent to C Verd Described by John Seller Regis Hydrographer chart of Barbary Coast
A Chart of the GVINEA Describeing the Seacoast from Cape de Verde to Cape Bona Esperanca by John Seller chart of Guinea
A Draught of Cape-BONA ESPERANCA By Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the King view and chart of Cape Bona Esperanca
To the Honorable the Governer, Deputy and Committe of the EAST INDIA COMPANY. Iohn Seller. Humbly Dedicates this Chart of the East Indies. A Chart of the WESTERN part of the EAST INDIES. With all the Adjacent Islands. from Cape Bona Esperanca to Cape Comorin By Iohn Seller Hidrographer to the KING and are to be Sold at the Hermitage in Wapping F. Lamb sculp chart of the East Indies
A Chart of the EASTERMOST part of the EAST INDIES With all the Adjacent Islands from Cape Comorin to Iapan By Iohn Seller. Hydrographer to the King. and are to be Sold at the Hermitage in Wapping. Nobilissimo Prumo q Dou Georgia Domino Berkley de Berkley Castro seal Lamb Sculp chart of the East Indies
A Chart of the TARTARIAN SEA from NOVAZEMLA to IAPAN By John Seller Hydrographer to the King At theHermitage Stairs in Wapp∣ing in Exchange Ally in Cornhill. London chart of the Tartarian Sea
A GENERALL CHART of the NORTHERNE NAVIGATION Discribed by John Seller. Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Cum Privilegio chart of Northern Europe Francis Lamb sculp
A Chart of the North Part of AMERICA. Describing the sea Coast of Groenland Dauies Streights Baffins Bay Hudsons Streights Buttons Bay And James Bay. by John Seller. Hydrogra∣pher to the King at the Hermitage in Wapping London. chart of Northern America
A Chart of The WEST INDIES From Cape Cod. to the River Oronoque. By John Seller. Hydrographer to the King. at the Hermitage Stairs in Wapping. London. chart of the West Indies
A Chart of the CARIBE ISLANDS By Iohn Seller Hydrographer to the King at the Hermitage stares in Wap∣ping and in Exchange alley in Cornhill London chart of the Carribean
A Mapp of New JARSEY by Iohn Seller A The Fort B the Church C the Windmill D a Flagg hoised up for Shipps to come in to the Harbor E the Prison or Tolbooth F the Generals house G the Gallows H the Packhouse or Storehouse view of New York Ja Clerk sculp map of New Jersey
A Chart of the Coast of AMERICA from New found Lmd to Cap Cod by Iohn Seller Hyrographer the King. chart of America
A Chart of the WESTERN OCEAN. By John Seller Hydrographer to the King. HONI SOIT  MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms chart of Western Ocean
The Windward pasage from JAMAICA. betwene the East end of CUBA, and the West end of HISPANIOLA. Made and Sold by John Seller. at his Shop at the Signe of the Marriners Compas. at the Hermitage Staires in Wapping. chart of Jamaica, Cuba and Hispaniola
INSULAE INSIGNIA INDUS UTER SERVIET UNI coat of arms of Jamaica Leit: Gen: Doyley for his Majestie first Governour Sr Charles  third GovernourTho Lord of  Second Governor S Tho: Modiford B Fourth Governour Knight present Sr Thomas Lynch Governour HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Novissima et Accuratissima INSULAE JAMAICAE DESCRIPTIO per JOHANNEM SELLERUM. Hydrographum Regium. Londini Ornat ••o Consult ••• Vir D. JOS. WILLIAMSON Equiti Aurato. In Regni Comitijs Senatori. Regice Majestati ab Archivis status Et Sanctiori Concilio a Secretis. Tabulam hanc D D. Joh Sellerus.   Precincts Cocoa   Sugar Cotton 1 The Castle         2 The Towne         3 The Forte         St. Katherines 1 Sr Tho. Muddiford 2     2 Sr Jam Mddiford 1       3 Maj. Gen Muddiford 1       4 Coll Tho Ballard 1   1   5 Judg Molens     2   6 Royall Company       7 Cap Moseley 1 1     8 Judg Molens     1   9 Justice Freman 1       10 Cap Noy 2       11 White Chappel         12 Justice Freeman   2     13 Coll Bindles Farme         14 Maj Fller     2   15 Cap Wlrood     16 Lrete• Hebb     2   17 Cap Freeman   1     18 Parson Webb     1   19 Cap Burden 1       20 Geo Needham Esq       21 Coll Tho Ballard 2       22 Coll Fitz 1       23 Livett Verey 1       24 Ensi Hunt 1       25 Ald Ric Beford 1       26 Salt Pan Hill         27 Coll Burnets Gulley         28 Boers Gulley         St. Johns 2 Coll Iohn Cope 2   2   2 Maj Auscough 2   2   3 Cap Aylmar 2   2   4 Cap Gay 2   2   5 Cap Taylor     2   6 M Ty Dd     2   7 Livet Price 2   1   8 M Coniers 2   2   9 Cap Gaywood 2       10 Cap Langher 2       11 Cap Oldfeild 2   2   12 M Bragge 2       13 Cap Nelson 2   2   14 Cap olsworth 2       15 Fran Iians 2       16 Livet Whites Farme         17 M Holmes 2       18 M Stiles farme         19 Livet Charnock 1       20 Livett Gilbert Cope 2       21 Livett Anderson 1       22 M. Trigg 1       23 Liveton Gregory 1       24 Livett. Baerfield 1       25 The Beacon         26 The Church         27 Mrs. Reade     1   St. Andrewes 1 Coll Archbull     2   2 Livet Coll Hope       3 Maj. Whitfield     1   4 Livet Brayne     2   5 M Shis     2   6 Rainsford Waterhouse     2   7 Iudg. Vallet         8 Maj. Sellet     2   9 Thes store house         10 M Howel     2   11 Cap. Keene       12 M. Coniers     2   13 Cap. Archbole       14 M. Barry       15 k. Lewis Esq       16 Lt. Dela Acre     2   17 his Farme         18 M. Long       1 St. Davids 1 Livet Coll. Freeman   1 1   2 M. Rves   1     3 M. Stokes   1     4 M. Richardson   1     5 M Hobby   1     6 M. Alexander     1   7 M. Lloyd     1   8 M. Burton     1   9 Smithbys hill         10 M Fox   1     11 Coll. Freemans stores         12 The Church         St. Thomas 1 Cap Linch     1   2 Cap Atkins   2     3 Cap Cox 1   1   4 Cap Browne     1   5 Earle Carlille     1   6 M. Lnas Farme         Clarendon 1 S• The Muddiford Cap Kendal         2 Cap Colbeck     1   3 Maj Ascough 1   1   4 M Beckford   1     5 M Brayne     1   6 Cap Long 2   1   7 Maj Collier 2   1   8 M Mas 2   1   9 Coll Binos       10 Livet Mincle         11 Coll Iy     1   12 Earle of Clarendon         13 Cap Booth       14 M Spirru       15 M. Halliard       16 Cap Horner   1     17 M. Petteson   1     18 M Gardner   1     19 Iustice Philps     2   20 Iustice Varne     2   21 Cp hill         22 Maj. Fuller 1       23 M. Masters 2       St. Elizabeth 1 Cap. Parkers Farme         2 Nic. Stevens Farme         3 Mount Leaes         4 Chr. Pinder Esq Fa         5 Rich. Riggins Farme         6 M. Pattors Farme         7 Chr. Pinder Esq. Far         8 W. Sincl Farme         9 Cap. Breningham     1   10 Livet. Cox Farme         11 Maj. Perkinson     1   12 Parson Barrows Farme         13 Robert Shrton   1 1   14 Capt. James 1 1     St. James 1 Cap. incks     2   2           St. Annes 1 The Church           Rob. Bagnalls Farme         3 Edw. alos Farme         4 uar. e Bola Ialink         5 E Mnt. at Ldes         6 des Pasture         St. Maries 1 Capt. Cooper     2   2 Andrew gill     1 St. Georges 1 Cap. Prices Farme         2 M. Vincents Farme         3 Livet. Newmans Farme         4 M. Squire     2   5 M. Ash Farme         6 M Thomas Farme         Made and Sold by Iohn Seller at his shops: At the Hermitage in Wapping: And in Exchange-Alley near the Royall-Exchange in London map of Jamaica
To that Valient and Worthy Cōmander, Cap.t John Narborough, who Passed & Repased the Streights, of Magellan, in the year 1670 John Seller, in Testimony of the Respect he bears to him, Humbly dedicates this Chart. A Chart of the Sea Coast of BRAZIL. From Cape St. Augustine to the Straights of Magellan, & in the South Sea, from the Lattitud of Eight degrees, to the said Straights Made and Sold by John Seller Hydrographer to the King at the Hermitage in Wapping. chart of Brazil
A Chart of the SOUTH-SEA By John Seller Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie chart of the South Sea
