S462 E702_5 99866174 166577
Sal Scylla: OR, A LETTER Written From SCILLY TO Mr JOHN GOODWIN, Minister of the Gospel IN LONDON. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at their Shop in Popes-head Alley. 1653.
The Printer to the Reader. Gentle Reader, THis Letter coming from a Stranger, residing in a place far remote; for the Christian ingenuity therein exprest, and the symphony it bears (in the truth) with the minds of those that have per∣used it; and for the service that it may yet farthrr do, in several respects; It was the desire of many that it might have the honour, and they themselves the ease, of its being made more facilely publique, then the transcribing of many Copies would afford, and therefore a Copy of it coming to my hand (though without the knowledg of the Author or the Owner of the Original) it is put to the Press. VALE. Scilly, May25. 1653. Brother, I Dare be bold so to call and esteem you (consider∣ing what spirit you are of,) though I be but the least too of that body whereof (I beleeve) you are an eye at least: And (Providence having brought your Book of Redemption to my hand, and given me time and opportunity to read it over once and again, as also seriously to ponder the full-mouth'd Authority of
Scripture, Reason, and the most godly Learned, in vin∣dication of that Foundation Truth, the face whereof hath been (and still is) by most, almost as much mar'd, as was the face of the Lord and Master of it) I should be injuriously unthankful to God and man, if I should not acknowledg you so to be. For the light of the bo∣dy is the eye; and this light, which (by reflection of the true light) hath enlightened your eye, doth from thence again reflect upon many members, to guide their feet in the way of Grace, Mercy, Truth, and Peace. About four or five years past I met with two or three small Tracts upon the Point, as L. S. Stocks, Horn con∣tra Owen: The first mentioned (coming first to hand) undermined my Tabernacle (as it might easily do, ha∣ving but a sandy foundation) and blew up the whole fa∣brick about mine ears, spoiled all my goods which I had layd up for many years, and I escaped only with my life, wounded and naked, destitute of house or home, food, rayment, and medicine; yet withall shewed me, a Stone choyce and precious, wherewith I might lay a more sure foundation for a better house that could not be shaken: yet this Stone was rough and uneven, and I knew not as yet how to square and fit it to build upon, neither have I, or heard I, of any other that could, till I found out Horn, who squared this stone to my mind at that time; also he provided me with many materials to build upon it. Having therefore so good Benefactors to bear the cost, I thanked God and them, and fell to work. But having built two or three stones high, their materi∣als failed me. Wherefore my house being not yet co∣vered, and I weary of lying by the hedges, I made use of some of the ruines of my old house to finish my new building, and so patched it up as I could: but entering
into it, I found it every showre (like a contentious wo∣man) a continual dropping; until I met with your Model, which having throughly viewed within and without, I found every stone so close compact and ce∣mented, as if it had been one entire Rock; wherefore I pulled down so much as was faulty, and built up again according to the last pattern. And now I thank my God through the grace given to you and me; I have an house wherein to shelter me from all winds and weathers whatsoever, and not only so, but which is well furnish∣ed with all things necessary for my being and well-be∣ing. And that in such abundance, that they can never fail me to eternity, unless I turn prodigal, which I have no more cause to fear, then of cutting mine own throat. I need not expound my parable, the Moral (I believe) is obvious to the meanest member of your Church. To relate the divers transactions between the Father, Son, Spirit, and my Soul, (from the 20. to the 45. year of my pilgrimage) would exceed the bounds of an Epistle, and the limit of many sheets of paper. Therefore be pleased with this brief and general ac∣compt. From the 20. to the 39. year of mine age I lived upon the husks of the common faith of Election, (yet did not then so accompt it, though since I have found it to be no better.) In which time I was under many Eclipses and relapses, and once even at the gate of despair; In this Epilepsie, I made use of the com∣mon Antidote; Whom God loveth once, he loveth to the end; The Gifts and Calling of God are without repentance, &c. But this was but a paliative cure, the cause still remaining, depending upon the common notion of Election; during this time I was counted a Puritan, (except in my relapses wherein I was only a scandal
to those so called,) then I turned to the Presbyterian, after that to the Independent, thence to the Anabap∣tist, then to the Seeker, where seeking for that which could not be found, I had almost lost my self. Then I faced the Ranter, but found him to be set on fire of Hell; and knowing by woful experience, that the burnt child dreads the fire, I durst not come near. Here I was at a loss, and at as great a strait as the Lepers be∣fore that Gate of Samaria. If I stand here I must perish, If I went back to any of the former dispensati∣ons, the Famine was there, Therefore I resolved to yeild my self to the mercy of the Gentiles, which I did accordingly, where I continued the space of two years, not without hope, nor wiihout God in the World, (though I had rejected the Scripture, and all mens in∣terpretation upon it,) the vision of all being (to me) as a Book that was sealed, which neither learned nor unlearned could open or read, yet during this time, I had hope in God, and committed my soul and body to my faithful Creator, who did speak peace to me in this strange Land: And many times would lead me by his Spirit to the Scriptures, where I should yet read with as little understanding, as the Eunuch: At the end of this dispensation I was led by the Spirit once more to the Scriptures, then opened he my understand∣ing, and prest me farther to search and try all things, which I did accordingly; and so by the grace of God, I am what I am. And now, my Father, (the Chariot and Horsmen of the Israel of God) ride on because of the word of truth, charge through all opposition, and Jesus Christ who hath shewed you so great things, as the despisers and wonderers of the world will not be∣lieve, (though it be so plainly declared to them,) shall
shew you yet greater things that they may marvel. I know but two or three in all these West-parts like-minded in this point, the rest (which are many and zealous) though they might know that the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God stronger then men, yet are so bewitched with tradition, that seeing the visions of God will not answer the visi∣ons of their own hearts, they will make the Divel a Seer, according to that of the Poet. Flectere si nequeo, Superos Acherent a movebo. If the Pow'rs above I cannot bend, He move the Fiend some aid to send. And therefore they rejoyce in, and boast of Master Kendal's Answer, the word Answer, being (I believe) the strongest argument for the confirmation of their errour, or the eviction of their truth; yet these (I bare them record) have all zeal for God, though not according to knowledge; for they being iggnorant of the righteousness of God, and also of his love, good∣ness, mercy, wisdom, equity, and truth, and going about to establish his will and power alone, have not submitted to either. If your promise upon Rom. 9. be fulfilled, I pray send it down amongst us, that the deceiving and deceived may (if possible,) be undeceived. I pray also send us word whether your second part to the same tune be finished, or when (probably) it may, when happily the grand Objection, (the want of means to them that never heard of Jesus Christ) may be con∣vincingly answered, to the satisfaction of the most ju∣dicious of them, who chiefly stumble at that stumbling stone. I need make no Apologie for my boldness in thus writing, believing that your Greatness is in being least,
and servant unto all. Therefore follow on (Oh man of God) to serve your God, and your Generation, that you may finish the work that is given you to do with joy, to the joy of many; And that both you and they may attain to the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls, For which the weakest and unworthiest of all the members of Christ, shall cast in his mite of prayer into the Treasury of the Almighty; My duty I commend to you, and all that love and wait for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which is by love to serve you all, Christopher Salter, Chyrurgion of the Islands and Garrison of SCYLLY. FINIS.
