S5101 E172_22 99859489 111574
AN ANSWER To a printed Paper ENTITULED ARTICLES EXHIBITED IN PARLIAMENT. Against Mr. JOHN SQVIER, Ʋiccar of Saint Leonard Shoreditch. August 7. 1641. 2 Sam. 16.11, & 12. Let him curse, it may be the Lord will looke upon my affliction, and requite me good for his Cursing this Day. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
The Apologie. THE said John Squier saith, that since Hee doth humbly submit himself to the Censure of the high Court of Parliament, hee supposeth that this is e∣nough for Him, becomming the Obedience of an English-man, and the patience of a Christian man. And Hee doth beleeve, that God and good men will accept it. But since ignorant Pamphletters, who know nothing, but beleeve any thing, which they would publish, to brand Him, who already lyeth under a publique disgrace, have printed this Paper; He thinketh that a Necessity is laid upon him, to vindicate his innoceucy against this scandalous and slanderous Paper. 1. He doth call God a witnesse, to this his Apologie; that there shall not fall one falshood from his pen; for he loveth Truth and his Conscience, better then his Reputation. Of which, if others had done either for themselves: this untrue, & uncharitable Relation, durst never have looked upon the light. But this is the Methode of malice against that calling, those who are faulty, to report them faultier,: and those that are faultlesse, to report them faulty: thereby to make all odious, as I shall make it more then manifest by this particular.
Article 1. THat this Squier did arrogantly introduce many Po∣pish Ceremonies into their Parish Church, Tyranni∣cally insulting over the consciences, and liberties of the Parishioners, commanding them to subscribe thereunto without any interdiction. Answer. To the first he answereth, that he did never use any Popish Ceremonies, mush lesse introduce, or impose the use of them upon his Parishioners, by commanding them to subscribe. He doth deny this, by two undeniable witnesse. 1. By che te∣stimoniall of the most & best of his Parish hereto annexed. Then by the testimony of his adversaries themselves; for hee doth intreat this Pamphletter, those that informed him, & those that do beleeve him; that they themselves will come to Shoreditch church upon any sunday, & be Eye-witnesses; VVhether he doth use any offensive ceremonies not establi∣shed by Law: Or whither he doth omit any ceremonies now, which he hath used heretofore. Article 2. That he affirmed publikely in the Pulpit, that the Papists were the best subjects in three regards. 1. In regard of their liberality, who were alwayes ready to extend their cha∣rity, and did present themselves with their purses in their hands, alwayes before his. Majesty. 2. In regard of their loyalty, who did not onely seeme hospitable in their purses, but were alwayes in their owne persons ready to doe his Majesty service. 3. In regard of their patience, who (notwithstan∣ding the many affronts and persecutions offered them by Eng∣lishmen) have patiently submitted to their cruelty, & buried all in oblivion: wherefore upon the consideration of these three regards he was confident (as he related) that they were the Kings best subjects.
Answer. The 2. he did say, and more also: viz. That the Papist were the Kings best subjects: But, as they did boast of themselves, to leave out part of what was said, you learned this of an evill Master. Mat. 4.6. Psal. 91.11, 12. His case is, what Davids was; They lay to my charge, things that I knew not. Psal. 35.11. Article 3. That He called all those Schismaticks, who would not bow at the name of Jesus; but being afterwards privately examined upon that point, he could not lawfully call those Schismaticks which did not, unlesse those Idolaters which did. Answer. He never was examined in private concerning that point: nor did he call them Schismaticks, who did not bow at the name of Jesus; for he keepeth a charitable correspondence with divers, who do not bow. It may be, he did call such Schismaticks who did not bow, who did call him and them Idolaters, who did bow at the name of Jesus, who is God, our Saviour, to be blessed for evermore. Article 4. That he writes himselfe commonly Priest, and approves of it to be an Honourable Name, and despiseth the nomi∣nation of Minister, or Pastor, &c. although we have had sufficient testimony, that this Name was abrogated after Christs comming, and more decent names given them in the holy Gospell. Answer. He doth acknowledge that he writeth himselfe Priest, & that he approveth of it to be an Honourable name, and to make it more Honourable; he saith it is approved by the most honourable Court of Parliament, in the book of common Prayers, & in the book of Ordination. But that (as you say) he despiseth the Nomination of Minister & Pastor, and that there is testimony that the Name of Priest is abrogated (but you shew not that testimony) He answereth to the first no, to the second nothing.
Article 5. That our King was like unto the wounded man that fell among theeves (the Scots by his imaginary supposition) robbing His Majesty of his Castles, Holds, and withall the hearts of His subjects: & that the formall Confessors was like unto the Levits, that passed by; the Protestant like un∣to the Priest; but the Papists like unto the good Samari∣tan, who lifted up His Majesty from those wicked enemies to our Nation, and by their Hospitable benignity were ve∣ry indulgent to His Majesty. Answer. Concerning the application of that Parable of the Sama∣ritan, he saith; for the words you have bin mis-informed, and you do mis-informe the world. But for the substance, that He delivered (as he thinketh) onely what he was war∣ranted unto by His Majesties Proclamation: and that since the time of Pacification, He never mentioned a sylla∣ble concerning that businesse. Wherefore He hopeth, that He doth stand upright in the judgment of all charitable & knowing men: and of yours too; if you be such a man: I adde, it was spoken not absolutely, but by way of suppo∣sition; as it is testifyed by the voluntary subscription of above forty of my constant Hearers: who gave that testi∣mony without my knowledge. Article 6. That it was a sinne of Damnation for any man to heare voluntarily any other Minister than his owne, onely three Causes excepted. 1. Either going to the Christning of a Child. 2. Or to an Offering. 3. Or unlesse invited forth to Dinner. Although St. Chrysostome, St. Augustine, St. Hierome, and all the Fathers in next Antiquity to Apostolicall men, do with one assent affirme, that the Church in the Gospell is taken Catholikely, & is universall. Answer. If this accusation be true; He yeelds himself to be deli∣vered
into the Hands of This, and his other Accusers, and punishment enough He expecteth, if they might have him in their power. Article 7, That any man which passed Excommunication from the Priest publikely in the church, unlesse reconciled before His death, went directly to Hell in His judgment, al∣though we have sufficient prohibitions in the Gospell that no man (much lesse a Minister) should judge any man be∣fore the time. Answer. His words were these, I use not to passe my judgment of Damnation upon any. But for my self I say, I would not for the price of my soule, dye under an Excommunication, passed against me, clave non errante. Article 8. That it was lawfull for any man to play and take any recreation on the Sabbath Day, if so be it were not service time. Answer. He saith he doth conceive it a greater fault to tell an un∣truth, than to approve of lawfull Recreation on the Sab∣bath, out of Service time. What, His practise hath bin con∣cerning the Lords Day, these 30. yeares almost: His Parish doth testifie by their Testimoniall here annexed. But you have boldly printed a grosse untruth; for Hee was never questioned in the Parliament concerning this Article. Article 9. That He did alter the antient structure of the said Parish church, and withall did insolently induce many Pictures therein, against the will, intent, and subscription of any of the people, and such Images, as He pleased without prohi∣bition. Answer. All the clauses of this Article, and more, are untruths. He did never alter the structure of the church. He did never induce Pictures or Images. He did never any thing in the church, against the will, intent, or subscriptions of his Pari∣shioners. Moreover, he was never questioned in the Parlia∣ment for this Article.
Article 10. That He allowed the Pictures of the Ʋirgin Mary, of Christ, and his 12. Apostles at his last Supper in Glasse, & the Parishioners desired rather that in their stead a Cruci∣fixe might be erected, but he would not condiscend there∣unto. Answer. The Picture of the Virgin Mary is not in his church, the Picture of Christ & his 12. Apostles are there: and if any of his Parishioners desired rather that in their stead a Crucifixe might be erected, but He would not condiscend thereunto; because the Crucifixe had bin adored in the time of Popery: what offence was committed by Him? Article 11. That He was perswaded those had not safe consciences, who would not bow with all humility, & great reverence to the Communion table, both at their entrance into the church, and at their departure thereout. Answer. He never did bow himselfe; nor did He perswade any other to bow to the Communion table: neither was Hee questioned by the Parliament for this Article. Article 12. That He would not administer the Holy Sacrament to those which would not come up unto the Rayles, and bow thereunto with humble adoration; whereupon most of the Parishioners for conscience sake have (not presuming to submit to this Ceremony) omitted the receiving of the said Sacrament. Answer. He did never refuse to administer the Holy sacrament to any who would not come up to the Rayles: nor did any ever refuse to come up to the Rayles. Neither was he ever questioned by the Parliament for this Article. Article 13. That He did oftentimes exasperate, and foment strife & enmity betwixt Neighbor & Neighbor; and those who would not subscribe to his Ceremoniall Innovations, Hee was their perfect Enemie, untill many of them have bin
compelled to leave that Parish, to the great detriment of their Trade. Answer. He did never foment strife (but compose it) betwixt Neighbor & Neighbor: nor did he use or perswade Cere∣moniall Innovation: Nor did he compell any to leave the Parish, but used such as were obstinate against the Cere∣monies established by Law, with all Lenity (as his Neigh∣bors shall testifie.) Neither was he ever questioned by the Parliament for this Article. Artic. 14. That He affirmed publikely in his Pulpit, that it was a damnable fin for any man to deprave or speake against any of those Canons which were published by superiour autho∣rity. Answer. He did never speake any thing in his Pulpit concerning the Canons. Nor was he questioned by the Parliament concerning this Article. Article. 15. That if the King should demand either the Lands, Hou∣ses, Possessions, and whole Estate; Nay, the very life it self of any subject, without any offence by him committed, un∣lesse he did voluntarily attribute, & surrender it unto him, that he committed a most abominable sinne of damna∣tion. Answer. This is an abominable untruth, He did never say it. He did never think it. Neither is this Article in the Petition to the Parliament against him. Article 16. That he hath brought many of his Parishioners into the Court, and therby great troubles have bin incident to ma∣ny, and to some Excommunication, onely because they would not subscribe to these Ceremonies, and withall, that he hath caused great sedition, and discord in the said Pa∣rish. Answer. He never brought any of his Parishioners into the Court, but inforced thereunto by their own obstinacy, and by the
Oath of the Church-warders, Nay, he hath kept many of those obstinate persons out of the Court for a long time & helped them) yea some of these very persons that now pursue him in the Parliament) out of the Court. Nor did he cause discord in His Parish, but compose it as the most & best of His parish are ready to testifie. Neither was he ever questioned by the Parliament for this Article. Article 17. That in all these Popish Observations, and Ecclesiasticall Ceremonies, he hath bin no lesse offensive then Canterbury himself, in some respect, a man prompted for exalting that Roman Religion. And to incurre the favour of many Bi∣shops, He hath bin extreame diligent to execute all their Canons and Ceremonies, to the full extent. Answer. He never had Relation to nor favour from any Bishop. Nor did He every any thing to incurre their favour; but out of His Canonicall obedience Neither was He ever questi∣oned by the Parliament for this Article. And finally He faith Anathema to His soule, if He be prompt to exalt the Ronian Religion. Finally to cleare all scruples; if it shall please this Reve∣rend Pamphletter, or any of His Confidents to travell into Shoreditch, beginning at which end of the Parish he wil. Let Him inquire of every House-keeper, from House to House, what Testimony they will give to this Relation, and what thanks they will con Him for His labour. But for the Reader! To save Him this paines; Hee need not go to the Parishioners, the Parishioners doe come to Him, in this testimony, which I have annexed, & they sub∣scribed. Besides, for His further and full satisfaction, as oc∣casion shall offer them to His acquaintance, he may inquire of any of these Subscribers, the truth of these imputations. And accordingly let Iohn Squier, Vicar of Shoreditch, stand or fall, in the charitable and understanding judgment of the Christian Reader.
NOW! O that my head were waters, & mine eyes a foun∣tain of teares to weep — not for my self! I blesse my God these groundlesse Calumnies cannot clime so high as mine heart, like the prompter of them, they bruise but my heele — and there I leave them. But for mine uncharitable & unpla∣cable Calumniators, that any Christians should be so transpor∣ted, either with affected ignorance, or blinded zeale, or Ava∣rice or malice, or (which God forbid) with invidence and ha∣tred of the truth; to vent such shamefull & shamelesse Ʋn∣truths. For them, O that I could weepe sufficiently! Notwithstanding, to shew that I am a true conformable Mi∣nister of the Church of England, I conclude with a part of our Common Prayer, & with that part which is most commonly cavellid at, the Letany. That it may please thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecu∣tors, and slanderers: and to turne their hearts. Wee beseech thee to heare Us good Lord. Matth. 5.11.
These are to testifie, that Master Squier of the Parish of Shoreditch, hath about Thirty yeares bin very painfull in discharging his Cure, by his constant preaching twice every Sunday; As also in His Catechizing of the Youths of the Parish, and in His Sermons continually beating down Popery: And in His Catechizing, instructing the Youths with Argu∣ments against the papists. As also, hath in the grear sick∣nesses not forsaken his Flock. But hath procured the charity of many, for the reliefe of the poore in that time of Extremity, and hath lived blamelesse, and done much good in His Parish. ALexander St. Iohn, Richard Gips▪ VVilliam Cholmeley, Edmond Muschamp, VVilliam Bolton, Richard Gips, Jasper Cholmeley, Thomas Mainwairing, ƲƲilliam Burton, Samuell Speigzt, Hugh Edmondes, William Permer, Richard Wichaels, Thomas Preswicke, Richard Allen, Thomas Pont, John Joanes, James Cresson, Francis Hutchison, Andrew Fresell, William Ellwortzie, Richard Marrington, John Perriman, John Benbrick, William Curtis, John Hunt, John Adams. Daniel Carpenter, Henry Empson, Thomas VVright, T. Crowder & Church∣wardens. John Hill, George Argent, Richard Robinson, William Burbage, John Bride, Richard Sanderson, William Badger,
Robert Bratzawit, Robert Moore, Thomas Chip, Thomas Snow; Rowland Dod, John Taylor, John Preston, John Bird, Sawnell Catarill, Robert Cocke, John Noble. William Mouse, William Tison, William Bearstow, Edward Pares, Nath. Fox, John Ʋicaris, Robert Borne, Edward Eales, Anthony Watson, John Horner, Godfery Fox, Robert Asplin, Thomas Skingle, Thomas Hinton, Edward Pit, William Morris, John Riley, Robert Foster, Richard Blagrave, Alexander Lillington. Joh. Hodges, Thomas paddon, Thomas Williams, Edward Only, William Smith, George Catterill, Henry Joanes, Joh. Rolfe, Henry Spenser, Thomas Robinson, John Staines, Ralph Ashby, Henry Cock, John Hall, William Rawlings Kichard Hill, John Harding, William Parkor, Henry Eaton, William Tison, William Sowgate, James Ekersley, Christopher Ioyles, Salat haell Purser William Porter, Edward Aires, John Coleman, Rowland Davis, Edward Travers, Mark Croxon, Iohn Porter, Daniel Waltham, George Iohnson, Thomas Higby, Thomas Prat, Giles Hill, Barnet Heyward, Iames Brathwit. Henry Waybut, William Hurles, Steven Leonard, Nicholas VVakefield, Iohn VVix,
Thomas Love, Richard Handsmore Iohn Bradley, Iohn Holding, Edmond Harding, Edmond Cage Thomas Green, Iohn Hand, Peter Woodhouse, Water Loe, I. Savill, William Cock, Edward Dunckle, Iohn Nicks, Richard Crowder, William Lanslet, William Blakeley, Richard Harington, Ioh. Gothridge, Edward Edgerton, Joh. Bidle, Thomas Miles, Francis Chandler, Iohn Warner, Henry Pilthford. William Addison, Edw. Iackson, Ioseph Atkinson, Robert Tise, Griffith Joanes, John Bould, Matthew Morris, Thomas Simpson, William Mountfort, Henry Robert, John Smith, I. Smith Isaac Smith, Peter Atkinson, John Willson, Will. English, George Smith, Edward Ewen, William Ward, John Badger, Hen. Smithson, John Turner, Rich. Holden, William Banister Will: Lancaster, Hen. Starmore, William Dawly, Rich. Mason, Thomas Lamb. Thomas Coles, T. Braklebancke Joh. Okeman, Joh. Herbert. Joh. Barber, Edmon. Bearstow Joh. Martin, Roland Dodd. Robert Lee, George Aperley, Thomas Bullock, Roger Woodard, Mark Blower, Philip Boyes, Andrew Tedham John Bullock, Rob. quinne, William King, W. Cunningham, George Lawson, William White, Rob. Johnson, W. Hawkins, Walter Ekin, Rich. Thomas, Geo: Fremlen Isaac. Herbert, Tho. Morris Paul Hudson, Francis Hall, Rob. Nash, William Wyar Isaac Summers, Abra. Summers; Will: Smalebroke James Monnex, Iohn Exon, William Pigitt, Abra. qui Thomas Iackson, Edw. Dearing, Robert Wright, Anthony Bowyer Anthony Brown, John Williams Ʋmphry Rowse, George Adenly, Rich. Young, Roger Coates, George Franck. Rob. Batisford, Thomas Cotterel, Rob. Cheesman, William Waters, Edw. Joanes, Samuel Hony, Fran. Bourne, Iohn Wellman, John Castle: Ʋrius Lacy, Ralfe Searle, William Austin FINIS.
