S532 E565_27 R206152 99865329 117568
The same Hand again, Against the present Councel of STATE'S bad Friends, John Canna, and his maintainers, the Contrivers of those very Licentious, Scandalous Books, called the Discoverer, Part the First, and Second. JER. V. 26, 27, 28. For among my People are found wicked men, they lay wait as he that setteth snares, they set a trap, they catch men. As a Cage is full of Birds, so are their Houses full of deceit, there∣fore they are become great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine, yea they overpass the deeds of the wicked, they judge not the cause. &c. LONDON, Printed in the Yeer, MDCXLIX.
REader, The Discoverer doth much desire that whosoever hath not seen the first part, enquire after it, &c. p. 2. in margin; and in the line, saith, We have already published somthing to undeceive the People, &c. and at this time shall make a further Discovery. Now I having in the Discoverer uncovered, vindicated L. C. Lilburn, M. Walwyn, &c. from the criminations of this Priest (and those (how great soever it maketh no matter to me) who did for covers, interpose this mans black coat betwixt themselves, and the Peoples eys) do de∣sire you also to read that Vindication and say, Whether these men are not as like as one egg is to another, to those faithless Spies, who went to search, and Discover Canaan. Num. XIII. and brought an evil report of the Land, which (as faithful Joshua and Caleb brought word) flowed with Milk and Honey, and was conquerable by their Bre∣thren, might be made by their Couragious performances their own Possession, as the many good things proposed (by the Gentlemen so evilly spoken of) may be by our Parliament, &c. Further, Is it not a saucy boldness of this Pedantick, this silius terrae, J. Canne (who was puft up, even to Personating the Coun∣cel of State, in 1st part) to undertake to do (what?) no less than to Answer when the Parliament (if any one) is cald upon; to undertake the Justification of their Censure, yea, to give the sense of the Com∣mons of England assembled in Parliament (if we will believe him) touching such Particulars as their Wisdom thought fit to be silent of: Or, of which their Supreme Authority needed not to speak, viz. What was in the Book censured Destructive to the present Government; Wherein it tended to the raising of a New War, &c? And I would have returned words of correction touching his slan∣ders on each Particular: (For, its but to drop a little Inke on this mans rising dust, and its soon laid) but
1. There's ever and anon Rfrences to the first part of the Disco∣vrer for proof, vid. p. 4, 18, 29, 49, &c. and that's Disproved already in the Discoverer Uncovered. 2. You will (no doubt) soon have the folly and baseness of the Disco∣vers here shown by Writings from the Gentlemen accused. 3. Most of the scandals are cleanly, purely wip'd off by clear matter in the Praeface to the Agreement of the People, and in the neat An∣swers to (the Successor of M•s Gangraena) the book entituled Wal∣wyns Wyles. 4. L. C. Lilburn hath in his Legal Fundamental Liberties of the People of England, p. 74. promised (as the Discoverer lls me, who have not read it) to seal with his heart bloud every line of the book (declared against.) &c. I Shall therefore chiefly deal with matters relating to the Disco∣verer Ʋncovered. And (1) with that p. 19. Thompson stab'd one M. Haiden with a dagger, without any cause or provocation. But (you men of State) was it not a Provocation when Haiden would (and he came with company) seize upon such Papers as Thompson had at the Press, which might (as the wickedness of the times then were) occasion sufferance more than enough to Thompson, to the Printer, and to some others? And was not the stab (being in his Arme, neer his Shoulder) in the Opinion of himself, (who made no more of it, but would practise his Rogueries (some whereof see p. 12. of Discover or Ʋncovered) from Saturday to Munday before he would have it drest) as well as in the judgement of many others, a wound not dangerous, if in any time look't to, of easie cure? And did he not live about a moneth after this, ere death did give his heart the mor∣tal stroke, Whereby, he, who oftner than once was like (and that justly) to be hanged (but escaped with burning in the hand) did now dy in his bed? For shame mention his death no more, it hastned upon the wheels of his own neglect, and calls to mind too much his ill-lead life. 2. He will (p. 41. in margent) say somthing to the Author of the Discoverer Ʋncovered, who writes for his name LAPIS FRUCTIFERA. Its this, Note, there is one who stiles imself LAPIS (he saw onely with a sinister eye, with a right he might
have seen FRƲCTIFERA, dextrorsum posita) a Stone, or ra∣ther a Block, (a special Scholler, he translates properly. Speak  out; Lapis, a BLOCK. How? — see you do so no more, you de∣served a whipping for this. It was not so bad with you (though it was a fault great enough for one had read a Grammar) in p. 34. where irrefragabilis you turn un-gain-saying, Verbalia in bili, accepta passive, being forgot) the Simplician (bona verba) under∣takes (and performs it to thy shame) to Discover (commend him, legit ut clericus, its Ʋncover) the Discoverer, but speaks never a word to the matter ('t were ill luck if not one word hit) nor under∣stands it (how appears that?) For whereas the Levelling Faction (dunghil terms) hath aspersed (as the Discoverer oft told us, but ne∣ver could prove) the Parliament, Councel of State, (and Councel of War, which we have nothing to do with) the Discoverer (wrong again. Spell it. Ʋ, N, ƲN-) denies the things laid to their charge (and he had good reason to do so, vid. the Discoverer Ʋncovered) Now (it should be And) insteed of proving them (what them? the things the Undiscoverer denies? No sure, you would not have him prove Aspersions. That were a rare Task.) which he should have done, (he) undertakes the justification of them (them, comely lines, which the Discoverer made blots) The Block (ho then, we shall never have done, if he'l alwaies be thus Cuckowing, as if he attend∣ed to some Block-house, or did serve onely to hew wood (an em∣ployment the beguiling Gibeonites were put to) since he lost his living by the Printing-Press) speaks a parcel of non-sense (Prithee, be not jealous, and blab, thou maist kep thy faculty to thy self) but for their accusation he meddles not withal (it may be an Errata of the Compositer, for with at all. But then the Discoverer speaks contrary to himself, Its said in the lines above, that I undertake the Justifica∣tion of them) Although he had not bin as senseless as a stone (a brave piece of Non-sense. Sans controversie, he speaks it naturally, else he could never do it so kindly) he might have seen it was the main thing he had to do. Poor soul! how anger harh transported him, and he furles all? What a pitifully miserable bundle of loose confu∣sed matter was there?—! And is he otherwise when he flings the next stone? let's see him, p. 44. Lapis, its like, thinks us so contemptible and mean bred, or such senseless stones (as himself) that we cannot decline TREASON, yet (he hath so mingled his words, that Yes stands like a Granting what
was thought; not as Affirming the contrary) and could have found out sense too in his Book, of there had bin any. It will be the best wit the Block hath, if he have the wit to conceal his Name. How the wretch is troubled that he cannot see Sense in Lapis his book. So before, the Block spake non-sense, And once more, p. 80. Lapis writes non-sense. Never was man distracted about Non-sense, till thi Discover∣er was. But, come thy waies hither, I am an English-man, tender-hearted, and prone to acts of mercy; that thou maist not longer vex thy self thus shrewdly, Ile shew you some sense in that Books words thou just now spakest, viz. That he who wrote the Epistle praefixt to the first part of the Discoverer, was, and is a contemptible, mean∣bred, decayed Parson (though he did assume the Title and Trust of the COUNCEL OF STATE) being of contemptible birth (for so honorable a Place) of mean breeding, and wasted in Estate, Jack Canne by name (he cals L. C. Lilburn, Jack p. 60.) So that if one would express it cum Rebus (and elect a Devise for him) you know what smal vessels will do it, and they may without dishonor be pendant for his Signe. But the Counterfeiting THEIR Epistle, I dare freely say that men that have but one spark of Nobility in them, or that have the Grain of Gentlemen, will scorn to let it pass without condigne reward. But to hearken how these Discoverers decline Treason— We can &c.— sullen Schollers, they won't say their lesson: but turn M∣sters, and (forsooth) would have me to conceal my Name (yet p. 80. tells of my looking like No-body its for want of other discourse) A sniveling Advise, for which I should hardly have forborn kicking the Discoverer, if he had dictated it to my face; yet wish him furnished with so much Greek and Hebrew, as to find out what LAPIS FRƲCTIFERA might mean. But, observed you th'Application of this Marginal Note of the Discoverers to the line-reading? How loose it is? If his Pulpit ex∣ercises are stored with no closer applications, hee'l hardly ere earn his bread by preaching. And if he depended not more on some of the Councel of State, than u in the margent, on u in the page, I am afraid he might beg, or not live in England better than in Amsterdam. 3) Page 45. Hear what Lapis saith, This Sycophant hath invent∣ed wicked thoughts, which never entred their guiltless (what's the matter with him? Doth he read hout his Spectacles? Its gile∣less) souls. Poor hearts (toyis ion) las quentas en la mano, el
Diablo on capillo. Yet with both ys you may see the wickedly in∣vented scurvie thoughts of these Discoverers, if you'l read the Dis∣coverer Ʋncovered. Which thoughts their ungodlinesses would ain b upon those innocent souls which this Popish poverb no waies will stick to. Its applyed (apud Hispanes) to a special Sect of their Clergy: b (as they say) Piensa el ladrn, que tdos son de s cn∣dicion. (4) Page 49. Lapis moves like himself in p. 6. He repeats some words of the Discoverer [viz. How they have bin busie to raise Sedi∣tion and Mutiny amongst the Souldiers] and speaks never a wise word to it (to them he would say) But that the yong-man might not be discouraged, otherwise (here's some of that wherewith he stores his book, as if he made treasure of non-sense) we would ask him whether he were not enticed (an elegant word in this place) to step in between us and the Levellers, through reading the story how the Asse took upon him to judge between the Cuckow, and the Night∣ingal. Now of all others the Asse might worse do it. What broad spining here is? Threds fit to be Dedicated to C. to make halters of. But first, Excellent Concealers, what did I repeat? How they &c. hold there. I repeated those words of the Discoverer, viz. They (the four Tower-Prisoners) have bin busie to raise Sedition amongst the Souldiers, and shewed the invalidity of that cited to prove so much. The first quotation, being, not to be found, The se∣cond no whit concerning them, And the third ridiculous, as there you may read at large, And find somwhat more than NEVER a wise word: at which expression, if I had as much wit as the Discoverer, I could carp (like him, at by-matters, p. 4, 7, 10, 11, 24, &c. letting the main go free.) But these wise Cratures, would fain take me in (with them) to appear th'other Ass. Or like me to One that took upon him to judge between the Cuckow and the Nightingal, i. e. as the Discoverers lay it down between them (the Cuckow) and the Levellers [the Nightingal] A Fable exreme new to me; and their Moral is fit to scoff themselves with. And it could hardly be avoid∣ed by them. For Prov. XXVI. 9. As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a Drunkard; so is a Parable in the mouth of Fools; that is, them∣selves will be peirced met with by it. Now, upon the sole provocation of (what's provocation enough to me) mine ingenuity, to co, (for, I would not wittingly have any line drop from my pen, b at should fall plumb to one of
Truth; and be ayproved so, even when the curious shall appone most accurately the Level of Trueness) since the former uncover∣ing the Discoverer, I am informed, that, though Amsterdam, Printed by John Canne, 1643. is in the Titl page of a book quo∣ted by the Discoverer, p. 9. of first Part, yet the Book was Printed in England, without his knowledge. I therefore, upon insufficient (though likely) Ground charged it on him. Hitherto, of the Discoverer Ʋncovered, and to what said about it. Next, one word concerning their second part (and I have done for this time) its this; I think none will read farther in it (unless to confute it) after he hath read p. 12. where, with impudence suf∣ficient for men, who would arrogate infallibility to their hooded fancies, irrefragibility to their easie argutationes, and authority to impose upon the judgement of the most judicious Reader: they thus superciliously affront him, The Reader shall find here in our Dis∣coverer, so much cleerness of Truth, force of Reason, and fulness of proof, as he will easily see their lies, unless he purposely shut his eyes, and chuse rather to be deceived. He must therefore provide himself of credulity, and be sure to be obsequious, otherwise (there is no praevention) he's censured already. And to deal with them, is to have to do with men distempered, so extremely incensed, and ex∣ceedingly transported, as to say, We dare avouch it, and shall make it good, that there is not in the book one thing true, as they have set it down, p. 33. though there are these Truths of holy Scripture (for the last words) that, There is a reward for the Righteous; and that, There is a God that judgeth the earth, set down meerly as the Confession which will be enforced from the World, when the People shall be comforted, and the Land enjoy her rest, after so many yeers of sor∣row. Which hasten, ô God, the Creator! Amen. The End. Note that in p. 13, or 15. of the Discoverer Ʋncovered, there's one line or two transpos'd.
