T908 E99_29 P1069 50290042 155852
The third INTELLIGENCE FROM READING. Dated from His Excellency HIS QUARTERS Before READING, April 26. at night. London, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, April 28. 1643.
Mercurius Bellicus. April. 26. Sir, I Have now taken up a resolution as I shall have opportunity weekly at least, to give what account I shall be able to make up, of the affairs of our Army, which I shall do with no more advantage then truth allows. For God be thanked we are not driven to the refuge of lies, which in the issue proves but a lying failing refuge. Let our adver∣saries make contradictions betwixt their professions and practifes, maintain truth by lying, Law by stea∣ling, the Protestant Religion by an Army of Papists, the Libertie of the Subject by plundring and impri∣sonment. I shall endeavour a conformitie betwixt our carriage and cause, we fight for truth, and shall use no Weapons, but what truth affords us. And within the compasse of this rule I shall continue your Intel∣ligence from the twenty fourth of this instant, when you received my last, and in it, an account of Colo∣nell Middletons surprise of the Kings Regiment of foot at Dorchester, to which I can adde nothing, but that the victory might have proved more considera∣ble, if the advantage had been persued to the utmost.
But let us not despise the day of small things, they lead to greater, as you shall now hear; On Munday afternoon, I know nothing considerable, but the losse of a Captain of our, of Sir Henry Cholmlyes Regi∣ment by name Captain Nutty, the first, and only man of that qualitie, lost in this service. On Tuesday morning, toward ten of the clock, they hung up a White Flag from the Town for a Parley: but be∣fore I give you any account of the circumstances of the Treaty, I shall upon certain Information, relate to you what fell out betwixt the Kings Army coming to the relief of Reading, and two Regiments of ours appointed to withstand and prevent them. The King with His Nephews, Rupert and Maurice, marched from Wallingford, or thereabout, bringing with them as we are crediblie informed, fortie five Troops of Horse, nine Regiments of Foot, but something thin and weak; twelve Peeces of Ordnance, some very great, a Demi-Canon Bullet we found shot, and some Ammunition for the relief of the Town. Our two Regiments appointed for their resistance were, The Lord Roberts his Regiment, and Colonell Barclayes; The Lord Roberts, his was drawn into two Divisions, one half to the right, to strengthen Colonell Barclay, the other to the left by themselves. The Kings whole face was neer, but two Regiments marched up to ours, A Green and a Red; our men did as they were wont, very resolutely, as the issue proves; for they slew above one hundred on the place, wounded many, some they carryed away, but left Serjeant Major Smith slain, whom they much bewail: The two Re∣giments were much disordered as appears by three
hundred Arms, which were almost all of the Green Regiment, left upon the place, Drums and all; some of them had Money, it seems by thirtie pound taken out of one of their Pockets, I think Smths, by a common Souldier of my Lord Roberts: In summe they were put to so much disorder, that they with the rest, made a very confused and hasty retreat to∣ward Wallingford, not stopping till they came thither; a long march, but they went apace, and willingly: We lost only four men, and Colonell Barclay received a slight hurt in the Arm, which as it cannot discou∣rage him, so it doth no way disable him. It is thought, if we had gotten over three hundred Horse, they might have cut off very many of them; But let us be thankfull for this, and go on in the encourage∣ment of it, to do greater things through the same strength. But I must further adde, that the Town was not∣withstanding relieved with some little supply, two or three Cart-loads of something or other, light loaden, as appears by their galloping with their burden, being brought to the Water-side, but what was in them we know not. I know no more considerable Circum∣stances of this businesse, unlesse I should tell you that my noble Lord Roberts hearing that his Regi∣ment was in fight, presently rode up to their encou∣ragement, and came in to them, before the end of the businesse. And the certainty of this Relation, need not be doubted, The managing of the fight, I received from Lievtenant Colonell Bayly, and the manner of the retreat, from Master Russel who was sent upon busi∣businesse
to the Kings Armie, and Captain Dundaffe, who pursued them with a Regiment of Dragoons. As for the businesse of the Treaty, which it may be gives an ill sound among you, as it hath done among our common souldiers, in regard of the ma∣nifold and manifest disadvantage we have received by them in other places, it may be this present ac∣count will not reach the issue of it; if it do, I shall relate it. But the way of managing it was this; They sent to parley, Colonell Bolles, Lievtenant-Colonell Thelwell, Serjeant Major Gilby; and we sent to them, according to their demands, as Hostages, the Lord Rotchford, Lievtenant-Colonell Russell, and Serjeant Major Long: The Parley was appointed three hours; but by a second Message, continued longer, in regard that they desired liberty to go to the Kings Army, to acquaint the Commander in chief there with the terms: To that purpose Colonell Bolles, and Lievte∣nant-Colonel Russell went together toward the Kings Army, and had returned the last night, but that it was so dangerous marching upon, our men following the retreat of the enemy, who gave fire upon them, not knowing who they were: But this morning they returned with a Letter from Prince Rupert, to my Lord Generall, superscribed, To His Excellency; Sub∣scribed, Your servant Rupert: Of which, the substance was, That he agreed to quit the passage of Caver∣sham (which he hath not) when the Articles of Treaty betwixt His Excellency and the Town were performed, and the men came to him, either to Wal∣lingford, or Oxford. It hath now upon debate seem∣ed good to His Excellency and the Councell, to
conclude the taking of the Town upon surrender: Its true, the terms are more Honourable then they deserve, much like those given our men at Litchfield, To march away with Arms and Ammunition, Co∣lours flying, Baggage; And that those persons, not Inhabitants, as have been accidentally shut up, have liberty to go away with their Goods; excepting any that have been of our Army; and those Goods ex∣cepted from their Baggage, that have been taken from our friends, especially the Western Carriers; That they have liberty to march to Wallingford, or Oxford, without lett from our Forces, if they offer no Assault any where by the way; That they carry but four Pieces of Ordnance, and the Town be plun∣dered neither by them nor us; That 24 hours time be allowed them for the performance of these Arti∣cles; And that they give up their out Works, and three persons of quality, as Pledges for the faithfull performance. Although these terms seem too good for them, yet I hope they may be good for us; it will prevent the losse of those men we can ill spare: If we go on, espe∣cially with that eagernesse we are by some pressed, we may so take the Town, as not to be able afterward to take the Field: The alteration of the weather, the difficulty of the work, the easinesse of relief, the ty∣ring our Armie with continuall Alarms from our enemies, and too hard duty, our compasse being too great for our men; the Quarters not being intrench∣ed, the making our way clear, and I hope the resoluti∣on not to stay, but march presently after them may be considered: And as these and such like thoughts, I
suppose, were the grounds of our Commanders reso∣lution; so I hope they may be of the souldiers and peoples satisfaction, which in all the wayes of Ho∣nour and equity is much desired. I have little else for the present to impart, but that the Kings Armie is not invincible; if God so prosper and direct us as to take our opportunities; which through the help of our friends prayers, I hope we shall. So I rest, till the next opportunity. FINIS.
