W2005 E554_8 99863757 115971
A discourse of Liberty of Conscience, Wherin the arguments on both sides are so equally laid together in the ballance, that the indifferent Reader may with∣out difficulty judge whither side weighes the heavier. By Thomas Whitfeld, Minister of the Gospell. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. 1 Thes. 5.21. Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1649.
A Discourse of Liberty of Conscience. Arguments proving that Liberty of Conscience ought to be granted to all, and that no man should be punished for matters of Conscience. IF God alone be the Lord of the consci∣ence,  and to him onely it belongs to make lawes to binde conscience; then it belongs to no man either to make lawes to binde conscience or to force a man to do that which is contrary to the dictate of his con∣science, (for by doing this he should usurpe that power and authority which properly belongs to God) therefore every man must be left to the liberty of his con∣science. If it be full for any man to goe against the dictate of his conscience,  and doe that which his conscience condemns (for what ever is not of Faith, is sin,) then no man ought to enjoyne or enforce him to do this; for no man ought to enforce another to commit sin; therefore every man must be left at li∣berty to do that which his Conscience tells him he should doe.
If the Magistrate should punish any man for doing that which is good,  this is persecution: but it is good for a man to follow the dictate of his own Conscience. He therefore that shall inflict punishment for this, exerciseth persecution, and is to be accounted a persecutor. All errors are defects in a mans judgement,  arising from the darkenesse of his understanding: the way to helpe these is, rightly to informe his judgement, by presenting to it cleare Light and Strength of reason for that purpose; and not, to of∣fer violence to his will and affections by causing him to suffer that which is troublesome to him. If a man be dim-sighted by having a pinn and web or other disease in his eyes, the way to cure him, is not to hate him, but by applying such me∣dicines to his eyes, as are fit to cleare his sight. So for a man whose understanding is so farre clowded that he cannot see the truth of a deity or the truth of the Scripture, a pri∣son, or stripes will not reduce such an one, but better infor∣mation may do it. If the Magistrate may use coercive Power in matters of Re∣ligion,  then Jews and Turkes may be forced by the same to the faith of Christ, whereas Preachings and Perswasions and not Prisons and Fines, are the way and meanes to con∣vert men to God. The Apostles never made use of force or violence, but only of Informations, Instructions, perswasions to draw men to the obedience of Christ. It is not in the power of the Magistrate,  by his authority or any forcible meanes that he can use, to bring off mens minds from any error, to make them beleeve any truth, or willing∣ly to performe any duty; Now all the evill which a man shall forbeare, or good duties which he shall performe, if he doth not this out of inward principles, but be carryed to it by force and violence, by feare or favour or any other outward induce∣ment, he doth but herein play the hypocrite, and dissembles with God and men, so that all the force and violence which the Magistrate shall use to make men do any thing against their Consciences though never so good, or forbear any evill, though never so bad, serves but to make them play the hypocrites.
It is the Magistrates duty to cherish tender consciences not to offend them. The Apostle saith,  that he would rather cat no flesh while the world stood then offend his weake Brother, 1 Corin. 8, 13. Now this is the greatest offence that can be to one that hath a weake conscience, to be forced to doe that which is against his Conscience. As for instance, for any man to be forced to goe to the publike Congregation, and joyne in the use of publike Ordinances, when his Conscience goes against it. This will be a hindrance to the discovery of many excel∣lent truths,  and the beaking forth of such new light as hath not yet beene seene: for if men may not be free for their judgements and opinions, and have liberty to declare and ex∣presse themselves in any new thing which they have discover∣ed, it will discourage them from making search and inquiry after such truths as have not yet beene knowen, though very needfull to be known. Christian Magistrates must follow Christs example;  but Christ never gave any, either precept or president to imprison or kill men for Religion sake; therefore the Magistrate ought not to doe this. There is now no infallible Judge to determine what is He∣resie or Blasphemy;  that which one man conceives to be an excellent truth, another will be ready to condemne as here∣sy. The Apostle saith, that afer the way which the Jewes cal∣led heresie be did worship the God of his Fathers. Act, 24.14. And by this meanes it may come to passe that men may be punished for holding the truth. Errors and Heresies are those tares which our Saviour speaks of in the parable. Mat, 13.25.  and these he would not have to be plucked up, least they should pluck up the Wheat also, but let both grow together untill the harvest. verse. 29.30. It is Christs rule, that what we would that men should doe to us,  the like we should do to them: but no man would willingly be for∣ced to do that which is against his iudgement and conscience; therefore he must not do this to others. The Apostle saith that there must be Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.18.
It is in vaine therefore to strive against that which must and will be, and to seeke to hinder that which cannot be hindred. These are the principall arguments for the affirmative part which are brought to prove that, That all men ought to have liberty of conscience. Before the arguments for the negative part be propounded, it will be necessary that some few positions be premised that we may the better understand in what sense, and with what li∣mitations toleration for liberty of Conscience is denyed: which are these. 1. It is granted, That lighter and lesser errors may be tolerated and borne with, when grosse Errors and Heresies, yea Blasphemies are not to be suffered. The Apostle did beare with the errour of the Thessalouians, who thought that the day of Christ was neare at hand. 2 Thes. 2.1. But he would not enduce the heresy of Hymentus and Philetu, who held that the resurrection was already past, and that there was none to come. 2 Tim. 2.18. but delivered them up to Sathan. 2 That tender Consciences ought to be tenderly used; but those can hardly he thought to be truely tender, which can take liberty to got against cleare and evident light of Scripture. 3. That though men hold grosse and dangerous errors, yet while they conceale them and keepe them to themselves as their owne private opinions, they may be borne with all; but if they seeke to spread them abroad, to infect others with them, and draw aparty after them, they ought not to be endured, but to be severely censured. 4 That when such as these are censured, their punishment be ac∣cording to the nature or quality of the offence, in some lesser, in others greater; and the greatest and highest punishment never to be inflicted, but for offences of the highest nature, namely such Heresies as are ac∣companied with Blasphemy. 5 That this be done after many informations, admonitions, and the use of all fitting meanes, for reclaming and reducing them from their Error.
That (understanding it with these Cautions) liberty of Conscience ought not to be granted to all, is proved by these Arguments following. IF the Consciences of all naturall men be defiled,  if some be seared, then the Conscience of these is not to be the rule and measure by which the Magistrate is to be guided in the admi∣nistration of Justice, whether by sparing or punishing, but he must have some other rule; the reason is, because he must be guided by a just and straight rule, not by a crooked perverse rule, such as all defiled and seared Consciences are. But that the Consciences of all naturall men are desiled, of some are seared, is evident by the Scripture. The Apostle saith that, To the pure all things are pure, but to the unbeleeving nothing is pure, but even their mindes and consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15. yea, some are so seared by custome, and a continued course of sinning against Conscience, that they have lost all sence and feeling of sinne; the Apostle speakes of such whose Conscien∣ces were seared with an hot Iron, 1 Tim. 4.2. when the flesh of a mans body, or the finewes are seared with a hot Iron, the sence and feeling is lost in that part. hence he speakes of some who being past all feeling, gave themselves to wantonnesse, to commit all uncleannesse with greedinesse, Eph. 4.19. There is some light of Conscience left in every man by nature; but when the pra∣vity of a corrupt will so farre prevailes against this light, that a man goes on in a continued course against it, with holding this truth in unrighteousnesse, then (through the just Judgement of God) he comes to lose this light, it comes by degrees to be extinguished and quite put out. Hence the Apostle saith of the Gentiles, that because when they knew God they did not glorifie him as God, he gave them up to vile affections, to doe such things as were against the light of nature, that men left the naturall use of the woman, and burned in lust one toward another, man with man com∣mitting
filthinesse; and the woman did the like, Rom. 1.21.26, 27. Then a mans light is extinguished and lost, when his Conscience will allow him to doe any thing, even to doe such things as are not seemly; (as the Apostle speakes, Rom. 1 28.) and can we thinke such a Conscience as this to be a fit rule for the Magistrate to be guided by, for his proceedings in the ad∣ministration of Justice? If the Word must be the rule of all mens actions,  then o the Magistrates, then not other mens Consciences; the reason is, because the Consciences of ignorant men, and men of cor∣rupt mindes in few things agree with the Word, yea in some things are altogether contrary to it. That the Word is to be the rule of every mans actions is evi∣dent; the Apostle saith, the whole Scripture is given of God, and is profitable for instruction in righteousnesse, 2 Tim 3 16. If it be profitable and fitted for this purpose to instruct men in the right way, and given of God for this very end, then it must be used to this end. Wherewith shall a young man eleanse his way? by taking heed thereto recording to thy word, Psal. 119.9. That which is spoken of a young man, belongs to every man; therefore every man must take heed to the Word for the right ordering of his way; yea this is given in charge in a speciall minner to Princes and Governours, Tht the Booke of the Law must be with them, and that they must read therein all the dayes of their life, that they may learne to feare the Lord, and to keep all the words of this Law, and his ordinances to doe them, Deut. 17.19. The Magistrate must have a cleare and certaine rule to pro∣ceed by in the administration of Justice,  yea such a rule as is constant, alway one and the same; therefore other mens Con∣sciences cannot be the rule, because severall Consciences are of severall sizes and latitudes, one mans Conscience allowing that which another disallowes; yea sometimes they stand in points directly opposite one to another, one man highly ap∣proving of that which another abhorres, and deeply detests. Besides, how can there be any certaine knowledge of some men, what indeed goes against their Conscience, when the hearts of all unregenerate men being full of hypocrisie, and
deceitfull above all things, they may easily pretend that such or such things are against their Conscience, when indeed it is not their Conscience, but their corrupt wills and affections that stand in opposition against them. The Magistrate is the Minister of God,  and God hath put the Sword into his hand, to the end to take vengeance, and execute wrath upon them that doe evill; therefore he must not to∣lerate such, Rom. 13.4. That to hold and maintaine grosse errors and heresies is evill, appeares, 1 Because false teachers are called evill workers, Phil. 3.2. and those who bid such God speed, partake of their evill deeds, 2 Joh. 11. therefore their deeds in holding and spreading such doctrines, are evill deeds; and the Church of Ephesus is commended for not bearing with thse that are evill, Rev. 2.2. (speaking of false teachers.) 2 If all the truths of God be good (especially fundamentall truths) then it is an evill thing to contradict and oppose them. Who can deny it to be an evill thing to speake against, and seeke to overthrow the most cleare and evident truths of holy Scripture? 3 Sinne being a transgression of the Law, all transgressions of the Law are evill; sinnes against the first Table, as well as against the second; injuries against God, as well as wrongs to our neighbour. Now it is an injury to God, to deny any of the truths of his holy Word; a great injury to Christ, to deny ei∣ther his Natures, Offices, or any of his Actions which he hath done for the good of man; therefore the deniall of these things (which Hereticks are wont to doe) being direct brea∣ches against the first Table, are evills to be punished by the Magistrate, as well as the breaches of the second Table; other∣wise he doth not discharge his duty, and performe the Office and worke charged upon him by God himselfe, namely, execute wrath, and take vengeance upon them that doe evill. The Magistrate ought not to grant such a toleration as is destructive to the most essentiall worke of the Magistrate,  and
the principall end of Magistracie; that the toleration of all opinions in matters of Religion will doe this, may thus appeare. The most essentiall worke and principall end of Magistracie, is, to preserve peace and piety amongst men. The Apostle bids us to pray for Kings and Princes, 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. and all that are in authority, to this end, that we may lead a quiet life in all godlinesse and bo∣nesty; but the toleration of all corrupt opinions is destructive both to quietnesse and godlinesse, as will appeare in the par∣ticulars. 1 It is destructive to peace and quietnesse; for the Apostle saith, that when men doe not consent to the doctrine which is ac∣cording to godlinesse, but dote about questions and strifes of words (as all Hereticks are wont to doe) hence ariseth envie, strife, raylings, and evill surmisings, 1 Tim. 6.3, 4. 2 Difference in opinion causeth difference in affection, and both these cause difference in practise; whence followes strife, contention, and dangerous violations of the bond of peace. Hence the Apostle so often exhorts Christians to be like minded, to be of one minde and judgement, that so they may be of one ac∣cord, Phil. 2.2. to be knit together in one minde and judgement, and to speake the same thing, that there be no divisions, 1 Cor. 1.10. shewing thereby that where men are of divers mindes, and speake divers things, divisions will very hardly be prevented; when therefore Pragmaticall heads shall have liberty to bring forth the whole brood of their busie braines, and freely to vent all their novell fancies, and absurd opinions (though some luxuriant wanton wits may like well enough of these novel∣ties) yet those of more sober and solid judgement (who are alway fastest friends to truth) will not be carried away with these winds of doctrine, but thinke themselves bound (when they touch upon the foundation) earnestly to oppose them (because we are bidden to contend for the faith once given to the Saints, Jude 3) whence ariseth strife and contention, and ma∣ny breaches in the Church of God. 3 Experience hath shewed in all ages, that the greatest jarres and breaches both in Church and State have been occa∣sioned
by differences about matters in religion; so it was in the Church of Antioch, Acts 15.2. and in the Church of Galatia, Galat. 5.15. therefore it concernes the Governours of both these to take care that no new opinions be started, or somented, (unlesse they shall by judicious men be thought to be of great consequence for the good of the Church) much lesse that every one should have liberty to broach his owne fancies as he plea∣seth, and spread abroad any absurd or dangerous opinion without controll; such things as these being the usuall bones of strife, and the fuell whereby the fire of contention hath been both kindled and continued. 2 This is destructive as to peace, so to piety; for the founda∣tion of the practice of godlinesse is the doctrine of godlinesse, rightly entertained in mens judgements and affections. Now when there shall be liberty granted for any one to contradict and speake against this doctrine, yea to blaspheme and speake evill of it, as to cry downe the practice of daily repentance, humiliation for sinne, of the use of the Law of God as a rule of obedience, of the observation of Gods Sabbath as a neces∣sary meanes for preservation of Piety; yea to speake against the Divinity of the Son of God, or Spirit of God, to call in question, and dispute against the authority of the Word, and deny the truth of holy Scripture; this must needs be excee∣dingly destructive to all true piety and godlinesse, and open a wide gap to all irreligion and prophanesse. Must not this needs overthrow all the power of true piety, when not only the rules of it are violated by wicked practices, but the do∣ctrine it selfe is denyed, and contradicted by corrupt licen∣tious opinions? If Heresie be a fruit of the flesh,  then it ought not to be to∣lerated by the Christian Magistrate no more then Adultery, Murther, Theft, or any other fruit of the flesh. But the Apostle joynes all these together in the same ranke, making them se∣verall fruits of the flesh, and saith of them all, that they who doe such things shall not inherit the kingdome of God, Gal. 5.20, 21. That for which Christ commends the Church of Ephesus,  is to be followed; that for which he condemnes the Church of
Thyatira, is to be declined by the Christian Magistrate: but the Church of Fphesus is commended that she could not beare them that were evill, Rev. 2.2. (namely, false teachers) therefore this is to be followed by good Magistrates, and they are to doe the like: and the Church of Thyatira is condemned for suffering the woman Jezabel to teach and seduce Christs servants; Rev. 2.20. there∣fore this is to be declined, and they ought not to suffer false teachers to spread their dangerous doctrines, and thereby se∣duce the people of God. This was not spoken to Magistrates,  but to the Angels of the Churches. True,  then there was no Christian Magistrates, and there∣fore it could not be spoken to them; but this did concerne the Christian Magistrate, and therefore was to take place when the Church came to have such, when Governours came to be Christians. 1 Because the Christian Magistrate ought not to tolerate such whom the Church justly censures, to suffer such evills in the Church for which men are justly cast out of the Church, and delivered up to Sathan; for how then is he a nursing Fa∣ther to the Church? how then are those two great Ordinances of Magistracie and Ministry mutually helpfull, and subservient each to others as they ought to be. 2 How then is the Magistrate custs utriusque tabulae? how doth he discharge his duty in taking vengeance on those who doe evill, and taking order that people may live under him in all godlinesse and honelly (as before was shewed) if he suf∣fers the supplanters and underminers of all godlinesse to doe what they will in this worke? 3 If the Magistrate should tolerate such as the Church is bound to condemne and castout, this would cause perpetuall jarres and discord betwixt Church and State, Civill and Ec∣clesiastique Government, betweene which there ought to be a sweet harmony and agreement, mutually supporting and strengthening each other. If those,  that trouble the Church by false doctrin ought to be cut off, then they ought not to be tolerated; but the Apostle
prayes that such might be cut off, I would they were cut off that trouble you, Gal. 5.12. (speaking of false teachers) for whether this cutting off be by Church censures, or how ever it be, it excludes all toleration and allowance of such. It is the duty of all men to buy the truth (to use all meanes to obtaine and preserve it) and not to sell it, Prov. 23.23.  to doe nothing against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. but if the Magistrate shall give liberty to every man that will, to op∣pose, contradict, and cry downe cleare and evident truths of Scripture, the doing of this is not for the truth, but a gainst it; this is not a buying, but a selling, a voluntary letting goe of truth; therefore this ought net to be done. If it be unlawfull for the Magistrate to hate his brother,  it is unlawfull for him to suffer sinne upon him; for these two are joyned together as companions, or the one being as an effect of the other; Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy beart, but re∣buke him plainly, and not suffer sinne upon him, Lev. 19.17. or not suffer him to sinne (as the old Translation reads it.) He that doth neither rebuke nor restraine another from sinning when he hath power in his hand to doe it, but grants a toleration to him to doe that whereby he sinnes, he suffers such an one to sinne suffers sinne upon him; yea, he suffers such not on∣ly to sinne himselfe, but to draw others to the like sinne; He∣resie being like a Canker that eates in, and spreads it selfe from one part of the body to another, 2 Tim. 2.17. How doth the Magistrate take care of the welfare of the Church, when he suffers it to be over spread with such Errours and Herefies, that are like to Cankera and Gangrenes: as destructive to the safety and well being of it, as these are to the health and welfare of the body? Looke what is the duty of good Parents and Masters in the right governing of their Families,  is the duty of the Christian Magistrates in governing the Common-wealth; but Pacents and Masters ought to keeps their Children and Servants from being paysoned with dangerous Errours and Heresies, such as be like to Cankens and Gangrenes; therefore the Magi∣strate ought likewise to do the same thing for the safety of the
Church and Common-wealth; the Psalmist professeth, that no deceitfull person should dwell in his house, that he who talketh lyes should not abide in his sight, Psal. 101.7. false teachers are called by the Apostle deceitfull workers, 2 Cor. 11.13. and such are called also lyars, Revel. 2.2. yea, they are the worst kinde of Lyars that dare contradict and oppose, yea seeke to confute and overthrow the most cleare and evident truths of Scripture. It is the duty of the Magistrate to follow such Precepts and Patternes as are held forth in holy Scripture;  but the Scrip∣ture holds forth many precepts and patternes for punishing sinnes against the first Table, as well as the second; therefore the Magistrate ought to follow these. That the Scripture holds forth commands and examples for punishing Trans∣gressors of the first Table, (and in particular of false Pro∣phets) is evident by many places. The Lord commands that false Prophets should be put to death, Deuteronomy 13.4, 5. Blasphemers, Levit. 24.16. Idolaters, Deut. 17.4, 5. Sabbath∣breakers, Exod. 31.15. Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah Josiah, exercised their authority in punishing abuses in the worship of God, and setting things aright in matters of Religion, and are commended for it, 2 Chron. 14.4, 5.17.6, 7.29.3. to 10.33.2, 3.34.3, 4. Nehemiah punished such as broke the Sabbath; Neh. 13.21 and in the fourth Command the Lord gives charge, that the strangers within our gates should not be suffered to breake the Sab∣bath; which charge must needs belong to Magistrates. By all which it appeares, that Magistrates are bound to take care there be no violation of the precepts of the first Table as well as of the second; therefore not to tolerate all manner of Er∣rours and Herefies, which are violations of the first precept in the first Table in a high degree. Against this Argument some Exceptions are brought, which therefore it will be needfull to answer, for vindicating of the truth and strength of it. The Commands for punishing false Prophets,  and others of like kinde were branches of the judiciall Law, which
belonged to the Jews only, not of the morall, which belongs to Christians. Although the circumstantials of the judiciall law (as man∣ner, kind,  place of punishment and such like) were proper to the Jews, yet the substance and common equity of them belongs to all; for, 1 The substance of them is confirmed by Christ and his A∣postles, as when Christ saith, It is written in your Law, that the testimony of two witnesses is true. Joh. 8.17. and when the Apo∣stle saith, Thou shalt not inuzzell the month of the Oxe, that tread∣eth out the Corne, 1 Tim. 5.18. applying this to the mainte∣nance of Teachers. 2 The punishment for blasphemy was to be inflicted, not only upon the Jews, but those also of other Nations. As well the stranger as he that is borne in the Land, when he blasphemeth, shall be put to death. Lev. 24. So for Idolatry. Lev. 20.1. 3 Where the causes and grounds of any precept are perpetu∣all, there the thing it selfe is perpetuall; but the causes of pu∣nishing blasphemy, Idolatry, &c. namely Gods justice, holi∣nesse, glory, and other like are perpetuall; therefore the rule for punishing these is perpetuall. 4 The reason which God himselfe gives, why trangressors of the first table ought to be punished; namely because false Pro∣phets turned men away, from following the Lord their God, Deut. 13.5. And that others might beare and feare, and doe no more such wickednesse. verse. 11. is of the same force now as it was then, therefore the precept must be of the same force; so that though the accessoryes of this or other like commands may be abro∣gated, yet the substance holds still in force; namely, that the Magistrate ought to punish such offenders as these; and that their punishment be according to the nature and degree of the offence. Against the examples of those good Kings that punished I∣dolaters, and reformed abuses in the worship of God,  it is ex∣cepted that these Kings were types of Christ, and their actions typicall; and therefore enjoyne not imitation. Though Hezekiah and Josiab might be types of Christ;  yet
how can it appeare that Jehu, Ichoash and other wicked Kings were types of Christ? yet these are commended for destroying false worship. 2 Kings 10.30 yea Artxerxes and other heathen Kings are commended for what they did in advancing the worship of God. Ezra 7.26. 2 Jsiah, and other good Magistrates in the old Testament, punished idolatry; and other sins against the first table, out of love to God, and zeale to his glory; and not as they were types of Christ. If they did it out of morall, not typleall grounds, then Christian magistrates are bound upon the like grounds to performe the like actions. 3 If Christian magistrates must punish sins against the second Table out of love to God, and zeale for his glory; then they must punish sinnes against the first Table upon these grounds also, because they are with David to have respect to all Gods Commandments. And Kings are commanded to read in the booke of Gods law all the dayes of their life, that they may keepe all the words of this Law. Deut. 17.19. not some of them only. 4 By this reason their example were not binding, in punish∣ing sinnes against the second Table; no nor in the actions of prayer, humilitation for sinne, or any other morall duty; yea this way all the duties required in the Scripture of the old Testament might be shifted off, because the penmen of them were types; they were given to a typicall people, and written in a typicall Land. 5 Actions meerly typicall, are barely and simply related without any addition of commondation or reprehension as these are. Further it is excepted,  that in the times of the old Testa∣ment, the worshipping of false Gods was the only object of the magistrates coercive power. Not so:  for the worship of the calves at Dan and Bethel, the taking of strange wives, the breach of the Sabbath, yea the whole Covenant, came under the reach of their power and au∣thority, as appeares in the example of Ezra, Nebemiah, Ass, Jehosophat, and others; these exceptions there fore seeme rather to be shifts, then satisfying answers to the foregoing Argument.
It is imprinted upon men by nature, that there is a God, that this God is to be worshipped and honoured.  Hence all Nations have worshipped some God or other; and embraced some Religion or other. Neither would they suffer the God which they worshipped, to be blasphemed, and the Religion which they observed to be spoken against, it being abhorring to nature, & against the law of nature, that this should be to∣lerated. Hence heathens have punished Atheists and blasphe∣mers of their Gods. Socrates, Theodorus and some others were put to death for speaking something against the Gods. Shall heathens be so carefull to maintaine the honour of their false Gods; and shall Christians suffer wrong to be done to the true God? That his name should be blasphemed, his wor∣ship derided, his most sacred and holy truths, which in his word he hath revealed, to be contradicted and cryed down, and this tolerated, and the Actors of these evills to goe a∣way unpunished? Shall the soules of many people be indan∣gered, by being poysoned with damnable errours, and no∣thing done to hinder it? may we see those who are nearest tous, drawne into the way of eternall destruction, and stand by and looke on? (saith Mr. Burroughes Iren. p. 24.) These are the principall Arguments brought for the neg∣ative part, namely that liberty of Conscience ought not to to be granted to all; so as in matters of Religion, every man may hold and maintaine, yea hold forth to others what he pleaseth. The indifferent Reader may now judge whether part, nam∣ly those for the affirmative or negative, carry the greatest weight with them. And the latter seeming to sway the bal∣lance, it followes to be considered, whether there may not be a satisfying answer given to the former.
Answer to the arguments for the af∣firmative part. TO the first argument that it belongs to God alone to make lawes to binde Conscience &c. the answer is, That the Magistrate doth make no lawes to binde Con∣science,  but only enjoynes men to doe that which the law of God requires, and restraines them from doing that which the law and word of God forbids, and this is his duty to doe, namely; to punish sinne, all sinne and breaches of Gods Law, whether it be in matters of Doctrine or Practise. To the second, that it is a sinne, for any man to do that which is against his conscience, and therefore that the Ma∣gistrate shall make him sin, &c. The answer is,  That in the act of him that hath an er∣roneous Conscience, two things are to be considered. 1 The doing of such a thing as the law and word of God requires. 2 The doing of this against his Conscience. The first of these is good, and this onely the magistrate enjoynes; the other he doth neither enjoyne nor intend. Of the first, he is causa per se, a true and proper cause: of the se∣cond, he is onely causa per accidens, an accident all cause, it being praeter seopum efficientis, besides the scope and intent of the magistrate, that the man in doing a good thing should doe it against his Conscience; and therefore himselfe one∣ly, and not the magistrate is blame worthy in this action. This may be further cleared by an instance or two: Sup∣pose the magistrate should enjoyne a superstitious Papist to take the Image which usually he prayes before, and breake it in pieces or cast it into the fire, this would goe against the Conscience of the Papist, but it would be no sinne in the
Magistrate; because it is the command of God, that im∣ages being instruments of Idolatry should be destroyed: and this is the onely thing which the Magistrate commands, and not the doing of it against his conscience, that is his owne fault only, who ought to have a Conscience better informed, and not to thinke good, evill. Take another instance; God enjoynes men to pray and call upon him: and this is the duty of every man, it being a a part of that homage and honour which he owes to God; yet when a wicked man prayes, he sinnes, for the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Prov. 15.8. Shall we say then that God is the cause of his sinne? he is indeed the proper cause of the action, because he commands it, but onely an accidentall cause of the sinfulnesse of it, that rests onely in the wicked man himselfe; because though hee be bound to pray, yet for want of faith and other graces, when ever he does it, he does it sinfully; but this is not Gods fault who commads him to doe it, but his owne, who wants grace to doe it in the right manner. So it is with the Ma∣gistrate, when he commands a man to doe that which God commands, though he does it sinfully, for want of a right∣ly informed Conscience; and herein appeares the misery of him that hath an erroneous Conscience, which way soever he turnes himselfe, he is cast into a sinfull snare; if he neg∣lects the duty which God requires, he sinnes against God; if he doth it, he sins against his Conscience; but it is his owne fault that he hath such a Conscience. To the third Argument, That it is persecution to pun∣ish men for not doing that which is against their Con∣science. The answer is as before,  that the Magistrate doth not punish any man for following the dictate of his Conscience (this not being the thing which he strikes at) but for fol∣lowing wicked opinions and practises, for opposing necessa∣ry truths, for maintaining hereticall doctrines, seeking to spread these abroad, and cause others to be infected with
them. When hereticks suffer punishment for their dangerous and damnable opinions, they do not suffer for righteousnes sake, they doe not suffer for well doing, but for evill do∣ing; (hence Hereticks are called evill workers) and there∣fore it is an act of Justice and righteousnesse in the Magi∣strate to inflict punishment on such as these, and it is his duty so to doe (for he is the minister of God to execute wrath, and take vengeance on them that doe evill, Rom. 13.4.) And if he should not do this he should neglect his duty, and betray the trust committed to him. This therefore being an act of righteousnesse to punish evill doers, whoever calls it persecution, calls good evill, and light darknesse, and brings himselfe within the reach of that woe which is denounced against them that doe so, Esay 5.20. Theeves and Murderers may as well cry out of persecution, as grosse Hereticks and Seducers, when the sword of the Magistrate is exercised against them, the one seeking to rob men of their goods, the other of their graces, of their faith and love to the truth; the one offers violence to the life of their bodies, the other endanger (if not destroy) the life of their soules. Many in these times call earnestly for the execution of Justice upon such as have beene principall Authors and Actors in our late Warres, which (though divers did in conscience of their duty to their Soveraigne) yet it would be thought very absurd if they should call it persecution; because this execution of Justice is thought a meanes to remove the guilt of innocent blood from the Land; Why should not the blood of mens soules, which are daily poyson∣ed by Hereticall opinions be thought as precious as the blood of mens bodies, and care be taken for re∣removall of the guilt of the one from the Nation, as well as the guilt of the other? To the fourth Argument,  that the defects of an er∣ronious judgement are to be cured not by Prisons, but by Precepts; The answer is, That the disease of He∣reticks
lies not only or principally in their judgements, but rather in their wills and affections; Heresie being usually accompanied with pride and perversnesse, with wilfulnesse and obstinacy. Though any man shall hold very dangerous opinions, yet he is not counted an He∣reticke till he comes to be pertinatious in holding these, and continues in them after sufficient instruction and in∣formation. The Apostle bids, Reject an Hereticke after once or twice admonition, Tit. 3.10. whereby he intimates, that it is the property of Hereticks to stand out many ad∣monitions and informations. And he saith of such, that they are puft up though they know in thing aright, 2 Timoth. 1.4. Pride is the principall ingredient of their distem∣per. Hereticks are for the most part men of the sharpest wits, and strongest parts (Sathan being wise enough to make choyce of the ablest instruments to doe his worke) Hence, being wise in their owne conceit, they thinke scorne to be vanquished by their owne weapons, to be overcome by strength of reason and ability in arguing (wherein they usually excell.) As it is pride that leads them into new opinions (because they would seeme to know more then others) so it makes them tenacious in holding them fast, least (though they be mistaken) they should seeme to be so, which will not stand with a proud spirit; therefore informations or perswasions will doe little good upon such as these. Arius and Pelagius (in for∣mer times) and many learned Papists at this day, have not wanted sufficient meanes of information and conviction, but all to little purpose. Secondly, Pride and perversenesse being the principall disease of Hereticks, outward punishments and censures, (whether by Prisons or other wayes) are like to doe more good upon them then any informations or instructions, which they are wont to cast off with scorne: but the other (through Gods blessing) may be a meanes to humble them, and make them willing to heare and regard what
before they slighted. A Prison did more good to Manasseh then all the preaching of the Prophets could doe. God spake to Manasseh and his people by the Prophets, but they re∣garded not, 2 King, 21.10. 2 Chro. 33.10. but when he sent the Hoast of the Assyrians, who tooke him and bound him in chaines, and carried him to Babell, When he was in tribulation he humbled himselfe greatly before the Lord, 2 Chro. 3.11, 12. Admonitions and other Church Censures have been effectuall for staying the spreading of Heresies; so may the censures of Magistrates be when wisely and seaso∣nably applyed, and other meanes will take no effect. He that hath a Pin and Web, or other weaknesse in his sight, though beating will not make him see better, yet if he wilfully shuts his eyes, and will not receive any medicine, beating may cure him of this, and make him willing to receive such meanes of cure as shall be fit for recovery of his sight. It is not the weaknesse of mens judgements, which clouds their understandings so as they cannot see the truth of a Deity, or the truth of the Scriptures, but the wickednesse of their wills, which fit corrections and cen∣sures may be a meanes to cure. Thirdly, If Prisons or other penalties can doe no good for curing of Hereticks themselves, yet they may be a meanes of good to others by restraining Seducers from liberty and opportunity of spreading their errours, and infecting others with them: (which they are alway most industri∣ous to doe, there being an itching appetite in them to scatter their fancies as farre as they can) and may be a meanes of deterring and discouraging others from ready en∣tertaining their novelties, when they see they are not like to bring them any applause or advantage, but rather dis∣grace and danger. All Israel shall heare and feare, Deut. 13.11. saith the Lord in the like case. To the fifth Argument, That if the Magistrate may use coercive power in matters of Religion, then Jewes and Turkes may be forced by the sword to the faith of Christ.
The answer is; That although preaching and perswasions,  and not Prisons or Fines, be fit meanes to convert Jewes, Pagans, or any such as are yet strangers to the truth; yet they may be fitter necessary meanes for restraining Here∣ticks and Apostates, who have been bred in the Church, from doing mischiefe and harme to others, by drawing them into the same defection; yea, they may be a meanes of humbling them (as before was shewed) and putting them into such a disposition, whereby they may be brought to a sight of their errours, which they are not like to be, whiles being tolerated they are by their followers not only favoured, but fomented and applauded, and so more strengthened in their perverse wayes. Secondly, The use of coercive power may be a meanes to restraine even Pagans from Idolatrous and prophane practices, and bring them to an outward conformity in matters of religion. To the sixth Argument, That if the Magistrate shall enforce men in matters of religion, by this meanes he shall make them play the Hypocrites: the answer is this: 1 That though it be not in the power of the Magi∣strate to make men beleeve,  or yeeld inward obedience to the Commands of God (as it is neither in the pow∣er of the Minister) yet he may be a meanes to cause them make an outward profession, and yeeld an outward conformity to Gods Command by an outward attendance upon his ordinances. 2 This outward conformity is in it selfe good, being such a thing as God requires; it is in it selfe good to heare the word, to sanctifie the Sabboth, to joyne in performance of any religions, duties; and this only the Magistrate is the proper cause, that these are not done in the right manner, that they are done in formality, hypocrisie, or upon external grounds onely, he is onely the accidentall cause, (as before was shewed) and that there is a defect in the manner of do∣ing,
the fault is onely in themselves, and not in the Magi∣strate. When the master of the feast caused his servants to compell such as were bidden to come in to the supper, Luke 14.23. (That is to the use of the outward Ordinances) did he make them play the hypocrites? No, their comming in was from him, but their hypocrisie from themselves, hee was only an accidentall cause of that; so it is with the magi∣strate, when he compels men to outward conformity in mat∣ters of Religion. To the seventh Argument, That it is the Magistrates duty to cherish tender Consciences, not to offend them: The an∣swer is, 1 That tender Consciences ought to be tenderly used;  but as the magistrate ought to have charity to cherish such as are truly tender, so he ought to have wisedome to discern betwixt tendernesse and waywardnesse, betwixt weaknesse and wilfulnesse; tendernesse and weaknesse may be pretended and set on the top, when waywardnesse and wilfulnesse lye at the bottome. 2 The more truly tender any mans Conscience is, the more carefull it makes him to finde out the rule, and to cleave close to it, and that in one thing as well as another, (the obedience of a good Conscience being uniforme and universall) yea to cleave most close there, where the rule is most cleare and evident. He that scruples at small things which can scarcely be made appeare to be against the rule, and takes liberty in greater and grosser things, that are clearely and evidently against it, may well be suspected to have no tender Conscience. It is not the property of a tender Conscience to deny cleare and evident truthe of Scripture; to question the trinity, to deny the divinity of the son of God, or of the holy Ghost, the immortality of the soule of man, the being of any true Church on earth, to question the truth of the Scriptures themselves and the like. These things are scarcely compatible to a rectifyed Con∣science, they are not the scruples of a tender Conscience,
but rather symptomes of a seared Conscience. 3 When the Magistrate inflicts punishment upon them, whose Consciences will allow them to maintaine and spread abroad such grosse errors & heresies, as were before mention∣ed; if themselves or others be offended at it, this is an offence taken only, not given; for it is his duty to do it (as hath been shewed) and if he should not doe it, he should offend God by the neglect of his duty. Now when the case so stands as either man or God must be offended, it is not hard to judge whe∣ther ought to be perfered. True it is that in things indifferent such as are left to our own liberty, we cannot be too careful not to offend a weak Brother; but necessary duties, such as God in his word directly requires of us, ought not to be declined, for feare of offending erroneous Consciences. Yea he that is offended upon such grounds as these, hath just occasion to doubt that his Conscience is not truly tender; at least not a Conscience rightly informed. To the eighth Argument, That this will be a hinde∣rance to the discovery of many excellent truths: the answer is: 1 That some new truths had better be concealed, then liberty be given to question old truths of far greater conse∣quence: the shaking of which, causeth the shaking of the very foundation of true religion. 2 Oft-times old Errors (being newly varnisht over) are by this meanes obtruded upon us, under the names and notion of new truths. As the old error of the Anti∣nomians and Libertines, under the name and notion of free grace discovered, and of the Gospell in its glory, liberty, and freenesse, and such like. Old Pelagianisme under the title of the universality of Gods free grace to Mankinde in Christ, yea the substance of Arrianisme, and Familisme under other specious titles, and all these under the notion of new truths. 3 Though there will be daily a new discovery of Pro∣pheticall truths (as the accomplishment of them drawes
nearer) yet we ought to be very jealous of new doctrinall truths, because we are bidden to hold fast the forme of whol∣some words, and of the doctrine which is according to godlinesse, 1 Tim. 6.3. and to contend for the faith which was once given to the Saints, Jud. 3. The substantials of faith were but once given, not often; therefore we must contend against all innovations in these. 4 Wise Governours whether Civill, or Ecclesiastique, will easily know how to put a difference betwixt such opini∣ons as have a faire and likely probability from Scripture, and such as carry with them a contradiction to cleare and evident truths of Scripture, by countenancing or at least conniving the one, and seeking to suppresse the other. To the ninth Argument, That Christ never gave pre∣cept or example to kill men for religion; the answer is, That neither did he this for breach of Civill Justice,  as Murther, Adultery, and the like; when the adulterous woman was brought before him, Joh. 9. he did not passe any judiciall sentence against her, because when he was on earth he did not act the part of a civill Magistrate, but of a Minister, yea of a sufferer. 2 When the civill Magistrate doth execute justice upon transgressors of the first Table, especially upon obstinate Hereticks and Apostates; he doth not kill men for their religion, but for rebellion against the Lawes, for their im∣piety, obstinacy, and wicked endeavours to undermine and overthrow all grounds of Religion, by their damnable blasphemies; for while they come to this height of wicked∣nesse, the sword of the magistrate is not stretched forth to the highest degree of punishment. To the tenth argument: That there is now no infallible judge to determine what is heresie orblasphemy: the answer is, 1 That we have the same infallible judge, that those had to whom the Apostles wrote, when they bade them try the
spirits, whether they were of God or not, 1 Joh. 4.1. To try all things, and keepe that which was good. 1 Thes. 5.21. and to reject an heretique, after once or twice admonition. Tit. 3.10. Although the Apostles themselves were infallible in the pen∣ning of the holy Scriptures, yet those to whom they wrote were not infallible in their Judgement, not in that present, much lesse in future ages. 2 This Argument reacheth not those points of faith that can be certainly knowne; for touching these there needs no infallible judge. But are there no points of faith that can be certainly knowne? wherefore then serve the Scriptures? Can it not be certainly knowne, that there is a God, that this God is one, that he is most holy, wise, just, eternall, in∣finite? That there are three persons in the God-head, that Jesus Christ is the sonne of God, of the same essence with the Father; that he dyed, rose againe, and shall come to judge the quick and dead? that to reproach and speake basely of the true God, or any of the persons is blasphemy? cannot we certainly know that if we worship the Sunne, Moone, or Starres; yea Saints, Angels, or any other Crea∣tures, with the same worship, that is due onely to the true God, this is Idolatry? can it not be knowne that we must worship this God, with the same worship which him∣selfe appoints, and that one day in every weeke is to be set apart for this purpose? Can it not be certainly knowne that the soule of man is immortall, that there is a heaven prepared for the righteous, and an hell for the wicked? that the Scriptures are the word of God? cannot these and many other like truths be knowne without some other infallible judge besides the Scripture? Is not this (with the Papists) to deny the sufficiency and perspicuity of the Scrip∣ture? and to thinke them (as they doe) like a nose of wax that may turne into any fashion according to mens fancies? doth it not make them an imperfect rule, (at least such an abscure dark and doubtfull rule,) as a Christian must have something else to guide him in matters of faith, besides or better then the Scripture.
In all thing needfull to salvation, the Scripture is plaine and cleare enough: whence it is compared to a light or lamp, which may easily be seene, Psal. 119.102. to a light shining in a darke place. 2 Pet. 1.19. It is said to give understanding to to the simple Psal. 119.130. Prov. 1.4. and knowledge is easie to him that will understand. Prov. 14.6. For other things that are laid downe in darke obscure parts of Scripture on∣ly, and not in plaine places, if we be ignorant of them, or mistaken in them, the danger is not great, neither shall this ignorance be prejudiciall to our salvation, when it is onely a simple, and no affected ignorance. 3 For such things as the Scripture holds forth more dark∣ly and doubtfully, if we cannot satisfie our selves by such meanes as our selves are able to use, the surest way is to re∣ceive satisfaction from such as God hath best fitted for this purpose; namely from such as are godly, learned, and best able to judge of the true sence of Scripture; especially when these (being convened in lawfull synods and assemblies) have debated these things according to Scripture rules, and declared their judgements about them. But this is to pin our faith upon other mens,  sleeves. No it is not;  for 1 these things thus doubted, are no funda∣mentals of faith. 2 Every man is still left free to judge of them by the Scriptures. For better understanding of this, we are to take notice of a twofold judgement, that is to be made use of in matters of controversie. There is judicium discretionis, & judicium determinationis. 1 There is a judgement of discerning or discretion, and this belongs to every private Christian to make use off, be∣cause every one ought to labour to see the truth with his owne eyes so far as he is able. 2 There is a Judgement of determining and defining things that are doubtfull, of which we have a famous exam∣ple, this belongs onely to Church Synods and assemblies. Act. 15.
Now in those doubtfull truths wherein we cannot satis∣fie our selves, we are to receive satisfaction from these; yea in controversall points (though we be fully satisfied) wee ought so farre to acquiesce, in the determination of these as not make any opposition against it, to the distur∣bing of the Church, according to the example of the Church of Antioch. Act 15.31. And of other Churches, Act. 16.5. The reason is: 1 Because in controversall points, we may easily be mista∣ken and deceived; but in those truths whereby we are en∣joyned to preserve the peace of the Church, we cannot well be deceived, the Scripture holding them forth so plainely to us. 2 Because these latter are things of farre greater conse∣quence and necessity then the other; for, 1 It is a true rule that those things alway are of most ne∣cessity, which are most plainly laid downe in Scripture. 2 It is a thing of farre greater consequence, making more for the glory of God, and the well being of the Church, to seeke the preservation of the Churches peace, and main∣taine unity betwixt the members of the mysticall body, then eagerly to uphold any private opinion in controversall points (yea though our opinion be right) because we are charged in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that there should be no divisions amongst us, 1 Cor. 1.10. And that if it be possible, and as much as lies in us, we should have peace with all men, Rom. 12.18. much more with the members of the mysticall body; but we have no such charge for the stiff maintaining of any doubtfull or controversall point in matters of Religion; and therefore we may more safely con∣ceale it to our selves. But the Jewes had the helpe of the Urim and Thummim to consult with about the putting to death of blasphemers and idolaters. 1 But they wanted the helpe of a great part of the Scrip∣tures which we now have.
2 It doth not appeare that they consulted with the Urim and Thummim, to know what was idolatry or blasphemy; neither is this given as a reason why persons guilty of these sinnes should be put to death, but other grounds; namely the law of God, the nature of the sinnes, the causing of the peo∣ple to erre, the strengthning the hands of evill doers and such like, Deut. 13.17.18.20.22. Lev. 20.3.4. 3 The law for putting to death idolaters, was given be∣fore there was any Urim or Thummim, Exod. 22.20. and still kept in use after these were lost, when sinnes against the first Table were punished by the magistrate, Ezra. 10 8. Nebe. 7.65.13.2. 4. The testimony of Scripture is more sure then that of Urim and Thummim for it is more sure then the voyce of one that should come from the dead, Luk. 16. Last. yea then a voyce sounding from heaven, 2 Pet. 1.19. Besides, the Priests who were to give answer from the Urim and Thummim, whether it were done by the motion and stirring, or by the colour and brightnesse of the precious stones in the Ephod, yet (if they were not right) they might more easily de∣ceive the people in giving answer, then the Scriptures will deceive them, because in them God himselfe speakes im∣mediately, 2 Tim. 3.16. To the eleventh Argument: That errors and heresies are those tares in the field, which must be let alone till the har∣vest; the answer is, 1  By this reason neither murtherers, adulterers, or any other wicked persons should be punished by the magi∣strate; for the tares are not onely heretikes, but all such as offend and commit iniquity, Mat. 13.38.41. 2 For right understanding of the parable, we are to take notice of two sorts of tares. 1 Such as are openly offensive, as all grosse and obstinate hereticks are, and those that are scandalously wicked in their lives, and these are not to be let alone, for then the sword of the magistrate, and Church censures should be in vaine and to no purpose.
2 Such as are of a middle temper, that are orthodoxe in their judgements, and free from grosse scandals in their lives, yet not having a root of grace in their hearts, nor bringing forth any right fruit in their lives, are in Gods ac∣count no better then tares, and so shall be dealt withall at last; but (not falling within the reach either of the civill or Ecclesiastique sword) they are to be let alone till the harvest. To the twelfth Argument; That it is Christs rule, we must doe to others as we would be done to; the answer is, 1 That theeves and murtherers may thus plead against the judge, when he passeth sentence against them, or causeth it to be executed on them. 2 This rule holds onely in a rightly informed judgement and a rectified will; what one with such a judgement and will, would desire should be done to him, he must doe to a∣nother; but such an one if he had justly deserved punish∣ment, by violating the lawes either of the first or second Table, would willingly subject himselfe to just punish∣ment; therefore he desires also that another should doe the like. To the thirteenth Argument; That there must be here∣fies, therefore the magistrate should not punish them; the answer is, 1  That while the world stands, and there be wicked men in it, there will be wickednesse in every kinde, (neither can this be hindred) shall therefore no wickednesse be pu∣nished? 2 We are to know that there is a twofold necessity. 1 A necessity of causality, thus the fire burnes necessarily because it is a necessary cause of burning; but so heresies and other wickednesses doe not come necessarily, but proceed from the liberty of mans will, which workes freely, all mens actions as well evill as good, proceeding from inward prin∣ciples, from his understanding and will; and it being essen∣tiall to the will to worke freely, (as freedome stands in
opposition against naturall or violent necessity) men fall as freely to the maintaining of errors and herefies, as they doe to the committing of other sinnes. 2 There is a necessity of consequence or infallibility, and thus all things are necessary, which come within the reach of Gods knowledge which cannot be deceived, or of his providence which cannot be disappointed; but this neces∣sity affordeth no excuse, nor exemtion from punishment to any man that doth evill: for thus the crucifying of Christ was necessary, being foreknowne and foreappointed of God, Act. 2.23.3.28. but this was no excuse to the wicked Jews, who delivered him to death through envie and malice, nor to Pilate who to gratifie them did unjustly condemne him, when he found no fault in him; Thus it is said that offences must come, but withall it is said; Woe be to him, through whom they come Mat. 18.7. So woe to them that are the authors of heresies, and actors in spreading them abroad; for though heresies must come, this shall be no excuse to them. ERRATA p. 2. l. 13. for to hate, reade by beating. l. 20. for same read sword. p. 6. l. 30. for the read his. FINIS.
