W904 E1194_1 99867645 169458
Interna habeo. Eterna habebo. Externa habui.  reposita 1. Tim: 4.8. THE GAYNE of LOSSE OR TEMPORALL LOSSES SPIRITVALLY IMPROVED. In a Centurye & one Decad of Meditations & Resolves. By John Warner M. A. sometimes of Magd: Hall in Oxo: & one of the Ministers of the London Brigade in the late Western Expedition 1644. . Plutarch in Paedag: Isai: 42.24. Who gave Jacob for a spoyle, and Israel to the robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? London. Printed by M.S for H. Blunden at the Cas̄tle in Corn-hill. 1645.
The Approbation. I Have perused this Treatise, intituled, Temporall Losses spiritually improved: In which finding nothing but what is pious, sound and profitable, I allow to be printed. Novemb. 27. 1644. Iohn Downam.
TO HIS HONOU∣RED FRIEND, that pious Gentleman, Mr. John Ash, a worthy Member of the honourable House of Com∣mons in this present Parliament. Worthy Sir, HAnnibal being to en∣counter with Minutius in the vale,Liv. hist Polyb. was not so much daunted with the present enemy, as with Fabius Maximus, who faced him on a mountain in the Reare; and
therefore said, hee feared that cloud hovering aloft, would ere long poure down upon him. It was not our ene∣mies neer at hand I feared, being o∣ver-powered by our Forces, as that Western cloud, which like Elijahs of a handfull increased so as to over∣spread the face of our countrey; and against the expectation of the wisest, poured downe our nextMunk. on Fer∣dy in Wilts. adjacent hill, and as a confluence of many waters, drove all resistance before it. Hereby it came to passe, that the place where I lived, became like that place to which Paul & his companie were driven,Acts 27.4. where two seas met; so that by the stronger waters the Bark of my estate was, with some of my best neighbours, in a moment, swallowed up, and carried away. Yet in this danger, notwithstanding the earnest enquirie of the enemy after me, and as earnest pursuit, God gave me my life as a prey to my selfe. Now
after my escape, having got into a private Sanctuary, my sad spirit un∣fit for publick exercises, studied this Text which the enemies had given me, and from my losses by them gai∣ned this Manuell of Meditations, usefull for my selfe and others in these times of losing, which were compo∣sed by me in as much danger as Ar∣chimedes was in drawing his lines when the city was befieged.Made by me at the siege of Gloce∣ster. Admire you may at first my boldness, why (con∣sidering my small acquaintance with you) I should dedicate this poor peece unto you; but if you consider all, you might otherwise admire my unthank∣fulness. For, Sir, you may remember, (unless the multitude of your libera∣lity to others make you forgetfull) how that some years since I did large∣ly partake of your bounty; wherein I know not whether your gift, or the manner of giving, exceeded, which was so farre from ostentation, that I
dare say your left hand knew not what your right hand did, seeing you had no distinct knowledg of the recei∣ver, nor would you be known to be the giver, till some moneths after an ear∣nest desire of shewing my selfe thank∣full, prevailed with the messenger to discover such a hidden friend unto me. But besides private respects, your activenesse for the publick good, as well in the City as Countrey, and your patience under great private losses, doe challenge all respect from your Countreymen. As you have done much for Christ, so have you suffered much, not only by the Prelates hereto∣fore, but by their supporters now. In these evill times few great men are good, and therefore good great men should be great in the esteem of others. Sad experience demonstrates, how too many of the nobler & richer sort en∣devour to make themselves by undoing others, and strive to erect a Babell of
their own estates, by the ruine of ma∣ny families. It was an observation of the Historian, speaking of the Ci∣vill warres of Caesar and Pompey,Cluver. Oros. ii. 6. c. 4. c. 4. that Nemo sanctus injuriam privatam patriae subversione vin∣dicandam duceret. Yet how few such men, or such behaviours are to be found among us, our countries in the West doe lametably shew, which by the continuedCres cente per rapinas stud to & volu∣prate ra∣piendi. Cluveri Hist. mund. p, 230. rapine and cruel∣ty of those sons of Belial, of a Garden of Eden, are made like a desolate wildernesse. The Lord of Hosts did lately raise an Army for the help of those parts, but he denied his blessing on the designe; not onely because the instruments were unworthy to deli∣ver, but because the country was unfit for deliverance; especially that Hea∣thenish country of Cornwal (where God did break our arm of flesh) who are a people that ever since the light of the Gospel did first break out a∣mong
us, under the reigne ofCamb den Britan. Lu∣cius our first Christian King, have hated to be reformed; and therefore have openly opposedThey did ever give voyce for the Papall conti∣nuance, Speed. Histor. p. 1090. col. 2. line ult. all publick Re∣formation of the Church, as not long since that in Edward the sixth his dayes, so this now, as if that malig∣nant spirit against the Gospel, and their blind zeale for their Dia∣na, were traduced to them from their progenitors. Our hope and comfort is, that when the Ephah of the ene∣mies sins is full, the harvest ripe, that then the Lord will put in his sickle and avenge himselfe of his adversa∣ries; that though an Eastern wind could not cleare the countrey of those Locusts, yet a Northeast under God shall: twice did Israel flie before Benjamin, but the third time they prevailed. Goe on therefore, worthy Sir, and doe worthily in Ephraim, and be more famous in Bethlehem, with draw not your shoulder from up∣holding
the tottering frame of this Kingdome, and you may assure your selfe of what that good Patriot Ne∣hemiah desired, viz. that the Lord would remember him for all the good be did to that people. Encourage∣ments hereto you have enough, if you consider how God hath bles∣sed you with blessings of heaven above, with blessings of the earth be∣neath, with blessings of the breast and womb. Perhaps the Lord may borrow some of these blessings of you, but doubt not of his repayment, the promise whereof is a hundred fold with tribulation here, and hereafter eternall life. This I beleeve you will account as performed, when the Lord shall turn our captivitie, drive out those Canaanites, and bring us to our countrey again; till which time, and for which mercy incessant∣ly supplicates, Your obliged servant in the Lord, John Warner.
TO ALL CHRISTIAN READERS; Especially the Plundred exiles of the West Countries. BEing now in a strange place,Heb. 13.14. and having no certain dwelling, Cirie or Countrey, but seeking and expecting one, it should be the care of every beleeving soule, to get this time of pilgrimage sanctified to him; for the accomplish∣ing whereof, the performance of two Christian duties are most helpfull. The first is prayer and supplication, and this is a duty that must not onely respect our selves, but the publick,Psalm 122.6. even those Countries which now are as A∣celdama's,
fields of blood. Though God had decreed the restitution of Israel from captivity,Ezek. 36.37. Ier. 29.11. yet for it he would be enquired of by the house of Israel. Though God doth not conferre mer∣cies on us because of our duties, yet he will not conferre them without our du∣ties. O then if you would have the Sun arise on that land of darknesse in the West,Cant. 2.8. Mal. 4.3. pray that Christ would come skipping over the mountains, arising with healing under his wings, and en∣lightning them that have a long time sate in darknesse,Luke 1.79. Dan. 6.10. and the shadow of death. Look towards them as Daniel did towards Jerusalem out of his cham∣ber, beseeching the Lord to perfect his own praise, and their deliverance, that the Lord would save his people from the West country,Zach. 8.7. that so they might feare his name from the West, Isai. 9.19. The time of the desolations of Is∣rael was known to Daniel by his books;Dan. 9.2. v. 3. & then being informed of it, he sets his face to seek the Lord by prayer and sup¦plication. Now though we cannot have such a distinct knowledge of the time of deliverance for a motive to our prai∣ers, as Daniel had; yet it is an infallible
signe that the Lord doth hasten to deli∣ver, when he enlargeth the hearts of his people with a mighty spirit of supplica∣tion. As therefore we may be confident,Psal. 102.13. that there is a time appointed when the Lord will have mercy upon Sion: so we may be assured that the Lord will observe his time, and keep his daySee Ex∣od. 12.41. Hab. 2. Psal. 5.8.. In the mean time we must stand upon our watch by prayer, and hearken when the Lord will speak peace to his people. The second duty is more particular concerning our selves, viz. Meditati∣on. Hereby a soule acquaint; it selfe with God out of his word, or works, either of mercy or judgement. A de∣jected mind is hereby set on wing, and made to look above sufferings and dan∣ger. Want of calling, place, and usuall accommodation, doe sad the spirits of many; and by Satans concurrence fill the hearts of many with discontent, murmuring, repining. It is the Devils policie, having impaired our outward estate, to endevour to deprive the inner man of true comfort. It should be our care therefore to cast out such fretting carefull, vexing thoughts, and put on heavenly meditations. A true Chri∣stians
glory is inward, unseen to the world, his happinesse is above, which isPsa. 45.13. reserved for him, and for which he is1 pet. 1.4 1 pet. 1.5 kept, it being beyond the reach of the men of this. Epictet. l. 3 cap. 22. Aliae divitiae nec verae, nec vestrae. Bern. de bono de∣sert. . Aeneas Gaza Epist. 5. world, so that all wch his enemy can deprive him of, is on∣ly accessory to his wel being, not essentially required to his being. Raise up therfore thy meditations to con∣template on thy high calling, and the high price of that calling: and then in these times of losing, thou mayst say with that Philoso∣pher, who when the Citie was plun∣dered, and hee turned out naked, being asked what hee had lost, an∣swered, Nihil perdidiSene∣ca de Sap. Const. e. 6.. What though the Lord takes all from thee, and gives thee more of himselfePerdiderat omnia quae Deus dedit; sed habuerit ipsum qui omnia dederat: manet qui de∣dit, & abstulit quod dedit. De∣us substraxit data, nen dato∣rem, Aug. in Psal. 66. Omnia perdidit Iohus, & plenus e∣rat, Aug. de divers. 12.? That man growes rich, to whom God draws nigh, and from whom the world withdrawes. Hee only hath lost all, that hath lost his God Now if God
bee thine, thy country and dwelling is thine, or else a better.Psal. 42.12. Psal. 45.4. It was not the Sword or Bow of our Fathers that did plant them there at first, but the right hand of God, and the same right hand of God may teach him as terrible things by replanting us. Till which time if this Manuell of Medita∣tions may as a Flaggon taken from the Lords Cellar, stay thy fainting soule,Cant. 2.5. it shall be the happinesse of the Auther, that he hath comforted others with the same consolations wherewith hee was comforted.1 Cor. 1.4. Yours and his Countries in the Lord, John Warner.
Temporal Losses Spiritually improved. I. SUch is the dege∣nerate nature of some spirits, that in meane losses they discover great impati∣ence: but if the losse of their e∣states befall , they cannot but therewith e themselves al∣so. The love of the world doth herein strongly appeare, when not onely the fruition of things present doe ravish mens hearts with joy; but the imagination of
them absent, overwhelmes them with more sorrow. The Mam∣mon of this world is a God, and is served by the men whose por∣tion is only here in a most affe∣ctionate obedientiall manner; for if the world and the things thereof keep neere them, they serve and love it; if it leave them, they follow and pursue it, with as much earnestnesse as Laban did his gods. It should bee our care then, that when wee lose our goods, wee may not lose our wits; and that when they leave us, and take the wing, to pursue them with a godly hope, and mo∣derate endevour, not with an im∣moderate sorrow, or desperate behaviour. II. PHilosophers observe, that the higher the Element is, the
purer it is;Bac. nat hist. water purer then earth, aire then water, fire purer then aire. And it is the observa∣tion of a Naturalist, that by Art water may be conveyed as high as the Fountain from whence it did arise. O my soule, remember from whence thou art inspired, from how high and holy a place; remember also of what a divine nature thou art made partaker; dwell not therefore on these earthly objects, but let the consi∣deration of thy heavenly nature, cause thee to contemplate on heavenly things; or if thou bu∣siest thy selfe about these things below, let it bee to extract some divine quintessence from them. God hath removed these perish∣ing things from thee, that thou mayst seek for, and think of thy incorruptible inheritance. The soul which is confined to earthly
meditations, forgets whence it came, and whither it should goe. A heavenly spirit hath its conver∣sation in heaven. III. VVE read of some of the wisest Heathens, that cast away all, and became volun∣tarily poor. Some might impute this to pride, others to madnesse, others to wisdome and discreti∣on, as if two objects were too large to busie the minde on with profit.Mat. 16 24. Our Saviour also himself bids them forsake all, that would follow him; and this his precept was seconded by the practice of many in those times. However what they did doe in effect, wee must doe in affection, depart with all for Christ.Hab. 2.6. That person who lades himselfe with thick clay, makes himselfe too heavie to as∣cend
up to Christ. The Emble∣matist describes him fitly, having one hand winged for heaven, the other deprest wth agreat weight. As then it is dangerous to possesse all and want Christ; so it is most safe to lose all, thereby to win Christ, or keep him. In this case then, as I am not bound to cast a∣way my estate; yet I wil suffer it either to be taken away from me as a snare, or offered up to Christ as a sacrifice; for the further I am parted from earth, the neerer I am to heaven. The more emp∣ty I am, the fitter I am for con∣templation, though unfit for action. IV. THough poverty and want be the portion of some of the godly, yet it is not the con∣dition of all: some are not onely
heires of a crowne hereafter, but have also large pledges of Gods love in the things of this life; and that not onely to saciety, but to superfluity. This the abundant estates of Abraham, Job, Jacob, Joseph, David and Solomon, doe a∣bundantly testifie, who were all good men in Gods eye, and great men in the world. The earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse there∣of. The Lord is their God, and thus are they made heires of the promises; and the promises are not onely of the life to come, but of this present. Yet seeing these things are subject to moth, theef, rust, if this were all their porti∣on, they would esteeme them∣selves no wayes happier then o∣thers. God then though he gives them this for their maintenance, hee reserves the inheritance for them. The Lord, though he laies
out much for his people here, yet he lays up more for them hereaf∣ter. Thus though they have much in possession, they have more in reversion. If then God be mine, though I am not rich both wayes, I am the latter. What I have not in feeling, I have in faith. V. THe book of the creatures is a large volume, such as very few do learne throughly. Now as in some bookes there are many guilded and red Letters, but more black; so though in the creature there seem much beauty and glo∣ry, yet the black dismall discon∣tents, sorrows and vanitie that a∣riseth are more. The front of eve∣ry leafe is not fuller of content, then the backfide is of vexation. Solomon though he were blessed with a confluence of all outward
things, yet his tongue nor penne could be bribed so as to speake nothing of the evill of them. He wrote other bookes of the crea∣tures vertue, varietie, glory, yet the Lord would have those con∣cealed, and that onely reserved for us which speaks of its vanitie and vexation, it being the fittest lesson for us to learne. We should all desire to have some insight in the whole volume, and the best School-master to teach us herein is affliction. VI. AS the creatures glory declare much of God, so its vanitie declareth much to us. For when the creature becomes a vexing creature to us, it is the rod of God, and this rod is a speaking rod;Mic. 6.9 He are yee the rod, and he that appointed it; It speakes to us of
Gods justice in punishing of us, of his mercy in moderating the punishment, of his power and glo∣ry in bringing us out of tentation. Every blow is a legible character of Gods hand, where ever it falls, in body, estate, good name; and like Jonathans arrowes, are sent to warne and direct us what to avoyd, and what to doe. Unpro∣fitable and unfit Schollers they are for the School of Christ, that can learne nothing out of his Crosse; that are taken up with the joy of outward things, as Peter & James at the glory of Christs transfigu∣ration, saying,Mat. 17.4. It is good to be here; but when the Crosse doth come, doe either deny Christ with Pe∣ter, or forsake him with the other Apostles. Happy therefore is the man whose eare is opened to both these kinds of Instructions. As we ought to observe how the crea∣tures
declare the glory of God, so also when the Lord by them declareth our sin, and his wrath for sinne; then let every one that hath eares heare. VII. THat God is the Author of e∣very good and perfect gift, is a Tenent that none but an A∣theist in opinion can expresly de∣ny; yet which all that are Atheists in practise doe not truly know. This appears when most sacrifice to their own nets: others pro∣phanely say with him in the Pro∣phet, By my own hand have I pro∣cured me this; others more blinde ascribe all to the blinde goddesse Fortune, crying her up as strongly as the Ephesians did their Diana. Though this be the practise of the children of this world, yet a childe of God knows that what
he hath, he hath received; he see∣eth God in every thing; appre∣hendeth God above all, receiveth all as proceeding from him, say∣ing still with Jacob,Gen. 27.20. The Lord brought it unto me; and with Job, The Lord giveth; Whatsoever I have then, or shall receive, I will labour to see God in it; thus will the gift draw me neerer to the gi∣ver; and the plentifull showres of his favours powred downe upon me, shall make me more fruitfull and abundant in the work of the Lord. VIII. GOd the giver, hath gifts of a two-fold nature. 1. Gifts of his right hand;Prov. 3.16. as graces here, and glory hereafter; these are peculiar to his people, onely the childrens meate. 2. Gifts of his left hand; as ri∣ches,
honours. All sorts of men partake of this sort of gifts; Esau, Laban, Nabal, Belshazzar, had as large a portion in them as any, Thus all things fall alike to all, neither can good or evill, love or hatred be known by them. For if there were no other disting uish∣ing evidence of Gods love, then these fading tokens, then were the men of this world, yea those Ame∣ricans and Indians, who abound in wealth, of all men most happy. They whose portion is onely in this life, have it larger then o∣thers.; whereas the portion of Gods people is not like Benjamins messe, larger then their brethren, but lesser. Yet here's their qom∣fort, that what they receive from God, is extended to them by Gods right hand; whereas others receive what they have from Gods left hand. Laeva porrigere, was a∣mong
the Latines an unwelcome kinde of giving. Whatsoever gift the Lord bestowes upon me, if I might have my choice, it should be that of his right hand; Let his right hand fall on my head, his left on others. So though my portion be not the greater, it will be the better. IX. GOD is my portion, says Da∣vid;Psa. 119.57. Deut. 32 9. Yee are my portion and inheritance, says God; How hap∣pie and rich doth the Lord think himself in us, as to take us to be his inheritance? and can we think our selves poore, that have God to our inheritance? 'Twas the honour of the tribe of Levi, that they had no portion among their brethren, but that the Lord was their portion. Every beleeving person is of Gods. 1 Pet. 5.3. Clergie and
portion; and therefore if God be his God, his lot is fallen in a faire ground, he hath a goodly heri∣tage. O the humilitie of our bles∣sed God, that can denominate us to be his inheritance, that have nothing in us good, but what is from him! O the happinesse of that soule that can truly say, The Lord is my portion! for that thou art Gods, doth nothing benefit God, but that God is thine, is all in all to thee. This is the onely abiding, this the abounding por∣tion. If any one think not this enough, Let his portion be in this life;Psal. 17.14. And then when times of lo∣sing come, it shall be said of him, This is the man that took not God to his portion. X. GOD being Lord over all, even of the earth and its
fulnesse, hath an universall sove∣raigntie over all, an independent royaltie in all things; so that whatsoever man doth injoy, is by his dispensation. Now if among men, estates are incident to such forfeits, as their Land-lords may by Law deprive them, and reen∣ter; why may not the supreame Lord of heaven and earth deprive us of that which is his, when we break our Covenants with him, and run into so many forseits and arrearages? And if in such a case, none dare aske a Prince or Land∣lord, why he doth it, so here nei∣ther dare any one open his mouth against his Maker, seeing he may doe what he please with his own. To him that hath, that is, useth well what he hath, shall more be given, and from him that hath not, i. e. u∣seth not, or abuseth what he hath, shall it be taken away. O Lord;
what I have is thine by right and dominion, thine by my forfeit and self-deprivation, mine onely by usurpation, at most by dispensa∣tion. I blesse thy mercy, for the forbearance of thy right so long, I blesse thy justice for depriving me of that right at last. The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord. XI. GOD as he is the author of all the good wee partake, so he hath a hand in all the evill we suffer. His holinesse denies him to be a cause of the evill of sinne, his justice forceth him to inflict the evill of punishment. Is there any evill in the Citie, and the Lord hath not done it? This Job knew; when he saith, The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away; not onely the Chaldeans and Sabeans,
though they were the theeves, what they did was by Gods per∣mission. Who gave Jacob for a spoyle, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord? God concur∣reth in every evill action, though not in the evill of the action. The substance of it may be of God, when the obliquitie is of man. God hath an over-ruling hand over all mens wills, yet those wills may have contrary motions of their owne. Foolish men are they then, who being af∣flicted, either look upon the evill, and not the cause, or if the cause, either the wrong, or more imme∣diate causes, as misfortune, ma∣lice of man, want of discretion. I will therefore look not so much on my affliction, as on my affli∣cter, and that not subordinate, but supreame; so shall I finde my suffering to be the more sweet,
as proceeding from a gracious fa∣ther, whose hand as it casts down will raise up, as it woundeth will heale. Thus in looking up to him the agent, he will look down on me the patient, and either remove the evill from me, or make mee able to beare it. XII. GOd as he made man good, so hee made every thing good for man. Man was made uncapable of corruption, and they of alteration. If man had not fallen from God his Maker, they had not fallen from man their owner. Thus by one man sinne, death, corruption, altera∣tion came into the world. It is sinne which separateth God from man, man from man, soule from body, man from his goods, his goods from himselfe. Sinne cor∣rupteth
not onely the soule, but the body, not onely the body, but the earth whence he came, and the heavens whither he should goe. It breedeth a moth in our garments, a worme in our provi∣sion, rust in our silver, it exposeth all to the theese. It setteth not only God at enmity against man, but man with man, yea beast with beast, yea and makes one man be a beast, a Wolfe, a Lyon to ano∣ther. So that if wee lose the creature, it is because wee have made it lose its primitive nature. Now there's no other way to gain this permanency, either to our selves or others, but by righteous∣nesse, as this corruptibilitie came by unrighteousnesse. But on the earth dwelleth not this righte∣ousnesse nor durablenesse; but we look for a new heaven and new earth, wherein dwelleth not one∣ly
righteousnesse, but perpetuitie, and never fading happinesse. XIII. THe Lesson of the creatures corruptibilitie, is that which the word of God doth still di∣ctate, and which this world doth daily demonstrate. Wee have the volume of holy Writ, and the large volume of the creatures to teach us this. The Word says; All is vanitie; The world sheweth wherein this vanitie lyes. Wee see men daily taken from their goods, and their goods from them; Wee see corruptions and alteration of things, and yet wee dreame of such an unalterable condition in all things which may reach to eternitie. Imaginary continuance of things is in our heads, when reall changes are before our eyes. Every creature
groanes out this, and yet wee heare not its voyce. Wee build Castles in the ayre, and upon the sandy foundation of our owne speculations, promise to our selves an estate above the reach of ene∣mies, whereas the next storme that riseth, doth not onely disco∣ver the weaknesse, but overthrow the foundation of this imaginary fabrique. The foole in the Gospel (well so called) hugg'd himselfe with this conceit, that he had e∣nough laid up for many dayes, and therefore bid his soule take its repose; whereas the next night his soule was taken from him. Had his soule not been taken, his goods might. God though he had not destroyed his corn in the field, yet he could have sent de∣vourers into his barns; yea, if he had still brought his corne into his mouth, he could have sent
leanenesse into his soule. Teach me, O Lord, to know not onely my selfe, but all flesh to bee as grasse, and all things to be vani∣ty; so shall I use the world as if Iused it not; so shall I enjoy my goods, and not bee enjoyed by them. Thus the longer I possesse my riches, the more I shall know them, and the lesse shall be not onely my affection to them, but my affiance in them. XIV. WEre Riches ever tokens of Gods love for good, they would afflict mans heart wth as much sorrow in lofing, as they doe affect it with joy in possessing. But we see that sometimes God gives some their wealth as Ebud did the present to Eglm, with a dagger to destroy them; or as God gave Israel a King, in his
wrath; or as Saul gave David his daughter, to ensnare him. This God doth out of justice to satiate their exorbitant desires, till fur∣feit of the creature comming thereby, causeth some greater e∣vill. He puts this knife in these mad mens hands, whereby they will destroy themselves and o∣thers. Of such David sayes, Their table shall be made a snare: So that if we are brought to low com∣mons, we are delivered from the snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken, and wee are escaped. If thy wealth then proceed out of Gods love, it shall be as durable as comfortable: but if it be given thee out of wrath, it will either be an occasion of misery and vexation for the present, or of thy ruine at the last. The wealth of the ungodly is either a snare to entangle their soules, or else a thiese to steale them away.
XV. COuld the creatures vexation be separated from its sub∣stance, it would bee a desirable object: but experience shewes that to be impossible. We see men vex and trouble themselves to procure wealth, thinking then to be eased of trouble, when they are laden with substance; where∣as in stead of their desired con∣tent, they find abundance of un∣expected cares. Looke upon a worldling either sleeping or wa∣king, standing or going, at home or abroad, and you shall find that his distracted countenance, his needlesse fears, his jealous imagi∣nations, his corroding cares to get more, and keep what he hath, doe plainly demonstrate this. Now God is pleased there should be this medley, to embitter these
dugges, to cause these prickles about these Roses, to intermingle our joyes with sorrowes, and in∣terlace our commodities with discommodities, that we may bee weaned from them, and seek for such treasures above, which are not onely without mixture, but without measure, even at the right hand of God for evermore. XVI. MAn being a reasonable creature, doth not in any thing shew himselfe more unrea∣sonable then in this, to thinke that any thing in the world hath that in it which is proportiona∣ble to the capacitie of his soule. This appeares in those persons whose desires seeming for a while to be satiated with severall ob∣jects, supposing that this, or that thing being obtained, will termi∣nate
their appetites, and settle their roving soules with a sweet repose, as if there could be a nil ultra to seek for: whereas indeed in the prosecution of more, the soule loseth what it hath; and thinking to gain more abun∣dance, is deprived of the true use and comfort of what it enjoyes. For the hope of what such a one may have, swallowes up the com∣fort of what he hath: So vast and capacious a thing is the soul the sooner shall the barren womo be satisfied, yea sooner wil the mouth of hell be filled, then it be satisfied with the greatest confluence of outward things; and therefore sooner will the Sunne be weary, and stand still in its course, then it in the prosecution of earth∣ly objects. The reason hereof is, because the world yeelds nothing proportionable to the soules na∣ture:
its nature is divine, infinite, immortall; but things of this life are earthly, finite, perishing. Now that which is earthly savours earthly things, and is satisfied with them; but that which is spiritual, savours spiritual things, and can bee onely satisfied with them. You may fill a Chest with money, but not with wisdome, knowledge, grace: And so may the soul be filled with knowledge, and grace, but not with money; for the one hath dimensions, the other none: so that in one the thing contained may equalize the thing containing, but not in the other. That then which satisfies the soule, is onely that which created it, redeemed it. So that after all the rovings and disquisi∣tions of the mind, it can finde no true rest, till it pitch on God in Christ. Like Noahs Dove, it be∣ing
sent about the earth, finding no place to light on, it must re∣turne to the place from whence it came. Thou, O Lord, who didst en∣due my soule with such capacious faculties, fill them with they selfe for after its manifold wandring in the circle of this world, it find no adequate satisfactory object, but in thee its center, in whom all fulnesse dwels, and who art not onely above all, and in all, but All in All. XVII. GEN. 33.19. wee read: strange sentence dropping out of Esau's mouth; I have e∣nough. Afterward, vers. 13. Jacob is in the same tune, I have enough, (or as some translations have it) I have all, i.e. both temporall and spirituall. Out of the fulnesse of
the heart the mouth speaketh; and out of the fulnesse of pride of heart might Esau say thus, in that he scorned to be beholding to Jacob; or else out of a fulnesse of modesty, in that he would not seem to receive any of his. Hee that could in an outward forme, even with teares, say, Hast thou not a blessing for me? might rest unsa∣tisfied with temporall blessings. His rough hands were not onely tenacious of what he had, but as fit to receive more, hold more.Lau∣tent. Anat. The Anatomists observe one spe∣ciall Artery to passe from the heart to the tongue, to shew that Nature would have the tongue to be the hearts Oratour, to express the same thing moving in the same motion: Yet we see where the heart is not right, the tongue is not uniforme, this Artery suf∣fers a distortion. Many men with
Esau, say, I have enough; but it is either because they know not how to get more, or use more Give me, O Lord, the blessings of Jacob, the blessings of thy right hand, and then my voyce shall be the voyce of Jacob, I have enough; yea, I have all. XVIII. FOolish men that spend their labour for that wch satisfieth not, and expend their money for that which is not bread, that let loose their thoughts, which like Noabs Raven, returne not a∣gaine, but rove about after the carrion of this world! It was the complaint of Jeremiah, that they who are cloathed with skarlet, lie on the dunghill; and and how may wee complain of them who are highly deseended, yet doe seeke onely things
below? 'Tis true that every man is placed here on the earth as a treasurer of his own soule, the godly lay up a good foundation; the wicked also even in treasu∣ring up the world, doe treasure up wrath and oppression. How abundantly then soever my estate comes in, I will never bid my soul be at rest, till it finde it in Christ; nor will I ever think I have much laid up for many dayes, unlesse it be in heaven with the Ancient of dayes. XIX. LƲke 10. wee read of the re∣spect that two sisters bore to Christ; the one to his person, the other to his word: Martha's care was to entertain Christ delicate∣ly, Mary's was to heare him dili∣gently. Such a guest as hee was, was worthy to be entertained ex∣quisitely,
and such an Orator as he was, that spake as never man spake, was worthy to be heard at∣tentively. Yet we see that our Sa∣viour had rather bee entertained in us by his Word, then by us through our service; yet how many are there as farre behinde Martha in the duty of serving, as she was behind Mary in the duty of hearing? Make me, O Lord, to know the one thing which is needfull; so shall I not be trou∣bled about many things. Thus shall Ibe a brother to Mary, and a stranger to Martha. XX. AMong the evils which Solo∣mon saw under the Sun, this was one,Eccles. 5.19. A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, honour, so that be wanteth nothing; yet God giveth him not a heart: and power to eate
thereof, but a stranger eateth it. A disease it is indeed, and almost E∣pidemicall: For how many see we whose Barns are full, Fats o∣verflow, yet fare coursly them∣selves; have costly wardrobes, yet not power to put it on; have silver and gold in abundance, yet die to save charges? Thus the Lord makes them treasurers for other men: hee gives them the creature, but reserves the comfort and use of it for others. So that such in a manner have no more benefit or comfort by their Corn and Wine, then the Barnes and Cellars that hold it; nor of their money, then the Chests that contain it. Thus though they have their goods, yet in Jobs words, Their good is not in their bands, i. e. the use and comfort is not in their power. When ever I begge for a temporall bles∣sing,
I will adde this to my pray∣er, that this blessing may goe a∣long with it, even a heart to use it. Thus a stranger shall not in∣termeddle with my joy. XXI. BUt there is another evill, which is this, that as many have much, but not hearts to use it; so many have much, yet have hearts to use more. As evill a disease it is to have a mind excee∣ding ones means, as means excee∣ding ones minde. The power which many have to abuse the creature, is as common as the want of power to use it. The Moralists say, that prodigalitie comes neerer the mean then co∣vetousnesse; how ever it cannot come to the nature of a vertue. He then that hath this heart to carry him to a profuse spending
of what he hath, is as much to be pitied, as hee that wants this heart to make use of what hee hath. And if either of these drawneere the mean, God must give the one a heart, and renew it in the other. It shall be my en∣devour so to use what I have, as not to abuse it; and so to apply to my selfe the comforts of my substance, as not to deprive my selfe of the substance it selfe. O∣therwise I shall at last repent of having both a heart and riches: for when all is thus spent, the comfort vanisheth, the guilt abi∣deth. XXII. RIches have wings;Pro. 23. now what is winged will keep no con∣stant abode, unlesse it bee strait∣ned, or its wings imped; and in shortning the wings of riches, wee
set them flying: neither can they so be caged up, but at some time or other they will leave us, or be taken from us. Some birds being let loose, may bee lured back a∣gain, yet not all birds, nor at all times. If then my riches will once fly from mein possession, my safest way is to flie above them in affe∣ction. Thus shall I light upon a better object, if they light upon another subject. XXIII. THis earthly globe is that dug and breast which the chil∣dren of this world lie sucking at, and which they will not leave so long as there is any sweetnesse in it. God therefore to wean them from it, doth with his Marah imbitter this dugge, that so the present bitternesse may make them forget all former sweet∣nesse.
Lord, though since I came into this world, nothing could content me but this breast, nou∣rish me but its milk, quiet me but its sweetnesse; yet seeing now I see it imbittered by thee, make me to behave my selfe as a wea∣ned child, cause me to suck at the breasts of consolation; let those breasts satisfie me. XXIV. COmmonly one affliction to Gods people, is the fore∣runner of another; Job and no sooner heard of the losse of his Oxen, and Asses, but before that sound was out of his eares, hee heares of the losse of his sheep, and after that of his servants, and sonnes. The smaller losse doth usually usher in the greater. Thus many are the troubles of the righteous, many blowes must bee
given, before we are squared and made fit stones for the spirituall Temple. In this troubled Sea, wave will follow after wave, one depth call for another, till we are come to our haven. I will then after one affliction look for ano∣ther, prepare for another; thus shall I be not onely forewarned, but forearmed: if God reserve an∣other tryall for me, he will renew my strength to overcome, or my patience to beare it. My comfort is, that as my tribulations doe a∣bound, my glory shall abound. After all these sad messages, God will send me some good Ahimaaz, that will bring me good tidings of great joy. XXV. THe Prophet reproveth them that trusted in broken Ci∣sterns,Ier. 2.13. that would not hold wa∣ter,
and forsooke the fountaine of living water. All the comforts of this life are waters, yea cistern wa∣ters, and therefore not so fresh as others, being standing, neither so continuing as others, being in broken cisterns. Whatsoever I en∣joy then shall be in God the foun∣taine, and in his promises the streames; so shall my comfort be ever savoury & everlasting, when that wch others enjoy in cisterns, shall be both unsavoury and un∣constant;Iob. 13 For a Summer will come when such waters shal make them ashamed. When their bot∣tles faile with Hagar, they shall wish for death, and then will the Lord discover unto me a foun∣taine of living water. XXVI. WEE see in Cities where space of ground is pre∣cious,
that the buildings are more high and lofty, making more bold with the ayre and things above, when they are scanted of earth and things beneath. This may teach something, and edifie us in our spirituall building. When our lot falls out in a small portion of land here, to seek for a larger in∣heritance above in heaven, where is roome enough for us all, and whither wee may boldly goe. Lord seeing my portion is slen∣der, my estate narrow, build me up some stories higher in grace and goodnesse, that so the lesse. I have in earth, the more I may have in heaven; thus shall I be brought the neerer to thee, and receive more from thee. Had I more scope here below, I should not tend upwards, or mind hea∣venly things.
XXVII. THe onely Sanctuary in mans extremitie, is Gods all-suffi∣ciency.Psal. 84.11. The Lord is a Sunne, and a Sbield; a Sunne for consolation, a Shield for protection. Now from this fulnesse in God, all comfort and safety is derived to man. The Sunne enlighteneth others, the Shield defendeth others. If wee have a communion with God, we shall have a communication of all from God. Grace and glory will he give, yea no good thing will he withhold. Here then is our hap∣pinesse, that though we are neere the jawes of death, this Shield is neere us (the Lord being a very present helpe;) that though the night of adversitie be long, yet this Sunne will arise; and al∣though being risen, clouds may be interposed, yet the Sunne keeps
his place, and notwithstanding its light be eclipsed, its influence is not hindered. Though my sins and troubles may cause Gods face not to shine upon me, yet will he then uphold me by the influence of his Spirit. XXVIII. ACquaint thy selfe with God, and be at peace,Iob 22.21. so good shall come unto thee; All our good, pre∣sent or future, consists in and is derived from our acquaintance and communion with GOD. Estrangednesse from God, makes us acquainted with many evills; for all our miseries that befall us, arise from want of communion with God, or want of renewing it, and breaches of it. That now which makes us renew our ac∣quaintance with him is affliction; for before David was afflicted he
went astray. The woman in the Gospel, had spent all on the Phy∣sicians before shee came to Christ. When wee know not what to do, or whither to goe, then wee goe to him, our eyes are towards him. In these times wee see many that stood at distance, as not behold∣ing to, or depending on God, draw neere unto him in his ordi∣nances. Afflictions of themselves drive us further form God, and make us seek other hiding places, but being sanctified, they make us seek God early. Thus then is it good to be afflicted, when there∣by wee are brought neer to God. It shall be my endeavour to re∣new my acquaintance with God, both morning and evening, so good shall come unto me, his mercies towards me shall be new every morning.
XXIX. AS in these Divisions the thoughts of many hearts are discovered; so also in the same heart manifold thoughts disco∣ver themselves.Psal. 94.19. In the multitude of the thoughts of my heart, says David, thy comforts refresh my soule. His thoughts were somtimes vex∣ing, sometimes dejecting and de∣spairing; doubting, impatient, distracted, carefull, fearefull thoughts were often raised in him. As manifold thoughts may and doe arise from us in these times of trouble. Here onely is our misery, that having Davids maladie, wee cannot apply Da∣vids remedy; Depth of misery still calleth after depth, yet wee cannot draw water out of the Wells of salvation. Wee are more troubled with the dimensions of
the enemies hatred, then wee are comforted with the height, depth, length, breadth of the love of God in Christ. A sad thing it is, that Christians who are called to re∣joyce evermore, should let loose the reines to worldly sorrow, so farre till it work death. Surely, as ex∣cesse of sinne provoked the Lord to cast these burdens on us, so ex∣cesse of sorrow may cause him to continue them. As by over-sad thoughts wee injure our selves, so we dishonour God, disgrace our calling, disparage his Word. Let weeping & wailing possesse them that have no God to rejoyce in. Though in the world I shall have tribulations, yet will I glory in them, and triumph over them in Christ.
XXX. WHen Hagars bottle of water was spent,Gen. 21. shee fell a crying, whereas there was a fountain close by her, but those waters that appeared from with∣in her, hindered the appearance of any water without her; her weeping hindered the sight of the fountain. The condition of her is common to many puling Christians now, whose spirits do fail, being overcome with grief, when their stocks are spent, and their trades decayed. In this af∣fliction of the people of God they might see in God a fountain to make glad the city of God; but only excesse of worldly sorrow causeth a defect of heavenly joy. For when our eyes do thus run down with teares, the eye of faith waxeth dim, and so wee stand in
our own light. Why art thou then disuieted, Oh my soul? though the bottle of thy estate be empty, yet the Lord will ei∣ther fill it again, or discover unto thee a fountain which will al∣wayes run afresh. XXXI. TIs an ordinary thing to see men under some temporall losse to hang down their heads like bulrushes, and go mourning all the day long; and yet cannot have their spirits brought one degree lower for the loss of Gods favour. Foolish men! that let loose their affections on the least evill, and are not sensible of the grea∣test. That indeed which we love most to injoy, we grieve most for at the departure. Now this error in affection ariseth from this er∣ror in judgement, in supposing
that temporall things are good without Gods favour, or that Gods countenance and favour is not more then temporall things. Surely, that man knows not what God is, or his favour, that knows not how to sorrow for the lose of it. If God inflict a temporall losse upon me, it may produce a temporall moderate sorrow; but if the Lord hide his face from me, never was any sorrow like my sorrow. Of all losses, let me not lose the fa∣vour of my God. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me. XXXII. OUr Saviour forbids us to care for to morrow,Mat. 6.34. and bids us cast our care upon him, for he careth for us. This prohi∣bition, as it should not make us carefull, so it should not leave us carelesse. The eye of the Lord
runs to and fro the earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose hearts are up∣right; yet is not his eye so upon us, as if we should turn our own eyes off our selves, and not look to the main chance. Gods gene∣rall providence over us doth not take away our providence over our selves. Hee that so casts his burthen on the Lord, so as to ease his own shoulders altogether, shall have more infirmities then his spirit will beare. He that is alto∣gether carelesse of himself, because of Gods providence over him, may be a begger at last. The care then of my heavenly Father as it forbids the care of diffidence in him, so it requires and implies a care of diligence towards my self.
XXXIII. THere's none in this world but more or lesse, hath or shall taste of the cup of affliction. Some have onely a sip at the brim, others drink more deeply of it; yet the Lord deales with his people as a wise Physitian, admi∣nistring not only according to his own pleasure, but their strength. God doth not force whole ups on them, if it be not for their health; not a dram or drop shall be more in the Dosis then his wis∣dome shall direct, and their pa∣tience bear. If any say hee never tasted hereof, I tell him 'tis a sign there's a viall reserved for him in the hands of God, which he must drinke to the bottome. O Lord, I know, that to flesh and blood this cup is bitter, even as the wa∣ters of Marah; cast in the sweet
wood of thy grace, or else let this cup passe from me. XXXIV. LIght is sown for the righteous,Psal. 97.11. and joy for the upright in heart, saies David. Now that which is sown doth not presently appeare, but may lie covered with clods; and a long time is required be∣fore harvest come; in the mean∣while the husband-man waiteth patiently. O then though I see no light, yet I may expect it, for tis not cast away but sown, and being sown is not buried, but co∣vered; there's hope it will sprout again. What then? though I have sown in tears, I shall reap in joy; and though I have gone out weeping, I shall bring my sheaves with me; though all I have be sown, nay cast on the waters, yet shall it return after many dayes:
I will be content with all sorts of weather, so my harvest be sea∣sonable and fruitfull; let my heavinesse be all the night, yet joy shall come in the morning; and this I need not doubt of, for though it be midnight now, shall I therefore conclude the Sun will never rise, or that it is not neerer its rising? XXXV. WHerefore doth a living man complain,Lam. 3.39, 40. a man for the pu∣nishment of his sin? In which words the Spirit of God coucheth a three-fold argument against mur∣muring under our sufferings. First, we are men, creatures, and what impudence is it for such to com∣plain against their Creator, who may place us in what condition he pleases? Secondly, we are sin∣ners, so that what wee suffer, is
our demerit and wages, and what madnesse is it to accuse the just Judge of Heaven and Earth with injustice? Thirdly, we are living men, and therefore God hath pu∣nished us lesse then other sinners, as wee are on this side the grave and hell, and what unthankful∣nesse is it to repine against that hand that hath punished us in mercy? These reasons well ap∣plyed, may stop the mouth of any murmurer: for as thou art a man, God hath power over thee as a Potter over his vessel, to make thee for honour or dishonour. As thou art a sinner, tis Gods mercy thou art not consumed; for sin being finished, bringeth forth death. As thou art yet alive, so praise the Lord, and murmure not against him, who might as justly have turned thee into hell, as he hath turned thee out of thy
house, and might have deprived thee of thy life, as hee hath of thy livelihood. XXXVI. VVHy art thou cast downe, O my soule, and why art thou disquieted within mee? Still trust in God. Here David reproves and directs himselfe. The spirit of a man is a tender part, and yet a strong part. As there is nothing more sensible, and apt to be cast down, so nothing is more strong, being upheld by divine power. For the spirit of a man will sustaine its infirmities, but a wounded spi∣rit who can beare? Extremities and pressures may for a while deject & disquiet it, but falth will raise it up, and quiet it. So much unbe∣liefe as is in it, so much weakness, and so much faith as is in it, so much boldnesse. Why are yee fear∣full,
Oyee of little faith, says our Saviour: there wee see the excesse of feare arose from the defect of faith. So farre as my heart is e∣vill, it is unbelieving, and as farre as 'tis unbelieving, it departs from God, and as farre as it departs from God, it departs from true peace and comfort. To prevent this, Davids own counsell must be mine; Still trust in God. Di∣strust in God is the cause of all disquietnesse in our selves. XXXVII. IN the world yee shall have tribu∣lation,Ioh. 16.33. but be of good comfort, I have overcome the world, saith Christ. The world as it is a Chri∣stians prison and tormentor, so it is also his captive. Yet notwith∣standing the world be overcome, it opposeth, though it be crucifi∣ed, it strugleth. The world is the
way, and therefore may be foule as well as faire. We are strangers here, and therefore are spectacles to the men of this world, the ob∣jects not onely of their admirati∣on, but indignation. That dogge which fawnes on the inmate, may not only bark at, but bite a stran∣ger. Our happinesse is that as we suffer here, we conquer here, yea we conquer whiles we suffer, and doe overcome whiles we are over∣come. Yea wee are more then con∣querers through him that loved us; and this is our victory that over∣cometh the world, even our faith. XXXVIII. VVHen beleevers are pen∣sive and sad, by reason of outward crosses, they must ex∣amine and try the object of their faith, and the grounds of their beleeving; For usually sorrow is
there excessive, where faith is lit∣tle, and too much sorrow for out∣ward crosses doth commonly ar∣gue too much confidence in out∣ward goods. Above all persons, a true beleever may alwayes re∣joyce, and then most, when it goes worst with him. For his God is the God of consolation; the fruit of Gods Spirit is joy unspeakable and glorious; it is one of Christs offices to comfort his people; The Ordinances yeeld strong conso∣lation; by the communion of Saints, their joy is made more full; and the fulnesse of joy, they are assured of hereafter. Tis Sa∣tan therefore onely that makes these consolations of the Almigh∣ty seeme light; for the Devill in the overthrowing the outward e∣state, aymes chiefly to impaire the inward. In the spoyling of Jobs goods, it was his endeavour to
rob him of his comfort, and make him curse God. XXXIX. IT is observable that Paul though he had as much as any to glo∣ry of, yet he gloried in nothing so much,2 Cor. 12.5. as in his infirmities, re∣proaches, necessities, distresses for Christs sake, in his bonds and chaines for Jesus. Surely there was something in those bonds, that made them so precious, it was the name of Jesus, which like a pre∣cious Jewel fixed in these bonds, that did so endeare them to him. Yet wee see what was Pauls glory is others shame, when some glory in their wealth, others in their power, others in their wisedome, none glory in the Lord, such glo∣ry in their shame. But how much glory then have the persecutors conferred on Gods people? Sure∣ly
did they know that to be ho∣nour which they confer on them as shame, they would dispose of it elswhere. Why art thou then ashamed, O my soule, of that which others did glory? Know that to these bonds is a crowne annexed, and if with the Apostle thou art layd in them, there is laid up a crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge hath not onely given Paul, but will give to thee, and to every one that loves his appearing.2 Tim. 4.8. XL. A Sin poverty 'tis hard to keep under our nature, and bri∣dle our mouths from expressions of discontent and murmuring; so it is as difficult to restrain them from glorying & boasting, when riches doe increase. See this in good Hezekiah,Isa 39.1 who was not hap∣pie
enough to enjoy his gold, sil∣ver, spices, oyntments, unlesse also he might shew it to the servants of Merodachbaladan. So vaine are our natures, that we never know we have enough, till others know it so also. Such hath also been the abundance of many among us in times of peace, that their wealth & delectable things, have served onely to satiate their own eyes with reviewing, and others with viewing. Vaine men would not onely be rich, but be esteemed so. Now as in a Plethora of body, so of the soule, something must be taken from the whole, left the whole perish. Hezekiahs goods are shewed to the Babylonish Mes∣sengers, and therefore God threa∣tens, that they shall be taken a∣way by the Babylonians. When we cannot be content with much without shewing it to others,
we must be content with lesse for shewing it to others. 'Tis not one∣ly justice, but wisdome in God to have that stollen from us, which otherwise would steale our hearts from God. If therefore the Lord hath dealt with thee as with He∣zekiah, get his patience, saying, Good is the Word of the Lord. Know that that is of most worth, which is not worth shewing. We cannot shew our fulnesse to others, with∣out discovering our emptinesse to God. Let not him that is rich, glory in his riches, for his glory∣ing in them, may be the onely meanes to deprive him of them. XLI. VVHen the pride of Israel did testifie against it selfe,Isa. 3. the Lord tooke from her her delectable & pleasant things. Of all sinnes God doth and will
resist pride, for that doth most re∣sist him. That being followed will depose him, and therefore he will follow to depose that. The mo∣ther of pride is usually plentie, now this daughter would in time devoure the mother, did not God bring her downe. As Israels, so Englands pride, doth testifie a∣gainst her; and therefore as he dealt with the daughters of Israel, he will deale with the daughters of England. Because the daugh∣ters of Sion are haughtie, there∣fore he will smite with a scab the crown of their head; he will take away their bravery and tinkling ornaments. Thus shall our sor∣row for the losse be more, then the comfort in the injoying. That which was the pride of many, is now become their shame. Those things which in possessing yeeld most comfort, at parting pro∣duce
most sorrow. Falst objects of love, yeeld false comforts and true fears. XLII. AS nature is content with lit∣tle for food, so would it be with as little for rayment. But the excesse in one is as great as the ex∣cesse in the other. Dives did not onely fare sumptuously every day, but was also clothed in purple and fine linnen. Leaves and skins were our first parents array; ray∣ment was to them a shame, though it be to us a glory. Man had not knowne himselfe naked, had he not sinned. Garments then are onely a covert for that which sin laid open. If clothing therefore followed mans misery, I see not how its excellency should truly further mans happinesse. Such a∣dorned bodies may have naked
soules. If ever I am ambitious of cloathing, it shall be of those gar∣ments of salvation, which will alone make me glorious within. I scorn such array, wherein I shall seem admirable to men, and abo∣minable to my God. XLIII. TO all things there is an appoin∣ted time,Eccles. 3.6.8. says Solomon. A time to lose, and a time to keep; a time for warre, and a time for peace. God is the Lord of times and sea∣sons, and these times through his disposing, have a successive inter∣course in this life. Yet spiritually all times, are one to a true belee∣ver; for in times of warre he finds peace; when the Assyrian is in the land, Christ is their peace; and in times of losing, they are gainers; for as the outward man, like the house of Saul decreaseth, the in∣ner
man, like that of David, wax∣eth greater. But then in the next life, when time shall be no more, there will bee no∣thing but gaining, and kee∣ping, no losing nor warres and discord there, but peace and con∣cord. XLIV. IN the history of Joseph we read,Gen. 45. that hee sent Waggons and provision for his father Ja∣cob and his family; having procu∣red and reserved the land of Go∣shen for him till his comming. Now lest Jacob might hardly be perswaded to leave behinde him his houshould goods, the King of Aegypt bids him not regard that stuffe, for the Land of Aegypt was before him: Joseph was a type of Christ, as well in his low estate when he was sold, as in his
high estate when hee was able to give: Now Christ hath invited me to forsake all, and come un∣to him, having provided and promised me a Goshen, a mansion; hee also will send me enough to maintain me by the way. Why then should I regard such stuffe as will cumber me by the way, and be no comfort to me at the end? I will be content with or∣dinary provision in the way, when I am sure to finde extraor∣dinary entertainment at home. XLV. THe Church is described, Rev. 12. to bee clothed with the Sunne, and to have the Moon un∣der her feet. By the Sun is meant Christ, by the Moon all earthly things, by being under feet, notes subjection, shame, disesteeme. Those new converts therefore in
the Acts, did not cast their mony into the Apostles laps, or put it into their hands, but threw it down at their feet, as so much dung, fitter for trampling on, then handling. But as the Church doth so, the wicked doe the con∣trary, putting Christ the Sunne under feet, and the Moon on their heads. Though for the pre∣sent use I may have the Moon in my hands, yet in opposition to the Sun, it shall be at my feet. I will esteeme all these sublunary things, as losse for Christ: For all things are so farre under us, as we are above our selves. He that is clothed after this womans fa∣shion, shall surpasse others as farre as the Sunne doth the Moone in glory.
XLVI. VVHere onely temporall things are enjoyed by a man, that man is in danger of being enjoyed by them; such ob∣jects are likely to engross his affe∣ctions and desires. But when by losses a divorce is made from the first love, another is sought for. The heart will more easily bee brought to affect a more abiding object. Prosperity dilates the affections, and makes a man lose himselfe in the creature; but ad∣versity unites and gathers in all the powers of the soule, and settles them on God more fer∣vently and lastingly. Either we must leave earthly things, or they leave us, before we affect or possesse spirituall. The children of Israel had spent their Gar∣lick and Onions before they ta∣sted any Manna.
XLVII. ALL things are yours,1 Cor. 3.21. saith the Apostle, all things pre∣sent and and to come: yea, ha∣ving nothing to see, they possesse all things by faith. Beleevers have a right to earthly things,Iusad rem, non in re. A∣quin. though not in them; but they have a right to and in heavenly things. All things then are theirs, as well what they want, as what they enjoy. Yet seeing in this life a Christian is in his nonage, hee hath not actuall possession of all that he hath title unto: However he shall not want what is requi∣red to maintain him; hee shall have comforts, yea and afflictions and wants, so as to further him in the way. For sanctified af∣flictions are not the least to∣kens of Gods love, or of a godly mans possession here.
XLVIII. THe summe of all promises is comprised in this,Heb. 13. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Parents, friends, lands, goods, may leave and forsake us, or we may leave and forsake them; but God nei∣ther will nor can leave us. How can I give thee up, O Israel? sayes God. Now God is all in all. Am not I better to thee then ten sonnes? said Elkanah to Hannah. So may God say, Am not I better to thee then many goods, many friends? They may leave thee, I will not. God may for a while seeme to leave us; but 'tis onely as a pa∣rent doth the child, to try it how 'twill goe or stand by it self: nay, when his hand is off them, hee guides them with his eye. Gods children stand him in as much, cost him as deare, as any
mothers child, and yet a mother may forget her sucking child, yet he Lord cannot forget his. Therefore let the world, and all in the world, leave me & forsake me, yet I will not be cast down, if God say but this to me, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. XLIX. GEt thee out of thy Countrey,Gen. 12.1. and from thy fathers house, unto a land that I shall shew thee, sayes God to Abraham. A strange command, fit onely for him who was the father of the faithfull. Against this command first naturall affection might plead, not to relinquish his kin∣dred and fathers house; then common reason might plead for his right which he had in his na∣tive countrey, and to part with a certainty for an uncertainty:
yet this and all that could bee said by Abraham, was silenced by Abrahams faith; hee makes no put-offs, he reasons not with flesh and blood, he craves not time, he needs not an Angell to hasten him, as Lot did out of Sodome; but away he goes: yet 'tis a question what Abraham would have done if he had not had a promise gi∣ven him as large as his com∣mand. For the most part, the obedience of the best is mercena∣ry, we have an eye to the recom∣pence of reward. What God did command and promise Abra∣ham, the same doth Christ com∣mand and promise to all that follow him, viz. that they for∣sake all, and then his promise is, that whosoever forsaketh father, mo∣ther, sister, brother, lands, goods, for my Name sake, bee shall receive an handred fold: not eight or ten
in the hundred, but an hundred for one. Lord, how grievous so∣ever thy command be to me, how contrary to flesh and blood, I will not dispute, but obey, and o∣bey because thou commandest, I will bleeve because thou promi∣sest. Thus if I have Abrahams faith, I must have Abrahams obe∣dience, and shall have Abrahams reward; thou wilt be unto me, as thou wast unto Abraham, an ex∣ceeding great reward. L. AFfliction is Gods furnance, whereby he doth, as twere with fire, purifie his people, cal∣led therefore the fiery triall. Now as the drosse and corruption is, so doth God heat his furnace. The Lord is willing to doe away these spots by more gentle means, by water; but they are so
grounded in us, that they cannot bee done out but by fire. In the younger dayes of the world, sin did abound, and then the Lord took it away be water: but as the world growes older, it growes worser, and is more abundant in sinne, and therefore 'twill want fire to doe it away. Now though for the present this triall be grie∣vous, yet the issue is the peaceable fruit of righteousnesse. Though we are put into the fire by the sonnes of men, yet the Sonne of God abides with us in it, as hee did with the three children, God will either abate or suspend the power of the fire, or else en∣crease our patience; so shall wee come out with more glory, and lesse corruption; this being all the fruit, to take away all the drosse. Lord, thou hast kindled a fire among us, which among o∣thers
hath consumed my estate; my comfort is, that though by reason thereof, I am left the poo∣rer, yet I shall be found the purer. LI. THe Apostle would not have us to think strange of the fie∣ry triall,1 Pet. 4.12. i.e. as if it were a strange thing, and unusuall, seldome seen or heard of: However the thoughts of most are otherwise of it, when they murmure and say, Never were the times so bad, never such a time of losing. Thus they who are afflicted of God, become so many spectacles to o∣thers, as if they were so many monsters. But grant we all this, that these trials are strange, yet the Lord is just, who therefore sends them, because he findes in us as strange corruptions, as strange fashions, strange swear∣ing
haunting after the strange woman. I will think it strange then, if no strange judgment follow, when sinne is more then ordinary. LII. IT is usuall with men to com∣plain of the times badnesse, whereas the times might as justly complain of their badnesse. For as many are made worse by the times, so the times are made worse by many. If ever there∣fore we looke to see better times, we must looke to be better per∣sons. God must first mend us, and then the times will mend them∣selves. LIII. FEare not,Isai. 41.14. O worm Jacob, sayes God, though thou walkest through the fire, it shall not burne
thee, and through the water, it shall not overwhelme thee, for I am with thee. Gods presence sanctifies and sweetens any estate. What makes heaven but the presence of God? And what makes hell but the ab∣sence of God? Let God be pre∣sent in any condition, and it shall be full of comfort, though it bee full of trouble; and usually God is more present with his in ad∣versity then in prosperity. It is not affliction, but sinne that se∣parates God from us. It should be our care then to seek for his presence in troubles, comfort our selves in it in troubles, behave our selves so as he may not with∣draw it; for as David having Gods presence, feared nothing, though walking in the valley of the shadow of death; yet when the Lord hid his face, hee was troubled.
LIV. VVHen we see some escape scotfree from the over∣flowing scourge, and suffer no losses through neutrality or ma∣lignancy, some there be that en∣vie their happinesse;Hos. 4.14. but when we read that the Lord chastiseth every sonne be receiveth, and loveth, and sayes, being angry, I will not punish your daughters, they should rather be the objects of our pity, then of our envie. It is the grea∣test signe of Gods anger, not to seem angry; and the greatest punishment to goe unpunished. In affliction this is all the fruit, to take away the drosse; and where there is nothing but drosse, who will be at the charge of refining? Hee then that in publick suffe∣rings undergoes nothing here, is likely to suffer most hereafter,
being reserved to that great day. Unhappy children, though con∣nived at for a while, are paid for all at last. It shall bee my happi∣nesse to suffer affliction with them here, with whom I shall reigne for ever hereafter. Better it is to bee a child under wrath, then a chhild of wrath. LV. THe Lord doth commonly pu∣nish sinne in its owne kind, so that in the judgment wee may read the fault. Thus Adonize∣dechs cruelty was rewarded with the like cruelty. The old Law was, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; and there was a thumb for a thoumb, a toe for a toe. Thus Pharaohs bloody intent turned the rivers into blood. Davids a∣dultery in his neighbours bed, kindled the same fire in his own.
Dives his luxury brought on him penury. Sometimes also abuse of good things is punished with the want of them; abuse of liealth with sicknesse, of peace with warre, of riches with po∣verty. Thou, O Lord, art just in depriving me of my goods, sure∣ly I did affect them too much, or not use them well, or trust in them too much. Deserved dis∣appointment is usually the fruit of presumptuous confidence. It is Gods will and our wisdome to learn to spell our sinnes out of his judgements. LVI. IT is usuall with men to com∣plain of the suffering, when they doe not of the sinne: For when Nature openeth the mouth for the former, Satan stoppes it for the latter. Now as quicknesse
of the flesh is the cause of the one, so deadnesse of spirit is the cause of the other. For when the eye is opened to see sinne, the spirit prssed with the weight of it, the mouth will open to complaine against it. See it in a clock, which if it have its just weight, sets every wheele in its motion, and makes it sound: so let sinne have its just weight and pressure on the soule, and it will set every faculty of the soule, and part of the body on work, and will make the tongue cry aloud against it, though for∣merly silent. 'Tis true that extre∣mity of pain makes wicked men cry out against sinne: I and my people have done wickedly, sayes Pharaoh. The rack will open any mans mouth: but in the godly this confession is not extorted, but free; I have sinned, saith David, & done this wickednesse in thy sight.
I will therefore not so much ex∣claim against my suffering as a∣gainst my sinne; so when I have condemned my self for the fault, I shall through mercie be acquit∣ted from the punishment. LVII. VVHen we see men fare deliciously every day, there's no reason why we should repine at their fading happinesse, having their portion onely in this life, and being fatted against the day of slaughter. Greene hearbs with contentment (saith the wisest) is better then a stalled oxe with debate. Content is that which sweetneth and saw∣ceth the plainest fare. When I look upon my own deservings, what sinne hath deprived me of, and also looke to what I have through grace in the promise, I
need not murmure. The place where I am, is a strange coun∣trey, and strangers cannot chuse their diet. As long as I am from my fathers house, I may be glad with huskes; but when I come unto him, the fatted Calfe shall be provided for me, there shall I be satisfied as with marrow and fatnesse. LVIII. THe tune of the world is, What newes? What newes? where∣as if we call to mind the dayes of old, wee shall finde nothing new. What befalls the Church now in generall, or any one in particular, the primitive times, and our predecessors have par∣taken of. As bad warres, and ru∣mors of warres, as great spoy∣ling, as many losses and crosses as ever be now. Thus no temptati∣on
befalls us, but what is com∣mon to the Saints. But as man expects newes, so God also looks for newes, even for new men and new minds, hee would have old things past, and all things be∣come new. And indeed wee are not fit for good newes, till we our selves are made good & new. Old bottles are not fit for new wine. Renue, O Lord, the spirit of my mind, so shall I heare of joy and gladnesse; and what I heare, shall not only be new, but good. I will therefore be as inquisitive what is new within me, as what is new without me. LIX. TO you it is given in the behalfe of Christ,Phil. 1.29. not onely to beleeve on him, but also to suffer for his sake, saith the Apostle of his Philip∣pians: implying that beleeving in
Christ, and suffering for Christ, are two different gifts of God; yet such gifts they are, as one doth in some measure accompa∣ny the other. A weak faith may suffer something in losse of goods, or good name for Christ, though he cannot resist to blood, and losse of life: for when faith is weak, feare is strong, and doubts are many. So farre as we incline to nature, we decline from and avoid sufferings. As our faith is in Christ, so is our love to him, either in the sparkle or in the flame, such as many waters can∣not quench. There is such a faith as may make us not only active, but passive for Christ. It shall bee my desire and prayer, not onely for the gift of beleeving, but with it the gift of suffering. How can I have a true faith in Christ, and no power from Christ to suffer
any thing for him who suffered all for me, nay who suffers all in mee. LX. VVEE see in these dayes, what shifts the men of the world make to save them∣selves. One to his Tower and Ca∣stle; some put their trust in hor∣ses; others in riches; one hides; another flyes. As the man is car∣nall, his confidence is carnall, his weapons and helps of deliverance carnall. From this carnall wis∣dome, a spirituall man may learn spirituall wisdome, viz. when he seeth the evill to hide himselfe; and where can he with safetie hide himselfe, but in the Lord, who is the Rock, Castle, Tower, and hiding place of his people? For what safetie, helpe, succour, confidence is in, or can be expe∣cted
from any of these earthly helps; the same in a more abun∣dant manner is in the Lord. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous flie unto it and are safe. Such a Tower he is (if any com∣parison can illustrate it) as the Tower of David, which was for an Armory, wherein there hung a thousand Bucklers, all Shields of mightie men. To this Tower I will resort, from this Tower I will fetch Ammunition; so shall I be safe from the enemy, and strong against him. Let some put their trust in Chariots, others in horses, I will put my trust in the Lord; for a horse is a vaine thing; vaine is the helpe of man: He is one∣ly strong, that is strong in the Lord.
LXI. VVEE alwayes reade that God provides a refuge and hiding place for his people in times of trouble and danger. An Arke for Noah; flaggs for Moses; a little Zoar for Lot; a Midian for Moses; a Haran for Jacob; Caves and rocks in the Citie Keilab for David; the Temple his own house for Joash; a cave for Obadiahs hundred Prophets; an Aegypt for Paul; a Pella for the Christians leaving Hierusalem. The Lord hides them, because they are dear to him; they are his jewels, his treasure; now in times of danger men hide their treasures, and jew∣ells, have their Cabinets. I am thine, O Lord, and therefore be thou my hiding place, cover mee with thy feathers, hide me in thy Pa∣vilion,
keep me secretly in thy Taber∣nacle from the pride of men & strife of tongues. Thus as the lame and blind having got into the Tower of Sion, derided David; so having gotten thee to be my Tower, I will laugh at calamities, warres, dangers. LXII. The wicked are as a troubled Sea.Psa. 42.7. Rev. 12.15. Isa. 59.19. Psa. 32.6 The troubles wch they bring on the godly, are metaphorical∣ly called waters, flouds of waters. Now water is one of the most mercilesse creatures, if it be not contained, it will of it selfe keepe no bounds, but overflow all, car∣ry away all before it. The helpe wch the godly may expect herein is from the Lord, who hath pro∣mised, that in flouds of great waters they shall not come nigh thee. If they doe come nigh their soules, yet
will the Lord be with them, so that they shall not drowne them. In such inundations, god doth either provide for his an Arke to carry them above, as he did for Noah; or one to draw us out, as he did for Moses, or else will cause the floud to be swallowed up, and the place made dry ground, as he did for the Church, Rev. 12. This distracted Kingdome is as a troubled Sea, the waters thereof come nigh our soules. Our hope is, that he who setteth bounds to the Sea, that it shall goe no fur∣ther, will limit the rage of these waters, and either carry us above them by his power, or be with us in them by his presence, and make a way for us through them by his providence, as he did for Israel, that so we may attain to his hea∣venly Canaan.
LXIII. MAny are the troubles of the righteous,Psal. 34.15. but the Lord de∣livereth them out of all.Iob 5.19. He shall de∣liver thee in six troubles, yea in se∣ven there shall no evill touch thee. Where some of the learned say, the Spirit of God alludeth unto the dayes of the Lords worke of Creation in the six dayes, and ces∣sation on the seventh, implying that his servants must labour all the dayes of their lives with griefe and sorrow, and shall not be re∣freshed till that everlasting Sab∣bath. Others conceive, that by six and seven, are understood ma∣ny evills,Pro. 24.16. an indefinite number for a definite. However, if all my days must be spent in sorrow, I will comfort my selfe with the assured hope of a time of refreshing and rest at last. As my troubles are
many, my deliverances shall be as many, though my labour be long and tedious, my rest shall be joy∣ous and eternall. That Sabbati∣call yeare will recompence me for the years wherein I have suffered ad∣versitie. LXIV. OƲr light affliction which is but for a moment,2 Cor. 4.17. worketh for us a farre more exceeding, and eter∣nall weight of glory, saith the Apo∣stle most sweetly. Where wee see a very elegant Antithesis or op∣position betwixt present afflicti∣ons and future glory. Wee shall have for affliction glory, for light affliction massie substantial glory, a weight of glory; for momentary affliction, eternall glory: Yea he addeth, degrees of comparison beyond all degrees; calling it ex∣cellent, more excellent, farre more ex∣cellent,
an exceeding excessive weight of glory.A full and pithy speech, sufficient to make one swallow downe the most bitter affliction. Eternall glory will answer tem∣porall afflictions; A weight of glory, will weigh downe light af∣flictions. I will therefore not mur∣mure at my afflictions, seeing glory succeeds them; I will wil∣lingly goe through momentary afflictions, when my glory shall be eternall. My affliction shall seeme light, when I think of that weight of glory. LXV. PErfection and perpetuitie, are the two satisfactory conditi∣ons which an enlightened soule requires in any defired object, neither is any thing by it esteemed truly perfect, unlesse it be accom∣panied with perpetuitie. Now if
wee look for perpetuitie in the creature, wee may heare every thing say, as concerning wisdom; The Depth saith,Iob 28.14. it is not in me; the Sea saith, it is not in me. To this demand, things doe thus sub∣scribe; Riches say, Yours till a time of warre; Honours say, Yours till an enemy eclipse your Princes favour; Friends say, yours as you use him; Wives say, yours till death; God onely says, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. In him onely is perfection, who is the most perfect, perpetuitie one∣ly in him who is the same for ever. LXVI. IT was a grievous affliction for David to be dispossessed of his Kingdome by his own Son: Yet he saith in that condition,2 Sam. 15.20. I the Lord say, I have no delight in him,
loe here am I, let him doe unto mee as it seemeth good in his eyes. The losse would not be of a small thing, but of a Kingdome, and the person by whom he might have been dethroned, was not a stranger, or an enemy, nor a fa∣miliar friend, but a sonne. Yet in all this he submits his will to God. It is a hard thing to bring the will low, when the estate is low; stubbornnes and pride may rest there where is no outward thing to foment it. In some passi∣on directs their wills, in most rea∣son, but grace only makes it stoop to gods will. Lord though I am driven out of all with David, and if my estate be not framed to my will, frame my will to my estate; as the one is low, let the other be low also. If I must have Davids sufferings, I desire Davids pati∣ence, and then I will say with Da∣vid,
Loe here am I, let him doe with me what seemeth good in his eyes; or with the son of David; Not my will, but thy will be done. LXVII. I Have been young,Psa. 37.25. says, David, and now an old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor then seed begging bread. How different then seems the condition of Gods people now in these dayes, over it did in Davids? Are the righteous more in number now then they were then, and so is not their hea∣venly Father able to provide for all? Or else doth he take lesse care of them now, then he did then? No, God forbid. The truth is, that David in his own observation in his time might not see this; for he saith not, the righteous is never forsaken, but that he never saw it. Or else he might never see the
righteous and their see too forsa∣ken; for wee see godly parents want, when afterward their chil∣dren doe abound. Or else Davids meaning might be this, that he never saw the righteous forsaken in begging their bread, i.e. no not forsaken when they are brought to beggery; but even then the bowells of some might yearn up∣on them to refresh their bowells. Lord though thou inflictest po∣vertie on me, yet remove it from my seed; or if thou hast decreed both mee and mine to beggery, yet let us not be forsaken in beg∣gery. LXVIII. VVEE know not what to do,2 Chro. 20.12. onely our eyes are to thee, says good Johosaphat. Such may be the extremities of Gods peo∣ple, that they may be at their
wits ends, neither wisdome nor learning can teach them how to behave themselves in their evills, much lesse how to come out of them. The Lord doth often hide from us that helpe which wee look for in the creature, that we may look for it in him the crea∣tor. Our case is not behinde Je∣hosaphats; for if we look about us, wee see nothing but tumults, fightings, so that wee know not what to doe; if within us, there's nothing but terrors, sorrow and sadnesse of heart: in this case then wee should look above us to God, who will instruct us in the way wee should goe. I will therefore in my extremitie, shut the eye of sense in looking on my misery and weaknesse, and open the eye of faith to look on Gods mercy and power. Thus lifting up my eyes to the hills, from whence
cometh my helpe, I shall receive helpe from them. God will be seene in the Mount, my extremi∣tie shall be his opportunitie. LXIX. MArk 10. we reade of Peters demand to Christ, Loe we have left all and followed thee; What shall wee have therefore? If you did look for gaine Peter, it had been your wisest course to have made your bargaine at your first en∣trance into your Masters service. But what great matter was it that you did forsake? Perhaps a torne net, an old pieced boate, a rot∣ten oare: methinks the livery of Christ, and the bare title of be∣ing his servant, should counter∣poiz all that you forsook for him. Hadst thou known what a faith∣full servant thou didst prove to him in the high Priests hall,
shame would have stopped thy mouth from this demand: yet to this sawcy demand our meek Sa∣viour doth not give him a rough answer, bidding him goe as hee came, or tell him he should stand to his courtesie; but tells him that for what he had lost, hee should have an hundred fold here with persecution, and eternall life hereafter. O Lord, my losses perhaps doe not come behinde Peters; I will not demaud with Peter, what I shall have, but stand to thy courtesie: if with him thou repaiest me here an hundred fold, I will look for persecution with it; but give me life eternall here∣after, and then I shall say, I am paid, overpaid for all. LXX. THE shallownesse of our thoughts in comparison of
Gods, appeares in this, that when we see the meanes wanting, we thinke then God is hindred from working, & our selves depri∣ved of all hope of good. To help this we have the power of God set forth sometimes above all means, and beyond expectation, as when hee gave Israel Manna, and Samson water. Sometimes by ma∣king a little means suffice, as hee did by feeding five thousand per∣sons with five loaves and two fishes. Sometimes without means, as hee did by preserving Moses and Elias fourtie dayes fasting. Sometimes against means, thus when the Disciples did drinke poyson, it did not hurt them. I will never therefore despaire for want of meanes, when I can trust upon a God that can pre∣serve me not onely above means, but without means, yea and a∣gainst
means. It is not for want of power in God, but from a∣bundance and multiplying of his goodnesse, that hee useth any meanes at all. LXXI. COnsider the Ravens which neither sow nor reap,Luk. 12.24. and yet the Lord feedeth them, saith our Saviour; Christ could have brought other examples of holy men, and bid them consider Mo∣ses, Samson, Elijah, John Baptist, who were extraordinarily cared for and fed by the Lord; but he would not, because none should exclude themselves from Gods providence, because they had not the holinesse of those persons; as also because it should be an argu∣ment for their faith, à majori, that if the master of the house provide for the poultry, hee will
not neglect his children. Thy providence, O Lord, extendeth to all, the earth is full of thy goodnesse; I will not then ex∣clude my selfe from it, seeing be∣sides thy providence, I have thy promise, that I shal lack nothing. Thy esteeme of me doth oblige thee to it, as I am of more value then many Ravens; I am a child, and what child wil doubt of pre∣sent maintenance from his Fa∣ther here, who is assured of a fu∣ture inheritance from him here∣after? LXXII. FEed me with food convenient for me, lest I bee full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord?Prov. 30.8. was Agurs prayer, wherein hee im∣plies, 1. That that food is con∣venient for some, which is not for others; the condition, cu∣stome, means, education of some,
being different from others. 2. That fulnesse is a mean, or oc∣casion of denying the Lord; they that have and possesse all things in fulnesse and abundance, are not so likely to come to the Lord for their daily food, as they that have it for a day, not for the morrow. The larger the Cisterneis, the seldomer we goe to the Well. The staffe of bread if it be long and large, is still lea∣ned upon without looking to the Lord. Nature is content with little, grace with lesse, food brought in by Ravens, was more convenient for Eliah then the dainties of Jazabe's Table; and Daniels pulse, then Nebuchadnez∣zars delicious fare. A good con∣science is a continuall feast, it will make barly bread tast well, digest well. Let the Lord feed mee with any food, it shall be
covenient for me, so he sawce it with his Hidden Manna. LXXIII. GOD doth not give all his children his blessings in the grosse, but by little and little; not for their lives, nor from yeare to yeare, but from day to day. Should we have all at once, we should be lesse thankfull, and lesse fruitfull. One excessive vio∣lent showre will not make the earth so fruitfull, as often dewes and rain. He that powres down one great favour, and withholds his hand, shall not so oblige the receiver, as he that drops a token daily. Besides, the Lord takes this order in the dispensation of his mercies, that we may by prayer seek to him for our daily bread, therefore called daily, because we must seek daily for it. Should the
Lord with the prodigall give us our portion at once, wee should take our farewell, and never re∣turn till necessity drive us. The better therefore to flie unto God on the wings of devotion, we are kept low, thus shall we know his love, and return to him at a call; whereas if we had all things at the full, we should take the wing and follow after vanity. When mercies thus come by degrees, we are made to wait for them, desire them, sign for them. I seek thee at the dawning of the day, my soule thirsteth for thee in a bar∣ren wildernesse, where is no wa∣ter, sayes David. Renew thy goodnesse to me, O Lord, every morning, so shall my devotion, thankfulnesse, obedience, be daily renewed towards thee.
LXXIV. TRust in the Lord and doe good, so shalt thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shalt be fed.Psa 37.3. Wee cannot doe good unlesse we have trust and faith in God; neither have we faith in God, unlesse we doe good. These two must goe hand in hand, and this twofold duty hath a twofold blessing here promised, habitation, and pro∣vision, stability and satiety, dwelling in the land, and being fed in the land. Now as we can∣not doe good, but by persisting in the worke of our calling; so neither can wee bee assured of a blessing on that work, unlesse we trust in God. I will therefore be diligent in the calling whereto I am called, and what good I can doe, I will endevour to doe; and what is wanting in my doing, I
will make up by beleeving: For should I omit this doing, my trusting in God would be a tem∣pting of God. Thus though I I have no certain dwelling place, yet I have one in the promise, as well for this life, as that to come; and though I see not how to bee fed; yet seeing thou hast said, Verily I shall bee fed: Verily I will beleeve it. LXXV. IT is Gods usuall course to help his servants at a pinch. When Isaaks neck is on the block at a halfe blow, the Lord stayes the execution. When Is∣rael hath the sea on one side, and the enraged enemy on the other; when Jehosaphat knowes not what to doe, when Peter is sink∣ing, the Lord puts forth his hand. Not as if God were not alwayes
the same, or could not help, for his arme is never shortned; but because his wisdome directs his power, both to time, place, man∣ner, and meanes. Were the Lord seen in the beginning of trou∣bles, we should not reap so much comfort, nor God so much glo∣ry. God could have helped La∣zarus in his bed, as he did the Rulers sonne; or in his coffin, as he did the widow of Naims sonne; but then his glory had not been so much, as to doe it when hee had lain in the grave foure dayes. 'Tis said therefore of his sickness, that it was to the glory of God. The cure of some superficiall scar, doth not honour the Chirurgion so much, as an old festered foare. In my extremities therefore I will take heed of impatience and importunity, so as to say with the King of Israels messenger,
What, shall I wait for the Lord any longer? I will wait on the Lord, and the shal strengthen my heart. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. 'Tis good manners for me to stay his leasure, and it is his great mercy if he help at last. LXXVI. CAst thy burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain thee.Psa. 55. There's a gracious command, and as gra∣cious a promise: who then will not be beholding for anothers shoulder, when his burden is heavier then he can beare? Now God bids us cast all on him, as being able to beare all, and wil∣ling to take all on him. Most of our disquietnesse therefore in our conditions, is from troubling our selves about that which is Gods work. Hee that will not
help for his burden, must beare it or lie under it himselfe. That onely which makes him refuse to take it off us, is because wee re∣tain sin within us. Our sins op∣presse God more then our wants can. Wee read that God com∣plains hee was laden and weari∣ed with Israels sinnes, but not with their afflictions. This Jo∣nah then must bee cast over∣boord before the storme ceaseth. Hee that knowes how to beare the burden of sinne, must know how to beare his burdens for sinne: and then it is a most hea∣vie condition to bee under the burden of affliction, and the pres∣sures of a guilty conscience. LXXVII. NOtwithstanding Gods pro∣vidence over us, wee must not be carelesse or neglectfull in
our own endeavours; we must up and be doing, and not cast all on God, like the Clowne in the fa∣ble, who when his Cart was over∣thrown, stood still, and prayed to Jupiter. Jacob might have fa∣mished, if he had not sent out horse & man to Aegypt for corne; and so might Ruth, if shee had not gleaned; Paul and his com∣pany might have been drowned, if they had not swimmed. All these had promises of preservati∣on, and yet they did what they could to preserve themselves. Gods decree towards us includes the use of the means. The moti∣on and proceedings of the secon∣dary causes, proceed from the primary, and are included in them, and carried about by them, as the inferior Orbes by the first Mover; so that it would be in vaine to depend upon the one,
without the use of the other. As I will not trust in the means, so I will not neglect the use of them: otherwise my neglect of them, shall frustrate my hopes in them. God hath put the end, and the means together; and what the most wise God hath joyned to∣gether, none but a foole will put asunder. LXXVIII. UPon whomsoever God be∣stoweth faith, he doth with∣all give tryalls of it, more or lesse, first or last. For as all men have not faith, so the seeming faith of many is no faith. All is not gold that glisters, the touch stone shew∣eth what it is. The fight demon∣strates the Souldiers valour; a storme the Pilates skill. A tem∣porary faith may for a while flourish, but one fiery tryall will
make it vanish. Corruption can∣not, or will not discover corrup∣tion, but God will make it ap∣peare, when it will not endure the tryall. As grace is desirable, so its truth and sinceritie is more desirable. Now among graces, faith is the most usefull; and therefore it concerns us to looke to the truth of it. I will examine whether I be in the faith or no, and if my touchstone erre, Lord bring it to thine, so shall the try∣all of my faith being more preci∣ous then gold that perisheth, be found unto praise and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. LXXIX. COmmonly the Lord doth exercise our faith by tryalls in those things which wee most affect, that it may appeare which hath most of our hearts, either
God or them. Abraham had but one childe begotten of Sarah, and the Lord will try whether he will returne that childe to God that gave it. The circumstances of the tryall doe greatly aggravate it. Take thy Sonne, saith the Lord, not thy beast; take thy onely Son Isaac, not Ishmael; take him thy selfe, and seek no other executio∣ner; take him presently, and de∣lay not the time, Ile not allow thee a day or houre to conferre with, or comfort thy distracted heart; Get thee into the land of Moriah, three dayes journey, so long shall thy soule be in suspence; When thou comest thither, slay him, having slaine him, burne him to me in sacrifice; so many wayes did the Lord exercise his faith. Thus our most delectable things are those wherein the Lord try∣eth us. 'Tis wisdome then not to
be too much endeared to that in affection, which wee would still keepe with us in possession. I will therefore endeavour to take off my heart from those things wch God may take from me. LXXX. SOme there are who in prayer for temporall things, are im∣portunate beggers; as if such things were absolutely, and in their owne nature good. But I know not whether to admire in them, their folly or their sawci∣nesse. Had the Lord made an ab∣solute promise of temporalls, it would be a sufficient ground for such prayers. But oftentimes those things which seeme good, prove ill unto us; so that by desiring them, we wish evill to our selves. So farre as temporall things may doe us good, so farre God hath
promised them, and we may ex∣pect them. The Lord knows what to give, and what we want, bet∣ter then we our selves. But as for spirituall things, wee may be as bold beggers as we will, either in manner or measure. These are simply good, and are simply de∣sirable. When ever therefore I pray for a temporall thing, I will first say, Thy will be done, and then Give me my daily bread. LXXXI. I Have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content,Phil. 41.11. saith the Apostle: A lesson which though Paul the Master had lear∣ned, his Schollers may be to learne. Mens estates rise and fall, ebbe and flow; now the art is to make our spirits have the same cadence with our estates. For herein a mans minde and estate,
resemble the scales of a Ballance, which when one ascends, the other descends. Sometimes our minds are higher then our means, otherwhiles our means are high∣er then our minds, greater, and requiring other behaviours. Now nothing can exactly poize these, but a contented minde. If God set us low, and give us povertie, we must know how to be abased, and to be hungry; if he send us plentie and abundance, then to know how to be full and to a∣bound. The difficultie lyes here∣in, that when some are brought low, they are overcome with im∣patience, unbeliefe, murmuring; if they are set on high, and have all things at full, they prove ei∣ther forgetfull of God, or un∣thankfull to God, or unkinde to others. Now this knowledge and art of contentation, orders our
conversation a right in both. God gives some plentie, but withholds this knowledg from them, & thus their rising proves to be their fall; God gives others povertie, and teacheth them this art of con∣tentment, and then they have more comfort in a low estate, then they had in a high. O Lord, I am brought very low, make me know how to be abased, and if ever thou settest mee on high, teach me how to abound. Let me not sinke being now poore, nor swell if ever I be rich. LXXXII. GOdlinesse with contentment, is great gaine.1 Tim. 6.6. No godli∣nesse without contentment, and no true contentment without godlinesse. He that hath enough may very well be content; but a godly man hath enough, he hath
all; he hath both things present, and things to come: he is an heir of the promises, and he may bee sure of their performance, be∣cause faithfull is he that promi∣seth. A sufficiencie hee shall have here, a satietie hereafter. If any one say he is religious, and is not content, he hath but the form of godlinesse, he denieth the power. Godlinesse is of it selfe gain, but with contentment it is great gain. LXXXIII. WHat way soever a Chri∣stian looketh, hee may fide something to forward him in this art of contentation. If hee look under him, he sees what he is, dust and ashes, that from whence hee come, and to which he must returne. If within him, he shall find nothing but unwor∣thinesse,
whereby hee is lesse then the least of Gods favours. If without him, hee may see many better then him, poorer and low∣er then himt. If above him, hee may see the place whither hee shall goe, and where is fulnesse of joy. Thus both heaven and earth, our selves and others, teach us the lesson of contentment. If thou art therefore discontent with thy estate, thou forgettest whence thou camest, whither thou must goe, what thou art, what others are. I will never murmure at my condition, seeing others have lesse, I am lesse then it, seeing earth is my beginning, and hea∣ven my end. LXXXIV. GIve me neither poverty nor ri∣ches,Pro. 30.8. was Agurs prayer. A prayer which savours as much
of modesty as wisdome: of mo∣desty, seeing beggars ought not to be chusers: of wisdome, seeing a mean estate is the best estate. he that knowes the inconvenien∣ces of a low or high estate, will chuse a meane. They that wil be rich fall into many temptations, and they that are poore, fall into them likewise. Either of these extreames are fit baits for Sa∣tan, and our corrup. hearts; but he that likes and keeps the mean, is freed from both. As I would not be a shrub of the vallies to be trampled on by all, so I would not be a Cedar of the mountains to be envied at by most. I have read a meane estate to be com∣pared to the glasse of a win∣dow, which keeps out a storme, and admits the light; such and e∣state is best, as frees a man from the stormes of the world, and ad∣mits
the light of Gods counte∣nance. A great estate like a great wall, may keep off the injuries of the world; but not let in a beam of this light. As I will not pray then for poverty, so neither for riches, but for a convenient e∣state. LXXXV. IT is written,Psal. 4.5. Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. The Word doth not only sanctifie our bread, but satisfie us in stead of bread; when the staffe of bread failes us, the staffe of the Word upholdeth us. They that think to live only by bread with∣out the word, may for the present abound; but they that can live by the Word when they have no bread, are sure never to want. Carnall men may deride this kind
of life, but at destruction and famine they shall laugh: the surest way to injoy our food, is in the promise, I will satisfie her poore with bread: The heaven may with-hold its rain, and the earth not yeeld her increase, but before one word or tittle of Gods promise shall faile, heaven and earth shall passe a∣way. Lord, I should perish in my affliction, but thy Word quickens mee. Thy House is the house of bread, the true Bethlehem, thy Word is the bread of life; I will feed on it, live by it; so shall I never want, when I am at thy finding. LXXXVI. I Will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted poore people,Zeph. 3.1. that shall trust in the name of the Lord. Gods people, though they are a poore people, yet they are a trusting
people: And how can they be a poore people, that are a trusting people? Doth not the Apostle tell us, that they are rich in faith? And we read of the riches of full assurance: 'tis only in the worlds eye, and in worldly things that they are poore; none possesse more then they, none can shew a title to more. All they injoy is in God, and they injoy all things in God. When the plunderers have deprived them of all, the hand of faith will receive more from God, or lay hold on all in God: It shall be my glory, to be one of Gods poor afflicted people, so I may have this grace, to be one of his trusting people. LXXXVII. GReat is the use of faith; glorious things are spoken of it: It is called a shield, and as
heretofore, many have done va∣liantly with this shield, so also may we now. By faith wee may be inabled with Abraham to leave our own countrey, with Moses to forsake the pleasures and prefer∣ments of this life; yea, that which in these dayes is endeavoured to be done by strength of hand, may be done assuredly by the strength of faith. We may hereby subdue kingdomes, and not only escape, but learne, how by faith to handle the sword; faith ma∣king one of weak, become strong: and wax valiant in fight. All our hope ariseth from, and is stirred up by faith. In trouble faith stir∣reth up prayer, prayer stirreth up God, God stirs up the means: Faith will with Jacob make us continue wrastling with God till he blesse us: Faith wil draw water from the wells of salvation; it
will not only support us in trou∣ble, but bring us out. By faith I will be rich when I am poore; strong when I am weak, joyfull when I am sorrowfull. By it I will conquer, even when I am conquered. Let the Lord give me this grace of faith, and take away all that I have, yet by it I shall have as much as I had, more then I had; all that a God can yeeld is then mine. LXXXVIII. IT is the nature of faith in its workings, to suspend the soule from reflecting on its own weak∣nesse, and other difficulties, dire∣cting it to look up to the Lord in whom its hope is, and from whom its help must come. In af∣fliction we should not onely con∣sider how unable we are to beare them, but how able God is to
help our infirmities. Afflictions and troubles are manifold, but God is one and the same; and a true faith can make use of one God to conquer twenty troubles, one promise to support him in many dangers. Sense presenteth many enemies, but faith seeth more with it, then are or can be against it. What rule and course the Apostle, Heb. 12.13. prescri∣beth to lay aside any weight of sinne, viz. To look up to Jesus, the same must we take to be eased of any weight of affliction. LXXXIX. IT is written, The just shall live by faith. Now faith lives on the promise, and the promise lives and abides, because God lives and abides the same for evermore. The life of a beleever is not maintai∣ned by any mutable perishing
thing, and therefore it cannot suffer mutation. When we have no other feeding then, faith can be our bread, when wee have no other stay, faith can be our staffe; and when temporall things are removed from us, yet if faith ap∣prehend a promise, it hath plen∣ty enough; one promise suppor∣teth faith more then many thou∣sands per annum. Hee then that hath a large faith, hath a large living. That onely which causeth discomfort in a Christian walke, is, the suspension and intermissi∣on of faiths actings. For if wee would let faith have its perfect work, it would support us in all wants. Now faith doth its work best alone, having a higher prin∣ciple then the life of sense. Faith acteth upon a faithfull promise, and an Almighty God. Now as faith will not leave God; so God
will not faile faith. The dutie then of beleeving onely is ours, the worke of helping is Gods. XC. THe sight is the quickest of all the senses, for it can ken from earth to heaven in a moment; and is also the largest, for it can be∣hold the whole Hemisphere by one act of viewing. Most fitly therefore in the Scriptures doth the Spirit of God set forth the acts of faith, by seeing, behold∣ing, looking. Hereby Abraham is said to see afarre off; whereas un∣beleevers are by S. Peter described to be such as cannot see afarre off. O then let us labour for a large faith, as we have a large object; for wee can never be straltned in our God, unlesse we be straitned in our faith. If wee had a thou∣sand times more faith, we might
receive a thousand times more blessings of God. When the Pro∣phet came to the widows house, as many vessels as shee had were filled with oyle. The reason why so many abide under wants, is because they cannot see more in God, nor receive more from him. For to them all communicable good that they see in God be∣longs unto them. XCI. IN Christ dwelleth all fulnesse; a fulnesse not onely of suffici∣ency for himselfe, but of redun∣dancy for us. A fulnesse not of a vessell which will hold no more, and of which a little being taken, its fulnesse is diminished; but a fulnesse of the Ocean, which though it be still emptying it self, is still full; A fulnesse of the Sun, which though it diffuseth daily
light and heat, hath never the lesse. Though all the Saints in heaven partake of Christs glory, and all the Saints on earth of his grace, yet hath he never the lesse glory or grace. There is in Christ a fulnesse of power to protect, of wisdome to direct, of truth to confirme us, of love to comfort us, of life to quicken us: Of all, yea, and more then all wee can aske or thinke. Now of this ful∣ness, I may receive grace for grace, for if I am a member, I must par∣take of the heads fulnesse; If I am a Spouse, I must partake of my husbands fulnesse, to supply all my wants. I will therefore ne∣ver complaine of emptinesse and wants, as long as there is in Christ not onely a fulnesse, but a free∣nesse to communicate; For as sure as Christ is mine, his fulnesse is mine.Iam. 1.5 He gives to all men, and
yet he gives liberally, which no rich man in the world is able to doe, because as he gives to others himselfe decreaseth. XCII. OUr communiion with Christ is that which may comfort us in the disunion of all outward comforts from us; for our neare∣nesse with him, assures us of his compassion under them, and his helpe to beare them. If then I have Christ with mee, there can be no estate cumbersome to mee. If I am weake in body, Christ my head was wounded; if deje∣cted in minde, Christ my head was heavy unto death; if I suffer in my estate, Christ my head was poore, even as poore as a servant, even as any servant of his Christs head hath sanctified any thornes, his back any furrowes, his hands
any nayles, his side any speare, his heart any sorrowes that can come to mine. Thus though I beare the yoake, yet being it is Christs yoake, I have Christs fel∣lowship under it; I have his Spi∣rit to helpe beare it, and Christs strength to draw it; I have his graces to be glorified by it; his compassion to moderate it; his victories to overcome it; his crowne to reward it. XCIII. THe blessed Apostle Paul rec∣koned all things losse for Christ; not as if he did actually part with all things (though if occasion had bin offer'd he might) but as they were of no more e∣steeme with him, nor did take more comfort from them, then he could from that which was lost and taken from him. Most
heavenly Spirit, (would to God we were all like thee in this) thou hadst many prerogatives in thy birth, many priviledges in thy e∣ducation, many common gifts, much outward righteousnesse; and yet was all this but losse for Christ. Surely in this many of us are but almost Christians, when we preferre a trifle before Christ, and reckon that lost which is ta∣ken from us for Christ, or given to his members. Lord if I have any thing worth losing, let me gaine Christ; and if I lose it not in possession, I will in affection e∣steeme it as losse, yea as dung for Christ. XCIV. VVEE know that all things worke together for good to them that love God.Rom. 8. If all things, then afflictions, and losses. Now
we see that afflictions and world∣ly losses, worke worldly sorrow, and worldly sorrow worketh death; how then doe they worke together for good? The Apostle doth not say, all things of them∣selves worke for good to such, but worke together, i. e. together with the sanctifying grace of God, whereby that which is e∣vill, is turned into our good. Of poysonous destructive Drugges, the Apothecary can compose healthsome cordialls. Those things which are in themselves evill, God can so alter and quali∣fie by the ingredients of his grace, that they shall be good for his. As in prosperitie, God mingleth some evill to humbleus, so in ad∣versitie, he infuseth some good to comfort us. So then, though our losses doe in themselves worke much present sorrow and mise∣ry,
yet being thus sanctified they shall worke together for good; even the good of grace here, and that of glory hereafter. I will not therefore looke so much to the present misery, as to the promised issue. How bitter soever the pill be for a time, yet health will be sweet at last. Crosses being thus mastered by grace, prove service∣able to us. XCV. THough the fig-tree shall not blossome,Habak. 3.17. neither shall fruit be in the vine, the labour of the olive shall faile, the field shall yeeld no meate, the flocke shall be out off from the folds, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet will I rejoyce in the Lord; I will joy in the God of my salvation. It is a good thing to put cases of presupposed dangers and wants to our soules. Such ca∣ses
may not onely be praemoniti∣ons of them, but praemunitions a∣gainst them; we may come there∣by not onely to attaine a know∣ledge of our present weaknesse, but obtaine what strength was wanting. Expected evills loose their venome and strength; and when they doe come, the patient may say in Agags words, that surely the bitternesse of them is past. Now in expectation of evills, we must not only praeconceive what may come, but what possibly can come; See it in these gradations of the Prophets faith. Who could not want figges one yeare, if the vine prospered, if there were wine enough to cheare the heart? but though the vine were blasted, yet the olive might helpe for a time; but if these liquors failed, yet if the fields give their returne of corne, water with it might pre∣serve
life; but if there were a dearth of corne, yet if the pastures abounded with flockes, meate without bread might serve a while; and if the flockes were baned abroad, yet the stalls at home might preserve the life of the owners. Thus frarre the life of sense might goe; but when all these faile, and there's no out∣ward comfort to be seene, yet then to rejoyce in the LORD, there's none but he that lives by faith can doe. What was the Pro∣phets resolution, I will endeavour to make mine. As long as God gives me the creature, I will use it, but not live onely by it; I will live by all, so as to trust in none. I will take some comfort in what I have, but no true joy but in my God, and what I shall have from him. I will behold things before me, but so as to looke on things
above me. If all faile me, my God is all in all. He that lives by faith when things appeare, shall not perish when those things appeare not. XCVI. I Seldome reade in the sacred Volume, of any of Gods peo∣ple suffering want, though among strangers, and enemies, but have found favour in their sight, and received kindnesse from them. The Aegyptians were over and a∣bove courteous to the Israelites, in that they would lend them their Jewells: This also the kind∣nesse of Bozz to Ruth, of Nebu∣zaradan to Jeremiah, of Josephs Keeper to him, of the chiefe Cap∣taine to Paul, yea of the Barba∣rians to Paul and his company, doe plainly testifie. This doth not arise so much out of any love which the one beareth to the
other, as from the over-ruling hand of God, which can turne mens hearts to whatsoever object or act he pleaseth. The Lord can make them instruments in such workes to which their natures are averse. How great soever my wants are then, and how few my friends, yet as long as a stranger to mee is left, I hope not to be denied courtesies, perhaps more then ordinary. When my friends and acquaintance, to whom I am known, cast me off, they to whom I am not known, shall receive me. He that is in favour with God, cannot but find favour with men; happie is he whose God is the Lord. For the Lord will doe him good, either by himself, or by such instruments as are most unlikely. XCVII. IF Beleevers in former times did suffer the spoyling of their
goods with joy, why should not wee also in the same manner? We have the same God, the same promises, the same hope & faith; and therefore why should not we expresse the same joy in such ca∣ses of suffering as they did? Af∣flictions though they seeme grie∣vous to the carnall part, yet they are tolerable to that which is spirituall; and as they afflict the one with sorow, so they affect the other with joy, and that at the same time. See this in David, who when Ziglag was burned,1 Sam. 30.6. himselfe plundered of his goods and wives, did at first weep till he could weep no lon∣ger, and he was greatly distressed, thus farre he let loose the reignes to nature and passion, yet see how his spirit upheld it selfe, hwen he presently encouraged himselfe in the Lord his God. Davids
case is now common to the seed of David, where fire and sword pre∣vaile; the present apprehension thereof may empty our heads of teares, but not our hearts of cou∣rage. When our adversaries are increased, our strength failes us, our burdens increase, our estates decrease, so that wee can take pleasure in no earthly thing, yet then may wee encourage our selves in the Lord, nad joy in the God of our salvation. The seed of David, as they are heirs of Da∣vids sufferings, so also of his con∣solations. XCVIII. VVEE are apt to observe and take notice of what the Lord takes away from us, but not of what he gives us; thus minding one crosse more then many favours. Did wee thus diligently look to our Book of
accounts with God, we should finde that wee are indebted to him, and not he to us: For when the Lord takes away a blessing from his, hee gives them as good or better; here onely is the mi∣stake, that when the Lord doth not pay us in our own coyn, and in the same kind of blessing, we think he is behind hand with us: as if he that borrowed so much in silver, but returnes the summe in a few pieces of gold, were still indebted. God took away Eli∣jah from Elisha, but hee doubled his spirit upon Elisha. Christ did withdraw his bodily presence from his Disciples, but hee sent them the Comforter. The Lord takes from us temporall goods, but then hee gives us content, in a lower estate, and faith for a better. I will not be trou∣bled if God deprive me of out∣ward
gifts, so hee restore them unto me in inward graces. None that ever had trading in heaven, can say, he is a loser, unlesse hee mistake his accounts. XCIX. IMpatient people think God hath forgotten to be gracious, if hee deliver not in their time, and by their meanes: The Lord doth therefore hide the meanes and time from us, that his wayes of deliverance may be the more mysterious. God doth not al∣wayes deliver from the trouble, but from the evill of it; nay, sometimes hee delivers by the trouble, making that to bee the meanes which is our present mi∣sery. Thus is there a deliverance, when suffering the lesse, wee are freed from the greater, as many are delivered by death temporall from death eternall; by losses of
the death, from the losse of hea∣ven. If therefore our condition in suffering be so strange, that we know not what to doe, yet the Lord knowes how to deliver. The Lords thoughts are not as our thoughts, but as farre sur∣passing, as the heavens doe the earth. That sea which Israel thought would have been their grave, was their high way. And if the suffering be long and tedi∣ous, yet when the time of deli∣verance is come, the Lord will not only answer us for our prai∣ers, but for our patience and time in waiting. C. SKin for skin, and all that a man hath wil he give for his life; life being better then goods. Now what bargain I should have made for my life, the same hath God yeelded me my life upon: as
he hath given my goods as a prey to the enemies, so he hath given my life a prey to my selfe. Live∣lihood is good, but life is better. Laban did Jacob much hurt in his estate, but God suffered him not to hurt his person. And now, O Lord, as thou hast given me this life, by thy own inspiration, by thy Sonnes redemption, by this last preservation; so being not mine own, but thine, I desire to live, not to my selfe, but to thee. Henceforth to mee to live, is Christ; he that hath his life pre∣served from an imminent dan∣ger, should not live onely to live, but to God and his glory. CI. VVHen I heare the enemy, with Saul, breathe out threatnings and slaughter, say∣ing, Kill, slay, hew them, pistoll them, quarter them, I know not
whether doth exceed, their fury, or their folly, seeing that which is an act of enmity in the perse∣cuter, is an act of amity to the persecuted: for hereby they are the sooner dispatched to heaven, and wait the lesse time for their inheritance. Could they destroy the soule with the body, or sepa∣rate the soule from God, as easi∣ly as they can divide it from the body, it were a high degree of revenge. But this belongs to the Lord onely, to whom vengeance belongs. I will not therefore fear him that can kill the body one∣ly, but him that can destroy bo∣dy and soule. Thus though they destroy this earthly tabernacle, my spirit shall return to God that gave it; and thus to die, would bee to mee gaine, yea such gain, that if the enemy knew it, his envie would bee as great to my
soule separated, as his enmity was to it united. CII. ALL the comfort of a child of God is in this, that God is his God: for all good is in God in a more eminent manner, and fuller measure, then in any crea∣ture. Now as God is his God, so all in God is for his good. If God be ours, all things are ours; but if he be not ours, though we had all, yet when losses come, nothing would be ours. Nothing is so much ours, as God is ours; for by his being ours, all things else are ours. Here also is the glo∣ry and crown of rejoycing in a Christian, that when all things else leave him, hee neither lo∣seth his interest in God, nor God his interest in him.
CIII. VVE read of Jobs losses, that they fell out not at the same time, though one came in the neck of another. Parallell in manner to Jobs were mine: For when the Sabeans came, they dealt fairly (to see to) taking the one halfe that lay open, leaving me the other that lay hidden, (thankes rather to their blind∣nesse then their goodnesse.) Yet at last that which lay hid, did appeare to them, perhaps by Chaldean wisdome. Thus that which the Locusts left, the Ca∣terpillers have eaten. My com∣fort is, that my best estate is so hidden and laid up, where such Theeves cannot break through and steale; such is that hidden meat and Manna they know not of; or if they did know, would not trouble themselves with it;
but let who will take it for them. CIV. VVHen the remembrance of my losses over-clouds my heart with a multitude of thoughts, yet even then have I a multitude of comforts from God to refresh it. Every depth of my misery, is accompanied with a depth of mercy. Amongst all my losses, though not exceeding, yet the most affecting was that of my Library; which as for variety was good, so for value was not small. herein my comfort is, that now the Lord may give me a double portion of his Spirit, whereby I shall not onely know, but know all things: what I had by study & inspection, I may now have by inspiration: and thus I need not complain for want of bookes. Besides, having depri∣ved me of books, had they left
me a Peripatetick, not having a chamber so well furnished as Eli∣sha's was at Shunem, having in it a bed, stoole, table, or candle∣stick, their mercy would then have lessened my misery; yet herein my comfort is, that I shall lie no worse then my master did, who had not whereon to lay his head; and the remembrance of this my conformity to my Ma∣ster and Saviour, shall make any lodging as easie as a bed of Downe, though it seeme as hard as Jacobs pillowes of stone. Yet besides these losses of bed and bookes, there had been some mercy in their crueltie, if they had not deprived mee of house and means; but in this my God is my comfort: for the earth is the Lords, and the ful∣nesse thereof; so that though I am dispossessed of one place, the
worlds widenesse, and the Lords goodnesse can yeeld me another. But if I have no further lot or∣dained for me on earth, heaven also is the Lords, and there are many mansions; and I am assu∣red he will provide a place for me there. CV. AS we ought not desire af∣flictions and losses before they come, so we ought to pray, that they may be sanctified unto us when they come upon us. Now they are never truly sanctified to us, till we see God in them, and our selves altered by them. Many men that are non-proficients un∣der the word of God, become well learned being a while under his rod. They who onely heard of God before with the eare, will now see him with the eye. As for my own part, I ingenuously con∣fesse,
that what I have preached to others, I could never truly practise till now. I have delivered to others many speculations of the use of afflictions, of the life of faith in them, & now I find in my self experimentally true, what I taught. I am, with the Apostle, made able to comfort others which are in any trouble, by the same comfort wherewith I am comforted of God.2 Cor. 1.4. In briefe, I find these afflictions so far sancti∣fied to me, that I can say wth Da∣vid, It is good for me to be afflicted; yea, can say with him that said,The∣misto∣cles. Periis sem nisi perus∣sem. I had been undone, unlesse I had been undone. True it is what Lu∣ther sayes is required to make a good Divine, viz. Meditation, Prayer, Tentation. CVI. VVHen I read of the begin∣ning and end of Job, I
know not whether to admire the mutable insufficiency of the crea∣ture, or the immutable sufficiency of the Creator. We all know our beginnings, but our ends are hid from us. The Lord maketh rich and poore, he setteth up on high, and he casteth down. The estate of Job at first consisted of seven thousand sheep and three thou∣sand Camels, five hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred shee Asses. Besides, his own issue was seven sons and three daughters. Here was an estate seeming im∣possible to begained by one man; but more impossible, being lost, to be repaired in one mans time. Yet we read, that the Lord bles∣sed the latter end of Job more then his beginning: for his for∣mer substance was at the last doubled unto him in all things, save onely his children; they also,
as some think,Conra: Diete∣ric. ex Aug. were multiplied, so many being in heaven with the Lord, as were on earth with him. This should also bee my judge∣ment, were not my doubt that which was their fathers, that they might at last curse the Lord in their hearts. O Lord, thou hast brought mee as low as Job, and thou canst advance me as high as thou didst him. I beleeve what thy Prophet told Amaziah, that the Lord could give him much more then this. However if thou dost not increase my substance with Job, increase and continue in me the patience of Job. CVII. IT hath been the usuall procee∣ding of Beleevers for the act∣ing of their faith on some diffi∣cult thing, to reflect on some former act wherein the Lord de∣monstrated his power. Thus did
Abraham confirme himselfe in the faith of Isaacs resurrection, be∣cause he was by the power of God raised to him from a bar∣ren wombe as a figure, Heb. 11.29. And Job from the resurrecti∣on of his body, argues the possi∣bilitie of the raising of his estate.Iob 19.25.26, 27. Now there be two demonstrati∣ons of Gods power, which being applyed by any beleever, may keepe him from casting away his confidence in the greatest extre∣mitie, or distresse and povertie. The first is Gods removing his sinne from him; for there's more evill and obliquitie in sinne, then can be in any affliction or judge∣ment for sinne; and therefore why may not the same God remove the one that removed the other. The second is the resurrection of their bodies at the last day, which if they truly beleeve, they cannot
doubt of the raising their estates now.Ezek. 37 That God that can make dry scattered bones reunite, can make scattered goods come toge∣ther; he that shall raise the bodies of his people from the dust, can also raise the poore and needie from the dunghill, and set them with Princes. That God who is a God pardoning iniquitie & sinne, will he so gracious as to remove mountains of trouble. For he that can make the cause to cease, can make the effect to discontinue. CVIII. TOo many there are that make hast to be rich, I feare more hast then good speed, and have nested themselves on high, with more celeritie then sinceritie. Tis the end which most ayme at, not regarding the means of attaining it, they care not how bad the
meanes be, so the end be great. Yet is it not unusuall to see men decline faster then they were rai∣sed, and poverty to come upon them with more hast then their wealth did. The higher the rise is, the swifter and more precipitate is the fall. If riches be my end, I will choose the most right and plainest wayes, and use the fairest and most lawfull meanes; and if my corruptions drive mee on too fast, I will slack my pace by faith. He that beleeveth doth not make hast; thus though I have waited the longer for an estate, it shall stay the longer with me. CIX. OUr Saviour having sent forth his Apostles unprovided to see too, without staffe, scrippe, mo∣ney; demands of them at their re∣turne what they wanted, and they
said, nothing. A strange answer considering the length of their journey, the diversitie of their hearers, and the contrarietie of their new doctrine to flesh and bloud, yet that they should be ac∣commodated with every thing. No question but they were truly welcome to many, and it might appear so by their entertainment; yet such a worke as they went a∣bout, might want a supply of ma∣ny things. Christ told them, That the labourer was worthy of his hire; but many might thinke then, as now in our dayes, preaching to be scarce worth the hearing, much lesse paying. Surely in this worke of Christ, Christ was with them in a more speciall manner; His fulnesse was enough to supply all their wants, at least to make them content in all estates, & not mur∣mure at their pay, so their worke
went on. Lord, as thou wast with them, so thou hast promised to be with thine till the end of th e world. Goe thou forth therefore with me thy servant, who is to goe forth emptie as they, and then at my return, their answer to thee shall be mine to others, I want nothing. CX. VVicked men are the rod of Gods anger,Isa. 10.5 and the staffe of his indignation, so call'd by the Prophet; where 'tis worth the ob∣serving, where 'tis said, the staffe, i.e. the power in their hand, is not their indignation, but Gods. Now the anger of God is but for a mo∣ment, theirs is implacable; and if therefore they are Gods rod, wee must not so much look to the in∣strument, as to the hand that u∣seth it. They cannot give a blow
more, if God lay downe the rod; and when the childe is chastised and amended, the rod is cast into the fire. The rod of the wicked may fall on the lot of the righte∣ous, but it shall not rest there; Judgement may begin at Gods house; but it shall be but a little while,Isa. 10.25. & the indignation of God shall cease in ungodly mens de∣struction. ISA. 33.1. WOe to thee that spoylest, and thou wast not spoyled, and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shalt cease to spoyle, thou shalt be spoyled, and when thou shalt make an end to deale treacherously, they shall deale treacherously with thee. FINIS.
