G1608A R177624 51617642 175243
GREAT AND PRECIOUS PROMISES; OR, Some Sermons concerning the Promises, and the right application thereof: Whereunto are added some other concerning the usefulness of Faith in advancing Sanctification. As also, three more concerning the Faith of Assurance. By Mr. ANDREW GRAY, late Minister of the Gospel in Glasgow. All being revised since his death by some friends. The third Impression carefully corrected and amended. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holi∣nesse in the fear of God. Edinburgh, Printed by a  Stationers, Anno Dom.
To the Reader. Christian Reader, ALthough (upon some con∣siderations) these fol∣lowing Sermons have been keeped back till now, and have waited the vacany of the Presse from other things: yet was it at first intended the connexion of the purposes so requiring) at they should have come forth assoon as some her of this precious Author, which we did merly publish: And therefore, in the Pre∣ce which we then prefixed, we did relate to th, and gave the Reader such advertise∣nts as we conceived necessary, concerning e one as well as the other: So that we have hing to do at present, but to put this little ece into thy hands, commending it to thy se∣us thoughts, and the Lords blessing upon n. Neither shall we use many words  purpose; Only, we find some help  o thee, in three most weighty and  ts of Christian Religion. 1.
lively exercise of faith, thou may apply t great and precious Promises. 2. How by fai thou may advance the work of Sanctification And, 3. How thy faith may grow up unto ass∣rance: Of all which we may truely say, that  thing can more seasonably take up the thought nor bring more advantage to the souls of t Lords people in these times. O how necesary is it in such troublsome day to learn, how through Faith and Patience, w may inherit the Pomises: and now wh our strong corruption hath (in a manner nece∣tate the wise Physician to mix unto us so bit a cup, and give so strong a potion, in what fainting and swouning condition must we be, by the two immutable things, in which i impossible for God to lie, we receive not a the strong consolation. Again, when profanity and ungodlin hath so abounded in these Nations, t from the top of the head, to the sole of  foot, there is no soundnesse, but wound and bruises, and putrifying sores: A when the corruptions of the Time like the s of Zerviah, are grown too strong, even the Davids who are amongst us; What sho we study with more earnestnesse, then to  ∣rifie our hearts by faith, and by hav these promises, to cleanse our selves  all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit, ∣fecting holinesse in the fear of the Lo 3. When the Lord hath remoed us so far f peace, that the souls of many have even fo prosperity, and the multiplied changes
revolutions in our dayes, hath so clearly de∣monstrate the instability of all sublunary glory, and so convincingly taught us, that this is not our rest; Ʋndoubtedly, it is time to look for  city that hath foundations, and to give all diligence to make our calling and election ure. The subject then is usefull. As to the manner of handling it: It is true, much accuracy and neatnesse, is not to be expected in any work of this nature, being only the hasty gleanings of a Church Writer; And as to livelinesse and power, though it be as easie to draw a picture with the heat and motion of a living man, as to Write or Print, hese lively motions of the Spirit which do often accompany the Lords Messengers in Preaching, and in an eminent measure were also let out upon this blessed Author, yet we suppose thou will find, the matter most seriously and feel∣lingly spoken unto, as from a heart which believed, and therefore spake: Yea, both conceptions and expressions savouring much of an exercised spirit, not only much taken up in communion with God within it self, but even thirsting also, and panting for the salvation of others; nay (in some measure) travelling in birth, till Christ might be formed in them. Oh, that more of this holy zeal and fervency, might accompany this great measure of light and knowledge in the mysteries of the Gospe that the Lord hath graciously bestowed both  Pastors and People in this generation, th once again we might see, (as in the dayes of John Biptist) the Kingdome of Heave
suffering violence, and the violent taking by force. And that the blessed Spirit by same gracious operations, may so warm  inlarge thy soul in the use of this and all ot means for thy eternal Salvation, is, and sh he the sincere desires of Thy servants fo Christs sake, Robert Traill. John Stirling.
Great and precious Promises. SERMON I. 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious pro∣mises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. MAy we not truely say, that if ever the Christians who live in those dayes shall be advanced to stand within the holy place, and hall inherit everlasting life, all these are ow before his Throne may lay aside their arps and give us leave to sing? Will it not e a mysterie, suppose ye, unto heavenly noch that spent so much of his time in com∣union and fellowship with God, w e shall behold such Christians within  erlasting rest, that have spent so  heir time in corresponding with
it not be a mysterie unto believing Abraha when he shall behold such misbelievers, su disputers of the promises of God, advan to reign with Christ? Will it not be a ∣stery unto wrestling Jacob, when he sh behold these Christians once crowned w immortall glory, that did so little know w it was as Princes to wrestle with God,  they did prevail: Will it not be a wond to patient Job, when he shall behold su impatient Christians as we have been, en∣ing into that blessed place of repose? W it not be a mystery unto holy David, wh he shall behold such unmortified Christi entering within that City, into which  unclean thing doth enter? Will it not b mystery unto tender Josiah, to behold s Christians as we are, that have our hea dying as a stone within us, entering i Heaven? Will it not be a mysterie unto  right Nathaniel, to behold such hypoc∣call Christians as the most part of us are, ∣tering within the holy place, and to  those that have been cloathed with hypo∣sie and guile, now coathed with the r of immortal Glory? And will it not  mysterie unto self denied Paul, when shall behold so proud and selfish Christian enter into Heaven? Give me leave to this, go where we will, we shall be m lesse and singular; for if we shall go  eternity of pain, we shall be the gr  unto the infinit justice of God  of mercies we have received:   enter into eternity of joy, we
e the greatest debtors unto the  grace of Christ, in regard of mercy we  bused. There shall be none in heav  o us, and if we shall go to hell, there shall e few there that may be compared unto us. And let me but adde thus further before I ome to the words, go where we will, we shall be out of doubt with our condition: Within a short time a real Christian shall be exalted above the reach of his misbelieving,  hypocrite shall be depressed below the each of his faith, and one that is grosly in ature, he shall be abased beyond the reach of his presumption: A Christian ere long shall misbelieve no more; a hypocrite ere ong shall believe no more; and one that is grosly in nature shall ere long presume no more: there is no misbelief in heaven, and  here is no faith nor presumption of well eing in hell. But to come to that which we intend to speak to, we told you when first we began our discourse upon that pre∣tious and exalting grace of Faith under a wofold notion and consideration. First, As it is justifying: And, secondly, as it is sanctifying. For the first, we resolved to speak to it in a twofold consideration. First, As it closeth with Christ simply as the ob∣ect upon which it resteth, and of this we have spoken from that place, 1 Joh. 1.3, 23 Secondly, As it closeth with Christ, as held orth in the Promises. And now being  speak of it in this consideration, we  made choise of this place, in which  ings concerning the Promises,
2. In a Christians believing of spiritual p∣mises, there is often some sense and rea that helpeth him to the exercise of Fai at least, they presse not the contrary; b to believe a temporal Promise, when a Ch∣stian is redacted unto a strait, and that  can see no outgate present, sense and re∣son stands upon the top of his Faith, a presseth him to dispair: As for instance when a Christian is living upon the top of mountain, and knoweth not where to s at night, to believe that there is a prom upon which he may rest, that he shall  want his food; but if that the Lord had ∣vice for him he will provide: Here,  hath not only reason to dispute against, b the strong pinching sense of hunger, bo crying out, How can bread be given in  wildernesse? 3 The tentations that assa a Christian to misbelieve upon temporal pr∣mises, they are more subtile and more co naturall to a Christian, then his rentatio that assault him in resting upon spiritu promises: When a Christian is in straits  the world, the tentations that hinder  exercise of Faith, they are more consona to flesh and blood; we are ready to ye to misbelief then, because we think it is ∣tional, and speaketh the truth. 4 A Ch∣stian is often so affrighted by his daily ∣ings, or some particular more grosse o breakings in his life, that howbeit he  (through grace) be helped to belive  the Lord shall make out these prom which concern his eternall salvation, an
o him good in the latter end: yet may he be sadly perplexed and distrestfull in making use of any particular temporary promise, for drawing forth any comfort or encourage∣ment therefrom, as to his present exigont: because he knoweth, that although the Lord doth forgive his peoples iniquities, yet may he take vengeance on their inventions, Psal. 99.8. and therefore may punish his present failing with the like calamities as he hath lone others. 5. There is also much of a atural and carnal self love to a present life, emaining in the best, that we are many times worse to satisfie in our securities for the hings of this life, then of that which is to ome, and can more easily trust the Lord or our souls, then for our bodies; so that hough his naked word will sometimes satis∣e us for the one, yet it will not for the ther. And the last ground of it may be a hristians unacquaintednesse with that lo  exercising Faith upon temporal promises, ere being many who think not that there  use for Faith, except for Salvation and e things above, which maketh his Faith on these more difficult then upon pro∣ses that are spiritual: And this may ap∣ar most clearly, in that we find men more sily bear their spirituall wants (even a ristian that is most exercised) then they r their temporal want; and more cor∣ption and impatience doth arise from tem∣al want, then from spiritual want. 2. Consider, That all a Christians du  turned over into promises; there is
a duty that is required of a Christian, bu is converted into a Promise. Is not Faith duty, 1 Joh. 3.23. This is his Commandm that ye should believe? And is not that t ned over in a promise, Jer. 3.19. Thou sh call me thy Father? The word importe not only an act of necessity, but of violen thou shalt do it: And in the thirteenth  Zechary, at the close, Thou shalt call me  Father, and so in Ezek. 11.19. Is not m∣tification a Christians duty, Colos. 3.5. M∣tifie therefore your members; and it is turn over in a promise, Jer. 32.28. and Ez 36.25, 29. where he promiseth, that  will purge away all their uncleannesses; a it is clear from Micah 7.19. I will sub (said he) all thine iniquities, it is not sa thou must subdue them, but, I will do it,  not also the knowledge of God a comm∣ded duty? and yet it is turned over in a p∣mise in the Covenant of Grace; They sh know me from the highest to the lowest, nei shall there be need any more that one sh say, know the Lord, for they shall be all ta of me. Is not the commandement of  your duty, as is clear from Eccles. 12.  and yet that is likewise turned over in a ∣mise; I will put my fear in their in parts, that they shall not depart away from. So tendernesse is a Christians duty, and that is turned over in a promise, I will away their heart of stone, and give them a  of flesh. And that I may say no more of  but to these four places, and ther  see almost all duties turned over in
mises: there is Jer. 31. Jer. 32. Ezek. 11. nd Ezek. 36. ye will see all the duties of e Covenant converted into promises. But ay not some say, what advantage is there f this? much certainly, every way: That he duties are turned over into promises; it ay give a Christian hope, that he shall once erform these duties: Will ye not once e tender? Yes certainly, because your ten∣ernesse lieth within a promise; Will ye not nce be much in the exercise of fear? No oubt ye will, and the ground of it is this, ecause your fear lieth within a promise, and o of the rest. And, 2. there is this advan∣age of it, that all the duties required of a Christian are turned over in promises be∣cause by this means, a Christian may go to God when he cannot perform such a duty, and de∣ire him to fulfill his word, and accomplish is promise; and so may make use not only of he Omnipotency of God, but of the faithful∣nesse of God also. There is this third Consideration that we would propose, that there are some things f a Christian within a promise, that he doth not believe to be within it, especially these hree: First, the challenges of a Christian re within a promise, when ye are convinced, hat is the accomplishment of a promise his is clear from Isai. 30.21. where con∣victions and challenges are turned over into promise; When thou art turning unto the righ and or to the left, thine ears shall hear,  voice behind thee, crying, this is the way,  in it: And it may be clear, that our co∣ctions
are the accomplishment of prom because it is a work of the Comforter well to convince, Joh. 16.9. as it is him to make one rejoyce: and if a Christ could believe that his challenges were accomplishment of a promise, he might brace his challenges, he might see the fa∣fulnesse of God in his challenges, and might see much love in his challenges.  Christians crosse is within a promise, so t when a Christian meets with such affliction he may sit down and cry out, this is the complishment of a promise, and this is ch from Psal. 89.31, 32. wherein in the m of the promises of the Covenant of Gra that promise of visiting their iniquities w∣rods, is put in the bosome of them:  from Psal. 119.77. In faithfulnesse hast  afflicted me, Why doth David say in fa fulnesse? It was this, because his crosse  the accomplishment of a promise: and may be clear also from that word, Heb. 12. Forget not the exhortation, (speaking of crosse) the word is, Forget not the cons∣tion that speaketh unto you: As if the h Ghost did say, crosses do yeeld much co∣lation, as in vers. 11. They yeeld the peace fruits of righteousnesse: And if this wer lieved, that our crosses were the accomp∣ment of the promises, it would help a ∣stian unto much humble submission,  there would not be murmuring under th if once we did believe that they were accomplishment of a promise: Yea, the  advantage further, that if we did be
at our crosses were the accomplishment f a promise, we would be much in advanc∣g holinesse under our crosse. There is no∣ing that obstructeth the sweet fruits of ghteousnesse under a crosse so much as im∣tiency: and I would say this to commend e crosse, a Christian never moveth so iftly to heaven, as when he is under a san∣ified crosse; a crosse when it is sanctified, ill prove a Christians motion to Heaven, ore then ten enjoyments, for our enjoy∣ments ordinarily do retard our way as much  further it. And there is this, Thirdly, at is within the promises, even your daily od, and the hairs of your head, the hairs  a Christians head are numbred, and with∣ the Covenant. So that ye may see what  high respect Christ hath put upon Christi∣s, that is clear from that word, Psal. 111. 8. He hath given meat unto them that fear im, He will ever be mindfull of His Cove∣nt. Our fourth consideration shall be, to point at a little these grounds upon which Christ th delay his accomplishment of the pro∣ises; It is certain that a Christian is often∣es put to this, Doth his promise fail for ermore? and cryeth out, Why art thou be∣me unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail; d the grounds of this delay are these: Christ knoweth that a Christian can often tter improve the delay of the accomplish∣ent of the promise, then he can improve e accomplishment it self: we might find is in our experience (it being for the
most part) easier for a Christian to bea crosses, then to bear his enjoyments. I th David never had so sweet a time as th when he was pursued as a partridge by son Absolon; then grace did breath so most sweetly in his actions: but let ∣vid be under prosperity, and then we he falleth in the sin of Adultery.  therefore never repine when ye are u a crosse; for certainly, if we had spiri understanding, we would not judge i great a hazard to be under a crosse, as u prosperitie, since we have greater stro to bear the one, then to endure the o 2. The slothfulnesse of a Christian to w the promises are made, this makes the ∣mises to be delayed in their performance was clear in the people of Israel; the fourty years in a wildernesse, before promise of entering into Canaan is ac∣plished; It was a promise that could  been accomplished in a few dayes, an because of their sin, it was not accompl for fourty years, as ye may see from word in Numb. 14.33, 34. 3. The ac∣plishment of the promises is delayed, Faith may be more put in exercise;  clear from that remarkable word, Psal. 19. Ʋntill the time that his word came; is, untill the word of the Lord was a hed; The word of the Lord tried him; , it was the matter of his exercise, an cise especially unto Faith; for inde∣much for a Christian to believe upon a  when it is delayed in its accomplish
e fourth ground of delay is, that the ex∣cise of prayer may be more; and it is cer∣n, that the best improvement of delayes to be much in prayer; the promises they  occasion prayer, as is clear from Exod. 4. , They believed, and bowed down their ds and worshipped; and from 2 Sam. 7.  where the great promises being made to vid, he cryeth out, Therefore have I found my heart to pray this prayer unto God, and it clear from Psal. 119.49. Perform the word to thy servant upon which thou hast caused  to hope. It is bad improvement of delayes hen we turn impatient; and it is a bad im∣ovement of delayes, when we quite our nfidence. Know that promises are accom∣ished after delayes, and they have a lust on them that may compence all the delay. There is this other ground of the delayes accomplishment of the promises, even at the thing that is promised may be more eet to a Christian when it cometh: this clear from that word of Solomon, Prov. .12. Hope deferred maketh the heart sick, t when the desire doth come, it is as a tree  life: O but a mercy that cometh to a Christian through a promise, it is sweet; a, a drink of cold water taken up as the ac∣mplishment of a promise, is more sweet en a feast of fat things full of marrow, and ine on the lies well refined; to take up your ead and your drink as the accomplishment f your promises, it would make them re∣shfull to you. 6. The Lord delayes his romises, that a Christian may be more in
the exercise of dependency, and may  wayes keeped about the throne. A C an goeth to God from a threefold pri he goeth to God from a principle of  from a principle of necessity, and fr principle of love: but would you  that which putteth the Christian often  God? it is a principle of necessity: an lieve it, that if necessity did not drive a  stiun unto the foot of the Throne, we w seldom go from a principle of love, or  a principle of faith. And there is this ground of the delay of the accomplishm the promises, that the glory of the wisd of God may appear, & the glory of his p in the accomplishment of the pro When the promise is long beneath gro then the wisdom and power of God  more appear in the accomplishment of  promise. And from this I would only  to Christians that are under that exer compleaning of the want of the perform of the promises, these few things: 1.  lieve that the promise shall once be ac plished, that though the vision tarry, yet a it shall speak. 2. Believe, that every h delay of the accomplishment of the  mise hath a sweet design of love: the not one moment of delay, but it is for advantage of a Christian, as is clear from  word, Rom. 8.28. And, 3. that pro that cometh after long delayes, it hath  three sweet and soul-refreshing attend 1. It is performed most seasonably, a  tian if he will observe, he will see in
sedom shining in timeing the accomplish∣nt of the promise to such a particular y: a Christian will be constrained to cry t, if the promise had been fulfilled before, ere had not been such arte of wisdome p∣earing in the performance of it. 2. Th e promise when it is accomplished, w gage a Christian more in the exercise of ve, than four promises accomplished at a ort and smaller time: there is nothing at will so inflame the soul with love, as to ve a promise accomplished after delayes. nd, 3. the promises accomplished after layes, have much sense waiting upon the rformance thereof: I think hardly a hristian ever met with the accomplishment f a promise after long delay, but his soul  as made as a watered garden, and as springs  water whose waters fail not; this promise ileth and cometh to a Christian perfumed ith love. Now we shall shut up our discourse at is time, and shall only speak to these fix fects of a Christians faith in believing the omises. 1. That our faith is impatient, e cannot stay upon the promise if it be de∣yed: Hence ye will see, that in Scripture ten patience is annexed to faith; which eaketh this, That it is impossible for a hristian to believe as he ought, that want∣h the exercise of patience. See Heb. 6.12. e ye followers of them, who through faith and tience inherit the promise: And that word  the Revelation, This is the faith and pa∣ence of the Saints. 2. Our faith in closing
with the Promises, it is most unconstant  Christian when first a promise is born in  on his spirit, he will then believe the p∣mise and joyn with it; but after six or ven dayes go about, he will change  Faith: this is remarkably clear from E 4.31. compared with Exod. 6.9. W first the promise cometh to the people of ∣rael, that they shall go out of Egypt, it is  of them in the fourth Chapter at the cl They believed the promise, and worshipp But look to them in Exod. 6.9. and ther will see them not believing, because of  ternesse and anxiety of heart: And I  tell you the grounds why our Faith is  constant. 1. Sometimes the reading o promise to a Christian will be as his sa meat; sometimes when a Christian will  one time in the Covenant, it will be  fumed with love, and his soul will be tr ported with joy after it, and at another  when he shall read that promise again, it  be tastelesse as the white of an egge, and as sorrowfull meat. 2. That we are not m in studying the exercise of the things  are promised, which certainly would  short many of our debates. There is  third defect of our Faith, That we are  diligent, a diligent faith we call this,  after a Christian hath believed, he woul much in the exercise of prayer, for the complishment of the promise, he wou much in the exercise of meditation, to  that promise sweet and lively to him.  a fourth defect is this, We build our
ore upon Dispensations then upon the Word: when dispensations say that which e promise saith, then we will believe: but hen dispensation speaketh the contrary nguage unto the promise, then we will re∣ct our confidence and hope. I will tell ou two great mysteries of believing, It is ard for a Christian to believe when the ommentary seemeth to destroy the Text, at is, When the Commentary seemeth to clare, that the promise shall never be ac∣mplished. In sum it is this, It is hard to lieve when dispensation will say, the Word  the Lord will fail, and when promises ds you believe. 2. It is hard for a Chri∣an to take impossibilities in the one hand, d the word of promise in the other, and , O precious Christ reconcile these two gether, that impossibilities do not destroy e promise, but that the promise may be complished notwithstanding of this. We have this defect of faith amongst us, at we build our faith more upon sense, en upon the word of promise; when a ristian is in a good frame, he will believe, t when Christ hideth his face, he will then e over his hope. And lastly, there is this, at our faith upon the promises is general,  believe the truth of the promises, but  study notto make a particular applicati∣ of them. I shall not stand long to make  use of what we have spoken: Only I uld have the Christians of this age, and se that are here, to go home with this viction, the damnable neglect of believing
of the promises. A Christian negle these three duties of Religion most,  glecteth the duty of self-examining, the of believing the promises, and that nobl exalting duty of meditation: these thre ties a Christian doth so constantly neglect almost he is above the reach of convic that he doth neglect them. But I would say a word unto these are destitute of the Faith of the promise are strangers unto these blessed thing are recorded within the Covenant: A is onely this; doubtlesse ye must b your sences, if ye will not believe his W It is a question indeed, Which of al senses shall be most satisfied in heaven, ∣ther that of seeing, when we shall beh King in his beauty, and see him as he is  that of hearing, when we shall hear thes lodious Halelujahs of that innumerable pany, which are about the Throne, wi any jarring amongst them all, or th smelling, when we shall find the swee sume of his garments, which are per with all the powders of the merchant; o of touching, when we find Maries in on taken off, Touch me not, and be ad to imbrace him who is now ascended  Father; Or, that of tasting, when w drink of these rivers of Consolation, th never run dry. This, I say, is indeed  stion; But give me leave to tell  atheists and enemies of God: It is  question, Which of all the five sens eprate shall be tormented in He
hat would ye answer to it now? Whether hink ye the sense of sight, when ye shall be∣ old that darknesse of wrath, the devil and is angels, and your fellow-prisoners in that ungeon? Or whether shall your sense of earing be most tormented in hell, when ye all hear those screighings and howlings at shall eternally ascend up before God, y the souls that are in prison? O but the eatest enemy would have compassion up is enemy, to hear their cryes: Or, whether ill ye say the sense of tasting shall be most rmented, when ye shall drink of these ri∣ers of brimstone? Or, will the sense of uching, when ye shall be eternally scorch∣ with these flames of eternal indignation▪ r the sense of smelling, when ye shall eter∣lly be, as it were, suffocated with the oke of that sulphurious furnace that shall ever be quenched? O think you if Cain ould come from hell and preach that do∣rine, that we should not persecute the nts, would we listen unto him? If A∣lon should come from hell, and should each against the evil of ambition, would ye ten unto him? And if Achitophel should se from the dead and preach that doctrine to you, Let not the wise man glory in his isdome, would we stop our ears? Or if udas would come from hell and preach to u the evil of hypocrifie, in betraying th n of man with a kisse, would we belie m? Or if Dives that is recorded in  spel should come from hell, and  at Text to preach upon, Jam. 5.1.
ye rich men and houl, and weep for your  ries that shall come upon you. And if D would come and second him with that w love not the world, nor the things  are in the world. I fear ye would cry  we will imbrace that doctrine at an time. We desire not to insist much  these, but O to believe, that there is an  nity of pain, and that there is an eternity . I will give you a description of heist, and let him think upon it, it is e to convince hundreds of you, that ye  the fear of God, then that ye want the  and love of God. Oh, an imaginary f and a conceit of love, will ye ever  these two Idols. I confesse, once ye  have a faith that no man shall ever rob  of, and that is, the faith of that truth,  when once ye enter into eternity of  there is no redemption out of that pl Awake, awake, for behold the Judge com and he shall render vengeance unto t that know him not. To his blessed  most precious Name we desire to  praise.
SERMON II. Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious pro∣mises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. THough Justice and Judgement be the habitation of His Throne, yet mercy and truth do go before it as two di∣ne Ushers to convey us home unto God. ere are these two things that we would ve Christians principally to study. 1. That  would be much in the study of these rongs and injuries that ye have done to rist: And, 2. that ye would be much  the study of these infinit acts of precious ndescendency that Christ hath manifested wards you, that the one may provoke you to sorrow and humility, and the other y provoke you unto a sweet astonishment d admiration. And I would ask you this,  Christ should present that challenge unto , which Absolon presented unto Hushai,  this thy kindnesse unto thy friend? O be∣ed, what could you answer, when you re thus reproved? I think if Christ had t forgetfulnesse for that blessed end, to get the wrongs and injuries of his own,
I know not unto what use Christ should  forgetfulnesse, for he knoweth not wh is to forget our good works, but he ha blessed arte of forgetting our wrongs; tho we may say upon the contrary, that we h a cursed arte of forgetting them our sel There are these three things that Christ  doth forget; they forget much Christ,  is the great author of the promises, so  may charge them with this, Why hav gotten me? 2. They forget their  es, and these divine receipts of love  Christ hath given unto them. 3. They  get even their iniquities, yea sometimes  forget them before Christ doth forget t and passe an act of pardon upon the shall not stand long to plead with you your undervaluings of that blessed and  Plant of renown; I think if there wer more to evidence that low esteem that have of Christ, but only this, that we so much in sleighting the promises, it  more than sufficient: but besides, is t not this to testifie how much you u value that holy and just one; that ye  more to have an outward conformity  him, than to have an inward. We may  the Christians of this time Nephtali;  are as a hind let loose, and they give go words, but we do not give Christ  practices: And is there not this also  testifieth our undervaluings of Christ  we slight so much, secret and retired respondence and communion with hi suppose there are some that are hee,
nsciences beareth them record, they do t exercise themselves unto godlinesse, and shall only say that word, that Gideon spake  another case, If God be with us, how  all this come upon us? such a spirit of o∣ality, such a spirit of lazinesse, such a irit of hardnesse, and such a spirit of un∣rvaluing of Christ? I suppose, that if ere were a Chronicle written of all the es of the Saints that have been since Adams yes, and the Christians of this time should ad over that Chronicle, when they should gin and read the life of Adam, they might t this to the close of it, my life is not e his, and when they should read the life  Abel, they might put this to the close of it, y life is not like his; and when they should ad the life of Enoch, they might put this  the close of it, my life is not like his: O!  which of the Saints can we go: and if ye ould call, is there any that would answer u, your life is like mine. But to come to the words, we told you the last occasion that we spake upon them, at there were these things concerning the omises holden forth in them. 1. The rise  the promises is holden forth in these words, hereby, or as we cleared the words may be us rendered, by whom, which relateth un∣ Jesus Christ. The second thing concerning the promises, lden forth in the verse is, the property of e promise, and they are these four. 1. That e promises are free, holden forth in that rd, Whereby are given unto us; all the pro∣mises
of the everlasting Covenant are  and not debt. There is that second pro y of the promises, that they are unch∣able, holden forth in that word, Given, gifts and calling of God being without re∣tance. And the third property of the  mises was, That they were exceeding gr. And the fourth, That they were exce precious. The third thing concerning the prom∣holden forth in the words, is the advan that floweth to a Christian by the pro that by them they might be made partake the divine nature. And the last thing concerning them  that time when the promises were espe∣y accomplished, it was then, when we escaped the pollutions of the world th lust. Now, as for the first thing, to wit, fountain, original and rise of the prom which is Jesus Christ, By whom; In spe unto this, we shall speak a little unto  two. 1. In what respects Christ ma said to be the fountain and original of promises; and we conceive he may be to be so, First, Because he purchased promises unto us by his own pre bloud. There is not a promise in all everlasting Covenant, but it is the pri the bloud of the Son of God; this is cl Eph. 2.12, 13. where speaking of the tiles, that they were strangers unto the venant of promise: he setteth down  13. verse, the way by which they
brought near unto the Covenant, and had ight unto it, it was through the bloud of hit rosse: and it is clear in Eph. 3.6. that the romises of the Gospel were given unto us in im, that is, through the purchase of him, nd his merits: and 1 Pet. 1.19. where e are said to be bought by his bloud: for the romise of Redemption, was the price of oud. Secondly, Christ may be said to be e fountain of the Promises, in this respect, at he is the Person unto whom the pro∣ises of the Covenant are first made, and rough him are made over unto us; this is ear in Gal. 3.16. the promises were given to Abraham, not unto many seeds, but as to one, that is Christ; and it is clear from Tim. 1.9. where the promises of Grace d Salvation are said to be given unto us in  before the world was made: It is true, t the promises are not given to Christ, nsidered only as the Son of God, (for so  had no other relation to us then the Fa∣er of the holy Ghost) but yet they are, st, made to him as the Mediator and head  his Church, and as that blessed Dayes man,  King of Saints, and the Great Lord per of all the Rights of the young heirs Glory; And we all receive of his fulnesse,  grace for grace. Thirdly, There is this pect, in which Christ may be said to be  fountain of the promises, that he it is whom we have a right unto all the pro∣ses; this is clear, 1 Cor. 3 12, 13. where∣se two are conjoyned, ye are Christs, and n all things are yours: If once a soul
close with Christ in the Covenant of p∣mise, there is not one promise in Scriptu but he may write this superscription ab it, This is mine, this is mine. Fourth Christ may be said to be the fountain of  promises, in regard that he is the Person  applyeth the promises, and maketh u rest upon them, and to believe them,  David did acknowledge, Psal. 119.49.  member thy word unto thy servant, upon w thou hast caused me to hope: as if David s I had never believed a promise, except  hadest caused me, and it is clear, Eph. 2 where faith is called the gift of God,  faith to believe the promises, it is the r donation and gift of Christ. Fifthly, may be said to be the fountain of the  mises, in that he qualifieth us for the ac∣plishment of them. Christ giveth us stre to obey the condition that is annexed to promise, and Christ he infuseth habi grace in us, by which we may be helpe exercise faith upon the promises: so grant all the Scripture were promises, if Christ did not help us, we would never lieve a promise, and there would never a mise be accomplished unto us. Six The last respect in which Christ may b to be the fountain of the promises, is,  all the promises of the everlasting Cove they have their accomplishment through according to that word, 2 Cor. 1.20. A promises of God are in him yea, and i Amen; so that ye are to blesse Christ, ∣ly for the giving of the promises, but  accomplishment of them also.
That which secondly we shall speak to om this, that Christ is the fountain of the romises, shall be to presse upon Christians ese three excellent and soul-concerning ties. The first, That they would not have light account of the promises, since they are olets and streams that flow from that essed Ocean: O but if a Christian did be∣eve that the promise that he hath for his ily bread, it was bought with the blood  the second Person of the blessed Trinity, ould he not have an high account of that omise? And let me tell you, it is impos∣le for the promises to be in high account ith you, till once ye reduce them unto their e, and to their fountain: but once know at all the promises are sweet streams of we that have run through the heart of pre∣us Christ, and from thence they have wed unto you, and then when this is be∣ved, how shall ye sit down and comfort ur selves in the promises, and rejoyce ex∣dingly in them. The second duty that we presse upon you m this, is, That since Christ is the foun∣n and original of the Promises, be much  the application of the Promises. And e I shall speak a little upon these three ings. 1. A little unto the evidences and ks of those that have a right to apply  promises; and shall only name unto you se few. The first is, to be a person under, victions of sensible need and necessity of  a promise; have ye convictions of  ecessity; Then from that ye may
have a right to the promises, and are not  glad tidings? I know there are some are under such convictions of their sin, they think it boldness to apply the prom. But I would say this unto you, that i were under sensible convictions of your ∣nesse, ye would give a world for an ha a promise whereby to hang: believe it, exercise of misbelief is never at its hei ill we would be content to dig through earth to get a promise, and till we  at that, that our souls would pursue a them from the one end of the world to other: And for the grounds of this a∣tion, that sensible necessity giveth a righ the promises, if ye will look to these g promises of the everlasting Covenant, they not given to that Christian that is det a need, Isa. 55.1, 2. and Matth.  where the great promise of the Gosp given out, and the invitation of  Christ, is unto these that are weary and ∣Iaden. Christ would account it an exce courtesie, that ye would not dispute, believe, and that ye would look upon y necessities as his call to believe the prom 2. A person that hath a high account o Promises, he hath a right to apply the mises: Let once your soul close with  by Faith and Love, and then you may  holdnesse close with the Promises.  sesse, if we were more in believing the ises, we would have a higher and   of the Promiser: Would  the reason that Christ is not acco
matchlesse, it is because of this, our necessi∣ties of the promises is not alwayes within our sight, and our exercising of Faith upon the promises is not our daily work. 3. This looketh like a right to the promise; that which is born in upon a Christians spirit when he is near God in prayer, and is under most sensible exercise under his own infir∣mities, he hath readily a right to apply tha promise: As for instance, when a Christian is debating himself out of Christ, which is but an unpleasant exercise; to meet with a promise born in upon their spirit, that giveth them some ground of hope, that they may apply and rest upon Christ: of when a Christian is fainting under affliction and is like to give over; to meet with  word of promise born in upon his spirit  that doth uphold him in the day of his triall he may probably conclude he hath a right t believe that promise. 4. There is that ev∣dence, persons that have an high account  the promises, they have a right to apply  promises, it is an excellent and most conce ning work for a Christian to believe the ex∣cellency of the promises, when he cannot have the actual application of the Promise For when once a Christian cometh to this  that the great things of the everlasting Co∣venant are matchlesse in his eyes; then tha is the valey of Achor, and a door of hope that ere long Christ will apply the 5. When a Christian hath great delight  he promises, when they are sweet  aste, and are the refreshing and rejoy
his heart, that is an undeniable sign that  hath a right to make use of such promises  Were your souls never refreshed by reading of the boundlesse Covenant of love, an the sweet promises that are in it? I would have Christians marking these promises tha have upholden them in their straits, I would have them marking the promises that ha been lievely to their souls, and say, Th once was my goodly meat, and made me  rejoyce in the house of my affliction; and  would have a Christian marking the time  the accomplishment of the Promises,  which he will see infinite wisdom shining  ordering the accomplishment of the pr nises to such a time. And I would have  Christian marking the frame of his own spi∣rit, when the promises are accomplished (as ye will find often in Scripture) and  ll this, ye should find such a reviving an profitable delight in the promises, th ould give a very full evidence of your righ unto them. 6. Lastly, when a Christi under straits can receive consolation from  ther thing, but all prove Physicians of  lue and miserable comforters: when  Christian is convinced, there is no joy  e had under such a crosse but in the faith e promises, that is an evidence that th person hath a right to the promises.  would only say this, O beloved in the Lo not this your guilt, your undervaluing e promises, and your little exercise ith? I would pose you with this, w st studied ye to apply any promise of
Covenant of Grace? When last did ye ex∣ercise faith upon any of them? Shall I tell you what is the practise of the most part of us, we study perhaps to apply one promise, but for the rest of the promises we lay them aside, and do totally neglect them: we stu∣dy to apply the promises of salvation, and of having redemption through Christ, but for the promises of Sactification, for the promises to help us to perform duties, for the promises to support us under the crosse, for the promises to comfort us in our way to heaven, for promises in reference to all or∣dinary things, we are not much in applica∣tion of these. O but if a Christian were believing the promises, he might sit down even while he is here and sing one of the songs of Zion, though yet but in a strange land. The second thing that I shall speak to up∣on the application of the promise, shall be to propose unto you some rules that ye would mare use of in the application of them, and shal name unto you these. Frst, Study these four things, one is the faithninesse and truth of the promises, that such thing is the saying of him that is the faithful witnesse, and Amen: This was the practie of Paul, 1 Tim. 1.15. the way how he was ought to make application of the promise was, 1. by laying down that con∣clusion this is a faithfull saying; and Ren. 22. frot the beginning to the 6. verse, whose there n great promises made, and much spoken t the commendation of heaven, this
is subjoyned in the 6. verse, These are  faithfull and true sayings of God: As if Jo had said, all that I have spoken concerni heaven, will be to no purpose, except ye be∣lieve the truth of the promises; and this w the practice of David, 2 Sam. 7.28. T words are truth, O Lord, he subjoyneth th unto the actual application of the promise 2. Study the sweetnesse and excellency  the promises, this was the practice of Pa 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a faithfull saying,  then he subjoyneth, and worthy of all acc∣tation: And this was the practice of David Psal. 119.72. I have esteemed the laws of  mouth better then thousands of gold and sil O such an opinion, to esteem the promi better then thousands of gold! It is he rodox amongst the most part of you, th prefer the world before the promises of  Covenant: and it was his practice, vers. 10 and ver. 162. I rejoyce at thy word as one th findeth great spoil: he had a higher acco of the promises, then to divide the spo er war. 3. Let the Christian study  necessity that he hath of the promise, th there is no way of winning above that nece∣sity but the closing with the promise, a saying hold upon it. 4. Lastly, A Christ in would study the suitablnesse that is in  promise to answer their necessities that they be under need, there is aprecio way of remedy manifested unto them  hese. The second rule that we would prescr  the application of the promises, is, T
ye do not expect sensible comforts immedi∣ately after ye have believed the promise, a Christian may apply the promises, and yet want the joy and sweetnesse that is in them: This is clear, Psal. 119.25. My soul cleaveth unto the dust. There he is under much unxiety and much sorrow; and yet he is a believer of the promises in the mean time, s the words following doth clear, Quicken one according to thy word, he layeth claim to the promise, and this is clear in the 81 vers. of that Psalm, My soul doth faint within me; There is much exercise of sorrow, and yet he is a beleever in the promise, But I hope in hy word: A Christian after he hath believed the promise, he would put a blank in Christs hand concerning the sweetnesse of the pro∣mises to be made out in its own time. What s sense? Is it the precious indulgence of Christ that he giveth to his own. I would presse this upon you, prophesie nothing be∣fore your believing of the promise; but, having believed, ye may surely prophesie that the promise shall be accomplished in its own time, and the word that he hath spoken shall certainly come to passe: but as for sense, is for quickening, as for comforting, as for receiving, ye must put a blank in the hand of Christ to dispense these things to you as he seeth fit. The third rule in the application of the promises, is, That ye do not build your faith upon this, that the promises shall be acco plished, because probability and reason  to say the thing: I would say this
Christian, that ye may oftentimes suspect  promise is not near to be accomplishe when reason saith, Behold the word of the L cometh, and that of times the Lord is nea when we begin to passe a conclusion,  Word is not at hand, and the time of the  complishment of the promise is not nea Certainly many times before Christ acco∣plish the promises, he will learn us to be ∣ing above sense and reason, and he will h reason to submit to faith, and he will ha probabilities to contradict the accompli∣ment of the promise; and when probab∣ties are furthest away, that is His time  work: this is clear in these two signal d∣verances of the people of Israel from Eg and Babylon, Exod. 3.4, 5. and Ezech. 37▪ the beginning. And therefore as a Chris would not quite his grip of the promises,  cause dispensations seem to contradict  accomplishment of the promise, and so time cryeth out, Why art thou become unto as a liar, and waters that fail? So on  other hand, ye are to build your faith up the promises, and not upon dispensation even when favourable; seeing that we kno the way that Christ taketh many times accomplish the promises, is by contra means to our apprehension; His paths  in the whilewind, and his footsteps are  known. And may we not cry out, Who  take up the wayes of God, whose ways more subtil than the way of an eagle in the  the way of a serpent upon the rock, or the  of a ship upon the sea, &c.
The fourth rule that we would prescribe into you in the application of the promises, , That ye would close absolutely with the promises, I mean, without limiting the only ne. There is a limitted closing with the promise, which is the frequent exercise of ur hearts; we will close with the promise, ur with this restraint laid upon Christ, hat whensoever we begin to believe the promises, all things might go as we desire: nd this is the great occasion that we do so equently reject our confidence, and do re∣se our hope when God doth not answer ur peremptory expectations. Fifthly, We give you this rule, that ye ould eye Christ much in the application of e promises. There is a threefold sight of hrist that a Christian should have when he pplyeth the promises, a Christian should ave a sight of the boundlesse and conde∣ending love of Christ, that so he may be onstrained to hope, and may be constrained  love. 2. A Christian should eye the ithfulnesse and unchangeablenesse of Christ, hat what his blessed lips have spoken, he ill also do, and what he hath said, he will ikewise bring to passe. And, 3. in the ap∣lication of promises, he must eye the om∣ipotency of Christ, that what he hath said, e is able to bring to passe. And O when hall we have occasion to sing that song, What hath God wrought for us, which was the ong that Balaam sung who yet was but  rofane wretch.
6. There is this rule that we would pre∣scribe unto you in the application of the promises, that a Christian after he hath ap∣plyed them, he would be much in the exer∣cise of Prayer for the accomplishment of these promises; this was the practice of David, 2 Sam. 7.27. When God in passing many precious promises; David doth sub∣joyn that word, Therefore have I found in my heart to pray this prayer: And we see in Ezek. 36.37. all alongs that Chapter, God is passing most excellent promises; and yet in vers. 37. this is subjoyned, For all these things, I will be enquired of the house of Is∣rael: And in Jer. 29.10, and 12. where the time is coming, when God would accomplish his good word (as he speaketh) that is sub∣joyned in vers. 12. Then shall ye call upon me, and seek after me: And Daniel 9.2, 3. when Daniel knew that the promise was near the time of its accomplishment, then he set himself by prayer and supplication to seek the face of God. I would say these three words unto a Christian; The smallest mercy that a Christian meeteth with, if he can call it Samuel, that is, The son of prayer, and if ye can call it Isaac, that is, The childe of pro∣mise, he may then, and doth ordinarily re∣ceive much consolation in that mercy. O but a mercy flowing to a Christian through a promise, if it were but a drink of cold water, and a piece of brown bread, it will be more excellent chear, then all the dain∣es of the Kings of the earth. O but to
eat and drink, taking these things as the ac∣complishment of the promises, this would make us eat our bread with singlnesse of heart, and much chearfulnesse. And there is this, secondly, I would say unto you, When a promise is accomplished, and a Christian is not much in the exercise of Prayer in the accomplishment of it, one to a hundred if he lose not the sanctified use of the accom∣plishment of that promise. Ah, know ye not that a promise when it is accomplished, may be a curse to a Christian. That word is most terrible, Mal. 2.2. I will curse your blessings. And the last word that I would say to this, is, That a Christian who believeth the promises, notwithstanding that dispen∣sations seem to contradict it, that promise shall be made most refreshful unto his spirit, when it is accomplished. O but a Chri∣stian that never had much jealousie, nor much staggering about the accomplishment of the promise, when it cometh, it will be most refreshful unto him: And believe it, there is not one hours entertainment of jea∣lousie about the accomplishment of the promise, but it will impare the sweetnesse of the promise when it is accomplished, ex∣cept so far, that the transcendant and free love of Christ is seen in the accomplishment of them, notwithstanding of our misbe∣lief. The last rule that I shall offer a Christian in his application of the promises, when ye meet with objections that ye cannot answer,
but they do silence you; I will tell you wha ye should do with them, misken these ob∣structions and lay them by. This was th practice of believing Abraham, Rom. 4.9. He considered not his own body being weak, an the deadnesse of Sarahs womb. The weal∣nesse of his own body, and the deadnesse o Sarahs womb were so strong objections  the way of the accomplishment of the pr∣mises, that he could not answer them; an the way he taketh to refute them was, H did not consider them; as it were, he forg those objections, and went about his duty. The third thing that we shall speak to,  relation to the application of the promis shall be somwhat for helping a Christian th is standing at too great a distance, to get th promises applied. First, A Christian would be much in t study of these experiences of the faithfulne of God, and what others have met with When ye begin to apply a promise, ye ma be helped in the Faith of applying promise by beholding these great records of the faith∣fulnesse of God that are extant. This w the way the Angel took with Mary, Luk.  36. where helping her to believe that pr∣mise, that of her should be born the Messia this is the way that he strengthened he Thy cosin Elizabeth is now with childe,  hath gone six moneths, even she that was call barren. And I shall onely name these  places in Scripture which may help you ∣ceedingly, and strengthen you to believe
promises upon this account. There is that word in Exod. 12.41. and 51. It is a most re∣markable saying, At the end of the four hundred and thirty years, on that same very day, (there was not one day misled after the time that was set was accomplished) In that same very day they came out, and this is marked in ver. 51. again: And there is that word 1 King. 8.56. where Solomon, when he is singing most sweetly to God, he taketh an obser∣vation of this, Loe (saith he) there hath not failed one word that God hath spoken to you by his servant Moses. Secondly, Ye would be much in the con∣sideration of your own experiences, that you have in the accomplishment of promises formerly. This was Davids way that he took to strengthen himself to believe the promise, He that hath delivered me from the rage of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me from this uncircumcised Phi∣listine, 1 Sam. 17.35. and 37 46. And this was the practice of the Apostle Paul, 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. God hath delivered me from that cruel lion: And from thence he subjoyneth, And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work: And this was his practice, 2 Cor. 1.10. where these three are sweetly knit to∣gether, God hath delivered me, he doth deli∣ver me, and he shall deliver me. There is not one experience of this kind, but it preacheth that unto you: O believe the promise, and do not call in question his faith∣fulnesse.
Thirdly, There is that help; that  study much the excellency of the promise that is the most noble and excellent way  move you to apply the promises, accordin to that word, Psal. 119.111. I have ma thy testimonies my heritage for ever, and th ground of it is that, Because they are the r∣joycing of my heart. The sweetnesse of th promises would engage our heart to app them. And there is that fourth help, A Christ an would study the omnipotency of God that so he may be helped to believe a apply the promise: This is clear in Zee 12.1. where God going to passe many ex∣cellent promises, he ushers in that discour with high and majestick descriptions of h power, in that he streatcheth forth the heaven and layeth the foundation of the earth, a formeth the spirit of man within him. An this was the practice of Abraham, Rom. 4.2 the way how he came to believe the promise He counted him able that had made it, that  might perform it. Fifthly, For your help in applying  the promises, Study much the unchange ablnesse of Christ, and his faithfulnesse, kno that he is the same, yesterday, and to day and for ever. This was the way that Sar came to the faith of the promises, Heb.  11. She believed, and the ground of it  that she judged him faithfull that had ∣nised. There is not one act of misbe that a Christian falleth into, but it sai
that God is not faithfull, and that he is not true. Now the last duty that we would presse from this point, that Christ is the fountain of the promises, is, that we may have an high esteem of the Promiser; even of Jesus Christ, in whom they are yea, and Amen. And I shall close all at this time with this, are there not many here, that have no re∣spect unto him who is that faithful witnesse, and the Amen; who hath promised us him∣self, and all things: and if ye will not take with the challenge, let your hearts but an∣swer these two or three things. 1. Hath not the losse of things in the world affected your heart more, then ever absence from Christ did? Hath it not? And can such a soul say, I have an high account of the Pro∣miser? Is it possible, that these that will mourn more under the absence of their Idols than for the want of him, that they can have n high account of Jesus Christ? I am per∣swaded of this, there are some Merchants, that the losse of their goods at the Sea, hath diverted them from their nights rest, and yet absence from Christ never did divert them from their sleep one hour. O when did love to find out Jesus Christ, and to enjoy his fellowship, make you rise up in the filent watches of the night, and to pursue after Him. 2. Have not your souls delighted more on the enjoyment of the things of a world, than ever they did in the enjoyment of Christ? Is not this true, that the increase of wine and oyl, and of silver and gold, hath
affected your hearts more with joy than  Christ did? And have you a high es of the Promiser? 3. Are you taking  light to entertain fellowship and comm on with the Promiser; Is this true? W went you to your prayers, but ye wear∣ere ye went away? And have ye a h account of the Promiser? Is not that  language of your hearts; O when shall  Sabbath be over? and when shall the new  be gone that I may pursue after my Idols? would pose you with this, if there were eye to take notice of you, would you  flight secret prayer, would you not sli Family Prayer? We love not to serve ∣sus Christ. I know there are atheists he that would love to go to heaven with Faith, Love, Prayer and Repentance, th would love to go to heaven by a way t never one went before them. And now shall say but this one word to you that  the heirs of the promise, and have the ble expectation of heaven, what ever the wo do, esteem ye highly of him: O remem and comfort your selves in the thoughts  the blessed day which Christ (after he ha past the sentence of condemnation upon  wicked) shall go in upon the head of  Troups of the first born, he shall walk before us through the Ports of the New  rusalem, having Crowns of Immortal G upon his head, and then shall follow  Him His Angels, and then shall follow  Him the blessed company of the first  every one having the Harps of God in
and, and they shall be singing as they enter  through the Ports of the City, Hallelujah unto him that was devd, and is alive, and now liveth for evermore. O to believe that day when first we shall all enter in through the streets of the New Jerusalem, when we shall be cloathed in white robes, having Crowns upon our head! O such a day, if it were believed, might it make us often shake our glasse, and streach out our necks, (as the word is, Rom. 8.19.) till once we saw that blessed day were approaching to us! There is no wearying in heaven, the promises are now accomplished unto them, and they are inhe∣riting the promises; When shall that word be accomplished, or when shall we have oc∣casion to say it? Mark 1.37. Behold all men seek after thee; the word that these Disciples spake to Christ: O study to love him, study to believe on him, for be perswaded he is up∣on his way. And I shall say no more but this, that as all the promises that are within the bounds of this everlasting Covenant, they are yea, and Amen, in an imbraced Christ, and laid hold on by faith; so I say, all the curses that are in Deut. 26.27, 28. and all the curses that are within the volumn of the Book of this Covenant, they shall be yea and Amen in a despised Christ, and not laid hold upon by faith.
SERMON III. 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given un us exceeding great and precious pr∣mises, that by these you might  partakers of the divine nature having escaped the corruption th is in the world through lust. SOmetimes the soul of a Christian dot move in the paths of God, and in th wayes towards Zion as the chariots  Aminadab, when they are under the sou enliving and quickening influences of heaven and sometimes the soul of a Christian dot move in those blessed paths as Pharaohs ch∣riots, they drive most heavily, when there  a cloud between the precious face of Chri and them: and we conceive that sound an spiritual exercise of Faith upon the Pro∣mises, would make a Christians motio more swift towards heaven. We grant Chri hath three different wayes of guiding so and daughters to Glory: there are some th Christ carrieth to heaven in a chariot pa with love, that all alongs their life they  living within sight of that promised  and are taken up with the refreshing  tastes of the heavenly joyes; such a one  Henoch, who spent his dayes in walking  God: there are some that Christ guid
heaven in a chariot that is drawn with speck∣ed horses; they have mixed dispensations of forrow and joy attending them in their walk, they have a winter and a summer, they have a night and a day, and such a one was Job. 3. There are some that Christ carry∣eth to Heaven in a fiery chariot, that all alongs their life they are under distracting terrours of the most High, and are living perpetually to their own apprehensions upon the borders of hell, and such a one was Heman, whom Christ thus did guide to heaven: however, if we shall go there, we need not much dispute the way how we came, for he doth all things well. And upon the other part, Satan hath three different wayes of guiding souls unto everlasting tor∣ment; there are some that Satan carryeth to hell in a chariot of delusions, making them believe that they are still going to heaven; and such are the hypocrites in Sion: and I shall say; I think that chariot was never so filled as it is in those dayes. O fear that anxious disappointment that many of you (it is like) will meet with? An hypocrite he hath strong hopes, he hath strong idols, and he hath strong delusions, these are his three attendants. And there are some that Satan carryeth to hell in a chariot of profa∣nity and ignorance of God, whose judgement goeth before hand, and they are known that they are going there. And there are some that Satan carryeth to hell in a chariot of civility, whose Religion stands in thi, ∣cerning the letter of the Law to be blamele
And certainly, believing of the promis and studying to exercise faith upon them, that which might prevent many of th damnable soul destroying and murder delusions that are within some of our brea There are three things in Scripture that a called precious: Christ he is called precion 1 Pet. 2.7. Faith is called precious, 2 P 1.1 To you that are partakers of the li∣precious faith with us, and the Promises th are called precious, in the words that  have read, and Faith, (as it were) ha two blessed eyes, by one of these it beho∣eth Christ, and by another of these it  holdeth the promises, and fixeth it self upon them. O Christians and expectants of he∣ven, would ye know what is the rise of  the sad things that have befallen you in the dayes? It is this in short, ye believe not th promises. O Christians, what is the reas that ye carry not your crosses with patien it is, because ye believe not the promises  which your soul must be upholden in th day of your affliction. O Christian, wh is the rise of your little mortification?  it not because ye believe not the promise for by them ye should be made partakers  the divine nature. O Christian, what is th ground that ye pray so little, and that y pray with so little successe? It is, beca ye believe not the promises. A Chris when he goeth to pray, he should take th two things along; 1. The sensible ∣victions of his necessities: And, 2,  precious promises that is given to
hat necessity, the one would provoke fer∣ency, and the other Faith. Are there not some here that knoweth not what it is to ray upon a promise, and that maketh you ray to so little purpose. O Christian, what  the reason of your so much sorrow, and f your little spiritual comfort? It is, that ve believe not the promises: It is no won∣er that your names be called Marah, be∣ause ye exercise not faith upon the pre∣ious promises of God. I think without wronging you or any that are here; I doubt much if ever Christians had such hearts as the most part of us have; O what a heart is that, that can neither pray nor praise? both we alike mysteries unto them: What a heart is that, O Christian, that can neither believe promises, believe threatnings, nor obey commands? What a heart is that, that can either sorrow for sin, nor rejoyce in God? and what a heart is that, that can neither love Christ when he is present, nor can they long for Christ when he is absent? and what a heart is that, O Christian, that can neither love heaven, nor can fear hell? and is there not such hearts with us, even with us that are here this day? At the last occasion that we spake upon these words, we spake a little to the first thing in them, which was the rise and origi∣nall of the promises, holden forth in that word, Whereby, or by whom. The second thing in the words, was the properties of the promises; and we told you that there were these four holden forth in the words.
The first property of the promises is, t they are free, which is imported in  word, are given; all the promises of  everlasting Covenant being the precious  free gifts of God. Hence you will see t oft times the tenor of the Covenant of Gra∣runs upon that strain, I will give you, as clear, Jer. 32.39. I will give you one hea and Ezek. 36.26. I will give you a new hea and Ezek. 11.19. I will give you; It is t strain of the language of the Covenant  Grace, to give. Now in speaking upon this first proper of the promises, to wit, their freedom, shall speak a little unto these two, the fir thing shall be to point out unto you the w how a Christian may win to the distinct u taking of the freedom of the promises, a then I shall from thence presse some duties. And in short, as to the first, we concei that a Christian may win unto the distin uptaking of the freedom of the promises, by these Considerations. 1. Let a Christ cast his eye upon the sweet rise, and spring or fountain of the promises, and there y will see their freedom shining most clea for what is the fountain of the promises. Is it not the boundlesse and everlasting lov of Christ: this is clear, Deut. 7.7. whe God giving a reason of all the great thi that he had performed for them, he sett down the rise of it, Because I loved you, sa he: and again the ground of this is,  I have loved you, there being no reaso love, but love: and it is clear, 2 Sam.
where David having received many precious promises, he setteth down the rise of all these in that verse, For the words sake, saith he, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all these things to make them known to thy servant. And it is clear, Ezek. 17.8. where God calleth the time of entering into Covenant with them, a time of love; that love it was eminently shyning in that day when God did condescend to Covenant with them: And hence ye see in Scripture, that the promises they are called by the name of mercy, Micah 7.20. To perform the mercy to Abraham, which is the Promises, and they are so called, because mercy and boundlesse love is the sole fountain and spring of all these promises. Secondly, Consider the per∣sons who have right to make use of the pro∣mises? Must not the promises be free when the proclamation is upon these tearms, Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him come, there is nothing to give you a right to the promises, but only a willingnesse to embrace them, if ye will, ye may take them. And, thirdly, ye may read the freedom of the promises in this, that any condition which is annexed to the promise: Christ giveth to the Believer strength to perform that condition: It is known that Faith is the condition of the promises, and it is certain Christ giveth  Believer that condition as well as he give th him the promise, Philip. 1.29. To you it is given to believe, and Eph. 2.8. It is the gift of God: It is impossible for a Christian  perform the condition, except Christ who
is surety for him did perform it. Fourthl Ye may read the freedom of the promises, ye consider the time when the promises a accomplished, it is often at such a time, wh the Christian hath been, and is under no ∣ry spiritual frame. Hence ye will see  Ezek. 16.60.61. that when the promis are accomplished, then God requireth conf∣sion and blushing of face, because of their fo∣mer wayes: and Ezek. 36.31. when the pro∣mises are accomplished, then that is the tim when the Lord calleth them to rememb their own evil wayes, and their doings that wer not good; yea he will have them and all the world to know, it is not for their sakes th he doth this; therefore he commandeth them to be ashamed and confounded for their own wayes, or the posture they were in when he accomplished his promise: And if there were no other thing to speak the freedome of the promises, but the trysting of the accomplish∣ment of them with such a frame, it were more then sufficient: But besides this, see Davids practice, 2 Sam. 7.8. he readeth the freedom of the promises from his own imperfections, What am I (saith he) and what is my fathers house, that thou shouldest have brought me hitherto? And even in the same Text, there is an Emphasis in that word, to us, Whereby are given to us, as if the Apostle did say, to prove that the promis are gifts: I can bring no other argument so strong as this, They are given to us. Fifthly. Ye may read the freedom of the Promises,  ye will consider and take up the infinit ful∣nesse
and all-sufficiency of the Promiser, that there is nothing without himself that can perswade him to give such promises. Hence ye will see, Gen. 17.1. when he is making the Covenant with Abraham, he putteth it still in the Frontispiece of the Covenant, I am God all-sufficient, as it were, to put off all thoughts of merit that Abraham might have, and that Abraham might be perswaded of this, that there was not any imaginable per∣fection in himself, that could be the ground & rise of such promises. And there is that, lastly, from which ye may read the freedom of the promises, if ye consider the greatness of these promises: if they were of a lower nature, then were it lesse to be wondered, if merit should come in to plead for it self: But when a Christian shall compare himself, and the greatnesse of the promises together, he cannot but then sing that blessed song, These are the gifts and donations of God, and what am I, and what is my fathers house that thou hast brought me hitherto, Now the second thing that we purposed to speak to, is, to presse some duties upon you from this, that the promises are free, and we shall lay before you these three. The first, That since the promises of God are free, then as you would not destroy your own souls, be much in making use and ap∣plication of the Promises: Are not the pro∣mises your life? Did not all the Saints that went to heaven before us go to heaven, living upon the promises? There was not a step of Abrahams life, but he walked with
a promise in it; there was not an afflicti that Abraham met with, but he took co fort to himself from the promises; and shall remove these two mistakes that are ∣cident to Christians in the application of t promises, even from this ground, that the are free. The first is this, There are some Christ∣ans that will not apply the promises, because they are under the convictions of their ow infirmities, and of their own basenesse:  that when we presse you to believe the pro∣mises, ye reject this counsell, because ye consult with your own infirmities. This was the practice of David, Psal. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted and were delivered: but he durst not trust i the 6. verse, But I am a worm, and not a man, I am a reproach among the people. And it is that same divinity that is in these dayes, when we presse you to believe the promises, because of the great cloud of witnesses that have gone before you, that believed the pro∣mises. O say ye, if I were like David, and Abraham, I would believe the promises; but truely David said that same, that lived be∣fore you, if I were like my fathers, I would believe the promises, but I am not like my fathers. And therefore I would say to you these two words. 1. Are ye inferiour  short unto David in holinesse, or necessi∣ties? We do not question but all of you will answer, we are not inferiour to David in necessities, but in holinesse; Then sa we, if ye be not inferiour to David in nece∣sity,
then make use of the promises: for as we cleared the last day, necessity giveth a right in making use of the promises. 2, I would say, I am certainly perswaded, that sensible necessity would cut short many of our formal debates, in closing with the promises, necessities (as ye use to speak) hath no Law, and necessity hath no manners. Let me say that to you who will not close with the pro∣mises, that if ye were under sensible necessi∣ty, if Christ should forbid you to close with such a promise, ye would close with it though he forbid you, as the woman of Canaan did, there is nothing but sensible necessity will overcome it: necessity never disputes its right, for it goeth over the belly of such a dispute, it presently maketh use of that that its need calleth for. Secondly, There is that other mistake a∣mongst Christians in believing the promises, that they want the qualifications annexed to the promises, and therefore they dare not be∣lieve the Promise, especially that promise of dosing with Christ, they think they are not under such a deep measure of humiliation, of sorrow for sin, nor under such lively ap∣prehensions of the excellency of Christ. And I shall say but these six things unto these that will not close with Christ, because they want qualifications, or at least, have not these qualifications after such a way. First, Let me tell thee (O Christian that thus dis∣putes,) go between the fist steps of a Chri∣stians way to heaven and the last, and see if ye can behold a grave upon which this is,
written, Behold here lieth a man or a w∣man that came to Christ to imbrace him, an he would not receive them; Did ye eve behold such a grave as this? And why the do ye so much dispute? Will ye take a tria of Christ whether he will refuse you if y come, and if he shall refuse you, sure I am he will do that which he never did to any be∣fore you. The second thing I would say to such, that the want of such degrees of such things, ought not to be a ground of your no closing with Christ; for if ye had these qua∣lifications that ye require, ye would main∣tain that same dispute that ye do now; fo when we desire you to close with Christ, y answer, that your sorrow is not come to such a height as it ought, nor is you humi∣liation come to such a height, as ye pitch for your self to come to. O Christian, if ye come to ten times more, and yet ten times more, ye would have that same dispute the which ye have now: and the ground of it is this, the more that a Christian have real sorrow, he will oftentimes be the more i the apprehension that he hath not sorrow▪ Thirdly, If ye want the qualifications that are required in these that should close with Christ in the Covenant of promise, then come to Christ to get these qualifications. I would only ask at you, think ye to spin sorrow for sin out of your own hearts; Think ye to spin humiliation for sin out of these wretch∣ed breasts of yours, ye must come to Christ or sorrow, as well as ye come to Christ fo e. Fourthly, All the qualifications that
are annexed unto that promise of closing with Christ, and coming to him, they point out rather the qualification of them that will come, then the qualification of these that ought to come: Ye read such a com∣mand as that, Come unto me all ye that are wearied and heavy loaden. O say ye, I am not weary, and I am not under the burden of sin, therefore I cannot come. I will tell you what is the meaning of that com∣mand; Christ inviteth these who have the greatest unwillingnesse, to come and get willingnesse: But withall, it sheweth this, none will come to get rest from Christ, but these that are first weary; and that this is the Lords methode of working, first, to make weary, and then to ease; but no such matter in his Word, That first, we must have a wearinesse of our own making, or else he will not receive us: now but when ye come, ye will be weary, and he will receive you. Fifthly, Let me say to you who thus disputes, make your want of qualifications the very ground of your clo∣sing with Christ. I shall but in three places let you see this strange arguing of Faith in closing with the promises: There is that, Psal. 40.11, 12. Let thy truth continually pre∣serve me, that is, let thy promises be accom∣plished and made lively unto me, which are y preservation: and would ye know the ground and reason that he annexeth unto his; For saith he, Innumerable evils encom∣assed me about they have taken such hold of e, that I am not able to look up. He maketh
his very want of qualifications, the ground of his closing with the promise, and seeking the accomplishment of it. And there is th second expression which is most wonderful Psal. 25.11. David prayeth for the acco∣plishment of that promise, Pardon my si upon that same very account, Because it  great. And I shall give you a third place i which the arguing of Faith is most myster∣ous, Exod. 33. compared with Exod. 34.9. In the first place, God demeth the accom∣plishment of that promise, of going  amongst that people: And the ground  giveth of it, is, Because, saith he, ye are  stiff necked people. And chap. 34 verse o when Moses is praying for the accomplish∣ment of that promise, That God would  amongst them; he taketh that same very a∣gument out of the mouth of God; Go  amongst us; For, saith he, we are a sti necked people: God said he would not go up because they were a stiff necked people, a Moses desireth him to go up because of th And there is this, lastly, that we would sa to you, that so much dispute; If ye would have these qualifications that ye want, y would study to close with Christ by Faith Would ye have sorrow for sin? then believ Would ye have high thoughts of Christ? th believe: Would ye have humiliation? th believe; for believing is a mother grace un all these. The second duty that we would presse  on you from this consideration that the pr∣mises are free, is, That when the promis
are given to you, and are accomplished, ye would study to be denied to any merit in your selves, which ye may suppose to be the rise of the giving or accomplishment of the promises. There is nothing that a Christian receiveth, but it is a fruit of infinit love, there is not a conviction that trysteth a Christian, but it is the fruit of infinite love; there is not one real sigh for sin, but it is the fruit of infinit love; there is not one blink of the precious countenance of Christ, but it is a fruit of infinit love; there is not the least degree of hatred against sin, but it is the fruit of infinit love; there is not the least pro∣mise that is accomplished unto you, but it is the fruit of infinit love: so that upon all our recepts from God, there is reason to sing that song, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thee doth belong the glory: And therefore, I would presse this upon you, O Christians, reduce all your mercies unto the fountain, and there sit down and pen songs of everlast∣ing praise to him. Will ye but take a view of this, there is not one bite of bread that ye eat, that is within a promise, but it is a mercy that hath come running to you through the bowels and tender heart of Christ: his heart is the fountain of all our mercies, and they sweetly stream out of that precious foun∣tain; so that if ye had no other thing to com∣mend your mercy from, but that it is a gift of the heart of Christ, ye may take it in your arms upon this account, and solace your selves with it. The last duty that we would presse upon
you from this consideration, that the pro∣mises are free, is this; Ye would be study∣ing to close with Jesus Christ that is promis∣ed and freely holden out to you in the Gos∣pel: O sinner of eighty years old, O sinner of sixty years old, O atheists of fourty year old, and O sinner of twenty years old and downward! I do here invite you, as the Ambassadour of Jesus Christ, to imbrace Christ freely offered in the promise; yea, I do invite you by all the vertues of that noble Plant of renown; by that everlasting love that dwelt in his precious heart, by all the sufferings and wounds that he received, by his eternal glory, and by all the blessings and joyes of heaven, and by that love that ye owe unto your precious and immortal souls, that ye would come and imbrace him freely offered to you in the Gospel. And for the further pressing of this, and for clearing of the way of your closing with him, I shall first propose some Gospel mysteries, and sweetly agreeing contradictions, (if so we may speak) held forth in Scripture. 1. Come and buy Christ, and yet buy him without mo∣ney; that is, come and receive Christ, and ye shall have as unquestionable a right to him as if ye had bought him, that is to but without money; ye have nothing to com∣mend you to Christ but necessities, and ne∣cessities biddeth you go, and Christ bidde you come, why then will ye sit this call 2. What a Gospel-mysterie is that, Ye a to buy Christ, and Christ is above price, the is nothing that we can give to buy that pe
of greatest price, and yet we must buy him; then the meaning is, come, and buy Christ by faith, and by forsaking of your idols, this is all the price that he doth require for him∣self; and so he requireth nothing of you but what he himself doth give, or what is both your duty and advantage to forsake and which is no gain for him to receive: Christ is not enriched by your hearts, and by giving of your consent to him. 3. This is a Gos∣pel mysterie, that we are to buy without mo∣ney and without price, and yet to buy with a price, according to that word, Prov. 17.17. there is a price put in the hand of fools, to buy wisedome, and what is the meaning of that, to buy with price, and buy without price? It is in short this, though Christ be offered to you in the Gospel freely, ye must not sit down, but be active in closing with him; What is the price that Christ requir∣eth of you? even this, that ye would for∣sake your soul destroving idols, and that ye would forsake your former evil wayes, and take hold of the present opportunity for imbracing him. And O! cursed shall the heart be that will not imbrace Christ; O but to have him one hour in our arms, it were well worth ten thousand Eternities of the enjoyment of all things that are here be∣low; ye would never open your arms again to another lover, if once ye had him between your breasts. O but a sight of him that now is the eternal ravishment of all that are above, would transport your hearts with joy, with delight, and admiration;
above all expression. Fourthly, There  this Gospel mystery by which we would presse you to imbrace Christ; A Christia must buy Christ, and yet he must have him freely Is there not an inconsistence, do you sup∣pose, between buying and having freely▪ But I would say this to clear it, Christ is bot the seller, he is the wares, and he is th buyer; Christ he presenteth himself unto your hearts, and he desireth to sell himsel and he perswadeth and freely enableth yo to buy him: I will tell you what Christ doth, He standeth without our hearts, and within our hearts, he standeth without and knocketh by the Word, and he standeth with∣in and openeth by his Spirit; Christ he both commandeth, and he obeyeth, both within doors, and without doors, and all this h doth freely. The second thing I shall say to perswade your hearts to take Christ freely promised and offered unto you, shall be this; Will you consider that there is willingnesse in the heart of Christ to take you. I shall give unto you these six things that speaketh out Chris his willingnesse to receive you. First, Doth he not command you to come and receive him? and if ye could multiply objection throughout eternity, why ye should no close with Christ, ye may cut them all asu∣der with this knife, This is his Command∣ment: And doth he not command you, M 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labour: A Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, co to the water. Secondly, He doth regr
and deeply resent it that ye will not come. I think Christ never weeped so bitterly, as that day when he weeped over Jerusalem, that they would not imbrace him, Luk. 19.41. If thou, even thou, at least, in this thy day, had known these things that belong unto thy peace: And Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye may have life. O what think ye can be the rise of this, that Christ should sorrow because ye will not give up your hearts to him; doth he increase his gain when ye give him your hearts? No cer∣tainly, but he cannot endure that madnesse in you, that ye should forsake your onely gain. Thirdly, Would you do Christ a joy∣full turn, and make his heart glad? Imbrace him: This is clear, Luk. 15.5. that when he findeth the sheep that is going astray, He returneth rejoycing. Fourthly, I say no more unto you, would you make all the Persons of the blessed Trinity to rejoyce, would ye make all the Angels of heaven to sing, would ye make all the Saints that are round about the Throne to exult for joy; then give your hearts up to Christ, and close with him in the Covenant of promise; ac∣cording to that word, Song 6. last vers. Re∣turn, return O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon thee. Four times that com∣mand is repeated, return, and the great ar∣gument with which he backeth it, is, That all the Persons of the Trinity may rejoyce, That we may look upon thee. Fourthly, Con∣sider but how he hath condescended to give himself at a very low rate: What will ye
give for Christ? O sinners, what will ye gi for him? Would ye give the world  Christ? I will tell you what ye will  Christ for, ye will get him for a very loo Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, O all ye ends the earth: And think ye not that is a matc∣lesse mercy, that the thirty three years ∣ferings of Christ, all the pains and cortu of his heart, his being under the unsuppo able wrath of an offended God, the fruit  all that should be yours for a look. Will  deny that to Christ, Oh, do ye ever thi to find a more down coming market? Ye fifthly, doth not this speak an admirable w lingnesse to have you, he is to give you thi look. It is impossible for these cursed ey of ours, ever to give precious Christ a loo and therefore he hath promised to give th to us, that we may give to him, Zech. 1.10. They shall look to me, that very look y are to get from Christ, and ye see it is with the compasse of a promise. Lastly, That spe keth Christs willingnesse to receive and  you, that he doth not take the first refus O Christians that are now in Christ, if Ch had taken an hundred refusals from you,  should never have been in heaven, but  waiteth for an answer, and doth not take at our first word: according to that wo Song. 5.2. I am wet, saith he, with the d of the morning, and my locks with  the night: He was long knock  heart, and stayed a long time there pac  suffering all the injuries he could meer  And I would only pose you, think ye
if one of the richest of you were suiting a very poor woman, and she refused you so many times, would your proud hearts sub∣mit to take her? And yet how oftentimes hath the precious heart of Christ submitted to many effronts, and refusals that we have given him. I think if it were possible, Chri∣stians would wink when first they behold Christ upon the day of their espousals: For I suppose their will be a great dispute between shame and love, desire and confusion; shame will make you to close your eyes, because ye have oftentimes undervalued that Prince, and yet love dow not let you close them; desire will put you to look, though reflecting upon your former wayes, will make you blush and be ashamed. Thirdly, To perswade you to receive Christ in the offer of his free promises, I shall but say these three words and close. 1. Look to these excellent gifts that Christ bringeth with him, he bringeth Justification with him, and is not that an excellent gift? He bringeth Sanctification with him, and is not that an excellent gift? He bringeth joy of the holy Ghost with him, and is not that n excellent gift? He bringeth the ove of God with him, and is not that an excellent gift? He bringeth patience under sufferings with him, and is not that an excellent gift? But why should I name what he bringeth? He bringeth himself and all things, and what ould ye have more? O but for one saving k of his face, it would make your hearts y down your enimity that you have main∣tained
so long. 2. O Christian, that ye  close with Christ, do but remember the ha pinesse that ye will have in imbracing him I told you not long since, and now I put yo in mind again: There is a sixfold crown which shall be put upon your head; Would yo have long life, then come to Christ, and y shall have a crown of eternal life: Would  have glory? then come to Christ and ye sha have a crown of glory: Would ye have know∣ledge of the mysteries of God? then com to Christ, and he shall crown you with know∣ledge. Would you have an eternal felici and n-interrupted happinesse, then com to Christ, and ye shall have an immor crown: Would you have holinesse and sa∣ctification, then come to Christ, and ye shall have a crown of righteousnesse; yea, he shall put a royal crown upon your head, a crown of pure Gold; and then that word shall be accomplished to the full, Zech. 9.16. The shall they be as the stones of a crown lifted  and as an ensign upon the land. O what a d think ye will it be, when Christ shall ho your crowns upon his hand, and shall p them upon those heads never to be remov again, here we are often put to sigh o that lamentation, The crown is fallen from  heads, wo unto us for we have sinned,  there shall be no more sin to make our cro to totter. 2. I must tell you, Th fourfold sure of apparel that ye  cloathed with ere long: ye are now c∣ed with heavinesse, but then ye shal be ∣ed with the garments of praise; And
er know such a robe as that? Is it not a ore excellent robe then the robes of Kings nd Emperours in the earth, to be cloathed with praises? Many of them are and shall be for ever cloathed with infamy and shame. 2. Ye shall be cloathed with change of ray∣ment, and shall be brought unto the King in ayment of needle work. O poor Lasse and poor Lade that sitteth upon the dung hill, that knows not what it is to have change of apparel, ye shall have it in that day, when Christ shall solemnize the Marriage with you, ye shall misken your self. O Christian, if ye knew your self never so well, ye will be forced to cry out, O! is this I? Is this I that am now made perfect through his comeli∣nesse. 3. Ye shall be cloathed with the gar∣ments of immortal glory, ye that have your foundation in the dust, and dwell in the houses of clay, ye shall then be cloathed with these excellent robes of immortality, and cloathed upon with your house from heaven. And lastly, ye shall be cloathed with the garment of the spotlesse righteousnesse of Christ. O such a majestick walk as ye will have, when ye shall have a scepter in one hand, and a palm in the other, these robes put upon your back, and these crowns upon your heads, and then shall be walking through these streets that are paved with Gold. 3. I shall give you this word to think upon, That there are five things that shall be your exercise in hea∣ven. 1. Ye shall be constantly taken up in wondering: If it be not presumption for us to think a little; What is the exercise of
Christ and the Saints that are above, we ∣ceive it is this, Christ is wondering at  beauty, and they are wondering at his ∣ty, Christ is looking upon them, and  upon him; and is it not true, that if  be now ravished with one of our eyes,  4. ver. 9. much more shall he be rav when both our eyes shall be given to  and shall eternally behold him, withou∣ing a whoring after other lovers. 2. shall be continually in the exercise of p joy and light shall be flowing in, and ad∣tion and praise shall be flowing out etern ye shall then sweetly warble upon  Harps of God, and shall cry, Hallelujah  him that sitteth upon the Throne, there  be no discord there; there is a sweet  beautiful harmony amongst all these spir all and heavenly Musicians. O but to  them, it were a heaven, though we had  that blessed lot as to sing with them. 3. shall be continually taken up in the exe of love: Faith is your predominant  while ye are here, but Love shall be y predominant grace when ye are there.  is it not a mysterie to take up these  emanations of love and of delight, tha passe between Christ and you? ye shal  folding Christ, and Christ shall be info you. 4. Ye shal be continually beholding  I think it is hardly possible for the wife  member her husband in heaven, thou loved him as her own heart, they will  taken up in beholding him that fitteth  Throne, they will think it too low an
to be taken up with looking upon another in these relations: all will will be ravished be∣holding him, and one another in him, and for him. O the blessed exercise of these that are now entred within that City, and within these Gates, whose name is . 5. Ye shall be continually taken up in beholding, ye shall be alwayes knowing, and yet never able to com∣prehend the endless mysteries and perfections of Jesus Christ. O such a study! Is it not pleasant alwayes to be studying Christ? and will not these things perswade you. And now but a word more to these that will not have this free offer: If ye will not imbrace Christ and take him, let me tell you, I would not be in the stead of that person for ten thousand worlds, if ye will not im∣brace Christ and take him for your portion the stones of the wall of this house will b witnesse against you, and they shall have  tongue to speak against you, that ye have been invited to take him, and would not  ere long that day is approaching, and dra∣ing near, when the Atheists and refusers  Christ they shall change their faith, they shall change their love, they shall change their fea and they shall change their joy, and th shall change their mind, ye shall change you faith ye that are refusers of Christ; for  know there are many that thinks they have closed with Christ, who never did close with him; that faith shall flee away, and ye sha believe the contrary: ye shall change  love, or at least, your opinion of your  ye think ye love Christ, but ye do
brace him; I will tell you what will be y exercise, and I can tell you nothing so terrib Christ shall eternally hate you, and ye sh eternally hate Christ, there shall be a mut hatred betwixt you two for evermore.  that dreadful we Zech. 11.8. it shall th be accomplished to the uttermost, My s loathed them, and their soul also abhorred . And ye shall change your fear, for now thou ye fear not God, nor reverence man, yet th the horrour of God shall make you shake a leaf, and ye shall change your light and yo judgement. Ye do now undervalue Chri and thinks him of nothing worth; when Chri is presented unto you, there is no beauty  ye should desire him: But, O think on th day when Christ shall sit down in the clou and ye shall see his beautifull face, every  of which shall be able to captivate your hea if they were then capable to be ravished w the sight: O what will be your thought  him? And if the blessings of a crucified Sa our come not upon you, then the eternal,  unsupportable vengeance of Christ shall li upon your heads that would not condesc to take him: ye shall be cursed in your  ye shall be cursed in your death, and ye  be cursed after death; What say ye to  Are ye content to take him? ye might b the day that ever ye were born, if ye co once come to close with Christ. Now him that hath the keyes of the house of  vid, that can open your hearts to give  entry, we desire to give praise.
SERMON IV. Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious pro∣mises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. THere are three most glorious and ex∣cellent gifts that God hath bestowed upon man, there is that comprehen∣sive gift of heaven, Jesus Christ, who is so called, Joh. 4.10. and sure such a gift as that, ought in some sense to blind our eyes, and make us look upon all things that are be∣low him, as nothing. The second royal Gift that the Lord hath given, is the precious promises of the everlasting Covenant, which are given to us thorow him: A Christian that is united unto him by the bloud of Faith, he may write this above the head of every promise of the everlasting Covenant, this is mine, and this is mine. His third precious gift, is the gift of Faith, which is that grace that maketh use of the former two: and we conceive, that our little making use of these three excellent gifts, is the great oc∣casion and cause why these four most sad and lamentable evils have befallen us. 1. The evill of a silent conscience, that though we be profound to commit iniquity, and
do love a reward under every green tree, yet our consciences doth not speak nor reprove us; and if at any time they do speak; yet there are some that are so possessed with a dumb and deaf spirit, they can neither hear what God doth speak, nor can they hear their conscience. 2. The evil of a silent rod, we know not the voice of our rod, and who is he that hath appointed it; God doth not now open our ears to discipline, nor seal up our in∣struction. 3. There is that evil of silent mer∣cies, the mercies that we receive of God, we understand not the language of them: are not our mercies Barbarians unto us, speaking to us in an unknown tongue? and yet we may say, there is not a rod nor a mercy a Christian meets with, but it hath a voice, if we did un∣derstand it. And lastly, there is that evil which hath befallen us, and alas, this is the capestone of all, a silent God, who doth not hearken unto the voice of our cryes, but tur∣neth about the face of his Throne, covering himself with a cloud in his anger, so that our prayers cannot passe through. Alas, may not each Christian of this time cry out, Call me no more Naomi, but call me Mara, because the Lord hath dealt bitterly with me. In short, I think there are these two things that may be our lamentation upon the high places of Is∣rael. First, That we live without sight of God; And secondly, that we live without sight of our selves, and all this, because  live without a sight of these precious Gif Christ and his Promises. But now to the words; We told you, th
in them there were these four things holden forth concerning the promises. 1. The ori∣ginal and fountain of the promises, in that word, Whereby, or by whom: 2. The pro∣perties of the promises which we told you, were these four. The first was, that the promises were free, holden forth in that word, they are Given; all the promises of the everlasting Covenant being the noble gifts of God. The second (of which we are to speak at this time) is this, that the promises of the Covenant they are unchange∣able, which is imported also in that word, they are given, the gifts of God being in∣deed without repentance; And as to this: 1. We shall prove the truth of the point: and for this end, consider that place, Numb. 23.19. which was a part of Balaams song, Hath he not spoken it, and will he not also do it? Hath he said it, and shall it not also cme to passe? and Psal. 89.34. I will not break my Covenant, nor alter the word that hath gone out of my mouth: and the point is clear also, from the name that the promises getteth in Scripture, are they not called the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.3. and are they not sometimes in Scripture called Truth, as we may see from Micah 7.20. Thirdly, The nature of the Covenant prove∣eth it, in that it is called an everlasting Co∣venant, and sometimes a Covenant of Salt, because that Covenant is above the reach of alteration or putrifaction; And fourthly, It may be likewise shown from the constant experience that the Saints have had of the
unchangeablnesse of the promises. Th Joshua taketh notice of, Chap. 23.24. when  when he was a dying, There hath not failed (saith he) one thing of all these good thing  that God hath spoken; and he is so confidence of this, that he is forced to repeat that wor over again in that verse: and he taketh no∣tice of it, Josh. 21.45. where he hath that same expression again, There hath not failed (saith he) one thing of all the good things that God hath spoken: and this Solomon he took notice of, 1 King. 8.56. There hath not failed one thing that God hath spoken unto us by Moses; and indeed, there is near six thou∣sand years experience that preacheth this truth, the promises are unchangeable, so that we may now say, The word of the Lord is tried as silver is purified in a furnace of earth hot seven times: If there had been any falshood in the precious promises of the everlasting Covenant, six thousand years triall should have brought it to light; but doth not every one of the cloud of witnesses that have gone before us, leave this testi∣mony upon record, Faithfull is be that hath promised, who will also do it, his promise is with the night and with the day, it cannot be altered, the ordinances of heaven con∣tinue to this day, much lesse can this Cove∣nant of love be broken or altered, only w would have you taking this Caution by th way, that there are some conditional pro∣mises that God passeth unto his people which in the depths of his spotlesse wisdo he doth not accomplish unto these who ∣ver
fulfill the condition; such was that pro∣mise that he gave to the Israelites in the land of Egypt of their possessing the land of Ca∣naan, who yet died in the wildernesse: And hence is that strange word, Numb. 13.34. Ye shall know my breach of promise saith the Lord, which is a word spoken after the man∣ner of men, not importing any change of pur∣pose in God, but only shewing that because they did not believe, and so fulfill the condi∣tion of the promise, therefore it was not to be fulfilled personally to them. The second thing that we shall speak to upon this, that the promises are unchange∣able, shall be to propose these six golden pillars and excellent foundations, upon which the unchangeablenesse of the promises is built. And the first of them is the omni∣potency of God, that there is nothing that he hath promised, but he is able to effectuate and to bring to passe: Therefore, 2 Cor. 6.18. when God had been passing many excel∣lent promises, he strengtheneth their faith with this, Thus saith the Lord God Almighty: and no doubt, where the word of this King is, there is power, and who can say unto him, what dost thou: O misbeliever of the pre∣cious promises of the Covenant, be ashamed to cast up your eyes to heaven above, or to the earth beneath; we think the Stars, the Sun, the Moon, and all the works of God; they may speak that to you, do not misbelieve God, but trust in him, That is wonderfull in counsell, and excellent in working. The se∣cond is, the wisdom and infinit counsel of
God, he hath not only compleat ability to accomplish the promise that he hath given, but he hath the depths and treasures of knowledge, by which he hath contrived the way of the accomplishment of such a pro∣mise: Hence is that word, 2 Sam. 23.5. that the Covenant is well ordered, which speaketh out the wisdom of God and then that word is subjoyned, the Covenant is sure, yea, the Covenant of Grace is such a thing, that there is so much of the arte of heaven, so much of infinit wisdom shining in it, that it is called the counsel of God, Heb. 6.17. That ye might know the immutability of his counsel. The third golden pillar, is, the infinit love of God, that though there be nothing in us that can put him to accomplish the promises, yet he will take an argument from his own love, to make out such a promise to us; there is sometimes (if not alwayes) nothing in us, but that which may speak forth delayes of the accomplishment of the promises; but when God can bring no argument from us, he can bring an argument from his own love, as Deut. 7.7, 8. where giving a reason of the accomplishment of many promises, and of his love to them, I loved you, saith he, because I loved you; there being no reason that can be given for love, but love. The fourth is, The unchangeablnesse of the Promiser, that he is the same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever, and without all alteration and shad∣dow of change: Hence ye may see, Exod. 3.14. when God is repeating many preciou Promises unto Moses, He (as it were
strengtheneth Moses faith with this, I am, saith he, that I am, which we conceive to point forth the unchangeablnesse of God, that what he hath said, he will certainly ac∣complish in its own time, and though the vision do tarry, yet at last it shall speak. The fifth is, The faithfulnesse of God, and that he is one that cannot lie, but certainly will make out what he hath spoken. Love, it maketh the promises, the faithfulnesse and power of God accomplisheth the promises, and the infinit wisdom of God chooseth the most fit time for the performing of them. Hence it is said, Psal. 119.89, 90. Thy word O Lord, is for ever setled in heaven, and the ground of it is in the following verse; For thy faithfulnesse is unto all generations: Hence you may see, that oftentimes when God is making promises to his own, he putteth to that word, I that speak in righteousnesse, Isa. 45.19. and Isa. 63.1. O! must not the promises be unchangeable that are made by the Father who is the God of Truth? Must not the promises be unchangeable that are received and merited by the Son, that is Truth it self, and the faithfull Witnesse, and Amen? Must not the promises be unchange∣able that are applyed by the holy Ghost, that is the Spirit of Truth? And must not the promises be unchangeable that are made known unto us by the Gospel, that is the word of Truth? Was there ever any who could leave that upon record of God, that he was unfaithfull in the accomplishment of his promises. O what a clear sight of the faith∣fulnesse
of God shall a Christian get, whe he shall be standing upon the our most line between Time and Eternity, then he will see God faithful in accomplishing all his pro∣mises unto him from first to last. The last golden pillar, is, The justice of God, His justice, it now putteth him to accomplish his promises, mercy and righteousnesse have now kissed each other: Hence is that word, 1 Joh. 1.9. He is just and faithful to forgive: So that now the accomplishment of the promises, it is not only an act of love, but it is an act of justice also: We confesse indeed, love and mercy maketh the promises, but justice and truth also putteth God to the ac∣complishment of them: Hence is that word, Micah 7.20. To perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham: Why is it mercy to Abraham, and it is truth to Jacob? It is in short this, because mercy made the pro∣mises to Abraham, but truth did accomplish the promises to Jacob. The third thing that we shall speak to from this, That the promises are unchangeable, shall be, to presse these six duties upon you from this point. O Christians and Expectants of Heaven, who have Christ in you, the hope of Glory, rejoyce and be exceeding glad that the pro∣mises are unchangeable. 1. This is a duty that is pressed from that ground, Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things we might have strong consolation: There is exceeding much joy that may come to a Christian from this that the promises shall be accomplished i
their own time. We conceive that the word unchangeable, it is engraven upon the head of many a Christians mercies. Is not un∣changeable written above the head of our promises? Is not unchangeable written upon the head of our blessednesse? Is not un∣changeable written above the head of our enjoyment of God? That day is coming when we shall have unchangeable love, un∣changeable enjoyment of God, and all things unchangeable: And we conceive, that if these two were believed, the truth of the pro∣mises, and the unchangeablenesse of the pro∣mises, a Christian might walk through this valey of tears with joy, and comfort himself in hope. The second duty we would presse, is this, that ye would surcease and give over your disputings and carnal reasonings about the accomplishment of the promises, since the promises of God are unchangeable, ought not we with this to silence misbelief, and all that blind humane reason can say: This is pressed, Heb. 6.16. An oath for confirma∣tion, it is an end of all strife. Gods con∣firming of his Covenant by an oath, it ought to cut short the disputings of misbelief; And here give me leave to point out a little these grounds upon which it is that Chri∣stians doth so much dispute the accomplish∣ment of promises: and to let you see how all these grounds may be answered from these six pillars that were given of their unchange∣ablnesse. The first is, When dispensations seemeth
to coutradict the truth of the Promises, the promise it speaketh one thing, and dispen∣sations seem to speak another: and this is the occasion that oftentimes Christians cry out, Doth his promise fail for evermore. This is clear from the practice of David, 1 Sam. 27.1. when dispensations were upon the top of the accomplishment, and truth of the promises, then misbelief it ariseth as a Cham∣pion mighty to war, and cryeth out, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul: And we conceive, that dispensations contradicting the truth of the promises, was the occasion of his speaking that word, Psal. 116.11. I said in my haste, all men are liars. And I would only say to you that dispute the truth of the promises upon this account, that dispensations contradicteth them: Do but consider this: God in his way is not like un∣to you: Would ye know the time when the promises are nearest their accomplishment, it is then when we can least see that they are to be accomplished, the promises are never nearer their performance, then when we think that they are furthest off from it: And therefore let the faith of the omnipotency of God, uphold your spirit under such a de∣bate, then let dispensations speak what they will, ye may answer all with this, There is nothing too hard for him, there is nothing too hard for the Lord. I grant this may try the strength of the strongest faith, yea, we finde it hath made the best to stagger when they had no probabilities to tell them that the promise shall be accomplished: this was the
ground of Sarahs misbelief, Gen. 18.12. that when she heard she should bear a son in her old age, she laughed within her self, and did, as it were, mock at such a promise: and this was the ground of Moses his misbelief, Numb. 11.21, 22. he did not see a probabi∣lity that such a multitude should be fed with flesh, and therefore he did call in question the truth of that promise: this was the ground of the misbelief of that Lord that is made mention, 2 King. 7.2. and this was the ground of Zecharies misbelief, Luk. 1.20. But I would only say to you that do so much consult with probability in the exercise of your faith, these two things. 1. There is nothing too hard for God, this was the very argument that God took to convince Sarah in the 14. vers. of that 18. Chapter, Is there any thing too hard for God? And, 2. Faith is never in its native and spiritual exercise, till once probabilities contradict the truth of the promise, then faith it is put upon the stage, and then faith doth act; but as long as faith and probabilities think one thing, then the day of the trial of the strength of faith is not yet come. The second ground upon which Christians dispute the accomplishment of the promises, Is their much disputing of their interest in God? Sometimes a Christian will believe a promise, and before the accomplishment of the promise come, their hope will be dark∣ned, their interest in Christ will be obscured, and then they do quite their faith in adhe∣ring to the truth of that promise. These
two are joyned together, want of the faith of our interest, and want of faith of the accom∣plishment of the promise, as it is clear from that word, Psal. 77.8. Is his mercy clean gone. There is disputing of his interest, and presently this is subjoyned, Doth his promise fail for evermore. Except a Christian ca read his name in the ancient records of hea∣ven, and can seal this conclusion, I am my beloveds, and my beloved he is mine, it will be a hard and a difficult task for him, if not impossible to believe the promises. The fourth ground of a Christians disput∣ing the truth of the promises, is, their mi∣staking the way how the promises are to be accomplished, There are some that suppose that when ever they close with a promise by faith, there is no more but to enter to the possession of such a promise; but do not mistake it, between your believing the pro∣mise and the accomplishment of it, there may be sad and dark dayes interveening, according to that word in Mark. 10.30. where Christ passing great promises to his Disciples, He, as it were doth adde, do not mistake me that ye shall have these promises without trouble and affliction, Ye shall re∣ceive (saith he) an hundred fold in this life with persecutions. A Christian when he be∣lieveth the promises, he must resolve to have a winter before the spring time come, wherein the promise shall bud and flou∣rish. The fifth ground of a Christians disputing e truth of the promises, is, when the pro∣mises
are long in their accomplishing. A Christian when first he meeteth with a pro∣mise, he will cry forth, O I believe, but when time is taken for the accomplishment of it, then his faith beginneth to faint, and his hope beginneth to languish and give over; yea, sometimes Christians they fall in this fault, when they believe a promise, they fix a day for the accomplishment of it, which if God do not keep, but go over; then they immediately cry forth, What is my strength that I should wait, and what is my confidence that I should prolong my dayes. This is clear in the practice of Abraham, where the pro∣mise of having a numerous seed being given to him, Gen. 2.12. the long time before that promise was accomplished in part to him, was the occasion of his misbelief, that he vented, Gen. 15.3. O Lord, what wilt thou give me, since I go childelesse: But ye must know, that before the vision shall speak, there is an appointed time that ye must wait, according to 1 Pet. 5.9, 10. After ye have suffered a while, then the promises shall be accomplished, and ye shall be made perfect. The sixth ground upon which Christians call in question the accomplishment of the promises, is, The consideration of the great∣nesse of the thing that is promised, when they compare it with their own worth and deserving, then they begin to dispute, O shall such a thing be, shall unworthy I, shall finful I, shall self-destroying I, shall I that am lesse then the least of his mercies, re∣ceive
the accomplishment of such a mercy? This we may suppose was one ground of Abrahams misbelief, Gen. 17.18. when he cryed forth at that same time, when the Lord was giving him the excellent promise of an Isaac, O that Ishmael might live: He thought an Isaac such an excellent mercy, that he could not without presumption, ex∣pect the accomplishment of that promise. And, Zach. 8.6. this was the ground of their misbelief which God doth sweetly obviate, If it be wonderful in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these dayes, should it also be wonderful in mine. The last ground upon which Christians dispute the accomplishment of the promises, is, When in the time between their believ∣ing and the accomplishment of the promise, they fall into some grosse iniquity, this maketh them exceedingly debate, whether the promise shall be accomplished unto them, for since they have transgressed the Cove∣nant of God, and have broken their pur∣poses and resolutions, they cannot suppose God will abide faithful to them, and once accomplish his promises unto them, and the only way how to answer this dispute, is, to look to the faithfulnesse of God, and use that word, 2 Tim. 2.13. Though we believe not, yet God doth abide faithful, he cannot deny himself. And now to shut up this second duty tha e presse from the unchangeablnesse of th omises: I shall only say these two word o you, 1. Assure your selves of this,
that these accomplishments of promises that come not through the lively exercise of Faith, doth loose much of their sweetnesse, much of their luster, and much of their ad∣vantage: Sometimes a promise will be ac∣complished unto a Christian, when he hath not been much in the constant lively exer∣cise of Faith in believing such a promise; but then the disadvantage that attendeth such a one, are not easily expressed: How often may he cry out, The Lord was in this place, and I was not aware: How little of God doth he see in it, how short is he in praises and rendering to the Lord according to the good he hath receeived? How negli∣gent in improving or keeping the mercy, and how loath to lay it out for God, when he saith, The Lord hath need of it: and ma∣ny things more of this kind which may presse us to be stedfast in believing. And, 2. O dispute lesse, and believe more, what pro∣fite shall ye have of your disputings; and if ye would produce all your strong argu∣ments why ye should not believe the pro∣mises, ye may drown them in this immense depth, God is unchangeable. Let me say but this further, There are three most re∣markable changes in a Christian, in his ma∣king use of the promises: First, Some∣times he will believe the promises and make application of them, and ere many hours go about, he will misbelieve that promise which presently he believed. Will not some∣time a Christian in the morning cry out, I am my beloveds, and my beloved he is mine
and ere twelve hours come, they will change their note and cry out, My hope and my strength is perished from the Lord: Some∣times a Christian in the morning will cry out, My mountain standeth strong, I shall never be moved, and ere many hours go about, he will change his note, and cry out, Thou hast hid thy face from me, and I was troubled. Secondly, Sometimes a promise will be to a Christian sweeter then the honey and the honey comb: Some∣times a Christian would die and live upon the promise: Sometimes the believing of a pro∣mise will be to a Christian as the valey of Achor for a door of hope, that will make him to sing, and yet ere many dayes go about, he may come to that same very promise, and it will prove tastelesse to him as the white of an gge; so that he may cry out, O that it were with me, as in months past, and in the ancient times: And O where is the sweetnesse that I found in such a promise? O it is gone, it is gone, and I am left desolate. Thirdly, Some∣times when a Christian will be believing such  promise, and resting upon it, he wil (through  Spirit of the Lord) see much light and earnesse in that promise, he will take up the deep things of God that shineth therein; and at another time he may come to that  promise, and it may be dark to him, so, that his light hath evanished: and sometimes the joy of a Christian in the promise will be one then his light that he had in it may main with him. A Christian may come to  promise, and find his ancient light, yet
not his ancient joy, nor his ancient delight. Therefore if ye would have the promises alwayes sweet unto you, pray over them, pray that God might breath upon such a pro∣mise, and make it lively to you. The third thing that we would presse upon you from the unchangeablenesse of the promises, is that which by proportion ye may gather even from this, that the threat∣nings of God are unchangeable; these two are conjoyned: yea, Joshua seemeth to infer the unchangeablenesse of the threatnings from the unchangeablenesse of the promises, Chap. 23.14. compared with verse 15. and these two are conjoyned, Zech. 8.14, 15. That as I thought to punish you, and it hath come to passe, so I have thought to build you up, and it shall come to passe. And I would from this desire you to stand in awe, lest you come under the lash of the unchangeable threat∣nings of God; for know, that as God is un∣changeable in the promises, and there is not one word in all the everlasting Covenant that shall not be accomplished; so likewise know, there is not a curse in all the Book of the Covenant, but it shall be accomplished in its time: And know this likewise, that the day is coming when that sad word that i in Hos. 7.12. shall be accomplished, I will chastise them as their Congregation hath heard. And O ye that live in this place, if all the threatnings that your Congregations hath heard, shall be accomplished in their time ye may take up the last words of Balaam song, alas, Who shall live when God shall
these things: And therefore since the th∣nings of God are nuchangeable, as also promises, life and death is set before yo and either ye shall be the object of the  changeable threatnings of God, or ye  be the object of the unchangeable promi of God: And therefore I would from th charge you, that as you would not be he full to the destruction of your own immor souls, you would not undervalue the threa∣nings that ye hear in your Congregations since there is a declaration past, that th threatnings in your Congregations shall b accomplished. Now there is that fourth duty that  would presse upon you from this, that  promises are unchangeable, have an unchan∣able love to the Promiser; let this comm the Promiser, let this constrain your hearts delight in the Promiser. O what a blessed  pensation of love is this, that an unchangeable God should make unchangeable promises  to changeable creatures. If the promises the Covenant of Grace were as changeable their nature as we are changeable, there sh not one of us go to heaven: but know, i the blessed design of love, and it hath be ssed practice of the infinit wisdom of G  when he hath to do with changeable  ires, he will give them unchangeable . And I would once invite you  that you would come near and imbrace unchangeable Promiser: I shall speak  five words that may perswade you.  Christ is easily to be gotten if ye will
him, ye will get Christ if ye will but hear; yea, for one listening of your ear to his voice ye shall get him: according to that word, Isa. 55.3. Hear, And what of that, and your soul shall live; Is not this to get Christ at an easie rate: and as we spake be∣fore, ye will get Christ for a look, and is not that an easie rate, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me all ye ends of the earth and be saved: Have ye a desire to take Christ, ye shall get him for that desire; according to that word, Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsteth let him come, and he that wills let him come: Will ye but consent to take him, ye shall have him, and what can you have at a lower rate the this: Shall never your cursed hands take the pen and put to your name to the blessed con∣tract of Marriage? Shall never these cursed hearts of ours cry forth, Even so I take him, and do promise to live to him, and to die to him. O strange, will ye not do it, upon what terms would the world have Christ, is it possible to have him without a consent to take him? Oh if ye would but open to him, he would condescend to come in unto you, and to sup with you, and ye with him; do ye but stir to open, Christ hath the keys in his own hand, and he would help you to open. O what if Christ the precious Gift of Heaven, the eternal admiration of Angels, that Branch of Righteousnesse shall be de∣spised, being offered upon so easie tearms; then cursed eternally shall be that person that thus undervalueth Christ, it had been better for him that he had never been born:
Cursed shall ye be in your birth, and in you , and in your death, all the curses of th Persons of the Trinity will light upon you yea, believe it: O wife that hath a believing husband, in the day that the great sentence of eternal excommunication from the pre∣sence of the Lord, shall be past against th undervaluers of Christ, a believing husband will say amen to that sentence, even to his wife that did thus undervalue that Noble Plant of renown: and the wife upon the other part will say with hearty consent, amen, to that sentence against the unbeliev∣ing husband, and the father to the son, and the son to the father. Now there is this fifth duty that w would presse upon you from this, That th promises are unchangeable, that ye would be perswaded to make the promises your por∣tion and your inheritance; What can ye wa that will choise the promises for your por∣on? I know, our cursed eyes doth not love to make invisible promises, and that invisible crown, and an invisible God our portion,  look to walk by sight, not by faith. But o if you knew once what it were but to clai a relation to Christ! Did ye once know wh it were to have but Christ a moment betwe your breasts, ye would cry forth, O!  would not love him who is the King of Saint▪ who would not be content to quite all thing that they might get Christ that noble pe of price. And there is this last duty that we wo presse upon you from this, That the ∣mises
are unchangeable; read a lecture from this, O Christian, even your misbelief; God hath confirmed his everlasting Covenant with an oath, with the Bloud of his Son, by the two great broad Seals of heaven, the Sa∣crament of Baptism, and the Lords Supper; And what doth all these confirmations speak but our dreadfull misbelief, and that we know not what it is to be resting on a naked word of promise. I shall say no more, but desire that ye would consider and take no∣tice of these three. First, Ye have been solemnly and often invited by the Ambassa∣dors of Christ to close with him, and to take him for your Husband and your Lord, and will you consider presently, that all the Angels in heaven, and all that are about the Throne, and the three most glorious most blessed Persons of the Trinity, that they are witnesses, and shall be to your dissent. And are there not many here whose hearts could never be brought up to give a hearty consent to close with Christ that is the great Promiser, and who hath laid all the bonds that heaven or earth could contrive to gain sinners hearts unto himself: O precious Christ, what could he do to perswade us to love him which he hath not done; and yet that may be your name, which is in Ephes. 2.2. Children of disobedience, Or as the word is, Children of Imperswasion, we can∣not be perswaded. Secondly, I fear if Christ Himself would come from heaven and invite you, and say, here am I, in brace me, there are some here who would close
not only their eyes, but their ears,  would close their eyes lest the beauty▪ Christ should allure them, they wou close their cursed ears lest they should gained and captivate by the sweet encha∣ing voice of that blessed Charmer, when  should charm so wisely. And, lastly, w thou tell me, O Christian and expectant  heaven, what a day shall it be when all th unchangeable promises of God shall be  complished? What a day shall it be wh that promise shall be accomplished. Ye shall see him as he is? What a day shall it b when that promise shall be accomplished, Ye shall be made like unto him? What a day shall it be when that promise shall be accom∣plished, ye shall know as ye are known? O are ye not longing for the day of the full ac∣complishment of the precious promises  God, when ye shall sit down and comfort your selves in the eternal and unspeakable fruition of them? O let us long and wa till the day shall be when that voice shall  heard in heaven, That the mysterie of God i finished, till the day when that voice shall be heard in heaven, Behold, the Bridegro cometh, go ye out to meet him: Oh how us willing are we to leave a world. And ho gladly would we take up our rest on th side of Jordan. I think if this were th night that that blessed voice were to  heard in heaven, Behold, the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him; some, if  many of the Christians (that are so indeed in this time would cry forth, Oh spare
little that we may recover strength, before we go hence and shall be no more. Are ye not longing to bring the King over Jordan, and to bring him home to your self, and to have your heart brought home to him? O blessed, blessed are these that are above; Is not the voice of these that shout for victory heard amongst them? Is not the voice of these that sing for joy heard among them? Job doth not now any more complain, Why dost thou make me to possesse the iniquities of my youth, and setteth a print upon my heels? Da∣vid doth now no more complain, Why doth thy promise fail for evermore, but rather doth sweetly sing, How is thy promise fulfilled for evermore? Heman doth now no more com∣plain, While I suffer thy terrours I am di∣stracted, but rather cryeth out, While I feel thy comforts I am ravished. The voice of mourning is now sweetly gone away, and the voice of Hallelujah and of eternal prais∣ing of him that sitteth upon the Throne is now heard in the place of it: O such a day that shall never admit of a following night. Now to him that is upon his way, that will come, and shall come, and shall not tarry, we desire to give praise.
SERMON V. 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious pro∣mises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. THere are three cardinal and excel∣lent Graces that are exercised and taken up with the precious promises, there is the excellent grace of Faith, that believeth the truth and the goodnesse of the promise; there is the precious grace of Hope, that with patience waiteth for the accomplishment of the promise, and doth stay untill the vision speak: and that noble grace of Love, that loveth the thing that is promised; and taketh exceeding much de∣light in the Promiser. If we may be allowed to speak so, we think these strange revoluti∣ons and times we live in, are another Ecle∣siastes, which doth fully preach forth the vanity and emptinesse of all things that are below God: And we do indeed conceive, that it is the great design of God in the dark∣ing of our pleasant things, and in making every gourd to wither, under the shaddow  which we use to repose our self, and in fa ifling all the gods of the earth, to bring hi own to delight themselves in this visible
Treasure, the pomises of the everlasting Co∣venant, and in him who is the substance of them; and that since all things else are de∣clared to be vanity, we might choise these, as our own portion for ever. At the last occasion that we spake upon these words, we were speaking unto the pro∣perties of the promises; and we told you that there were four of them holden forth. 1. The freedom of the promises. 2. The un∣changeablenesse of the promises, of which two we have spoken unto you; and now there remains other two to be spoken to, to wit, that the promises are exceeding great, and that they are exceeding precious, a sweet and excellent, though a rare conjunction, greatnesse and goodnesse here kissing one another, preciousnesse and highnesse linked together by the bond of Union: And we shall speak unto these two properties to ∣ther, and shall clear a little this thing  what respects the promises of the Cove may be called exceeding great and precious; And we conceive in short, they may be cal∣led so in these eight respects. First, They are exceeding great, in respect of the great price that was laid down to purchase them, there not being a promise of the everlasting Covenant above the head of which this may not be engraven in great letters, Here is the price and purchase of bloud: And no doubt this ought highly to commend the promis that they are bought at so infinite a race. Must they not be great and precious things that so wise a Merchant did lay down so in∣finit
a treasure for the purchasing of them. 2. They may be called exceeding great and precious, in respect of those great and pre∣cious things that are promised in them. Is not godlinesse a great thing, and this is with∣in the bosome of a promise; Is not heaven and eternal enjoyment of God a great and precious thing? and yet this lyeth within the bosome of a promise? Is not the know∣ing of God as he is, our perfect conformity with God, our victory over Idols, great and excellent things; and yet all these are trea∣sured up in the promises. 3. They may be called exceeding great and precious, in re∣spect of the great advantage that redounds to a Christian through the enjoyment of them: the promises of the everlasting Co∣venant (if so we may speak) are the Pensils that draws the draughts and lineaments of the Image of Christ upon the soul, it is the promises of the everlasting Covenant by which we are changed from glory to glory, as it were by the Spirit of the Lord, and as Peter doth here speak, the promises are such things whereby we are made partakers of the divine nature. 4. They may be called exceeding precious, in respect of that neat relation that they have unto Jesus Christ; What are all the promises of the Covenant of Grace? Are they not streams and rivolets that flow from Jesus Christ; Christ is the fountain out of which all these promises do spring; and can this fountain that is sweet in it self send forth any bitter waters? must they not e precious things that have such a noble
descent? as to be streams of love flowing out from the Father to the Son, and from Him unto us, as the pouring out of the oyntment upon the head of Aaron which ran down the beard unto the skirts of his gar∣ments. 5. They may be called exceeding precious promises, in respect they, or ra∣ther Christ in them are the object of precious faith: What is the meat upon which faith doth feed? is it not upon the promises of the Covenant, and Christ the kernill of them: What are these things that faith taketh so much delight in, and is supported by? Is it not the promises of the Covenant: 6. They may be called exceeding precious, in that they are the things that guideth and leadeth us to precious Christ. There is not a promise within the Book of the Covenant, but, as it were, it cryeth forth with a loud voice, O come to Christ, The promises are indeed the star that leadeth us unto the house where Christ doth ly, and there is no accesse unto Jesus Christ but by a promise, Christ is to be found there, for he dwells within the bounds of the everlasting Cove∣nant, and there he will tryst with his people, and be found of them. And, 7. They may be called exceeding precious, in respect that the Saints have found such sweetnesse, and such unspeakable delight in these promises. Did not David find a great sweetnesse in the promises when he cryed forth, The word of thy mouth are better unto me, then thousands of gold and silver? Did he not find much sweet∣nesse in the promises, when he was con∣strained
to cry out, Thy Law is sweeter  to me, then the honey and the honey comb? D∣vid in a manner was put to a nonplus, to fin out any suitable similitude and significant re∣semblance, to point out the sweetnesse of th promises: though we may see the Christi∣ans of this time in a spiritual fever, they have lost their spiritual taste, so that they may say, if we may allude unto that word, 2 Sam. 19.25. I am this day fourscore years old, and cannot discern between good and evil, can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink. They know not what it is to be overcome with the sweetnesse that is to be found in these excellent streams of divine consolation. Lastly, The promises may be called exceeding precious, in that the Saints have a high and matchlesse account of them: Hence that word here rendered Precious, may likewise be rendered Honourable, which speaketh forth that there is nothing that hath so much of the esteem of a Christian as the promises. Would ye put wisdom, or riches, or honour, or what ye will in the ballance with the promises, they would cry forth, what should I profit to gain all these, if I lose the promises. We shall say no more of this, but that the promises are indeed that Aple, the eating of which would make us in some respect, (and in humility be it spoken) as God knowing good and evil: The promises are these things that doth elevate the soul unto a divine conformity with God. And oh that this might be the fruit of them the promises are as cords let down to soul
sinking in the myrie clay, and in the horrible pit, do but lay hold upon them, and ye shall undoubtedly be drawn up, and he shall set your feet upon the rock, and order all your goings. Now we come to speak of the third thing in the words; which is the advantage and unspeakable gain that floweth to a Christian through the promises, holden forth in these words, That by them ye might be made par∣takers of the divine nature; which words doth not hold forth that there is any sub∣stantial chance of our natures unto the es∣sence of God; but only it holds forth this, that the soul that is taken up in believing of the promises, they arise unto a likenesse and conformity to him in Holinesse, Wisedome and Righteousnesse. And as to these ad∣vantages that come to a Christian through the promises: 1. We must lay this for a ground, that the fruit of all cometh to him through believing the promises, and in making application of them. And the first is, That they do exceedingly help and promove that excellent and neces∣sary work of mortification: This is clear from the words of the Text; As likewise from 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us clearse our selves from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holinesse in the fear of the Lord. And the influence that the promises have upon San∣ctification, may be shown unto you in these three. First, They lay upon a Christian a divine bond and obligation to study holiness,
that since Christ hath signified and testifi His respects unto us, in so ample and lar a way as to give us such precious promise we ought to endeavour to study holinesse which is that great reward of love that h seeketh from us for all things that he hath bestowed, and we receive, and this is the meaning of that, 2 Corinth. 7.1. Secondly, The strength and furniture of a Christian for fulfilling and accomplishing of the work of Sanctification, lyeth within the promises: Are not the promises of God unto a Christi∣an, as Samsons locks, in which their great strength doth ly; and if once they cut them∣selves off from the promises through misbe∣lief, their strength doth decay, and they become as other men. Where must the Christian go to for strength? Is it not to the promise: Is it not the name of the Lord; yea, this is the strength of a Christian unto which he must resort continually. And, thirdly, the promises of God they hold forth that unspeakable reward that attendeth that Christian that shall study holinesse. There are several promises of the everlasting Cove∣nant that cryeth forth to the Christian, to him that overcometh will this promise be accomplished, to him that overcometh shall this truth be fulfilled, and this doth exceed∣ingly provoke a Christian to wrestle with all his discouragements he meeteth within the way, he burieth all his anxieties within the circle of his immortal Crown, which he hopeth for, and seeth in the promise, and his hope maketh him dispence with his wants,
his expectation maketh him overcome his fears, and his looked for joy maketh him to dispence with his sorrows. The second advantage, is, That the faith of the promises do help a Christian to a spi∣ritual and heavenly performance of the duty of prayer, and withal, makth him delight in the performance of it: This is clear from 2 Sam. 7.27. where David believing the promises, it is subjoyned, He found in his heart to pray that prayer unto God; and if any will look unto the words of that prayer, they will see them running in a heavenly and spiritual strain, speaking him one much ac∣quainted with God, and under most high and majestick apprehensions of his Glory, as is clear also, Psal. 119 147. I prevented the dawning of the morning and cryed; and as if David had said, would you know what made me thus fervent and diligent in prayer, it was that, I hoped in his word; and hence it is, that he hath so many prayers in that Psalm, all were occasioned through the faith of the promises: As for instance, when he cryed forth, Quicken me according to thy word, be merciful unto me according to thy word. And we conceive, the faith of the promises helpeth a Christian in his prayer to these four Divine ingredients of that duty. 1. It maketh him pray with faith: when once he buildeth his prayer upon the pro∣mises, then he venteth his prayer with much confidence of hope, according to that word, Psal. 65.3. where ye may see a man be∣lieving, and praying when he is believ∣ing,
and expressing his confidence m strangely in these words. As for our tran∣gressions thou shalt purge them away; It  not said thou wilt purge them away, or we desire that thou should purge them away, but thou shalt, which speaketh forth both the confidence of Faith, and the boldnesse of Faith: A Christian that believeth the pro∣mises, he can take the promise in his hand and present it unto God, and say fulfill this promise since thou wilt not deny thy name, but art faithfull. 2. It maketh a Christian pray with much humility, for when he doth understand that there is nothing that he hath but it is the fruit, and accomplishment of a promise, he doth not boast as those that have received, but walketh humbly under his enjoyments: this is clear, Gen. 32.10. where we may see Jacob speaking to God with much humility, and in the ninth verse, he is speaking to God with much Faith. And 3. It maketh a Christian pray with much love: Would you know the great ground that we are so remisse in the exercise of love in prayer, it is, because we build not our prayers upon the promise. And, 4. It helpeth a Christian to pray with much fer∣vency; When was it that David cryed to God? Was it not when he was believing the promise that past to him of old, we would not plead with God with such remisnesse if we did believe the promises that are within the Covenant. The third advantage is, That the faith of the promises doth sometimes uphold a Chri∣stian
under his spiritual disertions and ten∣tations. Is it not certain, that sometimes he hath been ready to draw that conclusion, I am cast out of his sight, and shall no more behold him in the land of the living? when a promise hath been born in upon his spirit, hath supported him and made him to change his song, and to invert his conclusion. This is clear from Psal. 94.18. when I said, my foot slippeth, there is the conclusion of misbe∣lief and dispair, yet thy mercy, O Lord, did hold me up, there is the gate at which faith doth bring in consolation, not from by gone experiences only; but certainly from that which he found in some precious promises that was born in upon his spirit: Many excellent cords of love hath Christ let down unto a soul, when they have been going down into the depths, and the weeds have been wrapt upon their heads: It is clear likewise from Psal. 119.81. My soul faint∣eth for thy salvation: as if David had said, I am in hazard to give over my hope and to break my confidence: And would ye know what was it that supported me under such an estate, I hoped in thy word; Hath not this oftentimes been the song of a Christian in their darkest night, In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts do delight my soul: Faith will see a morning approaching in the time of the greatest trouble; and no doubt that promise that upholdeth a Chri∣stian in their doubting and most misbeliev∣ing condition, the lively impressions of that promise will remain a long time with him;
and when first it is born in upon their spi∣rits, they will see no small love shining forth in carving out such a promise to suit with such a providence as they are (it may be) meeting with for the time. The fourth advantage in believing the pro∣mise, is, that thereby we have an excel∣lent help to patience and divine submission under our saddest outward afflictions: this is clear from Psal. 27.13. I had fainted, un∣lesse I had believed to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living; and from Psal. 119, 49, 50. where David telling his exer∣cise in the 49. I hope, saith he, in thy word, Immediately he subjoyneth; This is my com∣fort in mine affliction, as if he had said, if I had not had the promises to be my comfor∣ters, I had sit alone and kept silence, and should have remained without comfort in the day of my adversity, and verse 92. Ʋn∣lesse thy law had been my delight, I should have perished in my afflictions; and we conceive in short, the influence which faith upon the promises hath upon the patient bearing of the crosse, may be shown to you in these two particulars; First, Faith it is an ex∣cellent Prophet, that alwayes prophesieth unto us good things: Would ye enquire at Faith at your midnight of affliction, what is its opinion of God and of your own estate; Faith would swetly reolve you thus, Wait on God for I shall yet praise him for the health of his ounterance. Faith knoweth nor what it is to have wrong ostructions of God; and therefore it is the noble interpreter of a
Christians crosse: If sense, reason, and mis∣belief interpret your crosse, they will make you cry out unto God, Why art thou become unto me as an enemie, or as a liar and waters that fail? but if Faith that noble Inter∣preter do interpret your crosses, it will make you cry out, I know the thoughts of his heart, that they are thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give me an expected end. Faith letteth a Christian see a blessed outgate and issue of all the sad dispensations that he meeteth with. Faith, that is its divinity, I sow in tears, but I shall reap in joy, weeping may be at evening, saith Faith, but joy shall come in the morning. Secondly, It affordeth unto a Christian such soul-refreshing consolation in the midst of their afflictions, that in a man∣ner they forget their sorrows, as waters that passe away; this David doth divinely assert in Psal. 119.50. This is my comfort in mine affliction: The faith of the promises are in∣deed that tree which if they be cast into our waters of Marah, they will make them immedi∣ately become sweet. The fifth advantage is, that the faith of the promises doth help a Christian to a grea∣ter distance with the world, and to live as a pilgrime, as is clear from Heb. 11.13. where these two are sweetly linked toge∣ther, their imbracing of the promises by Faith, and confessing that they were strangers and pilgrims here on earth. And we shall show the influence that faith hath upon this, in these three. 1. It maketh a Christian see the end of all perfection here, and that there
is nothing within this Glob of the World that is not vanity and vexation of spirit: Faith is that prospect through which a Christian hath most clear discoveries of the vanity of all things, and this doth exceedingly help him to live as a pilgrime. 2. It letteth a Christian see the endlesse perfections of hea∣ven, and bringeth it within sight of that Im∣mense and everlasting hope, and this maketh him to live as a pilgrime, and to declare plain∣ly that he seeketh a Countrey. And, 3. It doth exceedingly help him forward in that blessed work of weaning of affections from all things that are here; would you know where a Believers heart is? It is in Heaven; would you know where his thoughts are? They are in Heaven; Would ye know where his conversation is? It is in Heaven; Would ye know where his hope is? It is in Heaven, his treasure is in heaven, and therefore his heart and his conversation is there, And Christ in him is the hope of glory: and indeed, more faith of the promises would constrain us all to subscribe that Confession of Faith that is in Heb. 11.13. The sixth advantage that attendeth the believing of the promises, is, That it is the mother of much spirituall joy and divine consolation, and maketh a Christian to be much in the exercise of praise: this is clear from Psal. 71.14. But I will hope continu∣ally, and then immediately is subjoyned, And will yet praise him more and more; As likewise from Rom. 15.13. and from 1 Pet. 1.8. If a man would have his way to heaven
made pleasant, and while they are sitting by the livers of Babel, would be admitted to sing one of the songs of Zion, then ought they to believe the promises, and to choose them as their heritage for ever: and then he may sing in hope, and praise in expectation, though he have but little in hand for the present: in∣deed when he looketh to his possession, there will not be so much matter of rejoycing, but when he looketh upon his hopes and his expectations, he may be constrained to cry sorth, Awake up O my glory, I my self will awake early. The seventh advantage is, That the faith of the promises is a notable mean to attain unto spiritual life: This is clear from Isai. 38.16. By these things, saith Hezekiah, do men live, (speaking of the promises) and in all these things is the life of my spirit. As likewise from Psal. 119.50. Thy word, saith David, hath quickned me. O what spirituall and divine life doth attend that Christian that is much in the exercise of Faith upon the promises: And what is the great occa∣sion that our hearts are oftentimes dying within us like a stone, and we are like unto those that are free among the dead? Is it not because we do not make use of the pro∣mises. Eighthly, there is that advantage, that faith of the promises, it maketh a Christian have an esteem of the thing that is pro∣mised: What is the reason that we write this above the head of the great things of the everlasting Covenant, this is a Zoar, a
little one? Is it not because we do not be∣lieve; great things sometimes to us have no beauty, and there is no comelinesse that ap∣peareth in them why they should be desired: but if we had so much faith as a grain of mustard seed, we would cry forth, How ex∣cellent are these things that are purchased to the Saints, and how eternally are they made up that have a right but to one line of the everlasting Covenant, That is well ordered in all things and sure. And, ninthly, The faith of the promises is the door at which the accomplishment of the promises doth enter in: according to that word, Luk. 1.45. Blessed are they that believe, for there shall be a performance of these things that are spoken of the Lord unto them. If we were more in waiting for the accomplishment of his promises, the vision should speak, and should not tarry: And no doubt, a mercy coming to us as the fruit and performance of a promise, will make it an exceedingly re∣freshful thing; When a Christian getteth leave to sing that song which is in Isa. 25.9. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will come and save us: And when a mercy is the fruit and accomplishment of the promise, there is a beautiful luster and dye upon that mercy, Which no arte could set on, but onely the finger of the love of God. The smallest mercy then becometh a match∣lesse mysterie of love, and the most matchless mysteries of love without the exercise of Faith, they become as things that are con∣temptible in our eyes, and we do not value
nor praise them. Faith maketh our thoughts to ascend, & misbelief makes our thoughts to descend, in relation to the mercies of heaven. Lastly, Besides all these advantages, We have these two mentioned in the Text: 1. That by them we are partakers of the Di∣vine Nature, and are brought up unto that blessed conformity with God, which we had lost in the fall. 2. That by them we escape the corruptions in the world through lust: Lintend not particularly to open up the na∣ture of these things at this time, because I am only to speak of the exercise of Faith in the promises. But O what excellent mercies are these, to get on the beauty of the Image of God, and to get off these ugly defilements which were the image of Satan upon our souls. O how should this commend the pro∣mises unto us, that by faith in them, we do all behold with open face as in a glasse, the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same from glory to glory, as it were by the Spirit of the Lord. Now that which, secondly, we shall speak to, shall be the advantages that results to a Christian from a spiritual observation of the Lords accomplishing his promises; for here ye see in the Text, the Apostle maketh an observation of these excellent things that are the fruit of these precious promises when they are accomplished. And the first advantage is, That it stampeth the soul of a Believer with most divine impressions of love: This is clear, Isa. 38.15. where Hezekiah cryeth out, What shall I say, he
hath spoken it, and himself hath done it, being as it were, astonished and overcome with th apprehensions of the condescendeny of God. He is put to a non plus, and to what shall  say, Psal. 41.8, 9. As we have heard (saith David) so have we seen in the City of the Lord of hosts, That is according to his pro∣mise, we have had suitable performance  and he subjoyneth, verse 9. that which wa both their exercise and their advantage, We have thought of thy loving kindnesse, O God, in the midst of thy Temple; as it were, the ob∣servation of the performance of the promise, made their thoughts wholly to be taken up with the love of God: and no doubt, ther is more love in performing one promise, the eternity were sufficient to make a commea∣tary upon. It is one wonder of condescen∣dency, that God should obliege and bind him∣self to us by promises: and another depth of wonderfull love, that he should perform these bonds, and answer his words with per∣formance. The second advantage is, That the obser∣ving of accomplishment of promises doth bring in to the soul new discoveries of God this is clear, Exod. 6.3. where God thu speaketh to Moses: I was known (saith he) unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and unto Jacob by the name of the Almighty, but by the nam of Jehovah was I not known unto them, the is, by the Name of giving an accomplis∣ment unto my promises, that Name was n discovered unto them, but should be ma known unto their posterity, in the day whe
his promises should passe unto performances. And hence it is also, that when the Lord is speaking of the accomplishment of great promises, he doth so often in the Scripture subjoyn that word, Ye shall know that I am Jehovah, or the Lord, Isa. 49.23, 52. and 60.16. And indeed we do daily find it so; for, is not every accomplishment of a pro∣mise, a new discovery of the wisdome of God, that shineth in the suitable tyming of the accomplishment of a promise: Is not every accomplishment of a promise a new disco∣very of the faithfulnesse of God, that he will not alter that which hath gone out of his mouth? And is not every performance of the promise a new discovery of the love of God, that he desireth to magnifie his mercies above all his work, and a new discovery of the power and Omnipotency of God, that can bring forth the performance of his promise, notwithstanding of all things that are in the way, yea, make things that are not to be, and bringeth to nought things that are. The third advantage is, That is helpeth a Christian to have high apprehensions, and majestick uptakings of God: This is clear, 1 Tim. 1.15. compared with vers. 17. where Paul closing with that promise, That Christ came in the world to save sinners, and behold∣ing in the accomplishment of it, in himself,  heart (as it were) is elevated within th, and he cryeth forth, Now unto the King ernal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, e honour and glory for ever and ever, Amen.
There is an Enphasis in that word, Now, if Paul had said, I could never praise and  toll him till now, and I am so much bound Christ that I will not delay this exercise o moment, now I will blesse him, and it is cl from Mic. 7.18. where the accomplishme of the promises that are there, made t Church cry out, Who is like unto thee, he  came matchlesse unto them through the p∣formance of the promises. And so we conce that these who are much in spiritual obser∣tion of the performance of the promises, th will see precious draughts of the Majesty God engraven upon them; so that they  be constrained to cry out, that he above mighty, that his Name is Jehovah, and in  is everlasting strength, upon which we ough to rely in our greatest straits. The fourth advantage is, The observi of the accomplishment of the promises, w help a Christian when he is redacted u new straits, to be much in the exercise of fa upon God; his former experience will p∣duce hope in his soul; for there is not ∣discovery of the faithfulnesse of God, but ha a voice, and cryeth out, O believe him wh able to give a clear being unto his word: T is clear from Psal. 56 at the close. Thou  delivered my soul from death, saith David, then he subioyneth, Wilt thou not delive feet from falling: that is, I am certainly  swaded, thou wilt likewise perform that w unto me. And from Psal. 37.2, 3. he giv that tittle unto God, vers. 2. that he perso∣meth all things for him, and then he doth s∣joyn,
He shal send from heaven and save me: and (by the way) the soul that can give God that tittle and stile, That he performeth all things for them, that soul must of necessity be in a choise and excellent state: And the point is likewise clear from 2 Cor. 1.10. where Paul saith, God hath delivered me, and he doth deli∣ver me; and from hence he draweth that con∣clusion of Faith, And he will yet deliver me. We confess sometimes our former experiences of the faithfulnesse of God, they do not sup∣port our faith when we are redacted unto new difficulties, which is either occasioned through the greatnesse of the strait that we are now put to, (in our apprehensions) above that which we were put to before; so that though God did deliver us when we were running with footmen, yet we have no faith to believe that he shall deliver us when we are about to con∣tend with horses: or else it is, through the unfaithfulnesse of our walk, in not answering the precious dispensations of Christ, in ac∣complishment of his promises, for this mak∣eth us that we cannot with boldnesse make use of his Word when we are brought into a new strait, a guilty conscience is the mother of misbelief. The fifth advantage is. That the accom∣plishment of the promises doth occasion much spiritual joy and rejoycing unto his own. We told you, the giving of the promises occa∣sioneth joy, and when the promises travelleth in birth and bringeth forth, that occasioneth much more spiritual joy: this is clear from Psal. 28.7. The Lord is my strength and my
shield, my heart trusted in him, and I was help. And he draweth this excellent conclusi from it, Therefore my heart greatly rejoycet and with my soul will I praise him. And  conceive, that sometimes, that God tryste the accomplishment of the promises wi some precious manifestation of himself to th soul, which maketh them to rejoyce with j unspeakable, and full of glory; but howeve this is the matter of a spiritual song, Th mercy and truth have met together, and right ousnesse and peace are kissing one another: Is not a pleasant matter of a song to beho love making promises, and to behold faithful∣nesse accomplishing them? And the last advantage is, That the obs∣vation of the accomplishment of promise doth strengthen a Christians faith in his inn rest in God; so that now many disputings a silenced, and many questions now are out  the way, this is clear Psal. 31.21, 22. Dav confesseth his quarrelling before, but wh once the Lord had shewed his marvellous lovin kindnesse in a strong city, then all his quarr was against himself, because he had quarrelle and did say in his hast, I am cut off from bef thine eyes. And now we shall only speak a little  to some duties that we would presse up you, from that which we have spok. And the first duty is, That Christians wo be much in waiting for the accomplishme of the promises, and standing upon th watch tower untill the vision shall spea And we shall only give you these to enfor
it. 1. It is commanded that you should so do: this is clear from Psal. 27. at the close, where David presseth that duty very much, Wait on the Lord, saith he, and if that be not enough, he will repeat that com∣mand in that same verse; Wait I say on the Lord: and no doubt the doubling of it speaketh not only advantage that is in it, but our difficulty to obey it, and the great ne∣cessity that we have to go about it: and that same word is repeated by David, Psal. 31.24. Be of good courage, which is that same, to wait upon the Lord. 2. These that wait patiently for the accomplishment of the promises, God will strengthen them to wait: this is clear from Psal. 27. at the close, Wait on the Lord, and when we are Hagar like, casting away the childe of hope, he will open our eyes, and give us resreshment, by which we may be supported under our disquietment, and he shall strengthen thine heart: And there is this, 3. There shall be a speedy accomplishment of the promises: it is not long before all the mercies that eves the Lord hath promised, and thou hast be∣lieved, shall be told down to you, as it were, in one sum, principall and interest: as is clear from Hab. 2.3. where he positively assert∣eth, That the vision will come, and will not tarry. There is indeed a pleasant seeming contradiction in that verse, he had said be∣fore, that the vision would tarry, and yet here he saith. The vision will not tarry, but will surely come: in which ye may see the divini∣ty both of sense and faith, and that noble
contradiction that is between their asse∣ons. Sense asserting that the promise do tarry too long, and Faith crying out, it w surely come, it will not tarry; which  set down, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not sl concerning his promise. 4. Promises th come unto us through the most strong  lively exercise of Faith, and that are e∣pected and longed for by us before the come, they are most relishing and sweet, an these mercies come unto us with a bindi tye of love: this is somewhat pointed  in Isa. 25.9. where the Church cryeth forth Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him we will be glad and rejoyce in his salvation their waiting and expecting of the promis to be accomplished in its time is there th fountain of their song and of their spiritual joy. I think sometimes a Christian is lik that misbelieving Lord, 2 King. 7.2. th though they meet with the accomplishment of a promise, yet they do not taste of th sweetnesse that is in it, because they did no believe the Word of the Lord. The second duty that we would press from what we have spoken, is, That Christi∣ans would close with the promises for their everlasting inheritance, since the promise of the Covenant are exceeding great, and ex∣ceeding precious, and the advantage that lyeth in them is unspeakable. O! should no these things proclaim aloud unto us, Close with the promises as your portion for ever. I think, one that hath a right to the promise and hath entered himself here unto the va
inheritance; he may sometimes rejoyce in that threefold mystery of the Gospel, that to a naturall man can hardly appear other then a contradiction. 1. He may somtimes, I have nothing, and yet I possesse all things; for when he looketh unto his being in the world, he is as poor Lazarus, having no place whereon to lay his head; but when he casteth his eye unto his spiritual inheri∣tance, then he beholdeth his treasures, and is constrained to cry out, I possesse all things. 2. Sometimes he may cry forth, I am rich, and yet I am exceeding poor; he may be rich in hopes and yet poor in his possessions. There is much of a Christians treasure that lyeth in hope; hope is that thing that will make the Christian sweetly quite all other in comparison of that: that is the motto of the Christian, spero meliora which he holdeth up in his flag, even in the greatest storm, and at length he findeth it true, that hope maketh not ashamed. 3. Sometime the Chri∣stian will cry forth, I am alwayes sorrowing, and yet alwayes rejoycing: when he casteth his eye upon himself, he will sit down and water his couch with tears, but when with the other eye he reflecteth upon Jesus Christ, He will rejoyce with joy unspeakable and full of glory; a Christian can both weep and re∣joyce at one time, and again he can rejoyce and weep: No doubt, the reflecting upon the immense hope, and that everlasting Crown, will make a Christian rejoyce under all his disquietments and anxieties in the world, he can look to the back of time, and
behold a glorious inheritance. A Christi hath the eye of an eagle that can behold  discern things afar of. The third duty that we would presse upon you, is, To long for the day when all the pr∣mises of the Covenant of Grace shall receiv their compleat accomplishment, and when  shall be entered into the everlasting fruitio of all these things wherein your blessedness lyeth. There is a threefold come that Chri speaketh to the soul that is united unto hi all which they sweetly obey. There is that first come, which is in Matth. 11.28. Com unto me all ye that are weary and heavy loaden And there is that second come, Isa. 26. Com my people, enter into the chambers, which is  entertain that excellent correspondency with him in troublesome times: And there is th third matchlesse come, when Christ shall say to his own in the day of their standing before the tribunal, Come, O blessed of my Father▪ Shall we say it, that if we had faith as a grai of mustard seed, we would cry forth, Why i his chariot so long in coming; and did we relish or made a high account of the matchless pro∣mises of the boundlesse Covenant, we would cry forth, O that our time would flee away as the ships of desire. I shall say no more but this, Christ is gone up with a shout unto heaven, and shall come again with the sound of a trumpet, sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises unto our God, sing praises. The last thing that we would presse upon you, is, That ye would mark the time of the accomplishment of the promises. And as
this, I shall say but these: 1. That ordina∣rily the time of the accomplishment of the promises, is the time when sense, reason, and probability doth most contradict them: this is clear, Ezek. 37. in the fulfilling of the pro∣mises that were past to Judah in their captivi∣ty, was it not when they were as a valley of dead bones, and their hopes were in a manner cut off for their part, from the 11. vers. of that chapter, compared with the 12. And, 2. that the time of the accomplishment of the promises, ordinarily is a praying time: this is also clear from Dan. 9.2, 3. and from Jer. 29.12. compared with the 11. vers. and the 10. thus saith the Lord, the time when he will visit them, and perform his good word to them, in causing them to return, it shall be a time when they shall call upon me, and shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto them. And, 3. the time of the accom∣plishment of his promises, it is a time when our thoughts of the promises are high and large, when once we begin to value our mer∣cies, this is a sign that our mercy is near and it is bringing forth: However, it is our duty to wait on Him who can give a being unto his Word, and sweetly perform his promises. We ought not to limit infinit wisdom, nor to say unto him that is infinite in strength, How can such a thing be? but answer all objections of misbelief with this, God hath spoken it, and he will also do it, and drown all our ob∣jections of misbelief in that glotious and my∣sterious Name of His, I am that I am. To Him be praise.
SERMON VI. Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, an to turn them from darknesse to ligh and from the power of Satan un God, that they may receive for givenesse of sins, and inheritan among them which are sanctified  faith that is in me. WHen first we did begin our  course upon the precious  excellent grace of Faith;  told you that we intended  speak of it under a twofold notion and con∣sideration. First, As it layeth hold up Christ for Justification; and of this we h spoken to you at some length, as ye h heard. Secondly, As it closeth with Ch for Sanctification; and of this we are  speak at this time; and have chosen th words to speak of it, which are a part  that excellent Oration and Discourse th Paul had before Agrippa in his own defen In which Oration and Discourse of his,  may be hold these four things eminently ∣ing: 1. That Godlinesse and good man are not inconsistent, nor contrary one to  ther: Therefore ye will see in the secon third verses of this Chapter, Paul acti part of a Courtly Oratour: and belie
there is more good manners to be learned by being seven dayes in the School of Christ, then by being seven years in all the Courts of France. This, secondly, that innocent Policy that he made use of in the deliverance of this Oration, which likewise doth appear in the second and third verse of this Chapter, where he endeavours to insinuate and ingratiate him∣self in the favours of the person before whom he had stood; I confesse, piety is the best po∣licy that is taken up in intertaining piety, howbeit true policy may move in one orb and sphere with piety, and the one is not con∣trary to the other in some case: 3. This shin∣eth in that discourse, even the spiritual bold∣nesse Paul had in giving an excellent confessi∣on of his faith, and the declaring him to be God, even Jesus Christ in whom he did be∣lieve; Christ witnessed a glorious confession be∣fore Pontius Pilat for him, and he would wit∣nesse a glorious confession before Agrippa for Christ, that since Christ had not denied him in that notable day, he would not now deny precious Christ in this day: and this is from the beginning and all alongs▪ Lastly, This shineth in the words that Paul doth set forth, the matchlesse freedom and unspeakable riches of Christ, not only toward himself in that he did cast the lot of everlasting love toward him; but likewise toward the Gentiles to whom he was sent as a Preacher, and that he did gloriously condescend to visit the dark places of the earth, and to have the morning star, and the day spring from on high arising on the habitations of cruelty. And
in this verse which we have read, you  behold these five glorious ends of the pre∣ing of this everlasting Gospel, for at∣ing of which, Ministers are made inst∣ments under God. The first is, to open  eyes of the blind, which in short is even th to give those that are ignorant of God,  spiritual knowledge of the deep mysteries the Father, and of the Son: So that fro this, ye may see that the Gospel hath a ki of omnipotency in producing effects abo the power of nature. The second, we ma see in these words, to remove them from dar∣nesse to light: Which importeth these two 1. The removing of persons from an estate of excellent joy. 2. The removing of per∣sons from an estate of iniquity, unto an est of holinesse, darknesse in Scripture pointing out sin, and light in Scripture pointing out holinesse. 3. The bringing us from under the power of Satan unto God, the making a blessed exchange of captivity and bondage, that these who were under the captivity of Satan, may be under the captivity of Love, that those who were under the bondage of sin, may be under the sweet obedience of Christ, whose yoke is easie, and whose burden is light, Marth. 11.30.4. That persons may receive the remission of sins, and the for givenesse of their iniquity; This is the gre voice of the Gospel, come to a crucifi Christ, come to a pardoning Christ, com to a glorified Christ, Christ hath the pardo of iniquity in his one hand, and riches  himself in the other, and these are the gre
motives by which he studieth to perswae us to come. And the last is in the close of the verse, that persons may receive foregive∣nesse of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me, that is, that they may have a share of that glorious mansion, of that excellent King∣dome that Christ hath purchased, and hath gone before to prepare. And withall, in this verse as the words are set down, ye may see the excellent and orderly methode that the Gospel keepeth in conquering souls, and you may see these excellent allurements, these perswasive arguments that Christ holdeth forth to conquer you, as it were, Christ com∣eth not unto us cloathed with the robes of Majesty, but clothed with the robes of Love and advantage, knowing that in this posture he shall most gain upon our hearts. Now in speaking unto that last end of the preaching the Gospel, we shall only accor∣ding to our present purpose, take notice of this one thing from it, (not intending to prosecute it as it is an end of the Gospel) but as a property of Faith, and it is that. Faith in Jesus Christ hath a noble and excellent influence upon the growth of Sanctification, and the attaining of holinesse, they are sanctified saith he, through faith in me. We shall no stand long to clear this unto you, it is evi∣dent from Act. 15.9. where the Apost telleth us of purifying their hearts by faith And likewise, 1 Tim. 1.5. where a pur heart and faith unfeigned, they are ioyne and linked together: As likewise, 1 Jo
3.3. Every man that hath this hope in him,  purifieth himself. All the Graces of the G∣spel they are linked together by a golden  unseparable chain, so that he that obtaine one, he shall obtain all; yea, more, all th graces of the Gospel, they have a mutual in∣fluence upon one anothers growth, so tha we may compare them unto Hypocrates twi of whom it was reported, that they di laugh and weep together, and they did grow together: even so when one grace doth re∣joyce, the rest doth rejoyce with it, and when one grace doth mourn, the rest doth also mourn with it, and when one grace doth grow, the rest of the graces of the spirit they do likewise grow apace. There are only three particulars that we shall insist a little upon: First, We shall shew you how faith hath influence upon the attaining of Sanctification, and this we make clear unto you in these respects. 1. In that it discovereth to the soul that matchless excellency, that transcendent beau∣ty, and that surpassing comelinesse that is in Christ, which sight doth exceedingly per∣swade the soul to draw that conclusion, What have I to do any more with idols? A glorious sight of Christ, and acquaintance with him, maketh us lose our acquaintance with our idols, and when once we are united unto Christ by faith, we break that union we had with them. And indeed, the want of the knowledge of that excellent comelinesse that s in Christ, and of love to him, is the great occasion that the poorest dieries and idols in
the world taketh up your hearts: did ye but once see him who is that glorious Son of righteousnesse, ye would be forced to put in your Amen unto that excellent confession of Faith, Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity and vexation of spirit. 2. In that it is the grace that discovers un∣to a Christian the spotlesse holinesse of Christ, Faith doth not onely discover the beauty of Christ, but likewise his holinesse, and this doth make the soul fall in love with that excellent thing Sanctification. It is recorded amongst the first steps to sin and misery, that we de∣sired to be as Gods, knowing good and evil; but certainly it is among the first steps to life and happinesse, when the soul desireth to be holy as he is holy: And I suppose, this is the great ground that ye are not much en∣deavouring a blessed conformity to God, and to be partakers of the blessed Image of Christ, ye know not the beauty of holinesse. 3. aith layeth hold upon Jesus Christ, and draweth strength and vertue from him for the conquering of lusts, and in raising us up into a blessed conformity unto himself: when the Christian is weak; Faith is that noble correpondent between that emptiness that is in us, and the fulness that is in Christ. Faith is that noble correspondent between that weaknesse that is in us, and that eerla∣sting strength that is in him: Therefore there are two noble and excellent counsels of Faith: First, It counsels us not to lean to our own strength: And, secondly, to have our recourse unto him whose Name is
Jehovah that everlasting strength; An doubt, if we were more taken up in imp∣ing Christ by faith, that prophesie should accomplished, I will make the feeble one David, and David as the Angel of God:  when a Christiian is most diffident in him then God should prove himself to be Almi∣ty, and All-sufficient. And, 4. Faiths influence may be clea in this, that it layeth hold upon the p∣mises, and doth believe them: and believ∣ing of the promise bringeth forth that no birth, conformity to God, according to th word upon which we were speaking, 2 P 1.4. by believing the promises, (that is the advantage of it) We are by them made part∣kers of the divine nature. 5. Faith also believeth the threatnings that are past in Scripture against sin, and the believing them hath an undoubted and strong influence upon the attaining and growth of Sanctification; Faith strengtheneth a Chri∣stian against the committing of iniquity with these two words: that word, Rom. 6.20. O soul (saith faith) commit not iniquity, for the wages of sin is death: and that word, Rev. 21. last, There shall in no way enter into that City, any thing that is unclean, or that com∣mitteth iniquity. And be perswaded of it that the faith of the threatnings and of the promises that are in Scripture, would be as a threefold cord not easily broken, to restra you from the acting of iniquity: And shall I sell you briefly the ground why these curs hearts of ours doth commit iniquity wi
so little fear, and with so much delight, it is even this, because we believe not the threat∣nings of God, which shall be accomplished in their own season: for is it possible that if ye believed that word, Rev. 21. last. That nothing shall enter into the New Jerusalem that defileth or worketh abominations; or that maketh a lie; that ye durst for a world adventure upon the committing of iniquity as ye do. And I shall onely say to such that do under∣value the threatnings of God, the day is com∣ing when they shall be constrained to cry out. He hath spoken it, and he hath done it, and faith∣full is he, there is not one jot nor title in the Word of the Lord that shall fal to the ground: And believe it, God will be faithfull in the accomplishment of his threatnings, as he is faithfull in the accomplishment of his pro∣mises. 6. Faith discovereth unto a Christian the noble excellencies, and those spiritual digni∣ties that are in that everlasting estate that is provided for the Saints in light; Faith (as it were) carrieth up the soul to the top of Pisgah, off which it is admitted to behold the promised land, and truely the seeing of these noble things that are provided for the Saints, cannot but make them study holinesse, since they know that there is an impossibi∣lity for one to attain to that estate without holinesse, because he had said it, Without ho∣linesse no man shall see God. O then if once ye saw heaven, ye would be constrained to walk in that path of Sanctification, since it is the glorious way by which ye must walk in
through the gates of that blessed City. Bu ye know not the excellency that is there, i is a fancy and notion unto you: and that  the ground that ye do not study to conform, your selves unto that blessed image of God. And I would only ask you this one question. Is it possible that such a delusion as this can overtake you, as to think, that ye who never studied holinesse on earth, shall yet enter in to heavens gates. I know there are some that say in their hearts, I shall have peace though I walk in the imaginations of my own heart: and many more, that suppose that they might fight and overcome, that they may quite the estate of nature, and be com∣pleat in the estate of grace all in one day. But why will ye deceive your selves, Can a nation be born in one day; Or is there but one step be∣tween hell and heaven? O remember, though nothing be impossible with God, yet there was but one thief saved upon the crosse. 7. Faith hath influence upon the attaining of holinesse in this respect, That it believeth the exceeding great advantages that are pro∣mised unto the person that studieth holiness: Faith believeth that word, Matth. 5.8. Bles∣sed are the poor in spirit, for they shall see God: Paith it layeth hold upon the truth of the excellent sayings, and maketh the Christia endeavour to attain unto a likenesse and con∣formity with him, that so he may be admitted to behold his face for all eternity, and to be made like unto him. 8. Faith discovereth unto Christians th sinfulnesse of sin, this is never done till once
they be in the lively exercise of the grace of Faith. And I will give you these three grounds why faith compleatly discovereth the sinfulnesse of sin. 1. Faith letteth us see the Person against whom we commit this sin, and that doth exceedingly aggrege sin; for, when the Christian is admitted to be∣hold God, and to see that matchlesse excel∣lency that is in him; then (saith he) what a beast was I to offend such a glorious Ma∣jesty as He? What a fool was I to kick a∣gainst the pricks; or to enter in the lists with such an infinite God? 2. Faith letteth a Christian see these excellent obligations of love that Christ hath imposed upon us; Faith letteth us see the ancient and ever∣lasting love of Christ; Faith is that grace that letteth us see his sufferings; Faith let∣teth us see all that he hath done for us, and this maketh the Christian to cry out, Do I thus requite the Lord, O foolish one and un∣wise. And no doubt, if a Christian were more taken up in the study of this duty, he would be lesse in contracting debt, and were you but seriously taken up in the study of these two great Registers. 1. The Register in which all the infinit acts of love are re∣corded. And, 2. That Register in which all your acts of offending precious Christ are written, ye would be astonished and ashamed to see so much forgiven you; and durst not sin any more; there ye would see infinite ency desiring to rejoyce over judgement, and here ye would see the spotlesse riches of hat transcendent grace that is in Christ.
3. Faith letteth a Christian see the disadv tages of sin, and what wofull effects doth  low upon it, and this doth exceedingly ho forth the sinfulnesse of sin. The second thing that we shall speak concerning Faiths influence in the attain Sanctification, shall be to enquire a little  to these things that hinder even Believ from attaining this blessed effect of th Faith; for some Christians there are that some respects are taken up in the exercise▪ Faith, making use of Christ for Sanctification and yet their making use of Christ by Faith doth not weaken the strength of their ido (at least) to their apprehensions, neither  raise them up to a conformity with God;  that they are constrained somtimes to cry o I shall once fall by the hand of one of mine  quities, and when they fight and doth  overcome, they are at last constrained to  There is no hope. The first ground of such a dispensation▪ That a Christian is not constant in his acti of Faith, he will be strong in saith to  and when the morrow cometh, he will fa in that exercise, and this doth exceeding interrupt the noble victory of Faith:  when faith hath gotten its advantages,  lose them through security and neglige that is a command that should be continu obeyed, Trust in the Lord at all times: and doubt, if a Christian were more taken  the constant actings of Faith, he should  times sing that song, I trusted in God,  was helped.
Secondly, The most part of Christians, they are not strong and vigorous in actings of their Faith, their Faith is exceedingly weak, and so they cannot bring forth these noble fruits and effects of Faith. If we were trusting in God with all our hearts, then that promise, Psal. 37.5. should be accom∣plished to us, Trust in the Lord, and he shall bring it to passe. Thirdly, There is a strong heart conjunction and soul-union between us and our idols: we are joyned to our idols, and therefore we cannot be easily devorced; yea, when we are in the heat of the war against them, there is a procura∣tour within that cryeth, O spare this little one, or this profitable or pleasant one, and this is ordinarily our practice, to spare the choisest of our lusts; so that our Agags may cry forth, The bitternesse of death is past. But I confesse, if that union were once dissolved, we should then be heard with greatest ear∣nestnesse to cry forth, O blessed be the Lord that teacheth my hands to fight. Fourthly, Sometimes a Christian layeth too much weight upon the actings of Faith, and doth not imploy Faith, but as an instrument to which Christ must bestow strength to con∣quer. Sometimes we think that faith hath the vertue of overcoming in its own hand, but remember, Faith is but an empty thing without Christ: as ye may see, Act. 15.9. where the purifying their hearts by faith is ascribed to the holy Ghost: so that the acti∣vity of faith is from him, and not in it self. Fifthly, A Christian doth not hate sin with
a perfect hatred, even in the time of hi warfare with his lusts, and with these strong idols that are within him, but there is a se∣cret heart inclination to that very idol which he doth oppose: So that oftentimes there is that twofold contradiction in a Christian; Sometimes his light will cry, mortifie such an idol, and yet his heart will cry, O spare such an idol; yea more, sometime his heart will cry, mortifie such an idol, and yet his heart will cry, O spare such an idol: That is to say, there will be one part of our affe∣ction crying one thing, and another part of it will cry another thing. O! but there is a remarkable command for the perfect hatred of sin, Rom. 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. The word is in the Original, hate evil, as ye would do hell, that is, have perfect hatred to sin, O to hate iniquity as much as hell: and joyn that word, Eph. 5.11. Reprove the unfruitful works of darknesse; or as the word may be rendered, Make out by unanswerable arguments to your tentations, that you can∣nor imbrace the unfruitful works of dark∣nesse, convince your tentations that ye cannot do it: As we suppose, it was a noble ar∣guing of Joseph when he was tempted, How shall I do this? he put the tentation (as it were) to it: O tentation give me on ground why I should commit such an iniqui∣ty. And certainly, if we were thus reason∣ing with our tentations, they should fl before us: But the truth is, we imbrac the desire of our tentation upon implic faith. It is a sad regrate; and yet I may u∣ter
it, O if men would but deal with God as they do by Satan, we never dispute the promise of Satan, and never examine these allurements he setteth forth, and yet we consiantly dispute with God upon every thing. Sixthly, A Christian promoveth not in the growth of Sanctification, though in some measure exercising faith, because he hath not such a heart to holinesse. If we did discover more that excellent beauty, that is, in being cloathed with that glorious robe of the righteousnesse of Christ, and in having the sweet draughts of the Image of Christ engraven upon our hearts, we would have more victory over our lusts: There is a com∣mand for a perfect love to that which is good, and holinesse in that same place, Rom. 12.9. and cleave (saith he) to that which is good; or, as the word may be rendered, Be married and glewed to that which is good, let there be an unspeakable and indissolvable knot of union between you and that which is good: And certainly, if once we believed that re∣port which is given of holinesse, we would endeavour more to be cloathed with it: but that is the great ground why we advance not in holinesse, we know not the advantage nor dignity, to be made like God. O will ye think on it, What a thing is it for you who are the dust of his feet, to be made con∣form to him? Seventhly, A Christian is no much in the exercise of other duties that should go along with faith, suspect that faith for presumption, that can act, and be main∣tained without Prayer, certainly prayer i
keepeth in the life of Faith: Prayer,  that grace that must act mutually with fai in accomplishing that blessed work of San∣fication, and if we prayed more, and believ more, then we should have more to spe concerning the victory over our lusts. Wh was it, O Christian and expectant of heave that ye was constrained to put up an Eben∣zer, and cry forth, Hitherto hath the Lo helped me? When was it, O Christian an expectant of heaven, that ye was put to cr forth, God hath arisen, and mine enemies ar scattered before my face? I will tell yo what is your practice, ye make such a cov∣nant with your idols as Nahash did with th men of Jabesh Gilead, 1 Sam. 11.2, 3. yo lusts desire to make you pluck out you right eyes, and there is nothing your lus will command you, but almost ye will obey, but would you send out prayers as a messe∣ger to tell the King of such a tyrannie, y should know better what it is to bevictori∣ous. There is such a Covenant between th graces of the Spirit, especially between faith and Prayer (if so we may allude) as was made between Joah and Abishai, 2 Sam 10.11. one grace, as it were, saith to another, If I be weak, Come over and help me, and if ye be weak, I will come and help you. When one grace is like to fall in battel, then another grace cometh and helpeth it; when faith i like to die, then prayer and experience come  in and sweetly helpeth faith; when love i ginning to die, and waxe cold in the fight en faith cometh in and putteth life in love,
and when patience is like to fall and be over∣come, then faith comes in and speaks that word to patience, Wait on God, for I shall yet praise him for the health of his countenance. Oftentimes our patience and our sense they joyn together, for when sense speaketh good things, patience is in life, but when once sense preacheth hard things, it is like to die, and Faith must then maintain and up∣hold it. The third thing that we shall speak as to faiths influence upon Sanctification, shall be to draw these four conclusions from  point. The first is, That ye may know from this, he rise and original of your little successe ver corruption: There are many that are roubled with this question; O! what is he ground that I get not victory over ny lusts, and they propose that question o Christ that once the Disciples proposed o him, Why was it that I could not cast out ch a devil? And I can give no other an∣ver nor Christ gave to them, it is, because  have not faith; For if ye had faith as a ain of mustard seed, ye might say unto our idols, depart from us, and they should bey you, and there should not be a moun∣in in the way between you and heaven, but  ye had faith, it should be rolled away and ecome a plain. And the ground why many e groaning under the captivity of their ols, is, That they are not much in the ex∣cise of faith; sometimes ye enter in the s with your lusts in your own strength,
then ye are carried captives, and if ye  ter in the lists having some faith, yet ye  tain not the war, if faith get but one stro I will tell you six things which if  overcome, it keepeth the fields, and mak the Christian sing a song of triumph, eve  fore a compleat victory. First, Faith helpeth a Christian to o come that idol of impatience and discont some never met with a discouragement,  they cry out, This evil is of the Lord,  should I wait any longer, they are soon pu  the end of their patience: Now faith  overcome such an idol, and I will tell  three excellent things that faith perform  to the soul under impatience, or when  in hazard of it. 1. Faith telleth the C∣stian there is an end, and their expectation  not be cut off; Faith telleth that there  morning as well as night, and this keep  the soul from being overcome with dis∣ragement, when they are brought to  midnight of trouble; Faith can tell  hour of the night it is, and how near the  proaching of the morning, when day  break and all their clouds flee away. 2.  helpeth the Christian to see there is muc Christ to make up any losse or disadvan that they have; if ye losse your son, or y choisest contentment in the world, Faith  say such a word as Elkana said to  1 Sam. 1.8. Is not Christ better to the ten sons? The choisest contentments  lose, (that is faiths divinity) Christ  an hundred of them: and so this
oul be ashamed of their impatiency, and to give over their fretting at the excellent and wise dispensations of God. 3. Faith letteth a Christian see, that there is not a dispensati∣on that he meeteth with, but it hath these two excellent ends, it hath our advantage as one end, and the glory of the Lord as another end: and there is not a dispensation that a Christian meeteth with, but these are the glorious ends proposed in it. And therefore I would only give you this advice, evermore when ye meet with a dark dispensation, let faith interpret it, for it is only the best interpreter of dark dispensations; for if ye meet with sense, this is its interpretation, he is not chastening me in love, but punishing me with the wound of an enemy, but faith will pro∣phesie good things to you in the darkest night. The second next great idol that faith will bring low, is that idol of covetousnesse and desire to the things of the world. I think that word, Eccles. 3.11. was never so much accomplished as it is in those dayes, and amongst you, He hath set the world in your hearts, that is the idol that dwelleth and lodgeth within you: yea, the world it hath your first thoughts in the morning, and your last thoughts at night; yea more, it hath your thoughts when ye are at Prayer, and when ye are at Preaching; yea, it hath such a dominion over you, that it giveth you, as it were, a new Bible, and in all the ten Com∣mands scrapeth out the Name of God, and setteth down the world. And whereas God saith, Thou shalt have no other Gods but
me, the world saith, Thou shalt have no  Gods but me, &c. But faith will bring  idol low, and soon let you see the vanity  emptinesse of it; yea, faith would let  see a more noble object, and withall, disco unto you how short your time is, and h few hours ye have to spend in following  ter lies: And I am perswaded of this, t if ye could win to shake hands with  death every day, and say, thou at last shall  my prince, and shall be the king to whom  shall be a subject, and if ye believed that t day of Eternity were approaching, it wo be a mean to mortifie these pursuits a the world: And I shall say, he is a ble Christian that can maintain alwayes su thoughts of the world, as he shall have w he is standing upon the outmost line betwe Time and Eternity. I shall say it, and  lieve it, O worldling, and O thou that  the Moon upon thy head, and in thy hea the day shall once come, that thou  preach as much of the vanity of the wor as those that undervalued it never so much. The third great idol that faith will bri low, is that idol of self-love and self-in∣gence, that which is the great mother of  other Idols. I think, if there were no m to be said against that idol of self-love a self-indulgence, that which is in 2 Tim. 3.. were sufficient, that amongst all the g idols of the latter times, this is put in  first place, They shall belovers of themsel we cannot take pains for Christ, we ca go about the exercise of any duty, bec
ido f  forbiddeth us. I will tell you its counsel and great advice it giveth you, O person, pity thy self, that same counsel Peter gave his Master, it biddeth you pity your self: But if we could rightly in∣terpret that language, it would be this, de∣stroy your self, for self indulgence, and self love is that which will ruine you. O what bles∣sed attainments of God; what blessed frui∣tions of Jesus Christ, what advancement in mortification, what conformity to God hath that idol of self indulgence obstructed, and only not utterly ruined, even in the best? I think, if once ye could set your foot upon that idol, the rest should fall apace; that is the general of all the forces of your lusts, and it is as Saul, the head higher then the rest of all your idols within you. The fourth idol that faith will subdue, is self righteousnesse, this is a great thing we maintain, we will never renounce our own righteousness and submit to the righteousness of Christ: and the great ground of it is, That there is this principle within us all, we love to go to heaven through a Covenant of Works, and we never desire to be much oblieged to any other, we cannot submit our selves to the righteousnesse of Christ. The fifth great idol that faith can subdue, is that of pleasure, the world, and the con∣tentments of it: Pleasure is the great idol that many worship and adore, there are some that love the gain of the world, and there are others that love the pleasures of the world; but faith hath a noble influence
upon the  faith discovereth to a soul more  pleasures, more sweet delights nor  found under the Sun; Faith maketh a  stian lose his state unto all things tha here below; Faith is that grace that ma us grow blind, and not much to behold  passing vanities, those transient delights  present evil world. Our second conclusion is this, Th Faith helpeth Sanctification, so Sanctific∣on helpeth Faith. I will tell you three  advantages Faith hath by the growth an ercise of Sanctification. 1. It is a nobl dence of faith, and maketh a Christian  perswaded that he is settled upon the  and that his interest in God is made sure,  ctification is that which will help a Ch an dayly to read his interest in God: T clear from Jam. 2.18. I will shew the  faith by my works, where this is clearly  den forth, That a Christian much in the  of Sanctification, he can upon all times an extract of his Faith, and, as it were,  cover it and shew it to the world. 2. S∣fication maketh faith perfect, accordin that remarkable word, Jam. 2.22. A works was faith made perfect. There is a  perfection that redoundeth to faith th the exercise of the work of Sanctifica for not only is it thereby made manifes receiveth such a shining luster and sp as that sometimes the eves of carnal m even dazled to behold a Believer, but i receiveth strength and power: Faith
the nature of there things that spend them∣ves in bringing forth, but on the contrary  faith bring forth a hundred children (I mean works of holinesse) in one day, it groweth stronger: and this is further clear, 2 Pet. 1.8. For if these things be in you, and abound, ye shal neither be barren nor unfruitful. And from that other word, Jam. 2. where it is said, That faith without works is dead, being alone: If faith be alone, it wants its spiritual life and vigour; but if ye were much in the exer∣cise of the work of Sanctification, ye would, no doubt, attain to a noble and lively acting of that grace of Faith. And, lastly, if a Chri∣stian be much in this work of Sanctification, there will be a comfortable exercise of faith, Sometimes Faith is exercised with much anxiety, and sometimes with much doubting, but faith and a pure conscience joyned toge∣ther, they make an excellent feast, and maketh a Christian rejoyce with joy unspeak∣able and full of glory. Thirdly, We may draw this conclusion, If faith have influence upon the work of Sanctification, and helpeth the producing of a noble conformity to God, then I say, there are many that their faith is a delusion, and their hope shall be cut off as a spiders web. There are some that have faith, that have not Sanctification, nor knows not what it is, and shall not that faith unquestionably perish as a dream, and evanish as the vision of the night? and therefore if ye would testifie the reality of your faith, then study more the work of Sanctification. I shall but from Joh. 8.14,
15. give you these eight properties of  pocrites faith and hope, which may  you try and examine your self. 1.  hope and their faith is but an act of  yea, there is not such an act of foolish under heaven, as a hypocrites hope;  cause it is but a castle in the aire, and writing to himself a charter on the sa so that word ye have rendered, whose  shall be cut off; is in the Original, whose  shall be cut off; shewing this, that they b without a foundation, and so their faith  be most unsure and uncertain. 2.  thing they hope for shall at last loath the O hypocrites, ye hope for enjoyment Christ, but be perswaded of it, Christ s eternally loath you, and ye shall eterna loath Ohrist: that is clear in that same w Whose hope shall be cut off, or as the w may be read, Whose hope shall loath the the thing he hoped for shall loath him,  Christ shall say, Depart, I know you  3. And though ye have now much des and pleasure in the actings of your presu tuous hope, yet at the last, ye shall loath  hope: The word will carry that, not  the thing ye hoped for shall loath you,  ye likewise shall loath your hope. The  is coming, that ye shall cry forth, curse the day that ever I believed that I sho get heaven. 3. It shall at last be the  ter of his vexation, from that word, w hope shall be cut off; or as the word ma rendered, whose hope shall vex him. O  the hypocrites shall meet with that anx
dreadfull disappointment one day, they all then put their hand on their head, being  shamed because of their confidence. 4. He  studieth by all means to keep his hope, though it be but false, therefore have ye that word in the 15. verse, he holdeth it fast, or as the word is, he keepeth it with hand and arm, with all his strength he keepeth his hope: so that if Christ would come from heaven and say, man, thou art a hypocrite, and thy hope shall be cut off, they would say, I will keep my hope Sir, and maintain it, and that is an evidence your hope is not built upon the foundation; I love never a faith that in this side of time is unchange∣able, and never knoweth what it is to have ups nor downs. 5. It is built alwayes upon a wrong foundation, which is imported in that word, He shall lean upon his house, which we suppose may interpret thus, he shall lean upon his worldly enjoyments, or upon these spiritual like enjoyments he met with. The hope of a hypocrite is never built upon Christ, and so unquestionably that hope shall be cut off and evanish. 6. Let hypocrites hold fast their hope with both their arms, I will say these three words to them: First, If all the Ministers should preach to you, and desire you to quite your hope, and ye will not, yet both your hope and you shall be seperate: as it is in that word, Your hope shall depart from you, and ye shall quite it. Secondly, Your hope will bring you to death, and no further: according to that word, Joh. 18.14. Whose hope shall bring
them to the King of terrors: Will it bri no further say you, O no, The King  rors shall separate you and your hope. Th The day is coming when the foundati it shall be discovered, and there shall  be a delusion but it shall be unfolded.  day is approaching when Christ shall  how you got your faith, and how you  tained it. 7. The hypocrites hope  poor building, it is as a spiders web;  I conceive (without being critick) is  The hope of hypocrites they spin it o their own bowels, they have it not  Christ, but as yee see a spider spin o its own bowels, so do they out of th selves, it is no better stuff then their  rotten righteousnesse, Christ ever b those unto a lively hope. Let me be you therefore, that by all means ye wo study to make fure your interest in God,  to build your faith on him, whose nam that munition of rocks; For believe it, I  say it with much perswasion, I know th are many that shall once meet (if God  vent it not) with a dreadful disappo ment: And therefore as ye would not in that eternal hazard that is attending  that presumptuously take hold of a h before Christ take hold of them, study  search your hope what it is: I desire no raze any foundation of their hope th laid by the hand of Christ, but would d and charge you to raze the foundatio that hope which ye have laid from th ginning by your own hands, and he
. I would presse these three things up∣on you. First, O ye that are strangers to Christ, and that know not what it is to im∣race the offers of the everlasting Gospel, ey that excellent counsel, 2 Chron. 3.8. ive Christ your hand; for that word which  have rendered, Yeeld your self to the Lord,  is in the Original, Give your hand to God; which is in short, Marry him, and be content o contract your self to him; for believe it, the day is coming, that either that contract between you and Christ, shall be eternally confirmed, or that contract between the de∣il and you, shall be eternally ratified. And, I suppose, there is so much spoken to the commendation of that noble Plant of re∣own, that ye may take Christ (if so we ay speak) blindly, ye may close your eyes nd take him, for he shall never disappoint your hope; for let you think of him to eternity, he shall alwayes be above your houghts. Secondly, I would earnestly de∣sire you once to search and try, what was he first rise of your faith in Jesus Christ: I m perswaded of it, there are many that ake up their faith at their foot, they never avelled in pain, and yet faith is brought forth. Is not this a mystery? shall it be aid, before they travelled, they brought forth:  do nor question but there may be lesse and greater pangs of the new birth, but this is most certain, there is alwayes some either esser troubles or greater, till that childe be rought forth: and yet I may condemn these hat stay too long in the place of the breaking
forth of children, Christ will never  you when ye do really come, because have not been so many years and dayes in son to the Law. Thirdly, Let me d you to go and ask, is there a grave betw you and heaven, in all that way thro which the Saints have travelled, upon w this is written, here lyeth a man that sin∣ly sought life from Christ, and he de him. I think without encroaching  much upon the searching forth of the  ercise of the Saints in heaven, I think  may suppose, there may be in heaven so Queries and Interrogations: Christ shall  O beloved, Did ye want any thing here bel when ye was sent forth to travel in  world? and ye shall be constrained to  swer, No: Christ shall ask that question you, Did I not all things well? and  shall be constrained to answer, Yes: Ch shall propose that question, Are ye not w rewarded for all your pains? and you  be constrained to answer, Yes: O but  take him, he is the blessed and most excell One in heaven and in earth, it is the best ∣gain ever ye made: O ye Merchants  have made many excellent bargains to y own apprehension, will ye come and  one excellent bargain yet, that will m you eternally up: And what is that? C and buy Christ and take him for nothing,  is not your ordinary bargaining: the few comes to you, and biddeth you bu cellent things without money; but con the Gospel, and ye shall get Christ wi
money; niggards that are loath to spend your money in the world, will ye  to Christ and believe on him, take him freely: O say ye, if I could get three things of Christ,  would come. 1. I would have much gold and silver; I say, come to Christ, and ye shall get much gold and silver: Is that true? it is abundantly true: See Job 22.25, 26. where pressing that exhortation, Acquaint thy felf with God, and using many arguments, he saith, Thou shall lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks. Is not that gold enough? yea, ye shall have silver like∣wise, Thou shalt have plenty of silver. In the 26. verse, ye shall not only have gold and sil∣ver, but shall have plenty of it, and shall have the most excellent and refined gold. But O say ve, will that promise be literally accom∣plished to me if I come to Christ: I would only say these three things to thee: 1. Come to Christ, and if gold and silver be for thy ad∣vantage, thou shall have it literally accom∣plished. 2. I say, ye shall have as much con∣tentment in Jesus Christ, as if ye had this house full of gold. 3. I will say this to thee, Christ shal be thy gold and thy silver: accord∣ing to that word in the 26. verse, which is most remarkable; yea, the Almighty shall be thy defence; or as it is in the Original, shall be thy gold, speaking of the promise of gold before. Secondly, Ye say, I would have this, that what I purpose might be accomplished: I say, come to Christ and ye shall have that likewise, Job 22.28. Thou shalt decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee; which I
conceive, doth not only take in these spiri¦all decrees; but likewise these that rel temporal enjoyments. But there is a  thing I would have (say ye) and I w¦come to Christ, and it is, that I might  all the desires of my heart: I say, O  and O woman, come to Christ, and thou  have what thou desirest: This is clear  Psal. 37.4. Delight thy self in God, an shall give thee the desires of thy heart:  can ye have man but it is there? Would have any thing of Christ? He putteth blank in your hand, and saith that  which he said to Solomon, Ask; What  ye have, and I shall give you, Christ,  were, putteth his name to the foot of a cle sheet of paper, and he desireth you to  what ye would have, And is not this an ¦cellent bargan? O niggard, what would  have which ye will not get in Christ?  be perswaded, that ye that refuse and  not take him, the eternal curse of all th in heaven will return upon thy head,  eternal curse of all the expectants  heaven and heirs of life will return upon  head of that person that will not take Chri And cursed, cursed shall that person be  will not take Christ, and one day all  Congregation in heaven and earth shall  Amen.
SERMON VII. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? ASsurance is a precious gift which many that live in these dayes do undervalue, and trode under foot; do not the Christians of these times go halting between two opinions, be∣ing neither positive that they are received into the adoption of children, nor positive that they are yet in a state of alienation, and ene∣mies in their mindes by wicked works; yea, and (that which is worse) there are many among as that walk with much contentment under their uncertainty. I think it is a fault to be condemned in many, they pursue more to sa∣fie their sense for the present, nor to have a solide well grounded assurance for time to ome: I could wish that all the debates and estions of these dayes, that take up so much of our time, & so much of our spirits from bet∣ter things, were happily drowned in these four excellent questions, which without contro∣ersie are of greatest concernment for all to ave resolved. 1. Where shall I rest all night when the long shaddows of the everlasting
evening shall be streached out upon me,  whither or not hath Christ gone before  take up a place for me in his Fathers ho 2. It is a soul-concerning question, Mas what shall I do to inherit eternal life? to  asking at him that can sweetly resolve y And 3. not to rest there, but to be cr forth in the morning, What shall I do to saved, and to be crying out in the even Lord what wilt thou have me to do. 4. I sweet to be asking seriously, Saw ye  whom my soul loveth: There is much of o time spent in asking news from Court,  from abroad, concerning the revolution States and Kingdoms: But I suppose,  were better to ask, What news from heav concerning thy self, and what news fr within, and news of thy Bridegrooms con∣ing? for these are great Courts, I mean  Court of heaven, and the Court of con∣ence, the affairs of which, a Christian shou endeavour much to know. 5. It is  soul concerning question, that a Christian should be much in proposing to himself. What shall I render unto the Lord for all  benefits. It is certain, we must say, that o faith and assurance, and all our other merc are from him, and yet alar, we are neglig in praises, we may with Tamar rent our g ments of divers colours, even the garment the Kings daughters, because of spirit whoredome against God, and our ingratit to him. Now having spoken unto you at so  a length of that precious and fundamen
grace of Faith, we have thought fit to shut up all in speaking a little upon these words we now have read, concerning the evidence and assurance of Faith. The Apostle in this Chapter is vindicating his Ministery and Apostleship, from the contempt that was cast upon it, he proveth he was a Minister of the New Testament, called and sent of God, by the blessing and successe he had among them, in that he had not plowed nor thres∣sed in vain; and they being so much in cen∣suring his way, and seeking an account of his Ministery: In these words, he doth (as it were) draw them off by a holy diversion unto another businesse, as if he had said to them, O Corinthians, I will divert you from the exercise of judging me, and will lead you into an exercise that is more divine and pro∣fitable; be much in judging and examining your selves: and indeed, it is a truth worth our observation, that if we were more in judging of our selves, we would be lesse in judging others: but alas, there are some of us, we are so much abroad, that we cannot be much at home. In the words, there is these six things considerable. First, That there is such a thing attainable by a Christian while he is here, as a distinct perswasion and assurance that he is in the Faith, and hath an interest in Christ: by being in the faith; here is not to be understood, a being in the doctrine of Faith only, but it is to be understood of prin∣cipally, being indeed and really united to Christ by Faith. Secondly, That the seek∣ing
after assurance, is a necessary command duty, for ye see here the words very impe∣tive, Examine your selves, prove your selve Thirdly, That there are many mistakes a delusions among people, concerning th noble and excellent thing, Assurance, the being many that keep fast a hope which Chri shall once discountenance and sweep awa like a spiders web, and this is imported  these words, Examine your selves, or as th word may be rendered, Take an acurate an an experimental search of your selves, tr your selves, or prove your selves: it is a wor that is borrowed from the Gold smiths fine∣ing and trying Gold. And so his putting of the Corinthians to so acurate a search of themselves, saith this clearly to us, there are many mistakes concerning this thing many do passe a decreet in their own favours before Christ hath passed his approbation of them. Fourthly, Take notice of this from the words, that there is much and exceeding much advantage, by trying and searching whether we be in the faith or no; this is imported in his doubling the exhortation. Fifthly, That one most excellent and spiri∣tual way of attaining assurance, whether we be in the faith or no, is self examination, and putting our self to the trial, as if he had said would ye have a distinct perswasion that y are in Christ, then be much in the exercis of self examination. For the rest of th words of the verse, we intend not  handle. As to the first, That there is such a thi
attainable: I shall only propose these rea∣sons unto you to make it evident. 1. It is known in Scripture, that the Saints of old have in ordinary way attained to distinct perswasion of their interest in Christ, Song. 2. vers. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his, and Rom. 8.38. I am perswaded (saith the Apostle) that neither death nor life, &c. shall be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ. And 2 Cor. 5. ver. 1. For we know, if this our earthly tabernacle were dis∣solved, we have a house with God not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2. It is the great scope of many Scriptures, to shew how Christians may attain to assurance. 1 Job. 1.13. These things I write unto you, that ye may know what ye have eternal life. The great end and design of John, writing in these Epistles, is, to make a soul acquaint with Christ, and to make them to accept of him, and to give them a distinct assurance that Christ hath accepted them. 3. There are many commands in Scripture for Christians to be serious in scarching after assurance, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore brethren, give all di∣ligence to make your calling and election sure. It is the blessed end of Gods oath in the ever∣lasting Covenant, that a Christian might get assurance. What was the ground and great end that God confirmed his Covenant with an oath, was it not, Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, wherein it was impossible for God to lie, ye might have strong consolation. 5. If assurance of our interest in Christ were not attainable, then thse precious graces of joy
and love could not be well exercised: i Christian were evermore in the dark conce∣ning his interest in Christ, he could not giv obedience to that exhortation, Rejoyce eve more, again, I say, rejoyce. 6. The Scrip∣ture hath set down these means by which  Christian may win to assurance: as is clea 1 Joh. 3.18, 19. 2 Pet. 4.5. compared wit vers. 10. where the Apostle Peter pressing th Doctrine of making our calling and election sure, he setteth down these excellent mea by which they may win to it, and doubtless the marks and evidents that are registrate i the Scripture of a gracious state, do assur us, that assurance is attainable. 7. What ar the ends of the Sacraments, but that our assu∣rance may be confirmed, and that our faith may be strengthned, the two Sacraments are the two great Seals of heaven that are put to the Charter of the Covenant. Now as to the application, and the mor full improvement of this first point, I shal only offer these considerations. 1. I woul have it taken notice of, that though grac and assurance be two lovers, yet there is  such band of union between them, that th one cannot consist without the other:  Christian may have the real grace of God  and yet walk in darknesse and have no light  a Christian may be going to heaven, and ye that word oftentimes in his mouth, I am  off from thy sight; yea, are there not eve some who have had assurance, and somtim a day have been admitted to draw that co∣clusion, I am my beloveds, and his desire,
towards me, who are now under darknesse concerning their interest, and in much bit∣ternesse of spirit, do sometimes cry out, My hope and my strength is perished from the Lord. But therefore let me say this one word, both to weak ones who never had as∣surance, and deserted ones who have lost it; when ye misse assurance, beware of drawing such negative conclusions concerning your graces, but when ye sit in darknesse and see no light, Trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay your selves upon your God; that is when ye cannot reach the faith of assurance, be much in maintaining of adherence, remem∣ber Jobs divinity, Though thou should kill me, yet will I trust in thee, and consider that sweet word, He will keep them in perfect peace, whose hearts are stayed on him. My second consideration is, That since as∣surance is attainable, ye would  find out and remove these things that  hinder you from attaining unto it. And that we may help you in this, we conceive, that the obstru∣ctions of a Christians assurance, are especially in these two, 1. Our mistaking of the Lords dealing towards us. And, 2. Our untender and unsuitable dealing towards him. Of the first sort we shall lay before you these five. The first is, want of favourable termes of prayer; this often maketh a Chri∣stian to debate his interest, and call in questi∣on his evidence, Lam. 3.8. compared with verse 18. I cry and shout, but he shutteth out my prayers: and this is the conclusion of that dispensation, verse 18. My hope and my
strength is perished from the Lord: and this especially occasioned when the Christian most serious and servent in prayer, and the he meereth not with a return, this maketh them exceedingly debate their interest. A I confesse, it is a sad dispensation to m with a silent Christ in prayer; but yet th needeth not make a Believer question all, a debate the reality of his interest in God since the dearest of all the children of th Kingdom have been so dealt with, even  David, Psal. 22. Cryed night and day without silence, and is not heard, but cryeth out, Why art thou so far from helping, and from the word of my roaring; yea, that passage may relate t him who was the root and off-spring of David, for even he was so dealt with, and had not presently a sensible return, when he ha prayed thrice, that the cup might passe from him. Secondly, The want of sensible enlarge∣ment and liberty in prayer, that he never got to his knees, but his heart beginneth to die like a stone within him, then he cryeth forth that word, 2 Cor. 3.17. Where th Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, and sur if I had the Spirit of the Lord, I would ha liberty in the exercise of prayer, and tha this is a rise of the disputing of our intere is clear from Psal. 77.4. compared with  7.9 saith David, I am sore troubled that  cannot speak, I have no liberty in prayer,  never go to God in prayer, but (as it we my tongue sticketh to the roof of my mou he from hence draweth that conclusion,  God forgotten to be gracious, and hath
wrath shut up his tender mercies for ever: I con∣fesse, this also is a sad dispensation to meet with an absent and vailed Christ in prayer: so that we can never go to seek God in secret, but we may write this upon our prayers, He is gone, he is gone, especially when we have lost that liberty that formerly we have had: and therefore is Davids perplexity much highten∣ed, ver. 5, 6. from his remembering his song in the night, and his calling to mind the years of ancient times: yet we may remember how soon David wrote his tetractions, as to that sad conclusion, I said, this is my infirmity, ver. 10. and so should we do when upon every straiting in prayer, we begin to question all the Lords kindnesse towards us. A third obstruction of assurance, is a Chri∣stians wrestling with his corruptions pain∣fully and seriously, and yet not meeting with any sensible victory over them, but upon the contrary, their corruptions seem to be stronger, and they themselves seem to be weaker, and then it is, they strengthen their misbelief, by that word, 1 Joh. 3.3. Every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth him∣self even as he is pure: And indeed, this is a knot that is not easily loosed, but when he seeth his idols and corruptions prevailing over him, he will cry out, I am gone and there is no help in Israel concerning this thing, and yet this also is a word in haste, Paul hath registrate himself a standing witnesse, even after he was a chosen vessel, Rom. 7. How strangely a childe of God may be  down with a body of death even under most
serious wrestlings against it: And th fore if thou seriously maintain the comba though thou do not sensibly prevail, thou h no reason upon that ground to weaken t assurance. Fourthly, When a Christian is put to mo then ordinary outward affliction, when G doth dispence sadly unto them in outward things, they then begin to call in question the interest, and dispute their assurance, this clear, by comparing Lament. 3. vers. 18. wi the preceeding words, where speaking of th sad dispensations they meet with, he drawe that conclusion in vers. 18. My hope and  strength is perished from the Lord, and Jon. 2.2 where he draweth that conclusion from suc a promise, I am now cast out of thy sight, th devil he taketh Eliphaz divinity and present it to a Christian; Call now if there be any  answer thee, and to which of the Saints wilt th go; as if he had said, did thou ever know Christian afflicted so as thou art afflicted,  so he would have Job to quite his integrity. But yet we know all these blessed ones for  their afflictions, were dear unto the Lord,  had their interest secure in him, yea, as m as he loveth, he doth rebuke and chasten, and it bastards and not sons on whom he will not  stow a rod, and therefore we ought not  quarrel our interest because of afflictions. And lastly, The rise of a Christians  couragement, and that which hindered their assurance, is, when their former ex∣rience of the manifestations of God doth  relish to them, and when the promises
which they have built become tastelesse unto them as the white of an egge, and when they meet not with God in Ordinances, but these become lifelesse, when these three rise to ge∣ther upon them, their case becomes very per∣plexed oftentimes: and this also seemed to have been Davids case, Psal. 77. When he re∣membered his song in the night, and the dayes of old, and yet had no sweetnesse in them, then he breaketh forth into these bitter complaints which are there expressed: but yet as we said before, this was his infirmity, and there is no reason for a Christian to question his in∣terest upon such an account; because the Or∣dinances are not at all times alike lively even to the best, and the Lord is not alwayes pre∣sent, but though sometimes the candle of the Lord doth shine upon his head, yet at other times he is necessitate to cry out, O that it were with me as in months past. The second sort of obstructions of a Chri∣stians assurance, I mean such as flow from our untender dealing towards God are, First, A guilty conscience; that is a re∣markable word, 1 Tim. 3.9. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience; It telleth us, that this excellent grace Faith cannot bide but in a cleanly lodging, even in a pure conscience, and when a Christian setteth about to believe he will know how a guilty con∣science will flee in his face, and cry out, O adventure not to believe, dare thou believe; the guiltinesse of a Christians conscience maketh him oft to cry out. Touch not the mountain lest thou be thrust thorow: And I
tell you three disadvantages of a guilty ¦science. 1. It obstructeth a Christians ¦nesse in making applications to Christ;  heart saith close, and his necessity saith  but his guilty conscience cryeth out, O  aback and do not close. 2. A guilty con¦ence oftentimes it hindereth the discove of Christ to the soul, and doth so affright  terrifie, yea, it will so sting and bite us,  when he revealeth himself, we cannot take ¦tice, when he would lay on a plaster, our so will tear it off, and refuse to be comfort 3. It doth exceedingly obstruct our go about duty. O but our soul moves slowly the paths of God when we are under  power of a guilty conscience. The second obstruction is, That we  not much in the exercise of tendernesse.  but if a Christian were tender, and if in ev step of his life he desired to set Christ be his eyes, he would easily win to much assura according to that word, Isa. 64.5. Thou m¦est him that rejoycest and worketh righteousne and these that remember thee in thy wa▪ Would ye know the assured Christian,  the tender Christian; the Christian that  not crucifie convictions, the Christian  breaketh not resolutions, the Christian  doth not fit calls and opportunities to pra the Christian that saith not of any sin it  little one; or the Christian that searcheth  waves, watcheth alwayes, examineth alway and is alwayes casting out sin, that is the ¦sured Christian. The third obstruction is, The want of
exercise of the grace of fear, we are not much under this disposition, to fear the Lord and this goodnesse: this is clear from that word, Psal. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will shew to them his Covenant. I think there are these two great evidences that much of the power of Godlinesse is gone from some of our hearts: we fear God no more, nor if we were his companion. And we fear our selves no more nor if we had not a deceitfull heart within us, we neither fear God nor our selves, and that speaketh that much of the life of Reli∣gion is lost amongst us. The fifth thing that doth much astruct our assurance, is, much worldly mindednesse, and to eager pursuit after the things of a present life: That is remarkable, 2 Cor. 4. ver. last, compared with 2 Cor. 5.1. We look not unto the things that are seen, that is, we are not much taken up with the things of a present world, which the men of the world seek and delight themselves in: and it is subjoy∣ed, For we know, if this our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a house not made with hands; so we see assurance and mortification to the world, are much nit together. Would ye know where to find our hearts, the most part of us are con∣versing with idols of the world; Would e know where to find our hearts, they are mong the vanities of the world. O how true  that word, Psal. 39. Man walks in a vain ew: What is man in all his actings, but  one walking in a long gallery that is set
about with pictures, gting on these  and saluting them all, as if they were  Kings and Queens, and great persons  could do him good; and so our pursui ∣ter the world, is nothing else but a dead ∣dow pursuing after dead shaddows, a man is but a short living shaddow pursuing ∣vanity and nothing, and thus he fools  his time, forgetting to make sure the one  necessary. Fifthly, Want of distinct apprehen of these three, the infinit love of Christ,  infinit power of Christ, and the infinit w∣dome of Christ; there is not an objection Christians that ye have from the multi of your sins, but it may be drowned in  nit love; there is not an objection that have concerning the strength of your  but it may be drowned in that immense  of the infinit power of Christ; there  an objection ye have from your wants, or  your evil nature, but ye may drown it  infinit wisedom and goodnesse of Christ there can be nothing against your assur but may be sweetly answered also from  rightly applied, taken up and rested  the soul. The last thing which hinder  assurance, is, the smainesse of the meas grace that we have attained; for when  is small, it is hard to be discerned, and  fore, if we would have assurance, lea to ly still and dispute, but to rise up  increase our stock, and then you shall  ye are rich, Grow in Grace and the know of God, and by this ye shall know if ye  know the Lord.
The third consideration is, that assurance  not bestowed at all times, but there are ome special times and seasons when God gi∣veth a Christian a broad sight of his interest, ad I shall but name these. The first is, when he is first converted, and Christ and he joyns hands together, even then sometimes the best robe is put on upon the prodigal son, and the fatted calf is killed, and a ring is put upon his hand, and shoes upon his feet, Act. 9.17. Paul meeteth with as∣surance immediatly after his conversion, 1 Joh. 2.12.14. I write unto you little children, be∣cause ye have known the Father; and before that, in the 12. vers. I write unto you little children, because your sins are forgiven you; so that when a Christian is brought into Christ, he will (as it were) lead them to the Regi∣sters of heaven, and say, friend come and see, here is your name written from eternity: But do not mistake me, I do not say, this is al∣wayes so, but these whom Christ converreth through the thunderings of the Law, these most frequently meet with intimation of the pardon of their sins and peace of God, even at their first acquaintance. I know there are some Christians, that if ye ask at them when they were begotten to a lively hope, they would say that word that the blind man once said, One thing I know, I was once blind, and now I see, but for the time and the day, I know not when it was. The second time is, when they are wrest∣ling with God like Princes in Prayer, and watching unto that exercise, Dan. 9.23. com∣pared
with the preceeding verse, h much and serious in prayer, doth meet that word from heaven, O man greatly ∣ved, or as the word is, O man of desires,  Act. 10.2, 3, 4. when Cornelius is  exercise of watching and prayer, he  a vision, and getteth intimation of his  with God; and Jacob when he was ∣ling with Christ, Gen. 32. he hath that  mony given him, Thou hast as a prince ∣led with God and prevailed. The third time is, when a Christian is ∣sing through the gates of death, and is  the borders of Eternity: I desire not  mistaken in this neither; I know some ∣stians are led to heaven through a dark tr so as they never see a blink of the co∣nance of Christ, untill the day come  they get him in their arms eternally w his Fathers house; Some Christians  they go through the gates of death, they  be disputing of this question, Where am ∣ing, but this is certain, that sometimes,  oftentimes Christ will dispense a broad  of a Christians interest unto him at the  death, 2 Sam. 25.5. When was it that  sands in the very jaws of death, God  made with me an everlasting Covenant,  not when death was shaking hands with  and 2 Tim. 4.8. When was it that Paul  that song, I have fought the good fight of  I have finished my course, henceforth is la for me a crown of righteousnesse, was i even then when he was ready to depart
offered up? And when was it when old ∣eon did sing that blessed song, Luk. 2.29. Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, for my eyes have seen thy salvation, was it not within a step of death, as it were, he went to heaven with Christ in his arms, or rather in his heart he carried Christ with him, and found Christ before him, and so death to Sime∣n was a change of his place, and not a change of his company. The fourth time is, when he is to be put to some hard and difficult duty: Before Abraham be put to forsake his native land, and become a stranger and a wanderer, he meeteth with sweet intimation of his , Gen. 12.2. I will make of thee a great nation, and vers. 7. The Lord appeared unto Abraham, and before Jeremiah be sent a Preacher to a rebellious people he will have that word spo∣ken unto him, I know thee before thou wast brought forth. The fifth time is, when a Christian hath done some singular act of obedience, when Abraham had obeyed the Lord, and was con∣tent to offer up his Isaac he meeteth  sight of his interest and Covenant renew  to him with an oath, Gen. 22.16. By my  I have sworn, because th hast done  and hast not withholden thy son, even thy only son, blessing, I will blesse thee, and multiplying. I will multiply thee as the stars of heaven. The sixth time is, when a Christian is  meet with hard trials, difficulties and afflicti∣ons in the world, then they usually meet with assurance, and so Gen 28.14, 15, 16. before
Jacob go to serve Laban, he meeteth  intimation of his peace with God. The seventh time is, when a Christian under sad persecution and affliction, then the Lord give a word from heaven to co him and assure him of his fatherly love mercy: When was it that Christ left that  Legacy to his Disciples, Joh. 14. ver. 27. peace I leave with you, my peace I give you, it not when he himself was to leave the troublesome and sorrowful dayes, in a  secuting world. The eighth time is at some solemn O∣nances and approaches to God, the daye a Communion to a tender Christian  been sweet dayes, when Christ hath come the soul, and said, Behold me, behold me.  think the eleven Apostles met with  assurance of their interest in Christ at  Communion they were at with him: O w sweet intimations were these, This is  body which is broken for you, and this  the New Testament in my blood shed for  and a little after, you are they which have  tinued with me in my tentation, and I appo unto you a kingdom. We come now to the second point wh we proposed from the words, viz. That  assurance is a thing which may be attain  so to seek after it, is a necessary duty:  me not be mistaken, as if I said, the hav of assurance were simply necessary to Sal∣tion; no, that were a Doctrine as com lesse upon the other hand, as the Po doctrine of the impossibility of assuranc
upon the other: But the thing I say, is, hat the Christians seeking after assurance, nd his real endeavouring to attain unto it, s a necessary command of God which he ath bound upon the consciences of his chil∣dren amongst other Gospel duties; And cer∣tainly, we need go no further for the clear∣ing of this then the Text it self; what eaneth these peremptory injunctions, Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith  not: Prove your own selves; Know ye not, &c. but if you will, you may add that word,  Pet. 1. vers. 5. and 10. compared, what an be more expresly commanded, and more strongly pressed, then that Christians should end their utmost endeavours for attaining unto this blessed condition of assurance: Give diligence, yea, give all diligence, yea the ather give all diligence to make your calling nd election sure. From this, we shall only lay before you these Considerations. 1. If the seeking after ssurance be a necessary duety, then these three things are most lamentable. First, That there are so many in this Generation who are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their iniquity; they flatter them∣selves with a rotten assurance, that hath no other foundation but their own imaginati∣on: they never knew since the first day they were Baptized and did begin to professe Christ, what it was to mortifie one lust, nor eriously to wrestle against one temptation, nd yet they want not a strong perswasion of heir interest in Christ: But ah, will ye
stand in awe, lest ye meet with such a d fll disappointment, as (when ye thi are in the very gate of heaven) even th fall backwards to the very bottome of  and when ye expect a kindly welcome  the Lord of Glory, as one who thinks  have been in Covenant with him this  years, ye meet with that dreadfull summ Depart from me ye cursed, I know you not. 2. How sad may we be upon this accou that howbeit assurance be an attainable th and a great many dare not say they have ∣tained it; yet so little diligence is used pursuing after it: Is it not very lamentab that many of you to whom I am speak since first ye gave up your names to Chris a visible way, and were reputed amongst generation of the seekers of his face, s ever set a day or an hour a part to exa whether ever indeed ye were in Christ or  Alas, is heaven of so little moment, is the ∣ving or wanting all the enjoyments which there of so small concernment to you, tha will not be at the pains as once to enquire ∣ter your interest in the matter: What if  of you were but possessors of a thous pound, and your interest or right unto it  certain and questionable, would not your  depart from you, and your rest be unquie  you had made it more secure? What th you shall the men of this generation an in the day of the Lord for neglecting th thing necessary, when they have been so ∣ing themselves about many things, and  been so serious in so many consultation
make sure a worm eaten portion in a perish∣ing world, that the whole wit of Men and Angels cannot secure for one moment: It is certain, the root of all this slothfulnesse is Atheism: It is not possible that we believe s really there is a heaven as we believe there  an earth, or that the world to come is as eal as that which is present, or else it must be a strange power in these lusts that keeps us captive, that we are never suffered to think upon Eternity, nor to ask where we must dge when this cottage we carry about shall fall about our ears. O will ye think upon it how serious and pressing that command is,  Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure, when the Lord saith, Give all diligence, will ye give no diligence, and when he saith, make your calling and election sure, will ye leave upon uncertainty, I said to the foolish, deal not so foolishly. 3. It is most lamentable, that since assu∣rance is attainable, yet men live so content∣edly under the want thereof: how strange is it that many are so seldom on their knees complaining of their uncertainty, if Christ were precious unto you, would it be so, I am sure there are some of us here that have had the name of Christians I know not how long, that never had one sad thought about the want of assurance: when we look upon the desolations, vastations and plunderings in the world, how many of us can cry out. They have taken away my gods, and what have I more; but when we speak of heaven we care not who deprive us of our portion
there. I will not limite the Lord, no termine what he may do, but believe it,  one to a thousand, if many Christians of  age have a pleasant night and comfortable  sing of their eyes, they are such underva of assurance: I may fear, that lamenta shall be heard upon the death-beds of  O poor wretched wandering soul where art  going: and it is no wonder it come to th when we are so long in beginning to ask  question. And now I close with this  thing, that I think beyond all question  souls that live contentedly under the want  assurance, are the carelesse daughters that d∣leth at ease; Christ and they are at a rema∣able distance; it must be a cold winter and dark night (at best) as to their present  lowship with God. A second consideration from this point  that if the seeking after assurance be so neces∣sary a duty, then let me beseech you to po∣der with your selves what means are fit  you to use that ye may attain it, and if ye  quire what these means are, I shall only  before you some few. 1. That ye would be much in the exerc of Faith, I mean the direct acts of Faith  whereby the sinner from his sense and fe∣ing of his wants, layeth hold on Jesus Chris closing with him, and leaning upon him  a full supply out of his fulnesse: for indeed there are two great faults amongst the Lord people, some do seek assurance of Faith, be∣fore ever they seek to have faith. 2. Some  much more taken up in debating their ∣dences,
whether they be real or not, then they are instrengthening their evidences, so that most of their time is spent in question∣ing: O! is this a real evidence of assurance; where as more actual believing in Christ and gripping to the promises, and lesse disputing, were the shorter and surer way, that word is most clear, Eph. 1.13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with the spirit of promise, that is, ye got assurance, but not before ye believed: and ye know, it is said, Matth. 9.2. And when Jesus saw their faith, he said, son, be of good comfort thy sins are forgiven thee, so then it is clear, that to be much in believing, is the nearest way to assurance. 2. Ye would be much in believing the ge∣neral truths and promises of the Gospel, and frequently meditating of them; all assurance is by a practical sylogisme; the first propo∣sition whereof must needs be a Scripture truth: And certainly, the firm assent to that truth, and the souls delightfull meditation on it, is often blessed of the Lord as a spe∣cial mean whereby the conscience is helped to make the assumption, and also to bring forth the conclusion: For instance, we see with what strength of affection Paul acteth his faith on that word, 1 Tim. 1.15 This is a faithfull saying and worthy of all accep∣tation, Christ Jesus came to save sinners; and presently we see what followeth on it of whom I am the chief, then is his assurance; for doubtlesse he meaneth, that he was the chief of saved sinners, yea, certainly, a sinner thus exercising himself, will often finde so
much sweetnesse in the general truths,  cannot but put to his own name. 3. diligent in the exercise of all sp∣tual graces and Christian duties, that th among the best means of attaining to  rance, is manifest from 2 Pet. 1. Give all  ance to make your calling and election sure:  ndeed it is very observable, that the dilig there mentioned, is not a diligence in disp∣ing and questioning about our election,  diligence in the practice of duties and gra as is clear from ver. 5. Give all diligence ( the Apostle) Whereto? in adding to your  vertue, to your vertue knowledge, and to know∣ledge temperance, &c. and then vers. 8. If  do these things, ye shall neither be barren  unfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord Jesu Christ; he doth not say in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ simply, but of our Lo Jesus: importing that, that the result of di∣ligence in these graces, shall be the know∣ledge of Christ as ours, and of our intere in him: and then he addeth (upon the other hand) he that laketh these things, is blind  cannot see afar off, this is, he cannot see far  any spiritual matter, and so not in the matt of his interest. O therefore, think not th ye will get assurance by lying down with  sleggard upon your bed, or by your for prayers, or your anxious debates, but if ev ye come to assurance, ye must be striving  in an agony, for so the word importeth, whi is used to expresse our diligence in Christian duties. 4. As ye would be diligent, so if eve
would come to assurance, ye would be ten∣der and circumspect in your walking, that is  clear word, Psal. 50. last verse, To him that dereth his conversation aright, will I shew he salvation of God, and Isa. 32. The effect of righteousnesse is peace and assurance for ever: h the untender walk that many of us have: it is no wonder to see us walk in darknesse, uch stinking grosse vapors that ariseth off our conversation, cannot but engender clouds hat hinder us from seeing God, and certainly such pearls as Assurance is not given to dogs and swine, lest they tread upon them. SERMON VIII. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? THere are two great ballances into which men do weight themselves; there are some that weight them∣selves in the ballance of deceit, who hink that in all their labours there is no ini∣uiy to be found, yet God who is the weigher f the spirit, when he shall weigh them, will grave this upon their forehead, Thou art eighed in the ballance, and are found light:  but there are many who approve them∣selves,
whom Christ shall never appro There are many that call God Father,  he will not call Children, and many th Christ Husband, whom he will not call  2. There are some who weigh themselve in the ballance of the Sanctuary, who  so lide and most spiritual grounds do  this conclusion, I am my beloveds, and  desire is towards me, who can with boldn and confidence look Christ in the face,  say thou art mine, and with much spiri confidence, take him in their arms, and  out, he shall be eternally mine: and  there is not a more pleasant life than to  taking him every day in our arms, and to  crying out, am I not made up in him, am I no made up in him. Before I come to the words, there  three great and most soul concerning errou amongst the Christians of these dayes, th we desire ye may consider. 1. There  many that are more desirous to know wh they are, then what they should do; th are some are more taken up to know wh∣ther they be justified and sanctified, then  be indeed justified and sanctified; and the are more desirous to know if they be  Christ, then indeed to be in him: and there∣fore we finde many who do spend a gre deal more time disputing that question;  ther am I in Christ or not, then they do  using of these means by which real un and communion with him may be attain But oh, will ye once study more to be in  and that shall be the shortest way to
to the knowledge of your being in him. Th second great errour is, that some are more desirous to know what they should do, the they are desirous to do what they know  Are there not many of us that have this que∣stion, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and yet we do not know his Commandement is with us; that we should do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with . A third errour is, that we are more in talking of Christ, then in believing in him, or closing with him: Some of us think to win to hea∣n by discourses, if we can talk of Christ, e think all is without debate or contro∣versie; but alas, there are many who were sweet talkers of Christ, that are cursing Him this day in hell. And I would only say this by the way, if there be any of you that have win to any soul perswasion of your interest in Christ, I intreat you if you can put the conclusion upon record, that in such a day of such a Month, and such a Year of God, you then did win to cry out, I am my be∣loveds, and he is mine: It seemeth to have been Davids practice, Psal. 16.2. O my soul thou hast said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord; and it was Jeremiahs practice, Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion saith my soul, I say, ye should even mark that conclusion as they did, that when tentations come, and begin to assault you, ye may look to your record that ye have set down, and be ashamed to misbelieve. It is true, that for a little while our assurance at best will be but ebbing and flowing, but I hope ere long, we shall be
above the reach of misbelief, and above  ch of fears, I hope ere long, we shall  no more, we shall be jealous no more  we shall question our interest no more  hen all our disputings and questionings shall e sweetly drowned in that infinit ocean of ernal delight and fruition of God. O  ectants of heaven, expectants of heaven, are e not king after this day, are ye not look∣ng after it: I know not what we do here,  we be not walking forward every day: he i upon his way; O to see him, we will even and and wonder at him: I hope the day i∣oming when we shall never lose our grips of Christ any more, he is coming, he is coming  nd I think if Christ would give a Passe, we would long to go hence: O what streets are these that are there, is there any here who is roaning for heaven, be of good comfort, I ope ere long he shall come, he shall come nd wash all tears from our eyes. Now at the last occasion, when we spake pon these words, we old you that there, as five or six things which we intended to onsider in them. The first was, that such  thing as a distinct and well grounded per∣asion of our interest in Christ was artain∣ble; and of this we have already spoken. The second thing is, That concerning thing oble and excellent thing assurance, there∣re many mistakes among the people of d, and to make this evident, it is clear first  this Text, from that serious and acorate arch in this matter, which the Apostl tteth these people unto, as we cleared
unto you from the force of the words; and his doubling of these exhortations, Ty your own selves, prove your own selv. 2. From the many commands which the Lord hath left upon record that we should not be mistaken concerning our assurance, 1 Cor. 3.18. Let no man deceive himself, Gal. 6.3. If a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself, and therefore doth the Apostle adde, Let every one prove his own work, and vers. 7. Be not deceived. 3. The point is clear from this, that we find in Scripture many who have been mistaken most dreadfully in the matter of their assurance, Hos. 8. Israel cryeth out, my God we know thee, and yet Israel was in a great mi∣stake, for in the words following. vers. 3. Is∣rael had cut off the thing that was good, and Prov. 30. vers 12. we find there, A genera∣tion that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their iniquities. 4. It is clear from this, that it is a great design of Satan the great deceiver, that we might be mistaken a∣bout that noble and weighty point of our As∣surance of being in Christ: Is there not a power given unto him from Christ to deceive the Nations; I may say, that in no point doth he more prevail to deceive us then in this: if profanity kill its thousands, delusion kills ten thousands, & this delusion its twenty thousands. Lastly, Doth not this prove how much a Chri∣stian may be mistaken in the matter of his As∣surance, even that name which is given to our hearts, Jer. 17. ver. 9. It is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, and who
can know it; no doubt this may show  (though there were no more) how  our hearts are to deceive us, making us  entertain a delusion in stead of truth, and i brace a shadow in stead of substance. The next thing that we have to speak  you upon this point, is to show you whe these mistakes do lye, and what are the false grounds by which so many do decei their own souls in this matter; and her there are two sorts of persons whom we must inform. 1. There be some who upon mos unwarrantable grounds do conclude that their interest in Christ is sure, when indee it is not. 2. There be some (upon the othe hand) who from sad mistakes of themselved, and the Lords dealing towards them,  that they have an interest, when indeed they have. The first sort are the worst, and in the most dangerous condition, and they build upon these six false foundations, which we beseech them to consider. The first is, their supposed sensible e joyments, some Christians in these times esp∣cially do meet with some flashes of light and joy which they have not been (it may be) acquainted with before, or at least, not  such a measure, or in such a sensible mann and upon this they presently cry forth,  beloved is mine, and I am his. I shall no dispute with such about the reality of these enjoyments, or how they came to know tha these are such as proceed from a saving wo of the Spirit of Grace, but waving th , give me leave to say this much of
enjoyments and sensible manifestations (as to the point in hand) they may be some∣time a good supporter to underprop a Chri∣stians assurance when it tottereth, but never a good foundation whereon he may lay the first stone of that building: and therefore, he is the wiser Christian who first tryeth the reality of his interest in Christ by other blessed fruits of righteousnesse and holinesse before he trust the reality of sensible enjoy∣ments, how sweet or comfortable soever they may seem to be. 2. Some build their assu∣rance upon the number and bulk of their duties, without confidering the frame of their spirit, and the principle from which they flow, they use prayer, and reading, and conference, they wait upon Ordinances, and are alwayes there where the means is thought to be most powerful; and upon this they take up themselves in their own arms, bles∣sing themselves as that poor man, Luk. 18. I fast twise a week, I pay tithes of all that I possesse: But alas, they do not consider that they do but build their house upon the sand, which the first blast of a temptation will overturn, because not only all our duties when weighed in the ballance, may be found light, but when put to the trial may be found empty, dead, and lifelesse things, wherein the Lord's soul can have no pleasure. 3. Some are mistaken in the matter of their assurance, by judging themselves by the Law, not knowing or not regarding the spiritual meaning thereof: Paul was a gallant man (in his own apprehension) when he was
without the Law, that is, when he knew  the spiritual meaning of the Law, he though himself the most eminent Saint in all his Na∣tion, and as he sheweth us, Phil. 3. he could compare with any of them, but when th Lord opened his eyes, we see, he put himself last in the roll of Saints, and first in the roll of sinners, Rom. 7. He was alive without th Law, that is, thought himself living and reigning above his sins; but when the com∣mandement came, that is, when it came to  knowledge, and he saw the spirituality of it, sin revived, and he died, then he saw how that he had triumphed before the victory  he then saw all his sins alive, and, as it wer∣risen from the dead, and himself a dead ma, lost and undone in the estate he was in. O how many are there amongst us in Pauls first condition, alive without the Law: O how many destroy themselves with this, they think there is not a sin forbidden in all th Law of God but onely Ten, but alas, th fool, thou errest in this, not knowing the Scrip∣tures; should thou not judge thy self by th spiritual extent of the meaning of the Law and that divine commentary which th Apostle James hath set forth upon it, where in he sheweth thee, That if thou be gui of the breach of one point, thou art guilty of  and by that infallible exposition which Chri himself the blessed Law giver hath set dow Mat. 6. whereby he discovereth adultery the heart and in the eye. O atheist, th must take up the Ten Commands, and ∣scribe guilty to them all: And let me
you this, if ye will subscribe the Law to Christ, He will subscribe the Gospel to you; if thou wilt sincerely say, I am guilty. He will as sincerely say, I have pardoned; Son∣cy daughter, be of good courage, thy fins are for∣given thee. Fourthly, Some build their assurance upon the apprehension of their hatred of some particular sin, that albeit it was sometimes as their right hand, or their eve, yet now they can pluck it out, or cut it off: But O! will thou but consider, some sin may be made weak, and the soul (though not upon a right principle) brought to hate it, and to cry unto it, get you hence, and yet the interest of Satan may be strong in the heart. The fifth mistake is of many who judge themselves, because they go a greater length then the former, and are kept free from a grosse outbreaking sin; how many are there who go sleeping down to hell with this?  am no drunkard, no adulterer, no murderes, no thief nor whore; this long have I lived in the town, and they were never born that can say, I wronged them: and so they ad∣venture their soul upon this, they never committed any grosse sin. But I beseech you be not deceived, remember how that wretched man did speed, Luk. 18.11. I am no extortioner, nor adulterer, nor even as this publican, &c. poor creature that he was, Christ giveth not a testimonial to every one who take it for themselves; and I must tell some of you, that there may be desperate atheists without God, and without Christ in
the world, and yet be free of grosse out bre∣ing sins: I do not think, but many of the who crucified the Lord of Glory, wer keeped from other grosse sins: What know∣est thou O man that there is more favour shewed to thee, in that thou art keeped fro some grosse sins, when yet thou hast a di∣perately wiked heart, then is shewed to the devil, when some links of his chain are ∣ken in, and restraining power, keeping  in from his ourmost bounds. God will some∣times restrain a hypocrite, or a heathen, a it was said of Abimelech, and God restraine him: there may be a cord put upon thy jaws, when thou art far from having th power of conquering grace. It may be also that all that abstaining from outward out∣breakings, proceedeth but from outward disadvantages, and not from any fear of God, or respect to him, yea, not so much as from the fear of any eternal punishment: Are there not many amongst us. I believe it, there are many, that take away shame, and Church censure, or civil punishment, and other in∣conveniences of that sort, and set a thou∣sand hells before them, they would not be∣keeped back from one sin, but would take their hazard of them all: Yea, is it not wa of tentation, and nothing else that hinder∣eth many from grosse out-breakings; if Sa∣tan would come but with a kindled match there wanteth no more to set tongue and hands and all on fire of hell, O wretched soul, do but ask thy self how often thou  rempted Satan, when he would not tem
thee, and how often thou hast followed a tentation when it fled from thee; yea, when the Lord hath hedged up thy wayes that thou could not overtake thy lovers, how many a long look hast thou sent after them, and what lustings of thy spirit within; and do ye think that heart sins are nothing, al∣though thou had no out breakings what were the matter of that; if thou had not a tongue thou would break the third com∣mand, and curse God in thy heart, if thou had not an eye, thou could commit adultery in thy heart; if thou had not a hand, thou might commit murder in thy heart. O therefore build not thy assurance upon this, that thou hast made clean the outside of the platter, when yet all filthinesse is within. The sixth false foundation upon which  am sure too many build their assurance, is, their gifts and parts, and especially upon these two, the gift of prayer, and the gift of knowledge; but believe it, it is not much to be a Christian in tongue, but it is much to be a Christian in heart; know ye not that this will cast out many, We have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy name cast out devils. No doubt, these had been excellent slourishers, and if the tongue would have done it, they had been highly advanced; but yet ye see these men meet with a depart from me, I know you not. Ah, think upon it, he is not the best Christian that is the best Orator. Re∣ligion that is pure and undefiled, consisteth more in the affction, then in the tongue, and more in practice, then in Profession; I
beseech you, when you cast up your  whences of assurance, consider how we have done, and not how well ye  spoken. The seventh false ground whereby  do misjudge themselves, is, their suppo peace of conscience: O saith one, my  science doth not charge me with any th I thank God I have a quiet mind, and noth trouble me; but ah, poor wretch, will  tell me, may not the strong man be with and therefore all is at peace; a dumb con∣ence, and a seared conscience, is a dread∣plague. Knowest thou not that many  I shall have peace, though I walk in the  gination of my own heart, and because  say so, the Lord shall not spare them,  the curses in His Book shall ly upon them. The eighth false ground, is, the appro∣tion of other Christians, so that if they  the approbation of some such exercised C∣stians, or if they have the approbation such a Minister, that is the way to sile all their disputings. O curred be the p∣son that putteth his trust in men who ∣liars; O man or woman, let me assure  this, if ye had a testimoniall to presen Christ, subscribed with all the hands of ∣ry Christian that ever ye were acquai with, this will be enough for Christ to re you and it both, I know you not, and there depart from me. There is an emphasis in  word, I know you not, as if he had said,  not much though all others know you, know you not.
The ninth false ground, is, their diligent observing all the Ordinances, their going to Preachings, and their going to Comma∣nions, and running to and fro, pretending this end, that knowledge may be increased; but know it, there are many that have sitten down at a Table with Christ here, that shall never sit down at the higher Table with him hereafter: Are there not many that shall say unto Christ in the great day, Have we not eaten and drunken in thy presence, unto whom Christ shall say, depart from me, I know you not. The tenth false foundation, which is the strong delusion of Atheists, of which no doubt there are many here to day: is the building of their eternal happinesse upon this, I never met with a crosse, I never knew what it was to have a sad day; but to thee I shall only say, It may be thou never had a joyfull day, neither in all thy sinfull pleasures under the Sun; but let me tell thee, it is had divinity to conclude, therefore I am in the way to heaven: It may be it were better reasoning, (and though I will not say it, yet it cometh nearer truth) I had never a crosse, therefore I am going on in the way to hell: O will thou but consider, what if He be heaping coals upon thy head, and fatting thee to the day of slaughter? What if this word be your portion? Eat, drink, and be merry while you are here, for to morrow thou must eternally die. What are all your plea∣sures? and what are all your honours: and what are all your possessions? What are they
must bring us back to Christ, and Christ, send us back to the Law, and deliver us  to it, not to the condemning power  as before, but the directing and gu power of it as a rule of holinesse; so th Christians whole life must be a sweet and  stant travelling between Christ and the  when thou hast broke the Law, flie  Christ to take away thy guilt, and when  hast closed with Christ, come ru out again in his strength to perform  Law. The fourth mistake, is, that Christian judge of their estate by the measure of th graces, more nor by the sincerity of the some Christians, if they finde not love in s a degree, and if they finde not repentance such a degree, immediately they begin raze the foundations, and do call their  joyments delusions, and their faith presu∣tion, and their mortification hypocrisie;  I must say this to thee, we should not o weigh our graces in the ballance, but try  also by the touch stone, for the smallest  of gold is gold, and the least degree of f i alike precious faith, with that the Apo themselves had. The fifth ground of mistakes among C∣stians is this. That they compare themselve more unto the Saints, then they judge  themselves by the Word. O saith one,  were like David. I would believe, but I  not like David, nor Job, nor Hezeki and therefore there is none of the Saines
hich I should go, and if I should call, there  none to answer, and why then should I lieve; I would onely say to thee whose jection that is, it is even Davids objecti∣n, Psal. 22.5, 6. Our fathers trusted in thee;  they were excellent men; But what a an am I, A worme, and not a man, and yet e was put from that objection: and I would y this, Are ye below him: In what? I ope ye are not below David in necessity: ow though ye be below him in grace, if ye e not below him in necessity, ye have so uch the more right to believe; for as we id before, necessity giveth you a right, and he more necessity, the greater right to be∣eve. The sixth ground is, That Christians judge of their estate by Christs part of the Cove∣ant, and not by their own, rather examin∣g themselves by what Christ hath promised  do for them, then by what is left to them o do, which thing if it were headed, would ut a close to many of our mistakes and dis∣utings. Having now laid out some mistakes upon ther hand, the next we would do, is to opose some considerations to presse you  guard against these mistakes, especially e first. And the first consideration is, That mis∣kes about ones interest in Christ, and assu∣ce, is a most universal and popular evil; is nor one of a city, nor two of a family, t many are mistaken in their interest in
Christ: that word, Prov. 30.12. The a generation that are pure in their own  and yet is not cleansed from their iniquity is not one or two that are under this mist but it is a generation: And I suppose, th are many of us, we are of this tribe and ∣neration, Matth. 7.22. He saith, many that day shall say unto me, Lord, Lord,  have we not prophesied, and yet he shall  unto them, I know you not: Since it is universal a mistake, I intreat you be m in the search of your selves, search your ∣selves: Certainly I think, if there were  within this Church one that were under ∣mistake, it should put us all to this, Ma is it I, Master is it I; but how much m since there is a generation of mistakers, shou it not be our exercise every day to cry o is it I. The second consideration is, That as  is a most universal, so also it is a most i coverable mistake; if ye mistake about th your being in Christ, there is no making  of that mistake; if once ye passe the bord of Time with this lie in your right hand,  am in Christ, there is no hope of recover eternity will cut off accesse to make up th mistake: I intreat you go not down to yo grave with this, I am in Christ, when  Christ may say, I know you not: I belie it, if ye could have a testimonial subscrib by the hands of all the most eminent a tender Christians that ye have known,  ye are indeed a Saint, and if all the Minist
hat ever you spoke to should praise you in he gate, and declare you to be a son & daugh∣ter of Abraham; yet when you shall bring up our testimoniall to Heaven, and the Father hall read it, and shall ask you where is my Sons Name, if that be nor there, it will cer∣tainly be rejected, and cast over the bar. Thirdly, It is a soul destroying delu∣sion, this mistake about ones interest in Christ, is the very ruine of their immortal oul, according to that word, Isa. 44.20.  deceived heart hath led him aside, and what s the fruits of it, so that he cannot deliver his soul, and by consequence it may be said, that they destroy their soul: I believe it, there re many that go to hell in a chariot of de∣usion; we know some Christ guideth to Heaven by the gates of hell, and letteth them ot see life till they be in sight of hell; but  is true also, there are others whom the evil guideth to hell, by the very borders of Heaven, he maketh them believe they are welling in the gate of Heaven all their days, nd yet at last they are thrust down to these abitations that are prepared for the devil and is angels. Fourthly, If once a person be mistaken bout their interest in Christ, they will have hese three notable disadvantanges attending pon them. 1. As long as he is under this istake, he is without all reach of profiting y the Ordinances, for when he heareth reaching, he will apply promises, when  should apply threatenings, and upon the
other hand, apply threatnings wh should apply promises, and so that  should be his medicine, becometh pois him. 2. As long as he is under this mis it maketh him that he cannot pity not  compassion upon himself, that though  the most suitable object of compassion,  he knows not what it is to weep over own ruine. 3 Readily all his graces are delusions, all his good motions are but fl and all his mortification counterfeit, and his tendernesse is but the mother of stupid and therefore guard against mistakes a your interest in Christ I intreat you. Fifthly, Consider that mistakes ab  interest, is a most abiding and const , believe it, if once we mistake this, it is one to a hundred if ever we  right again: this is clear, Jer. 8 5.  hold fast deceit, they keep it with both  hands: And Isa. 44.20. There is a lie in  right hand, that is, they hold the lie  they keep it with all their power; I  if once one be mistaken concerning their terest in Christ, it is hard to put them  it, yea, delusion it is such an abiding th hat we find Christ speaketh of it, as  would wait upon one before the judg seat of Christ, and as if some would  quite their hope of heaven, till Christ  nounce that word, Depart from me, I know not, delusion may carry us over the bo of Time, and lead us in to Eternity. Sixthly, There is much counterfe
igion that is in those dayes; their is a painted ith, there is a painted love, there is a pain∣ed mortification, and there is a painted ten∣dernesse; some they love shaddows and pi∣stures, and yet they do not love the very shaddow of Christ, and are there nor  who think they are imbracing Christ, and yet  imbracing a delusion and a fancy. That which thirdly we would speak to from this point, is, to give you some evi∣dences by which ye may know if the assu∣rance ye have of your being in Christ, be right or no: Believe it, there are many that draw that conclusion, I am in Christ, which the devil and their own deceitfull heart hath drawn, and Christ never gave consent to it; And I shall propose these seven or eighth evidences of real assurance, by which ye may discern. First, A real assurance is a purifying and sanctifying assurance: this is clear, 1 Joh.  3. Every man that hath this hope in him, that is, perswaded of this that he shall come o heaven, He will purifie himself, as he is ure: And 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthinesse of the flesh, and of the spirit. O! When a Christian getteth Christ in his arms, he cannot but cry forth, What have I to do any more with idole: Wh he hath once gotten Christ in his arms, he will answer every tentation that he meeteth with this, I am not mine own, I am bought with a price, I cannot now dispose of my
self: and if your assurance of going to ∣ven be not a purifying assurance, be pers∣ed of it, it is but the devils pillow sowe∣der your arm holes: Is it possible a p can be assured of heaven, and not study linesse, can such a delufion as this o take you. Secondly, A real assurance putteth  Christian to a pressing and earnest pur after communion and fellowship with G it is possible for one to be assured, and  to be saying, he is sick of love: this is c Song 2.16, 17. My beloved is mine, and I  his; and immediately followeth, Turn th O my beloved, and be like a roe, or a young h upon the mountains of Bether: And it is cle Song. 7.10, 11. I am my beloveds, and  desire is towards me: and what follower upon that, She cometh and inviteth Chr O come down with me to the fields, let  lodge in the villages. O when gave  Christ such an invitation as this, O precio Christ, let us lodge in the villages, and  down to the secret places of the field: a Psal. 63.1. My God, there is his assurance and immediately followeth upon that, Ea will I seek thee, my soul thirsteth after th as in a dry parched land where no water  There is a pressing desire after communi But I would ask you, Are there not m here who have the hope of heaven (to th apprehension) and yet the desire of c∣munion with Christ was never with th I desire to say to thee, (be who thou
Be not deceived, God is not mocked, that which thou sowest, thou shall also reap. I think there are some of us, we would let Christ leave in heaven many dayes without giving him one visit, if He would let us alone: But O if we were within sight of our interest in Christ, how often would this be our com∣plaint when he were absent, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him; or my idol hath carried me away from Him, and I know not where to find Him. Thirdly, Assurance of our being in Christ, will put us to the exercise of praise; be∣lieve it, I think this is one of the most search∣ing evidences of assurance: There are some Christians they will be convinced for the ne∣glect of duty of prayer, but for the neglect of the duty of praise, they never have one conviction; and I tell you the reason of it, prayer is a selfish grace, (so to speak) but praise is a denying grace, prayer secketh, but praise giveth, Exod. 15.2. He is my God, I will prepare him an habitation, and he is my fathers God, I will exalt him. Psal. 118.28. He is my God, I will praise him, he is my God, I will exalt him: What needeth David these repetitions, might not one serve? No saith he, I would even spend my dayes in this, My God, my God, there is much of hea∣ven in that word, My God, and love commit∣teth many sweet hatoligies: Now I say to thee, was thou ever put to the heart exer∣cise of praise, by this assurance that thou
hast this is an evidence indeed, but ala, ma of us cannot say it. Fourthly, A person that liveth wi sight of his interest, Christ is matchlesse  him, as is clear, Song 2.3. I sate down  his shadow, there is faith and assurance of  and what accompanieth that, As the a tree among the trees of the wood, so is my  loved among the sons: Christ hath no  match, saith the Spouse, in his sweetness his power, his beauty; and his usefulnesse  above all. Fifthly, Real assurance is a humbli thing, the assurance of a Christian make  him to sit low in the dust: Was not Jac low in his own eyes, when he cryed out,  am lesse then the least of all thy mercies; Wha  was not David low in his own eyes, wh he ke that word, What am I, and what  hers house, that thou hast brought me ; and was not Paul a low man in  own eyes, Eph. 3.8.16. I am lesse then th least of all thy Saints, and when he cry out, I am the chief of sinners: The assuranc that is real, it will make a Christian to  down in the dust, and cry out, Wo is me,  am a man of polluted lips. Sixthly, Real assurance will put him  take much pleasure and delight in the go about of duties: that word, Psal. 40  y God, saith he, that is his assurance,  ently he subjoyneth, I delight to do , O Lord, this he speaketh of himself,  off, and likewise as a type of Ch
Psal. 119.115. Depart from me evil dors, or I will keep the commandements of my God; I believe it, the love of Christ when it is much in exercise, it will constrain us to our uty: and therefore this proud transpor∣ing assurance in these dayes, that setteth men above all duties and Ordinances, and make  them count the Gospel as well as the Law  beggerly rudiments, and cry out to their  ours, Stand aback, for I am holier then them, must needs be a delusion. Lastly, There are these three  of a real assurance, it is a begotten rance,  is a living assurance, and it is a constrain∣ing assurance. The first two properties of  are set down in that, 1 Pet. 1.2. He hath begotten us to a lively hope; Who begat that assurance in thee? I suppose some have assu∣rance, and it was begotten without travel; but if Christ be not the father of thy assu∣rance, it will evanish and passe away. And, secondly, it must be a living assurance, some hearts are dead as a stone, and yet they say they have the hope of heaven. And, thirdly,  must be a constraining assurance, it will ut the Christian to do what he commands, ea, if it were the most pleasant Isaac that we have, if he commandeth us to sacrifice it, we would put a knife to the throat of it, and e willing to offer it up. Now after all these evidences, I desire  ve a report from you concerning your ate; What think ye of your selves, are  Christ, or no; I suppose, if Christ
come here to day, and put us all to the  but these that are in Christ, we would  a thin assembly: I confesse, I wonder,  that word doth not make us to walk  sadnesse, Many are called, but few are chos Now I ask this question at you all, as in  fight of God, and as ye will one day ans unto him that will be your Judge; W think ye of your selves? Is there none  that can give a present positive answer  this, Are ye in Christ: I suppose this, if were to go round them that are here,  ask, are ye in Christ, are ye, and ye in Chri O! I doubt much if there should be m negative answers within the doors, we have so strong a faith some of us, that since  were born, we never doubted of it; But  think (without commending doubting)  may say, the faith that thou never doubte of, is too like a delusion, and the faith tha thou never took pains to keep, and yet i keeped it self, that is too like a delusion, th faith that never knew what it was to put the to real seeking of Christ, is too like a delusio But let me close with this, be your esta what it will, search and come away; I thi that is one of the most Gospel invitations th is in all the Scripture. Lam. 3.34. Let us sea and try our wayes, and turn again unto th Lord: When thou hast searched, come away for I tell thee this there will be nothing th will commend thee to Christ so much as nece∣sity, and I hope there is none of you, but  have enough of this, and know it, if ye
not come to Christ, he will compell you to come, but it shall not be for your advantage to stay away, till ye be compelled. O persons that are out of Christ, Come away; O persons that are in Christ, Come away; we must preach that word, Come away, unto you, as long as ye are here, till ye come and be fixed as a pillar in the house of God, and go no more out, O study to be near him: O Christian didst thou ever think upon this, and say with thy self, O when shall I have immediate imbraces of blessed Christ? When shall there be nothing between my heart and Him? till then, we never get Christ near enough, there is alway something between Him and us, till we be above the Clouds: O these immediate soul infoldings and imbracings of Christ: Are ye never sending a messenger to heaven, desiring a passe to go away that ye may enjoy them, and are ye not longing for the day, when the waters of Jordan shall divide themselves, and the ransomed of the Lord shall passe thorow▪ Now let us sing praises to our King, sing praises, for he hath gone up with a shout, and shall come again, sing praises to our King, sing praises.
SERMON IX. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith? prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ i in you, except ye be reprobates? I Think ere long, there are many that  passeth under the notion of Professors,  that the veriest atheist when he behold∣th there walk, may cry out, Are thou also become like unto one of us: Are there not many here that are in a golden dream, and in  fools paradise, that dream they eat, and be∣hold, when they awake, they shall be hungry  therefore I think it is incumbent upon us, to search and examine our state, and condi∣tion; profanity hath slain its thousands, but delusion and presumption hath slain their ten thousands. It was an ancient complain of Christ. Luk. 12.57. And why even of  judge ye not what is right; I am per∣waded of this, there are many decreets  peace past upon earth, that are never rati∣ed in heaven, there are many that cry out ternesse of death is past, whom yet  the sword of His Justice, shall ew   our eyes. We told you
last occasion, that we spake upon these words, there were six things we intended to speak from them, of the first three we have spoken. That which we intended to speak to at this time, is, That there is much soul advantage and spiritual gain, that doth redound to the Christian, by the distinct perswasion of his interest in Christ; this we gathered from Paul's doubling the command of searching and trying themselves, as if he had said, it is a businesse that will be so much for your advantage, that it is incumbent for you to search and try diligently: And for further clearing of the point, I shall onely give these three places, Rev. 2.17. I will give unto them a white stone, and in the stone a new name, written that no man knoweth, but he that hath received it: By the new name, and the white stone, is understood assurance, and the intima∣tion of it to the soul: This indeed is such a mercy, that I defy any to make language of it, no man knoweth it, much lesse can he expresse it, but he that is the professor of it, and that place, Isa. 62 2.3. I will give unto them a new name, which the mouth of the Lord will name: O what a name must tt be which the mouth of the Lord will name: I think, what he giveth, must be one of the noblest names that ever was given, all the stiles and titles under heaven cannot equal it. And, thirdly, we see David in the 18 Psal. fod much sweetnesse and advantage in this, when nine times he hath that word,
my: My strength, my rock, my foretresse  my deliverer, my strength and my buckler,  horn of my salvation, and my high tower,  David, what needeth all those Mys, Dav would answer us, O! he is so sweet in hi∣self, but O! much sweeter to me, when I pu to that possessive note, My. Now to speak more particularly to the advantages of assurance, The first is, That a person that is assured of his interest in Christ, he is much in desiring communion with Christ: Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, (there is his assurance) where th feedest, and where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon, there is desire of communion, and Song 7.10, 11. My beloved is mine, and his desire is towards me, there is her assurance, and immediately followeth, Come my belo∣ved, let us go forth into the fields, let us lodg in the villages, there her desire of commu∣nion, Song 2.16, 17. My beloved is mine, and I am his, and what flloweth upon that, He feedeth among the lillies, untill the day break, and the shadows flie away. Turn my beloved, and be as a roe, or a wild hart upon the moun∣tains of Bther, that is i short, let me have sweet correspondency and fellowship with thee, till the day of Eternity shall come  I think the desires of an assured Christian they are like the grave, they cry continually Give, give, and they never say, it is enough What is the reason, ye seek so little after fe∣lowship with Christ, it is even this, ye  not perswaded of your interest in him;
lieve it, if once ye had attained to th blest length, as to cry out, Christ is mine, it  be a hell upon earth for you to live at such a distance with him as ye do for the most part: O but assurance maketh absence from Christ an unsupportable burden, Psal. 22.1. My God, my God, there is assurance, and immedi∣ately followeth his complaint, Why hiddest thou thy self from me, Song 3.1, 2, 3. that word, Him whom my soul loveth, made her to weep so much under absence from Christ, and Joh. 20.13 when the Angels ask the question at Mary, Woman why weepest thou? I think she thought it a needlesse question, and she tells the cause of it, They have taken away my Lord: I think her heart was at her mouth when she pronounced these two words, My Lord, she spake them with a great deal of emphasis and force, could ye resent absence with Christ so little, if ye were assu∣red he were yours. I confesse, it is no won∣der when persons losse that which is not their own, that they weep not much for the losse of it; but O! to losse that which is our own, it maketh it a crosse and a bur∣den to us. Secondly, It maketh the soul to have a high and matchless esteem of precious Christ, Song 5.10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand: O saith the Spouse, I never saw his like, and I shall ne∣ver see his like again; there is much in that My; interest maketh her look upon Christ with another eye nor she would have done,
strangers look upon him but as a tree pla at the sand, 1 Pet. 2.7. To you that beli Christ is precious. not to every one: A Song 2.2. I sate down under his shaddow wi great delight, the reason is, interest in th words going before, As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons; yea, assurance will make ever thing in Christ exceeding pleasant to the soul: as is clear, Song 5 16. My beloved  altogether lovely, or, he is all desires. I tell you what assurance will do, it will make Christs person pleasant and precious to the soul, it will make Christs Natures pleasant to the soul, it will make Christs Offices plea∣sant to the soul, it will make Christs Pro∣mises pleasant to the soul, it will make Threatnings pleasant to the soul, it will make the smell of Christs Garments pleasant to the soul, and it will make the kisses of His Mouth pleasant to the soul: O saith the assured Christian, there is nothing of Chist but it is most pleasant, and is all desires  His Threatnings are pleasant, they are the wounds of a friend, and His kisses are plea∣sant, they are better then wine, His Name i is pleasant, it is as precious ointment powred Forth, His smellings are most delightsome whse countenance is as Lebanon, excellent  the cedars: O to imbrace a married Christ, how pleasant is it to the soul; What make∣ you to have so low thoughts of Christ  this, the want of assurance that He  your Husband.
Thirdly, Assurance will make the Christi∣an patiently to submit to every crosse and sad dispensation he meeteth with: this is clear, Heb. 10.34. They took with joy the spoiling of their goods, and what made them do so, They hoped for a better inheritance, and a more induring substance: I tell you assurance, it will answer all crosses with this, Christ is mine; when they are afflicted, assu∣rance will lift up its face, and cry out, Christ it mine, and when they are reproached, they will comfort themselves with this, Christ i mine, I can put on the Lord Jesus. Fourthly, Assurance will keep you from apostacy and defection from Christ, 2 Pet. 1.10. Make your calling and election sure, and if ye do this, (saith he) ye shall never fall, Heb. 3.11, 12. It is there set down as a fruit of the evil heart of misbelief, it maketh us depart from the living God, but on the contrary, assurance knitteth the soul to Christ by a threefold cord, which is not easily broken. Believe it, the assured Chri∣stian can cry out with much confidence of faith, My moutain standeth strong, I shall ne∣ver be moved; the assured Christian  out with much chearfulnesse: In God  I praise his word, in God have I put my trust, I will not be afraid what flesh can do unto me▪ yea, he can sweetly sing in the very mouth of danger. The Lord is my light  salvati∣on, Whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid, Psal. 27.1.
Fifthly, Assurance keepeth all the  of the spirit green and flourishing, it is  refreshing dew upon our branches, whi maketh every grace sweetly to blossome  its season. 1. It stirreth up the exerci of love: O how vigorous are the actings  love, when a Christian can cry out, My  loved is mne, and I am his, Song. 1.13. M∣beloved, there is her assurance. He is a bund  of myrrhe, and shall lye all night between  breasts, that is, as long as time shall last, I shall never have Christ out of my heart, there is love, 1 Joh 4.19. We loved him, because he loved us first; our hearts are na∣turally cold, but love kindleth love, the sense of his love to us, putteth our hearts into a heavenly flame towards him again. 2. Assurance keepeth up the exercise of prayer, it is the assured Christian that can pray best, and to best advantage, and in these three things especially, is prayer helped by assurance. First, It helpeth in the point of boldnesse O but the assured Christian can go boldly to the Throne of grace, Crying Abba father, and my Lord and my God. Se∣condly, It helpeth our diligence in prayer, Psa. 63.1. O my God, there is assurance, early will I seek thee, there is his diligence as the fruit thereof. Thirdly, It helpeth the fervency of prayer, as in that same place, my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee, there is his fervency as another fruit of his assurance. 3. Assurance keepeth In exercise and life, the grace of mortification:
as is clear by comparing, 2 Cor. 4. verse last, with 2 Cor. 5.1. We look not after the things that are seen: O Paul, what aileth you, may ye not take a look of the world, O saith Paul, and would ye know the ground of it, We know if this house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a house not made with hands, eternally in the heavens: my house and my treasure is in heaven, I must have my heart there, and my eyes also: Would ye know what would stay your pursuit after the world, study to have the assurance of your interest in Christ continually with you. And 4. It keepeth in exercise the grace of humility; there is nothing will keep a Chri∣stian so humble as assurance, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, Eph. 3.8. there he is all in exalting grace, and debasing himself. It is the misbeliever and discouraged person that dwelleth near∣est pride; Believe it, misbelief is big with childe of pride and apostacy, these are the two children which that fruitful mother will bring forth. And, 5. it will help the grace of Repentance: Would ye know what would make the Christian to repent, it is even this, to take Christ in our arms and call him ours, Zech. 12.10. They shall look unto him, that is, there faith and they shall mourn as one mour∣neth for his only son: I think it is known by experience, the soul never weeps more ten∣derly under the conviction of sin, then when he hath Christ in his arms, and can say, He
is : O how sweetly doth they,  complain, there is not a fight of Chri their own, when they have offended, b breaketh all their heart in pieces, and i as a sword piercing into the bones, w ey cry out, O what a fool was  to offe uch a precious One, in whom I had so mu terest; Was it not sense of interest th made Mary wash the feet of Christ with h ears. Lastly, It will keep in exercise th grace of Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. It is faith wht keth one to rejoyce with joy unspeakab d full of glory: Would ye know w our graces are withered? would ye kno hy all the pleasant plants of God with  soul are decayed? It is this, ye live with  sight of your interest in Christ, believe i ( so I may speak) assurance will be a w tering to your graces every morning, and r fresh them every hour, it being as a chan through which divine influence is conveig  to the increase of grace, and especiall  joy. he sixth advantage that cometh in to th  ian by assurance of his interest i Christ, is, That it maketh death exceedi pleasant and comfortable to the soul; wh  th douth the king of terrours, and wh  unto us? Is it not this, we   under a cloud: the assured  take death in his arms, and cry  come, O friend: the assured Christi  he seeth the chariots his father  doth with old Jacob rejoyce,
23 When I walk through the valley of e, shaddw of death, I will fear no evil: hat brought you that length David? I tell on why saith he, for God is with me, ver. 4.  think I need not fear any thing, when I ave God in my company: It is the assured hristian that can cry out, Why should I fea eath, should I not laugh at destruction: I ink indeed, the assured Christian needeh ot fear death, because death to him is the eath of all his lusts, the funerall of all his orrows: and is not the day of death his co∣onation day, his marriage day, the day of is triumph, and of his entering into rest, and why then should he fear it. The seventh advantage is, That a Christi∣n being in the state of assurance, can put the ighest account upon the smallest mercy that e meets with from God: the assured Chri∣ian lookth upon every mercy as a wonder;  is the assured Christian that cryeth out, I  lesse then the least of all thy mercies: there  not a mercy he meets with, were it but a op of cold water, but if he can read this n it, that it came from my Husband, and from y Father, it will be better to him then the weerest wine. Lastly, Assurance doth exceedingly help  to chearfulnesse in obedience: O that is emakable connexion that Paul hath, Act. .23 The Lord whose I am, and whom I ve: That passge also. 2 Cor. 5.14. is ve∣ observable, The love of Christ constraineth , &c. Why art hou so painfull a Minister
Paul? Why? Knowest thou no man after th flesh, are not led by carnal interests, nor at sections, art so busie and diligent as all the world counteth thee mad? Why? (saith he) love will not lt me rest if I would be le or carnal, or fold my hands to sleep: the love of Christ doth alwayes sound that in my ears, that I was dead, and he hath died for me, that henceforth I should not live un∣to my self, but to Him who died for me: Now to him who is the first and the last, wh was dead, and is alive for evermore, We give praise. FINIS.
