P3698 R182163 [ocm]80923410 191966
A PROPOSAL For the Better Education of Infants. ALtho many good Provisions have been heretofore made by the Cha∣rity of well-disposed Persons, for the Maintenance and Education of Youth: Yet no Convenience or Education hath yet been thought on, or taken care of, for poor Infants, who can least provide for themselves, or be provided for. For want whereof, many great Evils and Inconveniences are daily found, by the wilful and careless causing, or suffering many Infants to perish, or to Suck in wicked and debauched Principles, to the ruin, as 'tis to be fear'd, often of their Souls, as well as Bodies. Now for the remedying thereof, a General Nursery, or Infantory, is recom∣mended by His Majesties Justices of the Peace, at the Quarter Sessions for Mid∣dlesex and Westminster, to the Inhabitants therein, as by their Orders at their several Sessions may appear. And for that purpose, the Justices of the Peace of the County of Middlesex. have already disposed of, and appropriated a great publick Bulding, at Cler∣kenwell (whose good Examples, 'tis hop'd, will soon be followed by others) and such Orders and Provisions are there already made, that Infants shall be there Received and Provided for, with all manner of necessaries, and be taught to Read and Write, and be bred up in true Religion and Virtue. And 'tis supposed, that when Persons are satisfied of the great Conveniences and Advantages of this Infantory or Nursery, many Charitable and Religious Persons will be Liberal Benefactors thereunto, whereby the Charge of the Main∣tenance and Educatiion of the Poor may be at least eas'd, if not wholly taken off. But the Children first brought in, must first be provided for, out of such Charities. The great Conveniences and Advantages by this Nursery will be, 1. To the Fatherless and Motherless. 2. To the Poor; the Trouble and Charge of Breeding up such Infants, ta∣king them much off from earning their Liverlyhoods. 3. To all such whose Employments require, or cause their Absence from their Dwellings, as Seafaring men, users of Fairs and Markets. 4. And to all such as would not otherwise keep Houses, unless it were for the Looking after, and Breeding up their Children. It is also believed this Provision may prevent the great Trouble and Charge to all Persons, by Children left and laid in the several Parishes. Or that at least it may ease the Parishes, and their Officers, in Providing for, and Breeding up of their Parish Children. And by this Education, we may be assured there will be better Subjects, better Masters, and better Apprentices and Servants, for all Persons that shall need them. And as this good Work takes, many other Proposals shall be made for the taking off, and wholly providing for Infants, for small sums of Money, which shall be secured by certain and sufficient Funds. The Rates propos'd for such Maintenance and Education are, Twenty Shillings Entrance, which is for new Cloaths and Bedding. And 3 s. a Week, for Meat, Drink, Cloaths, and all other things for the future. The Days to receive them, are Thursdays weekly, from Nine till Noon, at the Nursery or Infantory at Clerkenwell, &c. But the place and accommodation being so much approved of by all that see it, and the confluence of people thither on those days being great, for the greater ease and dispatch to the business, It is desired that all persons approving of the Undertaking, will come and bring in their children on the Mondays before, and leave the Name and Age of the Child with the Officer, who is appointed to attend there on those days to that purpose. Note, That you may take the Child away at any time, when you have an opportunity of a better Provision for it, and the new Cloaths with it.
