12702 S120055 99855255 176292
decorative border A PLAINE And Familiar EXPLICATION (by way of Paraphrase) OF ALL THE HARD Texts of the whole Di∣vine Scripture of the OLD and NEVV TESTAMENT. BY JOS. EXON. LONDON, Printed by MILES FLESHER, for NATH: BVTTER at the Signe of the Pyde' Bull at S. Austins Gate. MDCXXXIII.
TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING OF GREAT BRITAINE, FRANCE AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH. MOST GRATIOVS AND DREAD SOVERAINE, NOthing can so much concern a man to seeke for, as life eternall; the onely meanes to finde this eternall life, is the knowledge of God; there is no meanes to know God, (to purpose,) but by his Word; this word, though plaine, and cleare in the maine truthes, yet wants not some difficulties, in other expressions; the explication of these difficulties, is (for a great part) the occasion, and matter of our Sermons, Lectures, Commentaries; every man holding it both an high honour, and an happy service to be Gods trucheman to
the world; the clearest and shortest way of explication, is by Paraphrase: many learned Interpreters, both of our Church, and the Roman, have under∣taken this taske by parcels, the use and benefit whereof, is, and should no lesse, be universall: My meannesse hath therefore boldly endeavoured this great worke; which, as I durst not under∣goe, without the aide of the best Com∣menters, both ancient and moderne; so I do in all humility subject it to the grave and holy judgement of this renowned Church: it is so farre from my thoughts, peremptorily to prescribe senses unto a∣ny, as that I am ready upon better in∣formation, to amend my owne errours: Onely my desire, and ambition is, to give some light to weaker apprehensi∣ons; wherein I hope to do a service, not utterly unbeseeming your Majesties gra∣cious Patronage; and unspeakably be∣neficiall to many thousands of soules; who shall blesse God for the least glim∣pses of illumination in these divine O∣racles. The worke, such as it is, I most humbly cast downe, with my selfe, at your Majesties feet; for who but Gods Vice-gerent upon earth could seeme
proper to challenge the protection of a businesse, so highly importing the ho∣nour of the God of heaven; and amongst Kings, (besides the relation of a Sove∣raine Master) who but the Defender of that true faith, which is infallibly groun∣ded upon these holy Scriptures: eminent no lesse in goodnesse and piety, then in greatnesse and power; the great patterne of devotion, twice every day (even in publique view) constantly busied in this booke of God: In so many names, I have presumed through your Majesties roy∣all hands, to tender it unto Gods Church; not without the vowes of my most fer∣vent prayers to God for the inlarge∣ments of his blessings upon your sacred person, family, government, as who am ever justly obliged to be Your Majesties most loyall and faithfully devoted servant IOS. EXON.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. Reader, I Cannot be so weake, as not to presuppose, that so great, and bold a worke must needs un∣dergoe variety of constructi∣ons: There will not want some, I doubt not, who will be of opinion, that this labour might have beene better spared; as thinking the Scriptures to lie al∣ready too open to vulgar hands; with whom it is not now seasonable to argue that beaten questi∣on concerning the expedience of the free allow∣ance of Gods Booke to Laick readers; wherein the Church of England (our deare and blessed mother) hath sufficiently declared her judgement (besides words) by her ingenuous practice; one∣ly therefore taking this liberty for granted, I shall easily from hence evince the usefulnesse of some such plaine and orthodox explication; For, since the Scriptures are through the liberall bessing of God, promiscuously allowed to all hands, I aske whether it bee not much better they should bee put into the way of being rightly understood by the simplest, then to lie under the danger of an ignorant mis-construction; Neither doe I here∣by indevour to make them more common, but better conceived; that, where the letter is in use, the sense may not be mis-taken; The inconveni∣ences that are pretended to have followed upon the open, and free permission of Scriptures in
vulgar languages, have sensibly arisen from the mis-understanding of them; remove that perill, & the frequence and universality of thē can be no o∣ther then a blessing; This service I have here inde∣vored to perform; having cōmonly in the passages of this worke, trod in the steps (as I have judged) of the best interpretations: & seldome when, gone alone: Neither doe I offer to obtrude these my explications upon any reader, as Magisteriall, and peremptory; Who am I that I should take upō me to governe, and command other mens thoughts? but modestly and humbly propound them to Gods Church, as probable helpes to weaker judgements: leaving my reader free, in the meane time, if my sense satisfie not, to his owne further disquisition: Onely, since all men have not choice of commenters, nor leasure to com∣pare them, nor skill to judge of the fairest sense, I have undertaken this paines for the ease and ad∣vantage of my plaine reader, to cull out, and com∣mend unto him, the most safe, and likely inter∣pretations. In the historicall part, he shall need little help, in the Poeticall, or Sapientiall, more; in the propheticall most of all; in many passages whereof, every line is a riddle; I should bee vaine to brag of my fidelity herein; as who have not knowingly omitted any clause, wherein there seemed to be any shew of difficulty; nor clogged the volume with glosses that I conceived unne∣cessary. Some perhaps will imagine it might have been much better, to have taken the whole text before me, then to have thus selected some noted periods of harder construction; Who may be pleased to consider how much vastnesse might so have ac∣crewed to this labour, and how little use; To pa∣raphrase easie texts, had beene to set up a candle
before the Sunne; and to publish the whole Text, with a partiall explication (if leave might possibly have beene obtained for so bold a project) had beene to raise the bulke, and to lose the vigour and benefit of the worke: Since there be some historicall bookes of Scripture, wherein there is very little use of any Paraphrase; and some (as those of the Chronicles) wherein there is none at all; Herein therefore I have done that, which I judged to availe most to the use and profit of my Christian Reader; whō I must suppose furnished with a Bible at home; and willing to helpe his understanding in places of more obscurity. To fore-mention the particularities of that be∣nefit which may arise to Gods Church in the use of so plaine an enarration of the meaning of his holy Spirit, were both too much to distrust the judgement of others; and to seeme to set forth the glory of my owne indevours; the infirmities whereof, if they may receive pardon from God, and my Superiours; and amendment from more able hands, to whose aide and correction I doe humbly submit my selfe, and them, it shall bee the utmost of my ayme, and ambition. That good God, who hath graciously inabled mee, notwithstanding the throng of other occa∣sions, to goe through with this well-meant worke, blesse it to the behoofe of his Church, and the glory of his owne Name. Amen.
A PARAPHRASE VPON THE HARD TEXTS OF THE WHOLE DIVINE SCRIPTURE. GENESIS. CAP. I. IN the beginning of time,1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. God the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, made, of nothing, the whole great, and goodly frame of the world; both the heaven and the earth, and the other elements, with all the furniture and inhabitants of them all. Yet not all together, and at once, nor in this perfect forme, at first,2 And the earth was without forme, and void, and darkenesse was upon the face of the deep: & the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. wherein we now see them, but by leisure & degrees; for both the earth and elements, in their first being, were a rude and confused heape, by him newly created without any matter pre∣ceding, or without any fashionable shape at all; it being not distinguished, fashioned, beautified, as afterward, neither had this vast masse of water and earth inter∣mingled, as yet any light, either for distinction or orna∣ment, but even in this their confusion, the holy Spirit (the preserver of all creatures) upheld, cherished, and gave fit succour to this imperfect beginning of all things. Then God willed,3 And God said, Let there be light, and there was light. and in this point brought his eter∣nall decree to execution, that there should be light, not of the Sunne, or starres, which were not yet created; but a common brightnesse onely, to distinguish the time, and to remedy that former confused darknesse and it was accordingly made. And God approved this light, by him created,4 And God saw the light, that it was good: and and God divided the light from the darknesse. to be of excellent, and necessary use, and established it, by his
allowance, as fit to continue, and to be interchanged with darknesse. 5 And God called the light day, and the darknesse he called night: and the evening and the morning were the first day.And God set to either of them their due times and courses; appointing that the light should serve for day, darknesse for night, and that man afterwards should so call them; and so was the first naturall day, consisting of evening and morning, fully finished. 6 And God said, Let there be a firmamēt in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.Then God willed that there should be a large cleare aery distance betwixt those upper waters, which are ga∣thered into clouds, and these below. 7 And God made the firmament, and divided the waters, which were under the firmament, from the waters, which were a∣bove the firmament, and it was so.Therefore God caused this large extent of aire, to spread it selfe high and wide, and thereby made a sepa∣ration betwixt those aery, and these lower earthly wa∣ters, and it was done. 8 And God called the firmament heaven, and the evening and the morning were the second day.And this dilated aire (as also that above) hee taught man, after, to call heaven, and established the due use, and course therof, and thus was the second naturall day, consisting of evening and morning, finished. 9 And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appeare, and it was so.Further, God willed that these lower waters should be gathered into one common place of receit, and that the dry land, which was till now covered over there∣with, should appeare, and it was so done. 10 And God called the dry land earth, and the ga∣thering together of the waters called he seas: and God saw that it was goodAnd God taught to call this dry land (according to the nature of it) earth: and the common receptacle of waters, seas: and God allowed this second dayes worke also as of necessary and excellent use for his purposed creatures. 11 And God said, Let the earth bring forth grasse, the herbe yeelding seed, and the fruit tree yeelding fruit after his kinde, whose seed is in it selfe upon the earth: and it was so.Then God willed that by his immediate power, even before the Sunne was created, the earth should bring forth all manner of vegetables: both those that do volun∣tarily sprout up, and those which doe since require the art, and labour of man: all buds, blossomes, herbes, trees, which both may, and doe beare fruit according to their kinde; and whose fruit by his appointment containeth in it the seed of their owne kindes, and it was so done. 12 And the earth brought forth grasse, and herbe yeelding seed after his kinde, and the tree yeelding fruit, whose seed was in it selfe after his kinde: and God saw that it was good.And the earth brought forth, (as God commanded her) all manner of vegetables in very great variety, ac∣cording to the severall kindes, both of herbes that yeeld their owne seed as the meanes of their future increase, and all trees that beare fruit, and whose fruit by his ap∣pointment, containeth in it the seed of their own kinde: & God allowed them as of necessary, and excellent use, & established the benefits therof to his future creatures. 13 And the evening and the morning were the third day.And thus was the third naturall day, consisting of morning and evening, also finished.
And God further willed,14 And God said, Let there bee lights in the fir∣mament of the heaven, to divide the day from the night: and let them be for signes, and for seasons, and for dayes, and yeares. that in the highest part of the aire, which wee call heaven, there should bee made the starres, which are so many glorious lights, in the fir∣mament, partly to make a perpetuall and constant divi∣sion betwixt day and night, and partly to be certaine and naturall signes for mans direction in his course of judge∣ment, and practice, for sowing, planting, sailing, and such other common affaires, and partly to make a distin∣ction of seasōs: sommer, winter, spring, harvest, autumne, yeares, months, weekes, dayes, houres. Lastly (which is their chiefest use) he willed that they should serve to give lively heate, and light,15 And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, to give light upon the earth, and it was so. from those high places, wherin he set them to his creatures here up∣on earth, and it was so done. And now God made amongst the rest,16 And God made two great lights; the greater to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the starres also. two great lights greater then the rest, not in body, but in glory, the greater to rule the day; to which purpose he gathered into all that light, which hitherto was diffused through the aire; the lesser, together with the other smaller stars, to rule the night. Thus God (I say) made these heavenly lights,17 And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth. and pla∣ced them in the highest part of the aire, that they might the better give light to the earth. And that they might interchangeably governe the day and night, and distinguish the light from the darknesse,18 And to rule over the day, and over the night, and to divide the light from the darknesse: and God saw that it was good the dawning and twilight from the cleare day; and God allowed them, as of excellent, and necessary use for his other creatures. So the fourth naturall day consisting of morning and evening, was fully finished.19 And the evening and and the morning were the fourth day. Now,20 And God said, Let the waters bring forth a∣bundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowle that may flie above the earth in the open fir∣mament of heaven. that God had thus made fit roome and place for his creatures, he willed that they should in their se∣verall rankes, and orders be framed; and first (as the least perfect) hee decreed that the waters should abundantly bring forth all swimming and creeping things (proper to it selfe) that have life; and, that of the lighter and more ayrie part thereof, should be made all kinde of fowles, that flie upon the earth, and waters, in the open space of the aire. Then God of the same Element,21 And God created great whales, and every li∣ving creature that moveth which the waters brought forth abundātly, after their kind, and every winged fowle after his kinde: and and God saw that it was good. made the mighty Whales, Whirlpooles, & all other those huge & strange formes of creatures; and all kinde of fishes, that live and move in the waters; he framed of the same matter, in great variety and abundance, according to their kinds, and every flying fowle according to his kind: and God al∣lowed them to be of excellent use.
22 And God blessed them, saying, Bee fruitfull and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas; and let fowle multiply in the earth.Then God gave a reall and sensible blessing unto them, willing and decreeing by an everlasting Law, that these watery creatures should naturally multiply themselves by generation, in an especiall manner, and measure; so as they should plentifully store both the Sea and Rivers, and that the fowles also, should by a naturall forme of generation, multiply their numbers, and successions up∣on earth. 23 And the evening and the morning were the fift day.So the fift naturall day, consisting of morning and evening, was fully finished. 24 And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kinde, cattell, and creep∣ing things and beasts of the earth after his kind: and it was so.Furthermore, God appointed that of the earth (by his almighty power) should bee made all other living things according to their kinds; all cattell that should be for more familiar use to man; all those creeping things, which live and move in, and upon the earth; and those wild beasts of the forrest, which live apart from the sight and service of man, each of them according to his nature, and kind, and it was so done. 25 And God made the beast of the earth after his kinde, and cattle after their kinde: and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good.And God accordingly made the wild beast of the field according to his kinde, and all those creeping things which move in and upon the earth, according to their severall kind, and the tamer cattell, according to their kind, and God allowed their use as commodious and ne∣cessary. 26 And God said, Let us make man in our Image af∣ter our likenesse: and let them have dominion over the fish of the Sea, & over the fowle of the aire, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over eve∣ry creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.Then God (when all helps, and ornaments were thus prepared) decreed, and after a divine manner consulted with himselfe, the Father with the Son, and holy Spirit, concerning the Creation of his chiefe creature, Man; as it were to this effect: We have made our severall crea∣tures, in great variety; having given to them, being, life, sense and motion; but now, let us make that creature, for whose sake the rest have beene created; consisting as of a materiall body; wherein hee shall partake with other creatures, in being, life, sense, and motion; so also, of a spi∣tuall nature & substance, wherin he shall be like to us; be∣ing indued, as with all the faculties of a reasonable soule, so also with perfect knowledg, holinesse, righteousnesse: And let them have dominion over all the creatures, over the fishes of the Sea, and over the fowles of the aire, and over the cattel, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing, that creepeth on the earth. 27 So God created man in his owne Image, in the Image of God created he him, male and female crea∣ted he them.So God, accordingly, created man, after his owne Image, both in respect of his spirituall soule, and of this integritie, and holinesse, and righteousnesse, wherewith hee was indued; hee created them in both sexes, both male and female; forming the male of the matter of earth, and the female afterwards of the male.
And God gave a speciall blessing unto them; and said,28 And God blessed thē, and God said unto them, be fruitfull, and multiply, and replenish the earth, & subdue it: & have domi∣niō over the fish of the sea. Be yee (through that power of propagation, which I give you) fruitfull; and multiply and replenish the earth with your seed; and be yee possessors and rulers of the earth, &c. And God said, Behold, as I have made you,29 And God said, Behold I have given you every herbe bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree. and given you life, so am I carefull to provide and grant you fit sustenance for the continuance of that life, which I have given you: Take ye liberty therfore to eate of every plant, that groweth upon the earth, whether herbe or tree, &c. CAP. II. THus were the heavens, and the earth, and sea,1 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the hoste of them. and all the hoasts of heaven (both the Angels, and starres,) and all the furniture of the earth and water (both plants, and beasts, and birds, and fishes) finished, by the mighty power of God in the space of sixe dayes. And on the seventh day,2 And on the seventh day God ended his work, which he had made: and he rested on the seaventh day from all his worke which he had made. God having finished the the great worke of his creation; ceased from any further act of this kinde, rejoycing in the view of his glorious workmanship, and never since ceasing to preserve, order, and governe that world, which he then created. And thereupon God gave a speciall blessing to the seventh day, and honoured it with this priviledge,3 And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his worke which God created and made. that it should be a day set apart to rest and holinesse; that so by this meanes, men might be put in minde of the wonder∣full worke of his creation, and might celebrate that rest of their creator. This is the story,4 These are the generati∣ons of the heavens, and of the earth, when they were created, in the day that the Lord God mad the earth, &c. or just report of the making of the heavens, and the earth, in that beginning of time, where∣in the Lord God (who hath eternall being in himselfe) gave a being to the earth and the heavens. And to every plant of the field, when as before it had no being in the earth,5 And every plant of the field, before it was in the earth, and every herbe of the field, before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to raine upon the earth: and there was not a man to till the ground. and to every herbe that had not as yet beene, nor could have beene, as by any naturall meanes: for there had beene as yet no raine (which is the ordinary meanes of fruitfullnesse, (sent downe from God upon the earth, neither was there any man (as yet) to till the ground, and by his industry and art to draw forth any fruit therefrom. Onely God caused a mist or vapour,6 But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground. to rise up from the earth, and to fall downe againe, upon the whole face of the ground; whereby the earth was watered, and the fruits thereof refreshed, till he thought good to send the ordinary and naturall helpes of her fruitfulnesse.
7 And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soule.And the Lord God formed the body of man, of the mould of the ground, and inspired and animated him, with a living and reasonable spirit, which is immortall, immateriall, separable from the body: and so man, con∣sisting of body and soule, became a perfect creature, in∣dued with life and reason, and such qualities, and moti∣ons as were fit to proceed from both. 8 And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there hee put man whom hee had for∣med.And the Lord God planted an orchard, and garden of pleasure, in the easterne tract of that goodly and fruit∣full country of Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed. 9 And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree, that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food: the tree of life also, in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evill.And the Lord God furnished, and adorned that gar∣den with all variety of goodly and pleasant plants, that might be delectable either to the eye, or to the taste, or wholsome for nourishment: and amongst the rest cau∣sed to grow there, that flourishing and sacramentall tree of life; which as it had vertue to preserve the naturall life, so served to signifie both that eternall life of glory, and blessednesse in heaven, and the onely author of that eternall life, Jesus Christ; and therewith also, that fa∣tall tree of knowledge, the eating whereof should cause man (who before knew onely good) to have a wofull knowledge and experience of evill. 10 And a river went out of Eden to water the garden, and from thence it was parted, and became in∣to foure heads.And for the commodity of the place, God had so sea∣ted it, as that a river came downe out of Eden; to water the garden; and from thence it parted it selfe into foure severall streames. 11 The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold:The first is that chanell of Euphrates which is called Pischon, which washeth upon the land which afterward tooke the name of Havilah (one of the grand-children of Eber) where there is gold. 12 And the gold of that land is good, there is Bdel∣lium and the Onyx stone.And the gold of that land (as likewise of his brother Ophirs) is very pure and fine; and there is store of rich gummes, or pearles, and precious stones 13 And the name of the second river is Gihon, the same is it that compasseth the whole lād of Ethiopia.The name of the second streame, or chanell, is Gi∣hon, which floweth along by desert Arabia; the inhe∣ritance afterwards of Cush, the sonne of Cham. 14 And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth to∣ward the east of Assyria: and the fourth river is Eu∣phrates.The name of the third streame is Hiddekel, or Tigris, which floweth eastward to Assyria: And the fourth, re∣taining the appellation of the whole maine river, is cal∣led Euphrates. Then the Lord tooke man from the place where hee was created;15 And the Lord God tooke the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dresse it, and to keepe it. and placed him in this goodly paradise of Eden, not that hee should be idle, and there spend his time in vaine pleasure; but that hee might sowe, plant, prune, keepe and dresse it, not in any toyling, or afflicting labour, but only for his voluntary, and delight∣full exercise.
And God prescribed man a Law for his diet,16 And the Lord God commanded the man, say∣ing; Of every tree of the garden thou maiest freely eate. to this effect; Thou seest with what plenty, and delicacie of fruit I have stored this garden, for thee; all which I leave to thy free choice, and full liberty: feed on which soe∣ver thou likest. Onely one tree there is,17 But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evill, thou shalt not eate of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die. which for the tryall of thine obedience, I forbid thee, and thine to taste of; the tree of experience so good & evill; so termed in regard of the event, for so soone as ever thou eatest the fruit therof, thou shalt surely bee in the state of mortality, and shalt sensibly feele evident proofes of thy frailty; and besides this bodily death, thy transgression of this my Comman∣dement, shall be punished (if I should deale with thee in the rigour of my Justice) with the separation of thy body and soule from my presence for ever. Now before this time, even in the sixt day,18 And the Lord God said, it is not good that the man should bee alone: I will make him an helpe meet for him. the Lord had thus determined, concerning man; It is neither so cō∣fortable an estate, nor fit for the naturall propagation of mankinde, that the man should live alone, in one onely Sex: I will make him an helper, of his owne nature, meet for him, in both regards. For when the Lord had formed of the earth every beast of the field, and every fowle of the ayre,19 And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowle of the aire, and brought them unto Adam, to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof. of their owne fit matter, and had brought them to man (who was their lord) to acknowledge his soveraignty, and to re∣ceive from him their names (for howsoever Adam, out of the knowledge of their severall nature, thought good to call them, so was their names.) And when Adam had given fit names to all the crea∣tures; to all the tamer sort of cattell,20 And Adam gave names to all cattell, and to the fowle of the aire, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an helpe meet for him. all the fowles of the aire, all wild beasts; all this while, among so great choice, Adam found not a meet helper of his owne nature, and forme, with whom he might converse for comfort, and generation. Wherefore the Lord God had cast man into a deepe sleep or extasie,21 And the Lord God caused a deep sleep, to fall upon Adam, & he slept, and he tooke one of his ribbs, and closed up the flesh in∣stead thereof. that he might not be sensible of what he suffered, and whiles he thus slept, he tooke out one of his ribbs from his side, and closed up the breach with flesh in the roome thereof. And of this ribbe, thus taken from Adam,22 And the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a wo∣man, and brought her unto the man. God fra∣med the woman, in a most comely proportion, and brought her thus framed immediately to Adam, as a fit match to joyne with him. Then Adam lovingly and cheerfully receiving her,23 And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: shee shall be called woman, be∣cause she was taken out of man.
gladly acknowledged; this indeed, is she whom I sought among all the creatures, and found not: now have I ob∣tained of the Lord, a fit helper for me, for loe, this is not onely of the same nature, but (as I well see) of the same flesh, blood, and bone, with my selfe. She shall be therefore called woman; because she is taken out of the man, that as she received her substance from me, so she may take her name also. 24 Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shal cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.Seeing therefore such was the creation of woman, and the first institution of marriage; it is the everlasting will of God, that there shall be an intire and loving cōjuncti∣on betwixt the man and wife: and, whether in their ha∣bitation (if occasion so require) or whether in the dan∣ger of the dissolution of this bond, the man shall rather leave father and mother, and his duty to them in this case, for his wife, thē neglect her due satisfaction; & they two shall be so neerly knit together, both in body and minde, that they shall be but as one flesh; like as at their first creation. 25 And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not asha∣med.And such was the purity, simplicity, and perfection of their mindes and bodies, as that both Adam and his wife were naked; and found not this estate, either un∣wholsome, or unhonest, or uncomly: for as yet there was no lust in them, which might breed their shame either before God, or themselves.
CAP. III. NOw the Serpent was, by nature,1 Now the Serpent was more subtill then any beast of the field, which the Lord God had made, and he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Yee shall not eate of every tree of the garden? more subtill then any beast of the field, which God had made; and therefore the fitter to be imployed, as an instru∣ment of Sathan, to betray mankinde: Him therefore did Sathan make choice of; and in him thus spake in double sense to the woman; as the weaker vessell: Is it so in∣deede that God hath forbidden you to eate of any tree of the Garden? And the woman said unto the Serpent;2 And the woman said unto the Serpent, We may eate of the fruit of the trees of the garden: We have free liberty given us to eate indifferently of the fruit of the Trees of the Garden, in great varietie of diet. Onely from one tree in the midst of the Garden,3 But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eate of it, neither shall Ye touch it, lest ye die. hath God restrained us, and hath charged us; ye shall not eate of that one tree, nor touch it, upon paine of death. Then the Serpent said to the woman; Tush, there is a farther matter in this prohibition; feare not;4 And the Serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die. there is no danger of dying any death at all. But herein God rather envies your further felicity; for he well knowes, on the contrary,5 For God knowes, that in the day ye eate ther∣of, then your eyes shall be opened, and yee shall be as gods, knowing good and evill. that whensoever yee shall eat of that fruit, the eyes of your understanding (which are now halfe shut) shall be fully opened, and yee shall be full of divine knowledge, like your Maker: for (as the name of that tree may informe you) whereas now you know by halves onely, that which is good; then you shall know evill also. So the woman, being wonne by Sathan,6 And when the wo∣man saw, that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, shee tooke of the fruit thereof, and did eate, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eate. to fixe her eies upon that fruit, and being perswaded that it was like by the outward shew of it, to be fit for use; and finding it to be exceeding pleasant to sight, And hearing it to be a fruit of such admirable benefit, for the obtaining of further knowledge, tooke thereof, and did eate it; and because she would have her husband partaker with her of such happinesse, she commended it to him; and he se∣duced by her, did eate of it also. Then the eyes of their understanding were opened in∣deed as Satan had foretold,7 And the eyes of them both were opened, & they knew that: they were na∣ked: and they sewed figge leaves together, and made themselves aprons. to discern between the good which they had lost, & the evill into wch they were fallen; opened therefore to their owne misery, and shame; for now the impuritie of their mindes caused them to see, and acknowledge the deformity of their bodies, which before their sin, were no other then comely: to the hiding whereof, they fastned together figge leaves, and made
themselves, a cover for those parts, wherein now their corrupted nature told them their chiefe shame lay. 8 And they heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the coole of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the pre∣sence of the Lord God a∣mongst the trees of the Garden.And now, after the conscience of their sinne; God who is the Judge, and revenger of it, gave some sensible tokens of his presence, about that time, when the heate of the day was abated, in the Garden; and therefore Adam and his wife (who had wont to delight in the pre∣sence of their God) now ranne away, to hide themselves, among the thickets of trees, from the sight of him. But God (from whom he could not be hid) audibly called him forth;9 And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? and said unto him, in the person of both, Adam, where art thou? Who answered, I heard thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid of thy Majestie,10 And he said, I heard thy voice in the Garden: and was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid my selfe. & in regard of my selfe, I saw that my nakednes had in it shame, and deformitie, There∣fore I hid my selfe. Then God saith, thou hast heretofore appeared before me boldly,11 And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I com∣manded thee, that thou shouldest not eate. and not complained of thy naked∣nesse, Whence therefore is thy shame, and conscience of deformity? It is a wrong cause which thou pretendest: the owne mouth evinceth thee as guiltie of the breach of my law, speake out therefore more plainly, against thy selfe; Hast thou not eaten of that fruit, whereof alone I charged thee, upon so fearefull a paine, that thou shoul∣dest not eate? 12 And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave mee of the tree, and did eate.Then Adam, still desiring to put off the blame from himselfe, said, It is true, I have eaten indeed; but the fault was not so much mine; for, Lo, the woman, which was of thine owne choosing, and giving, she drew me to this sinne; which of my selfe I should not have easily yeelded to. 13 And the Lord God said unto the womā, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eate.And the Lord God said unto the woman; How is it that thou hast commited so hainous a crime, both to eate thy selfe, and to draw thy husband into sinne with thee? And the woman said, Alas, Lord, how did I thinke that any of thy creatures wold have thus betraied us; behold, the Serpent, a creature of thine owne making, beguiled me with false promises, and induced me, in simplicitie, to eate of it. 14 And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Be∣cause, thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattell, and above every beast of the field: upon thy belly shalt thou goe, and dust shalt thou eate, all the daies of thy life.Then God, not examining any farther, beganne to pronounce sentence upon the Serpent; and said, Because thou hast beene used, as an instrument to destroy man∣kinde; thou shalt be most execrable, and detestable, above all, either Cattel, or wild beast, and where as thou didst lift up thy selfe to deceive the woman; now thou shalt for ever craule upon thy belly, in an ugly and horrible fashion, and, as thou hast brought man backe againe to
the dust, so thou shalt eate the dust of the earth, while thou livest. Unto the woman,16 Vnto the woman he said, I will greatly mul∣tiplie thy sorrow and thy conception. In sorrow shalt thou bring forth chil∣dren: and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and hee shall rule over thee. which was the next instrument of this sinne, God said, I will greatly increase those sor∣rowes, which are proper to thy Sex, and those especially, which shall follow upon thy conceptions. And whereas thou shouldest have had children borne without sin, and borne without paine, now (seeing thou hast sought too much unlawfull pleasure) thou shalt in much anguish, and sore throwes of travell, bring forth Children; and as thou hast won thy husband, in this new act, to follow thee; so for ever thine appetite shall be subject to thine husband; & curbed by him at pleasure, and he shall with more com∣mand, & inequalitie rule over thee, in all thine actions. Also, to Adam he said;17 And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkned unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which I com∣manded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eate of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake: in sorrow shalt thou eate of it al the daies of thy life. because thou hast yeelded to the evill perswasions of thy wife, and not to me, and hast eaten of that tree, whereof alone, I so deeply charged thee not to eate, behold, that earth which I made, and fitted for thy use, shall now, because of thy sinne, be ac∣cursed to thee, with barrennesse, and evill fruit; with much toyle, and paine, shalt thou procure, and eate the fruit thereof, all the dayes of thy life. And when thou hast done thy best to it, it shall deceive thy hope, and, in stead of wholesome graine,18 Thornes also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee: and thou shalt eate the herbe of the field. shall yeeld thee thornes and thistles; and thou that hast thus pleased thy tast, shalt no more eate of the pleasant fruit of this Garden; but shalt be faine to take up with the herbs and fruit of the field, else where. And not onely with vexation of minde,19 In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eate bread, till thou returne unto the ground: for out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou returne. but with wea∣risome and extreme labour of body, shalt thou procure thy sustenance; and that not for some short time, but till thou returne to the earth; for, what proud conceipt and hope soever the Serpent put into thee, of not dying, I tell thee, that as of the dust of the earth thou wert for∣med, so now thou art in the state of certaine mortality, and to dust shalt thou returne. And Adam, now looking for that perpetuity in his seed,20 And Adam called his wives name Eve, be∣because she was the mo∣ther of all living. which he saw he could not have in himselfe, called his wives name, Hevah, because she was, and should be the mother of all living men, the posteritie whereof he saw would be large, and manifold. And God the Lord, partly for wholsomnesse of body,21 Vnto Adam also, and to his wife, did the Lord God make coats of skinnes, & cloathed them. and partly to put them in minde of their corruption, which had made nakednesse shamefull, prepared skinnes for Adam and Eve, and taught them both to fashion those skinnes into garments (whereby their whole bodies might be covered) and also to put them on.
22 And the Lord God said; Behold, the man is be∣come as one of us to know good and evill. And now lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eate and live for ever:Then the Lord God upbraiding man with his follie, said; See now how well Sathan hath performed his pro∣mise to man: Is he not thinke you, become like one of us? Hath he not gained a goodly measure of knowledge, both of good and evill? And now heede must be taken lest he should farther prophane the sacrament of that other tree of life, and double his sinne, by hoping as vainely, to obtaine an eternall life, by the fruit thereof, as he hoped for the perfection of knowledge by the o∣ther. 23 Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the Garden of Eden, to till the ground, from whence he was taken.Therefore the Lord forced man to goe forth of the Garden of pleasure, as being unworthy to abide in so godly a place any more, and let him to till the other ba∣ser Earth whence he was taken. 24 So he drove out the man: and he placed at the East of the gardē of Eden, Cherubims, and a flaming sword, which turned every way, to keepe the way of the tree of life.And when God had thus, in disgrace, cast man out of Paradise, that he might utterly cut off all hope of his returne, he placed on the East side of Eden (where the entrance was,) Angells with flaming swords, conti∣nually shaken, to be guarders thereof, which untill the defacing thereof by the flood, duely kept it from all possibility of reentring; as in regard of the whole Garden, so especially of the tree of life, which God would not have touched by man, in this estate of his corruption. CAP. IIII. 1 And Adam knew Eve his wife, and she con∣ceived and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord.THen Adam, after his banishment out of Paradise, had carnall knowledge of Evah his wife; which concei∣ved and bare a sonne, whom shee (acknowledging the performance of Gods promise and blessing) called Cain, that is, Possession, because, said she, I have obtained a man, even after my fall, by the gift of the Lord. 4 And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flocke, and of the fat thereof, and the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering.And Abel also himselfe brought of the first fruits of his flocke; and of the fattest, and best of them; with a faithfull and cheerefull heart, and the Lord shewed by some visible testimonie, that he did gratiously accept both Abels person, and offering. And Cain was exceed∣ing wroth, and his counte∣nance fell.He was exceedingly moved with anger, and envie a∣gainst God, and his brother: and bewrayed extreame dis∣contentment in his countenance, which was now chur∣lish and dejected. 7 If thou doe well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou dost not well, sinne lieth at the doore: and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.If thou doe well, and offer in faith, is there any doubt but thou shalt be accepted, as well as thy brother? but if thou doe amisse, both the conscience of thy sinne, shall
be ever ready to afflict and torment thee, and the due revenge of sinne shall continually waite upon thee; and, as for thy brother, there is no cause of heart burning towards him; for both by nature, and his owne will, he is subject unto thee, and thou, as the elder brother, mayest command him.9 Am I my brothers keeper? Am I to waite upon my younger brother, or should not he rather attend upon me? Why shoul∣dest thou aske an accompt of him from me? Againe, God said:10 And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood crieth unto me from the ground. What villany is this that thou hast done? behold how silent soever thou be in the confession of thy sinne, the blood of thy bro∣ther (which thou hast shed) cries loude in mine eares, out of the Earth, for vengeance against thee. Now therefore cursed be thou both in thy paines which thou bestowest upon the ground,11 And now art thou cursed from the Earth which, &c. and in thy flight from this earth which hath, &c. And wheresoever thou shalt bestow thy paines in tilling the ground,12 When thou tillest the ground, it shall not hence-forth yeeld unto thee her strength: A fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the Earth. it shall not henceforth yeeld thee her wonted increase; neither shalt thou be able to settle thy selfe any where; for thine unquiet conscience shall not suffer thee to rest, but shall drive thee from place to place, so as thou shalt be a miserable vagabond, and runagate in the earth. Then Cain said unto the Lord,13 And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater then I can beare. Alas how shall I abide this curse? The punishment which thou inflictest upon me is intolerable. For behold, thou castest me out of this earth,14 Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the Earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth: and it shall come to passe, that every one that findeth me, shall slay me. and out of thy protection and grace, wherein a∣lone is all safety, and I, driven with the horrors of mine owne conscience, shall be a vagrant, and run∣agate, upon earth, I know not whither; and whoso∣ever findeth me (though of mine owne loynes) shall kill me, as I have done my brother. Then the Lord said unto him, Feare not,15 And the Lord said unto him; Therefore whosoever slaieth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sever fold. And the Lord set a marke upon Cain, lest any find∣ing him, should kill him. this dan∣ger of thy death, I would have it the chiefe part of thy punishment to live long & miserable, for feare∣full example unto others: whosoever therefore shal kill Cain (though so bloody a murtherer) he shall be punished by many degrees more severely then Cain himselfe, for the blood of his brother. And God set a visible and conspicuous marke upon the body of Cain, that whosoever met him, might hereby be warned not to lay hands upon him, not∣withstanding his just desert of death.
16 Then Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, & dwelt in the land of Nod, on the East of Eden.Then Cain was shut out from the protection of God, and that place where were visible signes of Gods presence, and meanes of his worship: and dwelt after his uncertaine and wandering manner, in that Land which was afterwards from his aber∣ration, called the land of Nod, toward the East side of Eden. 23 And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah & Zillhah, Heare my voice, ye wives of Lamech, harken unto my speech: For I have slaine a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.And Lamech said to his wives, Adah and Zill∣hah: what tell you me of any dangers and feares? heare my voice O yee faint-hearted wives of La∣mech, and hearken to my speech; I passe not of the strength of any adversary: For I know my owne valour, and power to revenge, if any man give me but a wound, or a stroke, though he be never so young, and lustie, I can, and will kill him dead. 24 If Cain shall be avenged seven-fold, truly Lamech seventie and seven fold.And if the murtherer of Cain shall finde it a∣venged upon him sevenfold, how then shall the violence offered to Lamech escape the revenge of seventy times seven fold? 26 Then began men to call up∣on the name of the Lord.Then, after all the dissolutenesse and prophane∣nes of Caines posteritie, men beganne to gather themselves into Congregations for publike service of God, and to make open, and solemne professi∣on of Religion. CAP. V. 1 This is the Booke of the ge∣neration of Adam: in the day that God created man, in the likenesse of God made he him.THis is the Roll or Catalogue of the genera∣tions of Adam, In that sixt day wherin God created man, he made him after his owne Image, in holinesse and righteousnesse. 3 And Adam lived an hundred and thirtie yeares and begat a son in his owne likenesse, after his Image; and called his name Seth.And Adam lived an hundred and thirtie yeares when in the ordinary course of generation, he be∣got a sonne in the same state of corruption, and mortalitie, wherein himselfe was after his fall, and he called his name Seth. 24 And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God tooke him.And Henoch acknowledged the Lord in all his wayes, and studied in all his life to approve him∣selfe to God, having his affections and conversati∣on above: therefore he had no more being upon Earth: For God tooke him from amongst men; and after no ordinary manner translated both his body and soule into his glory. 29 And he called his name Noah; saying, This same shall comfort us, concerning our worke' and toile of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed.And called his name Noah: because of the con∣solation which should arise from that rest which
the world should enjoy through him; saying, whe∣ther by revelation, from God, or upon the confi∣dence of his good hope, this same shall by the bles∣sing, wherwith his Justice shall be rewarded, com∣fort us concerning that toyle & sorrow, which our sinnes have procured; and this earth which the Lord hath cursed for our iniquities, shall through his holinesse, and integritie, in some measure, reco∣ver her strength, and yeeld due increase. CAP. VI. SO when the world beganne to be much peopled both of men and women:1 And it came to passe, when men beganne to multiply on the face of the Earth, and daughters were borne unto them: Then even the professors of Religion the seed of the righteous Seth and Henoch,2 That the sonnes of God saw the daughters of men, that they were faire, and they tooke them wives, of all which they chose. saw the daugh∣ters of the prophane and godlesse generation of Cain, and Lamech; that they were faire, and being overtaken with their beauty, yeelded so much to their lust, that without all respect had to religion, and godlines, they matched themselves carelesly in mariage with them.3 And the Lord said, My spirit shall not alwaies strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his daies shall be an hundred and twenty yeares. Therefore the Lord decreed thus with himselfe. I have used meanes enow to have reclaimed the world from their wickednesse: I have taught, ad∣monished, threatned them, all this prevailes not, I will no more strive with the perversnesse of Man, in this kinde: For, when I have all done, they are still but carnall; I will therefore set him a stint of yeares, before his common destruction, unlesse therefore within an hundred & twentie yeares he repent him of his sins: I wil then surely destroy him. In those dayes were men monstrous both in stature and conditions,4 There were Giants in the Earth in those dayes: and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them: the same became mighty men, which were of old, men of renowne. and not the parents onely but their children; for after that the seed of the righteous had thus lawlesly joyned thēselves with the daughters of the wicked: and they had borne them children, even these also were men of the same hugenesse and disposition, which were in those past ages much spoken of for their strength and tyranny. Then God (like as a man that repenteth him of his worke,6 And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth and it grieved him at his heart. purposeth to undoe that which he hath wrought) by the effect seemed to our weakenesse, as if he repented him of mans Creation, in that he
now determined to destroy him, whom hee had made, & now was both grievously displeased with their sinnes, and yet loath to revenge. 11 The Earth also was cor∣rupt before God, &c.Then not onely the men, but the very Earth it∣selfe was defiled with their abominations in the presence of God. 14 Make thee an Arke of Go∣pher wood: Roomes shalt thou make in the Arke, and shalt pitch it within & without with pitch.Make thee by the helpe of workemen, an Arke of the tallest Pine or Cedar trees, framed and pla∣ned for that purpose, thou shalt make many seve∣rall partitions in the Arke, and shalt cause it to bee pitched within and without. 15 And this is the fashion, which thou shalt make it of: the length of the Arke shall bee 300 Cubits, the breadth of it 50 Cubits, and the height of it 30 Cubits.And this shall be the proportion wherein thou shalt make it; the length thereof shall be three hundred of the largest Cubits, such as the tall sta∣ture of men in thine age affordeth; and the breadth fifty of the same Cubits, so as the length may bee Sixe times the breadth, and Ten times the height. 16 A Window shalt thou make to the Arke, and in a Cu∣bite shalt thou finish it above: and the doore of the Arke shalt thou set in the side thereof: with lower, second, and third Stories shalt thou make it.Thou shalt make a cleare light of windowes in the Arke, and in the space of a Cubit above them, shall be the rising of the Roofe thereof; the doore of the Arke shalt thou make in the one side thereof, not in either of the ends, and thou shalt frame it in three lofts, or floores one above ano∣ther. CAP. VII. 1 And the Lord said unto No∣ah, Come thou and all thy house into the Arke, for thee have I seene righteous before me in this generation.NOw when an hundred and twenty yeares after that first warning given to Noah, were expired; the Lord said to Noah: En∣ter thou and all thine house into the Arke, for thee onely haue I found, in this corrupt and depraved age, free from the common infection of wickednes, and sincere-hearted towards me. 2 Of every cleane beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts which are not cleane by two the male and his female.Of every cleane beast (whereof there shall bee great use for meate and sacrifice) shalt thou take unto thee seaven; of each kinde; the one halfe whereof shall bee male, the other, which is the greater halfe, female: all which shall by payres come unto thee (as I formerly promised) being sent by instinct from mee for their preservation; but of vncleane beasts (whereof there is lesse use) thou shalt take but onely a couple of each; the male and his female.
In the end of the six hundredth yeare of Noahs life in the second moneth of the Spring,11 In the 600. yeare of Noahs life, in the second moneth, the seventeenth day of the moneth, the same day, were all the fountaines of the great Deepe broken up, and the windowes of Heaven were opened. the seventeenth day of the moneth; even in that same day, began the issues of the lower waters (which are gathered within the earth) to gush forth above their bankes, and those which God had bound in the Clouds of Heaven to powre downe vehemently, like as if some full vessels had beene at once cast out of the windowes of the Aire. And the Lord by whose instinct all these Creatures were brought thither,16 And the Lord shut him in, &c. when all were entered which hee meant to preserve, closed up the doore fast and sure, that he might be safe from the waters. And the waters violently overwhelmed all the whole Earth (counting from the beginning of those forty dayes wherein the raine fell,24 And the waters pre∣vailed upon the Earth an hundred and fifty dayes. unto the end of an hun∣dred and fifty dayes) for the full space of five moneths. CAP. VIII. THen God who cannot forget his mercy to his, shewed by the effect to Noah,1 And God remem∣bred Noah, and every li∣ving thing, and all the Cattell that was within the Arke: and God made a winde to passe over the Earth, and the waters as∣swaged. that hee re∣membred him, and for his sake, all the wild beasts, and tame Cattel, that were with him in the Arke; there∣fore God by his immediate power caused an extraordi∣nary drying or driving winde, to passe about the earth, thus covered with waters, and the fury of the waters be∣gan by little and little to decrease. And God made way for the Channels of the earth to receive in the waters, which they had sent forth,2 The Fountaines also of the deepe, and the win∣dowes of Heaven were stopped, and the Raine from Heaven was restrai∣ned. and shut up the lower waters into their former receptacles, and closed up the passages of the Clouds above, and so the fall of the raine was restrained, when it had continued forty dayes and nights. And after the end of the hundred and fiftieth day from the beginning of the floud,3 And after the end of the hundred & fifty dayes the waters were abated. the waters sensibly abated. And in the seventh moneth,4 And the Arke re∣sted in the seventh mo∣neth, on the seventeenth day of the moneth, upon the mountaines of Ararat. and in the seventeenth day of the moneth, the Arke which had hitherto floated uncertainly, and was carried up by the force of the waves, that it could feele no ground, now, in the ebbing of the waters, stayed upon one of the high mountaines of Ararat, the ledge whereof passeth along from Ar∣menia Eastward towards India. And from this resting of the Arke,5 And the waters de∣creased continually untill the tenth moneth: and in the tenth moneth, on the first day of the moneth were the toppes of the mountaines seene. in the space of seventy three dayes, which was till the first day of the
tenth moneth, the waters so farre abated, that the tops of the mountaines were seene. And forty dayes after the first of the tenth moneth (which fell upon the eleventh day of the eleventh moneth) Noah opened one of the windows of the Arke,6 And it came to passe at the end of forty dayes, that Noah opened the windowes of the Arke which he had made. which he had made. And he let forth a Raven (because that foule was of a good sent;7 And he sent forth a Raven, which went forth too and fro untill the wa∣ters were dryed up from off the Earth. and used to feed on carcasses, which might be found lying upon the mountaines) thereby to have perfect knowledge of the decrease of the waters; which continued fluttering up and down, too and fro, not farre from the Arke, till the waters were dryed up upon the earth. 8 Also he sent forth a Dove from him to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground.Againe, since hee could have no information hereof, by the Raven, about seven dayes after, hee sent out a Dove from him, a Bird that was both more tame and domesticall; and which was wont to seeke her foode in the plaines, that by this second messenger, hee might see, if the earth were yet lightened of her burthen of waters. 9 For the waters were upon the face of the whole Earth.For the waters were still over all that part of the Earth, where he should have rested, and still covered all the plaines. 13 And Noah remo∣ved the covering of the Arke, and looked, and behold, the face of the ground was dry.And Noah removed some part of the roofe of the Arke, that he might looke round about him, and view∣ing it, found that the upper part of the ground, even of the plaines appeared dry, that is, not covered over with waters; though still soft, and moorish, with the conti∣nuance of that former moisture, that it was not yet fit for habitation. 14 And in the second moneth on the twenty se∣venth day of the moneth was the Earth dry.And in the second Moneth, in the twenty seaventh day of the moneth (which was a yeare and ten dayes af∣ter the beginning of the Flood) was the Earth fully dry, and firme, and habitable againe. 20 And Noah builded an Altar unto the Lord, and tooke of every cleane beast, and of every cleane foule, and offered burnt offerings on the Altar.Then Noah, moved thereto by the godly example of his forefathers, and by warrant from God, built an Al∣tar to the Lord; and tooke of every cleane beast, and of every cleane foule, one, (for God had appointed him one odde of each of these for this purpose) and, partly for expiation, partly in token of his thankfulnes, offered them, as a burnt offering consumed to ashes unto God, for preservation of them and all their fellow-Crea∣tures. 21 And the Lord smel∣led a sweet savor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not againe curse the ground for mans sake: for the imagination of mans heart is evill from his youth: neither will I againe smite any more every thing living, as I have done.And the Lord, who was before offended with Man∣kind, now was pacified toward the remainder of them; and pleased gratiously to accept this obedience of Noah; and as hee had eternally decreed, so hee utte∣red
his counsell to Noah, I will not from henceforth send any more such generall curse upon the Earth for mans sake; for I see that if I should judge him according to his deserts, I should every day bring upon him a new Deluge, for behold, all the thoughts and the whole fashi∣on of mans heart is altogether evill, even from his Infan∣cy; my mercy therefore shall exalt it selfe above his sinnes, neither will I any more smite all living things, as I have now done, with an universall destruction. Hereafter the course and use of the seasons of the yeare, the Harvest, the Spring, Winter, and Summer;22 While the earth re∣maineth, seed-time and harvest, and cold add heat, and Summer, and Winter, and day, and night shall not cease. and their tempers of heate, and cold, and the differen∣ces of the night, and day, (which now in the thicke and gloomy darknesse, could not well be observed) shall no more generally cease, over all the whole Earth, at once, so long as the Earth remaineth is this state. CAP. IX. THe outward priviledges of your first Creation,2 And the feare of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, & upon every fowle of the aire, and upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered. I doe now (though imperfectly) renew to you, let the feare and dread of you be planted naturally in every beast of the Earth, whether tame or wilde, & in every foule of the Aire, and generally in all that treadeth upon the Earth; and in all the fishes of the sea; all these, my will is, shall be subject to your pleasure and com∣mand; that as by you, and for you, they were preserved, so they accordingly serve to your use. Yea, in respect of your diet,3 Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you: even as the greene hearbe have I given you all things. I do now whether give or renew unto you, more ample priviledges, for now, sith that the strength of all herbs, & plants are decreased with the deluge, I allow you every thing that moveth, & liveth to be meat for you; of all which you will wisely make choyce for your selves, of those Creatures which are wholsome, and fit, even as freely doe I now allow you to eate thereof, as I formerly did allow the greene herbe for them and you; so doe I now allow them unto you. But so doe I give you the libertie to eate of the flesh of all other Creatures,4 But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall you not eate. as that you abstaine from eating the blood of thē; whether with the flesh, or severed from it; whether they be alive, or dead, for in the blood is the seat of life, which cannot without cruelty be devoured. Further,5 And surely your blood of your lives will I re∣quire: at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man, at the hand of every mans bro∣ther, will I require the life of man. know yee that I have great respect as to the eating, so to the spilling of blood, wherein the vitall spi∣rits are seated, but especially of man, which is my prin∣cipall
Creature; and so doe detest cruelty in shedding his blood, that if a very brute beast shall be guilty of this fact, I will have his blood shed againe for it; much more will I have this satisfaction from a neighbour, or bro∣ther, for the life of a man. 6 Who so sheddeth mans blood, by man shall his blood, be shed: for in the Image of God made he man.Whosoever sheddeth mans blood, unlesse by lawfull authoritie from God, his blood shall be shed againe; for in his owne Image hath God made man: some remnants whereof there are still in our depravednesse: therefore followes it, that both a man may not shed his brothers blood, and that the magistrates in Gods name may and must revenge it. 13 I doe set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant, betweene me & the earth.I will and ordaine, that the Raine-bow which you have seene appeare in the watery Cloud, shall be, from hence∣forth, set apart for the signe of a covenant, made on my part betwixt me and the Earth, of never drowning it againe, which may the more fitly represent thus much unto you, for that it naturally is wont to foresignifie the ceasing of the Raine, by the appearance thereof. 15 And I will remēber my covenant which is be∣tweene me and you, and e∣very living creature of all flesh: and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.You shall then know, by this signe, that I remember my purpose of never drowning the world, &c. And Noah began againe, according to his former trade,20 And Noah beganne to be an husbandman, and he planted a Vineyard. to exercise himselfe, in tilling the earth, & of those vines, which were found here, and there, sprouting out of the earth, he with much industry, planted a whole Vineyard; and by this meanes devised the use of wine. 21 And he dranke of the wine, and was drun∣ken, and he was uncovered within his tent.And he dranke of that his wine, and (whether through Ignorance, or weakenesse) was drunke therewith; inso∣much that forgetting himselfe, and all shame, and come∣linesse, he lay immodestly uncovered, and that openly in the floore of his Tent. 22 And Ham the father of Canaan saw the naked∣nes of his father, and told his two brethren without.And when Cham the youngest sonne of Noah, had unnaturally sported himselfe in gazing upon his fathers nakednesse, he told his two brethren, without, that they might also take part with him in this wicked derision of their father. 24 And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his youngest sonne had done unto him.Then Noah awoke from his wine, and by inquiry up∣on occasion of his sonnes garment, which he found upon him, knew what his youngest sonne had done unto him. 25 And he said, Cursed be Canaan: a servant of servants he shall be unto his brethren.And in the spirit of Prophesie said; The sinne of Cham is so great, that the punishment of it shall not rest in him alone, but shall be derived to his posterity: Even Cana∣an his sonne, amongst the rest, shall be accursed, he shall be in most slavish servitude even to his owne brethren. 27 God shall inlarge (or perswade) Iaphet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant.God shall perswade the posterity of Iaphet, by the voice of his word, to come home into the bosome of the true Church, and Canaans Issue shall be servants un∣to theirs.
CAP. X. ANd Cush begat Nimrod,8 And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth. who began to usurpe much rule, & by oppression to inlarge the bounds of his dominions. He was a cruell tyrant, both in his usurpation,9 Hee was a mighty hunter before the Lord: Wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mightie hunter before the Lord. and in the manner of his government, without all awe of God, or care of men, wherefore it is ever since growne into a proverb; As great a tyrant as Nimrod. CAP. XI. THen all the men upon the whole earth,1 And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech. had but one Common language, and one fashion of speech. And as they spread themselves from that Esterne mountainous Country, where the Arke first staied:2 And it came to passe as they journied from the East, that they found a plaine in the land of Shinar, and they dwelt there. they found a large, and fruitfull plaine (since called Shinar) now Mesopotamia, and there they setled their abode. And some yeares after they had there well seated themselves, they said one to another, Come,3 And they said one to another; Goe to, let us make brick, & burne them thorowly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter. let us make bricke, and burne it in the fire; so they had bricke for stone, the fittest matter that this fat plaine would afford, for building; and a cleaving-pitchy slime (which that soile yeeldeth) in stead of morter. Then Nimrod, as their ring-leader, and the rest of his followers,4 And they said, Goe to, let us build us a City & a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. said thus in consultation among them∣selves, Goe to, let us build us a large City, and a tower therein, of an exceeding height; partly that we may make our selves famous, and partly that we may unite our power and societie, and prevent the danger of being dispersed one from another. But the Lord, who is every where,5 And the Lord came downe to see the City, and the tower, which the chil∣dren of men builded. and seeth all things (to speake of him after the manner of men) as if he should come downe, and looke upon the City & tower, which these vaine men, in the pride of their hearts had begunne to build, so tooke notice of what they did and meant to doe: And the Lord decreed thus with himselfe, Behold,6 And the Lord said; Behold, the people is one, and they have all one lan∣guage, and this they begin to doe: and now nothing will bee restrained from them, which they have imagined to doe. the people is one in heart, joyning together in one com∣mon resolution of this worke; and they all have one lan∣guage, that they may the better performe it, and this they have through our permission, begun, and proceeded to doe, and now, nothing appeares which may stop them
in all that vaine project they have imagined to thēselves. 7 Goe to, let us goe downe, & there confound their language, that they may not understand one anothers speech.Come, let us (as if we should goe downe amongst them) so from Heaven cause their languages to bee con∣founded, &c. CAP. XII. 2 And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will blesse thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing.THou shall lose nothing by the change, for in stead of a small kindred which thou shalt leave, I will cause thee to be the father of a great, and populous nation: And I will prosper thee both outwardly, and spiritually, and make thy name famous and reverend; And thou shalt be ever mentioned in the forme of all blessings. 3 And in thee shall all families of the earth bee blessed.And in, and by that holy seed, the Messias, which shall come of thy loines, all the people of the earth shall be blessed. 11 And it came to passe, when he was come neere to enter into Aegypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a faire woman to looke upon:And when he drew neare to enter into Aegypt; in his infirmitie, consulting with flesh and blood, he said to Sarai his wife, Behold now, while I looke upon the Sou∣thern women, and compare them with thee, thy colour and complection is much more beautifull then theirs: Therefore it will (I feare) come to passe, that the Aegyptians making no conscience of their wayes,12 Therefore it shall come to passe, when the Aegyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive. but be∣ing altogether led by their lust, when they see thee, they will say, Shee is his wife, there is no hope of enjoying her while he is alive: so they will kill me, that they may with more libertie enjoy thee, and live with thee. CAP. XIII. 10 And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plaine of Iordane, that it was well watered, every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Go∣morrah, even as the Garden of the Lord, like the land of Aegypt, as thou com∣mest unto Zoar.SO when Lot had taken a view of all that Countrey, he saw that part of the plaine of Iordane to be well watred every where; and therefore very rich and commodious for pasture; for before the Lord destroyed Sodom, & Gomorrah; with those other three bordering Cities, it was a goodly and fruitfull land; like unto the Garden of Eden, for pleasure; or like unto the land of Aegypt watred with the streames of Nilus: especially that part that is toward Zoar, as it is now called, thē Bela. 11 Then Lot chose him all the plaines of Iordane: &c.Then Lot being led onely by his eye, not at all inqui∣ring into the qualitie of the people, chose to himselfe (although the younger) all that part of the plaine of Iordane.
Seeing thou hast so willingly yeelded to thy Nephew,14 And the Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward. thou shalt sustaine no losse by it, Lift up thine eyes now, and looke round about thee, from this high place where thou art, Northward, and Southward, &c. For all the land which thou seest, and all that pertaines unto it, will I give to thee in right, and to thy seed after thee, in possession, for many ages.15 For all the land, which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seede for ever. And I will increase thy seed, both carnall and spiritu∣all, unto a very exceeding great number,16 And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbred. so as they shall not be counted for multitude. CAP. XIIII. TIdal King of a mixed people,1 Tidal King of Nations. which dwelt neare un∣to them. When Abram heard that his Nephew Lot was taken captive,14 And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, borne in his owne house, three hundreh and eighteene, and pursued them unto Dan. he brought forth into the field and armed three hundred & eighteene persons of them that were borne & brought up in his house, besides them that he had bought, and procured to his service, yea, besides the companies of his confederates, and pursued them to the farthest point of that land, which God should give to his posterity, even to Dan. And Melchizedek, King of Salem,18 And Melchizedek, King of Salem, brought foorth bread and wine, &c. brought forth store of provision for the entertainment of Abram, and his company; which as he did royally like a King, So as he was a Priest of the most high God,19 And he blessed him, and said; Blessed be Abram of the most high God, pos∣sessour of heaven and earth. by vertue thereof he blessed him, saying, Blessed be thou Abram, &c. And Abram acknowledging his office,20 And hee gave him Tithes of all. voluntarily of∣fered to him the Tithe of all the goods that were taken. I have solemnly sworne by the Lord the most high God, &c. And in token thereof lift up my hand unto him,22 I have lift up my hand unto the Lord, &c. ere I went to this fight. Wishing all evill to my selfe,23 That I will not take from a thrid even to a shoo-latchet, &c. if I shall take from thee so much as a thrid, &c. CAP. XV. ANd Abram which hitherto had onely heard Gods promises to him, now said; Alas Lord,2 And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I goe childlesse, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus. all the bles∣sings
that thou shalt personally give me, cannot much a∣vaile me, seeing I goe childlesse, and the man, whom I shall leave heire of my house, is but a stranger in blood, and Countrey, this Eliezer of Damascus. 5 And he brought him forth abroade, and said, Looke now towards Hea∣ven, and tell the starres, if thou be able to number them. And he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.Moreover, he brought him forth of his house in the Evening, after he had spent the day within, in the exer∣cise of his faith, and said: Looke up, now, to Heaven, and count the starres thou seest there, if thou canst possi∣bly number them; so far shalt thou be from barrennesse, that thy seed, both spirituall and carnall, shall be as infi∣nite in number, as they. 6 And he beleeved in the Lord: and he counted it to him for righteousnesse.And Abram beleeved in God, and stedfastly relied on these gratious promises, which were made unto him; And therefore upon his faith God accounted him truly just, and righteous in his sight. 8 And he said, Lord God, wherby shall I know that I shall inherit it?And Abram said, O Lord God, I doe beleeve that my seed shall (as thou saiest) inherit this land; but yet I de∣sire thee to give me some further confirmation and assu∣rance of my faith in this point. 12 And when the Sunne was going downe, a deepe sleepe fell upon Abram: and loe, an horrour of great darknesse fell upon him.And when the Sunne was set, there fell, by the ap∣pointment of God, a dead sleepe upon Abram, and his minde was troubled in his dreame, with much feare and unquietnesse. 13 And he said unto A∣bram, Know of a surety, that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them foure hundred yeares.Then the Lord said to him, (for the declaring of these doubtfull visions of his sleepe) know for certaine, that thy seed shall be a stranger in Aegypt, and Canaan (which as yet also is not thine) for the space of foure hundred yeares; in a great part whereof they shall serve, and be evill-entreated. And in the fourth succession of men they shall come forth to this place againe (which then shall be theirs) for the wickednesse of the Amorites (who must be driven out hence,16 But in the fourth generation they shall come hither againe: for the ini∣quity of the Amorites is not yet full. to give roome to thy posterity) is not yet come to their full ripenesse for my intended judgments. 17 And it came to passe, that when the Sunne went downe, and it was darke, behold, a smoking fornace, and a burning lampe that passed betweene those pieces.Also yet somewhat longer after the going down of the Sunne, there was represented unto him a great dark∣nesse, and behold, A smoaking fornace, in which God would foreshew to Abram the affliction, and servility, of his posterity, and withall there was a cleare lampe betokening his deliverance, both which passed betweene the pieces formerly divided.
CAP. XVI. THen Sarai Abrams wife (being past all hope of Issue,3 And Sarai, Abrams wife, tooke Hagar her maide the Aegyptian, after Abram had dwelt tenne yeares in the land of Cana∣an, and gave her to her hus∣band Abram to be his wife. seeing she was now seventy five yeers old) tooke Ha∣gar her maid, the Egyptian, after she had waited ten years for the performance of Gods promise, concerning A∣brams seede (so long had Abram now dwelt in Canaan) and by consent of all sides (out of her weaknesse and distrust) gave her to her husband to be his wife, in regard of all the rights of the mariage bed, though not of house∣hold government. And he shall be a wild and savage man,12 And hee will bee a wild man: his hand will be against every man, and every mans hand against him: and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren. of a fierce and untameable disposition; hee shall be ready in the height of his courage, to fight with every man, and every man shall be as ready to wage warre with him; all which notwithstanding, his successe shall be such, that he shall live, and rule farre and wide in all the Coasts of his bre∣thren. For she said; have I not here also,13 For she said, I have also here looked after him that seeth me. even in the waste de∣sert, and not only in the house of Abram, seen that good God of mine, which hath first gratiously looked upon me, and mine affliction? CAP. XVII. ANd when Abram was ninty and nine yeares old,1 And when Abram was ninetie yeares old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him; I am the Almighty GOD, walke before me, and bee thou perfect. and had now waited thirteene yeares after the birth of Ismael, the Lord by some visible representation of his presence appeared unto Abram, and said to him, I am God Omnipotent, and therefore able to fulfill all my pro∣mises which may seeme delayed; onely carry thou thy selfe holily and awfully (as ever in my sight) and let thy heart be still sincere and upright towards me. And I will renew,2 And I will make my Covenant betweene me & thee. and by a sensible signe confirme and ratifie my covenant betweene me and thee. But the manchild which at due age shall through his owne default be uncircumcised,14 And the uncircum∣cised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised: that soule shall be cut off from his people: he hath broken my Covenant. contemning mine or∣dinance, even that person shall be cut off from the fellow∣ship of my people, both on earth and in heaven; because he hath (in neglect of the signe) broken and despised my Covenant. Then Abram fell upon his face, and partly for joy, partly for admiration and astonishment,17 Then Abram fell upō his face, & laughed, & said in his heart, Shall a Childe be borne unto him that is an hundred yeares old? and shall Sarah, that is ninty yeares old, beare? laughed in himselfe, and thought thus in his heart; Shall a Child be
borne to meat an hundred yeares of age; and (which is more wonderfull) shall this sonne be borne of Sarah my wife, after her ninety yeares barrennes? seeing our youth could raise no seed, shall our old age be blessed with posterity? 18 And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee.And Abraham said to God; I beleeve, O Lord, as thou saiest, that my old age shall be blessed with further Issue, for which also thou wilt (in all likelihood) reserve thy speciall & highest favour; but let not the sonne thou hast given me already, even Ishmael, he cast out, and neg∣lected by thee; let it please thee to continue him to me also with much prosperity. CAP. XVIII. 2 And he lifted up his eyes and looked, and loe, three men stood by him, &c.ANd as he looked about, behold, three Angels in the appearance of men (though not yet so knowne of him,) stood within view of him. And he noting one of them to carry some extraordi∣nary Majesty above the rest,3 And said, My Lord, if now I have found fa∣vour in thy sight, passe not away, I pray thee, from thy servant. as being indeed the Sonne of God, spake especially to him, not excluding the rest; Lord, if I have now found favour in thy sight, goe not, I pray thee, hastily away from me thy servant; but be con∣tent that I may give thee some intertainment. 10 And he said, I will certainely returne unto thee according to the time of life; and loe, Sarah thy wife shall have a sonne, &c.And he said, I will most certainely returne againe to thee at that time, when the conception, by course of na∣ture, may have life and being, and Lo, then Sarah thy wife shall beare thee a sonne. 11 And it ceased to bee with Sarah after the maner of women.That disposition of body which naturally (in their moneths) is necessary for child-bearing women, was through drinesse of age long agoe ceased in Sarah. 12 Therefore Sarah laughed within her selfe, saying, After I am waxen old, shall I have plea∣sure, my Lord being old also?Therefore Sarah distrustfully laughed in the secret of her heart, and said in her selfe? After I am waxen old (above the course of nature in those that are capable of conceiving) and my husband Abraham also; shall I have the pleasure of the marriage bed, which in my younger dayes I could not finde? 18 Seeing that Abra∣ham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, & all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him.Seeing that I have purposed to honour Abraham so, as that of his loynes a great and mighty Nation shall rise; and in that seed which shall come of him, namely the Saviour of mankinde, all the nations in the earth shall be blessed, and all solemne benedictions shall still be under the name of Abraham. 12 I will goe downe now, and see whether they have done altogether ac∣cording to the crie of it which is come unto me: and if not, I will know.I will now take some publike course, wherby the world may see, and know, that I take notice of their sinnes: I
will therefore call their sinnes to examination, and judge them according to the shamelesnesse of their wicked∣nesse, and if their iniquitie hath beene lesse hainous then it hath appeared, I will inflict some lesse grievous pu∣nishment upon them. And the two destroying Angels turned from Abra∣ham, and went towards Sodom,22 And the men turned their faces from thence and went towards Sodom, but Abraham stood yet before the Lord. but Abraham stood still before the third, whom now he knew to be the sonne of God, suing to him for mercy. If there be fifty sincere, upright,24 Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the City, wilt thou also de∣stroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein? and innocent men in all the five Cities (whereof Sodom is the chiefe) wilt thou destroy them notwithstanding? If there shall lacke five of fifty righteous in all the five Cities, wilt thou for the want of five destroy them?28 Peradvenrure there shall lacke five of the fifty righteous; wilt thou de∣stroy all the City for lacke of five? CAP. XIX. WHo crying unto Lot, said,5 And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them. where are the men which came unto thee this night, whose goodly forme and beauty we noted; bring them forth to us, that we may use them to our lust. For seeing they are come to my house as my guests;8 Onely unto these men doe nothing: for therefore came they under the sha∣dow of my roofe. by the law of common equity and hospitality, they may well looke to be safe guarded by me. Then they smote all the Sodomites,11 And they smote the men that were at the doore of the house, with blind∣nesse, both small and great: so that they wearied them∣selves to finde the doore. that were at the doore, both small and great, with such dizzinesse of braine, and dimnesse of sight; that they went up and downe, groping for Lots doore, till they were weary, and could not finde it. Then Lot went out, and spake unto his sonnes in law,14 And Lot went out, and spake unto his sonnes in law, which maried his daughters, &c. which were contracted to his daughters. And when they had brought them (as it were) by strong hand out of the City; the Angell said,17 And it came to passe when they had brough thē forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life, looke not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plaine: escape to the mountaine, lest thou be consumed. now escape for thy life; doe not, (whether for distrust, or curiosity, or pity) once looke towards Sodome, and thinke it not enough that thou hast voyded the City, unlesse thou make speede also out of the whole plaine, which hath been defiled by these abominations; haste thee therefore up to the next hill, lest thou be destroyed. See now this towne which is hard by,20 Behold now, this City is neare to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh let me escape thither (is it not a little one?) and my soule shall live. and therefore easie for me to flee unto; and is withall a little one, and therefore not much for thee to grant, and by all likeli∣hood
not so notoriously evill as these other, that are more frequent and populous: O let me goe thither for shelter, behold, it is no great thing that I aske of thee, and yet such as may be to my safety and preservation. 22 Haste thee, escape thither: for I cannot doe any thing till thou be come thither: therefore the name of the citie was called Zoar.Haste thee then, and be thou there preserved; for such is my merciful respect to thee, that it holds my hands so, that I cannot take revenge on these wicked Cities, till thou be in safety: Therefore upon this occasion of Lots argument from the smalnesse of the City, it was ever af∣ter called Zoar. 24 Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.Then God the Sonne rained downe upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and the other two Cities of the plaine, fire and brimstone, from God the Father out of Heaven. Now his wife, that stood lingring behind him, whe∣ther through love or pity of the place,26 But his wife looked backe from behind him, & she became a pillar of salt. or expectation of her sonnes in law, or distrust, or curious desire to see the manner of the judgement, looked back towards Sodom, & therfore was enwrapped in the judgement, & through the extreame rage of that fire and brimstone, where∣with she was overwhelmed, was miraculously made a pillar of a white or saltish kinde of stone. 30 And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountaine, & his two daughters with him: for he feared to dwell in Zoar, & he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.But he feared to tarry in Zoar, through the weaknesse of his faith, notwithstanding Gods promise to him, whe∣ther for that it was so neare to Sodom; or whether for the manners of the place, but chose rather to dwell soli∣tary in a Cave, in the mountaine, both he and his two daughters. 31 And the first borne said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth, to come in unto us, after the manner of all the earth.And the elder said to the younger, Our father is now old, and cannot long be in any possibilitie of Issue, and in all these parts there is not left a man which might con∣verse with us, for generation. Come, we know well that our father will never by sober perswasions be drawne to this Act; let us make him drunke with wine,32 Come, let us make our father drinke wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father. and so lie with him; not so much for any lust, as for the preservation of some seed of our father. And he being oppressed with wine, was drawne una∣wares unto this filthinesse,33 And they made their father drinke wine that night, and the first borne went in, and lay with her father: & he perceived not when she lay downe nor when she arose. not considering what he did; and not perceiving either when he lay downe or rose up.
CAP. XX. ANd Abraham, through his weakenes,2 And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: And Abimelech King of Gerar sent, and tooke Sarah. seeing how his excuse had sped in Aegypt; renewed it now againe, and concealing part of the truth, said, she is my sister; Then Abimelech, a King in that Countrey of Canaan, upon the report given of her, sent, and tooke her into his house. And he said, Lord wilt thou punish not me onely,4 Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation. but my whole nation and people, in me, which are utterly innocent in this businesse. Now then deliver the man his wife againe,7 Now therefore re∣store the man his wife: for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live, &c. for he is a man deare unto me, and one whom I have in an especi∣all manner graced with my presence, and promises; and therefore, whose prayers shall be much availeable for thy safety and life. What motive didst thou raise unto thy selfe from any lightnesse in me, or injury done to thy selfe by me,10 And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What saw∣est thou, that thou hast done this thing. that thou shouldest doe this thing? Yet in very deed I have not meerely lied, in saying,12 And yet indeed she is my sister: she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife. she is my sister; but onely dissembled, and concealed some part of the truth; for she is very neere of blood to me, my neece, as being the daughter of that brother of mine, whom my father had by a second wife. Likewise, to Sarah, he said, Behold, I have given to him whom thou calledst thy brother,16 And unto Sarah hee said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pie∣ces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved. a thousand pieces of silver; behold he is thy protection, from all injuries, wheresoever thou cōmest; thine eyes & desires shall con∣tent themselves with him alone; & he shall stand betwixt all others eyes, and thee, as thy lawfull husband; that they may not thus inordinately desire thee: and by this speech and event she was thus secretly reproved. For the Lord had punished all the women in Abime∣lechs house with a sudden barrennesse;18 For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of A∣bimelech, because of Sarah Abrahams wife. so that they could not conceive; because of Sarah Abrahams wife. CAP. XXI. WHo could ever have thought or beleeved,7 And she said, Who would have said unto A∣braham, that Sarah should have given children suck? much lesse would have told Abraham, that Sarah, after this age, should both beare him a sonne, and have this strength and vigor of body continued to her, to give sucke also, &c?
14 And Abraham rose up early in the morning, & tooke bread, & a bottle of water, & gave it unto Ha∣gar, (putting it on her shoulder) and the child, and sent her away, &c.He tooke bread, and a bottle of water, so much as he thought would suffice till they came to the place he in∣joyned them; and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and committed the boy to her hand, and sent her away, &c. And now God caused her to see a well of water which was there before her,19 And God opened her eyes, & she saw a well of water, & she went and filled the bottle with wa∣ter, & gave the lad drinke. but, through her griefe, or the closenesse of the place, was not before seene of her. And he answered; My desire is that thou shouldest receive from my hands these seven lambes, as a pledge or confirmation of this covenant of peace, made be∣tweene us;30 And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witnesse un∣to me, that I have digged this Well. and an ernest of the recovery, and free grant of this Well, which I have digged; in the receipt whereof thou shall disclaimed all right and title unto it for ever. CAP. XXII. 12 And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither doe any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy sonne, thine onely sonne from me.THen he said, Doe not (as thou art about) sacrifice this thy Sonne unto me, neither doe any bodily hurt to him; for now thou hast sufficiently approved by thine act and forwardnesse, that thou hast an heart truly religi∣ous towards God, seeing, at my Commandement, thou hast not forborne to have slaine thine onely Sonne, in whom the promise of blessing was made unto thee. 14 And Abraham called the name of that place, Ie∣hovah-jireh, as it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seene.And Abraham named the place (God will provide) whereupon the Jewes have a proverbe still continued a∣mongst them; God will make provision in the Mount, when all meanes faile. 17 And thy seed shall possesse the gate of his ene∣mies.Thy posterity shall be victorious over their enemies. Of thy seed shall come that Saviour, in whom all be∣leevers through the world shall be blessed,18 And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; CAP. XXIII. 2 And Abraham came to mourne for Sarah and to weepe for her.ANd Abraham entred into the Tent of Sarah, that he might solemnely mourne for her, in the sight of the Corps. 6 Thou art a mighty Prince amongst us, &c.Thou art a great Prince, and one whom God hath much honoured amongst us. 15 The land is worth foure hundred shekels of silver: what is that be∣tweene thee and me?The Land is worth some hundred and eleven ounces of silver; about fourescore crownes betweene friends; how small a summe is that to stand upon?
CAP. XXIIII. ACcording to the common rite used in the oathes of inferiors to their superiors.2 Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh. To Charran in Syria.10 To Mesapotamia, un∣to the City of Nahor. To rest under their burthens.11 To kneele downe. Which is the ight of neare three ounces.22 Ten shekels weight of gold. CAP. XXV. WHy have I conceived,22 If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the Lord, &c. if I must feele such paine∣full unquietnesse within me? And she sought to God in her prayers, to know the reason and issue of this inward strife. The Twinnes which are strugling within thee,23 Two nations are in wombe, &c. shall be the fathers of two opposite nations, the Israelites, and Edomites. Make over to me all the priviledges of thy birthright:31 Sell me this day thy birthright. the consecration, the honor, the double portion that be∣longeth thereunto. CAP. XXVII. THe smell of the garments of my Son,27 See the smell of my sonne is as the smell of a field, which the Lord hath blessed. is as the sweet perfume which is sent up from a field richly furnished with all manner of pleasant and fragrant flowers, and herbs. And Isaac was exceedingly astonished in himselfe at the thought of the conveiance of the blessing upon a per∣son that he intended not.33 And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, &c. The course of thy life shall be troublesome, & unquiet,40 By thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother. And thou shalt uphold thy state by warres: and though thy person shall be free, yet in thy posterity thou shalt be subject to the issue of thy brother Iacob. If Esau should in his fury kill thee;45 Why should I bee deprived of you both in one day? the Law will justly kill him, and so we lose both at once. These heathenish wives of Esau, are a perpetuall and intolerable vexation to my soule,46 I am weary of my life, because of the daugh∣ters of Heth. by reason of their I∣dolatry, and vitiousnesse.
CAP. XXVIII. 16 Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.SUrely the Lord hath in a divine dreame, or vision, re∣presented himselfe to me inexpectedly in this place. 17 How dreadfull is this place? this is none o∣ther, then the house of God, and this is the gate of Heaven.How full of awe and reverend respect is this place, which God hath thus sanctified by his presence, having so familiarly manifested himselfe to me here, as men doe in their dwelling houses to their friends; this is no other then a representation of Gods spirituall house, his Church, by which we enter into the glory of heaven. 22 And this stone which I have set for a pil∣lar, shall be Gods house.The place where I set up this stone shalbe dedicated to the worship and service of my God, where I will build an Altar to his name. CAP. XXIX. 12 Her fathers brother &c.HEr fathers Cousin or Nephew. 17 Leah was tender eyed, &c.Leah had an unbecomming weaknesse in her eyes. 27 Fulfill her weeke, & we will give this also, &c.Doe thou celebrate the consummation of Leahs mar∣riage seven dayes, according to the custome, and then when this former marriage is fully ratified, and com∣plete, I will give thee her other sister to wife. 31 That Leah was ha∣ted, &c.That Leah was lesse regarded or disesteemed in com∣parison of Rachel. CAP. XXX. 1 Give me children or else I die, &c.GRiefe and impatience will kill me, if I have not chil∣dren from thy loynes, as well as my Sister Leah. 3 Behold my maide Bilhah, goe in unto her, and she shall beare upon my knees; that I may also have children by her.Behold my maid Bilhah, goe retyre thy selfe into her chamber, and lie with her, and I shall have children by her, which I shall bear upon my knees, and in my bosome, as my owne. 4 And she gave him Bil∣hah her handmaid to wife.Then she gave him Bilhah her maid to converse with as a wife. 14 And found Man∣drakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah.And found mandrake apples in the field, which he had perceived his mother to esteeme for their medicinable use, and brought them therefore to her. 18 And Leah said, God hath given mee my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband.Then said Leah, God hath repayed me my reward for the good office which I did to my husband, in giving him my hand-maid for his Concubine.
And God heard her prayers,22 And God hearkened to her, and opened her wombe. and gave her power to conceive. And turned the faces of those sheepe which were in the flocke of Laban, towards the party-coloured,40 And Iacob did se∣parate the Lambes, and set the faces of the flockes to∣wards the ringstraked, and all the browne in the flocke of Laban. and blacke, which were of his flocke, that the sight thereof might cause those colours in their conception. CAP. XXXI. BUt your father hath deceived me,7 And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times, &c. and changed my wages agreed upon, very often, but God hath so or∣dered it, that his changes have beene no losse to my e∣state. For, in ramming time,10 And it came to passe at the time that the cattell conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dreame, and behold the rammes which leaped up∣on the cattell, were ring∣straked, speckled, and gri∣sled. God premonished me in a dreame, of this course of inriching my selfe, by the party-coloured goates male and female; and of this meanes to effect that diversity of colour. Hath he not delt with us as strangers? for he hath sold us to thee for thy service, in stead of a Dowry,15 Are we not counted of him strangers? for hee hath sold us, & hath quite devoured also our money. and since hee hath thus used us, shall we stay still, that he may prey upon us, and consume that substance which wee have. Then Rachel,19 And Rachel had stoln the Images that were her fathers. whether out of some superstition of her owne, or in some purpose to bereave her father of those meanes of his Idolatry, stole the Images which her father had wont to worship. Then Iacob stole away secretly without the know∣ledge or consent of Laban, his father in Law.20 And Iacob stole a∣way unawares to Laban the Syrian. He tooke his kinsfolke with him, &c.23 And he tooke his brethren with him. The accustomed infirmitie of women is upon me,35 Let it not displease my Lord, that I cannot rise up before thee, for the custome of women is up∣on mee. and makes me unfit for these outward duties of courtesie; I beseech thee hold me excused in the forbearance of this ceremonie of my due respect to thee. If the God of my father,42 Except the God of my father, the God of A∣braham, and the feare of Isaac had beene with mee, surely thou hadst sent mee away now empty. I meane the God of Abra∣ham, and the same God whom Isaac my father feareth, and worshippeth, had not beene with me, and prospered me, &c. And Laban in the Syrian tongue, and Iacob in the He∣brew called it, The heape of the witnesse.47 And Laban called it Iegar-Sahadutha, but Ia∣cob called it Galeed. The God which once Abraham worshipt, and the gods of his predecessors, be judge betweene us: but Iacob sware by the true God whom his father Isaac feared.53 The God of Abra∣ham, and the God of Na∣hor, the God of their father judge betwixt us: but Ia∣cob sware by the feare of his father Isaac.
CAP. XXXII. 1 And Iacob went on his wayes: and the Angels of God met him.ANd the Angells of God appeared to him in the way, in the forme of heavenly souldiers. 5 And I have sent to tell thee my Lord, that I may finde grace in thy sight.And I have sent to give thee my Lord Esau notice both of my purpose of passing through thy Countrey, and of my estate. 11 Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I feare him.Deliver me from the revenge of my brother, even my Brother Esau, for I feare lest he will come and put all to the sword, without regard of sexe, or age. 13 And tooke of that which came to his hand a present for Esau his bro∣ther.And tooke of the choicest of that substance he had for a present for Esau. God the Son appeared to him, and wrestled with him in the likenesse of a man, exercising both his bodily and spirituall strength.24 And there wrest∣led a man with him un∣till the breaking of the day. And when he had proved the strength of his faith such, as that it could not be daunted, &c. lest Iacob should have beene puffed up with the opinion of his strength,25 And when he saw, that he prevailed not a∣gainst him, he touched the hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of Iacobs thigh was out of joynt, as he wrestled with him. Christ left him a bodily afflictiō to humble him by, such as might testifie, it was not the hand of a meere man that strove with him. And he as yet concealing himselfe from Iacob, said (after the manner of men) as if the violence of Iacob had compelled him,26 And he said, Let me goe, for the day breaketh: and he said, I will not let thee go, except thou blesse mee. Let me goe, for the morning appeareth: but Iacob now perceiving some more then humane mat∣ter in this his wrestler, answered, Let me be importu∣nate with thee, not to depart from me, till thou have blessed me. 27 And hee said unto him? What is thy name, & he said, Iacob.Then asked he (not as being ignorant, but as desirous to take occasion from Iacobs owne report of his name, to pronounce his purpose of the alteration of it) What is thy name? 28 For as a Prince hast thou power with God & with men, and hast prevai∣led:Because thy faith and importunity hath prevailed with God, much more shalt thou prevaile with Esau, and with whatsoever adversary. 30 For I have seene God face to face, and my life is preserved.I have seene the Sonne of God in the assumed shape of a man, face to face, and have escaped death, both from this sight, and also from the danger of Esau. 32 Therefore the chil∣dren of Israel eate not of the sinew which shranke.Therefore the children of Israel, in a reverent remem∣brance of this act and event, concerning Iacob, eate not of the hinder sinewes, &c.
CAP. XXXIII. SO hee went before them,3 And he passed over before them, and bowed himselfe to the ground seven times, untill hee came neere to his bro∣ther. and bowed himselfe in an humble manner sundry times, while he was within the sight of Esau. It is unspeakeably comfortable to me, that I have seen thy face thus loving and friendly to me.10 For therefore have I seene thy face, as though I had seene the face of God. And he consecrated there, anew, that Altar, which was set up by his Grandfather Abraham, which he called,20 And hee erected there an Altar, and called it, El-Elohe-Israel. The altar of the mighty God of Israel. CAP. XXXIIII. SO his affections were set upon Dinah.3 And his soule clave unto Dinah the daughter of Iacob. Then wil we take our sister away out of your custo∣die, and depart.17 Then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone. It shall not be onely a matter of pleasure and con∣tentment to us, but also of great profit unto you all, For shall we not have a right in all their substance and strength?23 Shall not their cattell, and their substance, and e∣very beast of theirs be ours? &c. All that dwelt within the Citie.24 All that went out of the gate of his Citie. And on the third day when they were sore and stiffe of the wound of their circumcision, &c.25 And it came to passe on the third day, when they were sore, &c. Ye have put me to much unquietnesse in unsetling my estate, and have made me odious to the inhabitants.30 And Iacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me, &c. CAP. XXXV. CAst away those false gods of the heathen,2 Put away the strange gods that are among you, and change your gar∣ments. which you learned to worship in Syria, the idols of Laban, or Shechem, and cleanse both your soules and bodies: and by the change of your very apparell, testifie the change of your hearts. Moreover, God said unto him,10 And God said unto him, thy name is Iacob: thy name shall not be cal∣led any more Iacob, &c. in a confirmation and reiteration of the same favour, which he had formerly shewed to Iacob: Thy name shall no more bee called Iacob, &c. Many Tribes shall arise from thy seede,11 And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitfull and multiplie &c. And Kings shall come out of thy loines, &c. and out of them shall many exercise Princely authority both over their owne Nations, and others. So Iacob according to his vow formerly made, set up a Monument of a stone in that place where God had tal∣ked with him,14 And Iacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him. and both by pouring out of water and oyle consecrated it to God.
18 That she called his name Ben-oni: but his fa∣ther called him Benjamin.She called his name, The sonne of my sorrow; but his father (as not willing to have so sad a remembrance of his losse, evermore before him, in the name of his sonne) called him (to signifie his dearenesse, with a little change of the word) The sonne of my right hand. CAP. XXXVI. 6 And went into the Countrey from the face of his brother Iacob.ANd fully removed his whole familie and substance unto mount Seir, where he had before sojourned. 24 This was that Anah, that found the mules in the wildernesse.This was that Anah, which first found out by mixture of the seeds of two kindes, the generation of mules in the wildernesse. 31 Before there reig∣ned any King over the children of Israel.Before there was any ordinary Ruler or Magistrate in Israel. CAP. XXXVII. 2 And Ioseph brought unto his father their evill report.ANd Ioseph brought unto his fathers care the evill rumors and reports that went of the misbehaviour of his brethren. 3 And he made him a coate of many colours.And he made him a party-coloured coate, which was held to be of more pleasant shew, and, by reason of the mixtures, more curious. 27 And let not our hand be upon him.Let us not lay violent hands upon him, and be defiled with his blood, in suffering him thus wilfully to perish with hunger. 28 Then there passed by Midianites, merchant men.The Midianites (or Ismaelites so called, indifferently, because they bordered upon each other, and were neare both in place, and blood) passed by. 30 And I, whither shall I goe?And I, which way shall I turne me, or what shall I doe? since both I have already provoked my fathers displeasure by my incest, and at my hands especially (as being eldest) he will require my brother. 32 And they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their father, and said, this have we found.So they sent that party-coloured coate, and caused it to be brought unto their father with this message. 35 For I will go downe into the grave unto my sonne mourning.Surely I will not cease mourning for my sonne, untill I goe downe to my owne grave. Unto Potiphar, one of Pharaohs chiefe Courtiers, the Captaine of his gard.36 Unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaohs, and Captaine of the gard.
CAP. XXXVIII. GOe according to the custome of our people,8 Goe in unto thy brothers wife, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother. and con∣verse with thy deceased brothers wife, and doe that office to her which appertaines to the next of blood: that the issue which shall come of thee, may be imputed unto him, to take away the reproach of his barrennesse. For he thought, it is not safe thus to bestow my sonne,11 For he said, lest per∣adventure he did also as his brethren did. neither hath this match beene hitherto so prosperous, that I dare adventure my third sonne, yet will I put her in hope hereof for her present contentment. When Judah saw her sitting thus openly, alone,15 When Iudah saw her, he thought her to bee an harlot: because she had covered her face. by the way side, he judged her an whore; for he could not dis∣cerne her who she was, because her face was covered with the vaile. Let her keepe these pledges;23 Let her take it to her, lest we be asha∣med. and let us take no notice of them, nor make any inquiry, lest the filthinesse of this my fact may hence be knowne, to my shame. CAP. XXXIX. HE tooke care of nothing,6 And he left all that he had, in Iosephs hand: and he knew not of ought he had, save the bread which he did eate. save onely to eate and drinke, and follow his owne contentments; referring the oversight of all things to Ioseph. Cast wanton eyes and affections upon Ioseph.7 That his masters wife cast her eyes upon Ioseph. See, he hath taken in this Hebrew, to offer this villa∣nie and violence unto me.14 See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us, to mocke us. CAP. XL. WHat doe you looking after sinister meanes,8 Doe not interpreta∣tions belong to God? or why are yee grieved for the want of meanes? Hath not God given power of interpreting all secrets to some of his servants? Within three dayes shall Pharaoh advance thee to thy former dignity.13 Yet within three dayes shall Pharaoh lift up thine head. Within three dayes shall Pharaoh put thee to death,19 Yet within three dayes shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, & shall hang thee on a tree, and the birds shall eate thy flesh from off thee. and after, for the greater ignominie, shall hang thee upon a tree, till thy flesh be consumed.
CAP. XLI. 16 It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an an∣swere of peace.I Can doe nothing of my selfe in this businesse, but God shall by me give an answer to the contentment of Pha∣raoh. 34 And take up the fifth part of the land of Aegypt.And take up the fifth part of the fruits of the Land, & keepe it in meet store-houses for future use. 43 And they cryed be∣fore him, Bow the knee?And the heralds cryed before him, that the people should bow their knees to him, &c. 44 I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot, in all the land of Aegypt.I only reserve unto my selfe the place & title of being King of Aegypt, in the rest I will have thee to be next me; So that no man shall attempt any thing at all in the pub∣like government of the State, without thy advice and consent. 45 And Pharaoh called Iosephs name, Zaphnath-Paaneah, and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah Priest of On?And Pharaoh called his name, The discloser of secrets, and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of ano∣ther Potipher, which was governor of Heliopolis. CAP. XLII. 6 And he it was that sold to all the people of the land.YEe are spies, and are come to marke what parts of the land are least defenced. 13 Thy servants are twelve brethren, &c. And behold the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.It neede not seeme suspicious to thee that we come thus so many together of a Company; for the cause is, that we are all so many brethren, &c. And one is dead. 16 Or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.Or else, as sure as Pharaoh liveth, ye are but spies. 36 Ioseph is not, and Simeon is not, and yee will take Benjamin away: all these things are against mee.Ioseph is dead, and Simeon is in danger to miscarry in prison, and now you will take Beniamin from me; all these are heavy afflictions, which you have brought up∣on me. CAP. XLIII. 14 If I be bereaved of my children, I am berea∣ved.I Am determined to put it to the hazard, relying on God for the event; if therefore I shall be robbed of my sonnes, let me be robbed, goe you on, and doe as the necessity of the businesse requireth. 2 Because the Aegyp∣tians might not eate bread with the Hebrewes.Because the Aegyptians held it unlawfull to eate with the Hebrewes; cheifly for the differences of their Reli∣gion; for the Hebrewes were wont to sacrifice those creatures which the Aegyptians worshipped.
CAP. XLIIII. VP, follow after them,4 Up, follow after the men, and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evill for good? and when thou dost overtake them, make this merry and officious lie for my sake: Aske them, in dissimulation, Why have ye, &c. Is not that which you have stolen, the cup of speciall note and vse for my master, both for his table,5 Is not this it, in which my Lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divi∣neth? and (ac∣cording to the manner of the Aegyptian Magicians) for divination, and sooth-saying? Could you thinke any otherwise of me, being a Peere of Aegypt,15 Wote ye not, that such a man as I, can certain∣ly divine? but that I could by divination finde out your offence? CAP. XLV. GOd hath made me not onely a Counsellor of State to Pharaoh,8 And hee hath made me a father to Pharaoh. but a meanes of preservation of his Court and Kingdome, &c. You see and perceive by my language,12 That it is my mouth that speaketh unto you. that I am your brother Ioseph, that speake unto you. I will give you the most commodious and fruitfull part of the land of Aegypt, to dwell in,18 And I will give you the good of the Land of Aegypt, and ye shall eate the fat of the Land. and ye shall be par∣takers of the best profits of the Countrey. And Iacob swouned with sudden astonishment at this newes of Ioseph, and the mention of his name.26 And Iacobs heart fainted, for he beleeved them not. CAP. XLVI. ANd Ioseph shall close up thine eyes, when thou diest.4 And Ioseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes. For every sheepe keeper, not out of pride, but su∣perstition, is abominable to the Aegyptians.34 For every shepherd is an abomination unto the Aegyptians. CAP. XLVII. TAke thee the choyce of the whole Land of Aegypt.6 The land of Aegypt is before thee. If thou knowest that there be any amongst them of skill and strength:6 And if thou knowest any man of activity among them; The whole time of my life, which to me hath beene as a continued pilgrimage,9 The dayes of the yeers of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty yeers? both in respect of my many habi∣tations, and of that one fixed habitation which abides for me above, &c.
31 And Israel bowed himselfe upon the beds head.And Iacob raised himselfe upon his Pillow to give thankes to God. CAP. XLVIII. 5 Ephraim & Manasseth which were borne unto thee in the land of Egypt, before I came unto thee into Aegypt, are mine.MAnasseth and Ephraim shalbe, not as my grandchil∣dren, but even as my owne, and shall have a portion of inheritance among their brethren, as if they had come immediately out of my owne Loines. 6 And thy issue which thou begettest after them, shalbe thine, & shalbe cal∣led after the name of their brethren in their inheri∣tance.But thy other children, if any shall be since borne unto thee, shall carry thy name, and looke for their portion un∣der the title of the Tribes of Ephraim, and Manasses. And Ioseph tooke them away from his fathers knees, to set them in that order wherein he desired the blessing might be given them,12 And Ioseph brought them out from betweene his knees, and he bowed himselfe with his face to the earth. which done, he bowed himselfe to the ground, in a reverent and humble manner to crave this blessing from his father. That Angell of the Covenant, the Son of God, which hath delivered, &c. Let them be numbred among the Pa∣triarkes of Gods people,16 The Angell which redeemed me, &c. And let my name bee named on them. as my sonnes, &c. I give thee one Portion (according to the priviledge of the birth-right) above thy brethren: the Citie and territories of Shechem,22 I have given to thee one portiō above thy bre∣thren, which I tooke out of the hand of the Amo∣rite. which after that my sonnes had taken from the Hivites, I maintained by strong hand a∣gainst the Amorites. CAP. XLIX. 1 That I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last dayes.WHat shall come to passe in the following times, both soone upon my departure, and many ages after. 3 Thou art my first borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength.Thou wert both begotten in the prime of my strength, and wert the first of my sonnes in whom my strength consisteth: having as then all the priviledges of the first borne; Preheminence over thy brethren, and a double portion above them. 4 Thou shalt not excell.Thou art runne abroad as water, that is spilt, which cannot be gathered up; thou shalt no more be eminent above thy brethren, &c. 5 Simeon and Levi are brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their ha∣bitations;Simeon and Levi, which have too well consented to∣gether to doe mischiefe: and were instruments of much cruelty in their agreement against the Sichemites; 6 O my soule, come not thou into their secret: unto their assembly mine honour bee not thou uni∣ted: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfe-will they digged downe a wall:Let not my soule joyne with them in their consultati∣ons:
neither let my reputation depend upon their mee∣ting, which my heart abhorred; fr in their wrath they slew the Shechemits, and in their selfe-will brake downe the walls of their Citie. They shall have no certaine habitations allowed to their Tribes,7 I will divide them in Iacob, and scatter them in Israel. but shall be mingled with their other bre∣thren. Iudah,8 Iudah, thou art hee whom thy brethren shall praise. according as thy name imports, thou shalt have praise from thy brethren, who shall acknowledge thy Princedome, in thy posterity, over them, &c. Judah shall have a knowne distinct Tribe amongst his brethren and governours in the kingdome,10 The Scepter shall not depart from Iudah, nor a law giver from between his feet, untill Shilo come; and unto him shall the ga∣thering of people be. of the same Line, to beare rule untill the time of Messias comming: and the people shall yeeld their obedience to him. He shall so abound with wines,11 Binding his foale unto the vine, and his as∣ses colt unto the choice vine, he washed his gar∣ments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes. that he shall load his Asses with grapes, and even wash his garments with the juice of them. His posterity shall be abundantly furnished with wine and milke, Vineyards and Pastures.12 His eyes shall bee red with wine, and his teeth white with milke. Zebulun shall be commodiously situated for his tra∣fique, by the Sea side towards Zidon.13 Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea, and he shall be for an ha∣ven of ships. Issachar shall be laborious and strong, more fit for sub∣jection then command;14 Issachar is a strong Asse, couching downe be∣tweene two burdens. and shall yeeld himselfe willingly to all impositions of labor, and tributes. Dan, though he be the sonne of a bondwoman, yet shall attaine unto the dignitie of ruling amongst the Tribes of Israel:16 Dan shall Iudge his people, as one of the Tribes of Israel: and shall afford some that shall sway the government. His posterity shall inlarge their bounds,17 Dan shall be a Ser∣pent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth his horse heeles. and prevaile more by subtilty, then strength: and therefore shall bee like the Serpent, &c. And though this Tribe shall passe through many op∣pressions & grievances, yet, O Lord,18 I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord. I doe constantly ex∣pect thy gracious deliverance of him. Gad shall be sore annoyed with the Ammonites,19 Gad, a troope shall overcome him: but hee shall overcome at the last? and other neighbouring nations, but shall at last prevaile. Concerning Asher,20 Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yeeld royall dainties. he shall be seated in a place of great fruitfulnesse, and delicacy. Nepthali shall be both swift to warre, and yet gentle,21 Nepthali is a Hinde let loose; he giveth good∣ly words. and friendly to embrace and maintaine peace. Ioseph shall be as a fruitfull Bough,22 Ioseph is a fruitfull Bough, even a fruitfull Bough by a well, whose branches runne over the wall. set beside a foun∣taine,
whose branches shall run upon the wall, and have benefit of the reflection. 23 The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, & hated him.His enemies bent themselves against him (as an archer doth his bow to shoot at a marke:) and wrought all the mischiefe they could against him. 24 But his bow abode in strength, &c. Of the mighty God of Iacob: from thence is the shep∣heard, the stone of Israel.But his strength was able to match them in their owne kind, &c. The God of Iacob, of whom and by whom Ioseph was appointed, as a nourisher and refuge unto Israel. The blessing of me thy father shall be the stronger upon thee,26 The blessings of thy father have prevailed a∣bove the blessings of my progenitors, unto the ut∣most bound of the ever∣lasting Hills. by being added unto the blessing of Abraham, and Isaac, which all doe light upon thee: and shall continue as long as there are hills upon the earth. Benjamin shall be fierce and terrible in his warres, de∣vouring his enemies as a Wolfe his prey, and shall have his whole time taken up with the division,27 Benjamin shall ra∣vine as a Wolfe: in the morning he shall devoure the prey, and at night hee shall divide the spoile. and improv∣ing of the spoile. CAP. L. 3 And the Aegyptians mourned for him three∣score and tenne dayes.ANd the Aegyptians bewailed him seventy dayes, whereof the forty dayes of embalming were a part. Forgive the trespasse of them, which, besides the bonds of nature,17 Forgive the trespasse of the servants of the God of thy father. are tied unto thee with so neare bonds of Religion, &c. 19 Feare not: for am I in the place of God?Feare not: for is not all this done by the will and dis∣position of that wise, and holy God, which ordained this to good? 23 The children also of Machir, the son of Manas∣seh, were brought up up∣on Iosephs knees.The sonnes of Machir were a comfort to Ioseph, their grandfather, in their education; Who brought them up, and tooke pleasure in them. 25 And ye shall carry up my bones from hence.Ye shall, when ye depart out of Aegypt, cary my bones hence with you, and bury them in the promised Land, &c.
EXODVS. CAP. I. A New King,8 Now there arose up a new King over Aegypt, which knew not Ioseph. for his Lawes and manner of go∣vernment, which unthankfully forgot the great service which Ioseph had done to the Kingdome, and crowne of Aegypt. Therefore did they set over them taskmasters,11 Therefore they did set over them taskmasters, to afflict them with their burdens. of their owne nation, that their cruelty might have the better pretence. God therefore prospered the midwives, because,20 Therefore God dealt well with the midwives. out of a religious feare, they refrained from that cruell practice injoyned them, &c. CAP. II. HIs sister Miriam stood afarre off, &c.4 And his Sister stood afarre off. And in those dayes when Moses was now growne up to his best age, and was forty yeares old, &c.11 And it came to passe in those dayes, when Mo∣ses was growne, And,12 And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew the Aegyptian, &c.2 though he knew he had a secret calling to deli∣ver the Israelites, yet because it was not publikely knowne, he carried himselfe warily in this businesse, and looked round about, &c. Revel their grandfather.18 And when they came to Revel their father, Then, in processe of time, this Pharaoh from whom Moses fled, died, and the children of Israel,23 And it came to passe in processe of time, that the King of Aegypt died, and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage. now in the change of the Prince, hoping for some ease, bemoned themselves earnestly to God. CAP. III. THen Christ the Angell of the Covenant appeared,2 And the Angell of the Lord appeared unto him. &c. In token of reverence, & respect unto so holy a place, and in token of laying aside all carnall thoughts,5 Put off thy shooes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stan∣dest, is holy ground. and af∣fections, put off thy shooes. Then, Moses in humility and awfull adoration of the glory of God,6 And Moses hid his face: for he was afraid to looke upon God. which he held himselfe not worthy to be∣hold, hid his face.
8 And to bring them up out of that land, unto a good land, and a large, unto a land flowing with milke and honey.Therefore, have I thought good to shew some testi∣monies of my presence, and intention of delivering them, and bringing them out of Goshen, into a land which in comparison thereof is large, and exceeding fruitfull in all usefull commodities, both for necessity, and pleasure, &c. 13 Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fa∣thers hath sent me unto you.If the Israelites shall curiously inquire concerning thee; How, and in what termes shall I describe thee unto them? I am constantly and eternally unchangeable, being of my selfe, and that one, and the same, for ever; even thus shalt thou describe & expresse me to my people;14 I am that I am: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel. the chil∣dren of Israel, &c. CAP. IIII. 6 Behold, his hand was leprous as snow;ANd behold his hand was as white with leprosie, as any snow. 10 O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither here∣tofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of speech, & of a slow tongue.I am not ready in speech, nor ever have beene, neither hath thine appearance, (which of all other things should be most effectuall) altered me any whit at all: but I am naturally slacke, and heavy of utterance. Who hath given to man the faculty of speech? or who is the author of these infirmites,11 Who hath made mans mouth? or who maketh the dumbe, or deafe, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the Lord? whereof thou complai∣nest? dost thou not consider that I the Lord who now send thee, cause these where I will, for just and holy pur∣poses, and give abilitie of all parts and senses, at my plea∣sure? 13 O my Lord, send I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt sendOh my Lord, send I pray thee by the ministery of some other fitter man, then I am, whoso ever it be. 16 Even he shall bee to thee in stead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him in stead of God.Aaron shall speake to the people, as from thee: and thou shalt give direction and counsell to Aaron, as from God. And Moses tooke his wife, and his two sonnes, Ger∣shom and Eleazar,20 And Moses tooke his wife, and his sonnes, and set them upon an Asse, and he returned to the land of Aegypt, & Moses tooke the rod of God in his hand. & caused them to ride toward Egypt: and Moses tooke that rod, which God had given so mi∣raculous experiments of, in his hand. But I will withdraw and withhold my grace from Pharaoh, so as he shall through his owne corruption turne all those occasions, which I shall offer him for his repentance,21 But I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people goe. unto the hardning of himselfe in a greater obstinacy of sinning. 22 Israel is my sonne, even my first borne.The children of Israel are my chosen and adopted people, both before all other and above all other nati∣ons, &c.
The Lord appeared visibly unto him,24 And it came to passe by the way in the Inne, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. and sensibly af∣flicted him with some sudden and violent disease, which he knew to be done, in regard of his neglect of his sonnes circumcision. And with indignation she cast the foreskinne at his feet, and said: It is for thy sake,25 And cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me. that I am faine thus to shed the blood of this my child: therefore art thou to me a bloody husband, &c. CAP. V. O Ye Elders of Israel,4 Get you unto your burdens. which joine with Moses & Aaron in this suite, Get you to your burdens. Behold, the Israelites are a great people;5 Behold the people of the Land now are many, and you make them rest from their burdens. should so many thousands leave their worke, and goe idle for your pleasure? Ye shall give the Israelites no more straw,7 Yee shall no more give the people straw to make bricke, as heretofore. whether to mixe with their clay, or to burne their brickes withall, &c. Ye have brought us into hatred with Pharaoh,21 Because you have made our savour to bee abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us. and his servants, and have stirred them up to a further tyranny against us, by giving them this occasion of vexing us. CAP. VI. I Appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob,3 And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Iacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Iehovah was I not knowne to them. as that God which was still able and powerfull to effect that, which I promised, and they lived still in the hope and exepecta∣tion of my powerfull performance: but now I doe ap∣peare to thee, as ready to make good and execute, and give a being to that which I promised to them. But they were so over-pressed,9 But they hearkened not unto Moses, for an∣guish of spirit, & for cruell bondage. and growne heartlesse with the cruelty of that bondage, that they regarded not the words of Moses. How then shall Pharaoh regard me,12 How then shall Pharaoh heare me, who am of uncircumcised lips? which am of a stammering, and hindered utterance? The sonnes of Reuben, who was in order of nature the first borne, though he lost the priviledges thereof.14 The sonnes of Reu∣ben the first borne of Is∣rael.
CAP. VII. 1 See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet.BEhold, I have made thee a terrible meanes to execute my judgements upon Pharaoh: which he shall take as wrought by me, through thy hands: and Aaron thy bro∣ther (for his readinesse of speech) shall deliver thy minde, and my message to the Aegyptians: so as thou shalt act, and he shall speake. 2 For they cast downe every man his rod, & they became serpēts, but Aarons rod swallowed up their rods.For they cast downe every man his rod, and they were in appearance turned into Serpents; but not truly: for that Serpent into which Aarons rod was turned, devou∣red theirs. CAP. VIII. 3 And the river shall bring forth frogs abun∣dantly, which shall goe up and come into thine house.THe river Nilus shal craule full of frogs, which, against their naturall use, shall leave the water, and creep up into thine houses. 7 And the Magicians did so with their inchant∣ments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Aegypt.And the sorcerers did likewise, for experiment sake, and brought frogs, whether in appearance onely, or true frogs (by secret conveiance) into some part of Aegypt, that was freed for this triall. 19 This is the finger of God.This worke is done by the immediate and over-ruling power of God. CAP. IX. 15 For now I will stretch out my had, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence, and thou shalt be cut off from the earth. Or, I had stretched out my hand, that I might have smitten thee.FOr now, when I stretched forth mine hand, I might have smitten thee, and thy people, as well as I did thy cattell, with the pestilence: and so thou shouldest have perished from the earth. 16 And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power. Or, But indeed.But indeed I have in my secret counsell reserved thee for a further manifestation of my glorious power. As for thee, and thy servants, I know, and finde upon the experience of your former obstinacy, that you will not,30 But as for thee and thy servants, I know that yee will not yet feare the Lord God. as yet, feare before the face of the Lord, &c. CAP. X. 1 For I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants.FOr I have withdrawne my grace from him, and his servants, that their heart should not relent at my judg∣ment,
yea, I have punisheh their former sinnes with hardnesse of heart, and obstinacy in sinning, &c. How long shall Moses be a meanes of punishment and destruction to us?7 How long shall this man be a snare unto us? I wish you might have no more favour of God then you are like to have of me,10 Let the Lord doe so with you, as I will let you goe, and your little ones; Looke to it, for evill is be∣fore you. in this suite of dismissing you and your children: looke to it, goe if you will, at your owne perill. That he would take away from me but this one dead∣ly plague wherewith we and our land are thus hurt,17 That he may take away from me this death onely. and spoyled. CAP. XI. ABout midnight,4 About midnight will I goe out into the midst of Aegypt. I will by my destroying Angell goe through the midst of Aegypt. But, as for the children of Israel, there shall not be so much as the least danger of any slaughter towards them,7 But against any of the children of Israel, shall not a dog move his tongue against man or beast. or any unquietnesse amongst them. CAP. XII. NOw, before the last plague,1 And the Lord spake unto Moses, &c. the Lord had spoken to Moses, &c. This moneth shall be unto you both a moneth of prin∣cipall account, as also, the first in number,2 This moneth shall be unto you the beginning of moneths. in all your re∣ligious computations; so that from this you shall count the yeare to beginne. Let every Master of a family within his severall hous∣hold take unto him a Lambe, &c.3 In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a Lambe. Ye shall celebrate your passover for this once,5 Yee shall take it out from the sheepe or from the goates. (in re∣spect of those straits, wherein you are) either with a lamb, or a kid, whether can most commodiously be provided. Every one of the Congregation, whom it concernes,6 And the whole as∣sembly of the Congregati∣on of Israel, shall kill it in the evening. shall kill the lamb, betwixt the ninth and eleventh houre of the day. And thus shall you eate it, for this first time,11 And thus shall you eate it, with your loines girded. for the greater haste; with your loines girded. That person shall be separated from the Communion of the Church, and lie open unto bodily judgements.15 That soule shall bee cut off from Israel. So they left the Aegyptians destitute of their Jewels,36 And they spoiled the Aegyptians. and rich furnitures, who by their owne censent, and will,
parted with these things, o hire the Israelites unto a more speedy haste, for their owne safegard. 43 There shall no stranger eate thereof.None that is a stranger in religion shall eate of it. CAP. XIII. 2 Sanctifie unto me all the first borne, whatso∣ever openeth the wombe among the children of Is∣rael.THat which first commeth out of the womb, set it a∣part to me, and consecrate it to my name, whether it be of man, or of any serviceable beast, among the Israe∣lites: for it is mine by a peculiar right, I having well de∣served it in my preservation from the common destru∣ction. 9 And it shall be for a signe unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memoriall betweene thine eyes, that the Lords Law may be in thy mouth.This Passover shall be as full a remembrance unto thee of Gods mercy in thy deliverance, as if thou shouldst by any signet upon thy hand, or frontlet betweene thine eies, recall any businesse, or favour which thou wouldest ever thinke upon; yea, thou shalt keepe some record, or me∣moriall of this blessing also, in those scrolls which thou shalt bind upon thine arme and head. 13 And every firstling of an Asse thou shalt re∣deeme with a Lambe: and if thou wilt not re∣deeme it, then thou shalt breake his necke.But the first foale of the Asse, because it is an uncleane beast, since it may not be sacrificed, thou shall redeeme it with a Lambe: or else, because it is not fit that whatso∣ever is consecrated to God, should be put to prophane uses, thou shalt breake the necke of it, &c. 18 And the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Aegypt.And the children of Israel went up well furnished out of the land of Aegypt, both with provision, and mu∣nition. CAP. XIIII. 4 And I will har∣den Pharaohs heart, that he shall follow after them.ANd I will in just judgement so besot Pharaoh, that forgetting the experiments of my power, he shall, in hope of prevailing, follow after you. 8 And the children of Israel went out with an high hand.But the children of Israel went out by strong hand, vnder the miraculous guidance and protection of the Almighty. 15 Wherefore cryest thou unto me?Why dost thou thus earnestly importune me in thy secret prayers, which are as so many loud cries in my eares? 19 And the Angell of God, which went before the Campe of Israel, re∣moved and went behinde them.And the Angel of the Covenant (which was Christ) removed the signes of his presence from before the Israe∣lites, behind them. 24 And it came to passe, that in the morn∣ing watch the Lord look∣ed unto the host of the Aegyptians.Now in the morning watch, when the Lord, out
of the pillar of fire (who had seemed all this while to winke at the enterprises of the Aegyptians) began, ac∣cording to our apprehension, to take notice of this their pursuite, &c. CAP. XV. THe troupes of horses and their riders hath he over∣throwne in the Sea.1 The horse and his rider hath he throwne into the Sea. I foresee by that spirit of prophecy which he hath gi∣ven mee,2 He is my God, and I will prepare him an ha∣bitation. that he shall have a Tabernacle reared up for him by his people. The Lord is a noble Warriour indeed.3 The Lord is a man of warre. And the Lord directed him unto a tree,25 And the Lord shew∣ed him a tree, which when he had cast into the wa∣ters, the waters were made sweet: to which hee gave such miraculous power, that it being cast into the waters, the wood thereof changed the whole streame from the former bitternesse. There he, in generall, gave them rules and advice of holy obedience before him,25 There he made a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them. to prepare them for that exact Law which he meant afterwards to deliver, &c. CAP. XVI. GEnerally there was a murmuring over the whole Campe, of the most part of the Israelites, &c.2 And the whole con∣gregation of the children of Israel murmured, &c. Behold,4 Behold, I will raine bread from heaven for you. I will cause that which shall be in stead of bread, to raine, as it were, out of the clouds upon you. For as much as you have murmured, both for flesh,8 This shall be when the Lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eate, & in the morning bread to the full. and for bread, therefore you shall be filled with both: in the evening shall Quailes, the daintiest flesh fall upon your tents, and in the morning Manna. And the glory of God shewed it selfe in an extraordi∣nary manner in the cloud that was wont to appeare to them.10 And behold, the glory of the Lord appea∣red in the cloud. They said one to another,15 This is the bread which the Lord hath gi∣ven you to eate. This is a strange food pre∣pared and given us from above: for they knew not par∣ticularly what it was, or what to name it. And having put their common gatherings together,18 And when they did mete it with an Omer, hee that gathered much, had nothing over, and he that gathered little, had no lack. into one heape, it was equally divided amongst them: so as he that had gathered much, had no more then an omen, and he that gathered little, wanted nothing of it. So Aaron, in processe of time,34 So Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept, &c. when the Tabernacle was erected, laid it up before the Arke (which testified
Gods presence to his people) to be reserved for a monu∣ment of Gods miraculous provision for Israel. 36 Now an omer is the tenth part of an Ephah.The omer is the tenth part of the Jewish bushell, which contained about three pecks. CAP. XVII. 12 But Moses hands were heavy, & they tooke, &c.ANd Moses grew faint in body, with long continu∣ance of that earnest prayer, in so much as his hands grew weary and remisse with lifting up: and they tooke, &c. 15 And called the name of it Iehovah-Nissi.And he called the name of the place, The Altar of Je∣hovah my banner. CAP. XVIII. 12 They came to eate bread with Moses father in law, before God.THey came to feast with Jethro the father in law of Moses, in that place, where God declared his presence by the cloudy pillar. 13 And the people stood by Moses, from the morning unto the evening.The people stood before Moses, to call for justice in their severall causes, and resolution in their doubts, &c. Even all the day long. 15 Because the people come unto me to enquire of God.Because the people come to me in all weighty causes, to consult with God by me. 19 Be thou for the peo∣ple to God-ward: that thou maiest bring the cau∣ses unto God.Doe thou propound the doubts and demands of the people to God, as also their suits, in thy prayers: and re∣port Gods answers backe againe to them. If thou shalt doe this thing (which yet I would not draw thee unto,23 If thou shalt doe this thing, and God com∣mand thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure. without the good liking and approba∣tion of God) then thou shalt be able to sustaine this burden. CAP. XIX. 3 And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the mountaine.BUt Moses went up the hill unto God, whose voice had called to him, and bidden him to ascend, &c. 4 And how I bare you on Eagles wings, and I brought you unto my selfe.And how I carried you (as it were) aloft, above the reach of all dangers, like as an Eagle carrieth her young ones, supporting and helping them with her wings. 6 And ye shall be unto me a kingdome of Priests, and an holy nation.Ye shall be in a speciall manner a people devoted pe∣culiarly to my worship.
Goe to the people,10 Goe unto the peo∣ple, and sanctifie them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clo∣thes. and by due preparation set them apart these two dayes, for their holy appearance before me, and, in a representation of that inward cleannesse which I require of them, let them wash their very clothes, which they brought with them out of Aegypt. And thou shalt set limits unto the people,12 And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about. how farre they shall goe, and how neare they shall dare to come to the Hill, &c. When the Trumpet,13 When the Trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount. which the Angell shall sound to call the people, shall sound long, then shall the people goe up towards the Mountaine unto the place limited unto them. Set your selves apart from your wives, for a time,15 Come not at your wives. that your hearts may not be distracted with any carnall delight, now that they are to be fixed upon God. And let those which doe the office of the Priesthood,22 And let the Priests also which come neare to the Lord, sanctifie them∣selves, lest the Lord breake forth upon them. namely the first borne of the families, who are wont to offer sacrifices to God, see that they specially be devout∣ly, and holily prepared for this great appearance of God. CAP. XX. I Am so affected to you my people,5 For I the Lord thy God am a jelous God, vi∣siting the inquities of the fathers upon the children; unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. as a loving husband to his wife, whom he cannot indure to set her affections upon any other: where I see, therefore, a succession of in∣iquitie from the fathers to children, (both which hate to be reformed) I punish it not only eternally in themselves, but temporally in many generations after them. Honour those which are any way set over thee,12 Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy dayes may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. and give them due reverence, and obedience for Conscience sake: that God may give thee a long and happie life in this thy promised land upon earth, and an eternall life (figured by the other) in that true land of rest, which is above. Thou shalt not entertaine so much as the very first motions of unlawfull desires towards ought that is thy neighbours, &c.17 Thou shalt not co∣vet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, &c. But shalt rest well contented with thine owne. You shall not make (in competition with me) gods of silver, &c.23 Yee shall not make with me gods of silver. Untill the time of your setling,24 An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, & shalt sacrifice theron thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheepe and thine oxen. and the set residence of God in his Tabernacle and Temple, you shall onely make your altars of earth, that may not continue, and thereon, in an homely manner, shall you offer all your sa∣crifices, whether those which you offer up in acknow∣ledgment
of the Soverainty of God, or those which you offer in suit of further favour, or thankefulnesse, for a favour received. CAP. XXI. 1 Now these are the judgements which thou shalt set before them:NOw these are the Civill, or Judiciall lawes which thou shalt appoint for the government of the Israe∣lites. 2 If thou buy an He∣brew servant, six yeares he shall serve, and in the se∣venth he shall goe out for nothing.Howsoever thou keepe a seruant of the Gentiles in a perpetuall bondage, yet thou shalt not have that power over an Hebrew; But in the yeare of liberty and inter∣mission, which is the seventh yeare, thou shalt release him without any Composition. 4 If his master have gi∣ven him a wife.If his Master upon his owne liking, or desire, shall al∣low him to marry with a forrainer, which is his maid servant. 6 And his master shall boare his eare through with an aule, and he shall serve him for ever.His master shall boare through his eare, to the doore, whether as a reproachfull marke of his perpetuall servi∣tude, or as a signification of his fastning himselfe unto that house, so as he will not, nor may not passe from it, without the liking of his master. 7 And if a man sell his daughter to be a maid ser∣vant, she shall not goe out as the men-servants doe.Likewise, if a man sell his daughter, as yet under age, with intention that she should marry him that buyes her, if she be dismissed, it shall be upon better conditions, then an ordinary servant. 8 If she please not her master, who hath betro∣thed her to himselfe, then shall he let her be redee∣med, &c.If she please not her master, so farre, as that he be∣troths her to himselfe, then shall he suffer another, one of her friends to redeeme her of him, but he shall have no power to sell her to a stranger, seeing he hath deceived her expectation of marrying him. 9 He shall deale with her after the manner of daughters.He shall so deale with her, in giving her to marriage, as if she had beene a free woman. 11 And if he doe not these three unto her, then shall she go out free with∣out money.But if he doe not allow unto her food, raiment, and house roome convenient for her, then shall she goe out free, at the time of libertie, or of such his deniall (upon judgement) without any repaiment of the money for which she was sold. 13 And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand.If a man have not laid wait for another, but casually without any purpose of his, shall by Gods disposition doe some act which might procure the death of ano∣ther. 21 He shall not bee punished, for hee is his money.For he bought him with his money, therefore not pur∣posely striking him, to kill him, he shall not be puni∣shed: since he is already punished in his losse.
CAP. XXII. IF a thiefe be found breaking into thine house by night,2 If a thiefe be found breaking up, and be smit∣ten that he die; and be smitten in the act by thee unto death, &c. They shall be put to sweare by the name of God, &c.11 Then shall an oath of the Lord be betweene them both. If thou lend money to an Israelite, those especially which are poore, and borrow upon need,25 If thou lend money to any of my people that is poore by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer. thou shalt not take any increase for the use of it. If thou take of thy poore neighbour any of his necessa∣ry rayment whether for the day or night as a pledge for money borrowed of him.26 If thou at all take thy neighbours raiment to pledge, &c. Of all kind of thy fruits, whether dried in their kinde,29 Thou shalt not de∣lay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors. or strained into liquor, thou shalt pay dly thy tithes and first fruits unto God. Neither shall you eate any part of that beast which was torne in pieces by any other beast,31 Neither shall yee eate any flesh that is torne of beasts in the field. whether cleane or uncleane. CAP. XXIII. THou shalt not give thine assistance or countenance unto a wicked man, in a false testimony.1 Put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witnesse. Thou shalt not suffer the regard of poverty it selfe to make thee partiall in a case of judgement.3 Neither shalt thou countenance a poore man in his cause. Thou shalt not pronounce a sentence of death upon an innocent man: For if thou doe,7 The innocent and the righteous slay not, for I will nor justifie the wic∣ked. and herein deale wicked∣ly, howsoever thou maist escape the censure of men, yet my judgement thou shalt not escape. Thou shalt not take any bribe to draw thee unto par∣tiality in any cause.8 And thou shalt take no gift. Ye shall not, with any approbation,13 And make no men∣tion of the names of other gods. so much as men∣tion the names of other gods. Three times in the yeare shall all thy men children,17 Three times in the yeare all thy males shall ppeare before the Lord a od. of sufficient age, whether bond or free, present themselves in the place of Gods publike service, which is his Taber∣nacle. During these solemne times of sacrificing unto me,18 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread. ye shall not eate any leavened bread. Thou shalt not be so cruell in thine oblations, as to seethe a Kid, in that milke of the dam,19 Thou shalt not seethe a Kid in his mothers milke. which was given it for nourishment. Because my power and divinity is in him.21 For my name is in him: And that I may herein approve my selfe the God of28 And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, & the Hit∣tite, from before thee.
hosts, I will by small meanes confound thine adversaries, for as I afflicted the Aegyptians with frogs and lice, so will I vexe the Canaanites with hornets, which shall sting them to death, &c. 31 And from the desert unto the River.From the wildernesse of Sur, unto the great River Euphrates. CAP. XXIIII. 4 And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord.ANd Moses wrote all these words of the Lord, which concerne either the Civill government of the Jewes, or the Ceremonies of Gods service. 5 And he sent young men of the children of Is∣rael.And he sent some chosen young men, of the first borne of the severall Tribes, which offered, &c. 7 And he tooke the book of the Covenant, &c.After Moses tooke the booke, wherein he had writen that Covenant betwixt God and his people, in the Judi∣ciall and Ceremoniall Lawes, &c. 8 Behold, the blood of the Covenant which the Lord hath made with you.Behold, that blood whereby the Covenant made be∣twixt God and you is signified to be confirmed. 10 And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feete, as it were a paved worke of a Saphir stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearnesse.And they saw some visible signes of the presence of God, and at the lower part of that brightnesse, there was a cleare shining blew pavemēt, as it were of Saphir, or like to a skie when it is cleare. They saw God in these signes of his manifestation, and yet lived in health,11 They also saw God, and did eate and drinke. and soundnesse of body. CAP. XXV. 5 And Shittim wood.OF a pretious and durable wood, which growes not farre from Sinai. 16 And thou shalt put into the Arke the Testi∣mony which I shall give thee.So thou shalt put into the Arke the two Tables of the Law, which I shall give thee, as a witnesse of my Cove∣nant with my people. Thou shalt make a cover for the Arke of pure gold: which shall serve also as an Oracle,17 And thou shalt make mercy-seate of pure gold. from which God shall give answers to thee upon all occasions. 23 Thou shalt also make a Table of Shittim wood.Now in the outward sanctuary also, thou shalt make a Table of costly and sweet wood, &c. 30 And thou shalt set upon the Table, shew-bread before me alway.And thou shalt set upon the Table twelve loaves of bread, which because they shall be ever presented before my face, are termed justly, The bread of presence.
CAP. XXVI. THe length of each curtaine shall be eight and twenty cubits,2 The length of one curtaine shall be eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtaine, foure cubits. that so ten may be for the breadth of the roofe of the Tent, and nine, on each side, may hang downe, within one cubit of the gound, &c. Also thou shalt make another rancke of curtaines,7 And thou shalt make curtaines of goats haire, to be a covering upon the Ta∣bernacle. of a meaner value, namely of goates haire woven into cloth, &c. Moreover, to defend the Tabernacle from weather,14 And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rammes skinnes died red, and a covering above of badgers skinnes. thou shalt make a third covering for it, of rams skins died red; and a fourth yet above that, next to the weather, of badgers skins, which are yet stronger and courser. And two shalt thou make in the corners of the Ta∣bernacle lined with other boards for more strength of carriage, on each side of the Tabernacle.23 And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the Tabernacle in the two sides. And thou shalt make five rowes of barres,26 And thou shalt make barres of Shittim wood, five for the boards of one side of the Tabernacle. to goe through the boards on each side of the Tabernacle. Moreover, thou shalt make a vaile for the Holy of Holies of blew silke, &c.31 And thou shalt make a vaile of blew and purple and scarlet. CAP. XXVII. THou shalt make the inner part of the altar of Shittim wood,1 And thou shalt make an altar of Shittim wood, five cubits long and five cubites broad. the outward part whereof shall be all covered on both sides, with brasse. The Altar shall be for length and breadth foure square.1 The altar shall be foure square. The foure corners shall have, as it were, foure hornes (of the same matter whereof the altar is made) upon the tops thereof.2 And thou shalt make the hornes of it upon the foure corners thereof. Vessels to carry away the ashes,3 And thou shalt make his pannes to receive his ashes, and his shovels. and shovels to take them up. Thou shalt make the Altar hollow with boards, like unto a boarded cofer, without either bottom, or cover.8 Hollow with boards shalt thou make it. And thou shalt make a court to compasse in the Taber∣nacle.9 And thou shalt make the court of the Taber∣nacle. Aaron and his sonnes shall dresse, and tend them eve∣ry morning, and evening: kindling them in the evening,21 Aaron and his sons shall order it from Even∣ing to morning, before the Lord. and cleansing them in the morning. CAP. XXVIII. THou shalt make garments consecrated to the holy uses of my service.2 And thou shalt make holy garments.
3 Whom I have filled with the spirit of wise∣dome.Whom I have indued with an extraordinary skill for these exquisite workes. 4 And these are the garments which they shall make; a brestplate, and an Ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coate, a miter and a girdle.These shall be the garments thou shalt make proper to the high Priest: a brestplate for his brest, a rich Ephod for his shoulders, a robe with bells and Pomgranats for the whole body, a rich embroidered coate under that, a Miter for his head, a Girdle for his loines, &c. They shall make a peculiar Ephod to the high Priest, of gold,6 And they shall make the Ephod of gold, &c. &c. As a signe whereby the children of Israel may know that their memory is presented to God,12 For stones of memo∣riall unto the children of Israel. and that they are had in remembrance of God. 15 And thou shalt make the brestplate of judge∣ment.And thou shalt make the brestplate which thou shalt weare in thy consultations with God, in the causes of judgement. 16 Foure square it shall be, being doubled.Thou shalt make it of the same stuffe, doubled for the more strength, and better convenience of holding the stones. 30 And thou shalt put in the brestplate of judge∣ment, the Urim and the Thummim, and they shall be upon Aarons heart &c.Also thou shalt inclose within the brestplate, where∣with thou shalt consult with God, these two secret signes of knowledge and holinesse, which shall bee upon the heart of Aaron, to signifie what is required to be within his heart. 35 And his sound shall be heard, when he goeth in unto the holy place be∣fore the Lord, and when he commeth out, that hee die not.His sound shall be heard when he goeth in, and com∣meth forth of the holy place, and thus addressing himselfe and the people, with awfull reverence, and devotion to the service of God, he shall not die, whereas, if he abrupt∣ly entring into the place, shall be an occasion of the peo∣ples negligence, and his owne prophanation of Gods ser∣vice, he shall die for it. 38 And it shall be upon Aarons forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniqui∣ty of the holy things, &c.So shall it be upon Aarons forehead, that Aaron here∣by may shew, that, in signification of the perfect high Priest, which was to come, he tooke upon him the expi∣ation of all those sinnes, and infirmities, which the Israe∣lites should be guilty of in their offerings to God. 41 And shalt annoint them, and consecrate thē, and sanctifie them, that they may minister unto me in the Priests office.Thou shalt annoint them, and prepare their persons for this service of mine. CAP. XXIX. 4 And shalt wash them with water.ANd shalt wash them all the body over, with the wa∣ter of the laver. 9 And the Priests office shall be theirs for a per∣petuall statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sonnes.And the Priests office shall be thus continued to Aaron and his sonnes, untill the time that all these legall rites shall be finished by him, whom they serve to signifie.
And Aaron and his sonnes shall lay their hands upon the head of the calfe,10 And Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bul∣locke. to signifie their interest in that sa∣crifie, and to acknowledge their worthinesse to die, in that beast, which in the signification of the true sacrifice, was put to death for them. So after this calfe is offered as a sacrifice and expiation for the sinnes of Aaron and his sonnes,15 Thou shalt also take one ramme, and Aaron and his sonnes shall put their hands upon the head of the ramme. then thou shalt cause them to offer a ramme for a burnt offering. Whatsoever toucheth the altar,37 Whatsoever touch∣eth the altar, shall be holy. shall thereby be sancti∣fied, so as it may not be any more put to any ordinary or prophane use. Where I will (as it were) appoint to meet thee fami∣liarly, and to declare my will to thee by my servants.42 Where I will meet thee to speake there unto thee. And I will make a cleare manifestation of my grati∣ous presence among the children of Israel, both to direct,45 And I will dwell amongst the children of Israel, and will be their God. and preserve them. CAP. XXX. AFter thou shalt set it close before the vaile,6 And thou shalt put it before the vaile. that di∣stinguishes the holy place from the holiest of all. Ye shall offer no incense of any other composition,9 Yee shall offer no strange incense thereon. &c. And the high Priest shall once a yeare put the blood of the sinne offering upon the hornes of the altar,10 And Aaron shall make an attonement upon the hornes of it, once in a yeare, with the blood of the sinne offerings of at∣tonement. to make an expiation of the defects, which had passed that yeare, in Gods service. When thou takest an account of the number of the children of Israel,12 When thou takest the summe of the children of Israel, after their num∣ber, then shall they give every man a ransome for his soule unto the Lord, when thou numbrest them, that there be no plague amongst them, &c. then shall they give every man halfe a Shekel, to testifie that he holds his life of that God, whose service that shall be used to maintaine: which shall be paid of every man upon paine of the displeasure of God, who shall plague the contempt of whosoever re∣fuses thus to contribute to his service. Halfe a sicle (that is according to our current money the value of fifteen pence sterling) according to the stan∣dard which shall be kept in the Sanctuary.13 Halfe a shekel after the shekel of the Sanctu∣ary. He shall die the death, whether by the immediate hand of God, or by the sword of the magistrate.33 shall even be cut off from his people.
CAP. XXXI. 2 I have called by name, Bezaleel the sonne of Vri.I Have singled out (as if I had by his name called him from others) Bezaleel the sonne of Uri, and &c. 3 And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisedome, and in under∣standing, and in know∣ledge, and in all manner of workemanship.Whom I have indued with this gift of the spirit of God, to be able both perfectly to conceive, and curiously to worke all these things which belong to the Taber∣nacle. 6 And in the hearts of all that are wise-hearted, I have put wisedome, that they make all that I com∣manded thee.And in the hearts of all those that are apt for these businesses, have I put a greater apprehension, and dexte∣rity of working all these things that I have commanded. Although I could be willing that these workes of the sanctuary should be finished,13 Speake thou also un∣to the children of Israel, saying, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keepe, for it is a signe betweene me and you, &c. yet I would not have them so followed, as that ye should worke them upon the Sab∣bath day: for that day is a common signe betwixt us, of your holding me for your Creator, and of my speciall in∣terest in you above all other people. 18 Two tables of Testi∣monie, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.He gave him two tables of the Law, which testi∣fied unto the people the will of God which spake and wrote it. CAP. XXXII. 1 Vp, make us gods which shall goe before us, for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Aegypt, wee wote not what is become of him.STirre up thy selfe, and make some visible Image, that may bring to our mindes the presence of God: and may give us a sensible representation of his going before us, and assisting us; sithence both Moses is gone, and the cloud which was wont to direct us, hath stood still thus long. 4 And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graven toole, after he had made it a molten Calfe, and they said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Aegypt.Who received them at their hands, and according to the peoples desire, cast it in a mold framed for that pur∣pose, and polisht it afterwards with tooles, and the peo∣ple said to each other: this is a representation (O Israel) of that God of thine, which brought thee out of the land of Aegypt. When Aaron saw the importunity of the people, hee yeelded to have an altar built before the calfe;5 And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar be∣fore it, and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the Lord. and pro∣claimed publikely: To morrow shall be the day, where∣in yee shall solemnely worship God in this calfe, which is made. Now therefore doe not thou, after thy wonted man∣ner,10 Now therefore let mee alone that my wrath may waxe hote a∣gainst them, &c. pray so instantly for their remission: which if thou
doe, so great is my respect unto thee, that my mercy will not suffer a revenge to light upon them; onely be thou silent, for whose sake I forbeare them, and then shall my wrath shew it selfe, &c. Then the Lord, at Moses his request,14 And the Lord re∣pented of the evill which he thought to doe unto his people. did not goe on to bring that evill upon the Israelites, which he had con∣ditionally threatned against them. Therefore now, if thou wilt pardon this their sinne, thy mercy will be so much more magnified,32 Yet now, if thou wilt, forgive their sinne: and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy booke, which thou hast written. by how much their sinne is more hainous; but rather then thou shouldest not, since I know thy glory with men doth so much depend upon it, I could be for thy sake contented even to be cast away my selfe from thee, at least to bee wip't out of the catalogue of living men, here upon earth. I will give them the same protection by my Angel,34 Behold, mine Angel shall goe before thee, ne∣verthelesse in the day when I visit, I will visit their sinne upon them. which they have had, but I will notwithstanding finde a time to correct them for this their offence. CAP. XXXIII. I Will send a created Angel to safegard and direct thee,2 And I will send an Angel before thee. &c. For I will not in that familiar manner, that I was wont,3 For I will not goe up in the midst of thee. converse with thee, and worke wonderfully for thee, &c. Therefore now put off thy costly raiment,5 Therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to doe unto thee. and hum∣ble thy selfe before me, that according to the measure of thine humiliation, or obstinacy, I may proportion out my dealings with thee. Then Moses tooke a speciall Tent wherein publike service should be done to God,7 And Moses tooke the Tabernacle, and pitched it without the campe, afarre off from the campe, and called it the Tabernacle of the Congregation. and pitched it without the host, afarre off, and called it the Tent of the Con∣gregation, &c. And the Lord gave unto Moses most familiar tokens and representations of his presence,11 And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. speaking by audible voices unto him, as one friend imparts his counsells to another. I have taken speciall notice of thee above all others.17 And I know thee by name. CAP. XXXIV. SO the Lord in some sensible signes of his presence pas∣sed before him.6 And the Lord passed by before thee.
10 Before all thy peo∣ple I will doe marvailes, &c.And will doe strange miracles for thy sake both in the wildernesse, and in Canan, &c. Thou shalt make thee no Images to represent God, whether molten,17 Thou shalt make thee no molten gods. or carved, or painted, or howsoever framed for this purpose. 19 Verse.See Exodus 13.12. 29 That Moses wist not that the skinne of his face shone, while he talk∣ed with him, &c.Now Moses knew not that his face had a certaine bright shining and majesty imprinted in it, by God, in his conference with him. CAP. XXXV. 3 Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habi∣tations upon the Sabbath day.VNlesse it be for a necessary use, ye shall not so much as take paines to kindle a fire for the dressing of any provision on the Sabbath day. 5 Ʋerse.See Chapter 25. in the whole sequell. 10 And every wise hearted among you, shall come and make all that the Lord hath comman∣ded.And all to whō the Lord hath given dexterity of work∣ing in these kinds, shall set themselves to make all that the Lord hath commanded concerning the Tabernacle. 30 Ʋerse.See Chapter 31.2, 3. &c. CAP. XXXVI. See Chapter 26. in the whole. CAP. XXXVII. See Chapter 25. in the whole, CAP. XXXVIII. See Chapter 27. in the whole. 8 And he made the Laver of brasse, and the foote of it of brasse, of the looking glasses of the wo∣men, &c.Also he made a great laver to wash the Priests, and to cleanse the sacrifices, and both the foot and frame of it was made of that brasse, and shining mettall, whereof the womens looking glasses were made, which now de∣voutly gave these instruments of their vanity, to holy uses. 21 This is the sum of the Tabernacle, even of the Ta∣bernacle of testimonie, as it was counted, according to the commandement of Moses, for the service of the Levites, &c.These are the parts of the Tabernacle, that is, the Ta∣bernacle that witnesseth the presence of God, to his peo∣ple: all the parts whereof by the Commandement of Moses was at the taking downe, and erecting, com∣mitted
to the charge of the Levites, by Ithamar, the sonne of Aaron, which was set over the Levites. CAP. XXXIX. See Chapter 28. in the whole. CAP. XL. SO Moses at that time could not for reverence of the place enter into the Tabernacle of the Congregation,35 And Moses was not able to enter into the Tent of the Congregation, be∣cause the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the Taber∣nacle. because God now at the first consecration of it, did so gloriously manifest himselfe, not onely in the signe of the cloud, upon the Tabernacle, but also, of exceeding glory and brightnesse within the Tabernacle. LEVITICVS. CAP. I. IF any of you offer an ordinary sacrifice unto the Lord,2 If any man of you bring an offering unto the Lord, ye shall bring your offering of the cattel, even of the herd, and of the flocke. ye shall offer your sacrifice of those cattel which are most common for their use, namely, Beeves, and Sheepe, or Goates. If it be a sacrifice to be consumed by fire, of beeves from the herd.3 If his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd. And the Priest shall kill the bullocke,5 And he shall kill the bullocke before the Lord. before the Lord for him. CAP. II. WHen any man will voluntarily,1 And when any will offer a meat offering unto the Lord: besides the set oc∣casions, offer a meat offering unto the Lord. In this oblation of the first fruits onely,12 As for the oblation of the first fruits, ye shall offer them unto the Lord, &c. ye shall offer leaven unto the Lord, in the two loaves which shall bee for the shake offering. Whereof see Levit. 23.17. &c.
CAP. III. 1 And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offe∣ring, if he offer it of the herd.ANd if his oblation be a peace offering, that is, such as whereby the offerer doth thankfully present him∣selfe to God, acknowledging to have received all bles∣sings from him, &c. 3 And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering, an offering made by fire unto the Lord, the fat that covereth the in∣wards.So the Priest shall offer of the peace offering, the fat that covereth the inwards, &c. as a sacrifice to be consu∣med by fire unto the Lord. CAP. IIII. 3 If the Priest that is annointed, doe sinne ac∣cording to the sinne of the people, then let him bring for his sinne, which hee hath sinned, a young bul∣locke without blemish.IF the Priest, which is annointed, and thereby consecra∣ted to God, shall sinne, so as occasion may be given therfore unto the people to offend, then shall he accord∣ing to the greater eminence of his place, offer for his sin, a young bullocke, &c. He shall put his hand upon the bullockes head, in token that that sinne of his is transferred to him,4 And shall lay his hand upon the bullocks head, and kill the bullocke before the Lord. that is the true propitiatorie sacrifice for sinne, &c. So he shall cause all the rest of the bullocke, besides the blood, the fat, the kidneis, and the caull, to be carri∣ed out of the host,12 Even the whole bullocke shall he carry forth without the campe, vnto a cleane place where the ashes are powred out, & burne him on the wood with fire, &c. into some cleane place, to be consu∣med; both to shew detestation unto the sinne, for which it is offered, and to signifie, that the true sacrifice must be offered without the gates. CAP. V. 11 He shall bring for his sinne offering a tenth part of an Ephah of fine floure, he shall put no oyle upon, it neither shall he put any frankincense thereon, for it is a sin-offering.HE shall bring the quantity of a pottle of fine flower, as an offering for his sin; he shall put neither oyle, nor frankincense upon it; for these two are figures of grace, and obedience, wherewith sinne hath no affinity. If a man shall through ignorance doe any act, where∣by he offends, in the use of any thing that is consecrated to God,15 If a soule commit a trespasse through igno∣rance, in the holy things of the Lord, then shall hee bring for his trespasse unto the Lord a ram without blemish out of the flockes, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary. whether in the omission of any due circum∣stance concerning it, or in mis-imploying it to any other purpose, then that whereto it is set apart; he shall bring to the Lord, as an offering for such trespasse, a ram without any blemish, out of the flockes, worth, in the Priests valuation, two Shekels of silver at the least; ac∣cording to the largest proportion of the Shekel; which is that of the Sanctuary; weighing three hundred and twenty graines.
CAP. VI. IN the court of the Sanctuary where these holy Oblati∣ons were dressed.16 In the holy place, in the court of the Taber∣nacle of the Congregation they shall eate it. Every one that toucheth them shall be before hand sanctified, and free from all legall pollutions.18 Every one that toucheth them shall bee holy. The peices of the cake, which shall be broken for the use of the meat offering, by the Priest.21 And the baken peices of the meat offering. CAP. VII. HE shall receive no benefit by it.18 It shall not be im∣puted to him. Shall suffer the punishment of his iniquity that hath not taken the prescribed course for the expiating of his uncleannesse.20 Shall beare his ini∣quitie, that hath his un∣cleannesse upon him. CAP. VIII. HE put in the brest-plate those two precious stones,8 He put in the brest-plate the Vrim and the Thummim. which signified light and perfection; by the meanes whereof the people should receive answers from God. That it might be duely prepared to receive those sa∣crifices,15 To make reconcili∣ation upon it. by which reconciliation might be made for the sinnes of the people. To signifie that the hearing of his eares,23 On the tip of Aarons right eare, &c. and actions of his hands, and motions of his feet, are, and should bee sanctified. It was the portion appointed for Moses in the right of that Priesthood,29 It was Moses part &c. which he did yet extraordinarily exe∣cute. Therefore ye shall not goe out of the bounds of the court-yard of the Tabernacle,35 Therefore shall ye abide at the doore of the Tabernacle of the Congre∣gation, day and night seven dayes, and keep the charge of the Lord, that yee die not. for the space of seven dayes, and seven nights, and shall duely keepe all these observations, which the Lord hath injoyned you; that so God may not be provoked to strike you with death. CAP. IX. THe Lord shall give you some visible,6 And the glory of the Lord shall appeare unto you. and glorious signe of his presence.
23 And the glory of the Lord appeared to all the people.And in the sight of all the people there came a fire, whether out of the Tabernacle, or from heaven, and fell upon the Altar, and consumed the sacrifice of burnt of∣fering,24 And there came a fire out from before the Lord, and consumed upon the Altar the burnt offring. which lay ready upon it. CAP. X. 1 And offered strange fire before the Lord.ANd tooke up in their censers common and unsancti∣fied fire, whereon they burnt the holy incense to the Lord. 6 Vncover not your heads, neither rend your garments, lest you die.Give no testimonies of a repining griefe, and discon∣tentment at this just judgement of God, lest in his dis∣pleasure he consume you also, &c. 9 When ye goe into the Tabernacle.When ye are to goe into the inner Court of the Ta∣bernacle, there to doe your service to the Lord. 14 In a cleane place.In a place free from legall pollution; or within the compasse of the camp of Israel, or that selected City, where God will have his worship to be fixed. 19 Behold, this day have they offered their sin offering, and their burnt offering before the Lord, and such, &c.Behold, the children of Israel have this day offred their sinne offring, and their burnt offring before the Lord, but as for me, you doe well know what cause of just sorrow I have had this day in that heavie judgement, which hath befallen my sonnes, and if in this mourning, and sad dejectednesse, I had eaten of the sinne offring, how could it have beene well taken of that God, who requires cheerfulnesse in all that thus partake of his holy things? CAP. XI. 2 These are the beasts, &c.I Would have your diet a figure of your conversation; beasts to be figures of men, those men which put just differences betwixt their actions,3 Whatsoever parteth the hoofe, & cheweth the cud among the beasts, that shall ye eate. and that doe meditate and chew upon the Law of God continually, those are fit for you to converse with, and to be received of you into your entyre fellowship, these are represented to you by beasts that divide the hoofe, and chew the cudde. The sinnes of the fish are for steering of their motion, the scales are for smoothnesse of passage,10 All that have not sinnes & scales in the seas, &c. shall be an abominati∣on to you. for safegard, for ornament; those men that have no knowledge and faith to guide them, no good dispositions to set them forward, nor good workes to set them forth, are not for your entyre conversation.
CAP. XII. THat sicknesse which in ordinary course is every mo∣neth incident to her sexe.2 Her infirmitie. CAP. XIII. IF the whole flesh be so covered over,13 If the leprosie have covered all the flesh, hee shall pronounce him cleane that hath the plague, all is turned white: he is cleane. that there is no appearance of difference in the skinne, it is a signe that the strength of nature hath wholly driven out that in∣ward matter, which was the cause of the leprosie, and therefore it argues, that the party is delivered from his disease. In signe of mourning for this judgement,45 He shall put a cover∣ing upon his upper lip. and for re∣straint of that breath, which is infectious, he shall muffle up himselfe. CAP. XIV. VNto some place which is in it selfe unhallowed,45 Vnto an uncleane place. and is now polluted by these uncleane materialls, that are cast upon it. There shall be the same ceremonies for the cleansing of the house, that are appointed for the man; such,49 And he shall take to cleanse the house, two birds, and Cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop. as are cleare types of the blood of the Messias cleansing the soule from the leprosie of sinne. CAP. XV. WHen any one hath an ordinary and insensible pas∣sage of seed, in the running of the reines.2 When any man hath a running issue out of his flesh. Thus shall ye teach the children of Israel to separate themselves, each from other,31 Thus shall ye sepa∣rate the children of Israel from their uncleannesses. in cases of their legall un∣cleannesses, and to cleanse themselves from their pol∣lutions.
CAP. XVI. 2 That he come not at all times unto the holy place within the vaile, be∣fore the mercy-seat, which is upon the Arke.THat he presume not to come ofter then once a yeare, into the Holy of holies, which is within the vaile; where God in a speciall maner manifesteth his presence, betweene the Cherubims, in the mercie-seat, the Cover of the Arke. 19 And hallow it from the uncleannesse of the children of Israel.The sinnes and infirmities of Gods people in their devotions, doe in a sort defile the holy place, and Altar; the high Priest shall thus expiate those sinnes of the peo∣ple, which have polluted the place, and vessels of Gods service. 22 And the goat shall beare upon him all their in∣iquities, unto a land not inhabited.As the slaine goat shall represent Christ dying for sin; so the escaping goat shall represent him freed from death, for our full justification, and taking away the sinnes of the world, so, as that they shall not appeare in the sight of God to their condemnation. 29 On the tenth day ye shall afflict your soules.It shall be a day of great and solemne humiliation in fasting, and all kind of sad and penitentiall devotion. CAP. XVII. 3 That killeth an oxe or lambe.THat killeth an Oxe or Lambe with an intention of sa∣crifice unto God. CAP. XVIII. 6 To uncover their na∣kednesse.TO lie with them, or to have carnall knowledge of them. 8 It is thy fathers na∣kednesse.That nakednesse is proper for none but thy father to uncover. 18 Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, &c.Having one wife, thou shalt not take another wife besides her, during her life; that the emulation, which will thereupon arise, may not be a perpetuall vexation to her, whom thou hast by lawfull wedlocke made one flesh with thee 21 Thou shalt not let any of thy seed passe through the fire to Mo∣lech.Thou shalt not give up any of thy sonnes, or daughters as a sacrifice to Molech, the Idol of the Ammonites; either to passe betweene his two fires, as in way of conse∣cration to him; or to be consumed by the fire of that Idol, as a burnt offering to him.
CAP. XIX. THou shalt not be any cause,16 Neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour. or furtherer of shedding the blood of thy neighbour; neither willingly for∣beare to hinder any act done against his life. To teach thee how God loveth simplicity of heart,19 Neither shall a gar∣ment mingled of linnen & woollen come upon thee. in all thy carriage and disposition, thou shalt not be allow∣ed mixtures, and compositions, so much as in thine outward apparell. During the first three yeares after the plantation thereof,23 Three yeares shall (the tree) be as uncircum∣cised to you. the fruit of those trees shall be unlawfull to be eaten, or to be put to any other profitable use. Ye shall not imitate the heathen fashion of your ido∣latrous neighbours, in cutting your haire round,27 Yee shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard. neither shall you, after their maner in their mournings, deforme your faces, by shaving off the haire of your beard. Ye shall not (according to the heathen manner) cut your flesh, whiles ye mourne for the dead;28 Ye shall not make any cuttings of your flesh for the dead, nor print any markes upon you. nor make any impression in your skin and flesh, as markes of your Ido∣latry, and superstition. CAP. XX. WHosoever revileth or speaketh reproachfully of either father or mother, let him be put to death.9 Every one that cur∣seth his father, or mother. CAP. XXI. NOne of the inferiour Priests may either touch a dead corps, or come into the roome where it is,1 There shall none be de∣filed for the dead among his people. if it be the corps of one not neere allyed to him. Vid. 19. verse 27.5 They shall not make, &c. However it may bee lawfull for the inferiour Priest to mourne for, or to be present ith the corps of those,11 Neither shall he goe in to the dead body, nor defile himselfe for his fa∣ther, or for his mother. which in nearenesse of blood, or alliance they have rela∣tion unto, yet the High-priest shall not condescend to any act, or signe of publike mourning, no not for his very parents; nor goe into the the roome where their corpes are laid. If he shall marry with any of these forbidden persons,15 Neither shall he pro∣phane his seed amongst his people. the issue which he shall have by her, shall be accounted as unhallowed; and shall not be capable of succeeding him in executing the Priests office.
18 Or any thing super∣fluous.Or that hath any part, or limme more then he should, or monstrously excessive in the proportion thereof. CAP. XXII. 14 If any man eate of the holy thing unwittingly then he shall put the fifth part unto it, and shall give it to the Priest.IF any Israelite, that is not of the Priests familie, shall ignorantly eate of those holy things, that are appropri∣ated by Gods ordinance, to the Priests, he shall pay the price of that whereof he eateth, and adde withall a fifth part more of the full worth, by way of satisfaction to the Priest. 15 Neither from a strangers hand shall yee offer the bread of your God of any of these.Not onely shall ye refuse to offer blemished, and un∣perfect sacrifices from the hands of Israelites; but if any heathen man, who is a stranger from the cōmonwealth of Israel, shall offer to present any such blemished, or unworthy oblation to you, ye shall also reject it, as that which is unlawfull to be offered to God. CAP. XXIII. Verse 27.Vid. 16. verse 29. 39 Shall be a Sabbath.ON the first and on the eight day ye shall rest from your labours. CAP. XXIV. 14 Let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head.LEt all that heard him, as in way of ratification of their testimonie, lay their hand on his head; as there∣by professing that the blood of the blasphemer shall be upon his owne head, as who doth most worthily suffer for his sinne. CAP. XXV. 6 And the Sabbath of the land shall bee meat for you, &c.ANd that fruit (of what kinde soever) which grow∣eth upon thy land, in the seventh yeare shall serve in∣differently for meat and drinke for the servant and stran∣ger, as well as the owner; and shall be freely taken, and used accordingly. 29 For the land is mine, &c.The land is mine, in a more peculiar manner; as that which I have set apart to be the inheritance of my cho∣sen
people on earth, and to be a figure of their happy, and glorious inheritance in heaven. In all the land which ye possesse,24 And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land. ye shall suffer a re∣demption to be given by him that sold or morgaged it; & shall accept thereof in the appointed yeare of Jubilee. If the Levites might sell their houses, in their Cities, yet the fields which are about the suburbes of the City,34 But the field of the suburbes of their cities may not be sold. three thousand cubits in extent from the walls thereof, may not at all be aliened, or sold. CAP. XXVI. YOu shall have a continued succession of blessings,5 And your threshing shall reach unto the vin∣tage. and variety of increase of al kinds of fruits, one in the neck of another; so as no sooner shall the threshing of your corne be finished, then your vintage shall come in hand. I will bring divers and frequent judgments upon you for your sinnes.24 I will punish you yet seven times. And when I have brought upon you,26 And when I have broken the staffe of your bread. famine and scar∣city, and have bereaved you of that which is the staffe of your life, bread, &c. Then shall the land be quiet;34 Then shall the land injoy her Sabbaths. as being delivered from those wicked inhabitants, which brought a curse upon it; and from those busie labours, wherewith it was worne out, and torne up continually. CAP. XVII. ANd if a man will consecrate unto the Lord some part of that field,16 And if a man shall sanctifie to the Lord some part of a field of his pos∣sessions, then thy estimati∣on shall be according to the seed thereof: An Ho∣mer of barly seed shall be valued at fiftie Shekels of silver. which by inheritance is descended to him, and would redeeme it: it shall be valued ac∣cording to the proportion of that seed, which is fit and sufficient to be sowne in that parcell, every ten bushells of barly seed shall be rated at fifty shekels of silver. See Levit. 5.15.25 Shekel of the San∣ctuary. No creature, which under a solemne vow, or curse, shall be devoted to destruction,29 None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall bee redeem∣ed. shall be redeemed by any price whatsoever, whether it be man, or beast, but shall undergoe that death to which it was solemnly de∣voted.
NVMBERS. CAP. I. 51 The stranger that commeth nigh shall be put to death.ANy Israelite whosoever, being not of the Tribe of Levi, if he offer to meddle with the Arke, shall surely die, either by the immedi∣ate hand of God, or by the hand of humane justice, and authority. CAP. II. 2 Farre off about the TabernacleTHe measure, of at least two thousand cubits, shall be the distance betwixt the tents of Israel, and the holy Tabernacle of God. CAP. III. 7 And they shall keep his charge.THey shall doe that service which Aaron, as from the Lord, shall appoint unto them. 9 Thou shalt give the Levites to Aaron and his sonnes.Thou shalt designe and appoint the Levites to attend upon Aaron, and his sonnes, in the holy ministration. 12 I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel, in stead of all the first borne, &c.Whereas, before, the first borne of the family was ordained to execute the office of the Priesthood, and to offer sacrifices for the rest, now I have confined this office to one tribe alone, so as onely those of Levi shall (in stead of the first borne) be set apart for this worke. CAP. IIII. 7 The continuall bread shall be thereon.THat shew-bread which is appointed to be continually set upon the Table before the Lord; being every Sabbath to be renewed in a perpetuall succession.
CAP. V. WHen a man,6 Shall commit any sin which men commit. or woman shall commit any sinne of frailty or infirmitie, which is commonly inci∣dent to every man. By way of recompence,7 He shall recompence his trespasse with the prin∣cipall thereof, and adde un∣to it the fift part. he shall pay the price of that thing which he hath taken away, or wherin he hath done the wrong, and adde moreover a fift part of the worth, as a satisfaction to the party wronged. If any mans wife shall leave off the conversation of her husband, and offend against his bed.12 If any mans wife goe aside, and commit a trespasse against him. That water which shall prove bitterly afflictive and deadly to her, if she be guilty. vid. Vers. 27.18 The bitter water. CAP. VI. TO signifie the continuance of his holy consecration and his subjection to God,5 Shall let the lockes of the haire of his head to grow. he shall suffer his haire to grow unto the length. This offering he shall make to the Lord,21 For his separation: besides that that his hand shall get. for his Na∣zariteship, besides that voluntary oblation, which hee shall moreover make upon any other occasion unto God. Laying their hands upon the children of Israel,27 And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel; and I will blesse them. they shall call upon my name for a blessing; and it shall be gi∣ven by me according to their prayers. CAP. VII. THe Princes of Israel by their severall gifts,2 The Princes offered. testified their joyfull celebration of the dedication of the Ta∣bernacle, and the Altar. To the sonnes of Merari (whose charge was the hea∣viest carriage that belonged to the Tabernacle,8 Foure waggons and eight oxen he gave unto the sonnes of Merari. as the boards and pillers thereof) he gave a double proportion of waggons, and oxen, for the more easie removall thereof. When Moses was gone into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to attend upon the Lord,89 When Moses, &c. to speake with him. and to re∣ceive his commandements.
CAP. VIII. 2 The seven lampes shal give light over against the candlesticke.THe seven lampes shall give light round about the bulke or shaft of the candlesticke on all sides. 11 Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord for an offering of the children of Israel.Aaron shall present the Levites before the Lord, as persons consecrated to God: whom the chiefe of Israel in the name of all the rest shall devote to the holy service of God, in their behalfe as designed, & allowed by them to offer up their oblations. 24 From the age of twenty five yeares and upward they shall goe in to wait upon the service of the Tabernacle.From the age of twenty five yeares they shall so enter into the Tabernacle, as to informe themselves, and to learne both by institution, and practice, how to per∣forme the services; and at the age of thirty yeares they shall enter upon the execution of their charge. 25 After fifty yeares, &c. they shall serve no more.They shall not serve any more, after the age of fiftie, in any of the painfull and laborious workes of carriage or attendance; although for over-sight, and aide of advice, no age ought to be exempted. CAP. IX. 15 And on the day that the Tabernacle was reared up, the cloud covered the Tabernacle: namely the tent of the testimonie; and at even there was upon the Tabernacle as it were an appearance of fire untill the morning.IN the day that the Tabernacle was perfitly set up, God gave visible testimonie of his presence therein; appearing in the day time as a cloud in the Holy of ho∣lies, over the Arke; and in the night time as a lightsome fire over the same. Upon the will of God signified really to them by the stay,18 At the commande∣ment of the Lord the chil∣dren of Israel journeied. or removall of the cloud, they disposed of their journey, or abode. CAP. X. 2 Make thee two trum∣pets of silver; of one whole peece shalt thou make them.OF one entire peece beaten out into length, and breadth, shalt thou make each trumpet; and not of severall parcells beaten together; of silver, for the puri∣ty of the metall; of one peece, for the unity and per∣fection of the sound. 31 Thou maiest be to us in stead of eyes.By reason of thy knowledge and experience, thou mayest be a good direction for us.
CAP. XI. ANd the people murmured,1 And when the peo∣ple complained, it displeas∣ed the Lord; and the Lord heard it; and his anger was kindled: and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them in the uttermost parts of the campe. and were discontent at their three dayes journey in the wildernesse, ere they setled in a resting place; and the Lord tooke notice of their repining; and his anger was kinled against them, and shewed it selfe in a sensible judgement upon them; for he sent forth a visible fire amongst them, and consu∣med those that were in the outer skirts of the campe. And the multitude,4 And the mixt multi∣tude that were among them fell a lusting; and the children of Israel also wept againe, and said; Who shall give us flesh to eate. which was a mixed company of native Israelites, and of strangers that came along with them, out of Aegypt, fell to an earnest longing, and lust∣ing after their old diet; and said, Oh that some body would now give us flesh to eate. The Manna was in fashion and quantity,7 The Manna was as Co∣riander seed; and the co∣lour thereof as the colour of Bdellium. like to Co∣riander seed, and the colour of it was, as of a cleare white gumme. If I shall be put to beare the charge, and burthen of this busie and troublesome people alone;15 And if thou deale thus with me, kill me I pray thee. rather take me away. I will endue them with the same spirituall gifts,16 I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them. and abilities, that I have furnished thee withall for the weild∣ing of this great administration. Make your selves by due preparation,18 Sanctifie your selves against to morrow. of beleeving and thankfull hearts, apt and capable to receive this new and marvellous blessing from God. Untill you be over-cloyed with it.20 Till it come forth at your nostrils. CAP. XII. IT is my manner when I would honour any man with the calling and imployment of a prophet,6 If there be a Prophet, among you, I the Lord will make my selfe knowne to him in a vision, and will speake unto him in a dreame. to reveale my will to that man either by dreames, or visions, which are the two usuall meanes whereby I am wont to im∣part my selfe unto men. But, as for my servant Moses,7 My servant Moses is not so, who is faithfull in all my house. he is none of the ordi∣nary ranke of Prophets; him (as whom I have found faithfull in all the service, that I have commited unto him) I have thought good to grace with an especiall fa∣vour and entirenesse. With him will I speake in a more familiar manner,8 With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even ap∣parently, and not in darke speeches. then with the rest of mankind, even as a man would talke with his friend, by an immediate revelation of my selfe unto him; here shall need no dreames, or visions, where∣in
to convey my will and pleasure unto him, but his very senses shall apprehend, and perceives the paine and cleare demonstration of my presence, and the notice of my will, by a familiar and sociable conference. CAP. XIII. 23 And when they came to the brooke of Eshcol.ANd when they came to the valley, or brooke, which afterward upon this occasion was called Eshcol, from the cluster of grapes which here they cut downe. 32 It is a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof.Either the ayre is unwholesome, and wasts the inhabi∣tants with diseases, or the soile is so stubborne and harsh to worke upon, that it spends their bodyes with the dif∣ficulty of their labours. 33 Wee were in our owne sight as Grassehop∣pers.For stature, and strength, there seemed to be no lesse difference betwixt them and us, then betweene grasse∣hoppers and men. CAP. XIV. 8 Floweth with milke and hony.HAth abundance of all provision, both for sustenance, and pleasure. 9 For they are bread for us.We shall consume them with great ease, and feed upon their rich provisions. 10 And the glory of the Lord appeared in the Ta∣bernacle.And the Lord gave an apparent signe of his glorious presence in the cloud, that covered the Tabernacle, in the sight of Israel. 21 All the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord.The whole earth shall take notice of my righteous judgements, which I will execute upon this people; and give unto me the praise, and glory of my justice. 33 Your children shall beare your whoredomes.Your children (though they shall at last enter into the promised land) yet in the meane time they shall smart for your sinnes; that you may be punished in them. 34 You shall know my breach of promise.Since you have thus shamfully broken your cove∣nant with me, ye shall know & feele that those promises, which I made to you upon your obedience, shall now be reversed. 40 We will goe up to the place which the Lord hath promised, for we have sinned.We will now, without any farther mutinie, goe for∣ward to the promised land, and fight with our enemies; for we doe well see, and confesse, wee have sinned against our God, in this our murmuring, and backward∣nesse.
CAP. XV. THat man that sinneth in an arrogant,30 But the soule that doth ought presumptuous∣ly, &c. the same reproach∣eth the Lord; and that soule shall be cut off from among his people. and presumptu∣ous manner, as it were daring God, and despighting heaven, he shall be destroyed by an immediate hand of God; as having wilfully affronted the Lord, and called his Iustice into question. CAP. XVI. YE take too much state and greatnesse upon you;3 Yee take too much upon you; seeing all the congregation is holy, eve∣ry one of them; and the Lord is among them. as if you onely might, or ought to ingrosse the Lord to your selves; since there is none of the congregation, but is capable, and fit to doe those holy actions, which yee have appropriated to your selves; and the Lord would be as ready to testifie his acceptation of them. In a deepe sorrow for this presumptuous sinne of these princes, and in an humble invocation upon God,4 Moses fell upon his face. who onely could right these proud challenges, Moses cast himselfe downe upon his face. To morrow the Lord will give a visible proofe,5 Even to morrow the Lord will shew who are his, and who is holy, and will cause him to come neare unto him whom he hath chosen. whether he hath set us apart to these his highest servi∣ces; and whether he bee well pleased, that ye should, without any speciall calling thereunto, approach unto his presence to offer sacrifices to him? Rather thou, O Korah, being one of the tribe of Levi,7 Yee take too much upon you, yee sonnes of Levi. takest too much upon thee and thine, thus to incroach upon the Priests office; which thou shalt well finde in the sequell. Canst thou hope so to blinde the eyes of these people;14 Wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? that they shall not discerne thy fraudulent, presumptu∣ous, and false dealing with them. God had begunne to strike the people with a sud∣daine death.47 The plague was be∣gunne among the people. CAP. XVII. WE doe well see how deadly a thing it is for us to offer to meddle with any of the sacred businesses of the Tabernacle; But, O Lord,13 Whosoever com∣meth any thing neare unto the Tabernacle of the Lord, shall dye. Shall we be con∣sumed with dying? what shall become of us? Some of us are swallowed up of the earth, others of us are consumed by fire, others by the sudden stroke
of thy hand; O God, wilt thou not be intreated to take off thy revenging hand from us, till we be all utterly con∣sumed? CAP. XVIII. 1 Thou and thy sonnes and thy fathers house with thee, shall beare the iniqui∣ty of the Sanctuary.THou (and thy posteritie, that is descended from the loynes of Levi) shalt be answerable for any abuse that is done in the Sanctuary. 7 I have given the Priests office unto you, as a service of gift.I have of my free choyce, and gift, designed you to the office and service of the Priest-hood. 19 It is a covenant of salt for ever.It is an incorruptible and everlasting covenant. 22 Lest they beare sin.Lest they suffer death, as the due punishment of their sinne. 24 But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer as an heave-offering unto the Lord, I have given to the Levites to in∣rite.The tithes of the children of Israel, which they set a∣part and consecrate to the Lord, by lifting them up in way of oblatiō to God, I have given to the tribe of Levi, as a constant and perpetuall inheritance, to claime and enjoy for ever. 27 And this your heave-offering shall be reckoned unto you, as though it were the come of the threshing floore, and as the fulnesse of the winepresse.And this tenth part, which you shall offer out of your tithe, shall be no lesse imputed to you, or accepted from you, then if it were raised out of your own corne-floore, or your owne winepresse. CAP. XX. 9 It shall be kept, &c. for a water of separation.IT shall be kept for the cleansing of those that are sepa∣rated upon occasion of legall uncleannesses. 10 Heare now ye re∣bels, must we fetch you water out of this rocke?Heare now ye rebells; Is it likely that we shall fetch water out of this hard rocke, to satisfie your thirst? this wee are required to doe; but is this a thing possible to be done? 12 Because ye beleeve me not to sanctifie me in the eyes of the children of Israel, &c.Because ye doubted of the performance of my word; and in a weake distrust stroke the rock twice, as not be∣ing confident of the issue, whereas ye were onely bidden to speake unto the rocke, to yeeld forth these waters, &c. CAP. XXI. 5 Our soule loatheth this light bread.VVE are weary of this Manna, as that which wee finde a light and unsatisfying food, in compa∣rison
of that solid, and substantiall diet, which we had in Aegypt. Serpents, which wheresoever they stung,6 Fiery Serpents. caused a deadly inflammation in the body. CAP. XXII. ANd God who seeth the heart,22 And Gods anger was kindled, because hee went. and knew the sinister affections, and intentions wherewith Balaam went, was sore displeased at his so going. And God caused the Asse miraculously to speake with the voice of a man,28 And the Lord open∣ed the mouth of the Asse. to reprove the foolishnesse of the Prophet. The eyes of Balaam, which before were held,31 Then the Lord open∣ed the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the Angel. that they could not see the visible shape which the Angell had ta∣ken upon him, were now freed, and inlightned to behold that sight. I have done ill in smiting my beast causlesly.34 I have sinned. CAP. XXIII. I Am set upon this high rocke and mountaine;9 From the tops of the rockes I see him, and from the hills I behold him, Lo; the people shall dwell a∣lone, and shall not be rec∣koned among the nations. on pur∣pose, that upon the sight of Israel, I might curse him; I doe indeed behold him, but I have no power to curse him; Lo, this people shall be an entire nation within themselves; and shall be a peculiar people, severed, and set apart to God, from all other nations upon earth. This people shall through the blessing of God so mul∣tiplie,10 Who can count the dust of Iacob, & the num∣ber of the fourth part of Israel? that a man may as soone count the severall moates of dust on the whole face of the earth, as reckon their number; yea, one of those foure squadrons into which they are divided, shall for their multitude be past the summe of any computation. God hath already spoken a word of blessing,19 God is not as man, that he should lie, neither the sonne of man that hee should repent. and hath accordingly decreed a large benediction for Israel; doe not therefore hope vainely, that he will upon any intrea∣ty reverse his word, and doe contrary to what he hath determined and revealed. God in his great mercy and favour to Israel,21 He hath not beheld iniquitie in Iacob: neither hath seene perversenesse in Israel. will not impute their sinnes unto them; he will not take notice of their offences, to punish them according to desert. As God is now their King to governe,21 The shout of a King is among them. and protect them, so he hath ordained that they shall have Kings out
of their owne loines, to rule over them; whom they shall receive with great joy, and acclamation. 23 Surely there is no enchantment against Iacob, nor any divination against Israel.In vaine doe yee carry me from place to place, that I might by my incantations procure some mischiefe to Israel, for certainely this people is so strong, and safe in Gods protection, that no inchantment, or any other evill art can prevaile against them. 23 According to this time it shall be said of Ia∣cob and of Israel, What hath God wrought?Even at this very time I cannot but with astonishment record what great and wonderfull things the Lord hath wrought for Israel. CAP. XXIIII. 1 And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to blesse Israel, hee went not as at other times to seeke inchantments.NOtwithstanding all the faire pretences of Balaam, he had (together with his former consultations of God) used all kinds of sorcery, to hurt Israel, but since he saw that none of his wicked plots would succeed, he surceased to practise his enchantments upon them, any more. 2 And the Spirit of God came upon him.God who knowes how to use evill instruments well, and is wont indifferently to bestow these kinds of gifts, caused the spirit of prophesie to come upon Balaam. 3 The man whose eyes are open hath said.The man whose eyes (how ever formerly shut) yet now are by the spirit of prophesie so opened, as be∣comes Gods Seer. 4 Falling into a trance but having his eyes open.Falling into a trance, so as all his outward senses were shut up, yet the eyes of his minde were opened, to be∣hold the visions of God. 6 As the trees of Lign-Aloes, which the Lord hath planted, and as Cedar trees beside the waters.As the most sweet and flourishing trees which the Lord himselfe hath planted, in a most fruitfull soile. 7 Hee shall poure the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in many waters; and his King shall be higher then Agag.He shall have a plentifull and rich progenie, his issue shall spread abroad over fruitfull regions, and the Kings that shall come of his loines, shall be more mighty then the most flourishing Kings of the Amalekites. 9 He couched, he lay downe as a Lion, &c. Who shall stirre him up?He shall rest in fulnesse of courage, strength, and victory, so as no enemie shall dare to provoke him. 17 I shall see him, but not now, I shall behold him but not nigh: There shall come a starre out of Iacob; and a scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the chil∣dren of Seth.I doe by the spirit of prophesie discry afarre off the state and glory of the people of Israel; There shall arise out of Jacob, a glorious King, bright as the morning starre, which shall not onely rule over Israel, but shall powerfully subdue all the enemies of his Church, round about. 19 Him that remaineth in the City.That sheltreth himselfe in any of the Cities of Edom. 21 And hee looked on the Kenites, &c. strong is thy dwelling place, and thou puttest thy nest in a rocke.Ye Kenites, the posterity of Jethro, may please your selves in your security, for that ye are setled in strong
and well fortified places; and according as your name signifieth, have built your nest, high, and impregnably. But your hopes shall, at the last, faile you; for when the Assyrians shall prevaile against Israel, then shall they also root you out of your land,22 Neverthelesse the Kenites shall be wasted untill Ashur shall carry thee away captive. and carry you away cap∣tive with your neighbours. What grievous and intolerable calamitie there shall be, when God shall bring this judgement!23 Alas, who shall live when God doth this! And ships shall come from the coasts of Greece, and Italy, & shall afflict both the Assyrians, & the Hebrewes,24 And ships shall come from the coasts of Chittim, and shall afflict Ashur, and shall afflict Eber; and he also shall pe∣rish for ever. but when they have done, these rods that scourged others, shall themselves be burnt; and feele that destru∣ction which they brought upon others. And Balaam rose up, and being frustrated of his wic∣ked plots, in cursing Israel,25 And Balaam rose up and went, and returned to his place. addressed himselfe towards his returne, but in the way was overtaken with the just revenge of God. CAP. XXV. ACcording to the wicked project of Balaam,1 And the people be∣gun to commit whore∣dome with the daughters of Moab. the people of Israel began to commit fornication with the women of Moab. And the Israelites joyned themselves both in spiritu∣all, and bodily fornication,3 And Israel joyned him selfe to Baal-Peor. with those which worship∣ped Baal Peor. The Captaines, and ring-leaders of this wickednesse.4 The heads of the people. Brought into the campe of Israel,6 Brought unto his bre∣thren a Midianitish wo∣man. with an open pro∣fession, and purpose of commtting fornication with her, a Midianitish woman. Behold,12 Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace. his zeale hath turned away my wrath from Israel; so as now, I will be reconciled with them; and for this cause I doe decree to make and everlasting co∣venant with Phinehas, that he, and his posterity shall serve me in the priest-hood. CAP. XXVI. Howsoever Korah perished in that insurrection a∣gainst Moses and Aaron, yet his sonnes,11 Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not. as being free from their fathers conspiracy, perished not with him, but were imployed in the service of God, with very gracious approbation.
CAP. XXVII. 3 He dyed in his owne sinne.HE was not one of them which was an author of sinne unto others, but as other un-noted Israelites, he di∣ed in the wildernesse, without any publike offence or censure. 11 A statute of judge∣ment.A Judiciall law that shall continue unto Israel for ever; which as it is grounded upon just reason, so shall stand in due force upon all occasions hereafter. 12 Get thee up into this mount Abarim.Get thee up into this mount Nebo, which is one of the hills called Abarim. 14 For ye rebelled, &c.vid. Num. 20.12. 18 A man in whom is the spirit.A man whom I have indued with more then an ordi∣nary measure of my spirit of wisedome, and courage. 20 Put some of thine honour upon him.Let him have the same titles, and respect from the people, that thou hadst. 21 He shall stand be∣fore Eleazar the Priest, who shall aske counsell for him, after the judge∣ment of Vrim.The high Priest shall upon all weighty occasions, aske counsell of God for him; and he shall receive directions from the brest-plate of judgement in all his doubts. C. 28. and 29. Are the lawes of the sacrifices repeated, after the long inter∣mission of them since their first delivery. CAP. XXX. 5 The Lord shall for∣give her, because her fa∣ther disallowed her.IT shall not be imputed to her, as a sinne; that she per∣formed not that which her father denieth allowance unto; since she is not in her owne power to dispose of. 13 Every vow and e∣very binding oath to af∣flict the soule, her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.Every vow, which the wife maketh (though she bind it with an oath also) tending to any act of humiliation, by abstinence, or any other penitentiall exercise, the husband (who hath power over the wife) may, according to his owne judgement, and will, either estabish, or frustrate. CAP. XXXI. 23 Yee shall make it goe through the fire.YE shall cleanse by putting it into the fire; that as by fire it received that form, so thereby it may receive a new purity. 23 Neverthelesse it shall be purified with the water of separation.The water of purification which is appointed for all
holy vessels shall be sprinkled upon it, beside and above that cleansing by fire. That ye may acknowledge all your successe and victo∣ry to come from the Lord,28 And levie a tribute unto the Lord of the men of warre which went out to battell, one soule of five hundred both of the per∣sons, and of the beeves, & of the asses, and of the sheepe. the soldiers shall present to God the five hundreth part of both the persons, and beasts which they have taken. CAP. XXXII. ON this condition that ye will goe armed in the front of the battell, before the people of the Lord;20 If ye will doe this thing, if ye will go armed before the Lord to war. and by this meanes testifie your courage, and forwardnesse, that all Israel may know, it is not out of any cowardise, or feare, that you take up your stations on this side Jordan, but onely for the greater convenience of the place; I shall yeeld that your portion shall light where you have desired. CAP. XXXIII. THose whom ye shall suffer to remaine amongst you,55 Those whom yee shall let to remaine of them, shall be prickes in your eyes, and thornes in your sides. shall be a continuall vexation to you, both in spiri∣tuall, and bodily respects; procuring much sorrow and mischiefe to you. CAP. XXXV. BEsides those sixe Cities of refuge which shall be gi∣ven to the Levites for their possesson,6 And to them shall ye adde forty & two cities. yee shall also adde two and forty Cities more, to be the peculiars of the said Levites, so as forty eight Cities shall be allotted to them, for their inheritance. That whosoever hath committed man-slaughter,12 That the manslaier die not, untill hee stand before the Congregation in judgement. may for the time shelter himselfe there, till he may have a faire and judiciall triall before the Elders of that City, where the fact was done, and may not be surprized by the avenger of blood, ere his cause be fully heard. The revenger of blood (to whom lawfull authority shall commit the execution) shall slay the murtherer;21 The revenger of blood himselfe shall slay the murtherer when hee he meeteth him. when he is delivered into his hand by a legall judgement, he shall be his executioner.
CAP. XXXVI. 6 Let them marry to whom they thinke best; Only to the familie of the Tribe of their father shall they marry.LEt them not bee forced to marry where they like not; it shall be free for them to take their owne choice; but so, as that they keepe themselves within the compasse of their owne Tribe; they may not there∣fore marry with any man of any other Tribe of Israel. DEVTERONOMIE. CAP. I. 9 I am not able to beare you my selfe alone.I Am not able to weild the government of so great and mightie a people, alone. 37 Also the Lord was angry with me for your sakes.The Lord was displeased with me; for that being moved by your provocations, I offended, both in my vnadvised speeches, and distrust. CAP. II. 30 For the Lord thy God hardned his spirit, and made his heart obsti∣nate.THe Lord thy God gave him up to his own thoughts; and he put on stubborne resolutions against Israel. CAP. III. 11 After the cubite of a man.ACcording to the usuall and received measure of a cubit. CAP. IV. 5 I have taught you statutes and judgements.I Have given you lawes both civill and sacred. 32 Aske now of the dayes that are past.Inquire of those events and proofes of actions, which have beene in ancient times. 34 By tentations.By severall trialls of their obedience.
CAP. VI. YE shall not provoke the Lord your God by distrust∣ing,16 Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, &c. or straining his power for the satisfying of your owne carnall desires. CAP. VII. THe Lord will not plague thee,15 The Lord will put none of the evill diseases of Aegypt upon thee. with those contagious & deadly diseases, which he inflicted upon the Aegyp∣tians, when they withstood his will in your departure. vid. Exodus. 9.14. The Lord thy God,20 The Lord thy God shall send the homet a∣mong them, &c. who is able by smallest meanes to confound the mightiest, shall send venomous flies a∣mongst them, which shall not onely gall them, but shall sting them to death. CAP. VIII. A Land,9 A land where stones are yron, and out of whose hills thou maiest digge brasse. whose face is not better furnish't with all kind of fruits, then her bowells are stored with rich, and usefull metalls. CAP. IX. I tooke that molten calfe wherein you had sinned,21 I tooke your sinne, the calfe which yee had made. ido∣latrously worshipping it in stead of the true God. CAP. X. CVt off therefore all that superfluity of wickednesse,16 Circumcise there∣fore the foreskin of your hearts. which is in your nature, and practise; and be ye spiri∣tually cleane and holy unto God. CAP. XI. THe Land of Canaan,11 But the land whi∣ther ye goe to possesse it, is a land of hills & vallies; and drinketh water of the raine of heaven. which ye are now going to pos∣sesse, is not an even, and low plaine, as Aegypt was, from whence ye came, but full of pleasant and wholsome mountaines; and therefore is not, nor cannot be wate∣red with the overflowings of a river (as Aegypt was with Nilus) but is moistned with the raine that fals from the clouds.
14 I will give you the first and the latter raine.I will give you seasonable raines, both the first raine after your seed time, to supple and fruiten the earth, and the later raine before your harvest, to swell up, and fill the eares. 18 For a signe on thine hand and a frontlet be∣tweene thine eyes.Vid. Exodus 13.9. & 26. Not onely shalt thou lay up my law in thy heart, but thou shalt have certaine scrolls tyed both to thy forehead, and to thy hand, for a memo∣riall thereof. CAP. XII. 22 Even as the Roe bucke and the Hart is ea∣ten, so shalt thou eate them, the uncleane and cleane shall eate of them alike. So also verse, 15.THou maist freely eate of thy beeves, or sheepe, or goates, though these kindes of creatures are wont to be of use for sacrifice unto God; yet maist thou with no lesse allowance eate of them, then of the Roe, and Hart, which are unfit for sacrifice, and yet fit for the use of thy table; neither shall there be any difference of persons, in respect of legall cleannesse, or pollution, at these thy civill meales; but all shall partake of them alike. CAP. XIII. 6 Or thy friend which is as thine owne soule.OR if it bee possible that a friend should be dearer to thee then all these, as being no lesse one with thy soule, then thy wife is with thy body. 9 Thou shalt surely kill him; thy hand shall be first upon him.Thou shalt certainly procure his death by thine infor∣mation and testimony; and as his just accuser, thou shalt throw the first stone at him. 17 And there shall cleave nought of the cur∣sed thing to thine hand.Thou shalt suffer nothing to bee reserved of all that spoile which is devoted to destruction. CAP. XIV. 1 Ye shall not cut your selves, &c.See Leviticus 19.28. and Ierem. 16.6. 6 Every beast that par∣teth the hoofe.See Levit. 11.2.3. CAP. XV. 4 Save when there shall be no poore; or, that there be no poore among you.THou shalt thus release, that thou maist not by thine exaction impoverish thy brother; that so there may be no needy person among you. Compare this verse with the eleventh.
CAP. XVI. AFter thou hast thus eaten the Passover on the Even∣ing,7 And thou shalt turne in the morning, and goe to thy tents. thou shalt in the morning returne to the place of thine abode. Thou shalt not receive a bribe to pervert justice.9 Thou shalt not take a gift. Thou shalt not so farre conforme thy selfe to heathen Idolaters,21 Thou shalt not plant thee any grove of trees neare to the Altar of the Lord. as to plant any grove of trees neare to the altar of the Lord. CAP. XVII. IF there arise a matter for thee too hard to decide in cases of murder, and manslaughter,8 If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judge∣ment betwe blood and blood, betweene plea and plea, betweene stroke and stroke, &c. in questions of dif∣ference betwixt parties, whether in civill affaires, or bu∣sinesse of violence offered. Nor send his people downe into Aegypt, to fetch thence such multitude of horses, as whereon he may trust for successe of victory.16 Nor cause the peo∣ple to returne to Aegypt, to the end that he should multiplie horses. CAP. XX. IF any man have minde to make excuses of occasions whereby his heart may be drawne homeward,5 What man have built a new house and hath not dedicated it, let him re∣turne, &c. so as he cannot heartily intend the service of the warre; whether it be in matter of purchase, or mariage, or plantation, let him have free libertie to returne; for God requires a free and chearefull resolution in those which goe forth to fight his battells. Except they accept of conditions of peace,16 Thou shalt save a∣live nothing that breath∣eth. when they are tendered unto them, thou shalt leave none of the per∣sons, or beasts alive. Thou shalt not destroy any of the trees that beareth fruit for the sustenance of man.19 Thou shalt not de∣stroy the trees thereof. CAP. XXI. VNto some obscure valley that lies neglected,5 Vnto a rough valley. and ut∣terly uncultured. Thou shalt take those courses with her,12 Shee shall shave her head, and suffer her nailes to grow. that may most set off thy affections from her; both by the shaving her head close, and by the deformed growth of her nailes.
14 If thou have no de∣light in her; then thou shalt let her goe.But if by these meanes of deformation thy heart shall be set off from her, before thy marriage to her, then thou shalt dismisse her, &c. 17 The beginning of his strength.He is the first of that issue, which is a strengthening and defence unto him. 23 For he that is hang∣ed is accursed of God.As all that are put to death as malactors, are, in re∣gard of the cause of their death, accursed of God, so in an especiall manner, those that are put to this painefull and shamfull death of hanging upon the tree; as their of∣fence is more hainous, and destable. CAP. XXII. 1 Thou shalt not hide thy selfe from them.THou shalt not forbeare to give helpe to the oxe or sheep of thy brother, in bringing it home frō straying. 7 But thou shalt in any wise let  dam goe, &c,Thou shalt avoid all cruelty towards those creatures which God hath given to thy use; thou shalt not there∣fore at once kill the damme sitting on her nest: since the lives of the young depend on hers. 27 And the betrothed damosell cryed.It is to be supposed that the betrothed damsell cryed. 30 Nor discouer his fathers skirt.See Levit. 18.8. CAP. XXIII. 1 Shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord.SHall not bee admitted to beare office, in the state of Israel. 8 The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the con∣gregation of the Lord in the third generation.After they have beene in three successions incorpora∣ted into Israel, they may have the priviledge of being admitted to the administration of the common-wealth. Thou shalt have a place set apart for thee without the campe, whither thou shalt goe for the discharging of the necessities of nature.12 Thou shalt have a place also without the camp whither thou shalt goe forth abroad. If an Heathenish servant shall be a convert to thy true religion, and shall in this regard, for the liberty of his conscience,15 Thou shalt not de∣liver unto his master, the servant which is escaped from his master to thee. flee unto thee, thou shalt not deliver him backe to his Master. 18 Thou shalt not bring the hire of an whore.An harlot shall not offer to God that money which was given her for the hire of her whordome. To him that is a stranger from the blood, and religi∣on of Israel, thou maiest carry thy selfe strangely; and therefore thou art not bound to lend unto such a one freely.20 Vnto a stranger thou maist lend upon usury. Thou maist for the satisfying of thy present hunger plucke the eares of corne with thine hand.25 Then thou maist plucke the eares with thine hand.
CAP. XXIV. IF a man shall finde any soule,1 Because hee hath found some uncleannesse in her, then let him write her a bill of divorce. or shamefull matter in the behaviour of his wife; or any intolerable imper∣fection in her body; a divorce in such case is, for the hard∣nesse of your hearts, tolerated; which divorce is to bee signified by a formall writing, to that purpose. For that which he taketh to pledge is a necessary in∣strument of preparing that bread,6 For he taketh a mans life to pledge. whereby mans life is sustained. Hee maketh account of it as the meanes of his live∣load.15 He setteth his heart upon it. However the Magistrate may deale in case of mulcts,16 The father shall not be put to death for the children, &c. and forfaitures, yet he may not inflict death upon the child for the fathers offence, nor on the father for the crime of the child. CAP. XXV. THey shall absolve and acquite the innocent.1 They shall justifie the righteous. He that is next in blood to her husband, shall re∣tire himselfe to a conjugall familiarity with her.5 Her husbands bro∣ther shall goe in unto her. Shall be reputed as the sonne of that brother which is dead.6 Shall succeed in the name of his brother. And shall spit upon the ground, before him; and shall say; So shall the man be defied,9 And shall spit in his face (or presence) and shall answer and say; So shall it be done to the man that will not build up his brothers house. or spat out of the con∣gregation, as justly worthy of contempt, who refuseth to raise up seed to his dead brother. CAP. XXVI. A Distressed sojourner in Syria that fled from a cruell brother to the service of a cruell uncle,5 A Syrian ready to pe∣rish was my father. was that ancestor from whom we are derived. I have not eaten thereof uncomfortably,14 I have not eaten thereof in my mourning. and deject∣edly, but with that chearefulnesse of heart, which thou re∣quirest. I have not superstitiously bestowed any part thereof in furnishing the exequies of the dead.14 Nor given ought thereof to the dead. CAP. XXVII. NO yron toole shall be used in hewing and squaring of the stones for Gods altar.5 Thou shalt not lift up any yron toole upon them.
9 This day thou art be∣come the people of the Lord thy God.This day by renewing thy covenant with God, thou art anew interessed in him, and acknowledged for his peculiar people. 12 These shall stand upon mount Gerizim, and blesse the people.Sixe of the tribes which are more noble (by the mo∣thers side) then the rest, shall, upon mount Gerizim pro∣nounce the blessing on the people. 24 Cursed bee hee that smiteth his neighbour se∣cretly.Cursed be he that by secret practises procureth the blood of his neighbour to be shed. 26 Cursed be hee that confirmeth not all the words of this law to doe them.Cursed be he that doth not in his practise conforme, and frame himselfe to the whole Law of God, and con∣tinue in the carefull observation thereof, all his dayes. CAP. XXVIII. 5 Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.BLessed shalt thou be in the fruits, which thou gathe∣rest, and layest up; and in those victualls which thou preparest, or reservest. 12 The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the raine to thy land, &c.The Lord that hath treasured up his rich and fruitfull showers, in the clouds, shall open them seasonably unto thee, causing the raine to fall from heaven upon thy land, &c. 13 The Lord shall make thee the head, and not the taile.The Lord shall give thee a superiority above other nations, and not put thee beneath them in honor and reputation. 23 The heaven that is over thy head shall bee brasse, and the earth that is under thee shall bee yron.The moisture of the clouds shall be utterly restrained from thee; and the earth shall with the drought there∣of be barren and fruitlesse. 24 The Lord shall make the raine of thy land powder and dust.The ayre shall be filled with a dry dust, in stead of the drops of a comfortable, and refreshing raine. The Lord shall smite thee with those grievous boiles, and blaines,27 The Lord shall smite thee with the botch of Aegypt. wherewith he plagued the Aegyptians, when they refused to let you goe out of their land. Exod. 9. 34 Thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes.The view and sense of those judgements which shall be inflicted upon thee, shall utterly distract thee of thy wits. 48 He shall put a yoke of yron upon thy necke.He shall put thee under an hard and intolerable bond∣age. 54 His eye shall bee evill toward his brother, &c.He shall grudge to his brother; or to his wife any part of the flesh of his owne children, &c. An heart full of dejectednesse and dismay, and an utter disappointment of all hopes of delivery.65 A trembling heart, and fayling of eyes. 68 The Lord shall bring thee in to Aegypt a∣gaine with ships.The Lord shall cause thee to bee carried captive in ships through the Mediterranean Sea into that land of Aegypt, where thou wert once in bondage.
CAP. XXIX. I Make this covenant, as with those that are now alive,15 But with him that standeth here with us this day before the Lord our God, and also with him that is not here with us this day. and here present this day, so with those of your poste∣rity, which as yet have no being. Lest there be amongst you any wicked person, who by his Idolatry may poyson Gods people,18 Lest there should be amongst you a root that beareth gall and wormwood. and bring many bitter and grievous judgements upon you. To draw on one sinne upon another; making one sin but a beginning and provocation of the next.19 To adde drunken∣nesse to thirst. And that the whole land thereof shall be Sodom-like covered over with brimstone, & salt,23 And that the whole land thereof is brimstone and salt, & burning, that it is not sowne, nor beareth. which shall scorch and dry up the earth, that it shall not be capable of seed, or fruit. CAP. XXX. THe Lord thy God will by his spirit reforme and re∣new thy heart.6 The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart. CAP. XXXII. I Wish that my doctrine may so fall upon your hearts,2 My doctrine shall dorp as the raine, &c. as the sweet and gentle showers fall upon the herbs and flowers of the earth; which cause them to spring forth and flowrish. He is a strong and sure refuge to his Church.4 He is the rocke. This people of Israel hath corrupted themselves with their Idolatry;5 They have corrup∣ted themselves; their spot is not the spot of his chil∣dren: they are a perverse and crooked generation. the blemishes of their actions are not such as may stand with the profession, which they make of Gods children, errors of infirmity; but such as justly argue them to bee a rebellious and wicked generation. The Lord hath chosen out Israel to be his share,9 For the Lords por∣tion is his people. and peculiar possession, among all the nations of the world. He made him to subdue,13 He made him ride on the high places of the earth. and triumph over the most defenced Cities, and most impregnable places of the earth. He caused the most craggie and barren parts to yeeld unto Israel much pleasure, and store of delicacies.13 He made him to sucke hony out of the rocke, and oyle out of the flintie rocke. But my people, whom I stiled righteous, have abused my bounty, and turned my grace into wantonnesse;15 But Iesurun waxed fat and kicked, &c. for being pampered by my mercifull provisions, they have carried themselves rebelliously towards me.
21 I will move them to jealousie with those which are not a people.This people of Israel shall be moved to anger and envy, by the sight of those mercies which (diverting from them) I shall bestow upon the Gentiles, whom now they scorne as no people of God. 22 For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burne unto the lowest hell.Those judgements, which I will inflict in my wrath∣full displeasure, shall be most vehement, and unconceive∣ably fearefull. 24 They shall be burnt with hunger.Their skins shall turne blacke with famine. If God, who was wont to be their refuge, had not given them up into the hands of their enemies,30 Except their rocke had sold them. to bee bought, and sold as slaves. 31 For their rocke is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.For the gods in whom the heathen trust, are not like unto our God, even in the judgement of our enemies themselves, who have had experience of the wonderfull power of God, both in his judgements, and our delive∣rances. 32 Their vine is of the vine of Sodome, and of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bit∣ter.The fruits that they yeeld are unsavory, and unwhol∣some, such as were yeelded by those wicked cities of Sodom, and Gomorrah: So abhominably evill are their lives, as were those of the cities accursed and consumed from heaven; their workes are most distastfull, and odi∣ous in the judgement of the Almighty. 33 Their wine is the poyson of dragons.Their best actions are to God, as the deadliest poy∣son is to the taste of men. 34 Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?Are not these wickednesses taken notice of, and kept in perpetuall remembrance by me; and in my eternall decree reserved to a most certaine judgement? 40 I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.I sweare by my selfe, and say, As I live for ever, I will be avenged on mine enemies. I will by my revenging hand worke an exceeding great slaughter amongst mine enemies.42 I will make mine arrowes drunke with blood. It is that, which if ye doe, yee shall live in perform∣ing it.47 It is your life. CAP. XXXIII. 2 The Lord came frō Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shineth forth frō mount Paran, and he came with ten thou∣sands of his Saints: From his right hand went a fie∣ry law for them.GOd, like a glorious sunne, imparted his beames un∣to Israel; beginning his course at their first entring into the wildernesse, and rising still up to them by the proofe of his goodnesse, in their passage through the land of Edom; he shined forth brightly as at noone day to them, when he blessed the elders of Israel with a large measure of his spirit; and he garded his people with ten thousands of his powerfull Angells; in whose attendance he did, in fire, deliver his law majestically, and terribly to Israel.
O God,3 All his Saints are in thine hand; and they sate downe at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words. all thine holy and chosen people are in thy safe, and blessed protection; They attended upon thee at the foot of the mount Sinai, and with awe and reve∣rence received the words of thy Law, which thou spakest unto them. Moses was the Prince and governour of Israel.5 He was King in Iesu∣run. Bring him home from his warres with victory and peace, let his hand be so strēgthened by thee,7 And bring him unto his people; let his hands be sufficient for him. that it may be able to subdue all his enemies. Be gracious to the tribe of Levi; and furnish thou thine High priest, whom thou hast chosen out of it,8 Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be with thine holy one whom thou didst prove in Massah. with those excellent graces, which thou hast figured in his brest-plate, with perfection of knowledge, and sanctity; Thus do thou blesse the sonne of that thy servant Aaron, whom thou provedst at Massah, &c. God shall take up his dwelling in that chiefe City,12 He shall dwell be∣tweene his shoulders. which, in part, pertaineth to the Tribe of Benjamin, even the holy City Hierusalem. For the dew that falleth from above,13 For the dewe, and for the deepe that couch∣eth beneath. and for the wa∣ter-springs that fruiten his plants from below. And for those precious fruits,14 And for the precious fruits brought forth by the Sunne, and for the preci∣ous fruits put forth by the Moone. which are brought forth by the warmth of the sun-beames, and by the kindly moisture of the night, & by the influence of the Moone. And for those choice fruits,15 And for the chiefe things of the ancient mountaines, &c. which ripen best upon the mountaines; those eminent mountaines, which have so continued ever since their first creation; and are now fa∣mous in the inheritance of Joseph. For the gracious favour and benediction of that God who appeared to me in that bush which consumed not.16 For the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush. The Tribe of Ephraim shall be glorious, and lusty,17 His glory is like the firstling, of his bullocke, and his hornes are like the hornes of Vnicornes, with them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth; & they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh. full of beauty and courage, like to a faire young bullock in his best strength; and his power shall be great and unresistible, wherewith he shall conquer far-remote na∣tions; Lo, thus succesfull and victorious shall bee both the sonnes of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh, but espe∣cially Ephraim, who shall exceed his brother no lesse then ten degrees. Much cause of joy mayst thou have, O Zebulun,18 Rejoyce Zebulun in thy going out; and Issa∣char in thy tents. in all thy goings out, whether for trafique, or for warre; and thou, Issachar, his elder brother, in thy quiet habitations at home. Gad shall dwell commodiously for spoyling his ene∣mies; of whom he shall make his pray,20 Hee dwelleth as a Lyon, and teareth the arme with the crowne of the head. like to strong fierce Lyon, which teareth the head from the shoulders of that beast which he seizeth upon. He made a wise and early provision for himselfe,21 And he provided the first part for himselfe, because there in a portion of the Lawgiver he was seated. in planting himselfe on this side Jordan, in that portion,
which upon his suit was alloted him by the ruler, and law-giver of Israel. 22 Dan is a Lyons whelpe, he shall leap from Bashan.Dan shall flie upon his enemies, like some fell and fierce young Lyon, that is bred in the mountaine of Bashan. He shall dwell in a rich soile, and shall abound with the plenty of all earthly blessings.24 Let him dip his foot in oyle. 25 Thy shooes shall be yron ard brasse.The earth whereon thou shalt tread shall be stored with all usefull metalls, as yron and brasse, and the like of those kinds. CAP. XXXIV. 6 And hee buried him in a vally in the land of Moab.GOd did this honor to his servant Moses, that he did, without the ayd of any mortall hand, provide a grave for him, and there inrerred him accordingly. 8 Face to face.See Numbers 12.8. IOSHVA. CAP. V. 9 I have this day rol∣led away the reproach of Aegypt off you.I Have taken away from you that your uncir∣cumcision, which you have kept all this while, out of that irreligous carelesnesse which your fathers brought with them out of Aegypt. 14 Nay, but as Captaine of the host of th Lord am I now comne.It is farre from me to be for thine adversaries; no, I am that Angell of the covenant who am comne to lead, and protect the troupes of Israel. 15 Loose thy shooe, &c.See Exodus 3.5. CAP. VI. 17 The city shall bee accursed, even it, and all that are therein, to the Lord.THe City shall be devoted to an absolute destruction, and all the living creatures that are in it; and seque∣stred to a revenge, and extirpation, from the Lord, 26 He shall lay the foundation thereof in his first borne, and in his yon∣gest sonne shall he set up the gates of it.When he laies the first stone in the foundation, let his eldest sonne die, and when he hath finished it, and
set up the gates, let his youngest sonne die; so let him be left utterly childlesse, that will goe about to reedifie that city, which God would have lie waste. See 1 Kings. 16.34. CAP. VII. THey beganne to be dis-heartened,5 The hearts of the people melted, and became as water. and their courage and spirit beganne to faile them. As thou hast offended, and dishonored God,19 My sonne, I pray thee give glory to the Lord, &c. by thy sinne, so now give honor to his omniscience and justice, who hath found thee out in thy sinne, by acknowledg∣ing this hainous offence, whereby thou hast provoked Gods anger against his people. CAP. IX. ANd the men tooke their relation upon trust,14 And the men tooke of their victualls, & asked not counsell at the mouth of the Lord. at the sight of their mouldy victualls; and did not consult with the High Priest, who in all doubtfull cases was to returne them the answers of the Lord. Ye are of that nation, whom God amongst the rest hath cursed, and appointed to be rooted out;23 Now therefore yee are cursed. and besides you have deserved a just punishment of this your guile. CAP. X. O God,12 Sunne stand thou still upon Gibeon, & thou Moone in the vally of Ajalon. let it please thee to command the Sunne to stand still, whiles we are fighting in, and for Gibeon; that we may have light to do full execution upon thine enemies; and let the Moone forbeare to bring on the night upon us. So Joshua smote all that part of the countrie,40 So Ioshua smote all the country of the hills, & of the South, and of the vale, and of the springs. which lay to the South; both those cities which were built on the hills, and those which were seated in the plaines. CAP. XI. AS for those cities which yeelded themselves up to Joshua,13 But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel burnt none of them. ere they were defaced by a violence of a siege, Israel burnt none of them. It was the wise counsell and just decree of the Almigh∣ty, that the inhabitants,20 For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battell. being left to their owne thoughts, should take up stubborne resolutions to stand out in battell against Israel.
CAP. XV. 19 Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a South-land, give me also springs of water.OVt of the bounty of a parent, give me this addition to my childs-part; thou hast already bestowed upon me a parcell of mountainous and dry land, give me also some other ground that lies low, and well watered. CAP. XVII. THou shalt take all the passages to, and from, and a∣bout it;18 And the out-goings of it shall be thine. and the bordering places adjoyning to it. CAP. XXII. 17 Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us; frō which we are not cleansed untill this day, although there was a plague in the Congregation of the Lord?WAs it not enough wickednesse in us, that hereto∣fore through the inticements of the Moabitish women, we were joyned to Baal-Peor, and were drawen into horrible Idolatrie, (the remainders of which sinne and judgement doe still sticke by us, although God sent a grievous plague amongst us, in regard thereof) but that ye must now againe this day,18 But that ye must turne away this day from following the Lord; &c. sinne against God, in a new point of will-worship, and Idolatry. If there bee any taint of Idolatry in the very place, whereby it is made unholy,19 If the land of your possession be uncleane, thē passe ye over unto the land of the possession of the Lord, &c. and infectious; then leave that your possession beyond Jordan, which is separated from the rest of the inheritance of Gods people, and passe over hither to us. CAP. XXIV. 12 And I sent the hor∣net before you.See Deut. 7.20. HEe will no suffer your willing, and presumptuous sinnes to goe unpunished.19 He will not forgive your transgressions, nor your sinnes. This stone shall bee a monument of this dayes cove∣nant,27 Behold, this stone shall be a witnesse unto us, for it hath heard all the words of the Lord, &c. which you have renewed with the Lord, for as much as in the view, and presence thereof, ye have spoken the words of this Covenant, mutually agreed upon, betwixt God, and us.
IVDGES. CAP. III. GOd gave them into the hands of the King of Mesopotamia,8 Hee sold them into the hand of Chushan-Ri∣shathaim King of Mesopo∣tamia. that they might be his tribu∣taries, and slaves. And God enabled him with the gifts of wisedome, and power to rescue,10 And the spirit of the Lord came upon him. and governe his peo∣ple. CAP. IV. ANd Deborah was moved with the spirit of Prophe∣sie & was extraordinarily raised up by God,4 Deborah a prophetesse the wife of Lapidoth shee judged Israel at that time. to give answers from God to Israel, and to give counsells, and directions to his people. CAP. V. O Lord,4 Lord when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, &c. thou shewd'st thy selfe marvelous in all the passages of Israel out of Aegypt; when thou wentest up before them from the land of the Edomites, both the heavens and the earth did both feele, and declare thy power; in all these were seene the wonderfull signes of thine almighty protection of thy people. The very foundations of the mountaines were moved at thy presence; in so much as mount Sinai it selfe,5 The mountaines mel∣ted from before the Lord, even that Sinai frō before the Lord God of Israel. which had formerly shaken at the deliverie of thy law given upon it, did now againe (though farre distant) quake at the awfull manifestation of thy power. In the daies of the late tyrans that enthralled and op∣pressed Israel,6 In the dayes of Sham∣gar the Son of Anath, in the dayes of Iael, the high wayes were unoc∣cupied, &c. even from the time of Shamgars delive∣rance, till this of Iael; the waies were unfrequented, no man durst stirre out, for feare of their cruelty. It was for their Idolatry,8 They chose new gods, then was warre in the gates. that God stirred up ene∣mies against them, and brought this desolation to their cities. I cannot but applaud, and blesse God,9 My heart is toward the governours of Israel that offered themselves willingly among the peo∣ple. for the for∣wardnesse, and chearefull courage of the chiefe rulers of Israel, in undertaking this warre.
10 Speake ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgement, and walke by the way.O ye, that are the chiefe leaders, and governers of the people, doe ye help me to praise our God, for our deli∣verance; and ye that are travailers, and traders abroad, joyne with me in this thanksgiving. 11 They that are deli∣vered from the noyse of the archers in the places of drawing water; there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord, &c. towards the villages of Israel; thē shall the people of the Lord goe downe to the gates.And ye the meanest of the people, even the drawers of water, in Israel, who for the danger of the enemie durst not stirre forth of your doores, doe you, being de∣livered from this feare, magnifie the great workes of God, who hath so freed all the villages of Israel, that now they may safely resort to their cities, whether for justice or trafique. 12 Lead thy captiuitie captive.Bring forth thy captives in a triumphant manner. Most of the severall tribes did their parts in this con∣flict;14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek, after thee Benjamin among thy people: out of Machir came downe governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer. some came from Ephraim, others from the borders of the Amalekites; and thou Benjamin, who art but a small tribe, wert not behinde the rest of Israel; Some from Manasseth (of whom Machir descended) who were chiefe rulers among the people, came forth; and the scribes of the Tribe of Zebulun were not wanting to this valiant service. Also Barak, with his tribe of Nephthali, came readi∣ly,15 And also Barak hee was sent on foot into the valley, for the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart. and with all the speed that his feet could make, into the field; As for those tribes of Reuben and Gad, who were by the lot of their inheritāce divided from the rest, there were great exceptions taken at their absence. 16 Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds to heare the bleatings of the flockes? for the divisions of Reuben were great searchings of heart.O ye of the tribes beyond Iordan, how could any of you sit still quiet among your flockes, and heards, when these great businesses were in hand; for the absence of Reuben great exceptions were taken, & diverse censures passed. 17 Gilead abode be∣yond Iordan, and why did Dan remaine in ships, &c?Gilead came not forth, but abode still at home be∣yond Iordan; and those of Dan were attending their merchandize, &c. 19 The Kings came and fought.The neighbour Kings came forth to ayd Jabin. 19 They tooke no gaine of money.They gained nothing by the warre. The very cloudes and windes sought for us, against our enemies; and the starres of heaven, whose influence workes upon these creatures,20 They fought frō hea∣ven, the stars in their cour∣ses fought against Sisera. tooke part with us against Sisera. 21 O my soule, thou hast troden downe strength.O my soule, thou hast triumphed over all the strength of thine enemies. 23 Curse ye Meroz, said the Angell of the Lord, curse ye utterly the inha∣bitants of Meroz, because they came not to the help of the Lord, &c.The Angell of God, whose prophetesse I am, hath bidden me to call for your curses against Meroz, and the inhabitants thereof, who dwelling neare to the place where this battel was fought, and (as it were) within the noise of our trumpets, yet came not forth to our ayd.
CAP. VI. DOe not worship or serve the gods of the Amo∣rites.10 Feare not the gods of the Amorites. For,22 For because I have seene an Angell of the Lord face to face. because I have seene an Angell of the Lord face to face in that visible forme which hee assumed, I shall surely die. In the top of this rocke whereon I gave order unto thee before,26 Vpon the top of this rocke, in the ordered place. to offer that thy sacrifice (which my fire consumed) in that place, which is already predisposed for this worke, offer thy burnt sacrifice, &c. God raised up the heart of Gideon with courage,34 But this Spirit of the Lord came upon Gi∣deon. to undertake this warre, and with prudence to ma∣nage it. CAP. VIII. VVHat need yee contend for this;2 What have I now done in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better then the vintage of Abiezer. that later fact that ye Ephraimites have done, in chasing, and executing the Midianites is much more, then all that which we followers of Abiezer have done in joyning the battle, and routing these enemies. Canst thou be so foolish,6 Are the hands of Ze∣ba and Zalmnana now in thine hands, that wee should give bread to thine army. as to hope to subdue Zeba and Zalmunna, that we should cast away our victualls on thine armie, upon this vaine pretence? I will beat your bodies with whippes of thornes,7 I will teare your flesh with the thornes of the wildernesse. and bryers, unto death. With them he did (according as he had threatned) beate the elders of that city,16 And with them he taught the men of Suc∣coth. for a warning unto the men of Succoth; who, by their example were taught, how dangerous it is to sleight Gods agents. A thousand and seven hundred Shekells of Gold,26 A thousand and seven hundred Shekells of gold. whereof every one weighed an hundred and sixtie graines, which is two drammes and sixteene graines. He put it (as a monument of that great victory and deliverance) in his city Ophrah;27 And put it in his citie, even in Ophrah; and all Israel went thither a whoring after it. but the people after∣wards made an ill use of it; turning it to the service of their idolls, wherewith they were shamefully defiled. CAP. IX. WHich is pleasing to God in the use of his sacrifi∣ces, and to men in their feasts.13 Which cheareth God and man. Let there be deadly dissension betweene Abimelech,20 Let fire come out from Abimelech, and de∣voure the men of She∣chem, &c.
and the men of Shechem; & let the one of them be used as a meanes to plague and destroy the other; let Abime∣lech burne the Shechemites, and let them kill him. 23 Then God sent an evill spirit betweene Abi∣melech, and the men of Shechem.Then God according to the imprecation of Jotham, did in his just judgement give way and power to Satan, to set discord betweene Abimelech and the men of Shechem. 28 Is not he the sonne of Ierubbaal? and Zebul his officer? Serve the men of Hamor the father of She∣chem: for why should we serve him?Is not he the base sonne of Jerubbaal? and is not this unworthy Zebul his officer? if ye must serve, rather sub∣mit your selves to those that are the issue of the ancient Lords of this citie; then to this upstart generation. In signe of an utter solitude and vastation, he sowed salt in the soile of the streets there;45 And sowed it with salt. as those which he would have continue desert and forlorne. CAP. X. 16 And his soule was grieved for the misery of Israel.ANd God had compassion on the miseries that Israel had brought upon themselves by their idolatrie. CAP. XI. 11 And Ieptha uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh.ANd Jeptha, calling all the congregation together in Mispha, did before them repeate the covenant that was betweene him, and Israel, and called the Lord to witnesse of this their mutuall agreement. 24 Wilt not thou pos∣sesse that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possesse: So whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out from before us, them will we possesse.Ye doe vainly worship Chemosh your false god, and when you have obtained a victory, or possession, ascribe it falsly to that your Idol, and thinke that you both doe, and ought to hold it of him; and is it not reason then, that when the only and true God (whom ye serve) gives us possession of the land of our enemies, we should en∣joy it? 29 The Spirit of the Lord came upon Ieptha.God stirred up the courage of Jeptha, and put into him the spirit of fortitude, &c. 31 Whatsoever cōmeth forth of the doores, &c. shall surely be the Lords, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.Whatsoever commeth first out of my doores to meet me, &c. shall surely be consecrated to the Lord; and if it be ought that may be capable of being sacrificed, I will offer it up for a burnt sacrifice to God. 35 Thou hast brought me very low, &c. For I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I can∣not goe backe.Thou art now unwittingly a cause of much sorrow, and affliction to me; for I have made a vow to God con∣cerning whatsoever should first come forth to meet me, and I cannot reverse it. 37 Let this thing bee done for me, let me alone two moneths, that I may goe up and downe upon the mountaines, and be∣waile my virginity; I and my fellowes.Since thou hast vowed to consecrate me to God, I do also willingly yeeld to make good thy vow; onely let
me have two moneths respite to bewaile that virginity of mine (which will follow upon this vow of thine, and shall occasion this discomfort unto thee.) And the daughters of Israel went yearely to condole with the daughter of Jeptha, foure dayes in a yeare.40 To lament (or speake with) the daughter of Jep∣tha. CAP. XII. YEe Gileadites are no better then base fugitives,4 Ye Gileadites are fu∣gitives of Ephraim among the Ephraimites, & among the Manassites. the scumme of two tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, a mungrell generation, compounded of both; and living upon both; so as ye have no reason to stand out in a con∣testation with the noble tribe of Ephraim. Give proofe of thy tribe, by thy speech;6 Say now Shibboleth. Thou wouldst passe over the ford of Jordan; pronounce that word which signifieth a Ford; say, Shibboleth, &c. CAP. XIII. THe Nazariteship of thy sonne shall beginne very early, even in the womb of thee his mother;4 Now therefore be∣ware I pray thee, and drinke no wine nor strong drinke, and eate not any uncleane thing. thou shalt therefore neither eate nor drinke that which is in the law forbidden to these votaries, lest the child should, within thy womb, bee nourished with unlawfull suste∣nance. And he began to have many instincts,25 And the spirit of the Lord beganne to move him at times in the campe of Dan, &c. and strong motions from God, at severall times, whereby he found himselfe set apart, and prepared for the great worke of delivering his people. CAP. XIV. HIs father,4 But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the Lord, that hee sought an occasion against the Philistims. and his mother knew not that the Lord had purposely contrived it thus, that hereupon Sampson might take an occasion to fall foule upon the Philistims, and might have the advantage of the quarrell. And the Lord indued him suddenly with an extra∣ordinary measure of strength;6 And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him; and he rent him as he would have rent Kid. and he pulled the Lyon in peeces, with as much ease, as if it had beene a yong and tender kid. If ye had not used the meanes of my wife for the know∣ledge of this secret.18 If ye had not plow∣ed with my heifer, &c.
CAP. XV. 8 And he smote them hip and thigh.ANd he smote them both horse and foote; both those that used the thigh for seate, and those that used the hip for motion, &c. 14 And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him.And God put a miraculous measure of strength into him. 19 But God cleave an hollow place that was in the Iaw, (or Lehi) and there came out water.And God opened an hollownesse that was in that place, which was called, Lehi; or Jaw-bone; and there came out water. CAP. XVI. 16 So that his soule was vexed unto death.SO as her importunity was an extreame and intole∣rable vexation to him. CAP. XVII. 5 And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an Ephod, and Tera∣phim, &c. And consecra∣ted one of his sonnes who became his Priest.ANd Micah had a Chappell in his house which hee consecrated to his gods, and made statues or Idols which he placed therein; and (in imitation of Gods own command to his Priests) made an Ephod for the Priest to weare in his devotions, and consecrated one of his sonnes (though of the tribe of Ephraim) to be his Priest. 13 Now know I that the Lord wil do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest.I know I did amisse in consecrating one to bee my Priest, who is not of the tribe of Levi; but now I have made amends for that error; and now, I hope God will be favorable to me; seeing I have chosen a Priest out of the due Tribe. CAP. XVIII. 6 Before the Lord is your way wherein ye go.GOd hath taken speciall notice of your journey to prosper it. 30 Vntill the day of the captivitie of the land.Untill the time that the Philistims prevailed against the Land. CAP. XIX. 18 But I am now going to the house of the Lord.I Am travelling to Shiloh, where the Tabernacle of the Lord, and my imployment is. 22 Sonnes of Belial.Leud and debaucht men.
That we may abuse him to our lust.22 That we may know him. If ye will needs be so outragious, take your pleasure on them rather; and bring this shame upon them.24 Humble them. CAP. XX. SEven hundred men,16 Seven hundred chosen men, left-handed, every one could sling stones at an haire breadth, and not misse. so skilfull that they could even with their left hand also weild their weapons; and so expert in the art of slinging, that they would not misse of the smallest marke. Ye are over-confident, as of your cause, so of your strength; and therefore for your further humiliation,23 And the Lord said, goe up against him. I give way unto you to goe up against Benjamin; but I doe not incourage you with promise of successe. CAP. XXI. YEe have sufficiently kept your oath,22 For ye did not give unto them at this time that you should be guilty. in that ye did not voluntarily give your daughters to them, so as now if you shall connive at this violence, they are furni∣shed with wives, and ye are guiltlesse. RVTH. CAP. I. YOu know I am past the possibility of having any other sonnes,11 Are there yet any moe sonnes in my wombe that they may bee your husbands? that might raise a seed to their dead brethren. My case is now altered,20 Call me not Naomi, call me Mara, &c. and so let my name be; I had a name when I was before with you, that soun∣ded of pleasure, but now my present condition calls for a name of bitternesse. CAP. II. GOd so disposed of her choise,3 And her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging to Boaz. that she light upon a part of the field belonging to Boaz.
20 Who hath not left off his kindnesse to the living and to the dead.Who so lovingly continueth a kinde remembrance of his dead kinsman, my late husband Elimelech, and for his sake, of me. CAP. III. 9 Spread therefore thy skirt over thine hand-maide; for thou art a neare kinsman.TAke thou me into thy protection, as mine husband, for thou art the man who by the law of God (as be∣ing one of the nearest kinsmen to my husband) hast right both to redeeme his inheritance, and to marry me, his widow. CAP. IV. 6 I cannot redeeme it for my selfe, lest I marre my owne inheritance.I Cannot redeeme it for my selfe, lest if I should have one onely sonne by Ruth, my inheritance should bee utterly extinguished, since that sonne must be accounted as my deceased kinsmans, and not mine. I. SAMVEL. CAP. I. 5 The Lord had shut up her wombe.BUt the Lord afflicted her with barrennesse. When the full number of moneths were comne about after her conception.20 When the time was comne about. 28 I haue also lent him unto the Lord.I have, upon my vow, returned him to the Lord, as consecrated unto him by me formerly. CAP. II. 3 Talke no more so ex∣ceeding proudly, &c.NOw let not Peninnah, or any other adversaries, that were wont to insult over me, open their mouthes a∣gainst me. 5 They that were full have hired out themselves for bread, and they that were hungry ceased: So that the barren hath borne seven.Those that were wealthy, are now so brought downe, that they are faine to hire out themselves to get bread for their mouthes, and those that were poore and hungrie are so filled, that they take their ease; The barren is now the mother of many children, &c.
The Lord hath founded the earth strongly,8 For the pillars of the earth are the Lords; and he hath set the world up∣on them. and im∣moueably; and hath made it the center, or foundation, whereon he hath framed, and stablished the world. The sons of Eli were lewd, and wicked men,12 Now the sonnes of Eli were sonnes of Beli∣al; they knew not the Lord. and did not acknowledge, and regard the Lord; but in their workes denied him. The Priests were not content with those parts of the sacrifice, which God had allotted unto them,14 All that the flesh∣hooke tooke up, the Priest tooke for himselfe. but tooke whatsoever the fleshhooke brought first up. Whereas by the ordinance of God,15 Also before they burnt the fat, the Priests servant came, &c. the fat was first to be offered, and burnt to the Lord, they would not stay the leisure of this due ceremony, but snatcht away the flesh before the time. See chapter 1. verse, 28.20 For the loane which, &c. Why do ye contemne my sacrifices; and make a scorne of them before the people?29 Wherefore kick you at my sacrifice? Wherefore hast thou given more respect to thy sons then unto me,29 And honourest thy sonnes above me. in that thou hast suffered them to carve for themselves of my sacrifices, and to eate thereof be∣fore I am served? I had indeed, at the first institution of the Priesthood,39 I said indeed that thy house and the house of thy father should walk before me for ever: But now the Lord saith; Be it farre from me. truly (though conditionally) decreed, that thy house and the house of thy fathers should ever continue this sa∣cred office before me; but now since ye have violated that part of the condition which concerned your selves, farre be it from me to perpetuate the Priesthood unto you. Thou shalt live to know that an enemie (the Phili∣stim) hath taken possession of my Arke, and Tabernacle.32 Thou shalt see an e∣nemie in my habitation. CAP. III. IT was a rare and unusall thing for the Lord to reveale his will by visions, to any man, in those dayes:1 And the word of the Lord was precious in those dayes, there was no open vision. and if privately he did thus speake unto some one, yet the pub∣like use of prophesie was a long time laid downe. Samuel was not yet acquainted with the voice of the Lord.7 Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord. CAP. IV. ANd these words of Samuel which God had by him spoken concerning Heli;1 And the word of Sa∣muel came to all Israel. came to the notice of all Israel.
CAP. VI. 5 Ye shall make images of your Emerods, & ima∣ges of your Mice.IN acknowledgement that these judgements come from the hand of the Lord, ye shall make the fashions both of the Emerods, and of the Mice (wherewith ye are annoied) in gold; and offer them up to God for an expi∣ation of that offence, which we have done against him. 19 And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, be∣cause they had looked in∣to the Arke of the Lord, even he smote of the peo∣ple fifty thousand, three∣score and ten men.He smote some of the men (that were Priests and Levites) of Bethshemesh, because, contrary to the charge of the Lord, they looked into the Arke; and of the common people, who resorted thither, upon the re∣port of the returne of the Arke, he smote fifty thousand, threescore and ten men, for the same presumption and curiosity. CAP. VII. 2 And all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord.ALl the house of Israel, being humbled by their ser∣vitude under the Philistims, made great means, and lamentation to God, for remission and favour. 6 And drew water, and poured it out before the Lord, &c.And drew water in great abundance, and washed, and purified themselves before the Lord from their long and generall uncleannesses. CAP. X. 5 After this thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is a garrison of the Philistims.AFter this, thou shalt come to the hill of Gibeah, which is consecrated to God, in that there is a col∣ledge of the sonnes of the prophets on the one side, as there is a garrison of the chased Philistims on the other. 5 Thou shalt meet a company of Prophets cō∣ming down from the high place, with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harpe, and they shall pro∣phesie.Thou shalt meet with a company of Prophets and their Scholers comming down from Gibeah, with much variety of the cheerefullest musicke, which they shall use for the raysing up of their spirits, and composing of their thoughts in a preparation to their prophesying, which they shall take up before thee. 6 And the spirit of the Lord will come upon thee; and thou shalt pro∣phesie with them; and shalt be turned into ano∣ther man.Thou shalt finde thy selfe suddenly indued with the same spirit, wherewith they are moved; and inabled to prophesie as they doe; and shalt feele a sensible alterati∣on in thy selfe, by reason of those extraordinary graces which shall be wrought in thee. 9 God gave him ano∣ther heart.God wrought a sensible change in him, by these new abilities which he infused into his heart.
Looke not unto the men themselves,12 One of the same place answered and said; But who is their father? but looke unto the hand of that God, who hath inspired them: What neede you to marvell that Saul prophesies? These other whom ye see, have not this power from their parents, but it is the gift of God, which is equally free wheresoever he pleaseth to bestow it. CAP. XIII. THat Kingdome whereinto thou wert elected,13 For now would the Lord have established thy kingdome upon Israel for ever. should have beene, all thy life, established unto thee; which now, by this sinne, thou hast lost the right unto, ere thou be throughly setled in it. Such was the jealousie and tyranny of the Philistims over their tributaries, the Israelites,19 Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel, that as they had despoyled them of those weapons, which were taken from the Ammonites, so they would not suffer a smith a∣mongst them, who might furnish them with new. CAP. XIV. I Finde a strong instinct from God, assuring me,10 But if they say, Come up to us, we will goe up; for the Lord hath delive∣red them into our hands. that if the Philistims shall say to us, come up to us, God would have us goe up, and we shall speed accordingly; this shall be a watchword from God to us, presaging our certaine victory. He received new strength,27 His eyes were en∣lightened. whereby all his senses were cheared and revived. Doe thou (O Lord) by this lot clearely and perfectly shew who is guilty this day.41 Give a perfect lot. CAP. XV. THou wilt grant that witchcraft is a most hainous and abhominable sinne; I tell thee,23 For rebellion is as the sinne of witchcraft. that this thy disobe∣dience to Gods command, is no lesse odious to him, then that witchcraft which thou justly hatest, and punishest in others. He that is the holy and strong God of Israel,29 And also the strength of Israel will not lie nor repent. as hee hath decreed thy kingdome to another; so he will be sure not to falsifie his word, nor retract that his just pur∣pose. And God did (as those doe which repent them of their former actions)35 And the Lord re∣pented that he had made Saul King over Israel. professe to undoe that which he
had done in setting up Saul; and therefore did now cast him off; and anoint another in his stead. CAP. XVI. 14 But the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evill spirit from the Lord troubled him.ANd the Lord tooke from Saul those graces of wise∣dome, and moderation, wherewith he had indued him; and gave power to an evill spirit to seize upon him, and to vexe him with frenzy, and distemper. By the sweet and holy musicke of David, the spirits of Saul were so composed for the time,23 And the evill spirit departed from him. and calmed, that he brake not forth into his wonted fury. CAP. XVII. 29 What have I now done? Is there not a cause?IS it not a just reason, that my father hath sent me hi∣ther for your good? have I not a lawfull businesse here? Wherein then have I given thee cause of displea∣sure, or exception? 58 And Saul said unto him; Whose sonne art thou, thou young man?And Saul, having never seene David, till this occasion of vanquishing the Philistim (which fell out before his frenzie, and Davids playing before him) said unto Da∣vid, Whose sonne art thou, thou young man? CAP. XVIII. 1 And it came to passe when he made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soule of Ionathan was knit with the soule of David,WHen Saul had called David to the court, and en∣tertained him as an attendant there, it came to passe that upon his conference with Saul, the heart of Jonathan was deeply affected towards David. And he carried himselfe as a man distracted of his sen∣ses,10 And he prophesied in the midst of the house. both in his speeches, and motions. CAP. XIX. 20 And they also pro∣phesied.See chapter 10. verse, 6. and 18.10. 24 And he stript off his clothes also; & prophesied before Samuel in like man∣ner, and lay downe naked all that day and all that night.ANd he stript himselfe of his military habit, or of his kingly attire, and carried himselfe in a wild distract∣ed fashion; and lay downe so dis-robed all that day, and that night; appearing before Samuel, in the habit and fashion of a Prophet, amongst the rest.
CAP. XX. SOme legall uncleannesse hath happened to him,26 Hee is not cleane; surely he is not cleane. that hinders him from this holy feast; for the Law forbids any uncleane person to eate of these holy Sacrifices. This thy favour to David shall be to thine owne wrong, and shame,30 Thou hast chosen the sonne of Iesse to thine owne confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mo∣thers nakednesse. since by this meanes thou shalt be defeated of the Kingdome, as if thou wert base borne, and therefore uncapable to succeed me; & to the shame of thy mother who shall by this act be proclaimed an a∣dulteresse, and a dishonourer of my bed. CAP. XXI. THere is hallowed bread,4 But there is hallowed bread: if the young men have kept themselves at least from women. which having been conse∣crated to the Lord, may not (thou knowest) be re∣ceived by any ordinarie person, much lesse by any that is uncleane; but in this necessitie, if the yong men have ab∣stained from the use of women, and have kept them∣selves this way undefiled, I shall condescend to give it unto them. The bodies of the young men are, this way undefiled,5 The vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a manner common, yea, though it it were this day sanctified in the vessell or (as in the margin) especially when this day there is other san∣ctified. and the bread how ever consecrated, is unto us in this case of necessity, but as common bread; so as we may lawfully receive it; especially when as this day there is other bread sanctifyed according to the law in the roome thereof. Is not this David that swayes so much in Israel?11 Is not this David the King of the land? CAP. XXIIII. TO discharge the necessities of nature.3 To cover his feet. Were I such as thou supposest me, wicked, sure∣ly wicked acts would proceed from mee;13 Wickednesse pro∣ceeds from the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee. but now thou findest how farre I am from any villainous intention a∣gainst thee; neither shall my hand lift up it selfe against thee to thy hurt. CAP. XXV. IF I leave so much as a dogge alive in all the house of Nabal.22 If I leave of all, &c. any that pisseth against the wall. Nabal was so deeply stricken with an apprehension of37 That his heart died within him, & he became as a stone.
the danger that was towards him, by the relation of his wi that his heart was cold within him; and he became stupid, and sencelesse with feare and astonishment. CAP. XXVI. 19 They have driven me out this day from a∣biding in the Lords inhe∣ritance; saying, goe serve other Gods.THey have driven me away from Gods people, and from his holy ordinances, and have in effect as good as said, goe serve other Gods. CAP. XXVIII. 6 Neither by Vrim nor by prophets.GOd had withdrawn himselfe frō Saul, & gave no an∣swer to him, either by his Priest, or by his Prophets. 15 And Samuel said to Saul, why hast thou disqui∣eted me to bring me up?And the evill spirit (which appeared in the likenesse of Samuel,) as counterfeyting the speech of the Prophet also, said to Saul, why hast thou disquieted me to bring me up? 19 Shalt thou and thy sons be with me.To morrow shalt thou and thy sonnes be dead men. CAP. XXXI. 10 They fastned his body to the wall of Beth∣shan.THey hanged up Sauls body on the wall of the City of Bethshan. II. SAMVEL. CAP. I. 9 Stand upon me, I pray thee, and slay me; for an∣guish (or my coate of male) hindered me, that my life is yet whole in me.DOe thou put me out of paine, in killing of me; for though I have offered to do this dispatch upon my selfe, yet the coat of male which is upon me; hath hindred my weapon from free∣ly entring into my body; So as my life is yet (to my sorrow) left whole, and entire in me. 18 Also he bad thē teach the children of Iudah the use of the bow; behold it is written in the booke of Iasher.Upon too good experience of the advantage which the Philistims had of Israel by the skill in shooting, he caused the men of Judah to be trained up in the use of
the bow; as it is also recorded in the civill Annalls of Judah. Let there upon you no fruitfull fields,21 Nor fields of offe∣rings. that may yeeld offerings of first fruits, and tithes unto the Tabernacle of God. CAP. II. LEt the young men arise, and skirmish before us.14 Let them arise and play before us. Dost thou not consider that the remembrance of so much Israelitish blood shed by their brethren will be once grievous unto thee?26 Knowest thou not that it will be bitternesse in the later end. As the Lord liveth,27 As the Lord liveth, unlesse thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morn∣ing the people had gone up every one from fol∣lowing his brother. thou art the onely cause of this bloodshed; for if thou hadst not made that challenge, and provoked us thereby to fight, surely in the morning the people had peaceably departed, without giving any blow to their brethren. CAP. III. AM I so base a person in thine eyes,8 Am I a dogges head? that thou shouldst thinke fit to charge me in this challenging fashion. Did Abner die,33 Dyed Abner as a foole dieth? as cowards or malefactors are wont to doe. Their hands use to be bound, and their feet fettered;34 Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters; as a man fal∣leth before wicked men, so fellest thou. and so they are forced to undergoe a foreseene death; it was not so with thee, O Abner; thy hands and thy feet were free; as the valiantest man may be surprized by the violence of a wicked enemie, so wert thou surprized, and slaine. CAP. V. THis our Citie is so defenced of it selfe,6 Except thou take a∣way the blinde and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither. that we care not for all thy forces; and if there were none but the blinde and the lame, impotent persons in it, thou shalt never be able to take it; those very blinde and lame doe boldly defie thee. Because they had said (even the blind and the lame in a presumption of their strength of their forts had said) He shall not come into the city,8 Wherefore they said; (or as the margin, because they said, even) the blind and the lame, &c. or enter into our houses.
CAP. VI. 7 And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzzah.ANd the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uz∣zah, for his presumption in touching the Arke, which should have beene carried on the shoulders of sa∣cred persons, not on a Cart, as the Philistims had placed it; and, though it might be carried by the sonnes of Levi, yet might it not be touched by them. 14 And David danced before the Lord with all his might, and David was girded with a linnen Ephod.And David testified the joy of his heart, by the vehe∣ment and cheerefull motions of his body, in a grave and holy manner, dancing before the Arke of God: and for the more freedome and ease of that motion, had girded a linnen garment close about him. 20 Who uncovered himselfe to day in the eyes of the handmaids of thy servants.Who casting off the robes of Majestie (which would have become his person, and this action,) and, arraying himselfe basely, exposed himselfe and his gestures to the scorne and derision, even of boyes and girles in the street. 23 Had no child un∣till the day of her death.Michal was punished with barrennesse all the dayes of her life. CAP. VII. 14 I will chasten him with the rod of men.IF he offend me, I will chastise him gently and favo∣rably, as loving parents use to correct their dearest children. 15 My mercy shall not depart from him, as I took if from Saul, whom I put away before thee.I will not utterly take away the kingdome from his posteritie, as I tooke it from Saul, to give it unto thee; but will perpetuate it spiritually to thy seed. CAP. VIII. 2 And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keepe a∣live.HE subdued the countrey of Moab, and divided it out, as he thought good; casting downe their cities; and so proportioning his execution, that he put to death two parts of the inhabitants, and suffered one third part at the least, to live, and become tributary. CAP. IX. 7 Thou shalt eate bread at my table continually.THou shalt be provided for, upon my charge, all thy life long.
CAP. X. THat they had made themselves odious unto David,6 Saw that they stanke before David. in offering so soule an affront to his ambassadors. CAP. XI. IN the turning of the yeare, even in the spring-time,1 After the yeare was expired, at the time when Kings goe forth to battell. when Kings are wont to draw their forces out of the garrison into the field. CAP. XII. HE that did this thing hath well deserved death.5 He that hath done this thing shall surely die, or, is the sonne of death. I give into thy power and command thy masters house, and thy masters wives; both the persons & houses,8 I give thee thy ma∣sters house, and thy ma∣sters wives into thy bo∣some, &c. and substance, that pertained to Saul, to beat thy dis∣posing. The chiefe officers of his house.17 The elders of his house. And he called his name Jedidiah, Beloved of God, be∣cause of that gracious word of promise, and acceptance,25 And he called his name Iedidiah, because of the Lord. which the Lord had formerly spoken concerning him. 2 Sam. 7.14.15. &c. And he put them to very sore and painefull deaths,31 And put them un∣der sawes, and under har∣rowes of yron, and under axes of yron, and made them passe thorow the bricke kilnes. upon the command of God, causing them be sawne to death, and to be torne with harrowes of yron, and hewne with axes, and, as they had beene guilty of burning their children in the fire to Molech, so he caused them to be used, burning them in the bricke kilne. CAP. XIII. EVery one that heares it will condemne thee of great wickednesse, and folly, in that, by this lewd act,13 Thou shalt be as one of the fooles in Is∣rael. thou wilt cast thy selfe out of the likelihood of succeeding in the kingdome of Israel. He is thy brother, and therefore,20 He is thy brother, regard not this thing. though he of all o∣ther should not have done this villany to thee, yet since he hath done it, have thou so much respect to the honor of our blood, and family, as not to prosecute it against him.
CAP. XIV. 9 My Lord O King, the iniquitie be on me and on my fathers house; and the King and his throne be guiltlesse.IF there be ought amisse in forbearing to execute re∣venge upon the offender, I take it wholly upon my selfe; thou, O King, and thy throne shall be herein guiltlesse. 14 For we must needs die, and are as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up againe; because he hath not taken away his life, he hath also devised meanes that his banished be not expelled from him.Our very life consists in his, and we are vtterly lost, if such an hope of succession be rigorously cut off; which, it is a signe that God would have continued, in that he hath not (all this while of his banishment) taken him a∣way, but hath now made this meanes unto thee for his restoring. According to the ordinary weight of the Shekel in civill use of trade, every Shekel weighing two drams, and sixteene graines.26 After the Kings Shekel. CAP. XV. 19 Abide thou with the King.ABide thou with this King that would be; this usur∣per Absalom. So also verse, 35. CAP. XVI. 10 So let him curse; Because the Lord hath said unto him, Curse Da∣vid.THe Lord hath for my triall and affliction thought good to make vse of this mans tongue, to revile, and curse me; which though it be a sinne in this wicked man, yet it is most wisely and justly ordered of God, for my humiliation, and exercise of my patience. 12 It may be the Lord will looke upon mine af∣fliction, and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day.It may be that the Lord will have pitie upon my sor∣row, and aggravated affliction; and will gratiously re∣ward my patient suffering with a blessing, in stead of those curses which are throwne at me, this day. 23 Was as if a man had enquired of the Ora∣cle of God.The counsell of Achitophel was held so wise, so cer∣taine, so succesfull, as if it had comne from the very ora∣cle of God. CAP. XVII. 3 The man whom thou seekest, is as if all returned, so all the people shall bee in peace.IT is but one man whom thou seekest; if he were taken away (which I shall this night undertake to doe) all will be quiet; all the people will returne to thee in peace. 9 When some of them be ouerthrowne at the first that whosoever hea∣reth it will say, &c.When some of thy men shall be discomfited in the first encounter, the rest will be, with the noise thereof, disheartened.
He returned home and made his will, and,23 Home to his house, to his city, and put his houshold into order, and hanged himselfe. as one that tooke care for all things, save his soule, when that was done, hanged himselfe. CAP. XVIII. ANd the wood by reason of the thickets, and ditches,8 And the wood de∣voured more people that day, then the sword de∣voured. and pits that were in it, was the occasion, tha more were slaine, then could have beene slaine in an open field upon a cleare pursuite, by the sword of the enemie. And his head was caught fast within the graines of a spreading oke,9 And his head caught hold of the oake, and hee was taken up betweene the heaven and the earth, and the Mule that was un∣der him went away. and thus (his Mule running from under him) he was hanged betwixt heaven and earth. For he said; Those two sons which I had are now dead, & I have no meanes to keepe a remēbrance of my name;18 For he said; I have no sonne to keepe my name in remembrance; & he called the pillar by his owne name. this pillar therefore shall remaine for a monument of mee. CAP. XIX. GOe say to Amasa; Art not thou my neare kinsman,13 And say ye to Ama∣sa: Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God doe so to mee and more also, if thou bee not captaine of the host before me continually, in the roome of Ioab. my sisters sonne; of the same flesh & blood with me; as I looke for any favour from God, or would avoid his heaviest judgements, my full purpose and resolution is, that thou shalt bee the Generall of all my forces; du∣ring thy life, in the stead of Joab; whom upon the just reason of his murders and insolency, I have decreed to discard. Doe not I know that this is the day wherein I am re∣stored unto, and setled in the Kingdome of Israel.23 Doe not I know that I am this day King over Israel. Trouble not thy selfe about these matters; I have in my first sentence set an order in these affaires,29 Why speakest thou any more of these matters? I have said, thou and Ziba divide the lands. which I doe still decree to make good; that Ziba should till, and husband those lands to thy use, so as he may receive one moity of the profits for his labour, and the rest may ac∣crew unto thee, whom I have made the Lord of them. CAP. XX. SO the men of Israel, taking advantage of that emula∣tion which was betwixt them, and the men of Jh,2 So every man of Is∣rael went up from after David, and followed She∣ba the sonne of Bichri. fell off from their lawfull King, and followed Sheba the sonne of Bichri. They said in the beginning of this warre;18 Then she spake say∣ing; They were wont to speake in old time, saying; They shall surely aske counsell at Abel, and so they ended the matter. surely they
will treat with the men of Abel, for peace, according to the charge which God hath given in his Law; which if you had done, this businesse had beene at an end. CAP. XXI. ANd Saul thought to slay the Gibeonites, in a mis∣grounded zeale to the children of Israel,2 And Saul sought to slay them in his zeale to the children of Israel and Iudah. and Judah; in that e desired to free the land of all that were stran∣gers in blood; according to the mis-applied charge which they had of old received from God; and to put it clearely into the hands of the Israelites. CAP. XXII. 8 Then the earth shook and trembled, the founda∣tions of heaven moved and shooke becaus hee was wroth.GOd did by manifest tokens declare his power, and his gracious will, to deliver me; and to avenge mine enemies; he caused the earth therefore to tremble and shake; and the very heavens seemed to be moved in the sense of his heavy displeasure against my adversaries. 9 There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured, coales were kindled by it.He gave testimonies of his fury, and indignation a∣gainst mine enemies; so vehement was his wrath, that even smoake seemed (to speake after the manner of men) to come out of his nostrills, and so hot a fire out of his mouth, that even coales were kindled by it. This lower part of the heaven was so affected, as if God had in the demonstration of his power,10 He bowed the hea∣vens also & came downe; and darknesse was under his feet. come down into it; and (if we may describe him by our weake hu∣mane representations;) under his feet, in the lowest re∣gion of his ayre there was a palpable darknesse. 11 He rode upon a Che∣rub and did flie; and hee was seene upon the wings of the winde.He used the ministration of his Angells, and of his windes to exhibite his powerfull presence unto men; and in them was this mighty power acknowledged. And, as we men are wont by tents and pavilions to shelter our selves from the view of others,12 He made darknesse pavilions round about him, darke water and thicke cloudes of the skies. so did he cast darknesse, and thick cloudes round about the place of his appearance. Then the Lord sent abroad his flashes of lightnings, with the flames whereof much combustible matter was consumed.13 Through the bright∣nesse before him were coales of firekindled. He sent out his thunderbolts out of his clouds, as arrwes from his bow.15 He sent out arrowes. He delivered me from many troubles, and persecu∣tions, which as some deepe and violent waters would have drowned me.17 He drew me out of many waters.
I was sound, and sincere in my intentions,24 I was also upright before him, and have kept my selfe from mine ini∣quity. and carri∣ages before him; and have, by his grace, kept my selfe free from giving full scope to those sinnes, whereto I am in∣clined. Therefore the Lord,25 The Lord hath re∣compensed me according to my righteousnesse. who hath graciously wrought this sincerity in me, will crowne his owne worke; and will deale with me according to my righteousnesse. Oh Lord, thou art such to men,26 With the mercifull thou wilt shew thy selfe mercifull, &c. as they doe approve themselves to thee; with the mercifull thou wilt shew thy selfe mercifull, &c. With those that are wicked,27 And with the fro∣ward thou wilt shew thy selfe unsavory. and walke perversely in their evill wayes, thou wilt deale severely, and by thy heavie judgements wilt let them feele the weight of thy displeasure. By thy power I have broken through the troupes of my enemies, and have discomfited the Moabites,30 For by thee I have runne thorow a troupe; by my God have I leaped over a wall. and Ammonites, and Philistims, and other my professed ad∣versaries; and when they have betaken themselves to their strong forts, by thine helpe I have scaled, and won them. Thou hast given me agility of body,34 He maketh my feet like hindes feet, and set∣teth me upon my high places. and quicknesse of motion to surprize mine enemies inexpectedly, and hast by this meanes setled me in the possession of their strong∣est holds. Those strangers,46 Strangers shall fade away; and they shall bee afraid out of their close places. which for feare have dissembled their submission to me, are ready, upon every occasion, to fall off from me; but when they have thus revolted, they shall be stricken with feare of me, even in their most retired, and defenced places. CAP. XXIII. HE that is the sure refuge and defence of Israel,3 The Rocke of Israel spake to me, He that ru∣leth over men must bee just. hath said of me, to Samuel his prophet, that I whom my God hath appointed to rule over Israel, should be up∣right and just in my government. Although I have not in every point beene answerable to that, which God hath required of me,5 Although my house be not so with God, yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant. and foretold concerning me, yet, in his great mercy he hath made an everlasting covenant with me. Is not this water purchased with the extreme hazard of the blood and life of those men which went to fetch it?17 Is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?
CAP. XXIV. 1 And againe the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel; and he mo∣ved Dauid against them, to say, Goe number Is∣rael and Iudah.AFter God was appeased for his former displeasure, and had taken away the famine from Israel, God was againe moved to anger, by the sinnes of Israel, and there∣upon he left David to himselfe, and gave power unto Satan, to suggest unto David thoughts of presumption, stirring him up to number the people of Israel,See 1 Chron. 21.1. and Ju∣dah; that he might raise unto his owne heart a proud confidence in his owne strength. The Lord did (as men doe when they repent them of what they have done) inhibite any further proceed∣ings of that plague.16 The Lord repen∣ted him of the evill, &c. 23 All these did Arau∣nah as a King give.All these did Arannah in a bountifull and royall man∣ner offer to give unto King David. I. KINGS. CAP. I. 11 That Adonijah doth raigne.THat Adonijah hath plotted for the Kingdome, and hath in a sort possessed himselfe of it. 50 And Adonijah arose, and went and caught hold of the hornes of the altar.And Adonijah, which had not the grace to consult with God in his challenge of the crowne of Is∣rael, now, through feare, had recourse to the altr of God, as thinking, under the protection thereof, to avoid that death, which by his usurpation he had deserved. CAP. II. 5 And shed the blood of warre in peace; and put the blood of warre upon his girdle that was upon his loines, and in his shooes that were on his feet.HOw in a profession of peace he did, after an hostile manner, shed the blood of two noble Captaines, Abner, and Amasa; and put up his sword all bloody, into his sheath, and walkt with his feet distained with innocent blood, in a bold and carelesse fashion, thinking to beare out his hatefull murder. 9 Hold him not guilt∣lesse.Take thou all advantages, to let him feele how hey∣nously he hath offended; and proceed against him upon any other just pretence. 22 Aske for him the Kingdome also; for he is my elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the Priest, and for Ioab the sonne of Zerviah.Adonijah hath already the advantage of age, for he is
my elder brother, and of the guard and strength of sol∣diery, for Joab is joyned to him, and of the countenance of the Priesthood, for Abiathar is for him, & now, what wants he but a match with the Kings owne bed-fellow? yeeld him this, and I, by that wisedome (wherwith God hath indued me) know well that his next step will be into the throne. Since he will needs die there, there let him die;31 Doe as he hath said, and fall upon him, &c. for the law of God doth not allow any protection for wil∣full murder, from his owne Tabernacle or altar; rather he defiles the Altar, then the Altar can assure him. CAP. III. ANd Salomon made affinity with Pharaoh King of Aegypt, and tooke Pharaohs daughter to wife,1 And tooke Pharaohs daughter, &c. upon her yeelded conformitie to that holy religion, which he professed. In the meane time, till the house of God was finished,2 Onely the people sa∣crificed in the high places; because there was no house built unto the name of the Lord, untill those dayes. wise and holy Salomon would not allow the people to sacrifice any other where, then in those high places, which his father had consecrated, that is, in Gibeon, where was the Tabernacle, and in Hierusalem where the Arke was. CAP. IIII. FRom the famous river Euphrates,21 From the River un∣to the land of the Phili∣stims, and unto the land of Aegypt. unto the land of the Philistims, and from thence unto the borders of Aegypt. Whereas those of the East, and of Aegypt,30 And Solomons wis∣dome excelled the wise∣dome of all the children of the East Countrie, and all the wisedome of Aegypt. were fa∣mous above all the world, for the fame of their wise∣dome, and knowledge of all the secrets of nature, of the motions of the heavens, and of the vertues and operati∣ons of all plants, and of the qualities of all sensitive crea∣tures; Salomon exceeded them all in all these kindes. He spake three thousand wise sentences,32 He spake three thousand proverbs. out of which are collected those which in the book of his Proverbs are reserved to the use of posterity, as the sacred monuments of a divine wisedome. Out of that divine illumination,33 And he spake of trees, from the Cedar that is in Lebanon, to the hys∣sop that springeth out of the wall. which was given to him from above, he discoursed of all plants, from the tallest Cedar to the very hysop, or mosse, that growes upon the wall.
CAP. V. 4 There is neither ad∣versarie, nor evill occur∣rent.THere is neither any publike enemie, nor any crosse accident that might hinder this holy worke of build∣ing a Temple to the Lord. CAP. VI. SO great a worke could not be suddenly done; there must be a just time for the gathering of all the mate∣rialls,1 In the fourth yeare of Solomons raigne over Israel, in the moneth of Zif, which is the second moneth. for felling, hewing, seasoning of the timber; In the fourth yeare therefore of his raigne did Salomon begin this magnificent structure of the Temple; and in the second moneth, which by Gods owne computation was the moneth of Aprill. 4 And for the house he made windowes of nar∣row lights.And for the temple he made windowes, narrow without and large within, for the more cleare transmit∣ting of the light into all the parts of the house. 30 And the floore of the house hee over-laid with gold within and without.And the floore of the temple he overlaid with gold, not onely in that part which was within the partition of the Oracle, or holy of holies, but in the outer part there∣of also. 38 In the moneth Bul.In the moneth of October. CAP. VII. 21 And he set up the pil∣lers in the porch of the tē∣ple: and set up the right piller and called the name thereof Iachin, and he set up the left piller and cal∣led the name of it Boaz.TO figure out the firmnesse and stabilitie of his Church for ever, he erected two brazen pillers in the porch of the temple, and called the one [God shall esta∣blish,] and the other, [In it is strength] implying both what invincible strength the Church of God should have; and whence it should be received. 23 And he made a mol∣ten Sea, ten cubits from the one brim unto the o∣ther.And he made a large and vast vessell of brasse, for the use of their manifold washings, which seemed like to some spatious pond, or sea, for the quantity of water, which it contained: the widenesse whereof was ten cubites from the one side to the other. 26 It contained two thousand bathes.It contained two thousand of those measures, where∣of every one held sixe gallons of our account. CAP. VIII. 9 There was nothing in the Arke save the two Tables of stone.WIthin the Arke under the cover thereof, there was nothing but the two tables of the Law; but
on the verge of the Arke, were Aarons blossomed rod, and the pot of Manna reserved. The Lord hath said that the thicke cloud in his most holy place should bee the testimonie of his presence there.12 The Lord said that he would dwell in the thicke darknesse. If in a case of some great trespasse against a mans life,31 If any man trespasse against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to sweare, and the oath come before thine altar in this house. good name, estate, there cannot be other evidences brought forth, so as the matter must necessarily be de∣termined by the oath of the party accused; and that oath shall be solemnly required of him before thy presence, at thine holy Altar. And Salomon, by command and instinct from God,64 The same day did the King hallow the mid∣dle of the court which was before the house of the Lord, &c. because the brazen altar was too little, &c. required the Priests to sanctifie the pavement of the outer court, which was called the Court of the Priests, to the use of the sacrifices; for that the brazen Altar (how great soever it was) could not be capable of these many offerings. A great congregation of all the subjects of Salomon from the Easterne borders of his dominions,65 A great Congrega∣tion from the entring in of Hamath unto the River of Aegypt. to the Westerne that reach unto that arme of Nilus, which runnes towards Palestine. CAP. IX. HOw meane and base are these townes which thou hast given me,13 What cities are these which thou hast given me my brother? And he called them the land of Cabul unto this day. in lieu of those great things wherewith I have furnished thee? and he called them; The displeasing land to this day; being twenty cities in that upper Gali∣lee, which was after called Galilee of the Gentiles. CAP. X. SHe was so astonished at the exceeding wisedome of Salomon,5 There was no more spirit in her. that she was even transported from her∣selfe with admiration. Great plenty of the trees of Heben wood,11 Great plenty of Almug trees. which for the solidnesse, and shining brightnesse, were fit for the use and ornament of his building, and for instruments. And Salomon,29 And a charet came up & went out of Aegypt for sixe hundred Shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty; and so for all the Kings of the Hivites, and for the Kings of Syria, did they bring them out by their meanes. through the favour of his father in law, the King of Aegypt, had the benefit of all the trade of Aegypt, for charets and horses (wherewith that coun∣try had wont to furnish the neighbour regions) to passe through the hands of his merchants, to his behoofe; so as, if the Kings of the Hivites or of Syria would have either charets, or horses, they must obtaine them from
the meanes of Solomons merchants, at a set rate; their charets must cost them sixe hundred Shekels, their horses an hundred and fifty. CAP. XI. 1 But King Solomon loved many strange womē, together with the daugh∣ter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, &c.BUt Solomon after he had holily & happily raigned five or sixe and twenty yeares, at last gave himselfe over to his inordinate lusts, and added to the daughter of Pharaoh his lawfull wife, a number of women that were strangers, both in nation, and religion. 5 For Solomon went after Ashtaroth the god∣desse of the Zidonians, &c.For Solomon gave way and countenance to the Ido∣latry of his wives, whom he willingly admitted to build houses, and altars to Ashtaroth. 7 Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh the abho∣mination of Moab, in the hill that is before Ierusa∣lem.Then did Solomon consent to the building of an high place for Chemosh, the abhominable Idol of the Moa∣bites, and that in the very face of the temple, on an hill over against Jerusalem. That David my servant may have one of his seed emi∣nent in honor,36 That David my ser∣vant may have a light al∣waies before me, &c. and authority alwayes, &c. CAP. XII. THe easiest impositions that I shall lay upon you, shall bee more grievous then the heaviest that you complaine of,10 My little finger shall be thicker then my fathers loines. from my father. I have ordered, and contrived this busines for the just punishment of thy fathers defection from me.24 For this thing is from me. Behold, O Israel, the remembrances, and representa∣tions of that God, which brought thee out of the land of Aegypt;28 Behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Aegypt. In, and by these maist thou recall and worship that deity. In stead of Gods Temple at Jerusalem, he set up houses of pretended devotion, wherein he appointed God to be worshipped in his owne Idolatrous fashion; and or∣dained Priests accordingly,31 And he made an house of high places and made Priests of the low∣est of the people. men that were of other tribes, besides the sacred tribe of Levi, and men of base condition, fit for the Idols he had set up. And he appointed, of his owne head, the feast of Ta∣bernacles, to be kept, not in the seventh moneth, as God had appointed,33 He offered, &c. on the fifteenth day of the eight moneth, even in the moneth which he had de∣vised, &c. but in the eight, which was October; that so the place, and time, and priests, and gods, might be all of his owne devising.
CAP. XIII. NOt onely did Jeroboam ordaine base Priests out of undue tribes, to offer unto God, but himselfe also,1 And Ieroboam stood by the altar to burne in∣cense. would be taking presumptuously upon him, the executi∣on of this sacred function; he stood therefore by the al∣tar to burne incence. CAP. XIV. See 1 Sam. 25.22.10 That pisseth against a wall. AS well him who for his more sure defence hath shut up himselfe within the strong walls of your cities,10 And him that is shut up and left in Israel. as he that is left at libertie in the fields and villages. CAP. XV. See chapter 11. verse, 36.4 Gave him a lampe in Ierusalem. HE was not miscarried into any hainous & enormous crime,5 He turned not aside from any thing, &c. save onely in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. whereby his profession was notoriously ble∣mished all the dayes of his life, save onely into that his murther of Vriah the Hittite, & the sinnes that were ap∣pendant unto it. Those high places wherein akars were built unto God in an ungrounded devotion;14 But the high places were not remoued. (contrary to the charge of God, who had appropriated his worship to the place which he should choose to put his name there) re∣mained still entire, and undemolished; and were put to that unwarrantable use. CAP. XVII. THere shall not bee deaw,1 There shall not be dew nor raine these yeares, but according to my word. nor raine for the space of these three yeares, and more, (that this drought may bring a just dearth upon Israel) neither shall it then fall, but upon my prayer to that God, who hath thus de∣creed to punish Israel, and to confirme his mission of mee.
CAP. XVIII. 10 There is no nation or Kingdome whither my Lord hath not sent to seek thee; and when they said he is not here, he tooke an oath of the kingdome, &c.THere is no nation, or kingdome round about borde∣ring upon Israel, whither my Lord hath not sent to seeke thee; and of all those neighbouring kingdomes whether tributarie to him, or allyed, he hath by oath in∣quired of thy presence. 17 Art thou he that troubleth Israel.Art thou the man that hast brought this grievous judgement of dearth, and drought upon Israel? 29 They prophesied untill the time of the offe∣ring of the evening sacri∣fies.They ranne up and downe in a furious raving and di∣stracted fashion, untill the time that the evening sacri∣fice was, by Gods appointment, wont to be offered. 41 Here is a sound of abundance of raine.I have a sure intimation from God that there is very great store of raine comming. CAP. XIX. 18 Yea I have left mee seven thousand, euen all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and euery mouth which hath not kissed him.VVHereas thou complainest that thou art left a∣lone; know, that I have reserved to my selfe many thousands, that are not at all infected with the Idolatry of Baal; having neither in heart, nor in outward gesture, yeelded themselves to the adoration of those false Gods. 20 Let me I pray thee kisse my father & my mo∣ther.Let me goe and take leave of my father and mother, ere I betake my selfe to follow thee. CAP. XX. 4 I am thine, and all that I have.I Doe acknowledge my selfe a tributary unto thee, and yeeld my selfe over as thy liege-man. 9 All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first, I will doe; but this thing I may not doe.Thy first message, which challenged a power and in∣terest in my silver, and gold, and houses, and land, I was willing to yeeld unto, but this, that thou shouldst utterly take them away out of my possession, I may by no meanes assent unto. CAP. XXI. 3 The Lord forbid it me, that I give the inheri∣tance of my fathers unto thee.WEre it a thing free and lawfull for me to doe, I should not sticke at the motion, but thou know∣est, that God hath expressely forbidden a finall alienati∣on of the land of our inheritance; I dare not sinne to pleasure thee. See Levit. 25.23. 7 Doest thou now go∣verne the Kingdome of Israel?Is it for thee, that art the King of Israel, to take a deni∣all
of so meane a suite, or to be thus affectd with the re∣pulse? hast not thou power enough to give thy selfe satis∣faction? other spirits would become soverainty; away with this poore dejectednesse. Proclaime a fast,9 Proclaime a fast, &c. as those that have cause of a publike humiliation for this hainous sinne of Naboths blasphe∣mie. That the world may see how well I accept of a peni∣tent & serious humiliation,29 Because Ahab hum∣bleth himselfe before me, I will not bring the evill in his dayes. I will so farre regard this de∣jectednesse of Ahab, (though I know it is not out of sound contrition for his sinne; or any true grounds of grace,) as that I will deferre these my threatned evills, during his dayes, and reserve them for his posterity. CAP. XXII. WHat needest thou aske me this question?15 And he said, Goe, and prosper. thy Prophets have sufficiently assured thee already; goe up, as they have bidden thee, no doubt thou shalt prosper; thou hast their word for security. Then I must needs tell thee,17 And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills as sheepe that have not a shepheard. that God hath revealed to me, that Israel shall in this warre be put to flight, and stray like sheepe, that have lost their shepheard; even so shall they be distressed in their wandring, having lost thee their King and master. It is certainely revealed to me by an infallible vision from God, that he in his just judgement,19 I saw the Lord sit∣ting on his throne, and all the host of heauen, &c. hath decreed to give power to an evill spirit to delude these thy foure hundred prophets, with lies,20 And the Lord said, Who shal perswade Ahab that hee may goe up and fall at Ramoth Gilead. and to give thee over to be mis-led by their delusions, to thine owne destru∣ction: and this I doe as surely know, as if I had seene the Lord sitting on his throne,21 And there came forth a spirit and said; I will perswade him. and consulting upon the way, and meanes of plaguing thee with these present seducements; and giving leave and commission to the evill spirit to worke this mischiefe unto thee. A certaine man drew a bow,34 And a certaine man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the King of Is∣rael betweene the joints of his harnesse, &c. without any aime or in∣tention of any speciall marke, but onely roving, in com∣mon, at the army of Israel; and behold the arrow was, by a divine providence, directed to strike the King of Israel, betweene the joynts of his harnesse.
II. KINGS. CAP. I. 8 And they answered him, He was an hairy man, and girt with a gir∣dle of leather about his loynes.HE was a man roughly clad, as one that profes∣sed to be a messenger of penitence and humi∣liation to the world. Thou which pretendest thy selfe to be a man of God,9 Thou man of God, the King hath said, Come downe. the King hath peremptorily sent me to fetch thee downe by strong hand into his presence; come downe therefore, or I will force thy descent. CAP. II. 9 Let a doule portion of thy spirit be upon me.AS thou hast chosen me unto a nearer relation unto thee, and herein hast preferred me to all the rest of the sonnes of the Prophets; So give me this prerogative, that (according to the right of primogeniture) I may have a double portion to theirs, of that spirit, and those miraculous powers, which are in thee; which I know thou by thy last prayers, art able to effect. 11 There appeared a charet of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder, &c.The Angells of God in the forme of a fiery charet and horses, not so much in a terrible, as a glorious fashion, ap∣peared, and parting them, tooke up Elias. 12 Oh my father, my father, the charet of Israel, and the horsemen there∣of.Oh my father, whose spirit I hope to inherit; all the safety and strength of Israel, was in thy holinesse, and prevalency with God; This glorious charet that hath fetcht thee up from us, puts me in minde of what thou wert unto us, the sure and glorious gard of thy Israel. 14 He smote the waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of Eliah?If, according to the ingagement and promise of my master, it hath pleased God to give me a double porti∣on, to my brethren, of his spirit, let it now be shewed in this triall; as to him, so to me, let the waters of Jordan be divided. 17 And they urged him till he was ashamed; and he said, Send.Since your importunitie will take no deniall; please your selves, try the event; send your messengers. CAP. III. 13 Nay; for the Lord hath called these three Kings together to deliver them into the hands of Moab.Nay, but howsoever I have deserved to be unregarded in this suit, yet, have thou pitty upon these other
Princes, that are joyned with me; and especially on that Jehosaphat, whom thou knowest to be a godly, and gracious Prince; let us not for meere want of water, be delivered into the hands of Moab. Bring me hither a minstrell, that by his Musicke,15 But now, bring me a minstrell. both my spirits, which have beene too much moved with in∣dignation at thine unworthinesse, may be composed, and that by some divine ditty, your hearts may be lifted up to an expectation of this great mercy from God. The enginers, and such as were imployed for battery,25 Howbeit the slin∣gers went about & smote it. went about it, and taking advantage of the fittest place of entry, smote it. He tooke the eldest sonne of the King of Edom pri∣soner, and offered to sacrifice him upon the wall,27 Then he tooke his eldest sonne that should have reigned in his stead; and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall; and there was great indignation against Israel, and they departed from him, and returned to their owne land. if the Kings would not breake up their siege; which when the King of Israel refused to doe; he, the said King of Moab offered that sonne of Edom, for a burnt offering upon the wall; and hereupon there was great indignation of Edom against Israel; and they in much discontentment departed to their owne contry. CAP. IIII. ABout forty weekes hence,16 About this season according to the time of life thou shalt embrace a sonne. according to the ordinary time of conception, and birth, thou shalt beare a sonne. On solemne dayes I know it is our manner to resort unto the Prophet of God, for the worship of our God,23 Wherefore wilt thou goe to him to day? it is neither new Moone, nor Sabbath. and our owne instruction, but now, since, it is neither new Moone, nor Sabbath, that might occasion thy jour∣ney to the man of God, what businesse is it that calls thee to him? Trouble not thy selfe with this question,26 And she answered; It is well. I shall give an account of it to thy master; in the meane time rest thou contented. CAP. V. I Doe solemnly protest unto thee that I will doe no worship to any God,18 In this thing par∣don thy servant, that when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship, there, and hee leaneth on my hand, and I bow my selfe in the house of Rimmon, when I bow my selfe in the house of Rimmon, the Lord par∣don thy servant in this thing. save to the true God of Israel on∣ly; and I could well wish, that I never might have occa∣sion to come into any of the Temples of those Idoll gods; but, in this, I shall desire to be dispensed with, that, when, upon the necessity of my place and service, I must wait upon the King, into the temple of his Rim∣mon,
and my master (leaning on my arme) shall bowe to his false god; I may thē (after publike notice given of my free intentions) not out of any respect of devotion to the Idoll, but out of my due service to my master, bowe downe under my master in the house of Rimmon, which however in it selfe, it may be construed as a gesture of adoration to the Idol; yet when the world shall be throughly possessed of my hatred of this Idolatry, and my unfained purpose to reserve my selfe wholly for the true God, it shall perhaps avoid that offence which o∣therwise might be taken at this, not religious, but civill gesture; in this I beseech thee pray to God, that he will not impute sinne unto me; as one that would faine be serviceable, and not Idolatrous. And he said unto him; God speed thee well; Goe, and doe that which may best stand with the peace of a good Conscience;19 And he said unto him, Goe in peace. For me, I give thee neither warrant, nor dispensation. Couldst thou vainly hope to elude a Prophet; Had not I notice from God of all the way that thou wentest,26 Went not mine heart with thee when the man turned againe from his charet, &c? and of all thy carriage towards Naaman, &c? CAP. VI. 17 Lord, I pray thee open his eyes that he may see.O Lord, doe thou so illuminate, and enable the eyes of this my servant, that they may discerne this spiri∣tuall aid that thou hast provided for our succour and rescue. 33 And he said, Behold this evill is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer?And when the Prophet advised him to wait still pati∣ently upon God, he answered desperatly; Doe ye not see to what height of misery we are comne; that mothers are forced to eate their owne children; It is the hand of God that hath brought us to this extremity; worse we cannot be; to what purpose is it to expect any favour from that hand, that hath thus plagued us; if ever God would have delivered us, he would have done it, ere we had comne to this hopelesse condition. CAP. VIII. 10 Goe, say unto him, thou maist certainly re∣cover, Howbeit, the Lord hath shewed me that hee shall surely dye.Goe, say unto him, The disease is not in it selfe dead∣ly; but such as thou maist well, in course of nature recover; but withall, I must tell thee, that the Lord hath shewed me that he shall die by another meanes; and shall not rise from the bed of his sicknesse.
Why doth my Lord speake so foule,14 But what? Is thy servant a dog, that hee should doe this great thing? and bloody things of me? He must be extremely savage and cruell that should doe such violences; For me, I doe not finde in my selfe any such brutish, and tyrannous disposition. CAP. IX. WHat businesse hast thou with this crackt-braine-franticke fellow?11 Wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? And he said unto them, Ye know the man, and his communication. what can a man of this robe have to doe with thee? And he said; The habit shewes you the mans profession; that he is a Prophet; and his profession intimates his errand. What possibilitie is there of holding good termes with thee whiles the abhominable Idolatries,22 What peace, so long as the whordomes and witchcrafts of thy mo∣ther Iezebel are so many? and super∣stition of thy mother Jezebel, both remaine, and are maintained, and countenanced by thee. CAP. X. THus Jehu destroyed all the Idols of Baal;28 Thus Iehu destroy∣ed Baal out of the land. and rooted out all the false gods from Israel. But that part of Idolatry which consisted in the false worship of the true God, (brought in by Jeroboam,29 Howbeit, from the sinnes of Ieroboam the son of Nebat, who made Is∣rael to sinne, Iehu depar∣ted not from them, the golden calves that were in Dan, and that were in Bethel. in those golden calves of Dan and Bethel) Jehu did not at all oppose; but countenanced, and practized it rather. CAP. XI. VVHereas the Levits (being distributed into foure and twenty courses) are appointed to keep their changes, every Sabbath,5 This is the thing which yee shall doe; A third part of you that en∣ter in on the Sabbath shall bee even keepers of the watch of the Kings house, &c. to the number of about sixteene hundred, in every succession now ye shall so marshall your selves, that whiles the new course enters, the former shall yet continue for this turne undischar∣ged; and those that come in to succeed, shall divide themselves into three parts, whereof one shall keepe the watch of the Kings house, &c. Upon my command from God,19 Thou shouldst have smitten five or sixe time then hadst thou smitten Syria, till thou hadst con∣sumed it; whereas now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice. thou shouldst have smittē, till I had staid thy hand; which if thou hadst done, thy obedience had beene rewarded with frequent victo∣ries; now, thou shalt overcome, but according to the proportion of thine obedience, diligence, and faith in that word which thou hast received.
CAP. XIIII. 9 The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the Cedar that was in Leba∣non, saying; Give thy daughter to my sonne to wife. And there passed a wild beast that was in Le∣banon, and trod downe the thistle, &c.THou the King of Juda, who art but as a thistle, sent'st to me, the King of Israel who am a Cedar of Leba∣non, to give thee aid, and joine in an offensive warre with thee, against the King of Edom; now, if some law∣lesse rovers on my part, which are as the wild beasts of that forrest, have troden downe thy thistle, and made a spoile of thy country; why shouldest thou take it so high∣ly, as to undertake a warre hereupon with me? CAP. XVI. 18 And the cover for the Sabbath, that they had built in the house; and the Kings entry without, turned he from the house of the Lord.ANd that covered place of shelter (neare to the house of God) which was used for the snade, and ease both of the officers of the temple, and of the people, on the occasions of their concourse upon the Sabbath dayes, and the close walke or cloyster which the King had made from his house to the Temple, he defaced. CAP. XVII. 9 And they built them high places in all their ci∣ties, from the tower of the watchmen, to the fen∣ced City.THey set up their altars, and sacrificed to God in al high places, which themselves (contrary to Gods command) had erected, in all the parts of the Kingdome, from one side of the borders, to the other; no part was free, whether more solitary, or more frequented. 33 They feared the Lord, & serued their owne gods.They made a formall profession of serving the Lord, and yet continued the worship of their owne false gods. CAP. XVIII. 4 He brake in peeces the brazen Serpent that Moses had made; for unto those dayes the children of Is∣rael did burne incense to it, and he called it Nehush∣tan.HE brake in peeces the brazen serpent that Moses had long since made, and erected, in the wildernesse, as a type of that Christ, by whom his people are healed of the venomous stings of their sinnes; which holy monu∣ment being reserved to this day, was grossely abused by the superstitious Israelites, who burnt incense to it, as a God; this Ezekiah pulled downe, and defaced, term∣ing it, by way of indignation, as it was, a peece of brasse.
CAP. XIX. IT is with us as with a woman in travell,3 The children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth. which hath not strength to bring forth her birth; extreme calamitie hath seized upon us; of which we have no power to de∣liver our selves. I will with a blast of winde send him away,7 Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and hee shall heare a rumour, and shall returne. for I will raise a rumour of Tirhakaes cōming up against his land, which shall fetch him off from you. See Esay 37.30.29 Ye shall eat this yeare, &c. CAP. XX. FOr the greater privacie of his meditation,2 Then he turned his face to the wall. he turned his face from the view of his attendants towards the wall. Shall the shadow in one moment skippe over ten de∣grees,9 Shall the shadow go forward ten degrees? &c. so as the day shall be so much shorter then ordi∣narie? And Isaiah prayed earnestly unto the Lord;11 And Isaiah the Pro∣phet cried unto the Lord, and he brought the sha∣dow backe ten degrees, by which it had gone downe in the diall of A∣haz. and hee recalled the motion of the Sunne ten degrees backe, from the point, where it was; so as the day (which in or∣dinary course consisted of twelve houres) was now pro∣tracted to two and twenty, and that this retrograde motion might be sensibly discerned; hee caused it to be apparently seene, and noted in the famous diall of Jerusalem, which was called by the name of Ahaz. God hath dealt graciously with me herein;19 And he said, Is it not good, if peace and truth be in my daies? For I had well desered a speedy judgement upon my selfe, in my owne person, but loe, the mercy of God hath not proceeded thus against me, but hath, notwithstanding my offence, promised peace, and stabilitie of his wonted grace to me, all my life. CAP. XXI. AS one that affected to be an universall Idolater,3 And worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them. he worshipped all the spirits that rule in the aire, and all the starres that are fixed in heaven. I will take the same course with Jerusalem,13 And I will stretch over Ierusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab. that I have taken with Samaria; and with the wicked house of Ahab, which I have urterly rooted out from before me.
CAP. XXII. 8 I have found the booke of the Law in the house of the Lord.I Have found the very originall record of the booke of the Law, which was left by Moses, and reserved in the Holy of holies by the command of God. 14 Now she dwelt in Ierusalem in the Col∣ledge.Now she dwelt at Jerusalem, in the colledge which is set apart for the use and inhabitation of the Prophets; as being (notwithstanding her sexe) of great eminence in that profession.The bookes of the Chronicles, consisting partly of Gene∣alogies, and partly of the same histories repeated; have afforded no use of this Paraphrase. EZRA. CAP. II. 62 But they were not found; therefore were they as polluted put from the Priesthood.BEcause their Genealogy could not be found, and approved, they were held in the ranke of ordinary Israelites, men not sanctified for the holy office of Priest-hood; and therefore were accordingly put from their ministration. 63 And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a Priest with Vrim and Thummim.And the Governour or Deputie (who was Sheshbaz∣zar) said unto them, by the motion, and information of the Jewes; that they should not be admitted to eate of those holy things (whose use was peculiar to the sacred tribe) untill there should be a decision made of this que∣stion by a Priest of God, who by the Oracle of the brest∣plate should give sentence and determination hereof from God himselfe. CAP. IIII. 4 The people of the land weakned the hands of the people of Iudah.THe people of the land disheartened, and discouraged the people of Judah, from this holy enterprise of building the Temple of God. 10 Whom the great and noble Asnapper brought over.Whom the great and noble Esar-haddon King of As∣syria brought over. See verse 2. CAP. IX. 2 So that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the people of the land.SO as, those who are the chosen, and peculiar people of God, the Jewes, have matched themselves in marri∣ages,
with the heathenish and Idolatrous people of the land. To fasten us,8 And to give us a naile in his holy place. and to give us the hope of a setled being in this holy place, as some naile that is driven up to the head, in some solid table, that cannot be removed. NEHEMIAH. CAP. II. ANd I went out by night,13 And I went out by night by the gate of the valley even before the Dragons well, and to the Dungport, &c. by the gate which opens towards the vally of Jehosaphat, which is to the South (over against that which is called the Serpents well, by reason of the slie creeping of it) and so to the dung-port, towards the East, &c. CAP. V. THere is no difference in nature, in flesh, or blood,5 Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, &c. be∣twixt us, and the rest of Israel, why should we, with∣out any fault of our part, be in worse condition then they? I,14 I and my brethren have not eaten the bread to the Governour. and my familie have not taken that allowance which was appointed for the governour; so as, though I weilded the place, yet I forbore to take the maintenance allotted unto it, both of money, and provision, in favour of the people, and respect to the common good. O God, thou that art wont to accept of,19 Thinke upon mee, my God for good, accord∣ing to all that I have done for this people. & graciously to reward the good desires, & works, that are wrought by thy spirit, in, and by us thy unworthy servants, be thou pleased to receive, and to crowne these my good inten∣tions, and indevours towards this thy people. CAP. VI. I Came to Shemaiah who was under pretence of de∣vout humiliation, and prayer for my safety,10 To Shemaiah, &c. Who was shut up; and he he said, Let us meet toge∣ther in the house of God. shut up in
his house; and he pretending a tender care of my per∣son, advised, that we shut up our selves in the Temple. 11 And I said, Should such a man as I flee?Have I taken upon me to be the governour of this people? and have I in a godly resolution, gone thorough this worke hitherto; and shall I now bewray any base feare, or cowardize? and seeme to set such a price upon my life, as that I would protract it by weake subducing of my selfe, and hiding my head in the Temple? 14 My God, thinke thou upon Tobiah, &c.O my God, I doe not out of any private malice or spleen, or in any respect to the affronts offred to my per∣son, but in a sincere desire of thy glory, beseech thee, to make knowne to the world how ill thou takest these treacherous plots of Tobiah, and his complices, &c. CAP. VII. 65 Now the Tirsha∣tha, &c.See Ezra 2.63. CAP. XI. 11 Seraiah, &c. the son Ahitub the ruler of the house of God.SEraiah the sonne of Ahitub, who was the man that had the charge of the over-sight of the Temple; both for the fabricke of it, and the good order to be kept in it. CAP. XIII. 4 Having the oversight of the chamber of the house of our God.HAving the over-sight of that chamber of store, which pertained to the Temple of the Lord; wherein were laid up all things that were of use for the sacrifices. See verse. 5. 14 Remember me, O God, &c.See chapter 6. verse 14. I Rated them, and reviled them, and dealt so roughly with them,25 And I cursed them, and smote certaine of thē and pluckt off their haire. as that I proceeded to blowes, and to the tearing off their haire from their heads.
ESTHER. CAP. I. THat were men of excellent judgement,13 Wise men which knew the times. and knowledge in all affaires, able to give advice for the fittest times, and manners of perfor∣mance, of all actions. That Vashti be no more addmitted into thy presence as thy wife, but be instantly dismissed.19 That Vashti come no more before King Aha∣suerus. CAP. II. FOr the honour of his marriage he gratified the pro∣vinces, with pardons, and releases of those exactions,18 And he made a re∣lease to the provinces, &c. whereof they complained; and gave bountifull gifts amongst them, &c. Mordecai,19 Then Mordecai sate at the Kings gate. according to the place or office that he had in the Court, sate in the gate of the King. CAP. III. BUt Mordecai,2 But Mordecai bowed not, nor did reverence. whether for that he knew Haman to be of that blood, which by Gods charge were expo∣sed to the hatred, and revenge of Israel, or whether, for that he thought the honour required, was more then was fit for a man, bowed not, nor did that reverence which all others too officiously gave to Haman. They did by superstitious lots,7 In the first moneth, &c. they cast Pur, that is, a lot, &c. seeke to finde out a day, which by their vaine conjectures, might be most likely to be prosperous for this their designe. In the last moneth of the yeare,7 In the moneth of A∣dar. which answers to our February. CAP. IIII. I Will put my life in hazard;16 If I perish, I perish. I cannot venture it upon a better cause; I will doe the act, let God give what issue he pleaseth.
CAP. VI. 13 If he be of the seed of the Iewes before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not pre∣vaile against him.I Have ever observed a speciall hand of God upon that his peculiar people, the Jewes; their friends are wont still to prosper, their enemies goe still to the worst; I feare the nation as much as I hate the man. CAP. VIII. 9 The moneth Sivan.IN that moneth which answereth to our May. CAP. IX. 26 Wherefore they cal∣led those dayes Purim.IN memory of those lotts, which were cast by Haman, for the prosperous successe of his bloody enterprise against the Jewes, they being now happily delivered, call the dayes of their deliverance, by the name at Purim. IOB. CAP. I. 1 There was a man in the land of Vz, whose name was Iob; and that man was perfect and up∣right, and one that feared God and eschewed evill.IN the Land of Vz, (which lieth upon the borders of the Chaldeans, Sabeans and Canaanites,) there was a man of the posterity of Abraham, by Keturah, called Iob; and he was sincere and true-hearted, and one that feared God, and conscionably avoided all knowne, and wilfull wickednesse. 3 This man was the greatest of all the men of the East.He was the greatest and wealthiest of all that posteri∣ty of Abraham, which were dispersed into the Easterne countries. 6 Now there was a day when the sonnes of God came to present them∣selves before the Lord, & Satan came also among them.And (to speake after the manner of men, and to ex∣presse the counsells and proceedings of God by humane allusions) on a time God held his sessions, and therein the Angells comming to present their service unto God
for the behoofe of his children, Satan also thrust him in amongst them into the presence of God. And, (as if there had beene a reall,7 And the Lord said to Satan; whence commest thou? Then Satan answe∣red the Lord, and said, &c. and vocall confe∣rence betwixt God and Satan, concerning the proceed∣ings with Iob; wherein God should inquire of Satan whence he came; and upon his answer, should in an holy kinde of confident insultation, commend Iobs per∣fection to this enemie of mankinde;8 And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou con∣sidered my seruant Iob, &c. which Satan spight∣fully detracts from, and desires to have tried by severall afflictions) so God most holily decreed to give power to Satan for the proofe of Iobs fidelity, and patience;9 Then Satan answe∣red the Lord, Doth Iob feare God for naught? and yeelded to the severall trialls, & calamities, which were brought upon Iob. CAP. II. SAtan,1 Againe there was a day when the sonnes of God came, &c. as not satisfied with that triall which he had taken of Iob, in the losse of his oxen, sheepe, camels,2 And the Lord said unto Satan, whence com∣mest thou? &c. children, receives (as if it had been upon his importunate, and personall suit unto God) commission from God, to take a further triall of him in his person; in his flesh,4 And Satan answered the Lord and said, Skinne for skinne, &c. and bones, with the reservation of his life onely. Doest thou still stand upon the termes of retaining thine integrity with God,5 But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh. since it speeds no better with thee? Ywis, thou hast fared much the better for thy so humble and patient resigning of thy selfe into the hands of God; it were as good for thee,9 Then said his wife unto him; Dost thou still retaine thine integritie? Curse God, and die. to dispatch at once, and be rid out of this misery; curse God; and hee will by his judgement make speedy way for thee out of this lingring torment. They testified their exceeding sorrow for his great affliction, by rending their clothes,12 They rent every one his mantle, and sprink∣led dust upon their heads towards heaven. and strewing dust upon their heads. And they were so affected, and astonished, with his grievous sufferings, that they sate downe silently by him,13 So they sate downe with him upō the ground seven dayes and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him. for the most part of seven daies, and seven nights, a∣bridging themselves of their wonted rest and suste∣nance. CAP. III. AT the last, Iob himselfe began to breake this silence,1 After this Iob opened his mouth, and cursed his day. and in a pitifull complaint of his misery, weakely cursed the day wherein he was borne.
3 Let the day perish wherein I was borne; and the night wherein, &c.Would to God that day had never comne, wherein so wretched a man, as I, was borne; and now that it is unhappily comne, let it be ever noted for direfull and ominous. 5 Let darknesse and the shadow of death staine it; let a cloud dwell upon it; let the blacknesse of the day terrifie it.Let the deepest and horriblest darknesse make it un∣comfortable; let a thicke cloud couer it; and let a con∣tinued darknesse make it terrible to all beholders. 12 Why did the knees prevent me? or why the brests that I should sucke?Why were the knees of the mid-wife ready to hold me, or why were the brests ready to give me sucke? With Kings and great potentates of the earth, who (to raise glory unto themselves) build sumptuous houses in those places,14 With Kings and counsellers of the earth, which built desolate pla∣ces for themselves. which through their desolatenesse and bar∣rennesse seemed uncapable of any cost, or magnificence. 23 Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged in?Why is light cast away upon a man, whom God hath made so miserable, that there is no way to be hoped for, of his evasion from this calamitie; whom God hath shut up in this distresse, without all possibility of escape? 26 I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet, yet trouble came.Indeed when I was at the best, I never made any ac∣count of my life, and welfare, and yet this feare, and moderation of minde doth not now excuse mee from misery. CAP. IIII. 6 Is not this thy feare thy confidence?IS not this thy storming, & fretting at the hand of God, a plaine argument that all thy religion, or pretended feare of God, was onely upon a confidence that he would still blesse and prosper thee? 8 Even as I have seene they that plow iniquity, and sow wickednesse, reape the same.I have well seene, and observed, that men speed accord∣ing to their actions, and reap the fruit of their evill do∣ings, in evill sufferings. 11 The old Lyon peri∣sheth for lacke of prey, & the stout Lyons whelps are scattered abroad.The Tyrans, and oppressors of the earth, which are as strong and roaring Lyons, however they may prevaile with men, yet they are by the just, and powerfull God disappointed of their purposed prey, and distressed with just want. 12 Now a thing was secretly brought unto me, and mine eare received a little thereof.If thou thinke not fit to beleeve me, yet beleeve the revelation, which I lately had concerning thee; for I had a secret intimation from God, wherein it pleased him to make knowne to me, what he judgeth of thine estate. 13 In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deepe sleep falleth upon men,When I was most seriously thinking of thee, in the very deep of the night, at such time other men are over∣taken and possessed with their dead sleepe: 14 Feare came upon me, &c.There came a great feare, & trembling on a sudden, upon me, as an harbinger of that vision which soone fol∣lowed after it.
Then a spirit appeared before me,15 Then a spirit passed before my face; the haire of my flesh stood up. the presence where∣of made my haire to stand upright. It stood still by me, but I could not discerne what manner of visage it had.16 But I could not dis∣cerne the forme thereof. If the best and most glorious creatures be compared with him, alas, what are they? Behold;18 Behold, he put no trust in his servants, and his Angells he charged with folly. he findes not any such stabilitie, or absolutenesse in his very Angels, as that setting aside his owne gratious indowments of them, and his firme decree concerning them, they can stand out in the challenge of any perfection in them∣selves. How much lesse can miserable man stand upon such points with his Maker?19 How much lesse on them that dwell in houses of clay, &c. CAP. V. SInce thou standest upon thine owne justification so much,1 Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints wilt thou turne? I appeale to any of the Saints of God upon earth; let any of them judge of this thy condition; and say, whether there be not reason to charge thee with hy∣pocrisie. They will tell thee, in all experience;2 For wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy (or indignation) slaieth the silly one. that God in his most just judgement, meets with the man (not that is just) but that is wickedly foolish; and that his indignati∣on falls heavie (even unto death) upon him that is grosly ignorant of God, and the things of his peace. I have seene the wicked man seemingly grounded,3 I have seene the foolish taking root; but suddenly I cursed his ha∣bitation. and flourishing in the world, but suddenly I gave him for gone; and in my thoughts made full account of his utter extirpation. Yet this misery, and affliction, that alights upon men,6 Although affliction commeth not out of the dust, neither doth spring out of the ground; comes not either by chance, or of it selfe, or meerly from the second causes, whether of men, or other creatures, but it comes from above, and is inflicted by the divine hand of supreme, and infinite justice. And yet even in the course of nature,7 Yet man is borne un∣to trouble, as the sparkes flie upward. man is borne to trouble, and vexation; and it is no lesse naturall to him to be tried with manifold crosses here, thē for the sparks of fire to flie upwards. They meet with inexpected crosses in their designes,14 They meet with darknesse in the day time, and grope in the noone day as in the darke. and finde contrary events to what they promised to themselves; when they made account of most joy, they meet with heavinesse. He shall save thee from sinking under many troubles,19 Hee shall deliver thee from sixe troubles, yea in seven there shall no evill touch thee. and from the last, and worst, he shall so rescue thee that the evill of it shall not have so much as power to touch thee.
23 Thou shalt bee in league with the stones of of the field.All the creatures, who are ingaged in the quarrells of their maker, shall now stand in good termes with thee, and joyne together to thy use, and service. 24 Thou shalt visit thine habitation, and shalt not sinne (or erre.)Thou shalt oversee thine affaires with good successe, and not erre, or faile in the administration of them. CAP. VI. 3 Therefore my words are swallowed up.SUch is the greatnesse of my affliction that it bereaves me of all words, whereby I should endevour to ex∣presse it. 4 For the arrowes of the Almighty are within me, the poyson whereof drinketh up my spirits.The grievous paines that I feele are as so many poyso∣ned arrowes, shot into my flesh by the almighty hand of God; which have diffused their venome into all the parts of my body and soule, and have even spent and wasted my spirits, with the wofull sense of them. 5 Doth the wild Asse bray when he hath grasse, &c?Can yee imagine that I would cry out so bitterly, if I did not feele a just cause of my complaint; yee see the very dumb creatures do not make their mone, but when they finde a sense of their want. 6 Can that which is unsavorie be eaten with∣out salt, or is there any tast in the white of an egge?Yet this is no small addition to my sorrow, that yee speake unto me words that have no savour of any com∣fort, but rather tend towards my further dejection; sure∣ly, there is no more relish in your speeches, then in the white of an Egge without salt. 7 The things that my soule refused to touch are as my sorrowfull meat.And yet these are they, that I am forced to feed upon, for the present, though they be such, as my soule hath too much cause to abhorre. 10 Let him not spare, for I have not concealed the words of the holy One.Let him doe me this favour to take away my life; let him not spare me to my further vexation; for I have beene faithfull to him, and have not concealed the words of his mouth; but have freely declared them to the world. 18 Is not my helpe in me? and is wisedome driven away from me?How ever ye labour to dishearten me, yet have not I the testimony of a good conscience to beare mee up? is there not true spirituall wisedome yet remaining in me, to know both my God, and my selfe? 15 My brethren have dealt deceitfully with me, as a brooke, &c.My kinsmen that came to comfort me, are like a de∣ceitfull current of land-waters in winter. 16 Which are blackish by reason of the yce, &c.Which in the cold season seem to be strongly covered with a firme yce: 17 What time they waxe warme they vanish.But when the heat of the sunne hath risen upon them, and warmer seasons come in, they vanish away, as if they had never beene. 19 The troupes of Te∣ma looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.The troupes of the Ismaelitish merchants, that trade unto Tema, made account to refresh themselves with
those streames in that dry wildernesse; and so did the merchants that traffique to Sheba. And now finde thēselves miserably disappointed, &c.20 They were confoun∣ded, &c. Right such are ye unto me; for now,21 For now ye are no∣thing, &c. howsoever yee formerly seemed, ye are as nothing; having utterly de∣ceived my hopes of kindnesse and mercy from you. Was I ever beholden to any of you for a favour?22 Did I say, bring un∣to me; or give, &c? did I ever crave of any of you either gift, or rescue? Doe you imagine that I speake nothing but light and idle words, and reprove me thereafter?26 Doe ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as winde? or doe yee account the passionate complaints of a man, thus despe∣rately miserable, to be no other then winde? Bethinke your selves well of the cruell wrong ye have offered me;29 Returne I pray you, let it not be iniquitie; yea, returne againe: my righ∣teousnesse is in it. and goe not on to charge me thus unjust∣ly; my righteousnesse and integrity is, and shall be ap∣parent in this whole carriage of the matter. CAP. VII. AS a servant longeth after the approch of the night;2 As a servant earnest∣ly desireth the shadow. when all things are shaded in a common darknesse. My flesh,5 My flesh is clothed with wormes and with clods of dust. beyond all the ordinary condition of other men, is even in my life time annoied with wormes, that grow in my ulcerous sores; and with cloddy scabbes that fall off from me. Am I as some boistrous, or raging sea,12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me? or some huge unruly whale, that thou shouldst need to set such bounds of restraint upon me, and hold me in from passing out of this my limited misery? So that my soule would rather (if I might have my free choice) wish to have my sorrow ended with a present dispatch, by strangling,15 So that my soule chooseth strangling. then thus to linger in continuall torment. How long shall it be,19 How long wilt thou not depart from me? nor let me alone till I swallow downe my spittle. ere thou wilt release thy heavy hand, that is upon me; and give me but so much respite, as whiles a man may swallow downe his spittle? For now I am dying; and, when that brunt is past,21 For now I sleepe in the dust, and thou shalt seeke me in the morning, but I shall not be. if thou wouldst make further use of me for the manifest∣ing of thy power and my patience, I shall not be at all. CAP. VIII. LOoke how ordinary a thing it is for the rush that grows up without mire;11 Can a rush grow up without mire; can the flagge grow without wa∣ter? or the flagge that sprouts up without water,12 Whiles it is yet in his greennesse and not cut downe, it withereth, &c. to wither and die without any hand cut∣ing it off, so usuall a thing it is with God, to cause the
ungrounded hypocrite to perish,14 And the hope of the hypocrite shall perish. after all the vaine hopes that his profession have raised. 17 His rootes are wrapped about the heape, and seeth the place of stones.His rootes are so vigorous, that by the force of their owne inward moisture they can grow, and spread, not∣withstanding any opposition of rubbish, or stones in their way. 18 If hee destroy him from his place, then it shall denie him; saying, I have not seene thee.And, if his master have a minde to destroy him, and root him up, the very place where he grew shall not be acknowne of him; neither shall there be any mention left that such a one grew there. 21 Till hee fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lipps with rejoycing.Neither therefore will God leave thee in this extre∣mity (if thou be, as thou pretendest, upright with him) nor will desist from mitigating thy affliction, so, as that thou shalt receive full and perfect consolation. CAP. IX. 7 Which commandeth the sunne, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the starres.WHo, when he pleaseth, can command the Sunne not to rise in the morning, that it may make day; and can forbid the starres to appeare in the evening; and restraine the succession of the night. Who ordereth all the set seasons of the yeare, and both maketh,9 Which maketh Arctu∣rus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the South. and disposeth of those remarkable constel∣lations, by which the foure seasons of the yeare are sen∣sibly distinguished & governed; Arcturus which ariseth in autumne, Orion in winter, Pleiades or the seven starrs in the spring; and those other starres which lie hidden in the Southern coasts of heaven, which rise to us in the heate of Summer. 21 Though I were per∣fect, yet wold I not know my soule, I would despise my life.Though I were perfect, yet would I not stand out in the justification of my selfe before his presence; but if he have determined my death, would willingly surren∣der my life into his hands. 22 This is one thing, therefore I said it; he de∣stroyeth the perfect and the wicked.This is one especiall thing that I have noted, and just∣ly stood upon, that the outward proceedings of God are indifferent towards all; he taketh away both the upright, and the wicked man. 24 He coverth the fa∣ces of the Iudges thereof: If not, where and who is he?He bringeth contēpt upon the great rulers of the earth; And if it be not he that doth it, where and who is he be∣sides, that hath this power, and executes these judge∣ments? Let me seeme never so pure in mine owne eyes, yet, O Lord,31 Yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine owne clothes shall abhorre me. the rigour of thy justice shall shew me as foule, as the man that is plunged in some filthy ditch; who is so defiled, that his very clothes make him more loath∣some.
CAP. X. O God, is it any profit, or advantage to thy glory,3 Is it good to thee that thou shouldest op∣presse? that thou dealest so rigorously with me? Hast thou not made me in a wonderfull fashion;10 Hast thou not pou∣red me out as milke, and crudled me like cheefe? whiles of the liquid matter of my marvelous conception thou hast formed this solid substance of my body, by se∣verall degrees of thy powerfull worke. And though thou bestowedst so much cost upon me,13 And these things hast thou hid in thine heart, I know that this is with thee. in my formation, yet thou didst from eternitie retaine in thy selfe this purpose of afflicting me; I know that this was from eternity determined by thee. Thou renewest the convictions of my sinnes,17 Thou renewest thy witnesses against me. which are thy heavy afflictions upon me. Varieties of troubles by thine appointment fight a∣gainst me.17 Changes and warre are against me. CAP. XI. IF he would manifest unto thee the hidden secrets of his wisedome;6 And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisedome, that they are double to that which is. thou shouldst finde that in strict rigor he might justly inflict double upon thee, to that thou now sufferest. If he have purposed to alter the course of all things,10 If he cut off, and shut up, or gather toge∣ther, who shall hinder him? to destroy, or to draw into a narrow compasse those things which are now at a large, & diffused liberty, who can hinder his will, or proceedings? For vaine man will be taking upon him to be wise,12 For vaine man would bee wise; though man be borne like a wild Asses colt. al∣though in deed he is in himselfe no better then brutish. If thou doe but digge a place where to pitch thy Tent,18 Yea thou shalt dig about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in safety. thou shalt dwell there as safely as in a walled city. CAP. XII. I Am as one mocked, and scorned of you my neighbours,4 I am as one mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he answereth him. and yet, how meanly so ever ye please to thinke of me, I am in my faithfull invocations upon God, heard, and gratiously answered by him. He that is neare to his ruine (as I now am) is (unto those that prosper,5 He that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lampe despised in the thought of him that is at ease. and are at ease) like unto a lampe that is neare burning out to the very snuffe; and there∣fore despised by them for the present; how ever it have formerly shined. You have told me of your age and wise experience,12 With the ancient is wisedome.
wherein I detract nothing from you;13 With him is wise∣dome. but what is your wisedome to Gods? He is onely, and all-wise, &c. CAP. XIII. 8 Will ye accept of his person?DOe ye thinke he hath need of an unjust gratification from you; so as that he would have you give him an undue favour in his cause, out of by-respects? 12 Your remembrances are like unto ashes.Whatsoever thing of yours seemes memorable; or what monument so ever ye shall set up to your selves, it shall vanish away, and be scattered like ashes. 14 Wherefore doe I take my flesh in my teeth; and put my life in mine hand.Wherefore doe I give way to these desperate ex∣tremities, as if I would teare my flesh in pieces with my owne teeth? and why doe I cast away all the care of my life, as now past all possibilitie of recovery? 15 Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him; but I will maintaine mine owne wayes before him.Though God should have determined thus to make an end of me, yet I will not cease to cast my selfe upon his hands, and confidently to relie upon his mercy; nei∣ther will I ever be driven from the defence of my ho∣nest sincerity, before him. 19 For now if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost.I am so full of this griefe, that I cannot hold it in; and if I should not thus give it vent, it would presently kill me. 20 Onely doe not two things unto me; then will I not hide my selfe from thee.And if it shall please God to vouchsafe to argue this case with me, I shall desire but these two conditions of him; and then I will not withdraw my selfe for feare, from appearing before him. 21 Withdraw thine hand farre from mee, and let not thy dread make me afraid.One is, that hee would take off from mee this heavie hand of his present affliction, which over∣whelmes me with the violence of it; the other, that he wold give me courage to beare out this my humble con∣testation, so as I may not be cōfounded with the terrors of his glorious majesty. 23 How many are mine iniquities and sins? make thou mee to know my transgressions, and my sinne.O God, I cannot accuse my selfe of wilfull wicked∣nesses against thee; but if there be any secret iniquity that I am not privie unto, doe thou make it knowne to mee, and convince me of it. 25 Wilt thou breake a leafe driven to and fro?Alas, Lord, am I a fit subject for thee to contend with? Oh consider my weaknesse, and my unworthinesse; and enter not into judgement with my vilenesse. 26 Thou makest me to possesse the iniquities of my youth.Thou callest me to a backe-reckoning for the very sinnes of my youth; and doest now cause me to feele the smart of them. 27 Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, & look∣est narrowly upon all my pathes, thou set'st a print upon the heeles of my feet.Thou shuttest me, in, sure and close with these strong afflictions, so as I cannot stir out of thy hand; thou dost strictly observe all my carriage; and, as if thou hadst set
some soft morter, or clay under my feet, to take the im∣pression of my steps, so hast thou curiously noted all my wayes. Alas, Lord,28 And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth. if I looke to the condition of man in ge∣nerall, what a poore vaine thing he is; for, behold, he consumeth away as a thing that is already rotten. CAP. XIIII. AS waters that after some exundation of the sea,11 As the waters faile from the sea; and the flood decaieth, and drieth up. or some great river, are left (upon the refluxe thereof) behind the rest, upon the plaine, which cannot returne, or continue, but drie up and evaporate; such is man. All the daies of my appointed time upon earth,14 All the dayes of my appointed time will I wait till my change come. will I patiently wait for that day, wherein my God shall change this my mortall condition for immortalitie; that so I may be ready for the happy day of my dissolution. Thou dost not let go any of my transgressions,17 My transgressions are sealed up in a bag. but hast made sure worke with them, and hast packed, and sealed them up, that they may be forth-comming for my pre∣sent punishment. Certainely,18 And surely the mountaine falling com∣meth to nought, and the rocke is removed out of his place. if the hugest and strongest mountaines doe moulder away, and come to nothing; if the very hardest rocks be through the powerfull hand of God re∣moved out of their places. If the very stones be worne with water falling upon them;19 The waters weare the stones, thou washest away the things that grow out of the dust of the earth, & thou destroy∣est the hope of man. and deluges beare downe any thing that is fastned in the earth, &c. how much lesse shall weake and fraile man make account to continue upon the face of the earth. When he is now in the agonie of death,21 His sonnes come to honor, and he knoweth it not; and they are brought lower, but he perceiveth it not. striving with those his last pangs, he litle regards what honour his son is newly comne vnto, or what shame he hath incurred. But his flesh upon him is in extremity of paine, which takes all up his thoughts, and senses;22 But his flesh upon him shall have paine, and his soule within him shall mourne. and his soule within him mournes for the present violence of his torment, and for the expectation or feare of the future. CAP. XV. IS it for a wise man (under a pretence of knowledge) to speake vaine words?2 Should a wise man utter vaine knowledge, and fill his belly with the East wind? and to have his heart filled with unprofitable, and harmfull imaginations. I doe now see that thou hast cast off the feare of God;4 Yea, thou castest off feare, & restrainest prayer before God and art not carefull, and devout to call upon God, in thy
tribulation; yea, in all kinde of inferred deniall of the providence of God, thou seemest to discourage others from calling upon him. 15 Behold he putteth no trust in his Saints.See chapter 4. verse 18. 20 The wicked man travaileth with paine all his dayes, and the number of his yeares, are hidden to the oppressour.The great Tyrans of the world, how ever they may seeme to flourish, yet have many secret girds and gripes of conscience; and are continually tormented within themselves; and yet, besides, they little know how long they shall be allowed to live upon earth; God keeps the stint of their life secret from them. 26 He runneth upon him even on his necke upon the thicke bosses of his buckler.He maketh violent and presumptuous opposition to God, as if he could graple with, and overcome the Al∣mighty; and fearlesly runnes upon the most eminent judgements of God. Because he lives at ease, and prospers in all his designes, so as through too much pampering his cheekes are cove∣red with fatnesse.27 Because he cove∣reth his face with fatnesse. 28 And he dwelleth in desolate cities, &c.And he is able, through his power, to raise sumptuous buildings in those places, which others have forsaken as barren and inhabitable. 29 He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue; neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.Yet (for all this) though he can for a glory doe these great matters, this wealth of his shall not continue long; neither shall this his flourishing estate hold any long while upon the earth. 30 He shall not depart out of darknesse; the flame shall drie up his branches, and by the breath of his mouth shall he goe away.He shall irrecoverably lie under those sad, and reme∣dilesse calamities, which are cast upon him; and if any hopes of comfort doe beginne to looke forth, God shall presently scorch and defeat them by the flames of his dis∣pleasure; and shall utterly confound him by his just judg∣ments. 31 Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity.Let not the man therefore that hath beene heretofore carried away with the vaine confidence in these earthly things, suffer himselfe to be so deceived any more. 32 It shall be accom∣plished before his time; and his branch shall not be greene.That recompence of his shall be so accomplished, that he shall be cut off before his naturall period; and his in∣devours shall be blasted at their first puting forth, neither shall ever come to any perfection. 33 He shall shake off his unripe grapes as the vine, and shall cost off his flowre as the Olive.He shall be as a Vine whose grape is perished in the very budde; and as an Olive whose flowre is cast off at the first putting forth; so as his hopes shall never attaine to any maturity. 35 Their belly prepa∣reth deceit.Their secret thoughts doe but, in the event, deceive themselves.
CAP. XVI. WHen wilt thou have made an end of these vaine speeches?2 Shall vaine words have an end? or what em∣boldeneth thee that thou thus answerest? Or what hath moved thee to make so uncharitable a replie to my words? But now, God hath loded me with sorrow,7 But now hee hath made me weary: thou hast made desolate all my company. till I am even weary of bearing it; yea thou, O Lord, hast put a distraction betwixt my family, my friends, and my selfe; and hast made us all miserable. The wrinkles that are suddenly growne in my face are a sufficient witnesse of my extreme suffering.8 Thou hast filled me with wrinkles, which is a witnesse against me. Mine enemie who beareth deadly hatred against me,9 He teareth me with his teeth who hateth me, &c. hath now his full scope of malice upon me; and in his cruelty insulteth ouer me at pleasure. His wrath reacheth to my inmost parts;13 Hee cleaveth my reines asunder, he poureth out my gall upon the ground. even to my reines and gall; and leaveth no part of me free from his tormenting hand. I have laid downe all mine honor in the dust;15 And defiled my horne in the dust. and have justly humbled my selfe (in the very height of my glory) by casting dust and ashes upon my forelorne head. CAP. XVII. IS not their unjust provocation continually in mine eye;2 Doth not mine eye continue in their pro∣vocation? So as I cannot but be a wofull witnesse of their injurie? I doe much desire to have my case throughly tried;3 Lay downe now, put me in surety with me? who is he that will strike hands with me? let me see then, who will give security to maintaine the suit with me, who will agree to joine issue with me upon this point. He that flatters his friend shall finde God plaguing him both in himselfe, and in his seed after him.5 He that speaketh flat∣tery to his friends, even the eyes of his children shall faile. But for me, this is not my case; I am scorned rather; it hath pleased God to give me over to so great misery,6 He hath made me also a byword of the people, & before them I was a ta∣bret. that I am becomne a by-word to the world; and am the matter of minstralsie, and sport to mine enemies. My great afflictions change my night into day; causing me to passe over that time of darknesse without any rest,12 They change the night into the day; the light is short because of darknesse. so as my thoughts are no lesse busie, then in the day time; and so great is the darknesse of my misery, that it eclip∣seth my day, and makes it either short, or none. Tell not me of any restauration of my selfe,13 If I wait, the grave is my house, &c. or of my estate; all that I can wait for, is the grave; that shall (I hope) receive and shelter me. I am even already entring into my grave;14 I have said unto cor∣ruption, Thou art my fa∣ther: and to the wormes; Thou art my sister and my mother. the corrup∣tion
whereof hath already seized upon me; and I have yeelded my selfe up unto it, and am as it were incorpo∣rated in it. 16 They shall goe downe to the barres of the pit, when our rest to∣gether is in the dust.Those hopes that you speake of, shall goe downe with me to the bottome of the grave, and shall rest with me together in the dust. CAP. XVIII. 4 He teareth himselfe in his anger; shall the earth be forsaken for thee; and shall the rocke be remo∣ved out of his place?HEare now, thou that talkest of tearing thy flesh with thy teeth for indignation, and sorrow; what, doest thou thinke that thy clamour and complaint can prevaile to alter Gods just administration; so as the earth should be forsaken because thou speedest ill; and the rockes re∣moved, because thy miserie continues? 8 He is cast into a net by his owne feet.He shall by his owne plots, and devices, run himselfe into inextricable perplexities and miseries. 13 The first borne of death shall devoure all his strength.The most cruell and painfull death shall make an end of all his power and glory. 14 And it shall bring him to the King of ter∣rors.His confidence shall at the last lead him into the ex∣tremest of all terrors, that can be conceived. Yea, this terror shall dwell, and continue in his taber∣nacle,15 It shall dwell in his Tabernacle, because it is none of his; brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation. which howsoever he possesseth, yet his conscience tells him is not his owne, since he hath got it by extorti∣on, and violence; and God shall raine downe brimstone upon it, as he did upon Sodom. He shall be like unto a withered tree, whose rootes; when they are once dried up below,16 His rootes shall be dried up beneath, and a∣bove shall his branches be cut off. the branches are presently cut downe for fire-wood. Posteritie shall be astonished to heare of the severe judgment of God executed upon him;20 They that come after him shall be astonied at his day, as those that went before were affrigh∣ted. & those that lived in the same age with him, were affrighted at the sight of that vengeance which was inflicted upon him. CAP. XIX. 3 These ten times have ye reproched me.WEe have had ten severall interlocutions, where∣in you have most uncharitably and cruelly repro∣ched me, ye have cast many and frequent aspersions of hypocrisie and wickednesse upon mine innocence. 6 Know now that God hath overthrowne me.If I be (as I am) most miserable: alas you should have considered that it is Gods hand that hath cast me down, which is both holy, and irresistible. 15 My maides count me for a stranger.My very maid-servants looke strangely, and overlie upon me, as if I were not their master; the very meanest
of my familie slight and neglect me. My wife,17 My breath is strange to my wife; though I en∣treated her for the chil∣drens sake of my owne body. as she was ready to adde unto my triall by her ill counsell, so now, she keeps aloofe from me, and denies me the comfort and aid of her tendance in this extremitie, though I intreated, and importuned her, even by the remembrance of those children which she had borne from my loynes, which were the deare pledges of our conjugall love. I have nothing that I can call skinne, about me,20 And I am escaped with the skinne of my teeth. but onely that, which is of my gummes; for the rest, the flesh hath shrunke from the skinne; and the skin is gone into corruption. If it hath pleased God to afflict me,22 Why doe ye perse∣cute me as God? will yee afflict me too? He knoweth upon what holy and just reasons he proceedeth with his creatures, it is not for you to arro∣gate this to your selves; let it be enough therefore that Gods hand is upon me, though yours be not. I am now to speake a sentence so memorable,23 Oh that my words were now written; Oh that they were printed in a booke, &c. that I could desire it should bee recorded to all posterity for ever. How ever I am judged by you; yet this is my comfort, that I know I have a judge,25 For I know that my Redeemer liveth; and that he shall stand at the latter day, upon the earth. and gracious Redeemer to come; who lives eternally, when ye shall be gone to dust, and shall, one day, come downe to judge the quicke and the dead; & shall in that last day of our generall account, present himselfe here upon earth to the eyes of all flesh. And though this skinne, and this body of mine,26 And though after my skinne wormes de∣stroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. shall now soone goe to corruption, and dust; yet in this very flesh of mine, raised up glorious by his divine power, I shall see my God and Saviour. I shall see him with these mine owne eyes,27 Whom I shall see my selfe, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another. and not with any others for me; I shall see & receive him as my just and gracious deliverer; both from those powers of death, and all these false calumniations which yee now cast upon me. But yee should rather say; Alas,28 But ye should say; Why persecute wee him; seeing the root of the matter is found in me? why doe we perse∣cute this distressed man any more? Seeing we find (if we looke to the very roote and bottome of this our quarrell) that he is upright, and innocent of those things where∣of we have accused him. CAP. XX. HIs children shall be glad to make restitution to the poore;10 His children shall seeke to please the poore, and his hands shall restore their goods. and to stop their clamorous mouthes with a late satisfaction; yea perhaps himselfe with his owne
hands shall give backe his extorted goods. 11 His bones are full of the sinnes of his youth.He shall, in his old decrepit age, feele the smart of the sinnes of his lawlesse youth; they shall sticke by him when he hath forgotten them, &c. 14 Yet his meat in his bowells is turned; it is the gall of aspes within him.Howsoever he have taken great pleasure in his sinnes, and, in the very act of them they have gone down sweet, yet in the end he shall finde them painfull, yea as deadly, as the venom of aspes. 17 He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brookes of hony and but∣ter.Howsoever he hath promised himselfe great content∣ment, and felicity in his lawlesse courses, yet, hee shall finde himselfe utterly disappointed, his hopes shall faile him, and leave him quite destitute of all comforts. 21 There shall none of his meat be left, therefore shall no man looke for his goods.He shall not have so much as meat left to his mouth, much lesse shall there be ought for other men to hope for, after him. 22 Every hand of the wicked (or, troublesome) shall come upon him.Every hand of those whom he hath cruelly spoyled, shall be upon him; each of them shall vexe him, whether with suites, or violence, to recover his owne. 24 He shall flee from the yron weapon, and the bow of steele shall strike him thoroughWhen he desires and hopes to avoid a lesser danger, he shall fall into a greater. A fire, not kindled by man, but sent downe from hea∣ven in the just judgement of God,26 A fire unblowne shall consume him. shall consume him, as thou, O Iob, hast not long since had lamentable proofe. CAP. XXI. 4 Is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled?IF I had onely to doe with man, in this my misery, and had no other to make my complaint unto, I had just reason to be utterly dejected; but now, I have a God to make my moane unto. 6 Even when I remem∣ber, I am afraid, and trem∣bling taketh hold of my flesh.When I bethinke my selfe of my owne grievous cala∣mity, and (on the contrary side) of the great, and appa∣rent prosperity of wicked men, I am so vexed, and dis∣quieted with the consideration hereof, that my very flesh trembleth. 16 Lo, their good is not in their hand; the counsell of the wicked is farre from me.Yet, for all that, the prosperity of the wicked is not in their owne hands, to continue at pleasure; no they are in the power of that just God, who can crush them when he thinkes good; and therefore, farre be it from me, not∣withstanding all their outward peace and glory, to yeeld unto the wayes of wickednesse. 19 God layeth up his iniquitie for his children.God reserveth the outward punishment of his iniqui∣tie, to be (besides his owne person) inflicted upon his children after him. 24 His brests (or, pailes) are full of milke; and his bones are moistened with marrow.The udders of his cattle, and his pailes, are full of milke; and his bones are strong, and his flesh firme and
succulent; so as, both his outward estate and his body doe exceedingly prosper and flourish. Ye say in a secret scorne;28 For ye say, Where is the house of the Prince? and where are the dwel∣ling places of the wicked? Where is now the house of this great man that hath borne himselfe as a Prince a∣mongst his neighbours; or what is becomne of this wic∣ked mans habitation? He pretended godlinesse, but this very disolation shewes what he was. He is so great and imperious,31 Who shall declare his way to his face, or who shall repay him what he hath done? that no man dares re∣prove him for his faults; or offer to punish him for his injuries done. He shall be glad to rest in the grave:33 The clods of the vallie shall be sweet unto him; and every man shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him. And by the law of nature every man shall follow after him, in his owne time, to that common receptacle of all flesh; as there are also innumerable gone thither before him. CAP. XXII. THou, through thy covetousnesse and pride,8 The mighty man hee had the earth. didst en∣grosse the earth to thy selfe. Affliction like a violent streame beares thee over,11 Abundance of wa∣ter covers thee. and covers thee, as drowning in the bottome of it. Hast thou not observed the course that God hath of old wont to take with the wicked?15 Hast thou not mar∣ked the old way which wicked men have troden? This is the lot of wicked men, whereas wee that are righteous and godly speede otherwise;20 Whereas our sub∣stance it not cut downe; but the remnant of them the fire consumeth. our substance is both continued, and multiplied; but as for them, that which remaines of their riches, together with their per∣sons, shall be consumed with the fire of Gods displea∣sure. When thou seest good men cast downe,29 When men are cast downe, then shalt thou say, There is a lifting up; and he shall save the hum∣ble person. then shalt thou, by the strength of thy faith, say; there shall be an xealtation for these men; and God will finde a time to deliver, and honor the humble person. He shall deliver a whole Iland for the sake of one in∣nocent and righteous man, and if thou wert he,30 He shall deliver the Iland of the innocent; and it is delivered by the purenesse of thine hands. the pure∣nesse of thy hands should obtaine this favour from him, that for his respect to thee he would spare many. CAP. XXIII. EVen still I have every day more cause then other,2 Even to day is my cōplaint bitter; my stroke is heauier then my groan∣ing. to complaine of my great affliction; and the stroke that I feele from God, is more heavie then my groanings can expresse. Oh that I knew where,3 Oh that I know where I might finde him? That I might come even to his seat. and how I might meet with
God, that I might lay open my estate before him, and in an humble manner argue the case of my suffering, with him. 6 Will he plead against me with his great power? No, but he would put strength in me.I know he is gratious, he would not stand either upon his rigour, or his power with me; but would mercifully sustaine me, and give me courage, and abilitie to stand out in the maintenance of my sincerity before him. 7 There the righteus might dispute with him; so should I be delivered for ever from my Iudge.Upon these termes, a man of upright heart might hold a lowly contestation with him; which once done, being absolved by his most just sentence, I should be de∣livered for ever, from the slanders and condemnations of my unjust censurers. 8 Behold I goe forward, but he is not there; & back¦ward, but I cannot per∣ceive him.But, alas, I know not how to come to have speech with the Almightie; though he bee every where, yet he doth not in any one place or way manifest himselfe so, as to admit any plea of mine; in vaine therefore shall I hope to argue my cause with him.9 On the left hand, &c. 13 But he is in one minde, and who can turne him?But, Oh vaine man that I am, how should I hope to alter the determinations of that wise and powerfull God; what he hath decreed, must be; and who can change his purposes? 14 And many such things are with him.Many such things (as these his proceedings with me) doth he in his great and unlimited power and unsearch∣able wisedome bring to passe; whereof we can give no reason or judgement. 17 Because I was not cut off before the darknes, neither hath he covered the darknesse from my face.I am astonished at the hand of the Almighty, for that I am still upheld by his power in these extremities, and not cut off by death before this darknesse of sorrow and misery over-whelmed me; neither yet hath he restrained these intolerable evills from seizing upon mee; but hath caused me to feele them, and not to be swallowed up by them. CAP. XXIIII. 1 Why (seeing the times are not hidden from the Almighty) doe they that know him not, see his dayes.IT is good reason we should attribute so much to the most wise providence of the Almighty, that he knowes and hath determined of the fittest times for his owne actiōs; but why will men be so presumptuous, as (though they know him not, yet) to foresee, and foreset the daies and times for his judgements, 2 Some remove the land markes, they violent∣ly take away flockes, &c.There are wicked men that give themselves to all vi∣olent and licentious outrages, of removing of land-markes, driving away the flockes and heards of their neighbours. 5 Behold as wild Asses in the desert, goe they forth to their worke.They runne as eagerly after their spoile and rapine, as
the wilde Asse in the desert, runnes after his prey. They reape every one his share of corne in another mans field;6 They reape every one his corne in the field; and they gather the vintage of the wicked. and gather that vintage which their cruell oppression hath forced to be theirs. So as their naked bodies are exposed to the showers that fall from the mountaines;8 They are wet with the showers of the moun∣taines, and embrace the rocke for want of a shel∣ter. & are faine to seek shelter of the rocke, to keepe them from the violence of the weather. The poore and painfull man toiles hard for these op∣pressors, to scruze out their Oyle and wine within their owne walls, and is forced to thirst the while;11 Which make oyle within their walls, and tread their winepresses, yet suffer thirst. being by their cruelty abridged of his wages, and livelode; and not suffered so much as to tast of his owne labours. They are of those that hate the light,13 They are of those that rebell against the light. which reproves their wicked deeds, and layes them open to the view of the world. Thus doth the evill man;18 He is swift as the waters, their portion is cursed upon earth; he be∣holdeth not the way of the vineyards. but shall he prosper in his mischeife? No, God shall soone be avenged of him; hee shal passe away swiftly, even as an headdy current of wa∣ters; and, whiles he continues here, he injoyes that which he hath, with a curse; his lo shall be barrennesse, so as he shall not so much as looke towards the way of the vineyards; he shall have no hope of receiving the benefit of his seasonable culture of the earth. As the moisture of the snow (which is more light and aery) is dried up by the heate of the Sun-beames,19 Drought and heate consume the snow wa∣ters; so doth the grave those which have sinned. so are the sinners suddenly consumed by that death, and de∣struction which God sends upon them. Though this wicked man seeme to passe his time in much securitie, and confidence;23 Though it be given him to be in safety, wher∣on he resteth; yet his eyes are upon their waies. yet the eyes of God are so upon his waies; as that he observes him to take his advantages against him; and to fit him with judgements. CAP. XXV. HE is an awfull God that hath the absolute dominion over all the world; he ordereth the very heavens, so,2 Dominion and feare are with him, he maketh peace in his high places. that there is a perfect harmony in all the (seemingly con∣trary) motions thereof; and contriveth all things so, that they agree to glorifie him. How innumerable troupes of glorious Angells hath he there above,3 Is there any number of their armies? and upon whom doth not his light arise. & how infinite armies of his creatures to execute his will upon all occasions? and how gratious is he in sending forth his light into all the corners of the earth; and how wise in searching all the secrets of humane actions and counsells?
CAP. XXVI. 2 How hast thou hel∣ped him that is without power? &c.OH what goodly help hast thou given to the Almigh∣ty! Ywis be had not had power enough to right himselfe without thee; foolish man, that pleadest for God, as if he had need of thy patronage. 5 Dead things are for∣med from under the wa∣ters and the inhabitants thereof.What doest thou tell me of a providence ordering those heavenly bodies, and motions? I know all this and more; and tell thee againe, that the same providence reacheth to all those obscure creatures, which are for∣med under the waters, and under the earth; so as they have not their being and continuance, but from him. 6 Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering.Yea, the very lowest part of the earth lies naked and open to his all-seeing eyes; hee knowes the places and wayes, and meanes of the dissolution of all the creatures which he hath made. 7 He stretcheth out the North over the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing.He hath spread out this glorious hemisphere of the heavens upon the void and empty space of the light, and thinne ayre; and hangeth the great ball of the earth in the midst of heaven, without any prop or foundation. 9 He holdeth backe the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloud upon it.He hideth the face of heaven (which is his throne) from our sight; by spreading his thicke clouds betwixt it, and us. The high mountaines (upon whom the heaven seemes to rest,11 The pillers of the heaven tremble, and are astonished at his reproofe as so many pillars) tremble and shake with his earthquakes. His hand hath made the huge and mighty Whale in the waters,13 His hand hath for∣med the crooked serpent. and the monstrous and dreadfull serpent on the land. CAP. XXVII. AS God liveth who hath not yet given any outward and sensible signification that he hath taken notice of my cause,2 As God liveth who hath taken away my judg∣ment; who hath vexed my soule. to cleare and avenge me; but contrarily hath laid many sore afflictions upon me. CAP. XXVIII. HOw ever you have pleased to passe your censure concerning the proceedings of God,1 Surely there is a veine for silver, & a place for gold, where they fine it. certainly his wayes, and his wisedome are unsearchable; there is a certaine and determinate place for these earthly trea∣sures, where they may be found out, there is a veyne for silver, and a place for gold.
And so it is with the courser mettalls:2 Iron is taken out of the earth, and brasse is molten out of the stone. Iron is found in the earth; and brasse is molten out of the oare, which is the rude matter of it. He setteth a stint,3 He setteth an end to darknesse, and searcheth out all perfection; the stones of darknesse, and shadow of death. or limit to the most obscure places of the earth; and by the industry of man findes them out; and workes out of them the purity and perfection of the best metals and Mines; and fetcheth thence those pre∣cious or usefull stones, which lay hid in darknesse, and utter obscurity. He disposeth of the waters also at his pleasure;4 The flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; even the waters forgotten of the foot; they are dried up; they are gone away from men. so as one while the flood breaketh out by a sudden inundati∣on; and, soone after, is so dried up, that the passengers foot takes not notice that ever any water was there. As for the earth it yeelds bread corne in the surface of it,5 As for the earth, out of it commeth bread, and under it, is turned up fire. and the bowells of it yeeld combustible matter for the use of man. Among the quarries of the earth are Sapphires and other precious stones found, and digged up,6 The stones of it are the places of Sapphires, & it hath dust of gold. and the oare of gold is also had amongst the dust, and mold thereof. There are indeed secret places of the earth,7 There is a path which no fowle knoweth, &c. which never any creature came to the sight of, &c. But in all these regions of the clouds, of the earth,12 But where shall wisedome be found, &c? of the waters, where shall wisdome be found? Neither is it to be found amongst living men;13 Neither is it found in the land of the living. since it is not an earthly, but an heavenly thing. However the wind is the most light of all creatures,25 To make weights for the windes. and uncapable of any ponderation, yet he who made it can make weights wherein to poyse it. CAP. XXIX. VVHen the light of his countenance shone graci∣ously upon me;3 When his candle shined upon my head, &c. and gave me comfort and suc∣cesse in all my actions. When I had such abundance of all these outward things,6 When I washed my steps with butter. that in the plenty of my milke I might have wash∣ed and suppled my feet with butter, &c. Then did I please my selfe in the confidence of my continuing happinesse; and durst boldly resolve,18 Then I said; I shall die in my nest. I shall die in peace, and fulnesse of dayes in my owne house. If by my smiles I gave intimation that I gave not as∣sent to any report,24 If I laughed on thē they beleeved it not, and the light of my coun∣tenance they did not cast downe. it was presently distrusted by the hea∣rers, or, if I sported with them, they had such an awfull opinion of my gravitie, that they did not thinke me to
be in jest; neither did they forbeare to give me all due reverence, and to hold their great respects to me. CAP. XXX. 1 Whose fathers I would have disdained to set with the dogges of my flocke.WHose fathers I would have disdained to have made the keepers of those dogges, which tended upon my flockes. 2 Whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old age was perished?For what use could I have made of them, which had wholly lost their time, and lived idly and unprofitably? Because God hath bereaved me of that power and honor,11 Because hee hath loosed my cord and affli∣cted me, they have also let loose the bridle before me. which I formerly injoyed, therefore they let loose the reines of their obedience and respects to me. By the running of my sores my garment is all stained with purulent matter, and requires a frequent change: yea,18 By the great force of my disease, is my gar∣ment changed; it bindeth me about as the collar of my coat. it cleaveth so close unto my bodie, by the meanes of this loathsome moisture, as the collar of my coat is straitened to my necke. Thou tossest me up with thy judgements, as dust or chaffe is blowne up with the wind.22 Thou liftest me up to the winde, &c. My paine forceth me to so lamentable cryes, and eju∣lations,29 I am a brother of Dragons, and a compani∣on to Owles. that I might seeme fit to be consorted with Dragons, and Owles, in some horrible desert, whose howlings and shriekings are wont to bee held most mournfull and ominous. CAP. XXXI. 1 I made a covenant, &c.2 For what portion of God is there from above? &c.FOr if I had suffered my eyes and my heart to rove af∣ter these unlawfull lusts,10 Then let my wife grinde unto another, &c. what could I have looked for at the hand of God, but due vengeance? 11 Yea, it is an iniqui∣ty to be punished by the Iudges.Then let my wife become false to my bed, and repay my sinne with the like adultery; let me be plagued (as I deserve) in my owne kinde. 21 If I have lift up my hand against the fa∣therlesse when I saw my help in the gate.This had beene a capitall offence, worthy to be pu∣nished by the sword of authority. If I have used my power injuriously against the father∣lesse,26 If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or, the moone walking in bright∣nesse. when I saw that my sentence would have beene se∣conded, and would have carried it, upon the bench. If when I have beheld thy glorious creatures, the Sun and the Moone;27 And my heart hath beene secretly intised, or my mouth hath kissed my hand. I have given way to any Idolatrous con∣ceits; and have ascribed divine honour unto them, as my Heathen neighbours do; this were indeed an heinous and capitall wickednesse.28 This also were an iniquitie, &c.
If the people of my house were not so taken up with the offices, & imployments of my hospitality to others,31 If the men of my Tabernacle said not, Oh that wee had of his flesh; we cannot be satisfied. that they had no leasure to feed themselves, and there∣fore complained for want of that flesh, which they dres∣sed for others. If I have made shifts and excuses to hide or diminish my offence, as the manner of men is,33 If I have covered my transgressions as Adam. who doe herein imitate our first father Adam, and from him have deri∣ved this corruption. Did I forbeare to reprove, or oppose any sinne,34 Did I feare a great multitude, or did the contempt of families ter∣rifie me? because it was backed by a multitude of offenders; or if I suffered my selfe to be dishartened by the feare of that contempt, which might fall upon me from large combinations and families. Oh,35 Oh that one would heare me! Behold my de∣sire is that the Almighty would answere me, and that mine adversary had written a booke. that I had a faire and equall hearing in this cause of mine; yea, I could presume so farre as to wish that the Almighty himselfe would be pleased to undertake this businesse; and that my triall might be the more certaine, Oh that my adversaries would put in their bill of com∣plaint in writing against me. Surely I would much rejoyce,36 Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and binde it, as a crowne, to mee. and triumph in that in∣ditement; and would account it the greatest honour that could be done me. I would helpe such a one with such informations a∣gainst my selfe, as he should never be able to finde out;37 I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a Prince would I goe neare unto him. and when I have done, I would encounter him boldly, and courageously, as some warlike Prince would come into the field against a weake enemie. CAP. XXXII. I Said, as in good manners I ought;7 I said, dayes should speake: and multitude of yeares should teach wise∣dome. Those that are an∣cient & full of dayes should speake; and those that had many yeares experience should be most able to teach wisedome to their yonger. But I see, all is not in age; there is a spirit of God which,8 But there is a spirit in man. breathing where it listeth, maketh a difference in men. Doe not thinke,13 Lest ye should say, we have found out wise∣dome. God thrusteth him downe, not man. or say that you have by your great wisedome convinced Iob, upon this ground, that God hath afflicted him, not man; and God being just puni∣shes none but a sinner; therefore Iob is an hypocrite; I shall goe another way to worke with him. I dare not sooth up and flatter any man in a false con∣ceit; if I should so doe,22 For I know not to give flattering titles, in so doing my Maker would soone take me away. I know God would be sure to be speedily avenged of me.
CAP. XXXIII. 14 For God speaketh once, yea twice, but man perceiveth it not.MAny times, and divers wayes doth God solicit, and admonish men, yet such is the dulnesse, and security of their hearts; that they either doe not, or will not heare and understand him. 16 Then hee openeth the eares of men, and sea∣leth their instructions.Then and by these meanes he causeth men to heare, and imprinteth in their heart his instructions. That he may prevaile with man to withdraw him from those evill courses,17 That he may with∣draw man from his pur∣pose, and hide pride from man. and resolutions which he hath undertaken, and that he may convince him of his proud and insolent conceits, which he hath harboured in him∣selfe. 23 If there be a messen∣ger with him, an inter∣preter one among a thousand, to shew unto man his uprightnes.When a man is thus soundly humbled, if a faithfull messenger, and minister of God (which is not easie and common to be found) shall shew that man his true e∣state, both in the truth of his repentance, and in the safe∣ty of his faithfull dependence upon his All-sufficient Redeemer. 24 Then he is gratious unto him, and saith, Deli∣ver him frō going downe to the pit, I have found a ransome.Then will God be gratious to that man, and will ad∣minister seasonable comforts to his soule; and say; This man shall be delivered from hell; I have found perfect and absolute atonement and ransome for him, in the blood of that Saviour in whom he hath beleeved. CAP. XXXIIII. 6 Should I lie against my right; my wound is incurable without my transgression.SHould I belie my selfe in my owne cause, so as to say, I have received hard measure from God, without any desert of mine; I am plagued, and have not offended. 7 What man is like Iob, who drinketh up scorne like water?There is no man that pretends to be so wise and holy as Iob, that would thus expose himselfe to the scorne of the world in his insolent chalenges; or would thus turne off the grave admonitions of his friends with scorne, and contempt. 14 If he set his heart upon man, if he gather un∣to himselfe his spirit, and his breath.If God would resolve to deale with man according to his absolute power; if he should call backe that life and soule which he hath given him. 15 All flesh shall perish.There were no abiding; all flesh should perish at once. 17 Shall he that hateth right, govern? &c.Is it fit for thee who fondly censurest the just proceed∣ings of God, to over-rule thy maker? 20 In a moment shall they die, and the people shall be troubled at mid∣night.He shall fetch away the great commanders of the earth, in a time when it is least expected; even in the deepest of security shall he cause astonishment and tu∣mult
in the death of the mighty ones. That man should hereupon have any just cause of con∣testation with God; or any ground of cavill against him.23 That he should en∣ter into judgement with God. Yea, not onely doth God execute his judgements up∣on the vulgar people onely,30 That the hypocrite reigne not, lest the people be insnared. but on the great Potentates of the earth; so as he strikes wicked tyrans with his plagues, lest the people should be too much oppressed with their injustice. Doest thou thinke it meet that God should proceed in his judgements according to thy conceits;33 Should it be accord∣ing to thy minde? he will recompence it, whether thou refuse, or whether thou chuse, and not I. if thou and I should determine what were fit for him to doe; he will take what course he thinkes best; whether thou or I like it, or dislike it. CAP. XXXV. IF thou sinnest, what dost thou hurt him? Is his holines,6 If thou sinnest, what dost thou against him; or if thy transgressions bee multiplied what dost thou unto him? justice, power ever the lesse, because thou hast trans∣gressed; is ought diminished from his essence by thine offence? Many make formall flourishes, but none doth hearti∣ly acknowledge the powerfull and just hand of that God, who gives due & seasonable comfort to the soule,10 But none saith, Where is God my maker, who giveth songs in the night? in the deepest and darkest night of our sorrowes. Therefore they crie out,12 Therefore they cry (but none heareth them) because of the pride of evill men. and complaine of the pride and oppressions of wicked men, but God giveth them not answer, by reason of their impenitence and unbe∣leefe. Although thou saiest that God gives thee no assu∣rance of his presence by any sensible demonstration,14 Although thou say∣est thou shalt not see him, yet judgement is before him, therefore trust thou in him. yet certainly he will be sure to execute true (though secret) judgement in all the cases of men; & therefore doe thou acknowledge him, and trust in him. But now,15 But now because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger: yet he know∣eth it not in great extre∣mitie. because thou dost not approve thy selfe to him as thou oughtest, therefore he hath afflicted thee in his anger: Yet Iob doth not consider that his suffering is not in such extremity as his sinne hath deserved. CAP. XXXVI. WHen hee afflicteth them,13 They crie not when he bindeth them. they doe not humble themselves under the hand of God, and repent them of their sinnes. Doe not thou wish for night,20 Desire not the night when people are cut off in their place. as thinking that that si∣lent and quiet time might give thee ease from thy
thoughts; whiles thou hast to doe with a God that can in an instant cut off whole nations, much more thee, who art one weake, and fraile man. 21 For this hast thou rather chosen then affli∣ction.Thou hast rather chosen to taxe the proceedings of God in thy weake impatience, then meekely to suffer his affliction. Behold, when the heaven is overcast with cloudes, he sendeth forth his bright beames,30 Behold, he spread∣eth his light upon it, and covereth the bottome of the sea. and inlightneth, and cheareth the face thereof; and againe sendeth such gloo∣my and darke clouds, as that the blacknesse and obscuri∣ty thereof shadeth even to the bottome of the sea. 33 The noise thereof sheweth concerning it, the cattel also concerning the vapour.The noise of thunder which is in the cloud, sheweth and presageth the raine, which will poure downe from it: and the very cattle have a kinde of notice, and give a certaine intimation (by signes and tokens) of the falling of that moist vapour. CAP. XXXVII. 2 Heare attentively the noise of his voice.WHiles we are now speaking, heare how dreadfully the noise of his thunder sounds in the clouds, &c. 2 Out of the South commeth the whirlwind; and cold out of the North.Out of those hidden chambers of his, which are the southerne coasts, the strong winds arise; and the cold windes come from the North. 11 By watering hee wearieth the thick cloud.He spends out all the moisture of the thicke cloud in watering the earth. 13 He causeth them to come, whether for corre∣ction, or for his land, or for mercy.He sendeth abundance of raine, whether for the pu∣nishment of men, or for the fruitening of the earth, or for the refreshing of men. 17 How thy garments are warme, when he qui∣eteth the earth by the South winde.How it comes about that the ayre is so hote as that thou canst not abide thy clothes on; when in a calme season the South Sunne shines upon thee; and the warme Southerne windes blow in thy face. 18 Which is strong, and as a molten looking-glasse.Which seemes unto us so firme and solid, as if it were a looking glasse of some strong polished metall. 19 We cannot order our speach by reason of darknesse.We know not how to order, or dispose our speeches to him, by reason of that grosse darkenesse of ignorance wherewith we are inwrapped. 20 If a man speake, surely hee shall be swal∣lowed up.If a man will bee opposing him in his speech; and questioning his justice, surely he shall be confounded. If men be not able with their weake eyes to behold the brightnesse of the Sunne,21 And now men see not the bright light which is in the cloudes, but the winde passeth and cleans∣eth them. which shineth in the light∣some clouds, when the winde passeth thorough, and dis∣perseth them. And when the ayre is cleared by the North winds, how shall they be able to looke God in the face,22 Faire weather com∣meth out of the North; with God is terrible Ma∣jesty. and to
hold contestation with him; whose majesty is terrible, beyond the powers of our apprehension? The best wisedom of men is but foolishnesse to him; he makes no reckoning therfore of that vaine wisedome,24 He respecteth not any that are wise in heart. with the conceit whereof men are wont to please them∣selves. CAP. XXXVIII. VVHo is this,2 Who is this that darkeneth counsell by words without know∣ledge? that ignorantly casts unjust aspersions upon the most wise and holy decrees, and pro∣ceedings of the Almighty? When the glorious starres in their first creation did in their kind celebrate the praises of their maker,7 When the morning starres sung together; and all the sonnes of God shouted for joy. and the Angells of God, created by that omnipotent word of his, testified their joy and thankfulnesse to the God, that made them such. Whose power,9 When I made the cloud the garment therof; and the thicke darknesse as the swadling band for it. when he had brought forth the sea as a new borne infant, wrapped it about with clouds, as with clouts and swadling-bands. And set upon it my everlasting decree for the bounds,10 And brake up (or se) my decreed place. and motion thereof. That evill doers (who hate the light of the day) might be affrighted by the rising of it,13 That the wicked might be shaken out of it. from their wicked projects. The earth is by the comming of the light changed in∣to divers formes;14 It is turned as clay to the seale; and they stand as a garment. and differs upon the impression there∣of, as waxe, or clay doth at the stamping of a new seale; so as it seemes quite other then it was; and men (especi∣ally guilty malefactors) are shifted by the breaking forth of the light, like to so many severall garments. Didst thou ever enter into that my store-house of meteors,22 Treasure of snow, &c. which I have decreed to bring forth upon all occasions of my judgements upon men? Dost thou know how the lightning comes to breake forth of the cloud;23 Which I have reser∣ved against the time of trouble. and how that vapor there included doth with great violence scatter a blustring winde upon the earth. See chapter 9. verse 9.24 By what way is the light parted? which scat∣tereth the East winde up∣on the earth. Canst thou alter the seasons of the yeare;31 Canst thou binde the sweet influences of Pleiades, &c. Orion, &c? or cause a re∣straint of the Spring, Summer, Autumne, &c? Canst thou bring forth those hidden starres of the South;32 Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sonnes? or direct the Northern Constellations in their courses? Knowest thou what lawes God hath made for the33 Knowest thou the ordinance of heavens and canst thou set the domini∣on thereof in the earth?
motions, and influences of the heaven; and what power he hath given to their operations on the earth? CAP. XXXIX. 1 Knowest thou the time when the wilde goates of the rocke bring forth?CAnst thou understand, or dispose of the concepti∣ons, and birthes of the wildest creatures? 19 Hast thou clothed his neck with thunder?Hast thou inabled him to neigh so loud, and strongly, as if it were the ratling of thunder. 24 Neither beleeveth he that it is the sound of the Trumpet.Neither doth conceive any terror at all in the alarum to the battel? 26 And stretch her wings towards the South.Is it by thine appointment, and instinct, that the hauke wasteth her nimble and swift wings, to flie into the warmer climates of the South? 30 Her yong ones also suck up blood; and where the slaine are, there is she.Whereas other foules drinke water, the yong Eagle is wont (and who taught it him?) to suck in the blood of his prey; and where carcasses are, thither, by a strange sagacity of nature, is drawne to resort. CAP. XL. 15 Behold now, Behe∣moth which I made with thee, he eateth grasse as an oxe.LOoke but upon two of my creatures; the one on the land, the other in the water; both hugh, and mighty; behold the Elephant first, which I have formed and pla∣ced in thy view, and made apt to thy use; which, though he be so vast that his very stature is enough to terrifie the beholder, yet I have caused him to eate grasse like the oxe, and to feed on no prey but these sleight vege∣tables. 17 Hee moveth his taile like a Cedar; and the sinewes of his stones are wrapt together.In his lust he moueth his generative part, like to some Cedar, and the sinewes of his stones are wrapt together, like to the rootes of those tall and strong trees. Will any man be able by open force to take him, whiles he sees,24 He taketh it with his eyes, (or as the margin rather) will any take him in his sight, or bore his nose with a ginne? and is forewarned of the enterprise, or can he be taken by the nose, as a fish with an hooke; is he not able to breake through all the dangers of a violent taking. CAP. XLI. 1 Canst thou draw up Leviathan with an hooke?IN like manner, cast thine eye into the deep waters, and see there the great whale that I have framed; canst thou thinke to angle for him,7 Canst thou fill his skin with barbed yron? as for small fish, &c. Canst thou pierce his skin with barbed hookes?
If thou lay thy hand upon him to strike him,8 ay thine hand upon him, remember the battell, doe no more. thou shalt have so much reason to feele the smart of this con∣flict, that thou shalt not medle with him any more. Who hath done me any favour in helping me to make,11 Who hath preven∣ted me that I should re∣pay him? or governe the world, or in furthering my actions, that I may repay it unto him. Who is able to turne over that skinne wherewith hee is covered as with a garment?13 Who can discover the face of his garment? Whē he neeseth, he maketh, as it were,18 By his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eye-lids of the morning. a fire to breake forth at his nostrills and eyes; and when thou beholdest his eyes, thou wouldest thinke thou sawest the Sunne rising in the morning. And if from any other creature,22 And sorrow is tur∣ned into joy before him. there be occasion of trouble and vexation offered to him, he takes pleasure therein, as that which he will turne to his advantage and triumph. Out of the feare of his vehement and terrible moti∣ons, they are glad to make their peace with God,25 By reason of break∣ings they purifie them∣selves. that they may be ready for that dissolution, which is threat∣ned unto them thereby. Where he moves in the sea,32 He maketh a path to shine after him; one would thinke the deepe to be hoary. he causeth a mention of his way in the waters, leaving behind him a white kinde of fome, on the face of the sea, discernable from the rest of the waves. He doth in the confidence of his great strength over looke all other living creatures,34 He beholdeth all high things; he is a King over all the children of pride. and exalt himselfe over the proudest of them; as thinking himselfe more strong and mighty then they. CAP. XLII. THe Lord also heard the prayer of Iob,9 The Lord also accep∣ted of Iob. that he made for his friends, and so accepted of his person, and his devotion, that he forgave their offence upon his inter∣cession. And the Lord released that miserable affliction,10 And the Lord tur∣ned the captivitie of Iob; when he prayed for his friends. un∣der which Iob was held bound; when, out of his meek∣nesse, and charitie, he was content to pray for those his persecuting friends. They came to him,11 Every man also brought him a piece of money, and every one an eare-ring of gold. & by way of gratulation brought him, each of them, a gift, a piece of coine usuall in those times (stamped with a sheepe or lambe) and an eare∣ring of gold. Their father,15 And their father gave them inheritance a∣mong their brethren. as the reward and incouragement of their vertues, gave them a possession of land, that they
should be coheires of his estate, and territories, as their brethren were, and should share proportionally with them. PSALMES. PSALM. I. 1 Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsell of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornfull.BLessednesse is the thing we all drive at; would ye then know who is a blessed and happie man? It is he that first refraineth himselfe from all evill; and whereas there are three degrees of wicked men, ungodly in their thoughts, sinners in their actions, and scorners in their words and carriage; this man holds aloofe from them all; not yeelding to frame himselfe, either to the coun∣sells of the ungodly, to continue in the way, and manner of life, which is used by sinners, or to settle himselfe in a resolution to joyne with the scornfull enemies of grace, and goodnesse. 2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he me∣ditate day and night.But contrarily, in stead of these leud courses, and sin∣full pleasures, his delight is wholly placed in the Lord his God; and for his sake, in the word of that God; and wherewith his heart is so taken up, that he spendeth his thoughts upon it day and night. 6 For the Lord know∣eth the way of the righ∣teous.For the Lord takes speciall notice of the actions and events of godly men; he graciously accepts of what they doe, and wisely and mercifully ordereth the issues of all things to their good. PSALM. II. 1 Why doe the hea∣then rage, and the people imagine a vaine thing?WHat madnesse is this in the enemies of God and of his Annointed, thus to conspire against that kingdome and government, which hee would have esta∣blished in me, as a type of the everlasting Soverainty of his Sonne, Christ? 7 I will declare the de∣cree; Thou art my Sonne, this day have I begotten thee.That men may no longer pretend ignorance, I will declare and publish the eternall decree of God; who hath said, concerning his Sonne Christ, (whose type I beare) Thou art my onely Sonne, I have from eternity
begotten thee; and now I doe this day proclaime thee to the world, as the everlasting King, and governour thereof. Give yee your true testimonies of your humble ho∣mage, and subjection to this eternall Sonne of God;12 Kisse the Sonne, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way. and of your meet obedience to me, whom he hath ordained to be a figure of that his glorious government; lest his anger be provoked against you by your contempt, and so he should cut you off in the midst of your designes. PSALM. IIII. OH yee proud enemies,2 O ye Sonnes of men, how long will ye turne my glory into shame? &c. that pride your selves in the favour and countenance of Saul, how long will yee vainly indevor to disappoint that glory, which God hath by his Prophet fore-promised unto me? Be afraid of Gods judgements,4 Stand in awe and sinne not; commune with your owne hearts upon your bed, and be still. and be reclaimed from your sinnes, and especially from your bloody persecuti∣on of me; deale seriously with your own hearts in secret, betwixt God and them; retyre your selves purposely for the more oportunitie of your deepe meditations; and be confounded in your selves, turning your displeasure back upon your owne wicked hearts. I know it is the common fashion of the world to look after outward prosperity;6 There be many that say, Who wil shew us any good? and to measure happinesse by the abundance of these earthly things; but for me, O Lord, I value thy favour aboue all things whatsoever. They doe not so much rejoyce in their vintage and harvest, when it is most rich, seasonable, abundant,7 Thou hast put glad∣nesse in my heart more then in the time that their corne & their wine increased. as I doe in the assurance of thy grace towards me. PSALM. V. THey have swallowed downe many deare morsells,9 Their throate is an open Sepulcher. of the estates, and lives of the godly, and innocent; and out of their throats have proceeded nothing but words tending to the destruction of others. PSALM. VI. WHen I am once dead,5 For in death there is no remembrance of thee. I can no more celebrate thy name amongst the living, as I now doe.
PSALM. VII. 7 So shall the congre∣gation of the people praise thee, for their sakes therefore returne on high.O God, in delivering me, thou shalt not onely doe good unto me; but this proofe of thy mercy shall draw all the people to a just admiration of thy goodnes; for their sakes therefore, ascend thou upon thy throne of judgement, and make thy grace conspicuous to all the world. 14 Behold, he travai∣leth with iniquitie, and hath cōceived mischiefe, and brought forth fals∣hood.It shall be with him, as with a woman that is mocked with a false, and yet painfull conception; he hath con∣ceived a mischeivous plot against me; he travelleth, in bringing that sinfull designe to execution, and when all is done, he is delivered of nothing, but a vaine and false hope, which vanisheth into winde and disappointment. PSALM. VIII. 2 Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies; that thou mightest still the enemie and avenger.O God, thou needest no skilfull Rhetoricians to set forth thy praise; even very new borne babes and sucklings doe sufficiently declare thy power, wisedome, and goodnesse; whosoever shall but looke upon them, and see their miraculous formation, and nourishment, and insensible growth shall see enough to stop the mouthes of all thine enemies; how much more whē they come to age and discretion dost thou fetch praise and glory to thy selfe from them? 5 For thou hast made him a little lower then the Angells.Thou hast made man in his very creation, and the Son, of man in his voluntary exinanition of himselfe (for our sake) a little lower then the Angells. PSALM. IX. 6 Oh thou enemie; de∣structions are come to a perpetuall end; and thou hast destroyed cities; their memoriall is perished with them.O Thou enemie, thou hast now, I hope, done destroy∣ing, thou hast made an end of sacking and ruining our cities, there is no more worke for thee further to doe; and now, when they have done their worst, them∣selves and their memoriall is utterly rooted out. 12 When he maketh iniquisition for blood, hee remembreth them.When God calls men to a reckoning for their oppres∣sions, and cruelties, he then remembers the poore, and is just and carefull to right their wrongs.
PSALM. X. THe wicked man followes his unbridled lust;3 For the wicked boasteth of his hearts de∣sire, and blesseth the co∣vetous, whom God abhor∣reth. and boasts of his free and full contentment that he findes in his evill wayes, and magnifies those that are earthly and carnall minded, like himselfe; who though they bee applauded by him, yet are abhorred of God. His wayes are ever offensive to God, thy judgements,5 His waies are alwaies grievous, thy judgements are farre above out of his sight? as for all his ene∣mies he puffeth at them. O God, are by him put farre from his thoughts; & for his enemies, in a confidence of his owne strength, he maketh a mocke of them. He glavereth; and speaks faire,10 He croucheth and humbleth himselfe that the poore may fall by his strong ones. and carryes himselfe courteously, to draw in the poore into his danger; and when he hath once got hold of them, he falls violently upon them. Doe thou search out, and punish,15 Seeke out his wic∣kednesse, till thou finde none. and restraine his wickednesse, till there be no more of it to be found; make a full end of his evill by thy judgements. PSALM. XI. OH God,3 If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous doe. they have undermined me in the very foun∣dations of my being and subsisting; how can I then hold out? Let me be never so upright and innocent; yet I must needs (for ought I can doe) fall under their vio∣lence. But howsoever such measure be offered me by men;4 The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords throne is in heaven? yet my comfort is, that I have a God, who dwells aboue in the glorious Temple of heaven, who can and will re∣dresse my wrongs. He will, in his due time, execute most terrible,6 Vpon the wicked he shall raine snares, fire and brimstone. and dreadfull judgements upon the wicked, such as he did upon Sodom and Gomorrah; he shall raine downe upon their heads, fire and brimstone, which shall surprize them suddenly, and ensnare them without possibility of escape. PSALM. XII. IT must needs be that wicked men should abound every where, and beare them proudly in their lend courses,8 The wicked walke on every side, when the vilest men are exalted. when the worst and most godlesse men are exalted and preferred to places of honor, and command, and magni∣fied in their sinnes.
PSALM. XIII. 3 Lighten mine eyes, lest I sleepe the sleepe of death.O Lord, doe thou comfort me, with the chearfull light of thy countenance; raise me up with a sweet sense of thy favour, lest I be utterly disheartned, and die dis∣consolate. PSALM. XIIII. 1 The foole hath said &c.See Psal. 53.1. WHat a strange madnes is this in wicked men, that they will not consider what vengeance they pull upon themselves,4 Have all the workers of iniquitie no know∣ledge? Who eate up my people as they eate bread. whiles they doe thus cruelly devoure my people, as they eate bread, so greedily, so familiarly; without feare or remorse? 5 There were they in great feare; for God is in the generation of the righ∣teous.But how secure so ever they now seeme; God hath a time, wherein he shall confound them with feare, and astonishment; for that just God takes speciall charge of the generation of the just, and shall surely plague their cruell persecutors. 6 Yee have shamed the counsell of the poore; because the Lord is his refuge.Ye have scorned, & made a mocke of the holy resoluti∣ons of the poore & godly man, in that he depended upon the Lord, as his refuge; and trusted not (as you doe) to his owne devices, and to the arme of flesh. PSALM. XV. 1 Lord, who shall a∣bide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?OH Lord, whom wilt thou admit, as a living mem∣ber of thy true Church upon earth, and as a glori∣ous citizen of thine heavenly Jerusalem above? PSALM. XVI. 2 My goodnesse ex∣tendeth not to thee.OH God what have I, or what can I doe, that can con∣fer any thing to thee? Since thou are infinitely glo∣rious and powerfull, & I am not finite onely, but weake, and miserable? 4 Their drinke offe∣rings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips.I will have nothing to doe with those Idolatrous heathen, nor yet with their superstitious, and sinfull rites; if they pollute themselves with the drinke offe∣rings of blood, whether of men, or other creatures, I abhorre to partake with them; neither will I so much as make mention of the names of their false gods.
I cannot envie the greatnesse,6 The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heri∣tage. and prosperitie of these wicked Idolaters; no, God hath allotted an happy por∣tion unto me in comparison of the best of them. I will also lay downe this bodie of mine in the grave, in a certaine hope and assurance of my resurrection to immortality.9 My flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou wilt not give me utterly over to that cor∣ruption, which shall seize on me in the grave,10 For thou wilt not leave my soule in hell; nei∣ther wilt thou suffer thine holy One to see corrup∣tion. neither wilt let the bodie of thy holy servant to vanish away in dust and rottennesse; but wilt one day raise it glorious; Whereof I am assured by the vertue of my insition into that Christ; whose sacred body thou wilt preserve from the least putrefaction in the earth. PSALM. XVII. THey are fat and well liking;10 They are inclosed in their owne fat. pampering themselves with all the contentments, and pleasures, that their heart can desire. Save thou me, O Lord, by thy powerfull hand,14 From men (as in the margin) by thine hand O Lord, from men of the world, which have their portion in this life; and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasures. from the cruelty of men, even from worldly and blood-thirsty men; which have set up their rest here below, making no account of any other life after this, wherein to re∣ceive the retribution of good, or evill; whom yet thou causest to abound with the choisest of all temporall and outward blessings, for their further iudgement. But as for me,15 As for me, I will be∣hold thy face in righ∣teousnesse, I shall be satis∣fied, when I awake, with they likenesse. I doe no way envie this happinesse of theirs, but rather am willingly content to suffer affliction here, since I am assured, I shall, one day, behold thy face in perfect beautie; When I shall awake out of my long sleepe in the grave, I shall be fully satisfied with thy glo∣rious presence; and in the meane time, I shall comforta∣bly hope to see thy deliverance of me in thy just vindica∣tion from mine enemies; and when thou raisest me out of my great adversitie, I shall be abundantly refreshed with thy loving countenance towards me. PSALM. XVIII. See for this whole Psalme in 2 Sam. 22.2 The Lord is my rock and my fortresse. PSALM. XIX. AS the continuall succession of day and night doth no∣tably set forth the wonderfull power,2 Day unto day utte∣reth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge. and provi∣dence
of God, so there is no day or night, wherein God doth not renew unto us some notable demonstration of his goodnesse, power, & wisdome, in this great admini∣stration; every day affords us some new document thereof. 3 There is no speech or language where their name is not heard.Though these heavens and this day and night be mute, yet their speech and language is universally understood; so as the world, being distinguished by variety of tongues, (the people whereof understand not each o∣ther, yet) all of them through the whole earth under∣stand this voice, whereby the heavens, and day, and night, praise their Maker. 4 Their line is gone out thorough all the earth and their words to the end of the world. In them hath he made a Tabernacle for the Sunne.The line that God made for the passage of the Sunne, the first day of his motion, is still and ever perpetuated round about the earth; so as God hath herein spoken, both to our eares, by the voice, and to our eyes by the visible lines, that he hath drawne of this great frame, and continuall and constant revolution of the heavens; In which, he hath made a receptacle (over and besies all other those glorious planets and starres) for the Sunne; as his most remarkable creature. PSALM. XX. 1 The name of the God of Jacob, defend thee.THe Almighty power of him, that is named the God of Iacob, protect, and defend thee. 2 Send thee helpe from the Sanctuarie, and streng∣then thee out of Sion.Send thee helpe from the holy heavens, and from his Sanctuarie, which is the type, and figure thereof; and strengthen thee out of Sion, where he hath by his com∣mand appointed the holy Arke of his covenant to bee placed, and from thence gives answers and directions to all thine actions. PSALM. XXI. 9 Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger.THose that are insolent, and presumptuous enemies of the Kingdome of thy Christ, thou shalt confound with thy most terrible judgements: thou shalt consume them, and theirs, in the extremitie of thy wrathfull ven∣geance. 12 Therfore shalt thou make them turne their backes (or, as in the margin) Thou shalt set them as a butt; when thou shalt make ready thine arrowes upon thy string.Thou shalt make them as a butt, against which thou shalt levell thine arrowes of judgement; thou shalt set them as noted objects of thy fearfullest revenge.
PSALM. XXII. MIne enemies (and, in type, thine,12 Many bulls have compassed me; strong Bulls of Basan have beset me round. O Saviour) are more like unto beasts then men, like furious Bulles which have beene pampered in the fat pastures of Basan, they beset me, and are ready to goare me thorow. Neither are they like to Bulles for their strength,16 For dogges have compassed me, the assem∣bly of the wicked have inclosed me; they pierced my hands and my feet. and Lyons for their fiercenesse, onely; but they are also like unto dogges for clamour, and cruell insultation; they both bite me with their teeth, and bay at me with their impure throats; Thus doe my implacable enemies per∣secute me; yea they have done that to me, in figure and representation, which they shall doe really to thee my Saviour, they have pierced my hands and my feet. Deliver thou O Lord, my deare life,20 Deliver, &c. and my darling from the power of the dogge. from the power and cruelty of these savage and mercilesse enemies. Not onely the poore and needy shall cheerfully eate of thy sacrifices,29 All they that be fat upon earth shall eate and worship: all they that goe downe to the dust shall bow before thee, and none can keepe alive his owne soule. but even the wealthy and great also shall partake thereof, and worship thee; yea all those that humble themselves even to the dust of death for the profession of thy name, even those that have no care to keepe themselves alive (when their life may stand in the way of thy honour) they shall humbly adore thee. They shall make report of the righteous judgements of God unto that posterity which is yet unborne;31 They shall come and shall declare his righ∣teousnesse unto a people that shall be borne; that he hath done this. & shall declare that it is he that hath done these great things. PSALM. XXIII. AS I am thy sheep, and thou my shepheard, O God;4 I will feare no evill, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staffe they comfort me. so shall I be ever confident in thy protection; what can the sheepe feare whiles they see their shep∣heard ready to defend them? Thus shall I ever hold my selfe safe, and sure under thy defence, and thy grati∣ous direction. Thou givest me abundance of all helps,5 Thou anointest my head with oyle, my cup runneth ouer. and com∣forts, not onely for necessity, but even for pleasure also. PSALM. XXIIII. HE hath caused the waters to lie lower then the sur∣face of the earth;2 He hath founded it upon the seas. for the convenience of mans habi∣tation; so hath he therefore lifted the earth over the sea, as if, to our sense, it were founded thereupon.
6 This is the generati∣on of them that seek him; that seeke thy face, O Iacob.This is the generation of those that doe truly and sincerely serve God, with an holy worship, the true sons of thee O Jacob; who faithfully apply themselves to serve the God of Jacob. 7 Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doores, and the King of glory shall come in.It shall not be long that God shall dwell in these moving Tabernacles; ere long, he shall settle his abode in a fixed and lasting habitation of his Temple; Oh there∣fore ye firme and ever during doores of his Temple, open your selves cheerfully to receive that King of glory which shall come to dwell in those sacred walls, and tri∣umph in so blessed a guest; and ye the faithfull hearts of all beleevers (who are his living temple shadowed by that other) raise up your soules, to intertaine him unto your everlasting comfort. PSALM. XXV. 3 Let them be asha∣med which transgresse without cause.MAgnifie thou thy justice, in pouring shame upon the face of those, which rise up against me spitefully, without any just cause or occasion of provocation on my part. 14 The secret of the Lord is with them that feare him.The Lord beares a secret love and favour to those that feare him; how ever they may seeme outwardly neglected; and in a gracious familiarity he imparts unto them the great mysteries of his will and their salvation. PSALM XXVI. 1 Iudge me O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity.O God, doe thou stand out for me, and give sentence with me; for thou knowest I have walked in up∣rightnesse & sincerity before thee; however I may have failed in weaknesse, yet my purposes and desires have beene truly devoted to thee. 6 I will wash my hands in innocency; so will I compasse thine Altar, O Lord.Lord, thou requirest holinesse in them that come neare thee, which thou hast signified by those many legall cleansings, and lotions; I will be carefull accordingly, to purge my heart and hands from all the impuritie of my sinnes; and then will I approach to thine Altar, and offer my sacrifices to thee. 9 Gather not my soule with sinners.Oh doe not take away my soule with sinners; thou seest I would not doe as they doe; Oh let me not speed as they doe.
PSALM. XXVII. VVHen my savage and cruell enemies came against me, like ravenous beasts,2 And my foes came upon me, to eat up my flesh. in an intention to worry and devoure me. PSALM. XXVIII. DOe not inwrap me in thy judgements together with the wicked;3 Draw mee not away with the wicked. whom thou draggest to their execution suddenly. PSALM. XXIX. VVOrship ye the Lord in that beautifull,2 Worship the Lord in the beautie of holi∣nesse. and glori∣ous Sanctuary, where he exhibits his presence to his people, The dreadfull thunder (wherein God speakes his power unto us) is above in those higher waters of the clouds; there, and thence doth God speake unto us,3 The voice of the Lord is upon (or over) the waters, &c. more loud and terribly then all the roaring of these lower waters. The voice of this thunder makes the very earth to shake, so, as the great mountaines of Lebanon,6 He maketh them to skip like a calfe: Lebanon, and Syrion like a young Vnicorne. and Her∣mon, are, as it were, moved out of their places with this horrible agitation. This voice of the thunder causeth the fearefull flashes of the lightnings to breake forth of the clouds to the a∣stonishing of the world.7 The voice of the Lord divideth the flames of fire. The terror of this voice causeth the hindes (which doe not easily deliver themselves of their burden) to cast their calues, for feare;9 The voice of the Lord maketh the hindes to calve; and discovereth the forests. and so shaketh downe not the leaves, and twigs onely, but the very trees of the forest, that they are left bare, and open to all eyes. PSALM. XXX. THou hast setled my habitation so firme and safe in my mountaine of Sion.7 Thou hast made my mountaine to stand strong. See Psalm. 6.5.2 Shall the dust praise thee? To the end that my tongue (which is the onely in∣strument wherby we can expresse glory) may sing praise unto thee.12 To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee.
PSALM. XXXI. 8 Thou hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemie, thou hast set my feet in a large roome.THou hast not given me over into the power of mine enemie; but hast enlarged me, and set me free from the feare, or danger of his attempts. 12 I am like a broken vessell.I am cast aside like a broken vessell, quite past all use or regard. 20 Thou shalt keepe them secretly in a pavili∣on from the strife of tongues.As that which is hid in some secret, and sure corner, is safe from all eyes; so, through thy mercifull care are they laid up, under the covert of thy providence, from all their enemies, and from the issue of all those slanderous suggestions, which they make against them. PSALM. XXXII. 3 When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, &c.WHen I concealed, and suppressed my guiltinesse, and smothered my sinne, in my bosome; I was extremely afflicted therewith; my body decayed, and languished. 6 Surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him.Surely, in the greatest extremity of troubles and per∣secution, there shall no evill have power to seize upon him, whom thou hast taken to thy protection. 9 Be ye not as the horse or as the mule, which have no understanding.Be not either stupid, or refractary under the hand of God, like to brute beasts which have no understanding. PSALM. XXXIII. THe element of waters though it be fluid, and natu∣rally apt to spread,7 He gathereth the wa∣ters of the sea together as an heape, he laieth up the depth in store-houses. and diffuse it selfe, yet hath he in his providence and power gathered it up, and com∣pacted it close together, as into one heape; & part there∣of, in stead of overflowing the face of the earth, he hath confined into the secret receptacles thereof. In vaine shall the crafty ones of the world thinke to bring about their plots against God;15 He fashioneth their harts alike; he considereth all their workes. he formed, and fashioned their hearts, as well as the simplest, and silliest of all his creatures; and therefore he well knowes, and considers all that they goe about. PSALM. XXXIV. 20 He keepeth all his bones, not one of them is broken.HE taketh charge of all that belongs to his chil∣dren; so as no violence shall be prejudiciall unto
them; not onely their bones, but the very haires of their head are numbred, in vaine shall their enemies hope to fasten any evill upon them, which the wise providence of God hath not foreappointed for their good. PSALM. XXXV. THough thou hast wayes enow by naturall and ordi∣nary meanes to plague thine enemies, yet besides,5 Let them be as chaffe before the winde, and the Angell of the Lord scat∣tering them. doe thou give them over into the hands of thine Angells whether good or evill, to vexe them according to their deserts. All the powers, and parts of my soule,10 All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee? and body shall praise thee; and confesse thee to be my onely good, and gracious God. I hanged downe my head in a serious humiliation,14 I bowed downe heavily, as one that mour∣neth for his mother. as one that had lost his dearest friend, even the mother that bore him. Those pretended false friends of mine, at their feasts,16 With hypocriticall mockers in feasts: they gnashed upon me with their teeth. made me their table-talke; and there signified their ma∣licious conceits against me. Deliver my deare and precious life from these cruell and brutish enemies.17 My darling from the Lyons. Those that doe secretly scorne me,19 Neither let them wincke with their eyes that hate me without cause. by their privie gestures of contempt, winking with their eyes, and wry∣ing their faces at me, in a disdainfull manner, doe thou meet with them, and let them not have cause to insult over me. PSALM. XXXVI. SO leudly doth the wicked man demeane himselfe,1 The transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no feare of God before his eyes. that my heart easily, and justly tells me that there is no feare of God within him. Thy righteousnesse is like some huge and high moun∣taine, which we may see afarre off;6 Thy righteousnesse is like the great moun∣taines. but can never compre∣hend with our eye all the extent, and largenesse of it, &c. They shall be abundātly satisfied with all thy blessings,8 They shall be abun∣dantly satisfied with the fatnesse of thy house; and thou shalt make them drinke of the river of thy pleasures. both temporall and spirituall; and shall not onely be fed up to a sufficiencie, but shall be furnished with thy mercifull provisions, even to delight, and pleasure. In, and from thee, is the ground of all true comfort; all life and happinesse is derived onely from thee;9 For with thee is the fountaine of life: and in thy light we shall see light. and of that infinite store of joy and contentment that is in thee,
we shall partake in our measure; injoying thy blessings, and gracious illuminations. 11 Let not the foot of pride come against me.Let not the proud man prevaile against me; Oh doe thou deliver me from his insolent insultations. PSALM. XXXVII. 13 The Lord shall laugh at him, for he seeth that his day is comming.THe Lord, who takes notice of all his secret plots, shall laugh him to scorne; for, howsoever the foolish wic∣ked man flatters himselfe in the conceit of his safety, and stability of condition, yet the all-wise God sees that his destruction is at hand. 20 They shall be as the fat of lambes; they shall consume, into smoke shall they consume away.They shall vanish away into smoake, as the fat of lambes, which is laid upon the altar in sacrifice, so shall they be suddenly consumed. 21 The wicked bor∣roweth and paieth not a∣gaine; but the righteous sheweth mercy and gi∣veth.The wicked man shall be punished with such want, that when he shall be driven to borrow, he shall not have wherewith to repay; but the righteous shall have enough both for his owne use, and for the charitable supply of others. 25 I have beene young and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed beg∣ing their bread.In all my life time, I have diligently observed the good hand, that God hath held over his righteous ser∣vants; whose provision for them I have noted to bee wonderfully carefull, and gracious, so as the affliction of want hath not continued upon them, and beene deri∣ved from them, to their children; if they have beene straitned with penury for the time, yet, it hath ere long beene supplied either to themselves, or theirs. 37 Marke the perfect man, and behold the up∣right; for the end of that man is peace.However it please God so to order the events of this life, that they fall out indifferently to the godly, and wicked men, and perhaps the worst may speed better here then the holiest; yet, looke to the end of both, and ye shall wel observe a cleare difference of Gods respects; for in the end, the godly man shall finde a gracious retri∣bution from the Lord his God; when the wicked man shall be everlastingly confounded. PSALM. XXXVIII. 2 For thine arrowes sticke fast in me.THine afflictions, as so many sharpe arrowes, gall my soule and sticke fast in me. 4 For mine iniquities are gone over my head.Mine iniquities are as some deepe waters, wherein (without thy mercy and grace) I should be utterly drowned; for I am sunke under them, as not able to up∣hold my selfe against the guilt of them.
It is no short and transient affliction which I suffer,5 My wounds stinke and are corrupted; because of my foolishnesse. but lingringly painfull and lothsome; all which is most justly brought upon me by my sin, which I have foolishly committed. But I would take no notice of their designes;13 But I as a deafe man heard not, I was as a dumbe man, that openeth not his mouth. onely in a patient and humble silence commending my selfe to thy blessed care, and them to thy just revenge. If thou didst not sustaine me, O Lord,17 For I am ready to halt. I am ready to be utterly depressed with my calamity, and to yeeld un∣to the weake doubts and diffidence of my naturall cor∣ruption. PSALM. XXXIX. I Have set downe this constant resolution in my heart,1 I said, I will take heed to my wayes, that I sinne not with my tongue: I will keepe my mouth with a bridle whiles the wicked is before me. that I will looke carefully to my selfe; and however my affliction bee very great, yet that I will not give my tongue leave to breake into any impatient, or unbeseem∣ing speeches, whiles it pleaseth God to exercise me with the malice of wicked men. I refrained my tongue from speaking that,2 I held my peace, even from good; and my sorrow was stirred. which I might have justly said in my own defence, and in their re∣proofe and conviction, though I were so much the more pained in my suppression thereof. PSALM. XL. HE delivered mee out of extreme distresse,2 He brought me out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rocke, &c. and misery, and out of so wofull a condition, as wherein there was neither comfort not hope; & set me upon the firme ground of good assurance, and stedfast safety. I doe not come to thee, O Lord,6 Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire, mine eares hast thou open∣ed, burnt offerings and sin offerings hast thou not re∣quired. in the formalities of legall sacrifices, as thinking to please thee by these out∣ward acts of devotion; but I bring a sincere heart to thee, and a prepared eare, in comparison whereof, burnt offerings and sinne offerings are of no value to thee. When thou hadst thus addressed my heart,7 Then said I, Lo, I come, in the volume of the booke it is written of mee. and my eare, then I said cheerfully, Behold, Lord, I am ready to consecrate my selfe unto thee; In the volume of thine everlasting counsell, signified by thy revealed will,8 I delight to doe thy will, O God. it is written both of me, and especially of thy blessed Sonne, whose type I beare, that wee should doe thy will cheer∣fully and effectually. These evills which mine iniquities have brought upon me, are so many and great,12 Mine iniquities have taken hold of me, so that I am not able to looke up. that I am not able to sustaine them, but must needs droupe under them, without thy mercifull release.
PSALM. XLI. 1 As the Hart panteth for the water-brookes, so panteth my soule after thee, O God.THe thirsty and panting Deere in the extremitie of drought, doth not more eagerly long for the wa∣ter-brookes, wherein to coole and refresh himselfe, then I doe for my accesse to thy holy Sanctuary, O Lord, even to thy Tabernacle from whence I am forcibly driven. 2 My soule thirsteth for God.My soule doth vehemētly thirstafter this thy presence. When I remember my former happinesse; how I had the liberty and favour of leading the multitude up to thine holy Tabernacle;4 When I remember these things, I powre out my soule in me; for I had gone with the multitude; I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise. and bethinke my selfe with what joy and melody we went up heretofore, to this house of thine, I cannot but poure out my soule into teares, and lamentations, to consider my greivous restraint, and exile from it. 6 O my God, my soule is cast downe within me; therefore will I remem∣ber thee from the land of Iordan, & of the Hermo∣nites, from the hill Missar.My soule is cast downe with this affliction; in whom should I then seeke for comfort, but in thee, O God; therefore since I cannot be present at thine house, yet I will ever remember and thinke upon it, where ever I am in my utmost banishment; whether in that Easterne land beyond Jordan, or the Southerne coast of the moun∣taines of Hermonim, or in this little obscure hill, where∣in I now am. 7 Deepe calleth unto deepe at the noise of thy water-spouts.One affliction (like so many waves) comes in the necke of another, and in a miserable succession as it were, calls for the next; upon thy predetermination of these my ad∣versities, which doe as it were gush out from thee, by those conveiances which thou hast ordained. The Lord will be gratiously present, to help and com∣fort me;8 Yet the Lord will commād his loving kind∣nesse in the day time, and in the night his long shall be with me. and, as in the day-time, hee will cheare me up, with the sense of his loving kindnesse, so in the night al∣so, he will put songs of praise and thanksgiving into my mouth. PSALM XLIIII. 12 Thou sellest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth by their price.VVE are made more base, O God, then those bond∣slaves, that are sold by their victors; there is somewhat given for them to their owners; but as for us, O Lord, thou hast sold us for nothing; and hast as it were cast us away, as unworthy to be prized. 19 Though thou hast broken us in the place of Dragons.Though thou have humbled us so low, as to the very bottom of the deepe; and hast cast us down into the ex∣treamest degree of sorrow, and misery.
PSALM. XLV. I Speake of that holy ditty,1 I speake of the things which I have made touching the King; My tongue is the pen of a ready writer. which I have made touching King Solomon, in the type of him, that was greater then Solomon, even the King of glory, the great Bride∣groome of his Spouse the Church: My tongue shall be swift, and free in her expressions of his just praises. Oh Saviour, there is more true inward beauty in thee,2 Thou art fairer then the children of men; grace is powred into thy lips. then in all the sonnes of men, yea all the glory and excel∣lence which they have, is onely derived from thee; So full of grace were thy lips, that thou spakest as never man spake. As thou art armed with infinite power,3 Gird thy sword up∣on thy thigh, O thou most mightie; with thy glory and majestie. O thou Lord of hosts; so let it please thee to buckle thy selfe to the exercise of this power, to the subduing of the many and mighty enemies of thy Church, and decke thy selfe with such glory, and majesty, as may confound thy op∣posers; Goe thou on, happily,4 And in thy majesty ride on prosperously, be∣cause of truth and meek∣nesse and righteousnesse, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. to execute the great admini∣stratiō of thy Kingly office, in the behalfe of thy Church, because of the meeknesse of thy person, and truth of thy word, and righteousnesse, of thy promises and perfor∣mances; and the right hand of thy power shall bring to passe strange, and fearefull things. Thy judgements are severely and mortally executed upon the enemies of thy divine Soverainty;5 Thine arrowes are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies; whereby the people fall under thee. and upon the sight thereof, the people of the world are glad to humble themselves under thine almighty hand. The thrones of earthly Princes are (like themselves) brittle and variable,6 Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, and the scepter of thy King∣dome is a right scepter. and their government many times drawne aside to protect evill, and depresse good; but thy throne, O Saviour, is everlasting; even when heaven shall passe, it shall continue, and thy government can be no other then holy and righteous. Therefore God, even thy God,7 Therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse above thy fel∣lowes. hath anointed thee from everlasting, as the King, Priest, and Prophet of thy Church, with that heavenly Oyle, whereby he hath glad∣ded the hearts of all thy chosen people; and hath en∣dowed thine assumed humanity; with all divine graces, above all meere mankinde. As thy garments, O Solomon,8 All thy garments smell of myrrhe, aloes, and cassia, out of the yvo∣ry palaces whereby they have made thee glad. are persumed with that precious confection, which is made of the choisest o∣dors, when thou comest out of thine yvory palaces; with which excellent fragrancies, thine attendants have chea∣red thy heart; so it is with thee, O Saviour, thine humane nature, wherewith thou art clad, is furnished with all
graces and perfections, when thou descendest out of the glorious palace of heaven; wherby thou wert chearefully inabled to performe this great worke of thy medi∣ation. 9 Kings daughters were amongst thine honorable women, upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir.Thou hast the honourable attendance of many noble, and famous Congregations, that desire, and delight to wait upon thine ordinances; But the spouse, thine holy Catholike Church, is so honoured by thee, that shee is set upon thy right hand, clothed with all true glory, and magnificence. 10 Hearken, O daugh∣ter, and consider, and in∣cline thine eare, forget also thy fathers house.And now, O daughter of Aegypt, heare what I shall say to thee, in type of the true Church and Spouse of my Saviour; in liew of so great mercy, as God hath shewed thee, in singling thee out of the world, it is thy duty to forget the corrupt condition of thy nature, and to be ali∣ened in thine affections, from all earthly things; it it not for thee to thinke any more of the Aegypt of this world; but to be as a stranger to all earthly vanities. 11 So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him.So shall God take pleasure in those graces, which he hath given thee thus to improve; and be graciously af∣fected with thy holy obedience, which thou justly re∣servest for him alone; for he is the Lord thy God; and therefore all thy worship and service is due to none but him. 12 And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift; even the rich among the people shall in∣treat thy favour.The neighbouring, and yet, forraine Churches, shall, in an acknowledgement of thy great honour, and happi∣nesse, present thee with the service of their love, and gifts of their bounty; and those that are great and fa∣mous in their reputation shall seeke communion with thee. 13 The Kings Daugh∣ter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold.Solomons Bride the daughter of Pharaoh; and Christs Spouse the daughter of the King of heaven, are both in∣wardly glorious, the one with rich embroideries, the other with excellent and heavenly graces; the one is clo∣thed with gold, the other with the righteousnesse of her Saviour, and with all divine vertues. 14 She shall be brought to the King in raiment of needle worke; the virgins her companions shall bee brought unto thee.Neither hath she this glory put upon her, onely to please, and amaze the eyes of the beholders, but the maine use of this goodly bravery, is, that she shall ap∣peare glorious in the eyes of the King of glory, her cele∣stiall husband, to whom she shall be presented in this goodly habit of grace; not without the attendance of all those beleeving soules, that appertaine to that blessed traine of hers. 15 With gladnesse & rejoycing shall they bee brought, they shall enter into the Kings Palace.With unspeakeable joy and triumph shall they bee presented unto the throne of glory; even into that Pa∣lace, not made with hands, eternall in the heavens; the
seat and mansion of the ever-living God shall they be brought, by the ministery, and with the acclamation of the blessed Angells of God. This happie marriage of thine shall be blessed with multitudes of children, who shall succeed their fathers,16 In stead of thy fa∣thers shall be thy children whom thou maiest make Princes in all the earth. in a comfortable and during government; the issue and condition whereof shall be so large, and happie, that they shall be so many Kings upon; earth and all thrones shall bee furnished with Princes from thy loines, for as much as all thy spirituall children are a royall genera∣tion unto God. O my God, and Saviour, I,17 I will make thy name to be remembred in all generations; there∣fore shal the people praise thee for ever and ever. who by thy gratious in∣spiration have made this Bridall-song unto thee, will celebrate and praise thy blessed name to all generations; and will stirre up thy people to blesse and praise thee for ever and ever. PSALM. XLVI. LEt the sea of this world roare,4 There is a river, the streames whereof shall make glad the Citie of God. and be never so un∣quiet, the holy city Jerusalem, the type of Gods Church, hath a litle river, even Gihon, or Kidron, whose calme and gentle streames shall abundantly refresh it; and the mysticall Jerusalem hath both the waters of life, the word of the ever-living God, to comfort and satisfie it here; and those living waters of life eternall in the Paradise of God, to make it everlastingly happie. He can (when he pleaseth) put an end to those broiles,9 He maketh warres to cease unto the ends of the earth, he breaketh the bowe, and cutteth the speare in peeces, be burn∣eth the chariot in the fire. and tyrannous oppositions, and persecutions, wherewith his Church is wont to be infested; and can cause the ene∣mies thereof to be still, PSALM. XLVII. HE hath gratiously made choise of us,4 He shall chuse our in∣heritance for us, the ex∣cellency of Iacob whom he loved. for his peculiar people, and of the land of Canaan for an inheritance for us, and hath purchased, and prepared a more glorious inheritance for us above; even the inheritance of his Saints in light; and in the meane time, hath graced us with all those noble priviledges which are appropriated to the seed of Jacob, whom he loved. As the Arke of God is gone with much triumph and joy to be placed in the Temple of the Lord,5 God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of the trumpet. so the Sonne of God is with much rejoycing of Angells and men, both received into his Evangelicall Church on earth, and afterwards taken up into the glory of heaven.
9 For the shields of the earth belong unto God.Unto God onely belongeth the safe and gratious protection of his Church, and children; and he accord∣ingly raiseth up and defendeth those Princes and gover∣nors, under whose rule his Church is preserved in peace. PSALM. XLVIII. 4 For lo, the Kings were assembled, they pas∣sed by together.THe heathen Kings, especially Senacherib, and his mighty hoast & assistants, came up against Jerusalem, with menaces of utter destruction; but they staid not long, before those walles, ere they were sent away with shame and slaughter. 7 Thou breakest the shippes of Tarshish with an Eastwinde.As a Navie by sea is dispersed by a furious East-winde, so didst thou, O Lord, scatter and discomfit those mighty enemies that came up against Hierusalem. 8 As we have heard, so we have seene into the city of the Lord of Hosts.According to the relation of thy former deliverances of thy poeple, reported to us by our forefathers, so have our eyes beene witnesses of thy present rescue of our city, and nation. 13 Tell the towers thereof; marke well her bulwarkes, consider her Palaces.Looke well, O ye beholders, upon the many and goodly towers of Jerusalem, upon her strong fortificati∣ons, upon her faire Palaces, and as thereby you shall bee excited to praise God for the deliverance of so noble and beautifull a pile; so take occasion thereby to thinke of the splendor and glory of that heavenly Jerusalem which is above. PSALM. XLIX. 5 Why should I feare in the dayes of evill, when the iniquitie of my heeles shall compasse me about.WHy should I feare upon any occasion whatsoever? Whether it be upon the conscience of the iniqui∣ty of my owne foot steps, or whether upon the prosecu∣tion of those enemies, which follow me at the heeles, and are ready to environ me? 7 None of them can by any meanes redeeme his brother, nor give God a ransome for him.It is not in the power of the wealthy, & great men of the world, to ransome another man from death, by all their riches and treasures; For the life of man is of great∣er price, and value, then can be countervailed by any earthly thing;8 For the redemption of their soule is pretious; and it ceaseth for ever. and therefore this redemption is a thing not to be effected, or hoped for at all. 14 And the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beautie shall con∣sume in the grave, from their dwelling.But however they flourish, and sway here, yet after the long night of the grave is past, in the morning of the resurrection, the just and righteous servants of God, whom they have here trampled upon, shall so have dominion over them, that they shall sit as their Judges; In the meane time all their glory and bravery shall bee
consumed, and rott away in the dull of their grave. That man, who lives in outward honor, and yet wants true wisedome, and understanding, to know God;20 Man that is in ho∣nor and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish. and himselfe, lives as a beast, and dies as a beast brutishly. PSALM. L. HEare, O ye inhabitants, of the earth;1 The mighty God, even the Lord hath spo∣ken, and called the earth from the rising of the Sun to the going downe of the same. the great and mighty God of heaven having taken just notice of the extreame depravednesse of the wayes of men, calls you to account of this your universall wickednesse, even all the world over, from one side of the earth to the other. Behold,2 Out of Sion the per∣fection of beauty God hath shined. God hath shewed himselfe in his holy hill of Sion (where his temple, the glory of the whole earth standeth) there he exhibits his Majestie, and thence shall he controll the wickednesse of men. In great terror,3 Our God shall come and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devoure before him, and it shall bee very tempestuous round about him. and majesty shall God declare his dis∣pleasure against the presumptuous sinnes of men; for he shall come attended with fire, and tempest; a devouring fire shall goe before him, and a fearefull tempest shall be round about him. He shall appeale both to the heavens, and earth,4 Hee shall call to the heaven above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people. as the witnesses of his just proceedings with men, and their too just deservings of judgements, and as the summoners of this great appearance. Let that heaven,5 Gather my Saints to∣gether, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. and that earth (saith he) summon together before me, that chosen people of mine, who have made an externall profession of my name, and have, by the continuall use of their sacrifices, outwardly renewed their couenant with me. Yea, those heavens shall not only summon his people,6 And the heavens shall declare his righte∣ousnesse; for God is judge himselfe. and witnesse their wickednesse, but shall also proclaime, and declare to the world, his apparent justice, both in giving his law, and in exacting it of them; neither shall their hypocrisie any longer deceive the eyes of men, for now, God himselfe (who cannot be deluded) will un∣maske their wickednesse, before all the world. Doe not thinke to choke me with the formalities of thine outward sacrifices,8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, &c. these are not the things I stand upon.9 I will take no bul∣locke, &c.
PSALM. LI. 4 Against thee, thee onely have I sinned; and done this evill in thy sight; that thou mightst be justified whē thou speak∣est, and be cleare when thou judgest.IT is only thy prohibition, O God, that can make a sin; I have sinned against men, but it is thy Law that I have violated, in that my offence; and if I have so carried my sinne that the world takes not notice of it, yet I know it cannot be hid from thee; thou onely, as thou canst charge me with it, so canst remit it unto me: I doe therefore freely acknowledge these horrible sinnes of mine, that I may clearely acquite thee in thy proceedings against me; the reproofe of thy Prophet, the menaces of thy judgement are too well deserved on my part; doe what thou wilt with me, I must needs justifie thy severe cour∣ses against me. 6 And in the hidden part thou shalt make mee to know wisedome.Notwithstanding this darknesse, that I haue brought upon my soule, by my sinne, thou shalt in thy great mercy so inlighten me, that in the secret corners of my heart, I shall understand that wonderfull mystery of my redemption and Salvation in the blood of my Saviour. 7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be cleane; wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow.Oh, doe thou then by that precious blood, sprinkled upon my soule by a true faith, (which was, and is figured in the legall aspersions) cleanse me from mine iniquities; so shall I be pure and innocent in thy sight; wash me in that all-sufficient laver of the blood of my Saviour, so shall I be whiter then snow, before thee. 8 Make me to heare joy and gladnesse; that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoyce.Doe thou speake peace and reconciliation to thy ser∣vant; renew the joy of my heart, in the comfortable assu∣rance of thy forgivenesse, that so my soule which is now dejected, and justly grieved, for my sinne, may find cause of rejoycing in thee. 11 Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.Howsoever I have deserved that thou shouldest cast me off, and strip me of all the graces, and gifts of thy spirit, which thou hast blessed me with; Yet, O Lord, doe not thou deale thus with me, but continue me in thy pre∣sence, and continue thy graces in me. 12 Restore unto mee the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit.How can I, O Lord, be other then pensive, and mise∣rable, whiles I stand in these termes with thee? what com∣fort can I finde, till my heart be assured of thy favour? Oh doe thou restore to me that joy of thine holy Ghost, which I have wont to feele in the cleare and evident ap∣prehension of my salvation; and though I have made my selfe a slave to my sinne, yet doe thou free me by thy good Spirit; and thereby doe thou maintaine me in this happy liberty of thy service. 16 For thou desirest not sacrifice, else I would give it; thou delightest not in burnt offerings.O God, it is not the price, or the outward ceremony of legall sacrifices, that either thou takest pleasure in,
or I affect to rest in; else I would be glad to come to thee with thousands of rammes; but these bare externall rites are not the thing thou requirest. Here is another and a better sacrifice,17 The sacrifices of God are a broken; &c. A broken and contrite heart O God thou wilt not de∣spise. which I present thee withall, even a broken and humbled soule; and this I know (such is thy wonderfull mercy) cannot but be very acceptable unto thee. PSALM. LII. OH thou vaine, and foolish Doeg,1 Why boastest thou thy selfe in mischiefe, O mighty man? the goodnes of God indureth continu∣ally. why doest thou thus pride thy selfe in Sauls favour, as if thou wert now able to doe what mischiefe thou listest? know, that there is an higher hand, that can either stint thee, or cut thee off, at pleasure, in vaine shalt thou strive against that ommipotent power, and goodnesse, which ever remaines ready to assist and deliver his Church. PSALM. LIII. THere is none so foolish, as an obdured sinner;1 The foole hath said in his heart there is no God. and that foole doth herein most approve his folly, in that (though with his mouth he dare not, yet) in his heart he hath said, There is no God; so lewd are his imaginations, desires, and affections, as if he verely thought and resol∣ved, there is no supreme power, that takes notice of, and will revenge his lawlesse impieties. See Psalm 14.4. and so for the whole Psalm.4 Have the workers of iniquitie no knowledge? &c. PSALM. LIV. OH God, doe thou save me by thy mighty power;1 Save me, O God, by thy Name, and judge mee by thy strength. and stand out for me in my just vindication, by thy strength. PSALM. LV. O Lord, doe thou destroy mine enemies,9 Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues; for I have seene violence and strife in the City. and for this cause doe thou divide them in their plots, and con∣sultations; that they may crosse each other in their con∣spiracies, and attemps, for I have, too well seene them apt both to devise, and execute violent practices against thy Church. It was not an open and professed enemie that hath12 For it was not an enemy that reproched mee, then I could have borne it, &c.
offered this cruell measure to me, for then I could have borne it off, & have wisely avoided it; or if I must needs have suffered it, I could have endured it with so much more patience, by how much I should have more expect∣ed it. 13 But it was thou, a man, mine equall, my guid, and my acquaintance.But it was thou, O Achitophel, a man of note, of noble rancke, of great respect with me; whom I used familiarly. 14 We tooke sweet counsell together, and walked unto the house of God in company.With whom I did oft communicate my counsells, as with my bosome-friend; yea, whom profession of reli∣gious devotion had (as I supposed) assured to me, as my true friend; whiles we oft walked unto the house of God, in a loving partnership of holy duties. 19 Because they have no changes; therefore they feare not God.Because their prosperity continues, and they finde no change of their estate, no interposition of crosses and troubles, therefore their hearts are hardened against that God, by whom they are insensibly blessed, neither doe they stand in awe of that hand of justice, whose smart they have never felt. PSALM. LVI. 3 What time I am a∣fraid, I will trust in thee.HOwsoever (such as my weaknesse is) I cannot but be overtaken with some feare, yet my feare shall never transport me from my trust, and confidence in thee; but in the midst of that my naturall timorousnesse, I will cast my selfe upon thee, and repose my heart upon thy mercy, 8 Thou tellest my wandrings, put thou my teares into thy bottle; are they not in thy booke?Oh God, thou takest full notice of all the persecu∣tions that I have undergone, thou notest every step of my long, and forced wandrings; Oh let not any of those teares which I shed, be spilt in the dust, keepe thou them, as most precious liquor, in thy bottle; Yea, Lord, thou hast done it already; thy favour hath prevented me, thou hast set downe the number of all teares in thy booke of everlasting record. PSALM LVII. 4 My soule is among Lyons, and I lie even a∣mong them that are set on fire, even the sonnes of men, whose teeth are speares and arrowes, and their tongues a sharp sword.O Lord, I am beset with cruell and bloody enemies, whose hearts are inflamed with deadly malice a∣gainst me; even men given over to wickednesse; whose mouthes are full of mischievous slanders, & reproaches, wherewith they indevour to wound me to the death. 7 My heart is fixed O Lord (or prepared) my heart is fixed I will sing and giue praise.O God, I doe not suddenly, and abruptly breake
forth into these praises of thy name, as a thing not be∣fore thought of, but I have seriously digested in my soule these my hearty thanksgivings unto thee. And therefore, (O thou my tongue) which is the on∣ly instrument wherewith I can expresse the glory of my God) be thou stirred up chearefully,8 Awake my glory, &c. to utter the praises of my gratious deliverer. PSALM. LVIII. IN stead of balancing all things by justice,2 You weigh the vio∣lence of your hands in the earth. ye weigh them according to the violence of your owne passions; that measure, which may satisfie your malice (and no other) is held sufficient. Neither is this any sudden surprisall with evill,3 The wicked are estranged frō the wombe: they goe astray assoone as they be borne, &c. but it is a long continued habit of wickednesse; their dispo∣sition hath beene perverse, and malicious; even from their infancy; and so they still continue, proceeding from evill to worse. My enemies, O Lord, are like unto Serpents,4 Their poyson is like the poyson of a Serpent; they are like the deafe ad∣der that stoppeth her eare, and their malice like unto deadly poyson; yet are they not like every Serpent; some there are, which are not so crafty, and whose poyson is not so deadly;5 Which will not har∣ken to the voice of the charmer, charme he never so wisely. but my ene∣mies are like the aspe, or adder, whose venome killeth speedily; and, which beside is so suttle, that laying one eare to the earth, and stopping the other with his taile, he eludeth all the power of whatsoever incantation; so doe these enemies of mine; no wholsome and holy advice can possibly fasten upon them, no threats of judgements can beat them off from their intended mischiefes. Let their dispatch be quicke, and sudden;9 Before your pots can feele the thornes, hee shall take them away as with a whirlewinde; both living and in his wrath. even before the pot can boile with a fire of drie thornes put under it; let them be consumed; yea, God shall fetch them furi∣ously away, as in a whirlewinde; swifter then thought, in the midst of their life, and the height of their strength, but in the extremity of his wrath. PSALM. LIX. THou seest, O God,5 Be not mercifull to any wicked transgres∣sors. that these agents of Saul doe ma∣liciously persecute me; they know well enough that I am innocent, and yet they seeke to take away my life; Oh doe not thou give way to their wilfull spight, and rancorous malice. Mine enemies are like to ravening dogges,6 They returne at even∣ing, they make a noise like a dogge, and go round about the citie. which run
about the citie, all day long, and onely late at night come to their kennell; in the meane time, barking and baying for a bone to supply their hunger, even so doe mine enemies incessantly bestirre themselves for my de∣struction. 9 Because of his strength will I wait upon thee; for God is my defence.The more strong, and the more malicious Saul is, the more will I looke up unto thee, and cast my selfe upon thee for thy protection and deliverance, for thou, O God, art my sure refuge in my greatest distresses. PSALM. LX. 2 Thou hast made the earth to tremble, &c. heale the breaches thereof, for it shaketh.OH God, thou seest that through thy just judgment upon our land, all things are out of order; and, as it is seene oftentimes in earth quakes, here are fearefull breaches made in our State, by reason of our sinnes; Oh doe thou heale up these breaches which our sinnes have made. 3 Thou hast made us to drinke the wine of astonishment.Thou hast made us giddy, and unable to guide our selves through astonishment at thy judgements, even as the man that is drunke with wine, reeleth, and knowes not where to place his steps. 4 Thou hast given a banner to them that feare thee, that it may be dis∣plaied because of the truth.Oh God, thou hast given to thy people an happy victo∣rie against the Syrians; and hast thereby incouraged them to depend upon thee, in these assaults of the men of Edom; that thou maiest thereby be glorified in the truth of thy promises, and performances. 6 God hath spoken in his holinesse, I will re∣joyce, I will divide She∣chem, and mete out the vally of Succoth.The holy God, who can never faile his promises, hath said that concerning me, wherein I will both trust, and triumph; Behold, he hath gratiously assured me that he will perfect, and accomplish this kingdome of mine, which he hath begun; & that part of it which is yet with∣held in the hands of Ishbosheth, Sauls sonne, namely Shechem and the vally of Succoth, I shall receive into my full possession. 7 Gilead is mine, and Manasseth is mine; Ephra∣im also is the strength of mine head, Iudah is my lawgiver.As for Gilead and Manasseth, which are the utmost coasts of Canaan, they are as surely mine, as if they had yeelded themselves into my hands already; & as for the tribe of Ephraim, I make account of that as my chiefe strength, and the maine power of my kingdome; Judah (as by Gods appointment and prediction was fore-or∣dained) is the tribe of authority, which shall give lawes to Israel. 8 Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shooe, Philistia tri∣umph thou because of me.And as for the bordering, but malignant nations of Moab, Edom, and Pilistia, I shall subdue them at plea∣sure, and destine them to those base offices, they are
worthy of; Moab shalbe as a pot of earth to wash my feet in, which I shall soone after breake into sheards; Over Edom I will trample, and insult, as it hath scorn∣fully insulted upon Gods people; and thou Philistia doe thou now domineere, and proudly tyrannize over Gods Israel, as thou hast hitherto done; and if thou finde cause; continue thy triumphes. Who, but thou, O Lord my God,9 Who will bring into the strong city; who will lead me into Edom? wilt bring me into those cities of strength, which pertaine to Edom, thou canst, and thou wilt give me victory over those proud neighbors? PSALM. LXII. CErtainly, man, of what degree or estate so ever,9 Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of hie degree are a lie; to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity. is meere vanitie, and utterly deceitfull in the trust, that is put in them, let vanity be laid in one end of the scales, and man in another, man shall be found lighter then vani∣ty it selfe. Oh then, trust not in that wealth,10 Trust not in oppres∣sion, become not vaine in robbery, &c. and greatnesse which is gotten by oppression, and violence; for ye shall finde no solid comfort, and stay therein. PSALM. LXIII. THose that maliciously persecute me,9 Those that seeke my soule to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the earth. shall by thy just hand be brought downe into the grave. They shall fall by the sword of the enemies, and be left in the field unburyed; as a prey to wild beasts.10 They shall fall by the sword, they shall be a portion for foxes. PSALM. LXIIII. THey have plotted secret devices against me;6 And the heart is deepe. accor∣ding to the depth of their malice, and the height of their skill. PSALM. LXV. O God,3 Iniquities prevaile against me; as for our trans∣gressions thou shalt purge them away. they are our iniquities that stand in the way of thy mercies, and prevaile strongly against all the endeavours of my reformation; but, O Lord, doe thou both mercifully forgive, and powerfully remedy our offences.
5 By terrible things in righeousnesse wilt thou answer us, O God.O God, thou in thine infinite justice wilt answer the prayers and supplications of thy Church, in marvellous deliverances, and in fearefull plagues upon thine e∣nemies. 8 Thou makest the out-goings of the morning and evening to rejoyce.Thou glorifiest thy selfe by the constant succession of the day, and night, and causest all the inhabitants of the earth from the Sunne rising, to the setting of the Sun, to rejoice and sing unto thee, for the great workes that thou hast done. 9 Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it, thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God which is full of water.After a faint and barren drought, thou graciously condescendest to send downe a fruitfull raine, upon the face of the earth; thou greatly enrichest it with plenti∣full floods sent out from God, out of the clouds of heaven. PSALM LXVI. 12 Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and water: but thou broughest us out into a wealthy place.THou hast caused us to be miserably trampled upon, by our scornfull, and imperious enemies; and hast put us to all manner of hard trialls, there is no afflictive element which we have not passed through, by thy just sufferance and ordination; but, at last, thou hast put an end to our troubles, and hast setled us in a quiet plenty. 18 If I regard iniquitie in my heart; the Lord will not heare me.If I give my selfe over to wickednesse, I have no rea∣son to expect favour from my God; how should I looke for other, then that he should marke me out for ven∣geance? PSALM. LXVIII. 1 Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered, &c.THy presence, O God, is with thine Arke; as that Arke of thine is now upon the remove, after a long rest; so doe thou, O Lord, arise, after thy seeming silence, and repose; and let thine enemies be discomfited and con∣founded. 4 Extoll him that rid∣eth upon the heavens by his Name Iah, &c.Extoll him that moves and rules, and governes the heavens by his mighty power, and dwells in that inac∣cessible glory; praise him in that his infinite and absolute being, which he hath within himselfe, without all rela∣tion and dependance; and in that bounty, whereby he communicates a being to all his creatures. He giveth plentifull issue to those that were child∣lesse,6 God setteth the soli∣tary in families, he bring∣eth out those which are bound with chaines, but the rebellious dwell in a dry land. and delivers the captive out of their thraldome, as contrarily those that are rebelliously wicked (however they might seeme fast rooted in a rich patrimony) he sends away into want, and exile.
O God,7 O God when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through the wil∣dernesse, what noble demonstrations hast thou given of old, to us thy people, & our forefathers, of thy power and providence; when thou wentest before thy people, in a pillar of cloud, and fire, through the wildernesse. Both in the heavens and the earth didst thou shew marvelous tokens of thy mighty protection,8 The earth shooke, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God; even Sinai it selfe was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel. and graci∣ous care for thy people; all the course of nature seemed to be miraculously altered to set forth thy power; Mount Sinai it selfe shooke at thy presence, in the delivery of thy Law. The Lord gave abundant matter of celebration and thanksgiving,11 The Lord gave the word, great was the com∣pany of those that pub∣lished it. and there wanted not store of messengers to publish his victories, or of damsells of Israel to ap∣plaud them, in their songs, and minstralsie. The Kings of the nations (who led forth their armies against Israel) were glad to flee apace for their lives;12 Kings of the armies did flee, and she that tar∣ried at home divided the spoile. and the spoile was so great, that the women (who staid at home) had their shares in the division of it. Though ye haue lien, like the drudges of the Camp,13 Though you have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be like the wings of a dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. in the hearths and sooty ranges of your tents, and thereby are soiled and deformed, yet, by Gods mercifull delive∣rance, the case shall be so altered, as that ye shall bee faire, and beautifull, like a pleasantly-coloured dove, whose feathers are as overlaid with gold and silver. And howsoever Gods Church seemed to be over-cast with darknesse of discomfort,14 When the Almigh∣ty scattered Kings in it, it was white as snow in Sal∣mon. whiles tyrans oppres∣sed her, yet now the Almighty hath subdued, and put to flight the enemies thereof, it was white and glorious, like to the hill of Salmon (of it selfe darke and shadie) when it is covered with snow. Sion (which is Gods hill,15 The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan; an high hill as the hill of Ba∣shan. where he pleaseth to dwell) may well compare with the fruitfull hill of Bashan; in height if it may equall it, in dignitie and priviledge it is much above it. Why doe ye so proudly vaunt your selves,16 Why leape ye so, ye high hills? this is the hill which God delighteth to dwell in. O yee mighty mountaines of the earth? ye are all of no value to this hill, where the God of heaven hath chosen to put his name. The great Lord of hosts is attēded with thousand thou∣sands of heavenly Angells,17 The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in his holy place. which are the chariots of de∣fence for his Church; powreful, irresistible; and, as he was waited on by these innumerable Angells, on mount Si∣ani, at his majestical delivery of the Law, so is he now at∣tended with them (though invisibly) in his holy hill of Sion where he manifesteth his gracious presence to his people. O Saviour,18 Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led cap∣tivitie captive, thou hast received gifts for men; yea even the rebellious al∣so, that the Lord God might dwell among them. thou art gloriously ascended up unto thine
highest heavens, having first happily triumphed over all thine enemies, and dragged them captive after thee; and immediately after that glorious ascension, thou hast sent downe thy Spirit, upon men, in the miraculous gifts thereof; which thou hast bountifully shed abroad, even upon those that were formerly rebellious against thee, that even by them thou O Lord mightest magnifie thy selfe in thy gracious inhabitation in them. 20 Vnto God the Lord belong the issues from death.Unto this almighty Lord, (who is the God of spirits) doe belong all the passages, both to, and from death; he can deliver his from it, he can bring his enemies into it, as seemeth best unto him. 22 The Lord said; I will bring againe my peo∣ple from Bashan; I will bring my people againe from the depths of the red Sea.The Lord hath said; ye well know what deliverances I have wrought for my people; how I caused them to passe through, and conquer the country of Og the great King of Bashan; and how I led them through the red Sea, in a miraculous fashion: my hand is not shortned, I will still worke the very like deliverances for my people. 23 That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of thy dogges in the same.That, as it was in the destruction of the Aegyptians, and in the conquest of Bashan, and those other proud heathens, so againe, thou maist rejoyce in the utter de∣bellation and destruction of them that oppose them∣selves spightfully against the Church, and Kingdome of Christ, so as thou maist trample in their blood, and thy dogs may lick it up. 24 They have seene thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King in the Sanctuary.Oh God, all thy people have seene, and rejoyced to see, with what exultation, and spirituall triumph, thou my God and King, in that thy holy Arke (when it mar∣ched from the house of Obed Edom) wentst up towards thy sacred Tabernacle. 26 Even the Lord, from the fountaine of Is∣rael.Blesse ye the Lord in the congregation of his people, all ye that flow from that plentifull fountaine of Israel. 27 There is little Ben∣jamin with their ruler, the Princes of Iudah, and their Councell, the Prices of Zebulun, and the Princes of Nepthali.There are the tribes of Israel, ready and zealous, to attend upon God; Benjamin the least of all the tribes, is not the least forward; but, together with their ruler, presents himselfe to this service: Iudah, the royall tribe, with their noble leaders, strives to be seene in the front of this glorious traine; and Zebulun & Nepthali, though most remote in situation, yet in this holy solemnity, are not behind their fellowes; but they and their Princes put forth themselves to celebrate this holy, and happy pro∣cession of Gods Arke. 28 Thy God hath com∣manded thy strength.O Israel, thy God hath decreed power and soveraign∣ty unto thee; so as, notwithstanding all oppositions, thou shalt be strong and mighty. 29 Because of thy Temple at Ierusalem, shall Kings bring presents unto thee.When thou shalt have established thy Temple at
Hierusalem; The Kings of the earth round about thee, shall come thither, and offer presents and sacrifices there unto thy name. Oh Lord,30 Rebuke the compa∣ny of the speare men, the multitude of the Bulls, with the calves of the people, till every one sub∣mit himselfe with pieces of silver; scatter thou the people which delight in warre. doe thou confound those professed enemies of thy Church; both their great patrons and abettors, as also their servile and ignorant followers; and humble thou them so farre, as till they shall submit themselves to thy spirituall government, and yeeld their homage and tribute unto thy Sonne Christ; and as for such as take pleasure in blood, and exercise wilfull hostility a∣gainst thy people, doe thou utterly destroy them, and their designes. The Gentiles shall come in,31 Princes shall come out of Aegypt; Ethiopia shall soone stretch out her hands to thee. and yeeld subjection to thee; even those (which are most unlikely) from the loines of Cham, the Princes of Aegypt and Ethiopia; these shall sue to be received into the bosome of the Church. PSALM. LXIX. OH God;2 I sinke in the deepe mire where there is no standing. I am ready to be utterly swallowed up with the evills, which are comne upon me; I find not any ground of comfort to rest my soule upon. The rulers,12 They that sit in the gate speake against me. and men of authority sticke not to raise slanderous suggestions against me. Let all those comfortable helps which thou hast given them here,22 Let their table be∣come a snare to them. be (in thy just judgement) turned into so many tentations, and occasions of their fall. Let the eyes of their understandings be so darkned,23 Let their eyes bee darkned that they see not; and make their loines con∣tinually to shake. that they may not see the things belonging to their peace; and as thou blindest their judgement, so doe thou also weaken their strength; that they may be no lesse un∣fit for action. Doe thou so farre give them over to the lawlesse de∣sires, and counsells of their owne hearts,27 Adde iniquitie unto their iniquity, & let them not come into thy righte∣ousnesse. that they may adde sinne to sinne, untill their measure be full; and may not recouer themselves by a seasonable conversion unto thee. Take them away by some sudden judgement,28 Let them be blotted out of the booke of the living, and not be written with the righteous. from among the living, let not their names be recorded a∣mong thy faithfull servants here, or thy Saints above.
PSALM. LXXI. 7 I am a wonder unto many.THere are many that gaze upon me in this my distres∣sed condition, as if I were some uncouth monster, some rare spectacle of thy displeasure. 16 I will goe in the strength of the Lord.I wil go on (through the power of him that inables me) to glorifie my God; and to win due praises to his name. PSALM. LXXII. 1 Give the King thy judgements, O God; and thy righteousnesse unto the Kings sonne.O God, thou, by whom Kings raigne, as thou hast called me, and my sonne Salomon after me, to the govern∣ment of this Kingdome, so doe thou inable both me (for that little time I have to live) and him in an happy suc∣cession to me, with those gifts of wisedome, and know∣ledge, as also of justice and holinesse, that are fit for so great a service. 2 He shall judge the people with righteousnes, and thy poore with judg∣ment.Let him governe thy people justly and uprightly; and even the poorer sort of them unpartially, and wisely. The very mountainous parts of the land, which use to be most barren shall under his peaceable and righteous government,3 The mountaines shall bring peace to the people; and the little hills, by righteousnesse. yeeld an happy, and joyfull increase to their owners. O thou Saviour of men (whose type my sonne Salo∣mon shall be) men shall serve & devoutly worship thee,5 They shall feare thee as long as the Sunne and Moone indure. so long as the Sun & Moone shall shine upon the earth. He shall be gentle and mild in his administration, and sweet and gratious in his heavenly doctrine,6 He shall come downe like raine upō the mowne grasse. which shall distill upon the hearts of men, as the still & gentle raine falls upon the mown grasse; so plausibly, so refreshingly. 8 He shall have domi∣nion also from sea to sea; and from the river to the ends of the earth.As the dominions of Salomon shall be large, and spread farre, so shall their extent be but a shadow of that unlimited Kingdome, which pertaines to the great Mes∣sias, whom he figureth; for behold, all the nations of the earth, even from one end thereof unto the other, shall yeeld their subjection to his spirituall Kingdome. 9 They that dwell in the wildernesse shall bow before him.Even those that are yet the most barbarous and savage people, shall submit themselves to the scepter of his Kingdome. 10 The Kings of Tar∣shish and the yles shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba and Saba, shall offer gifts.The heathenish Princes of remotest countries, yea, even those that are by the broadest seas divided from the firme lands, shal acknowledge the soveraignty of Christ; and, as in type, the Queene of the South shall come to heare and admire the wisedome of Salomon, not without rich gifts in her hand, so shall all the farre di∣stant Kings, and Princes of the world, come in and ac∣knowledge
their homage to this King of kings. He shall live for ever; when as all earthly Princes shall lay downe their corruptible crownes in the dust;15 And he shall live, & to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba, &c. and so shall his devout clients be affected to him, that they shall thinke their richest treasures fittest to be presented to him. His blessing shall make the earth exceedingly fruitfull;16 There shall bee an handfull of corne in the earth upon the top of the mountaines, the fruit ther∣of shall shake like Leba∣non. in so much as one handfull of corne sowne upon those very hills, which might cary the suspition of barrennesse, shall grow to a marvelous increase; and with a plenti∣full eare shall yeeld so large and strong a stalke, that, with the motion of the winde, it shall shake Cedar-like. PSALM. LXXIII. THere is neither pangs of body,4 There are no bands in their death. nor remorse and ter∣rour of soule in their death. They are pampered with the delicacies and pleasures of the world, they are full fed, and too well liking.7 Their eyes stand out with fatnesse. Therefore Gods owne people,10 Therefore his peo∣ple returne hither; And waters of a full cup are wrung out to them. and deare children come to this passe, seeing that they are exercised with store of afflictions, whiles the wicked prosper; as to say; Doth the God of heaven take notice of these things,11 And they say, How doth God know? &c. If I should yeeld to these weake thoughts,15 If I say I will speak thus, behold, I should of∣fend against the generati∣on of thy children. surely I should doe wrong to the happy estate of thy faithfull ones. When I lookt into the ground of this complaint,16 When I thought to know this; it was too painfull for me. I found it was too deepe for me, by my owne naturall dis∣course, to search into. Untill I betooke my selfe to inquire into the holy will of my God, revealed by his Prophets.17 Untill I went into the Sanctuary of God. Surely thou hast so contrived it,18 Surely thou didst set them in slippery pla∣ces. that these wicked men, howsoever their places be high, yet they are slippe∣ry; and such as they shall never be able to hold their feet in; but must needs fall downe into everlasting per∣dition. So, O Lord,20 So, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image. when thou stirrest up thy selfe to execute judgement, thou shalt shew how little thou reckonest of this vaine fancy, or dreame of the wicked mans pro∣sperity. So ignorant was I,22 So ignorant I was, as a beast before thee. and so brutish in my misconceits of these prosperous conditions of wicked men. Notwithstanding,23 Neverthelesse I am continually with thee; thou hast holden mee by my right hand. thou hast not taken advantage of my infirmities, but renewest thy favours upon me conti∣nually; and keepest both my heart, and my steps aright
with thee, and hast by thy mighty power upheld me from miscarying under this temptation. PSALM. LXXIIII. 3 Lift up thy feet unto the perpetuall desolations, even all that the enemie hath done wickedly in thy Sanctuary.OH God, doe thou stirre up thy selfe to worke the perpetuall desolations of thy enemies; trample them so downe, that they may never rise up againe; come speedily, and take notice of all that mischiefe which the enemie hath wrought against thy Sanctuary. 4 Thine enemies roare in the midst of thy Con∣gregations, they set up their ensignes for signes.Thine enemies insult, and triumph, in scorne of thy holy assemblies; and display proudly the monuments of their Idolatry, & despight of thy worship to the world; that all men may applaud their successe, and witnesse thy dishonour. 5 A man was famous acc rding as he had lifted up axes upon the thicke trees.It was heretofore thought an imployment of much honor, and merit, in those men who did cut downe and square the timber trees for the building of thy holy San∣ctuary. 6 But now they breake downe the carved worke thereof at once, with axes and hammers.But now, it is comne to that passe, that every man thinkes himselfe to deserve most thankes, that can doe most havocke to thine holy place; that can most spight∣fully demolish the walls, and breake downe the goodly seelings, and curious ornaments of thy Temple. 9 We see not our signes, there is no more any pro∣phet; neither is there a∣mong us any that knoweth how long.We have no testimonies left us, any more of Gods gratious presence with us; he hath so withdrawne him∣selfe, as that we have none of the wonted evidences of his favour to us; we have no prophet, of whom we might aske counsell of Gods purposes towards us, and be in∣formed how long we shall groane under this grievous calamity. 13 Thou brakest the heads of the Dragons in the waters.Thou didst confound the great and mighty enemies of thine Israel, in the red Sea. 14 Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the people in∣habiting the wildernesse.Thou didst destroy the great Princes of Aegypt, and gavest their flesh to be a prey unto wild beasts and rave∣nous fowles. 15 Thou didst cleave the fountaine, & the flood; thou driedst up mighty rivers.Thou clavest the rocke in sunder; and broughtst out a fountaine from thence, which flowed forth in plentifull streames; thou driedst up the great river of Jordan, that it might give free passage to thy people, through the chanells thereof.
PSALM. LXXV. WHen I shall in thine appointed time,2 When I shall receive the congregation, I will judge uprightly. take upon mee the charge of thy people, I will rule them justy, and unpartially. Both the whole world, and thy Church in speciall,3 The earth and al the inhabitants thereof are dis∣solved; I beare up the pil∣lars of it. are full of troubles, and dangerous affrights; it is I, whom thou hast, from all eternitie, ordained to be a mediator betwixt thee and it, that sustaine and uphold it from ruine. God hath set to every man his measure of sorrow,8 For in the hand of the Lord, there is a cup; & the wine is red; it is full of mixture, and he powreth out of the same; but the dregs thereof all the wic∣ked of the earth shall wring out and drink them. and affliction, and to the wicked he hath determined very grievous plagues, and sufferings which they must of force undergoe; and if his children drinke of the cleare wine of this bitter cup, they which are his enemies shall drink of the lees and dreggs thereof; and shall be judged in his extreame displeasure. The proud strength,10 All the hornes of the wicked also will I cut off. and power of wicked men wher∣in they boast themselves, shall be abated, and utterly dis∣appointed to their shame. PSALM. LXXVI. THere did he discomfit the mighty host of Senache∣rib; and confounded them in their military projects,3 There brake hee the arrowes of the bow; the shield, and the sword, and the battle. and defeated their bloody executions. Oh God,4 Thou art more glori∣ous and excellent then all the mountaines of prey. thou shewedst thy selfe more mighty then all the forces of those Assyrians, which dwell upon the mountaines; yea, then the strongest powers upon earth; though seconded with the advantage of the steepe, and rocky mountaines; The mighty warriors that came up against Jerusalem are spoiled, and have slept their last sleep, even in death;5 The stout hearted are spoyled; they have slept their sleep; and none of the men of might have found their hands. neither could any of those great champions be able to resist the destroying Angell. Thou canst, and dost so order the matter,10 Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath shalt thou restraine. that from the spight, and malice of thine enemies, thou shalt take occasion to win praise and glory to thy name; even their mischiefe shall, in despight of them, glorifie thee, in that those judgements which their malice drawes from thee, shall cause others to acknowledge and magnifie thy power and justice; and for the sequell, thou canst and wilt so restraine their power and tyranny, that they shall doe no further mischiefe to thy people.
PSALM. LXXVII. 2 My sore ran in the night, and ceased not.MY paine of body, and the sorrow of my soule conti∣nued upon me without any intermission. 3 I remembred God, and was troubled.I lookt up to God, and remembred him, who is the God of comfort, in whom I was wont to finde relief; and yet now my remembrance of him added to my trouble, in that I could not feele that aide and consolation from him which I expected, but rather found his countenance hid, and estranged from mee. 6 I call to remembrance my song in the night; I commune with my owne heart; my Spirit made di∣ligent search.I call to remembrance those songs of praise, which I have heretofore made unto thee, in the deepest night of mine afflictions. I reasoned with my selfe, my soule made diligent search into the experiments of thy former mercies. 10 And I said; this is mine infirmity; but I will remember the yeares of the right hand of the most high.Thus I said, but I tooke my selfe in the manner, and corrected my owne errour: and found that it was no∣thing but my infirmity, that I gave way to this temptati∣on: but now I will stirre up my drooping heart, and re∣call the thought of those many, and ancient favours, which the bountifull hand of God hath heaped upon me of old. 13 Thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary.Thy counsels and judgements, O God, are hidden from our reach; thou hast reserved them to thy selfe in the ca∣binet of heaven; it is fitter for us to adore, then search them. The waters of the red sea, and of Jordan, were sensible of thy divine presence,16 The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, they were afraid. and power, O Lord; and, as if they had beene afraid of thee, they ran away, and divided themselves into severall courses. 17 Thine arrowes also went abroad.Thy lightnings were shot forth of thy cloudes, as so many arrowes out of thy bow; and thine hailstones were as so many bullets, sent out from thence upon thine ene∣mies. 19 Thy way is in the sea; and thy path is in the great waters.Thou shewedst thy power in going before thy people, and making way for them through the midst of the sea; which is only subject to thy soveraigne command, and either stands, or moves according to thy will. PSALM. LXXVIII. 9 The children of E∣phraim being armed, and carrying bowes, turned back in the day of battle.EPhraim, which was the chiefe of the ten revolted tribes of Israel, though they were well armed, and fur∣nished with those weapons which might gall the enemy afarre off, yet (as a punishment from God upon them)
they cowardly fled before the enemie; and gave a foule example of base flight to the rest of their brethren. They, with their revolted associates,10 They kept not the covenant of God: and re∣fused to walke in his law. kept not the co∣venant which God had made with them, but turned a∣side to follow Ieroboam, in his wicked Idolatry; forsa∣king the law, and temple of their God. In the territories that belong to Zoan,12 In the field of Zoan. a chiefe citie of Aegypt, and the court of Pharaoh: where those mira∣culous workes would be so much more noted. Man did eat of that bread,25 Man did eat Angels food. which descended from hea∣ven, the glorious mansion of Angels. By giving them over into the power of evill Angels,49 By sending evill Angels among them. which are the executioners of Gods wrath: so as by their hand, many of those judgements, which were inflicted upon Aegypt, were wrought. He brought them into the possession of this promised land, where he hath placed his Sanctuary;54 He brought them to the border of his Sanctua∣ry; even to this holy moun∣taine which his right hand hath purchased. and to this ho∣ly hill of Sion, which he hath chosen to that purpose, ha∣ving cast out the Iebusites (who formerly possessed it) by his mighty power. So that he forsooke that Tabernacle of his,60 So that he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, &c. which was pitched in Shiloh: & had no further respect to that cho∣sen place. And withall gave up his very Arke,61 And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies hand. which was the strength and glory of Israel, and that signe of his pre∣sence, whereby he manifested his strength and glory to Israel, that Arke did he give up into the hands of the Philistims. Then the Lord who seemed to sleep,65 Then the Lord awa∣ked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. whiles he wink∣ed at the captivity of the Arke, rouzed up himselfe, to a revenge of these insolencies of the Philistims: and laid about him, as some mighty Gyant, whose spirits are cheared with abundance of wine, dealing judgements on all sides. And he smote the Philistims with a grievous,66 And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts, he put them to a per∣petuall reproach. and shamefull disease, in their hinder parts, even with sore Emerods, to their great paine and reproach. Moreover he refused to dwell any longer in Shiloh,67 Moreover he refu∣sed the Tabernacle of Io∣seph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim. which was in the tribe of Ephraim, the sonne of Ioseph, where his Arke had long sojourned. And made choise to fix himselfe at Hierusalem,68 But chose the tribe of Iudah, the mount Sion which he loved. with∣in the tribe of Iudah: even upon mount Sion, which he hath preferred to all the earth.
PSALM. LXXX. 1 Give eare O shep∣heard of Israel, thou that leadest Ioseph like a flocke, thou that dwellest betweene the Cherubims, shine forth.O Thou great ruler, and protector of thy people Isra∣el, thou that both guidest, and defendest the poste∣rity of Joseph, as a good shepherd doth his flocke, thou that art gratiously wont to manifest thy presence in thy Mercy-seate, which is between the wings of the Cheru∣bims, looke downe graciously upon us, and shew thy power in our deliverance. 2 Before Ephraim and Benjamin, and Manasseh stirre up thy strength; and come to save us.Before those holy remainders of the Tribes of Ephra∣im, Benjamin, and Manasseh, which still held close unto thee, notwithstanding the miserable defection of their brethren, even before these thy faithfull servants, stirre up thy strength, and worke our deliverance, 8 Thou hast brought a vine out of Aegypt; thou hast cast out the heathen and planted it.Thy Church of Israel is some generous, and pleasant vine, which thou hast brought out of that barren and hard soyle of Aegypt; and having cast out the Canaa∣nites, which were the wild and naturall plants of this place, hast here set, in this good land of thy promise. 13 The boare out of the wood doth wast it, and the wild beasts of the field doe devoure it.The heathenish Tyrans, that came up from Babylon and Assyria in open hostility to thy people, have made havocke of this thy vineyard, having rooted up the plants, and torne downe the branches of it; and their wicked complices, and followers devoure the grapes thereof. 15 And the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted; and the branch that thou madest strong for thy selfe.Be gratious to thy whole Church, and especially to that thine anointed servant, whom thou hast set over thy people, and advanced for the defence of thine owne cause, and the safegard of thine inheritance. 17 Let thy hand be up∣on the man of thy right hand; upon the Sonne of man whom thou madest strong for thy selfe.Doe thou prosper and blesse the great worke of thy deare and powerfull Messiah; even that Sonne of man, that Sonne of God, that God and man, whom thou hast set apart for this blessed worke of mediation; and furni∣shed with power, & graces fit for so glorious an imploy∣ment. PSALM. LXXXI. 3 Blow up the trumpet in the new Moone, in the time appointed of our solemne feast-dayes.DOe ye testifie the inward joy of your hearts by all kindes of melody, and especially by the loud noise of Trumpets; such, as wherewith ye celebrate the feasts of the new moones, and other set and Solemne festivities. 5 This he ordained in Ioseph for a testimony, whē he went out through the land of Aegypt.This he ordained to be observed of all the tribes, and especially those that are the ringleaders of the rest, even the posterity of Joseph; when he led his people along, frō
the land of Aegypt, through the wildernesse. I answered thee really out of the clouds;7 I answered thee in the secret places of thunder. from whence I sent thunder, and lightnings, and hailstones, upon thine enemies. I made proofe of thee,7 I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. whether thou wouldest meek∣ly, and faithfully attend upon my providence, and keepe my commandements, even at those waters, which justly had their name from that strife, which thou hadst with my servant Moses. See Deut. 32. verse 13.16 With hony out of the rocke should I have satisfied thee. PSALM. LXXXII. GOd is present in the Counsells of the great Rulers of the earth; he survaieth all their actions,1 God standeth in the congregation of the migh∣ty; he judgeth among the gods. and consul∣tations, and passeth judgement upon them accordingly. All things are out of order, good lawes are violated, authority is contemned, men are lawlesse.5 All the foundations of the earth are out of course. I have said of the great rulers of Israel; Ye are as the Angells of God to the people; yea, as Gods owne de∣puties upon earth, yea, as earthly images of God;6 I have said, Yee are gods; and all of you ate children of the most High; and ye are all in a peculiar manner chosen, and respected of the Almighty. But ye shall die like other men,7 But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes. there shall be no dif∣ference betwixt you and those other heathen Princes which know not God, in respect of the necessity, and wayes, and manner of your death, and dissolution. PSALM. LXXXIII. THey have laid their heads together, and consulted,3 And consented against thine hidden ones. how they may root out thine holy seed, those whom thou hast in thy secret counsell chosen for thy owne, and whom thou hast taken upon thee to protect. Those of the posterity of Esau & Ishmael,6 The Tabernacles of Edom & the Ishmaelites, of Moab and the Hagarens. and of Lot and Hagar which ought in regard of nearnesse of blood, to favour, and joyne with the other issue of Abraham and Jacob, they doe yet conspire all together against them, &c. And are in confederacy with the other neighbouring nations,7 Gebal, &c. and Ama∣leck; the Philistims, with the inhabitants of Tyre: &c. which professe and exercise hostility against thy people Israel. Doe thou utterly defeat, and destroy them, as thou didst the Midianites, and their five Kings;9 Doe thou unto them as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Iabin, at the brnoke Kishon. as thou didst Sisera the Generall of Jabins host, and his strong army, at the brooke and valley of Kison,
10 Which perished at Endor, they became as dung for the earth.Which perished in the plaines of the city Endor, neare to that famous river of Kishon; and left their car∣kasses upon the earth, for a prey to the fowles, and com∣post to the soile. 11 Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb; yea all their Princes, as Zeba and Zalmunna.Make their Princes, and nobles, like unto those Prin∣ces of the Midianites, which Gedeon pursued and slew. Doe thou whirle them away, & all their projects and attempts,13 O my God, make them like a wheele, as the stubble before the winde. and scatter them as stubble before the winde. PSALM. LXXXIV. OH God, how doe I, in this my exile, envie those little familiar birds,3 Yea the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for her selfe, where she may lay her young, even thine al∣tars, O Lord of hosts. the sparrow and the swallow, which are allowed to finde out quiet nests for them∣selves, and their young, in the houses of men; yea, neare unto thy very altars, O Lord of hosts; whiles I am driven away, and not suffered to enjoy the benefit, and comfort of thine house. 6 Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well, the raine also filleth the pooles.Who cannot be discouraged in their journie towards the holy Tabernacle, by all the difficulties of the way; for, though they passe through a dry, and barren desert, yet there doth their comfortable resolution make a well of refreshing; and afford them sweet, and pleasant showres; in that their heart is possessed with the expecta∣tion of that blessing, which they shall be partakers of in that holy mountaine. 7 They goe from strength to strength, every one of them in Sion ap∣peareth before God.And therefore they goe on chearefully gathering strength and courage, in the way, untill they come into the presence of the Lord, in his Temple, upon the hill of Sion. 10 I had rather bee a doore keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickednes.I would rather choose to be in the lowest and basest roome within thy holy Tabernacle, then to be setled in whatsoever dignitie, out of the bounds of thy Church. For the Lord God is the author and fountaine of all good,11 For the Lord God is a Sunne and a shield. & comfort, that can befall his children; & the pro∣tector and defender of them from all those evills, which they might be incident into. PSALM. LXXXV. 8 He will speake peace unto his people; and to his Saints; But let them not turne againe to folly.GOd will be exceeding gratious, no doubt, unto his people; both in his remission, and blessings, but let them take heed that they keepe stedfast unto him; and that they be not foolishly miscarried againe, into Idola∣try, and other such grievous offences; as whereby they may justly forfeit his favours.
The Kingdome of Christ under the Gospell,10 Mercy and truth are met together; righte∣ousnesse and peace have kissed each other. shall be exceeding glorious, and happie; for therein, the mercie and truth of God will approve themselves to be fully ac∣corded; In that both God will be found true, in the ma∣king good of his decreed threats of death to sinfull man; and also mercifull in saving mankinde (lost by sinne) through the blood of the redeemer; and in men answe∣rably shall righteousnesse and peace imbrace each other; for that, upon this imputed righteousnesse of Christ, joyned with true inward sanctification, shall follow an happie peace both with God, and with our owne consci∣ences. By the effects wrought upon men here on earth,11 Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righ∣teousnesse shall looke downe from heaven. shall God make good the truth of his promises; and righte∣ousnesse, which is the free gift of God to men, shall descend from above. His servants shall walke before him,13 Righteousnesse shal goe before him, and shall set us in the way of his steps. in holinesse and righteousnesse; and shall, by these graces, be directed in all the wayes of his commandements. PSALM LXXXVI. AMongst those that are falsly called gods, O Lord,8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord. there is none that is like unto thee; there is no lesse difference then betwene that which is nothing, and in∣finite. O Lord, doe thou give some good,17 Shew me a token for good, that they which hate me may see it and be ashamed. and sensible proofe of thy mercifull respect to me; such, as whereby mine enemies may be convinced; and may with shame con∣fesse their errour, whiles they spightfully said, there is no helpe for him in his God. PSALM. LXXXVII. GOd hath founded his city Jerusalem,1 His foundation is in the holy mountaines. and his holy Temple upon the mountaines, which he hath chosen. The Lord taketh more pleasure to dwell in his Taber∣nacle, and his Temple, on Sion hill,2 The Lord loveth the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Iacob. then in all the rest of the Land of Judah, or Israel. I rejoyce to see that the Church of God shall not al∣wayes be confined to these narrow bounds of Judea;4 I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me: Be∣hold, Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia, this man was borne there. but that it shall extend it selfe to all nations, in so much as I make account of the most unlikely nations of Egypt and Babylon to be admitted into the bosome therof; and even amongst the most spightful Philistims, and the Ty∣rians,
and Ethiopians, there shall be sonnes borne unto God. 5 And of Sion it shall be said, This and that man was borne in her: And the Highest himselfe shall establish her.And Sion, the true spirituall Sion, shall be so inlar∣ged, that it shall be said of every professed Christian, that he was borne in her; and God shall so establish her, that the gates of hell shall not prevaile against her. All the living waters of true comfort, all graces, and all salvation,7 All my springs are in thee. are to be found in thee onely, (viz. the Church of God.) PSALM. LXXXVIII. 5 Free among the dead.I Am as a man already admitted into the society of dead men, free and perfectly acquitted from all the cares and affaires of this life. 10 Shall the dead arise and praise thee?Shall the dead arise out of their graves, and live here among men, and celebrate thy praises? 12 Shall thy wonders be knowne in the darke? and thy righteousnesse in the land of forgetfulnesse?Shall notice be takē of thy wonderfull workes, in the grave? & shall the dead carkasses, in that estate of death where all these earthly things are forgotten, be sensible of thy righteous dealings with the living? 15 I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors, I am distract∣ed.My trialls and sufferings, as they have beene grie∣vous, and such, as have brought me to the very brinke of the grave, so they have beene also long, and tedious; for even from my youth up, hitherto, have I beene exer∣cised with them; and, besides the sense of evills, the feare and expectation of them hath beene, and is, no small tor∣ment and distraction to me. PSALM. LXXXXIX. 2 For I said, Mercy shall be built up for ever; Thy faithfulnesse shalt thou establish in the very heavens.AFter all my troubles, I came to this resolution; Thy mercy, O Lord, is as some goodly structure, which thou wilt never leave to build up (till thou have finished it) so firmely, that it shall stand for ever; Thy faithful∣nesse in making good all thy promises, is as surely esta∣blished, as the very heavens themselves. 10 Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces.Thou hast overthrowne the proud Aegyptian in the red Sea. 12 The North and the South, thou hast created them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoyce in thy name.Thou hast made all the coasts of heaven; The North and the South are created by thee; Tabor that is in the West, and Hermon towards the East, doe rejoyce in thee, and acknowledge thy power. 15 Blessed are the peo∣ple that know the joyfull sound.Blessed are the people whose eares are inured unto the chearefull sound of the sacred trumpets of God,
in their solemne feasts, and sacrifices. Thou spakest by way of vision to thine holy Prophet Samuel, and after him to Nathan thy prophet;19 When thou speakest in vision to thy holy One, and saidst, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, &c. and saidst; I have ordained to give help and victory unto my people, by my strong and mighty Champion, David. I will establish his rule over those which dwell on the Sea coast;25 I will set his hand also in the Sea; and his right hand in the rivers. and from the river Euphrates to the land of the Philistims; so as both the red Sea, and the medi∣terranean, together with the rivers of Euphrates, Jordan and the rest within that compasse, shall be swaied by his scepter. As he whom thou;27 Also I will make him my first borne; higher then the Kings of the earth. O David and Salomon doe repre∣sent (as types of him to come) is the first borne of every creature, and in all things hath the preeminence; so thou in figure of him, shalt be advanced to the honour of the highest Prince upon earth; having therein the true priviledge of primogeniture. See 2 Sam. 7.14.33 Neverthelesse my loving kindnesse wil I not utterly take from him, &c. The Spirituall government of Christ the Sonne of David shall continue as firme and stedfast,36 His throne shall be as the Sunne before me. as the Sunne and Moone, and those other heavenly bodies, which are the faithfull witnesses of Gods unfailable power,37 It shall be establi∣shed for ever as the Moon, and as a faithfull witnesse in heaven. and providence. But now as if thou meant'st to reverse, and recant that word of thine,39 Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant; thou hast propha∣ned his crowne, by casting it to the ground. and to frustrate the covenant with thine Anointed, thou hast, for the time, suffered his crowne to be puld off his head, and to be cast upon the ground; and his government to be openly despised. PSALM. XC. O Lord,11 Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy feare so is thy wrath. who is able to conceive how fearefull a thing thine anger is; and yet, it is fit to tremble at the con∣ceit thereof, for according as men doe more, or lesse tremble at thy judgements, so dost thou more or lesse execute them. Call backe those evills, which are threatned, and,13 Let it repent thee concerning thy servants. as it were, gone out against thy servants; and doe, as wee men are wont, when we repent of our actions, forbeare to punish us thy servants any more.
PSALM. XCI. 1 He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High, shall abide un∣der the shadow of the Al∣mighty.HE that puts himselfe under the protection of the Al∣mighty, shall be sure to be safely preserved under the shadow of his wings. 3 Surely he shall deli∣ver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noysome pestilence.He shall deliver thee from those secret dangers, which the craft of devils, or men have devised to intangle thee in; and from the fearefull and noysome contagion of the pestilence. 5 Thou shalt not be a∣fraid of the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flyeth by day.Thou shalt be freed from the feare of either secret, or open evils; whether by day, or by night; inward or out∣ward; from all the violent machinations of enemies, and from the immediate judgements of God that strike swiftly, and insensibly. 6 Nor for the pesti∣lence that walketh in darknesse, nor for the de∣struction that wasteth at noone day.Thou shalt not be afraid of that plague of pestilence, that infecteth secretly, and spreadeth insensibly, and yet destroyeth openly, and where it rageth, leaves the foot∣steps of death to be lamentably viewed at mid-day. 7 A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thou∣sand at thy right hand, but it shal not come nigh thee.In a common mortality, God shall make a difference betwixt his owne, and others; For his owne (save where and when he sees it best for them to suffer, and hath de∣creed their advantage by the stroke) he shall save, and preserve them, so as whiles many thousands fall on each hand of them, yet they shall be free. 11 For hee shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keepe thee in all thy waies.So great is his care of the good of his children, that besides his owne immediate protection, he shall give charge to his most glorious creatures, the Angels of heaven, and that not to one, but to many of them, to at∣tend upon their persons, and waies. 13 Thou shalt tread upon the Lion and Adder; the yong Lyon and the Dragon shalt thou trample upon.Thou shalt be delivered from the danger and annoy∣ance of whatsoever creatures may be hurtfull unto thee; whether by their violence, or by their venome: so as the most fierce, or the most poysonous shall be trampled up∣on by thee without harme. PSALM. XCII. 13 Those that are planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God.THose that are truly planted in Gods Church, being rooted in a lively, and stedfast faith, shall flourish, and spread forth into a fruitfull profession to the glory of their God, and benefit of others, and their owne hap∣pinesse.
PSALM. XCIII. THe great waters roare loud;3 The floods have lif∣ted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice; the floods lift up their waves. and the combined mul∣titude of the enemies of thy Church, O Lord, make great noises of threats, and furious attempts against thee and thy people. But the Lord on high can allay,4 The Lord on high is mightier, &c. and quiet them at pleasure. In the multitude of the sad and perplexed thoughts of my heart, the comforts of thy word and spirit,19 In the multitude of my thoughts within mee, thy comforts delight my soule. have cheared up my soule. Wilt thou, O Lord, have any thing to doe with,20 Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee; which frameth mischiefe by a law. or give any supportation to the tyrannicall government of wicked persecutors, which doe enact sinne and mischief; countenancing it both by their example and authority? No, thou hatest them and their divelish courses. PSALM. XCVII. See 2. Sam. 22.12.2 Clouds and darknes are round about him. See 2. Sam. 22.9, 13, 14.3 A fire goeth before him THere is much joy and happinesse laid up in store for the godly man;4 His lightnings en∣lightened the world. 11 Light is sowne for the righteous, and gladnes for the upright in heart. howsoever it doe not yet make any shew to carnall mindes; the seed of their comfort lies un∣der the clods of affliction, for the time, but it shall surely sprout out, and fill their hearts, when their harvest comes, with gladnesse. PSALM. XCIX. THe Lord of heaven ruleth & defendeth his Church,1 The Lord raigneth, let the people tremble; He sitteth betweene the Che∣rubims, let the earth. &c. and executes judgements upon the enemies of it; let all the people of the world therefore, in an humble feare, submit themselves to him, he manifesteth his presence upon his mercy-seat, betweene the Cherubims, let the earth therefore tremble at his majesty, and be afraid to oppose him, and his Church. Worship him,5 And worship at his footstoole. and bow downe upon the pavement of his Sanctuary. How gracious respect God gives to his faithfull ones,6 Moses and Aaron a∣mong his Priests, and Sa∣muel among them that call upon his name; they called upon the Lord, and he answered them. doth well appeare in those proofes of his mercifull audi∣ence which he gave to Moses and Aaron, among the
prime Rulers and Peeres of his Church, and to Samuel amongst his Prophets; all which were intercessors for Gods people, upon many occasions, and were heard so farre as to prevaile for them. PSALM. CI. 1 I will sing of Mercy and Iudgment; unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.OH Lord I will celebrate both thy mercy in blessing and forgiving thy people, and thy judgement in a∣venging thine enemies; and I will withall imitate thee in both, labouring to rule thy people both wisely and justly. 2 I will behave my selfe wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou come unto mee? I will walke within thine house with a perfect heart.I have vowed unto my selfe an holy and strict obedi∣ence and wise carriage before thee, in all my actions, that when thou shalt come to take an account of me (as I doe unfainedly desire thou shouldst) I may be well appro∣ved for my true sincerity of heart and life, in thy pre∣sence. 8 I will early destroy all the wicked of the land; that I may cut off all wic∣ked doers from the City of the Lord.I will roundly set my selfe to purge the land of all no∣torious offendors; and will indeavour that the Church of God may be freed from those wicked ones, which are a burden and a slander unto it. PSALM. CII. 3 My bones are burnt as an hearth.MY very bones are dryed up with sorrow, and are burnt blacke therewith, as an hearth is with the fire. 4 So that I forget to eat my bread.My heart is so wholly taken up with sorrow, that I cannot thinke of any earthly comforts, no, not so much as of my necessary sustenance. 6 I am like a Pelican of the wildernesse; I am like an Owle of the desert.I am left, and forsaken of all; and live, like one of those solitary, and dismall birds, which shriek out their mourn∣full notes, in a desert wildernesse, where either none heareth them, or those that doe heare them, hate their noise, as portending evill. 9 For I have eaten bread like ashes, and min∣gled my drinke with wee∣ping.As I have layne groveling upon the earth in my sorrow, I have taken no sustenance at all, except I have perhaps licked up the dust where I lay, and drunke in my teares in stead of other liquors. 14 For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust there∣of.For, howsoever the glory of thy Temple is utterly defaced, yet thy servants love the very rubbidge of those walls, and favour the very dust, into which it is moul∣dred. 26 As a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed.Oh God, the very heavens themselves, through our sinne, are made subject to corruption; they shall be both folded up once, as a garment; and changed, as an old gar∣ment
is changed for a new; so as these heavens shall bee once other then they are;27 But thou art the same. Onely thou art eternally im∣mutable. PSALM. CIII. WHo abundantly furnisheth thee with all good things, and reviveth thee,5 Who satisfyeth thy mouth with good things, so that thy youth is renew∣ed like the Eagles. when thou droopest under thy afflictions; as the Eagle, by casting her feathers and her beake, seemes to receive a new youthfulnesse. PSALM. CIIII. WHo art kept from all mortall eyes by that inacces∣sible light wherein thou dwellest above.2 Who coverest thy selfe with light as with a garment. Who layeth the floore of his upper loft,3 Who layeth the beames of his chambers in the waters, who maketh the clouds his charets, and who walketh upon the wings of the winds. which is the higher region of the aire, in the clouds; on which, as on some chariot, he seemeth to ride, in that he directs the uncertaine motion thereof, & so disposeth of the winds, as ordering their quick, and unsteddy agitations. Who maketh those glorious spirits of heaven, his messengers, which he sends on his holy errands,4 Who maketh his Angels Spirits; and his mi∣nisters a flaming fire. downe into the world; and causeth these celestiall ministers of his, to appeare in the formes of fire; and maketh both the windes, and fire to execute those offices of revenge, or preservation, which he committeth unto them. In the first creation,6 Thou coverest it with the deepe as with a gar∣ment. thou hadst covered all the face of that, which we now call earth, with the waters, as with a garment that enwrapped it; Vpon thy command the waters sunke downe into one place, so as,8 They goe up by the mountaines (or the moun∣taines ascend, the vallies descend unto the place thou hast foūded for thē.) the hils (thereupon appearing) seemed to ascend, and the vallyes to goe downe into their settled hollownesse; thither, by thy powerfull appointment, did the waters gather themselves, and there abide. It is he that causeth the springs to breake forth into large rivers, which finde passage in the lower plaines,10 Hee sendeth the springs into the vallies, which run among the hils. be∣twixt the hils. Out of the chambers of the clouds,13 Hee watereth the hils from his chambers. he sendeth raine to water the dry, and barren hils, Those trees which the Lord hath caused to grow,16 The trees of the Lord are full of sappe; the Cedars of Lebanon which he hath planted. even those goodly Cedars, which he set in Lebanon, are full of sappe, and thriving moisture, so that they grow tall and spreading. He hath given to every creature a severall dispositi∣on, and a severall way, and meanes of life,18 The high hils are a refuge for the wild goates and, &c. and hath fit∣ted
them with places meet for their disposition; so as the hils are the refuge for the wild goates, which to o∣ther creatures were inaccessible, &c. 21 And seeke their meat from God.And seeke to satisfie their hunger, with that prey, which the providence of God hath ordained for them, without their knowledge and expectation. That Spirit of thine, which moved, at the first, upon the face of the waters,30 Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created; and thou renuest the face of the earth. is still sent forth by thee, for the renuing of those severall creatures, whose daily morta∣lity requires the supply of a continuall succession, and propagation. If he doe but touch the hils, they smoake for feare of his mighty power,32 He toucheth the hils, and they smoake. which can shake, or remove them at pleasure. PSALM. CV. 15 Touch not mine An∣ointed.DOe not dare to lay hands upon those, whom I have peculiarly consecrated to my selfe and my service. 16 He brake the whole staffe of bread.He caused a great scarcity of bread, whereby the life of man is upheld, and maintained. 28 He sent darknesse, and made it dark, and they rebelled not against his word.He commanded a palpable darknesse to spread it selfe over the whole land of Aegypt; and, as Moses and Aaron obeyed in giving the command, so all the creatures yeel∣ded their willing obedience to it. PSALM. CVI. 15 He gave them their request, but sent leanenesse into their soule.HE gave them abundance of food, according to their desire, but withall, hee sauced it with judgement; causing it not to prosper with them; so as they did eate, but did not thrive withall. 39 They went a who∣ring with their owne in∣ventions.They were mis-carryed into spirituall fornication, committing folly with those idols, and false Gods, which they had vainly devised to themselves. PSALM. CVII. 7 He led them forth by the right way, that they might goe to a city of ha∣bitation.HEe led them by a pillar of cloud, and fire, till hee brought them into the cities of Canaan, which he had prepared for their habitation. 16 He hath broken the gates of brasse, and cut the barres of yron in sunder.He hath wrought out their freedome, against all dif∣ficulties, and hath removed all the strongest hinderances of their peaceable setling in the land of promise.
PSALM. CVIII. See Psalm. 57.8.1 O God my heart is fixed, &c. 7 God hath spoken in 8 his holines; I will di- 9 vide Sichem, &c. See Psalm. 60. verse. 6. and for this whole Psalme. PSALM. CIX. GIve him over into the rule and command of a wicked tyran, which taketh pleasure in blood;6 Set thou a wicked man over him; and let Sa∣tan stand at his right hand. and let his spi∣rituall estate be yet worse; let Satan, the great enemy of mankinde, have full advantage against him, and victory over him. As it was his common use, & practice to curse others,18 As he clothed him∣selfe with cursing like as with garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oyle into his bones. so let his curses returne upon himselfe; and take so full possession of him, as not only to enter into his bowels, but to soke into his very bones. I a tossed up and downe by the violent persecution of my enemy, as a locust is tossed with the winde;23 I am tossed up and downe as the locust. which is driven with every blast, here and there, where it would not, and is not suffered to rest any where. PSALM. CX. GOd the Father, in his eternall counsell,1 The Lord said unto my Lord; Sit thou at my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy footstoole. said unto his Sonne my Lord and Saviour, Take thou all power and authority, as the only mediator, and true King of my Church; untill I shall have utterly subdued all those, that dare rise up against thee; then, doe thou deliver up this royall state, and Kingdome of thy Mediatorship. The Lord shall send the scepter of thy power (O Sa∣viour) from out of Sion, and Jerusalem,2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, rule thou in the mids of thine enemies. (where thou first manifestedst thy glory) into all the coasts of the earth; in that all the nations of the world shall be subject unto thy spirituall government; Rule thou in the midst of those, which are yet thy professed enemies. Thy people shall willingly present themselves unto thee in thy holy Church, in that day,3 Thy people shall bee willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holinesse, from the womb of the morning; thou hast the dew of thy youth. when thy Gospell shall be powerfully preached unto them; even from the utmost coasts of the world; And, as the dewe falls sweet∣ly and plentifully from the wombe of the morning, so shall thine holy & vigorous professors abundantly come forth from thee, and shew themselves upon the face of the earth.
4 Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.Thy priesthood is everlasting, not temporary as the Leviticall; in thy person & office is, and shall be fulfilled that which was figured in the royall priesthood, person and name of Melchisedech, King of Salem; the King of righteousnesse, and peace. 6 He shall wound the heads over many coun∣tries.He shall bring downe, and trample under foot, Satan, and al his powerfull instruments, which labour to oppose his soveraignty, and rule in the Church. 7 He shall drinke of the brooke in the way; therefore shall he lift up his head.And in the heat of pursuit of his chased enemies, hee shall so hasten, that he shall onely content himselfe to drinke of the brooke, that runnes in the way; and shall speedily lift up his head, to follow his victory, which he shall gloriously atchieve. PSALM. CXI. 2 The workes of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that take plea∣sure therein.THe workes of the Lord are great; which are diligent∣ly searched, and inquired after; and profitably dis∣covered by those his wise and faithfull servants, who take pleasure both to note, and publish them. 10 The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome; a good under∣standing have all they that doe his commandements.The feare of the Lord is the chiefe point of all true wisedome; and those men have a right understanding of what is best for themselves, that give themselves wholly to the carefull keeping of his commandements. PSALM. CXII. 4 Vnto the upright there ariseth light in the darknesse.VNto those that are true of heart, God raiseth the light of comfort, in the midst of the darknesse of tri∣bulation. 9 His righteousnesse endureth for ever; his horne shall be exalted with honour.The mercifull man shall finde the fruit of this his charity, and holy beneficence, for ever; and God shall give him increase of true honour, & abundantly reward his liberality. PSALM. CXIIII. 2 Iuda was his sanctua∣ary, and Israel his domi∣nion.THe seed of Israel, and among them, in speciall, the Tribe of Judah, were his peculiar people, over which he raigned, and in whom he was honoured and sancti∣fied. 3 The Sea saw it and fled; Iordan was driven backe.The red Sea, as acknowledging the powerfull hand of God for the protectiō, & safety of his people, gave way unto their passage; and Jordan in the shutting up of their
journy, dividing his waves, ran backe, to give them way through his chanells. The great mountaines of the wildernesse shooke,4 The mountaines skip∣ped like Rams, the little hills like Lambs. and were moved sensibly at his terrible presence, when he delivered the Law to his people. PSALM. CXVI. I Was even in the very pangs of death;3 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the paines of hell gat hold upon me. and brought downe to the very brimme of the grave; and was, as it were, given up unto the estate of death. I said in the extremity of my sudden feare,11 I said in my haste; All men are liers. and per∣plexity, that all men are liers; that even those Prophets, which had foretold me the certainty of my succession to the Kingdom of Israel, were but deceivers; and no credit was to be given to their prediction. I will in my thankfull peace-offerings take up the cup of blessing, and joyfully acknowledge the Salvation,13 I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. which God hath wrought for me; and praise his name for my so gracious deliverance. The Lord makes high account of the life of his holy ones; so as he will not suffer them to miscarry,15 Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. but will rescue them from death, and disappoint the attempts of their enemies. PSALM. CXVIII. LIke as the Bees flie angerly about the man that stirres their hive, and threat their stings against him,12 They compassed me about like Bees, they are quenched as the fire of thornes. so doe mine enemies against me; but they shall soone be stilled, and mastered; They send forth a great flame of mena∣ces, and oppositions, but it shall be like a fire of thornes, soone out. The mutinous people have spightfully rejected the government of their Messiah, & of David,22 The stone which the builders refused, is be∣come the head stone of the corner. his type and predecessor; but now, behold, by the holy and wise or∣dination of God, either, and both of them are appointed for the chiefe stay of his people; so as the whole fabricke of the Church is coupled together, and resteth upon the foundation of that Christ, whom they have wickedly refused. God is the Lord which hath comforted us in our ex∣tremities; bring ye therefore abundance of sacrifices,27 God is the Lord which hath shewed us light, binde the sacrifice with cords; even unto the hornes of the altar. before him; and tye them with cords, ready for their
oblation, so thicke, as they can stand each by other, till they come up to the very hornes of the altar. PSALM. CXIX. 1 Bessed are the unde∣filed in the way, who walke in the Law of the Lord.BLessed are they whose hearts are upright with God; and who live conscionably according to the Law of the Lord. They make not a trade of any knowne, and willing sin, but frame themselves to walk in the waies which he hath chalked forth unto them.3 They also doe no in∣iquity, they walke in his wayes. I am exceeding low brought by thine afflicting hand; oh doe thou raise me,25 My soule cleaveth to the dust; quicken thou mee. and restore comfort unto mee, as thou hast graciously promised. 26 I have declared my wayes, and thou heardest mee.I have laid open my whole estate before thee, and thou gavest a mercifull respect to me. Oh let not mine eye betray my hart unto vanity, let me not so see,37 Turne away mine eyes from beholding va∣nity. that I be transported with any of these earth∣ly objects, from my perfect love of thee, and desire of heavenly things. 43 And take not the word of Truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in thy judgements.Oh God, continue, I beseech thee, as true faith in my heart, so the profession of thy truth in my mouth, for I have still hoped (and so shall doe) in thy righteous pro∣mises; who wilt graciously accept, and reward, both the beleefe of the heart, and confession of the mouth. 45 I will walke at liber∣ty, for I seeke thy pre∣cepts.I will walke free from all feares, and distractive cares; for my heart tells me, that I doe sincerely indevour to keepe thy Law. 48 My hands also will I lift up unto thy comman∣dements.I will earnestly imploy my selfe, and all my actions, to the performing of what thou commandest me. I am deeply afflicted in my selfe, to see the outrages, and rebellious courses of wicked men;53 Horror hath taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy Law. and am driven to great extremity, by their cruell attempts against me. Whole troupes of wicked men have conspired to undoe me,61 The bands of the wicked have robbed me. and to dispoyle me of my innocence. My soule is overcomne, and languisheth with a long∣ing desire of thy salvation;81 My soule fainteth for thy salvation, but I hope in thy word. yet still I am sustained by an assured hope of thy mercifull performances. 82 Mine eyes faile me for thy word.I have so long and earnestly looked for the accom∣plishment of thy promises, that I can scarce hold open mine eyes any longer. 83 I am become like a bottle in the smoake.I am dried up, and shrunke, and deformed and wrinck∣led with sorrow, even as a bottle that is hanged up in the smoake. 96 I have seene an end of all perfection, but thy Commandement is ex∣ceeding large.There is no earthly thing (be it never so excellent) but I have observed it subject to change, and corruption; but
thy Law, O Lord, is of infinite perfection, both for the wisedome, and justice of it, as also for the eternall conti∣nuance of it. O Lord,109 My soule is conti∣nually in my hand. I am exposed to continuall danger of my life, I am ready to have it taken from me upon all occa∣sions. Thou hast taken vengeance of wilfull sinners,118 Thou hast troden downe all them that erre from thy Statutes, for their deceit is falshood. and perverse hypocrites; for their deceit, wherewith they thought to beguile the eyes of men, doth but deceive themselves. O Lord, doe thou take my cause upon thee,122 Be surety for thy servant for good. and stand out for the protection of mine innocence. See verse. 81. and 82.123 Mine eyes faile. It is high time for thee, O Lord,126 It is time for thee, Lord, to worke; for they have make void thy Law. to shew thy detesta∣tion of the leaud courses of men, by executing due judge∣ments upon them, for they have so sleighted thy Law, as if it were to no purpose. There is so cleare a light in thy word, O God,130 The entrance of thy words giveth light. that upon the first sight thereof it gives great knowledge, and comfort to the beholder. See verse 53.139 My zeale hath con∣sumed me. Late at night, and early in the morning,148 Mine eyes preven∣ted the night watch, that I might meditate in thy word. did I give my selfe to the meditation in thy word. Many a time, in the day, doe I lift up my soule unto thee, and praise thy name in my continuall ejaculations.164 Seaven times a day doe I praise thee. PSALM. CXX. SVrely, the plagues of God shall be sent,4 Sharp arrowes of the mighty, with coales of Iuniper. as so many arrowes, singing into thy bosom; and his wrath shall waxe hot, and endure eternally upon thee. Woe is mee that I am forced to live amongst savage,5 Woe is me that I so∣journe in Meshech; that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. and barbarous men, that have neither feare of God, nor regard of humanity. PSALM. CXXI. NOne of all the creatures shall be hurtfull unto thee,6 The Sunne shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moone by night. the Sunne shall not offend thee with his scorching heat, nor the Moone with her cold and raw nightly vapors.
PSALM. CXXII. 3 Ierusalem is builded as a city that is compact together.IErusalem is stately built, for the outward fabricke, in type of the glorious frame of Gods Church; And is strongly, and unanimously compacted together; not di∣vided into several townes and religions, as it is was; but, once perfectly united both for structure, & for concord of heart, and affections. 5 There are set thrones of judgement, the thrones of the house of David.There doe yet remaine the thrones of judgement of the Kings of Judah, and Israel; the royll seat of the poste∣rity of King David; where he and his, sate to judge and governe their people. PSALM. CXXIIII. 5 The proud waters had gone over our soules.OUr swelling and raging enemies had utterly over∣throwne us, and brought us to nothing. PSALM. CXXV. 3 The rod of the wick∣ed shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.THe cruell oppression, and tyranny of wicked men shall not be suffered to prevaile long against the righ∣teous; lest they should be too much discouraged, and drawne into a weake distrust. PSALM. CXXVI. 1 We were like them that dreame.WE were so over-joyed with the blessing, that we could scarce assure our selves, whether we might beleeve that wee were indeed so happy, or whether it were a pleasing dreame. 4 Turne againe our captivitie, O Lord, as the streames in the South.O Lord, doe thou so refresh us with a full accomplish∣ment of our returne from this captivitie, as if thou shouldst cause some comfortable streames to flow through a dry Southerne desert, for the pleasure of the passengers. 6 He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing pre∣cious seed, shall doubtlesse come againe with rejoy∣cing, bringing his sheaves with him.As yet the returne from the captivitie is not perfect, and we that are returned, are subject to much oppressi∣on, and danger, from our heathen persecutors; but take comfort to your selves, O ye people of God, for howso∣ever ye are now distressed, and have a wet-seed-time, yet doubtlesse ye shall be at last abundantly comforted; and reape the fruit of your patient expectation.
PSALM. CXXVII. WHereas worldly minded men spend themselves in carking, and toyling,2 For so he giveth his beloved sleepe. and yet prosper not in their designes; God will so blesse his faithfull ones, that they shall without these turmoyles, and perplexities, enjoy themselves, and the comforts bestowed on them. They have those who shall stand by them,5 They shall not be a∣shamed, but they shal speak with their enemies in the gate. and be rea∣dy to maintaine their cause in all quarrells whether of law or violence. PSALM. CXXIX. THey have oppressed me with many,3 The Plowers plowed upon my backe, and made long their sorrowes. and intolerable injuries, and exercised their utmost spight upon me. PSALM. CXXX. MY soule waiteth for the Lord,6 My Soule waiteth for the Lord more then they that watch for the morning. and longs for his com∣fortable presence, more then the watchman, that is forced to wake the whole night, waiteth for the breake of day, that he may be discharged. PSALM. CXXXII. LO, we heard of thine Arke, O Lord,6 Lo, we heard of it at Ephrata, we found it in the fields of the wood. that it was for many yeares pitched in Shiloh, within the Tribe of Ephraim; & we found it, after the returne from the Phili∣stims; long fixed in the woody country of Kiriath-jea∣rim. I will spread my protection,16 I will clothe her Priests with salvation. and defence over her Priests, which are consecrated to me. I will inlarge the power and glory of the royall issue of King David;17 I will make the horne of David to bud; I have ordained a lampe for mine Anointed. and will cause a glorious successour to arise out of the loines of mine anointed. PSALM. CXXXIII. IT is as the comfortable dew that falls upon and from the fruitfull mountaine of Hermon into the fields of Bashan;3 As the dew of Her∣mon, and as the dew that descended upō the Moun∣taine of Sion, for there the Lord commanded bles∣sing; even life for ever∣more. or the dew that falls upon the Mountaine of Sion; For where there is
peace and concord, there God gives abundance of bles∣sings, both for the present, and for the future life, which is eternall. PSALM. CXXXVII. 7 Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, in the day of Ierusalem; who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundations there∣of.REmember, O Lord, the unkinde and cruell posterity of Esau; how spightfully they behaved themselves in the day, when Hierusalem was taken and sacked; how they insulted; how they incouraged our enemies, to rase, and demolish it, even to the very ground. 8 O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed; happy shall he be that re∣wardeth thee as thou hast served us.Oh thou Babylon, who, as thou hast destroyed this our goodly city, so thy selfe also art ordained to destru∣ction; it shall be an happy worke in those that shall have an hand in thy ruine, to returne thine owne cruell mea∣sure backe unto thee. PSALM. CXXXVIII. 1 Before the gods will I sing praise unto thee.EVen publiquely in the holy place, in thy presence, and the presence of thy blessed Angels, who are there re∣presented, and before the great peeres of Israel, wil I sing praise unto thee. 5 Yea they shall sing in the waies of the Lord.They shall celebrate, and set forth all the wondrous workes that thou hast wrought, and all the courses that thou hast taken with them, and tell what thou hast done, and what thou hast injoyned them to doe. 6 But the proud he knoweth afarre off.He so knowes the proud, that he will come neare them no way, but in judgement; and to that he hath long since designed them; PSALM. CXXXIX. 5 Thou hast beset mee behinde and before, and laid thine hand upon mee.O Lord, thy presence, and Almighty power encom∣passeth me, on all sides; and thou hast laid hold on mee by thine hand, so as there is no starting from thee. 6 Such knowledge is too wonderfull for mee.The knowledge of thy great, and glorious majesty, and infinitenesse, O Lord, is utterly past all humane com∣prehension. 9 If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea.If I could flie, as swift as the day, and remove my selfe into the utmost coasts of the world. If there were no other workmanship of thine, but that which thou hast shewed in framing the body,14 I will praise thee for I am fearefully and wonderfully made. and inspi∣ring the soule of man; O God, I can never praise and ad∣mire
thee enough for this only worke of thine. Thine eye,15 My substance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret: and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. and thine hand was upon that originall matter, whereof I was framed secretly in the wombe of my mother; thou sawest all the marvellous proceed∣ings of my conception, and formation here below. Thou takest notice and keepest record of all the mem∣bers of this body of mine, which thou hast made;16 And in thy book all my members were writ∣ten, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. which by severall degrees were to be fashioned, in the wombe; thou knewest, and in thy eternall decree hadst ordained them, when as yet they had no being. How wonderfully, and inconceiveably gracious are thy purposes towards mee, O Lord;17 How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God, how great is the summe of them? and how impossi∣ble is it for me, to expresse the specialties of thy bounty unto mee? PSALM. CXL. LEt that mischiefe,9 Let the mischiefe of their owne lips cover them. which the lips of wicked men have plotted, and uttered and wished against me, befall unto themselves, and so enwrap them, that they may not be able to extricate themselves. Let all manner of judgements light upon them,10 Let burning coales fal upon them, let them be cast into the fire. let it not be enough that fire fals downe upon them, but let them be cast downe into the fire. PSALM. CXLI. LEt my prayer ascend up unto thee,2 Let my prayer be set forth as incense, and the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice. with so sweet ac∣ceptation, as that fragrant incense of the Sanctua∣ry, which is every morning offered up unto thee; and let my supplication be as pleasing to thee, as that prescri∣bed meat offering, which is every evening made unto thee. O God, let good men reprove me,5 Let the righteous smite mee, it shall bee a kindnesse; let him reprove me, it shall be as an excel∣lent oyle which shall not breake my head, for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamity. this shall be a spe∣ciall favour and blessing to me, which in stead of hurt, shall be soveraigne and profitable unto me; This shall not be as a stone to breake my head, but as sweet oyle to refresh and supple it; which I shall be ready to repay un∣to them, in the day of their calamity. These men,6 When their judges are overthrowne in stony places, they shal heare my words, for they are sweet. when they shal see the judgements of God executed upon their rulers, and commanders (who set them on worke) shall then finde favour (in the day of af∣fliction) in my words, and shall acknowledge the fideli∣ty, and good purpose thereof. Our bones ly scattered upon the mouth of the grave,7 Our bones are scat∣tered at the graves mouth as when one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth.
through their cruelty, as chipps are wont to lye scattered about, when a man heweth wood. PSALM. CXLII. 7 The righteous shall compasse me about.THe godly men shall come about mee to see and ap∣plaud thy gracious deliverances of me; and to helpe mee to praise thy mercy. PSALM. CXLIIL. 5 I remember the daies of old.I Call to remembrance thy ancient mercies to me, and from thence fetch assurance of thy present goodnesse. Lest I be utterly comfortlesse, as those that are forsa∣ken of all hopes and possibilities of life,7 Lest I bee like to them that goe downe in∣to the pit. and have yeeld∣ed themselves over to the grave. PSALM. CXLIIII. 6 Cast forth lightning and scatter them, shoot out thine arrowes and de∣stroy them.OH God, doe thou take this revenge into thine own immediate hand; doe thou smite them with thy thunderbolt, or lightning from heaven; let those fiery darts of thine strike them through. That our daughters may be both goodly, and fruitful, like unto the corner stones of a royall building,12 That our daughters may be as corner stones polished after the simili∣tude of a palace. upon which the structure of a faire and lasting pile may bee raised. 14 That there be no breaking in, nor going out; no complaining in our streets.That there be no sacking of our cities, no carrying a∣way into captivity; no shrieking, and out-cries at the vi∣olence of an enemy raging in our streets. PSALM. CXLV. 14 He raiseth up all those that be bowed downe.THose that stoope under their afflictions, and are de∣pressed to the earth, he raiseth up with seasonable comfort. PSALM. CXLVII. 4 He telleth the num∣ber of the starres, he cal∣leth them all by their names.HE well knoweth the number of the starres, which he hath created; and causeth them in their seasons, so to arise, as if he called them up by their severall names.
It is he that makes thy cities strong, and invincible.13 Hee maketh strong the barres of thy gates. Whatsoever his pleasure is concerning his creatures upon earth, it is speedily and effectually accomplished.15 He sendeth forth his commandement upon earth, his word runneth very swiftly. He causeth a moist and thawing winde to blow,18 He causeth his winde to blow, and the waters flow. and then the waters which were bound up with a firme yee, doe returne to their former flowing. PSALM. CXLVIII. HE hath, by his eternall decree, ordered the motions,6 He hath made a de∣cree which shall not passe. and effects of these supernall creatures, which cannot be altered or eluded. Let the great God,7 Praise the Lord from the earth, yee dragons, and all deepes. the creator and preserver of all things have glory from all his wonderfull workes; let them shew forth his mighty power, and wisedome, in creating, and disposing of them; even from this inferi∣our globe of the earth, and sea; Let God be magnified in those huge, and fearefull whales, and sea-dragons, which he hath made, and in those vast and deepe waters wherein he hath placed them. PSALM. CXLIX. THose that meekly depend upon him,4 He will beautifie the meek with salvation. he will make glo∣rious, both with his rich blessings here, and with sal∣vation hereafter. Let that sword of the Spirit,6 And a two-edged sword in their hand. even that two-edged sword, which divideth the hearts and reines, the word of truth, be in the mouthes and hands of his holy ones. Which powerfull word of his,8 To binde their Kings with chaines, and their no∣bles with fetters of yron. in the mouthes of his faithfull messengers, shall be able to hamper, and re∣straine the most furious Tyrans of the earth; and bring the great Potentates of the world, in humble subjection, to the Gospell of peace. And (upon their perversenesse and obstinate continu∣ance in their sinnes) to denounce against them those judgements, which are written in the booke of God.9 To execute upon them the judgements written. This honor have all his Saints. Be∣hold then what honor God hath put upon his Saints, to be so powerfull agents both in mercy and judgements.
PSALM. CL. 6 Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord.LEt every creature that liveth, and breatheth upon the earth, praise the name of the Lord; and, in his kinde, yeeld glory to his Creator. PROVERBS. CAP. I. 1 The proverbs of So∣lomon.THe grave, wise, proverbiall sentences of So∣lomon. 2 To know wisedome and instruction.The use whereof is, to give true, morall, and spirituall wisedome and instruction to those that doe carefully read, or heare them. 8 Forsake not the law of thy mother.Doe not take advantage by the weaknesse of that sex, to thinke it safe for thee, to slight that charge which thy mother shall lay upon thee. 17 Surely in vaine the net is spread in the sight of any bird.Well might the foolish bird be warned, and kept off, by the sight of the net, which is spread for her; but shee being intent upon her food, minds not her danger, and so is heedlesly caught; so shall it be with thee, my sonne, if thou, in a desire of wicked gaine, shalt suffer thy selfe to be intised by leud men, &c. 18 And they lay waite for their owne blood, they lurk privily for their own lives.Whiles they thinke they lay wait for the blood of o∣thers, alas, they lay wait for their owne; and goe close∣ly to worke to betray, and destroy their owne soules. Evill gaine brings destruction upon the getter of it; so as he leeseth himselfe,19 Gaine, which ta∣keth away the life of the owners thereof. whiles he vainly thinkes to winne these outward things. 20 Wisedome crieth without, she uttereth her voice in the streets.He that is the eternall, & increated Wisedome of the Father, useth all meanes to draw men unto God; both by his workes, and by his word, he inviteth all men to the knowledge, and love of the truth. 23 I will poure out my spirit unto you, I will make knowne my words unto you.I offer unto you, both my word outwardly to your eares, and a plentifull measure of my spirit inwardly to your hearts, to make that word effectuall unto you. 26 I will also laugh at your calamity.As you have slighted, and disregarded mee and my word, so will I, you, in the day of your extremity; I
will not care that you are plagued; yea it shall be a plea∣sure to mee to see your just smart. Foolish sinners are hardened in their wicked courses by the sense of their continuing prosperity;32 The prosperity of fooles shall destroy them. & are there∣upon carryed on to their destruction. CAP. II. TO those that are true, and upright of heart he will,7 Hee layeth up sound wisedome for the righte∣ous. in his good time, reveale true and saving knowledge, and that sound spirituall wisedome which shall make them eternally happy. So powerfull are her intisements,19 None that goe unto her returne againe, neither take they hold of the pathes of life. and her infection so deadly, that it is a great wonder, if any of those, who are miscarried by her lustfull and wanton baites, doe e∣ver recover themselves againe, and returne to the pathes of life. CAP. III. LAy thou fast hold on the everlasting mercy,3 Let not mercy and truth forsake thee; binde them about thy necke, write them upon the table of thine heart. and truth of God, so as no evill occurrēce may slacken thy con∣fidence thereon; and, withall, be not thou removed from the exercise of mercy, and truth, towards thy brethren; make much of these, and keepe them close to thee, as thine owne soule. Withhold not good from them,27 Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. to whom it ought to be given or done, whether upon their deserving, or upon their need, when God gives thee power to performe it. CAP. IIII. AS the naturall sleepe arises from the vapors sent up out of the stomacke;16 Their sleepe is ta∣ken away, unlesse they cause some to fall. so doth the rest of these wicked men; when they have eaten wickednesse as bread, and powred in violence and oppression, as wine,17 For they eate the bread of wickednesse, and drink the wine of vio∣lence. then can they repose themselves, in a fals quietnesse, and contentment. For, as the heart is the fountaine of the naturall life, so it is of the spirituall; there is the seat of grace,23 For out of it are the issues of life. and holinesse; from thence flowes either the happinesse or miserie of man. Let neither thine eyes, nor thine other senses be drawn aside, either to the right hand, or to the lest;25 Let thine eyes look right on, &c. but let them be directed aright, according to the law of thy God.
CAP. V. 3 The lips of a strange woman drop as an hony combe.THe lips of an harlot are full of sweet intisements. 14 Drinke waters out of thine owne cisterne, and running waters out of thine owne well.Injoy thou the lawfull pleasures, and contentments of thine owne wife; and let her chast love be as some cleare, and pure waters out of thine own well, to refresh, and satisfie thee. Those streames of an happy, and comfortable issue, which shall be derived from thee,17 Let them be onely thine owne, and not stran∣gers with thee. let them be only thine owne, deduced from the chast and holy marriage-bed; Let not the adulterous wombe, or loines have any share in them. CAP. VI. 3 Make sure thy friend, &c.VSe all seasonable importunity unto that friend, to whom thou art ingaged, and make all meanes for a discharge from that friend, for whom thou art ingaged, that so, by this earnest solicitation of both parts, thou maiest be freed. The leud man composeth all his parts to deceit; every gesture of his tendeth to fraud;13 Hee winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers. the very motion of his eyes, of his feet, of his fingers, is vocall, and significant; and expresseth some secret intimation of guile. 30 Men do not despise a theefe, if he steale to sa∣tisfie his soule when he is hungry.Theft is an odious sinne, yet, if wee would compare the theefe with the adulterer, we shall finde much diffe∣rence, in the hainousnesse of the offence; Men are not wont to be inexorably cruell against him that steales out of his pure need. 31 But if he bee found, he shal restore sevenfold, he shall give all the sub∣stance of his house.But if he be found, how deare so ever he pay for his fault, by way of satisfaction, or mulct, the summe is yet accepted of the party wronged. But who so committeth adultery, &c. CAP. VII. BE thou so familiar with wisedome, as if she were thy owne naturall sister.4 Say unto wisedome, Thou art my sister. 14 I have peace-offe∣rings, with me, this day have I paid my vowes.I have plentifull provision of cheare, and besides, I can handsomely vaile our meeting under a faire pretence of devotion, so as thou maist boldly and chearefully resort unto my house. 23 Till a dart strike through his liver as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life.Thus he yieldeth to her lust, untill the revenging hus∣band, out of his just jealousie, give a deadly stroke to his
adulterous rivall, or till the just judgement of God seize upon body and soule; being thus heedlessely drawne in, as a bird is into the snare, not considering that under the shew of a little chaffe, or straw, her life is laid for. For shee hath first wounded, and after vanquished,26 For shee hath cast downe many wounded, yea many strong men have beene slaine by her. and slaine many; yea not only of the meaner and baser sort, but many that have beene most famous for valour, strength, wisedome, have beene foyled and undone by her. CAP. VIII. THus doth the harlot,2 Shee standeth in the top of the high places, by the way in the places of the pathes. by her secret whisperings allure men to their destruction, but the pure, holy, heaven∣ly wisedome of the glorious, and everliving God, doth openly invite all men to her gracious counsel, to her most chast, and happy inbracements. Shee therefore standeth forth in the most frequent, and conspicuous places of the city, and earnestly solicites all passengers, to give eare unto her for their owne salvation. Make no comparison of my instruction with silver and gold; Alas, these are base, and corruptible metals,10 Receive my instru∣ction and not silver, and knowledge rather then choice gold. not worthy to come into mention with those heavenly trea∣sures, which are contained in, and conveyed by my di∣vine counsels. True judgement, and skill how to manage all affaires,12 I wisedome dwell with prudence. doth proceed from me, and is inseparable from me; so as men have reason, for their owne good, to listen unto mee. Those that affect me,17 I love them that love mee. shall be sure not to lose their love, and recompence; for, as I have embraced them, with an everlasting love, so will I make it knowne to them, by my manifold blessings, and mercies concerning this life and the future. I the increated Wisedome of God,22 The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way before his workes of old. was with the Fa∣ther, from all eternity; neither was there any time, wherein I was not; I was with him, and in him, before a∣ny of the workes of his creation had any being. Then was I present by him,30 Then I was by him as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoycing alwaies before him. as one that was coeternal with him; and in whom we did mutually and infinitely solace each other, from everlasting.
CAP. IX. 1 Wisedome hath buil∣ded her house; shee hath hewen out her seaven pil∣lars.THe Son of God, who is the eternall Wisedome of the Father hath built his house, the Church of God; he hath laid sure foundations of it, and hath hewen out all the pillars thereof, in a seemly, and exquisite perfe∣ction. 2 She hath killed her beasts, shee hath mingled her wine, shee hath also furnished her table.He hath instituted, and addressed all his holy ordi∣nances, whereby he may feed up the soules of men to e∣verlasting life. 3 Shee hath sent forth her maidens; she cryeth upon the highest places of the city.He hath sent forth his holy, and zealous messengers, to invite men to the participation of his sacred mysteries, and they doe accordingly use all holy importunity to this good purpose. 12 If thou be wise thou shalt be wise for thy selfe.If thou be wise, thou thy selfe shalt reape the comfort and benefit of that wisedome of thine; others may bee profited by it; but the greatest advantage shall be thine owne, &c. 18 But he knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests are in the depths of hell.He considereth not that they are but dead men, which give way to her lustfull intisements; and that those with whom shee hath prevailed, are in the state of everlasting perdition. CAP. X. 10 Hee that winketh with his eye causeth sor∣row; but a prating foole shall fall.THe double dealing, and dissembling person causeth much sorrow at the last, both to himselfe, and to those that have beene deceived by him; but a prating foole that utters all his heart, procures stripes to himself without further danger to others. 11 Violence covers the mouth of the wicked.There is nothing in the mouth of the wicked but vio∣lent, and cruell designes. Both hee that smothereth his secret rancour under faire and plausible words,18 He that hideth ha∣tred with lying lips & hee that uttereth slander is a foole. and he that uttereth it in slan∣derous speeches, is a foole. CAP. XI. 9 An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour, but through knowledge shall the just be delivered.A Dissembling friend, with faire and false words, and semblances, draweth his neighbour into some dan∣gerous inconvenience; but a wise and just man will soone perceive his fraud, and avoid him, and the mis∣chiefe plotted by him.
A foolish man speakes spightfully,12 He that is void of wisedome, despiseth his neighbour, but a man of understanding holds his peace. and scornfully of his neighbour; but hee that is wise, concealeth his thoughts; and will not utter ought to the reproach of another. The mercifull man whiles he doth good to others,17 The mercifull man doth good to his owne soule; but he that is cruell troubleth his owne flesh. doth most good to his owne soule, which shall reape the comfort of all his beneficence; but he that is cruell to o∣thers, is (in that very disposition) the greatest enemie to himselfe. Though wicked men conspire,21 Though hand joine in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished. and joyne all their forces together, yet all their combination, and power, shall not free them from just punishment. Beauty is no more an ornament to a foolish,22 As a Iewell of gold in a swines snour, so is a faire woman, which is without discretion. undis∣creet, ungoverned woman, then a golden jewell is to a Swines snout; both are equally mis-placed, both are equally mis-beseeming. The liberall man that scattereth abroad his goods in a free bountifull largition,24 There is that scat∣tereth, and yet increaseth. so much more growes in wealth, (through the blessing of God) by how much more frankly he bestowes it. He that is an enemie to his owne thrift,29 Hee that troubleth his owne house shall in∣herite the winde, and the foole shall be servant to the wise of heart. and prodigal∣ly wasteth his estate, shall inherite nothing but an empty wind of applause, for the time, and afterwards, want and beggery; and he that was so foolish, as to mis-spend him∣selfe, shall come to be a servant (at the last) to him that is wise to get, and to keepe his owne. Behold, even the most just, and holy man upon earth,33 Behold, the righte∣ous shall be recompenced in the earth; much more the wicked and the sin∣ner. shall be sure of his measure of afflictions here, in the world; how much more shall the unconscionable, and ungodly man be sure to smart for his wickednesse, either here, or hereafter? CAP. XII. A Man that is meane in his owne conceit,9 He that is despised and hath a servant, is better then hee that honoureth himselfe, and lacketh bread. and yet hath somewhat to take unto; is better then a proud and vaine braggart, that wanteth meanes of necessary main∣tenance. The wicked man affects those meanes of fraudulent circumvention,12 The wicked desi∣reth the net of evill men. which he sees some crafty oppressours use, to their advantage. A good man shall (through Gods mercifull retribu∣tion) finde much comfort, and benefit,14 A man shall be sa∣tisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth, and the recompence of a mans hands shall be rendred un∣to him. both to himselfe and to others, from the gracious words, of holy counsell, which proceed from his mouth; and also from the holy workes of his hands.
16 A fooles wrath is presently knowne, but a prudent man covereth shame.A foole cannot be angry, but he must presently shew it, and breake forth into open distempers; but a wise man hides his passions, till he sees fit oportunities, and meanes to manifest them, so, as may be most safe and advantagious to himselfe. 20 Deceit is in the heart of them that imagin evill; but to the counsel∣lors of peace shall be joy,Those, whose hearts are full of mischievous devices, do, in the end, but deceive themselves, but those that ad∣vise, or procure good unto others, shall have much joy in themselves. CAP. XIII. 3 He that keepeth his mouth, keepeth his life.HE that lookes carefully to his tongue, restraining it from many, and offensive words, takes a safe course for the preserving of his life, which is oft times indange∣red by much, and wilde talking. 7 There is that maketh himselfe rich, yet hath no∣thing.There be some that bragge, and make ostentation of much wealth; affecting to be counted rich, when, indeed, they have little, or nothing, that may be justly called theirs. 9 The light of the righ∣teous rejoyceth, but the lampe of the wicked shall be put out.The heart of the righteous man shall be exceedingly cheared, with those true causes of joy, which God gives unto him, but the seeming, and false mirth of wicked men (wherewith they vainely please themselves) shall be soone put out, and end in sorrow. 14 The law of the wise is a fountaine of life; to depart from the snares of death.The Law of God, which is the matter, and scope whereto all the instruction of wise teachers tendeth, is that fountaine, from which spirituall and eternall life floweth, and the onely meanes to deliver the soule from the snares of everlasting death. 15 Good understanding giveth favour, but the way of transgressors is hard.Good insight into businesses, and discreet carriage of them, procureth thankfull acceptance, but those that take wrong courses cause much trouble, and vexation. 23 Much food is in the tillage of the poore.Even a poore man, by paines and industry may grow rich; and by his laborious tillage obtaineth a large croppe. CAP. XIIII. 3 In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride, but the lips of the wise shall preserve them.THe tongue of a foole is a scourge, whereby his owne pride, and over-weening is lashed; but the lips of the wise, are a safe defence for himselfe. 4 Where no oxen are the crib is cleane, but much increase is by the strength of the oxe.Where there is no husbandry, or use of the oxe, there needs no labour, to make the crib cleane, but that neat∣nesse is accompanied with want; as, contrarily, where
the oxen are imployed for tillage, the crib may be foule, but the barnes shall be full. The wicked man (who is indeed no better then a foole) imployes all that wit he hath, to deceive others.8 But the folly of fooles is deceit. The wicked foole makes himselfe merry with his sinne,9 Fooles make a mock at sinne, but among the righte us there is favour. and scoffes at the reproofe, and judgement which per∣taines thereunto; but the righteous hath a care so to be∣have himselfe, that he shall carry away favour both from God, and men. A man is best acquainted with his owne secret sor∣rowes; & knows where he is inwardly wrung,10 The heart knoweth his owne bitternesse, and a stranger doth not inter∣medle with his joy. whiles the world thinkes him happy; as contrarily, he may have hidden occasions of joy, which cannot be judged of by the lookers on. It is often seene,13 Even in laughter the heart is sorrowfull; and the end of that mirth is heavinesse. that whiles the face counterfeits a smile, the heart is inwardly heavy, and vexed; and after a fained, and forced mirth, returnes to the forme, griefe. A man that is froward, and perverse,14 The backslider in heart shall be filled with his owne wayes; and a good man shall be satisfi∣ed from himselfe. and that willing∣ly falls from his former good purposes, shall bee sure to beare the punishment of his owne wicked courses; and a good man shall reape the comfort of his holy carriage, and enjoy the conscience of his owne integrity. God will so blesse and advance the righteous man,19 The evill bowe be∣fore the good. that the wicked and unconscionable shall be glad to crouch, and bowe before him. He that spendeth his time in idle talke,23 But the talke of the lips tendeth onely to po∣verty. and doth no∣thing, shall be sure to come to poverty. A wise man, if he have riches, is much graced,24 The crowne of the wise is their riches; but the foolishnesse of fooles is folly. and adorned thereby; but a foole, though he have wealth, yet will be a foole still; and hath hereupon more occa∣sion to manifest his folly. He that feareth the Lord,26 In the feare of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children shall have a place of refuge. hath reason to be strongly confident in the favour, and sure protection of the Al∣mighty: and shall finde God, a like powerfull refuge even to his posterity after him. An heart that is clearely free from envie,30 A sonnd heart is the life of the flesh; but, &c. and all viti∣ous affections, is a comfortable preserver of the body; but &c. CAP. XV. A Well-governed,4 A wholesome tongue is a tree of life, but per∣versnesse therein, is a breach in the spirit. holy and discret tongue preserveth a man safe from dangers; and yeeldeth spirituall nourishment unto others; but perversnesse therein, is like a blustring winde among the boughes of the trees,
rending and tearing the life, and spirit of a mans selfe, and others. 11 Hell and destructi∣on are before the Lord, how much more then the hearts of the children of men?Even the devouring grave, and the lowest depths of the earth, lie open to the eyes of the Lord, how much more doth he behold the bottom of mans heart? 19 The way of the slothfull man is as an hedge of thornes.Every thing seemes difficult to a slothfull man; he is as unwilling to goe about his businesse, as a man would be to tread upon an hedge of thornes. 24 The way of life is above to the wise.He that is truly wise hath his affections, and conver∣sation above; and in the holy way of obedience walk∣eth on to eternall life. 30 The light of the eyes rejoyceth the heart; and a good report maketh the bones fat.Both the eye, and the eare yeeld much comfort, and refreshing to the soule; the eye is pleased with lightsome and pleasant objects; the eare with hearing of a good re∣port, concerning our selves; wherein we take so much contentment, as that hereby we are fed and fattened. CAP. XVI. 1 The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord.LEt it be yielded that a man hath power of his owne thoughts, so as he can digest and prepare what hee meanes to speake; and put all his words in due order; yet, when he shall come to utter them, God hath the dispo∣sing of his tongue; so as a man shall speake, not what himselfe hath contrived, but what God hath predeter∣mined. 2 All the wayes of a man are cleane in his owne eyes; but the Lord weigh∣eth the spirits.Every man is apt to thinke the best of his owne acti∣ons, and to justifie himselfe in his owne courses; but the Lord judgeth and examineth the soule, and spirit of man, and according to the truth of his inward disposi∣tions, so doth he passe sentence upon him, and his waies. 4 The Lord hath made all things for himselfe, yea even the wicked for the day of evill.The Lord hath in all his workes of creation and pro∣vidence had a just eye to his owne glory; in so much as the most wicked men, which might seeme to be most exempted from the regard and preordination of God, yet are not out of the compasse of his holy and just de∣cree; in that out of their evill he hath decreed to bring good, and to glorifie himselfe in their just punishment. 6 By mercie and truth, iniquitie is purged.It is not an outward sacrifice that God regards, in his remission of the punishment of our sinne; but where hee finds mercy to the poore, and uprightnesse of heart to∣wards himselfe, and men, there he is graciously pleased to forbeare his judgements; in as much as these graces, being wrought in us, by his Spirit, cannot but proceed from a true faith, where by our sinnes are purged.
As God raiseth Princes above other men,10 A divine sentence is in the lips of the King, his mouth transgresseth not in judgement. so he indu∣eth them with excellent graces, answerable to their high callings; he puts therefore divine sentences into their mouthes, which meaner men could not have attained unto; and giveth their tongues, even in doubtfull and hidden causes, to passe a wise and just judgement. A man needs no other inducement to labour,26 He that laboureth, laboureth for himselfe; for his mouth craveth it of him. but his owne profit, yea his owne necessitie; for it is that, where∣by he must sustaine himselfe, and uphold nature, which craveth it of him. An ungodly man if he cannot find oportunities of do∣ing mischiefe, will busily search for them;27 An ungodly man diggeth up evill; and in his lips there is as a burning fire. and as his heart is ill imployed, so his tongue is worse, for that is as a burning fire brand, to set all the world in com∣bustion. Old age (and the signe thereof,31 The hoary head is a crowne of glory, if it bee found in the way of righ∣teousnesse. gray haires) are a great ornament to a man, that lives justly and uprightly in the world. The lots are throwne at randome,33 The lot is cast into the lap: but the whole dis∣position thereof is of the Lord. and at peradven∣ture; but there is an over-ruling hand of God, that dis∣poseth of them, how they shall light; and hath certainly determined; that which carries a show of casualty. CAP. XVII. MEn use to speake, as they are: an high,7 Excellent speech be∣commeth not a foole, much lesse doe lying lips a Prince. deepe Philo∣sophicall discourse sounds ill from the mouth of a foole; a morall, and grave discourse of vertue and good behaviour, ill becomes a debaucht and vicious man; but, of all, it is most mis-becomming a Prince, to utter lies, and falshood. Secret gifts are wont to winne favour;8 A gift is as a preci∣ous stone in the eyes of him that hath it; whereso∣ever it turneth, it prospe∣reth. and much acceptation to the party that brings them; and if they fall into the hands of corrupt judges, have power to draw them into either part, and to sway any cause what∣soever. He that concealeth within himselfe an offence done to him, by his friend,9 He that covereth a transgressiō, seeketh love; but he that repeateth a matter, separateth very friends. takes a course to maintaine love and friendship; but he that will be calling every light unkindnesse into question, and expostulates upon every occasion, shall be sure to lose his friends. As it is with water, when it is dammed up,14 The beginning of strife is as when one let∣teth out water, &c. if the smallest hole bee made for a passage, it violently rush∣eth in, and beareth downe all those clods which were laid to keepe it in; so it is with contention; if the least way be given to it, it inlargeth it selfe, and
groweth furious, and strong by opposition, &c. 16 Wherefore is there a price in the hand of the foole to get wisedome, seeing he hath no heart?A wealthy foole doth in vaine hope by all his bagges to purchase wisedome, since he hath not an heart that is capable of it. 19 He that exalteth his gate, seeketh destruction.The proud man that builds his gate too high, for the offence, or overlooking of his neighbour, may indanger himselfe the sorer fall there from, and therefore workes perill and hurt to himselfe. 24 Wisedome is be∣fore him that hath under∣standing, but the eyes of a foole are in the ends of the earth.He that hath understanding, fixeth his eyes upon wise∣dome; and contenteth himselfe with that object, where∣as the eyes of a foole are inconstantly wandring, every where, and his thoughts settle upon nothing that may a∣vaile to his good. 27 A man of under∣standing is of an excellent (or coole) spirit.A man of understanding is of a well tempered spirit; not too forward in putting forth himselfe. CAP. XVIII. 1 Through desire a man having separated himselfe seeketh and in∣termedleth with all wise∣dome.HE that in a fervent desire of knowledge, hath set him∣selfe apart to his continuall study, laboureth to in∣forme himselfe in all points of wisedome; so as he may not be a stranger in any kinde of learning. 3 When the wicked commeth, then commeth also contempt.Wheresoever the wicked man commeth, he is apt to cast reproach and contempt upon every mans face. A wise man utters not all he knowes; his words are like to deepe waters,4 The words of a mans mouth are as deep waters, and the welspring of wise∣dome as a flowing brook. the bottome whereof cannot easi∣ly be fadomed; and his wisedome is as a living spring, which sends up full brookes that are ready to over-flow their banks; so plentifull is he in good discourse, and wholesome counsaile. 9 He also that is sloath∣full in his worke, is bro∣ther to him that is a great waster.The sloathful man is little better then a great spender, he equally consumes the estate wherewith he is entru∣sted. 10 The name of the Lord is a strong tower.The goodnesse, mercy, and power of the Lord, is a safe and strong refuge to all those who trust unto it. 4 The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can beare?A resolute and undaunted spirit is able to beare up both it owne infirmities, and those of the body also; but if the heart of a man be wounded, and dejected with whatsoever crosse befals unto it, what meanes hath a man any longer to subsist, and to sustaine himselfe? there is no remedy, but he must droope and yeeld. 21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue, and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof.It is a great power which the tongue hath, whether for life, or death; good words tend to life; evill unto death, whether to our selves, or others; and according as a man had rather to improve it, so it shall speed with him either way.
CAP. XIX. HE that fals rashly upon his determinations,2 He that hasteth with his feet, sinneth. without weighing all due circumstances, cannot but offend. It is through a mans owne foolishnes that he miscar∣ries in his businesses; and that he takes leud courses;3 The foolishnesse of a man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth a∣gainst the Lord. and when he justly smarteth through his owne fault, his heart fretteth, and his tongue muttereth against the Lord, as the author of all his harme and misery. Houses and riches may be derived to us by way of in∣heritance from our fore-fathers, without our care,14 House and riches are the inheritance of Fa∣thers, and a prudent wife is from the Lord. or in∣devour, but a prudent and vertuous wife, is a speciall blessing of Gods immediate choosing; and must there∣fore be obtained by our prayers at the hand of the giver. A man that is subject to often and extreame passions of anger, cannot avoid many and great inconveniences,19 A man of great wrath shall suffer punish∣ment; for if thou deliver him, yet thou must doe it againe. which he brings upon himselfe; and if thou doe, in a friendly manner, free him from some dangerous effects of his wrath, yet he will put thee to it againe. That which should be the chiefe desire of a man,22 The desire of a man is his kindnesse; and a poore man is better then a lyer. is his beneficence, and kindnesse to others; and if a rich man promise much, and performe nothing; a poore man that is unable either to undertake or performe is better then he. CAP. XX. EXcesse of wine beguiles a man of his wits, and senses, and exposeth him to the scorne and derision of every beholder; and strong drinke inflames the blood,1 Wine is a mocker, stronge drinke is raging. and makes a man apt to fall into raging distempers. See Prov. 18.5.5 Counsell in the heart is like deepe waters. A fraudulent diversity of weights and measures,10 Divers weights and divers measures. is ab∣hominable to the Lord. It is not hard by the carriage and disposition of the childhood, to judge, what is to be hoped or feated,11 Even a child is knowne by his doings, whether his work be pure or whether it be right. of a mans riper age; either good or evill begins to shew it selfe betimes. There are eares that heare not, and eyes that see not;12 The hearing eare, and the seeing eye, the Lord hath made even both of them. but if a man have an hearing eare, and a seeing eye; he is doubly bound to God, both for his sense, & the improve∣ment of it. Men esteeme much of gold, and precious stones;15 There is gold and a multitude of Rubies, but the lips of knowledge are a precious Iewell. but
the man that is furnished with learning and knowledge, deserves to be held of far greater price, then all these earthen treasures. 17 Bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but after∣wards his mouth shall be filled with gravell.The bread which a man hath got by fraud, and coze∣nage, seemes sweet and pleasant, at the first tast of it, but by that time he hath chewed it a little, he shall finde it to be but harsh gravell, that crasheth betweene his teeth, galls his jawes, and wounds his tongue, and offends his palate. 20 Who so curseth his father or his mother, his lampe shall be put out in obscure darknesse.Who so curseth his parents, his comfort and helpe shall be sure to be taken from him, when he hath the most need of it; and he shall be left utterly miserable and dis∣consolate. 24 Mans goings are of the Lord: how can a man then understand his owne waies?It is the Lord that disposeth of all the actions, and e∣vents of man; he hath ordered them, he over-rules and governes them, according to his owne will: It is not in the power of man, either to know what will betide him∣selfe, or to set himselfe in any good way, to will or to do ought that may be pleasing unto God. 25 It is a snare to that man who devoureth that which is holy, and after vowes to make inquiry.He intangleth his soule in the snares of death, who re∣sumeth unto a profane use, that which is once consecra∣ted unto God; and who, after he hath vowed ought un∣to the Lord, argues within himselfe, how to alter that holy purpose, and to defeat God of his due. 27 The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly.The reasonable soule is as a bright candle, which God hath set up in man, which gives light unto him for the finding out of the strange secrets of nature. Scourgings, and woundings are the best cure of the leud misbehaviour of wicked men;30 The blewnesse of a wound cleanseth away e∣vill, so doe stripes the in∣ward parts of the belly. only feare and smart can restraine them; sound punishment is therefore fit for them; even such stripes, as may pierce to the very inward parts of the body. CAP. XXI. 4 An high look, and proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked, is sinne.THe wicked man hath an haughty looke, and a proud heart; neither are his mis-dispositions onely sinfull, but those his very actions and indeavours (which in ano∣ther man would be harmelesse) are in him, no other then sinne. 5 The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plen∣teousnesse; but every one that is hasty, only to want.The thoughts and projects of him that is truly dili∣gent, are still to excellent purpose, and tend to the ad∣vancing, and enriching of a mans estate; but the hasty & rash thoughts of him that is too eager of the world, dis∣appoint a man, and bring him to want.
The wealth that is gotten by falshood, & lies,6 The getting of trea∣sures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seeke death. is alto∣gether uncertaine, and transitory; neither shall continue long, in any one hand; and besides, procures the utter destruction both of soule and body, to him that unjust∣ly gets it. It many times falls out,18 The wicked shall be a ransome for the righ∣teous, and the transgres∣sour for the upright. through the wise and just pro∣vidence of God, that those calamities which threatned to seize upon the godly, and righteous man, doe balke him, and fall upon the wicked and unconscionable. He that deales proudly in his anger,24 Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud wrath. is worthy to be branded with the name of an insolent scorner. The vaine and fruitlesse desire of a sloathfull man af∣famisheth him;25 The desire of a sloathfull man killeth him. whiles he longs for that which he will not set his hand to purchase; but will rather sit still and starve. CAP. XXII. THe wisdome of God hath not thought fit to make all men rich; or all poore;2 The rich and poore meet together; the Lord is the maker of them all. but hath intermixed the one with the other, that each of them might have use of o∣ther; neither is it for the wealthy to insult upon, or op∣presse the needy; since it is God, that hath made them both such as they are, and hee both can, and will re∣venge any unjust measure that is offered by the one to the other. The froward and perverse,5 Thornes and snares are in the way of the fro∣ward. is as a man on all sides en∣compassed with thornes, and snares; his stubbornnesse brings him into infinite perplexities, out of which he can finde no issue. The sloathfull man faines idle excuses,13 The sloathfull man saith, There is a Lion in the way. and preten∣ces of danger, when he should goe about his businesse. The plausible and smooth tongue of an harlot is no lesse dangerous, then a deepe pit fairely covered;14 The mouth of a strange woman, is a deepe pit, he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. into which if a man once fall, there is small hope of reco∣vering himselfe; and it is a fearefull signe and effect of Gods anger, to be given over to her intisements. There is a foolish waywardnesse,15 Foolishnesse is bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction shal drive it farre from him. that is naturall to the child, and cleaves close to his disposition, yet not so, but that it may be, with due correction, whip't out of him. As well he that unjustly takes from the poore to in∣rich himselfe; as he that gives to the rich,16 He that oppresseth the poore to increase his riches, and he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want. that which he unduly withholds from the poore, shall through the just judgement of God, come to want.
CAP. XXIII. 2 Put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man gi∣ven to appetite.BE carefull by all meanes to restraine thy wanton ap∣petite, if thou be a man given to please thy palate. Doe not too eagerly affect, and labour to be rich; and follow not thine owne carnall wisedome,4 Labour not to bee rich; cease from thine own wisedome. which suggests unto thee wrong wayes to the hasty purchase of wealth. 5 Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings, they flie away as an Eagle towards heaven.Wilt thou be so foolish, as to fixe thine heart, and thine eyes, upon that, which hath no constant being? For surely riches are of a flitting, uncertaine condition; they will not abide with thee, but, as with Eagles wings, will flie away from thee. 6 Eate thou not the bread of him that hath an evill eye, neither desire thou his dainty meat.Be not thou beholden to a niggard for his bread; neither doe thou wish to take part with him, in any dainty dish. For as in his heart he doth inwardly grudge thee every bit thou eatest;7 For as hee thinketh in his heart, so is he; Eate and drinke, saith he to thee, but his heart is not with thee. so, in his countenance, and gesture, he be∣wraies it; he bids thee after his churlish fashion to eate and drinke, but his heart repines at thy presence, and wishes thee further off. 8 The morsell which thou hast eaten, shalt thou vomit up; and lose thy sweet words.So shalt thou be vexed with thy grudging intertain∣ment, that thou shalt wish the churles meat were out of thy belly; and shalt repent of all those kinde words, that thou hast cast away upon so harsh, and unworthy an host. 18 For surely there is an end; and thine expecta∣tion shall not be cut off.For surely there shall be an happy and wished end, and a blessed reward of all thy holy indeavours; & thine expectation of a joyfull retribution shall not be disap∣pointed. Be thou glad to purchase the truth, at any rate, what∣soever it cost thee,23 Buy the truth, and sell it not. the peniworth is not deare; but when thou hast it, doe not part with it upon any termes. 27 A whore is a deepe ditch.See Prov. 22.14. 28 She increaseth the transgressors among men.She is the meanes to draw men into much wicked∣nesse. 29 Who hath wo? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath rednesse of eyes?Every wickednesse brings mischiefe with it; But who is the man that especially drawes upon himselfe all man∣ner of sorrowes, and inconveniences, both in soule, and in body, and estate? who is he that raiseth quarrells and contentions upon every trifle? Who is he that is full of idle, obscene, unsavory words? Who is he that in dis∣tempered fraies, gets stripes, and wounds? Who is he that afflicts his eyes which defluctions, and inflammati∣ons?
Who, but even he that sits long at the wine,30 They that tary long at the wine; they that goe to seeke mixt wine. that hunts about from one taverne to another, where he may finde the most exquisite wine, and the truest drunkards. Suffer not thine eyes to be tempted to take too much pleasure in beholding the pure,31 Look not thou up∣on the wine when it is red; when it giveth his co∣lour in the cup, when it moveth it selfe aright. and pleasing colour of the wine; when it shewes it selfe in the glasse; and when, through the strength, and spirit that is in it, it sparkleth right upward, therein. Thy head shall be so giddy,34 Yea thou shalt be as he that lieth downe in the midst of the sea, or as he that lyeth upon the top of a mast. and thy braine so turned within thee, as if thou wert laid sea-sicke in the midst of the ship; or as if thou laist upon the top of a tottering mast. Thou shalt be made so senselesse, that thou shalt not know, either what thou dost, or what is done to thee;35 They have striken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sicke; they have beaten me, & I felt it not; when shall I awake? I will seeke it yet againe. when thou art striken, thou art not affected with it; and when thou art beaten, thou art not sensible of it; and so shalt thou be besotted with this excesse of liquor, that thou shalt resolve after all correction, when thou awa∣kest out of thy drunken sleepe, to returne to the wonted course of thy drunkennesse. CAP. XXIIII. A Wise man hath much inward strength in himselfe;5 A wise man is strong, yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength. Yea, he that is a man of knowledge and understand∣ing, gives a great increase of strength, and defence unto the whole citie or community wherein he is. Wisedome is too high for a foole to attaine unto,7 Wisedome is too high for a foole; he open∣eth not his mouth in the gate. neither hath he any capacity of publique employments; either he is not called to counsell, or is unable to give it. He that is wickedly foolish, entertaineth commonly no thoughts, but sinfull.9 The thought of foo∣lishnesse is sinne. If thou doe out of a willing neglect,11 If thou forbeare to deliver them that are drawne to death, & those that are ready to be slaine. or unmerciful∣nesse, forbeare to deliver those, who are crushed by op∣pression, and led to an unjust death; and now are ready for a cruell execution. Thinke not to plead excuses of thine ignorance,12 If thou sayest, Be∣hold we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart, consider? &c. as to say; I knew not this man to be innocent, the other un∣just; neither the quality of his desert, nor the meanes of his delivery; for, there is an all-seeing God, who lookes upon the secrets of all hearts, who is privie to the fals∣hood of all thy vaine pretences, and dissimulation. My Sonne, as when thou eatest hony,13 My Sonne, eat hony, because it is good; and the hony combe which is sweet to thy tast; thou findest the tast of it sweet; and the hony combe, which thou tastest, is delightfull to thy palate; So shalt thou finde the knowledge of heavenly wise∣dome14 So shall the know∣ledge of wisedome be un∣to thy soule.
unspeakeably delectable to thy soule. 16 For the just man falleth seaven times, and riseth up againe, but the wicked shall fall into mis∣chiefe.For the righteous man, if he fall into manifold mise∣ries, and calamities, yet through the goodnesse of God, he shall be delivered out of them all; but the wicked man, through Gods just judgement, shall fall unrecove∣rably. 18 And he turne away his wrath from him.Lest he turne away his wrath from him, and turne it upon thee. 21 Meddle not with them that are given to change.Have nothing to doe with them, who are seditiously disposed; who vary from all good lawes and orders; and are affected to innovation and change, both of princes, and government. 22 And who knoweth the ruine of them both.Who knowes how soone, how suddainly God shall bring judgement and utter ruine upon both the wicked man, and the seditious? 26 Every man shall kisse his lips that giveth a right answere.Every good man will applaud and blesse the mouth of him that giveth an upright sentence in judgement. 27 Prepare thy worke without, and make it fit for thy selfe in the field, & afterwards build thine house.Look well to the setling, & husbanding of thine estate, and when thou hast well secured, and stocked, and furni∣shed thy selfe, then thinke of either building, or garni∣shing thine house; whereof let all the mateals be first provided abroad, ere thou beginne with the fabrick. CAP. XXV. 2 It is the glory of God to conceale a thing; but the honor of Kings is to search out a matter.IT is the great glory of Gods infinite wisedome, that he hath hidden mysteries, which our weake and ignorant capacity cannot reach unto; but as for these humane af∣faires, they may be searched into; and it is the glory of Kings to fadome them, even to the bottome; that so they may thereupon award just judgements upon all occa∣sions. Or, It is the great praise of Gods mercy that he hides and covers our manifold infirmities; but it is the honor of Kings, to finde out, and punish offences. 3 The heavens for height, and earth for depth, and the heart of Kings is unsearchable.As the heaven is exceedingly high, and the earth ex∣ceedingly deepe, beyond the reach of man; so is the heart of Kings; the very place wherein they are, and the due managing thereof cals them to great reservednesse. 6 Put not forth thy selfe in the presence of the King.Make not too much ostentation of thy wit, or wealth or bravery, in the presence of the King; as if thou wouldst offer to compare with thy superiours, under whose coun∣tenance thou must live; towards whom submissenesse of carriage would both better become thee, and more a∣vaile to thy good. 9 Debate thy cause with thy neighbour, and discover not a secret to a∣nother.If there be a difference betwixt thy neighbour, and
thee, take him aside, and in a friendly manner argue the matter with him alone; and offer faire termes of peace and reconciliation; and discover not a secret unkindnes to a third person, till thou seest no other way of atone∣ment. A seasonable and discreet speech is a most pleasing and precious thing,11 A word fitly spo∣ken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver. and no lesse delights the eare and the minde, then the most curious and costly imbroidery, or pictures of gold and silver, doth the eye. A docible and pliable eare accounts a loving and dis∣creet reproofe of his friend,12 As an eare-ring of gold and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise re∣prover upon an obedient eare. more precious then the rich∣est eare-ring of gold, or whatsoever more curious and costly ornament. The coolenesse of the snow or yce, wherewith the li∣quor is wont, in hote regions, to be tempered,13 As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithfull messenger to him that sends him. doth not more refresh the thirsty traveller, in the heat of summer, then a faithfull messenger doth refresh, and content the heart of him that sends him. He that makes bountifull and deluding promises of great gifts, which will never be performed,14 Who so boasteth himselfe of a false gift, is like clouds and winde without raine. is like a cloud which makes shew of that raine, which it will not or cannot yeeld. A gentle and submissive answere softeneth and scu∣pleth the most obdured, and inflexible heart.15 A soft tongue brea∣keth the bones. Take but a meet and moderate measure of those things which are most pleasing and delightfull to thy nature,16 Hast thou found ho∣ny? eat so much as is suf∣ficient for thee. or appetite. He that offers musicke to a man in deepe heavinesse,20 As hee that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vineger upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to an heavie heart. doth as unseasonably, as he that takes off a coverled in an extreame cold weather, from the bed; or as hee who to preserve nitre, powres vineger upon it, wherewith it is presently dissolved. For thus, thou shalt either win,22 For thou shalt heap coales of fire upon his head; and the Lord will reward thee. and overcome him with kindnesse; or, if he be stubbornly malicious, thou shall aggravate his judgement; and if he continue un∣thankfull to thee, yet that God for whose sake thou doest good for evill, will be sure to retribute it graciously unto thee. Looke how hatefull a thing it is, to see a cleare,26 A righteous man falling downe before the wicked, is as a troubled fountaine, and a corrupt spring. and pure fountaine annoyed with mudde, and filth, so odi∣ous a sight it is, to see a just man oppressed, and tyranni∣zed over by a wicked one. Hony is good, but to eate too much hony is not good;27 It is not good to eat much hony, so for men to seeke their owne glory, is not glory. so, to have a care of our owne reputation and honor, is good; but to seeke our owne glory and reputation too much, is shamefull and justly odious.
CAP. XXVI. 2 As the bird by wan∣dring, as the swallow by flying, so the causelesse curse shall not come.AS a bird flies swiftly away, and returnes not to thy hand againe; so the causelesse curse shall vanish into the aire suddenly, & never come neare thee, to thy hurt. 4 Answere not a foole according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto himAnswere not a foole in that idle, or malicious fashion wherein he provoketh thee, lest thou declare thy selfe to be as very a foole as he. 5 Answere a foole ac∣cording to his folly, lest he be wise in his owne conceit.In a discreet and sober manner take up a foole round∣ly; and convince him of his absurd cavills, and proud ignorance; lest otherwise he goe away more highly con∣ceited of his owne abilities, and victory. 6 He that sendeth a message by the hand of a foole cutteth off the feet, and drinketh dammage.No more can a foole doe his message, then a man without feet, can goe; he therefore doth as it were cut off his owne feet, that sends a foole on his errand; for both he is disappointed, and sustaines losse. 7 The legges of the lame are not equall; so is a parable in the mouth of fooles.As there is a disproportion in the legges of the lame man; whereof one is longer, another shorter; both, unfit for motion, so there is much unmeetnesse in a fooles pa∣rable; it doth neither agree with it selfe, nor with him that speakes it. 8 As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is hee that giveth honor to a foole.He that giveth applause, and honor to the person, or speech of a foole, doth as unseasonably; as he that binds up a stone in a sling; which should be altogether for eja∣culation; and should no more be fastened therein, then an high conceit should be raised and fixed in the mind of a foole, by our flattering approbation. 9 As a thorne goeth up into the hand of a drun∣kard, so is a parable in the mouth of fooles.It is no more fit for a foole to meddle with a wise speech, then for a drunken man to handle a thorne-bush; this wounds him, that shames him. 16 The sluggard is wi∣ser in his owne conceit then seaven men that can render a reason.The sluggard will not be beaten out of his sloath; and let never so many wise men perswade him to shake off his dull idlenesse, yet he persists in his errour, and thinks himselfe herein wiser then they all. 18 As a mad man who casteth fire-brands, arrows and death:There is little difference in this case betwixt fraud, and fury; He that purposely deceives his neighbour, un∣der a colour of jest,19 So is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, & saith, Am I not in sport? is no lesse prejudiciall to him, then a lunatike, that doth wrong out of frenzie, and distem∣per. 23 Burning lips, and a wicked heart are like a potsherd covered with silver drosse.Lips full of secret detraction, and slander, joyned with a false, and malicious heart; are like a base potsherd of earth, covered over with some filings of silver; under some shewes of friendship, there is nothing within but filthy hypocrisie. 25 There are seaven a∣bominations in his heart.There are many varieties of secret wickednesses in his heart.
A man of a lying tongue hates those,28 A lying tongue ha∣teth those that are affli∣cted by it. whom he hath wronged; only out of the conscience of his owne injurie; because he knows he hath deserved to be hated by them. CAP. XXVII. BE not too jocond,1 Boast not thy selfe of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. or too confident of that which thou wilt doe, or have, to morrow; for thou knowest not what changes may fall out in a day. A fooles wrath is more troublesome to beare,3 A fooles wrath is heavier then them both. and more intolerable, then they. Doe not rather make choice in the day of thine adver∣sity, to repaire for comfort, to the house of thy brother,10 Neither goe into thy brothers house in the day of thy calamitie; for better is a neighbour that is neare, then a brother far off. then of thy tried and faithfull friend; for a true hearted loving neighbour is better then an overlie, and unrespe∣ctive brother. The false acclamation,14 He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning it shall be counted a curse to him. and hollowly officious com∣plement of a formall friend, shall speed no better with a wise man, then if he had entertained him with a curse; and that flattery of his shall turne to a curse upon his owne head. Shee can no more be hid,16 Who so hideth her, hideth the winde, and the ointment of his right hand which bewrayeth himselfe. then the winde that blow∣eth upon the face, or the oylely substance of the ointment upon the hand; these both of them will be perceived; so will the unquiet spirit of a contentious woman. As yron,17 Iron sharpeneth y∣ron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend. or steele getteth an edge by the attrition of metall of the same kinde; so by the conversation of one friend with another, are the good parts, and faculties of men increased. As he that lookes into the water,19 As in water face answereth to face; so the heart of man to man. sees there his owne face, so he that lookes into his friends heart, sees there his owne heart. There is no way so sure to try a mans discretion,21 As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, so to a man is his praise. and temper; as by praising him, if he be vaine and light hee will be puffed up with it, if he be wise and solide; he will be no whit moved therewith. Be diligent, above all parts of husbandry,23 Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks; and looke well to thy heards. in that which concernes thy cattle, whether flocks, or heards, as that which affordeth the most certaine, and constant in∣crease. For the money that thou laiest up,24 For riches are not for ever; and doth the crowne endure to every generation? and houshold trea∣sure is fickle, and subject to sudden losse, and thy honor and dignity will not last alwaies; but the benefit that a∣rises from thy cattell, continues. For the earth in a constant succession yeelds thee grasse and hay, &c.25 The hay appeareth & the tender grasse shew∣eth it selfe.
CAP. XXVIII. 1 The wicked flee when no man pursues.THe wicked man hath such affrights within his owne conscience, that he is subject to be terrified with eve∣ry outward occasion; and when he hath no enemie, is apt to pursue himselfe. 2 For the transgression of a land, many are the princes thereof, &c.The wickednesse of a land is the cause of the manifold changes of the Princes, and governours thereof, whereby both the people and rulers conspiring in evill, are puni∣shed. 3 A poore man that oppresseth the poore is like a sweeping raine which leaveth no food.A rich oppressor leaves a man poore, but a poore op∣pressor leaves him nothing. Those that doe willingly breake, and cast off the law of God,4 They that forsake the law praise the wick∣ed. doe, in so doing, give approbation and incou∣ragement to wickednesse. 5 They that seeke the Lord, understād all things.They that are true hearted to God, and conscionable in their waies, have so much light from Gods Spirit, as that they understand their whole duty to God; they know both what they should doe, and how they should performe it. 17 A man that doth violence to the blood of any person shall flie to the pit, let no man stay him.A man that hath embrued his hand in innocent blood, driven by the horror of his conscience, flies he knowes not whither; even into the mouth of the pit; such a man runnes into the very jawes of death; neither let any man offer to stay him from that deserved judgement; It is not for any eye to pitty him that hath beene so cruell to another. 19 He that followeth strange persons shall have poverty enough.He that followeth vaine and idle persons shall fall in∣to extreame poverty. He that would be rich too soone, not caring by what meanes (how indirect soever) he obtaine wealth,22 Hee that hasteth to be rich hath an evill eye; and considereth not that poverty shall come upon him. that man hath a covetous eye, and a base niggardly heart; and knowes not that through the just judgement of God, this his immoderate eagernesse shall be punished with want, and beggery. 24 Who so robbeth his father or his mother and saith it is no transgression, the same is a companion of a destroyer.A rebellious unthrift that (notwithstanding all good counsell to the contrary) wasteth the goods of his pa∣rents, and will not be convinced of his offence, but per∣sists in the maintenance of his lawlesse courses, is, for the haynousnes of his sin, in the next degree to a murtherer.
CAP. XXIX. A Man that flattereth his neighbour,5 A man that flattereth his neighbour, spreadeth a net for his feet. goes about to doe him a secret mischiefe, and doth, as it were, lay a net to catch, and intangle him to his ruine. Those that are wilfully wicked,8 Scornfull men bring a city into a snare. and doe scornfully re∣ject all good counsell and reproofe, are the meanes to draw downe judgemets upon the very city where they dwell. Whether a wise man deale with him seriously and severely, or whether jestingly and merrily, all is one,9 Whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest. he shall not be able to prevaile; either for his owne peace, or the others reformation. But the righteous man contrarily seeks to preserve his life, and to save his soule.10 But the just seeke his soule. Such as the ruler is, such will be his attendants;12 If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. if the governour be one whose eares are open to either flatte∣ries, or slanders; his followers will frame themselves to feed his wicked humors in all things. The innocent poore man,13 The poore and the deceitfull man meet toge∣ther, the Lord lighteneth both their eyes. and the crafty griping usu∣rer meet both together, and the Lord causeth his Sun to shine upon them both, maintaining both in life, doing good outwardly, even to the worst-deserving. Where God withdraweth himselfe,18 Where there is no vision, the people perish. and doth not re∣veale his will to any nation, or people, there is no ordi∣nary meanes of keeping their soules from perishing. He that is of a servile and sturdy disposition will not be corrected, without blowes;19 A servant will not be corrected with words; for though he understand, he will not answer. for though he doe well enough understand a verball reproofe, yet he is no whit moved to an answerable regard of it. He heareth men urged with adjurations,24 He heareth cursing and bewrayeth it not. whether they have stolne the thing, or know the theefe; and yet keeps his wicked counsell, and will not bewray the male∣factor. That man whose heart is overcome with a weake and diffident feare,25 The feare of a man bringeth a snare. not daring to cast himselfe upon the care and providence of the Almighty, bringeth-misery upon himselfe. It is ordinary for men,26 Many seeke the ru∣lers face (or favour) but e∣very mans judgement commeth of the Lord. when their cause is to be heard to make friends to the judge; neglecting in the meane time to commit themselves & their case to the Almigh∣ty; in whose hand the Judges heart is; whereas they ought first to begin with God, which can over-rule all the actions, and purposes of men.
CAP. XXX. 2 Surely, I am more brutish then any man, &c.SVrely, I Agur am sufficiently conscious to mine own ignorance,3 I neither learned wise∣dome, nor have the know∣ledge of the holy. and unworthinesse; (of my selfe) I do, I can know nothing; and therefore am (as of my selfe) utterly unable to reach unto the great misteries of salvation. 4 Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descen∣ded? who hath gathered the winde in his fists; who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath e∣stablished all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his sons name, if thou canst tell?Indeed, what man can doe it? alas, how poore and impotent creatures are we? Is there any of us able to as∣cend up into heaven, and to descend thence againe; yea, have we power to command ought in these lower regi∣ons? have we the rule of the winds, of the waters, of the earth? shew me the man that can or dare arrogate this power to himselfe? Offer no unjust measure to the meanest person; do not wrongfully accuse a servant to his master;10 Accuse not a ser∣vant to his master, lest he curse thee, and thou bee found guilty. lest in the bit∣ternesse of his soule he curse thee, and God hearing him shall punish thy guiltinesse. 11 There is a generati∣on that curseth their Fa∣ther, and doth not blesse their mother.There are foure kinds of men worthy of our avoi∣dance, and detestation, the first is of gracelesse children, who curse those parents, from whom they have received their life and being. 12 There is a genera∣tion that are pure in their owne eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthi∣nesse.The next is of false hypocrites and selfe-pleasers, who thinke themselves holy and just, whiles yet they are full of wickednesse. 13 There is a generati∣on, oh how lofty are their eyes! and their eye-lids are lifted up.The third is of proud men, who are exalted in their owne opinions, and looke scornfully over other men, perhaps better then themselves. 14 There is a generati∣on whose teeth are as swords, &c.The last is of cruell oppressours, which kill and de∣voure the poore, &c. 15 The horse-leach hath two daughters, cry∣ing, Give, give; There are three things which are never satisfied, yea, foure things say not, It is e∣nough.The horse leach hath naturally a forked tongue; wher∣by shee draweth blood insatiably of that part whereon so ever it lights; answerable whereunto, are three things, yea foure, that still crave, and can never be satisfied. The grave is not satisfied with carcasses, the inconti∣nent wombe is not satisfied with lust, the dry earth drinkes up all the water that fals upon it,19 The grave, and the barren wombe; the earth that is not filled with wa∣ter, and the fire that saith not, It is enough. the fire devours all the combustible matter that it laies hold upon, and al of these call for more. That man who is so leud, and unnaturall, as to mocke his father,17 The eye that moc∣keth at his father, and de∣spiseth to obey his mo∣ther, the ravens of the val∣ly shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it. and to despise his mother, shall be sure to be seized upon by the just judgements of God; his very eyes (in whom that wicked and gracelesse scorne hath shewed
it selfe) shall be pickt out of his head, by the greediest and fiercest ravens, and the yong eagles shall eate them: Certainly, God will finde some meanes to be avenged of him. The close conveyances,19 The way of a man with a maid. and suttle passages of a secret and crafty fornicator, with a cunning harlot. There are foure things very intolerable.21 Foure which it can∣not beare. A woman of leud and odious qualities & conditions,23 For an odious wo∣man that is married, and a handmaid that is heire to her mistresse. which can neither be reformed, nor indured by her hus∣band, and a poore handmaid suddainly advanced to a rich estate, growne now insolent, and imperious with her promotion. Yea foure, which carry a good presence with them,29 Yea foure are come∣ly in going. and carry a kinde of port, and pleasure in their motion. A well-shaped and beautifull horse,31 An horse (as it is in the margin) an hee goate, and a King against whom there is no rising up. proudly tramp∣ling; a faire and well-coloured hee-goate; and a magni∣ficent Prince that is honored and acclaimed of all his sub∣jects. Yet, suppresse it in thy selfe,32 Lay thine hand up∣on thy mouth. and be not so foolish and wicked, as to utter it. As the agitation of the milke in the churne,33 Surely, the churn∣ing of milke bringeth forth butter, and the wrin∣ging of the nose bringeth forth blood, so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife. bringeth forth butter; and as the strong and vehement wringing of the nostrils, bringeth forth blood; so the earnest pro∣vocation of anger is the occasion of quarrels, and much strife. CAP. XXXI. THe words which King Salomon (whom his mother,1 The words of King Lemuel, the prophecie which his mother taught him. in a stile of love, termed Lemuel) received from that his mother in his yonger yeares; and that divine counsell which shee gave him. What shall I then say unto thee, O thou my Sonne,2 What my son? and what the sonne of my wombe? and what the sonne of my vowes? the deare sonne of my wombe, the sonne of my desires, whom by my fervent prayers I obtained from God, not without solemne vowes of testifying my thankfulnesse for blessing mee with thee. Suffer not thy selfe so to be besotted with the beauty of women,3 Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy waies to that which de∣stroyeth Kings. as that thou shouldst yeeld unto them the strength of thy body, and the best of thy thoughts; nei∣ther give thy selfe to those wanton courses, which have beene the bane of many great Princes. It is not fit for Kings, O Salomon,4 It is not for Kings O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drinke wine, nor for Princes strong drinke. to give themselves to excessive, or pleasurable drinking of wine, & to pow∣ring in of strong intoxicating liquors. Give rather strong drinke to the man that is dejected6 Give strong drink to him that is ready to pe∣rish.
in spirits, and neare to perishing, through extremity of affliction. 8 Open thou thy mouth for the dumbe in the cause of all such as are appoin∣ted to destruction.Speake thou for them that are not able to speake for themselves; and plead thou for them, who are undeser∣vedly designed to destruction. Whosoever findes a wise, vertuous, modest wife, let him know how to value her;10 Who can finde a vertuous woman; for her price is farre above rubies. let him esteeme her worth above all the precious rubies, and diamonds of the world. 11 The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her; so that he shall have no need of spoile.Her hushand may safely relie upon her trust, and care, for the maintenance, and inriching of his familie; so as he shall have no need to depend upon the spoile of enemies for the enhauncing of his wealth. 14 She is like the mer∣chants ships, she bringeth her food from farre.Shee provideth all necessaries for her family, at the best hand; and after the manner of merchants, sendeth farre for a good peniworth. Shee addresseth her selfe to goe roundly, and hartily about her businesse.17 Shee girdeth her loines with strength. Shee findeth such sweetnesse, and benefit in her care∣full indeavours,18 Shee perceiveth that her merchandise is good; her candle goeth not out by night. that shee is incouraged to adde vigilan∣cie to her painfulnesse; and as if the day were not long enough, she borrowes of the night. Shee knowes those of her family need not take care for the cold of winter;21 Shee it not afraid of the snow for her houshold for all her houshold are clothed with scarlet. for shee hath made both warme, and rich provision of clothes for them; not only for ne∣cessary use, but for ornament also. Her husband sitting in the gates of the city amongst other of the rulers,23 Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the El∣ders of the city. is easily knowne from all the rest by the cost, and neatnesse of that attire, which shee hath provided for him, above his fellowes. 25 Strength and ho∣nor are her clothing.Shee so demeanes her selfe, as that all her actions and carriages are full of honor, and bewray a masculine strength, and fortitude. 28 He praiseth her.Her husband shall extoll her worth and vertue above all other women,29 Many daughters have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all. saying; Other wives have done, and deserved well, but thou surpassest them all. 30 Favour is deceitfull and beauty is vaine, but a woman that feareth the Lord shall be praised.It is no trusting either to outward favour, or to plau∣siblenesse of disposition; as for beauty it is fading and transitory; but the true feare of God is that, the comfort whereof will sticke by us alwaies; the woman that is in∣dued therewith shall be ever praised. 31 Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her owne workes praise her in the gates.Let her have that due praise which shee hath deser∣ved, and let her owne workes (as they have merited) procure her a publique applause in the world.
ECCLESIASTES. CAP. I. ALl these earthly things,2 Vanitie of vanities saith the Preacher, Vanity of vanities, all is vanitie. all that a man can either doe, or attaine, is utterly vaine and ineffectuall, in respect of any true and perfect contentment, or happinesse, which it can yeeld to the soule; since it is both fickle in the continuance, and unsatisfying in the na∣ture, and worth thereof. So farre is all the labour of man,3 What profit hath a mā of all the labour which he taketh under the sun? which he takes here on earth, unable to make him truly happy, as that it yeel∣deth him no during profit at all; both he, and it, are swept away by death, as if they had never beene. There is no stability here;4 One generation pas∣seth away, and another generation commeth, but the earth abideth for ever. one generation of men go∣eth, another comes, none stayeth; whiles yet the earth the basest of all elements, and that from whence wee re∣ceived this corruptible substance, continueth in her won∣ted estate, and abides to the end of the world. All things are in motion; the sun,5 The sun also riseth, &c. and the winde whirle about the earth and returne around (after their circuition) to the very place,6 The winde goeth to∣ward the south, and turn∣eth about to the north, it whirleth, &c. whence they beganne their course. So doe the waters also keepe the same course of mo∣tion; For all rivers run into the sea,7 All the rivers run in∣to the sea, yet the sea is not full; unto the place whence the rivers come thither they return again. which againe emp∣ties it selfe, by secret convayances; through the channels of the earth, into those springs whereof the rivers arise; so as there is a continued circle in the moovings, and in∣terchanges of these creatures; But man passeth away at once, and appeareth no more. All these creatures doe (as it were) toile themselves in their motion; and all the world, wherein they are,1 All things are full of labour, man cannot utter it; the eye is not satisfied with seeing; nor the eare filled with hearing. is full of trouble and vexation; it is not in the power of man to expresse the particulars; no, the very eye of man can never have seene enough, the eare of man can never have heard enough of the miserable vanities, and irkesome conditions of this earthly life of ours. The eye and the eare can never come to an end of their worke;9 The thing that hath been it is that which shall be, and that which is done is that which shal be done, and there is no new thing under the sun. for there is still an interchangeable successi∣on of their objects, that which hath formerly beene, shall be againe, and that which now is done, shall, in the re∣volution of times, come about againe; and there is nei∣ther an end of old occurrences, nor a beginning of new.
11 There is no re∣membrance of former things, neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to come; with those that shall come after them.We easily mistake the condition of all things; for those things which have beene, leave no remembrance behind them; and those things which are now present, and those which shall be hereafter, shall be so forgotten of our succeeding posterity, as if they had never beene. That which is crooked, and perverse, cannot by any humane meanes be rectified,15 That which is crook∣ed cānot be made straight; and that which is wanting cannot be numbred. and reformed; onely the power of God, who made all things, can change the na∣turall misdisposition of them, & there are such store of defects, and enormities both in nature, and practice, that they cannot be numbred. 17 I gave my heart to know wisedome, and to know madnesse and folly.I addicted my selfe moreover to the disquisition and study of morality; and, therein, I did not onely labor to know what pertained to wisedome, but also, on the con∣trary, to understand what belongs to folly and madnesse, that I might perfectly comprehend all the fashions and courses of men; and I found this to be no better then vexation of spirit. 18 For in much wise∣dome is much griefe, and he that increaseth know∣ledge, increaseth sorrow.For whosoever gets much wisedome, shall be sure to have much sorrow to boote; since the more he knowes, the more cause of griefe shall he finde, for both he shall still see more that he cannot know, and in that which he doth know, he shall perceive so much vanity that shall pierce, and humble his soule. CAP. II. 1 I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth.FRom that austere search of knowledge, I thought to divert my thoughts unto mirth, and pleasure. When I had taken a full triall of the free jollities, and wilde delights of men,2 I said of laughter, It is mad; & of mirth, What doth it? I cast them off with scorne; and said of laughter; that it is both an effect and argument of a mad distemper of the minde; and of mirth, that it is a vaine and unprofitable passion, not fit for a wise mans intertainment. 3 I thought in my heart to give my selfe unto wine (yet acquainting my heart with wisedome) and to lay hold on folly till I might see what was that good, &c.I did yet further resolve to give my selfe over to the pleasures of the palate, and of the belly; to take my fill of wine, and delicates, for the chearing up of my dull and wearied spirits, yet so, as that I made account not to cast off the study of wisedome; but therewithall to mixe an experimentall knowledge of folly, and debauched∣nesse, till I might see whether any true contentment might be found therein. 7 I got me servants and maidens, and had servants borne in my house.I bought, and procured servants, and maides, and had besides, a numerous issue of those bondservants which
were borne and bred within my owne family. If ever any man could have found out full content∣ment either in wisedome, or folly,12 For what can the man doe that commeth after the King; even that which hath already beene done. certainly I should have done it; for who can have the like meanes that I have had, for these ends? surely, he that will come after me, for a further disquisition of this matter, shall finde that he can neither doe, nor know ought but that which I have done, and knowne before him. Wisedome is light, and folly is darknesse;14 The wise mans eyes are in his head, but the foole walketh in darknes; & I my selfe perceived al∣so that one event happen∣eth to them all. the wise man therefore walketh in this light, having the eyes of his understanding cleare, whereas the foole walketh in darknesse; yet, for all this difference, I perceived that e∣vents, whether good or evill, fall alike unto them both. To what purpose then,15 Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the foole, so it happeneth unto me; and why was I then more wise? then I said in my heart, that this also is vanity. should I weary my selfe in the pursuit of wisedome, if (in respect of the events of things) I shall speed no better then a foole? And, at last, I con∣cluded, that both this indifferencie of events, and this use, that I was apt to make of it, is vanity. Doth not the wise man die as well as the foole?16 And how dieth the wise man? as the foole. doth he not die with as much paine, as the foole? is there not the same act, and manner of dissolution of both? I was therefore utterly distasted with the present life;17 Therefore I hated life, because the work that is wrought under the sun is grievous unto mee. since it yeelded nothing, but anguish and vexation; even from the best workes that I could performe. It doth not a little aggravate the vanity of these earth∣ly contentments,18 Yea I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun; because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me. And who knoweth whe∣ther he shal be a wise man or a foole? and my hatred of all my laborious and magnificent workes, that when I have done, I must leave them to a successour; at all uncertainties; For who knowes whether he shall be a wise man, or a foole? Therefore I did bend my thoughts, what I might, to put my heart out of conceit,20 Therefore I went a∣bout to cause my heart to despaire of all the labour which I tooke under the sun. and hope of any good issue of all my earthly labours, and indeavours. Yet of all vanities this is the best, since the life of man is attended with so much sorrow and care;24 There is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and drinke, and that he should make his soule enjoy good in his labour, &c. what he may to put off all griefe and anxiety; to injoy the good bles∣sings of God; to eate and to drinke; and to take all law∣full pleasure, and delight in the use of those good things he hath. For,25 For who can eate? or who else can hasten hereunto more then I? is there any man living that can procure more ex∣cellent varieties of delicates, then I? Is there any, whose meanes will afford him opportunitie of providing them with more speed or ease, then my selfe?
CAP. III. 1 To every thing there is a season; & a time to every purpose under heaven.BOth God hath predetermined, in his most wise coun∣sell, a time and season, wherein all events shall come to passe, and hath put this wisedome into man, to make choise of the times and oportunities for all his actions. 3 A time to kill.There is a time (whether in a just warre, or in a peace∣able execution of justice) wherein it is seasonable and warrantable to kill, &c. 7 A time to rend, and a time to sew.A time to rend our garments in maine occasions of sorrow, and a time to make them up againe. 9 What profit hath he that worketh, in that wherein he laboureth?What stability or during profit therefore can a man expect from that which he doth; since there is such a changeable vicissitude in all actions and events. 11 He hath made eve∣ry thing beautifull in his time, also he hath set the world in their heart, so that no man can finde the worke that God maketh from the beginning to the end.He that made all his creatures in excellent order, and proportion, and to singular use, in their proper seasons, though man is not able to looke into them; for God hath (in his justice) so given up men to the cares, and stu∣dies of these worldly affaires, that they being taken up therewithall, cannot finde out the wonderfull workes which God hath wrought from the beginning, and shall continue to worke untill the end. 13 And also that, &c.See cap. 2. 24. 14 I know that what∣soever God doth, it shall be for ever; nothing can be put to it; nor any thing taken from it; and God doth it that men should feare before him.I know that whatsoever God doth, it is, and shall bee for ever, no otherwise then he intended it to be; there is no altering of it, by ought which our power can adde to it, or detract from it; and this God doth, that men may learne to adore and reverence his infinite justice and wisedome and power. 15 And God requireth that which is past.Gods cals for (backe againe) both an account, and a re∣nuing, of that which is already past. 17 For there is a time there, for every purpose and for every worke.For, howsoever here all things are carryed partially, and corruptly; yet there, before the just Tribunall of the Almighty, there, shall be a time, wherein every pur∣pose, and every worke of man shall appeare as it is. 18 I said in my heart con∣cerning the estate of the sons of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are beastsI thought in my heart concerning the outward condi∣tion and wicked dispositions of the sons of men, that if God would but let them see themselves, they would ea∣sily perceive that they are no better then beasts. 19 For that which be∣fals the sons of men, befal∣leth beasts; even one thing befalleth them; as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea they have all one breth so that a man hath no pre∣eminence above a beast; for all is vanity.All outward events befall alike to men, and beasts; they beath alike; they part with their breath alike; they both die by the same meanes, with the same paine, and reluctation; neither is there any outward or apparant thing in man above the beast, that can shelter him from that common vanity, to which both of them are subject; or distinguish his condition from theirs.
Both, in respect of their bodily substance,20 All goe unto one place, all are of the dust; and all turne to dust a∣gaine. goe to one place; out of the earth were they taken, and to the earth they returne. And howsoever,21 Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downeward to the earth? they are fully differenced by the soule or spirit, which informeth the man, whereof the beast is not capable; yet, in the very issue, and face of death, who can by his sense discerne this difference? no man can see, either the spirit of the man ascending to heaven, or the spirit of the beast that vanisheth toge∣ther with the body; only this is discerned by rectified reason, and by the illumination of Gods spirit; which as∣sureth, yea convinceth us of the severall, yea contrary condition of both. Since such is the vanity of man,22 Wherefore I per∣ceive that there is nothing better, then that a man should rejoyce in his own workes; for that is his portion; for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him? and his condition in all outward things, so like to that of brute creatures, I know no better way for a man, then to make a cheareful use of Gods good blessings here; for this is all the fruit, and alleviation of all his painful labours, which the earth can afford him; without all anxious cares of those things, which shall be after him; for when he hath all done, who shal bring him to see how his heires wil spend or save the estate which he hath carked to leave unto them? CAP. IIII. I Did in this preferre the state of the dead before the li∣ving;2 Wherefore I prai∣sed the dead which are al∣ready dead, more then the living which are yet alive. for that they are out of the reach of this cruelty and oppression, which the living groane under. The foolish sloathfull man folds his hands together,5 The foole foldeth his hands together, and eateth his owne flesh. and will not worke; and affamisheth himselfe with wil∣full idlenesse; rather choosing to starve then labour; And is ready to say for himselfe;6 Better is an handfull with quietnesse, then both the hands full with travell and vexation of spirit. A little with ease is better then a great deale with toile and trouble. I have noted a man that is single & solitary;8 There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea he hath neither child nor brother; yet is there no end of his labour, &c. that hath neither wife, nor child, nor brother to whom he might leave his estate, and yet this man toiles and drudges in∣cessantly, &c. Society is a thing of much comfort and benefit;9 Two are better then one, because they have a good reward for their la∣bour. upon every occasion two are better then one; Two are able to undertake, and performe that which one cannot; and therefore may well expect a good issue of their labours. And if an adversary be too strong for a man alone,12 And if one prevaile against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not easi∣ly broken. yet if the weaker be assisted by the strength of a second, hee shall be able to withstand and overcome; And as it is thus in the society of two; so it holds in a proportion of
more; a cord of two twists is strong; but if it be treble twisted it is not easily broken. 13 Better is a poore and wise child, then an old and foolish King who will no more be admonished.There is great difference betwixt a child, and an old man, betwixt a King and a begger; yet a poore child, if he be wise, is better then an old King if he be foolish; and perversly setled in wickednesse. 14 For out of prison he commeth to raigne; whereas also he that is borne in his Kingdome becommeth poore.For that poore wise man may from a base and misera∣ble condition, be advanced to highest dignity; whereas the foolish commander that was borne great, may be∣come needy and wretched. 15 I considered all the living which walke under the sunne, with the second child that shall stand up in his stead.I have noted it to be the common practice of the world, even generally of all living men, that they are apt still to regard the successour, and to neglect the father, though of great desert, in comparison of the sonne that shall inherite the crowne after him. 16 There is no end of all the people; even of all that have beene before them, they also that come after, shall not rejoyce in him.The world hath ever beene, and ever will be thus in∣constant, & disaffected to the present government; how wise and just soever; still they (as impatient of the yoake) will be complaining of that command under which they are; and not yeeld so chearefull and thankfull obedience as they ought. CAP. V. 1 Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more ready to heare then to give the sacrifice of fooles, &c.WHen thou goest up to the Temple of God, looke carefully with what affections thou presentest thy selfe there; see that thou have a minde free from worldly cares, and distractions; and thinke not that the very outward worke of a sacrifice, formally offered, can serve thy turne; this imagination is for a foolish and ig∣norant heart; but know that God lookes for a carefull and diligent attendance upon his ordinance, and requires an attentive eare to his word, &c. 2 Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few.Be not thou rash and over-hasty in the ingaging of thy selfe by vowes unto God; but be well advised, both what thou undertakest, and how thou shalt performe it; and let those prayers which thou shalt poure forth unto God be well digested in thy thoughts, for thou hast to doe with a pure and holy, as also, with a glorious and omni∣potent God, who dwelleth in the heaven; whereas thou (a base silly creature upon earth) art open to his all-see∣ing eye, and obnoxious to his Almighty power; let ther∣fore thy vowes be both rare and solemne, and thy pray∣ers free from loquacity and idle bablings. 3 For a dreame com∣meth through the multi∣tude of busines; and a fools voice is knowne by multitude of words.For as in a multitude of businesses there will be trou∣blesome and confused dreames, so in a multitude of
words there will be futility, and errour. It is the part of a foole to vow that which either hee cannot, or will not performe;4 For he taketh no pleasure in fooles. and God takes no pleasure in those that are thus impiously foolish. Suffer not thy tongue,6 Suffer not thy mouth to make thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an errour; wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the worke of thine hands? through the rashnesse of thy vow, to make it, and thy whole selfe guilty of a sin be∣fore God, and obnoxious to judgement; neither think to excuse it before God and his Angels, by a plea of error. Why shouldst thou draw Gods anger upon thee by the sinfull temerity of thy vow, so farre, as that hee should plague thee with an utter destruction? For as there are many vaine fantasies in the multitude of dreames, so surely there are many hatefull,7 For in the multitude of dreames and many words, there are also di∣vers vanities; but feare thou God. and dan∣gerous vanities in the multitude of hasty vowes; But thou, settle thou the feare of God in thy heart; and that shall ever both guide and preserve thy tongue. Be not amazed and dismaid,8 If thou, &c. Marvell not for the mat∣ter; for he that is higher than the highest regard∣eth, and there bee higher then they. as if all things were let loose, and as if these earthly things were not orderly swayed by a wise and just providence; for as God hath ap∣pointed Kings and Princes over men, so he hath appoin∣ted his spirituall creatures, in a degree above them; and himselfe is infinitely above all the degrees of them. Surely,9 Moreover the profit of the earth is for all; and the King himselfe is ser∣ved by the field. there is excellent and necessary use of husban∣drie; whence have wee the good things whereby our life is preserved, but from the fruitfull bounty of the earth? Even the states of Kings cannot wel subsist without a due culture of the earth. If a man have great store of lands,11 When goods in∣crease, they are increased that eate them; and what good is there to the ow∣ners thereof, saving the be∣holding thereof with their eyes? and much stocke in his hands, there must be many hands imployed in the managing of it, so that as his meanes are greater, so the mouthes that spend it are more; and what gaineth the owner hereby, above the servant, more then this, that he sees his goods both brought in, and wasted; whereof himselfe can take no more part, then to feed, and cloth him? I have noted those riches,13 Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. which men account bles∣sings, to turne to the great harme and mischiefe of the owners; both of their bodies, and soules, and lives, and estates, for, besides their difficulty in getting, and care in keeping, how ordinarily are they the occasions of vio∣lence offered to their persons, of unjust suggestions of capitall crimes against their lives, &c. And those very riches have I seen to vanish away un∣der the owners hand; in the midst of all his toile,14 But these riches pe∣rish by evill travell; and he begetteth a sonne, and there is nothing in his hand. and travell; so as the sonne whom he begets shall have no∣thing at all left him of that wealth, wherewith his father seemed to abound; neither shall the father have ought to leave him.
17 All his daies also he eateth in darknesse, and he hath much sorrow and wrath in his sicknesse.He abridgeth himselfe of all comfort through his too eager pursuit of wealth; and both pincheth his body, and tortureth his minde with many vexations, and discon∣tentments. 20 For hee shall not much remēber the daies of his life; because God answereth him in the joy of his heart.His daies goe away merily, and seeme short, for that God gives him chearfulnesse, and contentment in the fruition of what he hath. CAP. VI. 2 Yet God giveth him not power to eate there∣of; but a stranger eateth it.YEt God hath not given him a free heart to take com∣fort and benefit in the use of his riches; but rather hath given him up to such a besottednesse therewith, that he cannot finde in his heart to bestow any good thing upon himselfe; but saves it for a stranger that shall come after him. 3 If a man beget an hundred children, and live many yeares, &c. and his soule be not filled with good, and also that he have no buriall, I say that an un∣timely birth is better then hee.Let a man live to never so faire and full an age, (as long life is indeed a blessing of God,) and let him be as full of children, as of yeares (as children also, are the gift of God) yet, if that man scant and abridge himselfe of all his due comforts here, through his owne miserable∣nesse, and after his death be debarred of an honest and comely sepulture; I say that an untimely birth is in a con∣dition lesse ill, then he. 4 For hee commeth in with vanity; and depar∣teth in darknesse, and his name shall be covered with darknesse.For that abortive birth comes into the world without all noise, or use, and passes away obscurely without no∣tice, and as it lived not to have a name, so the name and memory of it vanisheth into darknesse, and oblivion. 5 This hath more rest then the other.He hath been freed by so early a death from those vex∣ations, which the old covetous man puts himselfe unto. 6 Yea, though he live a thousand yeares twise told, yet hath he seene no good; Doe not all goe to one place?Yea, though he have lived a thousand yeares twise told, yet when it is past, what is he the better for that? Is he not now in the same state with the abortive; do not both of them goe alike unto dust? 7 All the labour of man is for his mouth; and yet the appetite is not filled.Indeed, all the labour of man should be, and ordina∣rily is, for the preservation of his life; but the covetous man toiles, he knowes not for what; and though nature be content with a little, yet his appetite of having is ne∣ver satisfied. 8 For what hath the wise man more then the foole? what hath the poore that knoweth to walk be∣fore the living? q.d. But the same with the rich?In respect of the outward maintenance of this life, what can the wise man have, which the foole may not; both of them may, and must live by meate; either of them may come to abound, or want; what hath the rich, more then the poore man, that knowes how to live? his superfluity is nothing to his life. 6 Better is the sight of the eyes, then the wandring of the de∣sire.It is farre better for a man to injoy that present good
which is before his eyes, then to discruciate and rack his thoughts with an insatiable desire of what he hath not, or perhaps cannot have. There is a wise and infinite providence of God,10 That which hath been, is named already, and it is knowne to bee man, neither may he contend with him that is mightier then he. under which, eminently amongst the other creatures, man is; whom God hath noted, and designed out, with all his qualities and indowments; and hath determined to him all his conditions, and events; neither can hee thinke to struggle himselfe out from the mighty, and over-ruling power of his Creator. As man is vanity,11 Seeing there bee many things that increase vanity; what is a man the better? so are those things which he affe∣cteth; where there are many things therefore, there must needs be an increase of vanity; what is a man the better therefore, for having more vanities besides his owne? We are commonly subject to mistakings in our opini∣ons, concerning good things;12 For who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the, &c. as a shadow; for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun? we oft times take that for good, and profitable, which is indeed harmefull to us, either in the kind, or quantity of it; and if in this fleeting and vanishing life we be thus ignorant, in present things, how much more in future? Who can tell a man what shall be after him? CAP. VII. THe day of a good and faithfull mans death, is much better then the day of his birth;1 And the day of death better then the day of ones birth. for his death puts an end to those miseries, which his birth begins, and begins those happinesses, which the present life is not capable of. For that death which is the occasion of such mourning is the end of all men;2 For that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart. and those that are wise amongst the living, will carefully bethinke themselves of it, and make due preparation for it. A fire of thornes under a pot makes a loud noyse with the crackling thereof for a time,6 As the crackling of thornes under a pot, so is the laughter of fooles. but the blaze is soone out; so doth the mirth and laughter of a foole; after some short semblance of joy, it vanisheth to nothing. Extremity of oppression is enough to distemper a ve∣ry wise man;7 Surely oppression makes a wise man mad; & a gift destroyeth the heart & bribes are enough to corrupt & destroy the heart of him that receives them. There is much doubt and uncertainty in the begin∣ning of things; whereas there is full assurance in the end;8 Better is the end of a thing then the beginning thereof; and the patient in spirit is better then the proud in spirit. the end therefore of a thing is better then the beginning; for indeed, both the beginning and proceeding of all af∣faires, doe but drive at a good end; and a meek and pa∣tient-spirited man, that can quietly wait for the end and
event of things, is better then he that is proud and impe∣tuous, who violently rusheth upon all enterprizes, and will needs force his owne termes. 9 Be not hasty in the spirit to be angry, for an∣ger resteth in the bosome of fooles.Doe not give way to a rash, and sudden anger; for this techie and cholericke disposition argues much folly and mis-government in the man that is swayed with it. Be not thou discontentedly querulous at the present condition;10 Say not thou, what is the cause why the for∣mer daies were better thē these? for thou dost not inquire wisely concerning this. as to complaine how bad these times are, in respect of the former; and to murmure at the providence of God, as if there were some slacknesse, or neglect therein; for, this is a foolish thought of thine, and an un∣just; Rather doe thou in an humble thankfulnesse and submission, make use of the present. 11 Wisedome is good with an inheritance.If a man have a great estate, and wisedome to use it, he may doe great matters, and is very happy therein. 12 For wisedome is a defence, and money is a defence; but the excellen∣cie of wisedome giveth life to them that have it.Many a one hath beene preserved by his wisedome, and many have beene preserved by their money; so as both together must needs be an excellent defence; but if they must be severed; wisedome and knowledge must needs be the better, as that which both can safegard the present life, and give a better unto the owner of it. 13 Consider the work of God, for who can make straight that which he hath made crooked?Doe not complaine of times, and events; but consi∣der well the wise, and just and powerfull proceedings of God; for when he hath thought good, for the punish∣ments of mens sins to give them up to disorder, and per∣versenesse, it is not in the power of humane meanes to re∣ctifie them. 14 But in the day of adversity consider; God also hath set the one over against the other, to the end that man should finde nothing after him.In the day of adversity, bethinke thy selfe of the au∣thor of thine affliction, and of the manifold grounds of patience, which God hath laid before thee; for God hath given interchanges of wel-fare, and adversity, that man might finde no just cause to complaine of his pro∣ceedings. 15 There is a just man that perisheth in his righ∣teousnesse.There is a just and innocent man that mis-carrieth, not∣withstanding his righteousnes; through the cruelty, and injustice of oppressors. 16 Be not righteous o∣ver much; neither make thy selfe over-wise; why shouldst thou destroy thy selfe?Be not thou too rigid, and rigorous in exacting the extremity of justice upon every occasion; neither do thou affect too much semblance, and ostentation of more ju∣stice and perfection, then thou hast, or canst attaine. Neither doe thou arrogate more wisedome to thy selfe, then is in thee; nor curiously seek and search into those mysteries, which God would not have revealed; for why shouldest thou bring upon thee the displeasure and judgements of God, by this proud and sinfull affectation? 17 Be not over-much wicked, neither be thou foolish; why shouldst thou die before thy time?As I would not have thee too just, and too wise, so I would not have thee run into the other extreame; every
degree of wickednesse is too much; doe not let thy selfe loose to any evill; neither yeeld thy selfe over to a wil∣ling ignorance and foolish neglect of wisedome; for why shouldst thou provoke God to hasten his just judgements upon thee, to thine untimely destruction? It is good and sure to walke in a meane betwixt both these extreames; so to beware of severity,18 It is good that thou shouldst take hold of this, yea also from this with∣draw not thine hand: For he that feareth God shall come forth of them all. and too much profession of wisedome, that thou neglect not the other charge of avoiding loosnesse, and folly; he that feareth God shall by him be kept in an holy meane betwixt both these sinfull and dangerous excesses. He that would live in peace must put up many injuries especially of the tongue;21 Also take no heed unto all the words that are spoken, lest thou heare thy servant curse thee. be not too eagerly inquisitive after the words that are spoken concerning thee, lest thou heare those of thine owne family speake evill of thee. I thought to make all these observations and experi∣ments,23 All this have I pro∣ved by wisedome. I said, I will be wise, but it was farre from mee. and made account to gaine a great measure of wisedome; but the more I knew, the lesse I was satisfied, and the more I found that I wanted. So deepe is wisedome hid,24 That which is far off and exceeding deepe, who can finde it out? and so farre off from our reach, that it is not in the power of man to finde it out. As also to note the wicked courses of foolish, yea,25 And to know the wickednesse of folly, even of foolishnes and madnes. of mad sinners; both in their actions, and in their events. And I have found by wofull experience the mischiefe and deadlinesse of an alluring beauty, &c.26 And I finde more bitter then death the wo∣man whose, &c. Curiously searching, and examining of both sexes, as it were, by the pole; one by one;27 Counting one by one to make up the account. to give a just account of the estate of them both. Which yet still I doe earnestly seeke;28 Which yet my soule seeketh, but I finde not; one man among a thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I not found. but finde no cause to alter my judgement herein; this I professe to be the issue of all my inquisition; that though it be very rare and hard to finde one good of either sexe; yet more dif∣ficult and strange to finde such a one in that weaker sexe; a good man is rare, but a good woman more. Now this pravity and corruption which I finde in both sexes, I doe not cast upon their first creation, no,29 Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright, but they have sought out ma∣ny inventions. rather I doe herein justifie God; as finding and profes∣sing that it pleased him to make man holy and upright; all our depravation is from our selves; our first parents, created in perfect innocencie, would needs follow the devices of their owne hearts, and the suggestions of the common enemie, and we their sinfull posterity doe no∣thing but devise further meanes of our owne ruine.
CAP. VIII. 1 Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? A mans wisedome maketh his face to shine; and the boldnesse of his face shall be changed.WHat creature under heaven is so excellent as a wise man? he only can finde out the riddles of nature, and the secrets of art; it is his wisedome that makes him gracious, and reverently respected of all men; it is that which alters and changes both his disposition, and carri∣age; and of rude and harsh makes him gentle and inge∣nuous. 2 And that in-regard of the oath of God.For that thou hast, by the sacred name of God, sworn homage and allegeance to him. 3 Be not hasty to goe out of his sight; stand not in an evill thing, for hee doth whatsoever pleaseth him.Doe not offer to fling out from him, as in a fury or chafe; neither thinke thou to face out an evill action be∣fore him; for he hath power in his hand to revenge these insolencies at pleasure. 5 The heart of the wise man discerneth both time and judgement.The heart of the wise man discerneth both the time when every thing should be done, and the best way how it should be done. 6 Because to every purpose there is a time & judgement; therefore the misery of man is great up∣on him.For certainly there is both a proper time for all our actions, and a meet way for the doing of them; which because men ordinarily doe neither understand nor ob∣serve, they run themselves into great inconvenience. 8 There is no man that hath power over the spi∣rit to retain the spirit, nei∣ther hath he power in the day of death; and there is no discharge in that war, neither shall wickednesse deliver those that are gi∣ven thereto.No man hath power to keepe his soule when God cals for it; neither hath he power to protract the day of death any longer; there is no possibility of avoiding that last conflict; the bold and presumptuous wickednesse of men cannot deliver them from it, yea rather shall bring the evill day upon them. It falleth out sometime, that that soveraignty which was ordained for the good of the people,9 There is a time wher∣in one man ruleth over a∣nother to his owne hurt. turnes unto their hurt; and withall to the no lesse harme of the unjust manager thereof. 10 I saw the wicked buried, who had comne & gone frō the place of the holy, & they were forgot∣ten in the city where they had so done.Such a wicked ruler I have seen pompously buried, who had comne and gone from the sacred seat of Judica∣ture, with great state; and with no lesse to his grave, yet I have knowne him utterly forgotten (if not odiously re∣membred) in the city, where he had exercised authority. 14 To whom it hap∣neth according to the worke of the wicked.Which speed ill, and are outwardly punished, as the wicked deserve to be. 15 Then I commended mirth, because, &c.I resolved that it was good for man to bee chearefull in his calling, and the good and holy use of Gods bles∣sings.
CAP. IX. NO man can by the successe of these outward things,1 No man knoweth ei∣ther love or hatred, by all that is before them. judge, and know whether he be in the love, or hatred of God. Their heart is resolved to goe madly,3 And madnesse is in their heart whiles they live, and after that, they goe to the dead. and desperately forward in their wickednesse, whiles they live, and when they have done thus leudly, they drop into the grave, if not into hell. If we compare the estate of the living, and the dead,4 For to him that is joyned to all the living there is hope; but a living dog is better then a dead Lion. whether in it selfe, or in respect of the present world, no doubt that of the living is better; for whiles we live here we may be still in hope, either of amending, or of recei∣ving further graces and blessings; both which are in re∣gard of this life, cut off from the dead; and as our com∣mon proverb runs, the most vile and contemptible of all creatures (the dog) that is alive, is better then the most generous of all beasts (the lion) which is now dead. How ever in respect of a better life,5 For the living know that they shall die, but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward. and the glorious estate of the soule, the case is quite contrary, yet in refe∣rence to our present and sensible condition, the living know something; if no more but this, that they must die, but the dead know nothing at all, of these earthly occur∣rences; neither have they any more part or interest in these affaires, or any sense of their increase, or diminu∣tion. Also together with their senses,6 Also their love and their hatred, and their en∣vie, is now perished, nei∣ther have they any more a portion in any thing that is done under the sun. their affections are ceased, their love, and their hatred of their wonted ob∣jects, are now perished, their envie, and their desires are gone; neither have they ought to doe with any thing that is done here below. Testifie the joy of thy heart, by the nearnesse,8 Let thy garments be alwaies white; and let thy head lack no ointment. and brightnesse of thy garments, and let thy head lack no store of sweet, and precious oyles, to cheare thy spirits, and perfume thy skin. What ever occasion of honest delight offer it selfe unto thee, take it,10 Whatsoever thy hand findeth to doe, doe it with thy might: For there is no worke, nor de∣vice, nor knowledge, nor wisedome in the grave whither thou goest? and what ever oportunity is offered thee of doing good, embrace it gladly; and doe it accor∣dingly, with all thine heart; for thou hast but a while to doe it, or to injoy it, since that in the grave whither thou goest, there is no worke to be done, no device to be con∣trived, no use of knowledge, or wisedome. I saw and observed that here on earth,11 I returned and saw under the Sunne, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strōg neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to mē of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill, but time & chance happeneth to them all. all things doe not fall out according to the probability of second cau∣ses, but by an over-ruling of providence; The swiftest man doth not alwaies win the race, nor the strong pre∣vaile
in battell; the wise man doth not alwaies get main∣tenance, nor the prudent wealth, nor the skilfull appro∣bation and favour; but every one in his time, hath a se∣verall issue, and event, according to the predeterminati∣on of the Almighty, beyond, or contrary to his owne hopes. 12 For man also know∣eth not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an evill net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare so are the sonnes of men snared in an evill time, when it falleth suddenly upon them.For man cannot fore-know the time of his death, or danger, but even as the heedlesse fish runs unawares into the net, and the silly bird into the snare, so are we wret∣ched men caught in the net, and snare of evill occurrents, in the time, which God hath secretly set, and surprized suddenly with unavoidable calamities. There were many men in it, yet but one wise man, the number of the other was helplesse, if not burdenous; that wise man was poore;14 There was a little city, and few men within it, and there came a great King against it and besie∣ged it, and built great bul∣warks against it. and that poore man by a stra∣tageme, unthought of by the rest, found meanes to rescue and deliver that city; yet when he had done, no man re∣garded that man, because he was poore in estate, though rich in wisedome. 17 The words of the wise are heard in quiet, more then the cry of him that ruleth among fooles.The words of a wise poore man, though spoken softly out of a fearefull and lowly kinde of bashfulnesse, are worthy of more respect, then the imperious loud cla∣mours of him that rules among fooles. CAP. X. 1 Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothe∣cary to send forth a stink∣ing savour: so doth a lit∣tle folly him that is in re∣putation for wisedome and honour.LEt the ointment be never so fragrant, yet if dead flies be suffered to corrupt in it, the sweet smell thereof will be turned to a loathsome stench; so let a man be in never so good reputation for wisedome, and honour, yet some one foolish humour, and weake mis-carriage of his, marres, and staines his estimation. 2 A wise mans heart is at his right hand, but a fooles heart at his left.A wise mans heart is apt to give meet counsels, and to suggest dextrous and ready waies for the performance of any enterprise; whereas the fooles heart, and hand, goes sinisterly to work, and is utterly unapt to all good uses. 3 Yea also when he that is a foole walketh by the way, his wisedome faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a foole.Yea, let the foole but walke by the way, and his very motion, and gesture shewes what he is; and proclaimes his want of wit; much more doe his words, and actions bewray him. If the Prince be angry with thee, doe not in a stomach or froward pettishnesse give up thine office;4 If the spirit of the Ru∣ler rise up against thee, leave not thy place; for yeelding pacifieth great offences. but yeeld way humbly to that displeasure, and seeke by submission to satisfie his indignation. As an errour that proceeds from Princes in the ill choice which they make of those whom they promote.5 As an errour which proceedeth frō the Ruler.
That foolish and vnfitt men are advanced to places of dignity and imployments in publique affaires,6 Folly is set in great dignity: and the rich sit in low place. whiles those that are truly able, both for their parts and estate, and are well worthy of eminent places, are neglected, and disregarded. Which what is it other,7 I have seene servants vpon horses: and prin∣ces walking as servants vpon the earth. then as if servants shold ride on horse-back, whiles Princes walke by their stirrops, as their groomes on foot, in a servile attendance? It is a dangerous matter to attempt any thing against authority and established government;8 He that diggeth a pit shall fal into it, & who so breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him. whoso ever doth so, doth but digge a pitt whereinto himselfe shall fall; and whiles he is breaking vp an old hedge, is vnawares stung with an adder that lay vnder those bushes. Such a one doth as the man, who,9 Who so removeth stones shall be hurt there∣with: and he that cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby. whiles he labours to remove an old heape of stones, bruiseth his feet; or, as he, who cleaving of wood, cuts himselfe with the axe, or receives some of the splinters into his eye. Strength without wit prevailes not;10 If the yron be blunt, and he doe not whet the edge, then must hee put to more strength: but wis∣dome is profitable to di∣rect. if the axe be blūt and want an edge, there needs much force to be put to it in vaine; wisedome doth as it were whet the edge of the axe, and directs to doe that, with ease, which other∣wise cannot be atchieved with much labour. As the Serpent which is not charmed,11 Surely the Serpent will bite without inchan∣mēt, & a babler is no better will bite or sting the passenger, so will a busie and babling detractor wound the absent, with his malicious tongue. The words of a foole will be the occasion of his owne vndoing.12 But the lipps of a foole will swallow vp himselfe. A Foole is full of words,14 A foole also is full of words, a man cannot tell what shall be, and what shall be after him, who can tell him? a man cannot tell what he would have; or what he would say; and what the end of his speech, or drift will be, no man can tell. Fooles tire out themselves with laboursome & need∣lesse circuitions; and out of simplicity fetch large com∣passes ouer untracked wayes,15 The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth not how to goe to the Citie. because they do not so much as know the beaten road to the City; which is both easie and short. Wo to thee, O Land, whose King being vnmeet for age, or impotency,16 Woe to thee O Land, when thy King is a childe, & thy Princes eate in the morning. to sway the publique government is not assisted with temperate, and orderly Peeres; but such as spend that time which they should set apart to iustice, in riot and revelling. Blessed art thou, O Land,17 Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the Sonne of Nobles, and thy Princes eate in due sea∣son, for strength: and not for Drunkennesse. whose King is royally de∣scended; and whose Princes are sober and temperate; eating and drinking seasonably, and without excesse, as those that would nourish their health, and not their lux∣ury, and disorder. Feasts are for iollity, and pleasure,19 A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh maketh merry: but money answereth all things. and wine is for mirth; but it is money that must provide these, and all
other helpes, whether for delight or necessitie. Do not intertaine so much as an vndutifull thought in thine heart,20 Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, & curse not the rich in thy bed chamber: for a bird of the aire shall carrie the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter. concerning thy soveraigne; neither do thou speake evill of great persons that are in authoritie, so much as in thy bed chamber; for God wil find meanes to bring it out, & revenge it; and rather then it should not bee revealed, God will cause the very foules of the aire to disclose it. CAP. XI. 1 Cast thy bread vpon the waters: for thou shalt finde it after many daies.BEstow thy beneficence vpon them which are vtterly vnlikely ever to returne it; for he that seeth in secret, will, when thou hast forgotten it, restore it vnto thee with an happy increase. 2 Give a portion to se∣ven, and also to eight; for thou knowst not what evill shall be vpon the earth.Be not straight handed in thine almes; but give them liberally to all that haue need; for thou knowst not how soone thou maist have need of others bounty, nor how soone thou shalt be bereaved of an oportunity to give thine owne. 3 If the cloudes be ful of raine, they emptie thē∣selves vpon the earth: & if the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.As the cloudes which are full of raine, empty them∣selves vpon earth; so the liberall heart that is full of bounty empties it selfe in seasonable contributions; and which way soever thou castest thy beneficence, whether to the South or North, thou shalt be sure there to finde it, through Gods gracious remuneratiō with advantage. 4 He that observeth the winde, shall not sowe; and he that regardeth the clouds, shall not reape.Let not every circumstance of vaine feare discourage thee from doing good, and distributing; he that is too curious to observe every winde that blowes, shall never finde oportunity to sow; 5 As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones doe grow in the wombe of her that is with childe, even so thou knowest not the worke of God who maketh all.As thou knowest not how, or when the soule comes into the body; or how and by what degrees the childe is formed, in all the severall parts thereof, within the wombe of the mother; so, much lesse canst thou know those secret workes of God, which he will doe in time to come. 6 In the morning sowe thy seed, and in the even∣ing withhold not thine hand; for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whe∣ther &c.Be thou constant, and assiduous in doing good, and desist not at any time; if one of thy indeavours succeed not, yet another may; and thou knowest not which of them may speed the best. Indeed life is sweet, and light gives cheerfulnesse vnto our life; it is a comfortable thing to inioy the benefit thereof,7 Truely the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eies to behold the sunne. which our eye sends into our soule. But let a man live, and inioy both the light, and all the pleasures and delights of this life, never so many yeeres;8 But if a man live ma∣ny yeares, and rejoyce in them all, yea let him re∣member the dayes of darkenesse, for they shall be many; all that commeth is vanity. yet let him bethinke himselfe of that darknes
of death, and the grave whereinto he is entring, and con∣sider the long continuance of that darknesse, in compari∣son of this short and momentany life, and light; he shall have no lust to surfet of these things, but shall confesse that all that comes is vanity. Go to then, O thou vaine young man,9 Rejoyce, (O young man,) in thy youth, and let thy heart cheere thee in the dayes of thy youth. take thy full scope of pleasure in thy youth, &c. Denie nothing to thy selfe that either thine eye seeth or thy heart desireth; live wantonly and jocondly; but be thou assured, that a day of reckning will come, when for all these wild and lawlesse courses of thine, God will call thee to a just and severe judgement. Therefore strive to refraine all thine headstrong pas∣sions,10 Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, & put away evill from thy flesh, for childhood and youth are vanity. and rid thy selfe of those vicious affections and dis∣positions, whereto thou art subject; for thy childhood and youth, wherein thou now vainely rejoycest, are mo∣mentanie things, gone and passed, ere thou canst finde thou inioyest them. CAP. XII. BEfore thine eies grow dim with age,2 While the Sunne, or the light, or the Moone or the starres, be not darkned, nor the clouds returne af∣ter the raine. so as thou dost not clearely discerne the Sun, the Moone, or Starres, and before the evills and miseries of age succeed one another in thee, in a woefull vicissitude; Before the time that thine armes, which are the gard of this thine house of clay, shall tremble with palsies;3 In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow them∣selves, and the grinders cease, because they are few, and those that looke out of the windowes be darkned. & thy legges, which were thy strong supporters, shall bow thē∣selves; and thy teeth grind slowly and difficutly, because they are few; and thine eyes, which are as glasses in the windowes of the head, be dusky and darkened. When the street doores shall be shut upon thee, as now retired to thine owne home, without care of others visitations, or affaires; when thy slow feeding shall have made thee vnfit for other mens tables;4 And the doores shall be shut in the streets, whē the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of musick shall be brought low. when every little noyse, but of a bird, shall wake thee out of thy sleepe: and when thy spirits shall bee so dull and dejected, that thou shalt take no pleasure in the hearing of the most melodious musicke. When thy decrepit age shall make thee so unfit to move, that thou shalt be afraid of every rubbe,5 Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and feares shall bee in the way, & the Almond tree shall flourish, and the grashopper shall bee a burden, and desire shall saile, because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners goe about the streetes. or clod that lies in thy way; when the white blossoms of age shall cover thine head; and every light thing (though it be but of the weight of a grashopper) shall seeme bur∣densome to thee; and all those lusts and desires, which haunted thy stronger times, are now gone and past; For
there is no way but this one; man goeth to his long home, the grave; and the mourners, in an hired formali∣ty, goe about the streets. Before everall thy naturall, and vitall spirits be utter∣ly exhausted,6 Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the gol∣don bowle be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountaine, or the wheele broken at the cisterne. and all the functions and offices of life bee quite discharged; which shall be in the last act of death; for as when the cord is loosed, and the bucket broken, and the pitcher broken at the well, or the wheele at the cisterne, no water can any more be drawne; so when these vitall parts faile, can there be no longer protraction of life. 10 The Preacher sought to finde out acceptable words, & that which was written was upright, even words of truth.The Preacher sought to finde out excellent and di∣vine sentences, and matters of high and singular use; and such he hath indeed attained unto; for that which is writ∣ten by him, is full of admirable wisedom and truth. 12 The words of the wise are as goades, and as nailes fastened by the ma∣sters of assemblies, which are given from one shep∣heard.The words of the wise and holy prophets of God are of singular benefit; for they are as goads to pricke us forward to all good duties; yea they goe yet deeper, they are as nailes driven up to the head, by gracious teachers; so as they cannot easily be pulled out; which words, however they be delivered to us, by severall messengers, yet they come all originally from one hand, even from the great Pastor of his Church, the Word of his Father. By these divine words, O my sonne, doe thou content thy selfe to be admonished;12 And further, by these, my sonne, be admo∣nished: of making many bookes there is no end, & much studie is a wearines of the flesh. not roving in thy desires after multitude of other volumes, whereof there is no end; in the compiling and reading of which there is much toyle and wearinesse of the flesh, and much expence of the spirits.
THE SONG OF SALOMON. CAP. I. The Church to CHRIST. OH that he would bestow upon me the com∣fortable testimonies of his love;2 Let him kisse me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better then wine. and that hee would vouchsafe me yet a nearer conjuncti∣on with himselfe; as in glory hereafter, so for the meane time in his sensible graces! For thy love, O my Saviour, and these fruits of it, are more sweet un∣to me, thā all earthly delicates can be to the bodily taste. Yea, so wonderfully pleasant are the savours of those graces that are in thee,3 Because of the savour of thy good oyntments thy name is as oyntment poured forth, therefore doe the virgins love thee. wherewith I desire to be endu∣ed, that all whom thou hast blessed with the sense there∣of, make as high and deare account of thy Gospell, wher∣by they are wrought, as of some precious oyntment, or perfume: the delight whereof is such, that (hereupon) the pure and holy soules of the faithful place their whole affection upon thee. Pull me therefore out from the bondage of my sinnes:4 Draw me; we will runne after thee: the King hath brought me into his chambers; we will be glad and rejoyce in thee, wee will remember thy love, more then wine: the up∣right love thee. deliver me from the world, and doe thou powerfully in∣cline my will and affections toward thee: and in spight of all tentations, give me strength to cleave unto thee; and then both I, and all those faithfull children thou hast given me, shall all at once with speed & earnestnes walke to thee & with thee. yea, whē once my royall & glorious Husband hath brought me both into these lower roomes of his spirituall treasures on earth, and into his heavenly chābers of glory, then wil we rejoyce and be glad in none but thee which shalt be all in all to us: then will we cele∣brate and magnifie thy love above all the pleasures we found upon earth; for all of thy righteous ones, both Angells and Saints, are inflamed with the love of thee. Never upbraid me (O yee forraine congregations) that I seeme in outward appearance discoloured by my infirmities, and duskish with tribulations:5 I am blacke, but come∣ly, (O yee daughters of Ie∣rusalem) as the tents of Kedar, as the curtaines of Salomon. for whatso∣ever I seeme to you, I am yet inwardly well-favoured in the eyes of Him whom I seeke to please; and though I be to you blacke; like the tents of the Arabian shep∣heards; yet to him, and in him, I am glorious and beau∣tifull, like the Curtaines of Salomon.
6 Looke not upon me because I am blacke, be∣cause the Sun hath looked upon me, my mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the vineyards, but mine owne vineyard have I not kept.Looke not therefore disdainfully upon me; because I am blackish, and darke of hiew; for this colour is not so much naturall to me, as caused by that continuall heat of afflictions wherewith I have been usually scorched: nei∣ther this, so much upon mine own just desert, as upon the rage & envie of my false brethren, the world: who would needs force upon me the observation of their idolatrous religions, and superstitious impieties; through whose wicked importunitie, and my owne weaknesse, I have not so entirely kept the sincere truth of God committed to me, as I ought. 7 Tell me (O thou whom my soule loveth) where thou feedest, where thou makest thy flocke to rest at noone: for why should I be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions.Now therfore that I am some little started aside from thee, O thou whom my soule notwithstanding dearely loveth, shew me, I beseech thee, where, and in what wholsome and divine pastures thou (like a good shep∣heard) feedest and restest thy flockes with comfortable refreshings, in the extremitie of these hot persecutions: for how can it stand with thy glory, that I should, through thy neglect, thus suspiciously wander up and downe, among the congregations of them that both command and practise the worship of false gods. CHRIST to the Church. 8 If thou know not, (O thou fairest amongst wo∣men) goe thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy Kids besides the shepheards tents.If thou know not, O thou my Church, whom I both esteeme and have made most beautifull by my merits, and thy sanctification, stray not amongst these false wor∣shippers, but follow the holy steps of those blessed Pa∣triarkes, Prophets, Apostles, which have beene my true and ancient flocke, who have both knowne my voice, and followed me; and feed thou my weake and tender ones with this their spirituall food of life, farre above the car∣nall reach of those other false teachers. Such is mine estimation of thee, O my Love, that so farre as the choisest Aegyptian horses of Pharaoh,9 I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaohs cha∣riots. for comely shape, for honourable service, for strength and speed, exceed all other, so farre thou excellest all that may be compared with thee. 10 Thy cheekes are comely with rowes of Iewels, thy necke with chaines of gold.Those parts of thee, which both are the seats of beau∣ty, and most conspicuous to the eye, are gloriously ador∣ned with the graces of my sanctification; which are for their worth as so many precious borders of the goodliest stones, or chaines of pearles. 11 We will make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver.And though thou be already thus set forth; yet I and my Father have purposed a further ornament unto thee, in the more plentifull effusion of our Spirit upon thee: which shall be to thy former deckings, in stead of pure gold curiously wrought with speckes of silver.
The Church. Behold (O ye daughters) even now,12 While the King sit∣teth at his table, my Spike∣nard, sendeth forth the smell thereof. whiles my Lord and King seemes farre distant from me, and sits in the Throne of heaven among the companies of Angels (who attend around upon him) yet now doe I finde him present with me in spirit: even now the sweet influence of his graces, like to some precious oyntment, spreads it selfe over my soule, and returnes a pleasant savour into his owne nosthrils. And though I be thus delightfull to my Saviour,13 A bundle of myrrhe is my welbeloved unto me, he shall lie all night be∣twixt my brests. yet nothing so much as he is unto me: for loe, as some fra∣grant pomander of myrrh, laid betweene the brests, sends up a most comfortable sent; so his love, laid close unto my heart, doth still give me continuall and unspeakable refreshings. Or if any thing can be of more excellent vertue,14 My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Cāphire in the vineyards of En∣gedi. such smell as the clusters of Camphire or Cypres berries, within the fruitfulst, pleasantst, and richest vineyards and gardens of Judaea, yeeld unto the passengers; such and more delectable doe I find the savour of his grace to me. CHRIST. Neither doest thou on my part lose any of thy love,15 Behold, thou art faire, my love: behold, thou are faire, thou hast Doves eyes. O my deare Church: for behold, in mine eyes, thus clo∣thed as thou art with my righteousnesse, oh how faire and glorious thou art! how above all comparison glori∣ous and faire! Thine eyes which are thy seers, (Prophets, Apostles, Ministers) and those inward eyes, whereby thou seest him that is invisible, are full of grace, chasti∣tie, simplicitie. The Church. Nay then (O my sweet Saviour and Spouse) thou alone art that faire and pleasant one indeed,16 Behold, thou art faire, my beloved, yea pleasant: also our bed is greene. from whose fulnesse I confesse to have received all this lit∣tle measure of my spirituall beautie: and behold, from this our mutuall delight, and heavenly con∣junction, there ariseth a plentifull and flourishing in∣crease of thy faithfull ones in all places, and through all times. And behold, the congregations of Saints,17 The beames of our house are Cedar, and our rafters of firre. the places where we doe sweetly converse and walke together, are both firme & during (like Cedars amongst the trees) not subject, through thy protecting grace, to utter corrup∣tion;
and through thy favourable acceptation and word (like to galleries of sweet wood) full of pleasure and con∣tentment. CAP. II. CHRIST. 1 I am the rose of Sha∣ron, and the lillie of the valleyes.THou hast not without just cause magnified me, O my Church: for, as the fairest and sweetest of all flowers which the earth yeeldeth, the Rose and Lilly of the val∣leies, excell for beautie, for pleasure, for use, the most base and odious weeds that grow; so doth my grace, to all them that have felt the sweetnesse therof, surpasse all worldly contentments. Neither is this my dignity alone: but thou, O my Spouse (that thou maiest be a fit match for me) art thus excellent above the world,2 As the lillie among thornes, so is my love a∣mong the daughters. that no Lilly can be more in goodly shew beyond the naked thorne, than thou in thy glory thou receivest from me, over-lookest all the assem∣blies of aliens and unregenerates. The Church. 3 As the Apple tree a∣mong the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sonnes. I sate downe under his shadow with great delight, and his ruit was sweet to my staste.And (to returne thy owne praises) as some fruitfull and well-growne Appletree, in comparison of all the barren trees of the wilde forest, so art thou (O my be∣loved Saviour) to me, in comparison of all men, and under thy comfortable shadow alone have I ever wont to finde safe shelter against all mine afflictions, all my tentations & infirmities, against all the curses of the Law, and dangers of judgment, & to coole my selfe after all the scorching beames of thy Fathers displeasure, & (besides) to feed and satisfie my soule with the soveraigne fruit of thy holy Word, unto eternall life. 4 He brought me to the banquetting house, and his banner over me, was love.Hee hath graciously led me by his Spirit, into the midst of the mysteries of godlinesse; and hath plentifully broached unto me the sweet wines of his Scriptures and Sacraments. And looke how souldiers are drawne by their colours from place to place, and cleave fast to their ensigne: so his love, which he spred forth in my heart was my onely banner, whereby I was both drawne to him, directed by him, and fastened upon him. 5 Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sicke of love.And now, O ye faithfull Evangelists, Apostles, Tea∣chers, apply unto me with all care & diligēce, all the cor∣diall premises of the Gospel: these are the full Flagons of that spirituall wine, which only can cheere up my soule;
these are the apples of that tree of life, in the middest of the Garden, which can feed me to immortality. Oh come and apply these unto my heart: for I am even overcome with a longing expectation and desire of my delayed glory. And whiles I am thus spiritually languishing in this a∣gonie of desire,6 His left hand is un∣der my head, and his right hand doth embrace me. let my Saviour imploy both his hands to releeve mine infirmitie: let him comfort my head and my heart, my judgement and affections, (which both complaine of weaknesse) with the lively heat of his gra∣cious embracements: and so let us sweetly rest together. In the meane time,7 I charge you, O yee daughters of Ierusalem, by the Roes, & by the Hinds of the field, that yee stirre not up, nor awake my love till he please. I charge you (O all yee that pro∣fesse any friendship or affinitie with me) I charge you by whatsoever is comely, deare and pleasant unto you, as you will avoid my uttermost censures, take heed how you vexe and disquiet my mercifull Saviour, and grieve his Spirit, and wrong his name, with your vaine and lewd conversation; and doe not dare, by the least provo∣cation of your sinne, to interrupt his peace. Loe, I have no sooner called,8 The voice of my be∣loved! behold he com∣meth leaping upon the mountaines, skipping upon the hils. but he heares and an∣sweres me with his loving voice: neither doth he onely speake to me afarre, but he comes to me with much wil∣lingnesse and celeritie; so willingly, that no humane re∣sistance can hinder him, neither the hillocks of my lesser infirmities, nor the mountaines of my grosser sins (once repented of) can stay his mercifull pase towards me. So swiftly, that no Roe or Hinde can fully resemble him in this his speed and nimblenesse: and loe,9 My beloved is like a Roe, or a yong Hart: be∣hold he standeth behinde our wall, he looketh forth at the window, shewing himselfe through the lat∣tesse. even now before I can speake it, is he come neere unto me, close to the doore and wall of my heart. And though this wall of my flesh hinder my full fruition of him, yet loe, I see him by the eye of faith, looking upon me; I see him as in a glasse; I see him shining gloriously, through the gates and windowes of his Word and Sacraments, upon my soule. And now, me thinkes,10 My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my faire one, and come away. I heare him speake to mee in a gracious invitation, and say, Arise, (O my Church) rise up, whether from thy security, or feare: hide not thy head any longer, O my beautifull Spouse, for danger of thine enemies, neither suffer thy selfe to be pressed with the dulnesse of thy nature, or the carelesse sleepe of thy sinnes; but come forth into the comfortable light of my presence, and shew thy selfe chearfull in me. For behold,11 For loe, the winter is past, the raine is over and gone. all the cloudy winter of thy afflictions is passed; all the tempests of tentations are blowne over; the heaven is cleare, and now there is nothing that may not give thee cause of delight.
12 The flowers ap∣peare on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land.Every thing now resembles the face of a spirituall Spring; all the sweet flowers and blossomes of holy pro∣fession put forth, and shew themselves in their opportu∣nities: now is the time of that heavenly melodie, which the cheerfull Saints and Angels make in mine eares, while they sing songs of deliverance, and praise me with their Allelujahs, and say, Glory to God on high, in earth peace, good will towards men. 13 The Fig-tree put∣teth forth her greene figs, and the vines with the tender grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my faire one, and come away.What speake I of blossomes? behold, those fruitfull Vines, and Fig-trees of my faithfull ones, whom my hus∣bandry hath carefully tended and dressed, yeeld forth both pleasant (though tender) fruits of obedience, and the wholesome & comfortable savours of better desires; wherefore now, O my deare Church, shake off all that dull securitie, wherewith thou hast beene held, and come forth and enjoy me. 14 O my dove! that art in the clifts of the rock, in the secret places of the staires: let me see thy coū∣tenance, let me heare thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.O my beautifull, pure, and chast spouse, which like un∣to some solitarie Dove, hast long hid thine head in the secret and inaccessible clifts of the rocks, out of the reach and knowledge of thy persecutors; how-ever thou art concealed from others, shew thy selfe in thy workes and righteousnesse, unto mee: and let me be ever plied with thy words of imploration, & thanksgiving: for thy voice (though it be in mourning) and thy face (though it bee sad and blubbered) are exceedingly pleasing unto me. 15 Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoile the vines: for our vines have tender grapes.And in the meane time (O all yee that wish well to my name and Church) doe your utmost indeavour to de∣liver her from her secret enemies (not sparing the least) who either by hereticall doctrine, or prophane conver∣sation, hinder the course of the Gospell, and pervert the faith of many, especially of those that have newly given up their names to me, and are but newly entred into the profession of godlinesse. 16 My beloved is mine and I am his: hee feedeth among the lillies.My beloved Saviour is mine, through my faith and I am his through his love: and we both are one, by vertue of that blessed union on both parts; whereby wee mutu∣ally enjoy each other with all-sufficient contentment. And how worthily is my love placed upon him, who lea∣deth me forth into pleasant pastures, and at whose right hand there is the fulnesse of joy for evermore! Come therefore (O my Saviour) and untill the day of thy glorious appearance shal shine forth to the world,17 Vntill the day break and the shadowes flee a∣way: turne my beloved, and be thou like a Roe, or a young Hart, upon the mountaines of Bether. wherein our spirituall marriage shall be consummate, and untill all these shadowes of ignorance, of infidelity, of troubles of conscience, and of outward tribulations be utterly dispersed, and chased away, come and turne thee to mee againe, thou which to the carnall eyes of the
world seemest absent, come quickly, and delay not; but for the speed of thy return, be like unto some swift Roe, or Hinde, upon those smooth hills of Gilead, which Jor∣dan severs from the other part of Jury. CAP. III. MY securitie told me that my Saviour was neere unto my soule, yea with it, and in it:1 By night on my bed I sought him whom my soule loveth, I sought him, but I found him not. but when by serious and silent meditation I searched my owne heart, I found that (for ought my owne sense could discerne) he was far off from me. Then thought I with my selfe,2 I will rise now and goe about the city in the streets, and in the broad waies I will seeke him whom my soule love: I sought him, but I nd him not. Shall I lie still content∣ed with this want? No, I will stirre up my selfe; and the helpe I cannot finde in my selfe, I will seeke in others: Of all that have been experienced in all kinde of difficul∣ties, of all deepe Philosophers, of the wisest and honest∣est worldlings, I will diligently enquire for my Saviour: amongst them I sought him, yet could receive no answer to my satisfaction. Missing him there,3 The watchmen that goe about the citie, found me: to whom I said, Saw yee him whom my soule loveth? I ranne to those wise and carefull Teachers, whom God hath set as so many watch-men upon the wals of his Jerusalem, who sooner found me than I could aske after them; to whom I said (as thin∣king no man could be ignorant of my love) Can you give me no direction where I might finde him whom my soul loveth? Of whom when I had almost left hoping for comfort,4 It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soule loveth: I held him, and would not let him goe until I had brought him in∣to my mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me. that gracious Saviour who wold not suffer me to be tēp∣ted above my measure, presented himselfe to my soule: Loe then, by a new act of faith, I laid fast hold upon him, and will not let him any more part from my joyfull em∣bracemēts, until both I have brought him home fully in∣to the seat of my conscience, & have wonne him to a per∣petuall cohabitation with me, and a full accomplishment of my love, in that Jerusalem which is above, which is the mother of us all. CHRIST. Now that my distressed Church hath beene all the night long of my seeming absence, toiled in seeking me,5 I charge you, O yee daughters of Ierusalem, by the Roes and by the Hinds of the field, that yee stirre not up nor awake my love, till he please. I charge you, (O all that professe any friendship with me) I charge you by whatsoever is comely, deare, and plea∣sant unto you, that (as you will answere it) you trouble not her peace with any unjust or unseasonable suggesti∣ons,
with uncharitable contentions, with any Novelties of doctrine, but suffer her to rest sweetly in that divine truth, which shee hath received, and this true apprehen∣sion of me wherein shee rejoyceth. 6 Who is this that commeth out of the wil∣dernesse like pillars of smoake, perfumed with myrrhe and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?Oh who is this? how admirable? how lovely? who but my Church, that ascendeth thus gloriously out of the wildernesse of the world, wherein shee hath thus long wandered, into the blessed mansiōs of my Fathers house, all perfumed with the graces of perfect sanctification, moūting right upward into her glory, like some straight pillar of smoake, that ariseth from the most rich and pleasant composition of odours that can be devised. The Church. 7 Behold his bed, which is Salomons: three∣sce valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel:I am ascended; and loe how glorious is this place where I shall eternally enjoy the presence and love of my Saviour! how farre doth it exceed the earthly magnifi∣cence of Salomon? about his bed doe attend a Guard of threescore choisest men of Israel: 8 They all hold swords, being expert in warre: E∣very man hath his sword upon his thigh, because of feare in the night.All stout Warriers able and expert to handle the sword; which for more readinesse each of them weares hanging upon his thigh, so as it may be hastily drawne upon any sudden danger: but about this heavenly pavili∣on of my Saviour, attend millions of Angels, spirituall Souldiers, mighty in power, ready to be commanded service by him. 9 King Salomon made himselfe a charet, (or bed) of the wood of Lebanon.The Charet, or Bed that Salomon made (so much ad∣mired of the world) was but of the Cedars of Lebanon. The Pillars but of silver, and the Bedstead of gold; the Tester or Canopie,10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bot∣tome thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple; the middest thereof being paved with love, for the daughters of Ierusalem. but of purple; the coverlet wrought with the curious and painfull needle-worke of the maids of Ierusalem: but this celestiall resting place of my God is not made with hands, nor of any corruptible metall, but is full of incomprehensible light, shining evermore with the glorious presence of God. And as the outward state, so the majesty of his person is above all comparison.11 Goe forth, O yee daughters of Zion, and be∣hold King Salomon with the crowne wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the glad∣nesse of his heart. Come forth (O yee daughters of Sion) lay aside all private and earthly affections, looke upon King Salomon as he sits solemnly crowned in the day of his greatest royaltie and triumph, and compare his highest pompe, with the divine magnificence of my Saviour, in that day when his blessed marriage shall be fully perfected above, to the eternall rejoycing of himselfe and his Church; and see whether there be any proportion betwixt them.
CAP. IIII. CHRIST. OH how faire thou art and comely, my deare Spouse!1 Behold, thou art faire, my love, behold, thou art faire, thou hast doves eyes within thy locks, thy haire is as a flock of goates, that appeare from mount Gile∣ad. how inwardly faire with the gifts of my Spirit! how faire outwardly in thy comely administration and go∣vernment! Thy spirituall eyes of understanding and judgement, are full of puritie, chastitie, simplicitie; not wantonly cast forth, but modestly shining amidst thy locks: all thy gracious profession and all thy appendan∣ces, and ornaments of expedient ceremonies, are so com∣ly to behold, as is to see a flocke of well-fed goats gra∣zing upon the fruitfull hills of Gilead. Those that chew and prepare the heavenly food for thy soule, are both of gracious simplicitie,2 Thy teeth are like a flocke of sheepe that are e∣ven shome, which came up from the washing: whereof every one beare twins, and none is barren among them. and of sweet accordance one with another; having all one heart and one tongue: and both themselves are sanctified and pur∣ged from their uncleannesse, and are fruitfull in their ho∣ly labours unto others; so that their doctrine is never in vaine, but is still answered with plentifull increase of soules added to the Church. Thy speech (especially in the mouth of thy Teachers) is both gracious in it selfe,3 Thy lippes are like a thred of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy tem∣ples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy lockes. and such as administers grace to the hearers; full of zeale and fervent charity, full of gravity and discretion: and that part of thy countenance which thou wilt have seen (though dimly and sparingly) is full of holy modesty and bashfulnesse; so blushing, that it seemeth like the colour of a broken peece of Pome∣granate. Those who by their holy authority sustaine thy go∣vernment (which are as some straight and strong necke to beare up the head) are like unto Davids high Tower of defence, furnished with a rich armorie;4 Thy necke is like the tower of David, builded for an armory, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. which affords infinite waies of safe protection, and infinite monuments of victory. Thy two Testaments (which are thy two full and faire breasts,5 Thy two breasts are like two yong Roes, that are twins, which feed a∣mong the lilies. whereby thou nursest all thy faithfull children) are as two yong Roes: twins, for their excellent and per∣fect agreement one with another, in all resemblances of yong Roes, that are daintily fed among the sweet flow∣ers, for the pleasant nourishment which they yeeld to all that sucke thereof. Vntill the day of my gracious appearance shall shine forth, and untill all these shadowes of ignorance,6 Vntill the day breake, & the shadowes fly away, I will get me to the moun∣taines of myrrhe, and to the hill of frankincense. infide∣litie, afflictions, be utterly and suddenly dispersed, O
my Spouse, I will retire my selfe (in regard of my bodi∣ly presence) into my delightfull and glorious rest of heaven. 7 Thou art all faire, my love, there is no spot in thee.Thou art exceeding beautifull, O my Church, in all the parts of thee: for all thy sinnes are done away, and thine iniquitie is covered, and loe, I present thee to my Father without spot, or wrinkle, or any such deformitie. 8 Come with me from Lebanon (my Spouse) with me from Lebanon: looke from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the lyons dennes, from the moun∣taines of the leopards.And now (O thou which I professe to have married to my selfe in truth and righteousnesse) thou shalt be ga∣thered to mee from all parts of the world; not only from the confines of Judea, where I planted and found thee, but from the remotest and most savage places of the Na∣tions; out of the company of infidels, of cruell and bloo∣dy persecutors, who like Lions and Leopards have tyran∣nized over thee, and mercilesly torne thee in peeces. 9 Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my Spouse, thou hast ravished my heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chaine of thy necke.Thou hast utterly ravisht me from my selfe (O my si∣ster and Spouse; for so thou art, both joyned to mee in that spirituall union, and coheire with me of the same in∣heritance and glory) thou hast quite ravisht my heart with thy love: even one cast of one of thine eyes of faith, and one of the ornaments of thy sanctification, wherwith thou art decked by my Spirit, have thus stricken me with love: how much more, when I shall have a full sight of thee, and all thy graces, shall I be affected towards thee! 10 How faire is thy love, my sister, my Spouse, how much better is thy love then wine! and the smell of thine oyntments then all spices!O how excellent, how precious, how delectable are those loves of thine, O my sister, my Spouse! how farre surpassing all earthly delicates! and the savour of those divine vertues, wherewith thou art endued, more plea∣sing to my sent, then all the perfumes in the world! The gracious speeches that proceed from thee, are as so many drops of the Hony-combe that fal from thy lips,11 Thy lippes, O my Spouse, droppe as the ho∣ny-combe: hony and milk are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smel of Lebanō. and whether thou exhort, or confesse, or pray, or com∣fort, thy words are both sweet and nourishing; and the savour of thy good workes, and outward conversation, is to me as the smel of the wood of Lebanon to the sense of man. 12 A garden inclosed is my sister, my Spouse: a spring shut up, a fountaine sealed.My sister, my Spouse, is as a Garden or Orchard full of all varietie of the heavenly trees and flowers of grace; not lying carelesly open, either to the love of strangers, or to the rage of enemies, which like the wilde Boare out of the wood, might root up and destroy her choice plants: but safely hedged and walled about, by my pro∣tection, & reserved for my delight alone; she is a Spring and Well of wholesome waters, from whom flow forth the pure streames of my Word; but, both, inclosed and sealed up: partly, that shee may the better (by this close∣nesse) preserve her owne naturall taste and vigour, from
the corruptions of the world; and partly, that shee may not be defiled and mudded by the prophane feet of the wicked. Thou art an Orchard, yea a Paradise, whose plants (which are thy faithfull children that grow up in thee) are as Pomegranate Trees;13 Thy plants are an orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits, Cam∣phire, with Spikenard. the Apples whereof are estee∣med, for the largenesse, colour and taste, above all other: or (if I would feed my other senses) the plentifull fruits of thy holy obedience (which thou yeeldest unto mee) are for their smell, as some composition of Cypresse,14 Spikenard & Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon, with all trees of frankin∣cense, Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the chiefe spices. Spikenard, Saffron, sweet Cane, Cinamon, Incense, Myrrh, Aloes, and whatsoever else may be devised, unto the most perfect sent. Thou art so a Spring in my Garden,15 A fountaine of gar∣dens, a well of living wa∣ters, and streames from Lebanon. that the streames which are derived from thee, water all the gardens of my particular congregations, all the world over: thou art that Fountaine, from whose pure head issue all those li∣ving waters which, who so drinketh, shall never thirst againe; even such cleare currents, as flow from the hill of Libanus, which like, unto another Jordan, water all the Israel of God. The Church. If I be a garden,16 Awake, O North∣winde, and come thou South, blow upon my gar∣den, that the spices there∣of may flow out: let my be∣loved come into his gardē, & eate his pleasant fruits. as thou sayest (O my Saviour) then arise, O all yee soveraigne windes of the Spirit of God, and breathe upon this garden of my soule, that the sweet odours of these my plants may both be increased, and may also be dispersed afarre, and carried into the no∣strills of my Well-beloved: and so let him come into his owne garden (which his owne hand hath digged, planted, watred) and accept of the fruit of that service and praise, which he shall inable me to bring forth to his Name. CAP. V. CHRIST. BEhold, according to thy desire,1 I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my Myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honie combe with my honie, I have drunk my wine with my milke: eat, O friends, drinke, yea, drinke abun∣dantly, O beloved. I am come into my garden, O my sister, my Spouse; I have received those fruits of thine obedience which thou offeredst unto me, with much joy and pleasure. I have accepted not on∣ly of thy good workes, but thy endeavours and purposes of holinesse, both which are as pleasant to me, as the Hony and the Hony-combe. I have allowed of the cheerfulnesse of thy service, and the wholsomnesse of thy doctrine. And yee, O my friends, whether blessed Angels, or faithfull men, partake with me in this joy
arising frō the faithfulnesse of my Church: cheere up and fill your selves, O my beloved, with the same spirituall dainties wherewith I am refreshed. The Church. 2 I sleepe, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knock∣eth, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my doe, my undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my lockes with the drops of the night.When the world had cast me into a secure sleepe, or slumber rather (for my heart was not utterly bereaved of a true faith in my Saviour) even in this darknesse of my minde, it pleased my gracious Redeemer not to neg∣lect me; he came to me, and knocked oft, and called im∣portunately at the doore of my heart, by his word and chastisements, and said, Open the doore of thy soule, O my sister, my deare, chaste, comely, unspotted Church: let me come in, and lodge and dwell with thee, in my graces; shut out the world, and receive me with a more lively act, and renovation of thy faith. For loe, I have long waited patiently for this effect of thy love, and have endured all the injuries both of the night, and weather of thy provocations, that I might at last enjoy thee. 3 I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?I answered him againe, pleading excuses for my de∣lay; Alas, Lord, I have now, since I left my forward profession of thee, avoided a great number of cares and sorrowes: must I take them up againe to follow thee? I have lived cleane from the soile of these evils: and shall I now thrust my selfe into danger of them? 4 My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the doore, and my bowels were moved for him.When my Saviour heard this unkinde answer of delay, he let his hand fall from the key-hole, which he had thus before without successe laboured about; and withdrew himselfe from soliciting me any more: whereupon my heart and bowels yearned within me for him, and for the remorse of my so long fore-slowing his admittance unto me. 5 I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the handles of the locke.And now I rouzed up my drousie heart (what I could) that I might in some cheerfull manner desire to receive so gracious a Saviour: which when I but endevoured, I found that he had left behinde him such a plentifull bles∣sing (as the monument of his late presence) upon the first motions of my heart, as that with the very touch of them I was both exceedingly refreshed, and moved to further indignation at my selfe for delaying him. 6 I opened to my be∣loved, but my beloved had withdrawn himselfe, and was gone: my soule failed when hee spake, I sought him, but I could not finde him: I called him, but he gave me no answer.I opened to my beloved Saviour, but my Saviour had now (in my feeling) withdrawne himselfe, and hid his countenance from me, holding me short of those graci∣ous offers and meanes which I had refused; and now I was almost past my selfe with despaire, to remember that sweet invitation of his, which I neglected: I sought him
therefore in my thoughts, in the outward use of his or∣dinances, and of my earnest prayers; but he would not as yet be found of me, or let me finde that I was heard of him. Those which should have regarded me,7 The watchmen that went about the citie, found me; they smote me, they wounded me, the keepers of the walls took away my vaile from me. & by their vi∣gilancy have secured me from danger, proved mine ad∣versaries: in stead of comforting me, they fell upon me, and wounded me with their false doctrines, drawing me on into further errors, spoiling me of that purity & since∣rity of profession, wherewith, as with some rich and mo∣dest vaile, I was formerly adorned, and covered. I advise you solemnly,8 I charge you, O daugh∣ters of Ierusalem, if yee find my beloved, that yee tell him, that I am sicke of love. O all yee that wish well to me (for I care not who knowes the vehemency of my passi∣on) if you should finde my Saviours presence in your selves before me, pray for the recovery of his love to me; and bemoaning my estate to him, tell him how I lan∣guish with the impatient desire of his love, and presence to be restored unto me. O thou which art the most happy,9 What is thy beloved more then another belo∣ved, O thou fairest among women? what is thy be∣loved more then another beloved, that thou dost so charge us? most gracious and most glorious of all creatures, the chosen of the living God; what is thy well-beloved whom thou seekest, above all other the sonnes of men? what such eminency is there in him above all Saints and Angels, that thou art borh so farre gone in affection to him? and dost so vehemently adjure us to speake unto him for thee? My well-beloved (if you know not) is of perfect beautie;10 My beloved is white and ruddie, the chiefest among ten thousand. in whose face is an exact mixture of the colours of the purest and healthfullest complexion of holinesse: for he hath not received the spirit by measure; and in him the God-head dwels bodily; he is infinitely fairer then all the sonnes of men; and for goodlinesse of person may beare the standard of comelinesse and grace a∣mongst ten thousand. The Deitie which dwelleth in him,11 His head is as the most fine gold, his lockes are bushie, and blacke as a Raven. is most pure and glorious: and that fulnesse of grace which is communi∣cated to his humane nature, is wondrously beautifull, and so sets it forth, as the blacke curled locks doe a fresh and well favoured countenance. His judgement of all things,12 His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the ri∣vers of water, washed with milke, and fitly set. and his respect to his Church (which are as his eyes) are full of love, and full of pietie, shining like unto doves washed in water, yea, in milke; so as there is no spot, or blemish to be found in them: and they are withall so fully placed, as is most comely and most expedient for the perfect sight of the estate, and necessities of his servants. The manifestation of himselfe to us in his Word,13 His cheekes are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like lillies, dropping sweet-smelling myrrh. is sweet to our spirituall feeling, as an heap of spice, or those
flowers that are used to make the best persuming oint∣ments, are to the other senses: his heavenly instructions and promises of his Gospell are unspeakably comfor∣table, and plenteous, in the grace that is wrought by them. 14 His hands are as gold rings set with the erill: His belly is as bright Ivory, overlaid with Saphires.His actions, and his instruments (which are his hands) are set forth with much port and majestie, as some preci∣ous stone beautifies the Ring wherein it is set: the secret counsels of his brest, and the mysteries of his will, are most pure and holy, and full of excellent glory. 15 His egges are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Leba∣non, excellent as the Ce∣dars.All his proceedings are firme and stable; and withall, as Pillars of Marble set in sockets of tried gold; so as they are neither subject to wavering, nor to any danger of in∣firmitie & corruption: the shew & carriage of his whole person, whereby he makes himselfe knowne to his cho∣sen, is exceeding goodly and upright, like to the straight and lofty Cedars of Lebanon. 16 His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altoge∣ther lovely. This is my be∣loved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Ierusalem.His mouth, out of which proceede innumerable blessings and comfortable promises, is to my soule even sweetnesse it selfe; yea (what speake I of any one part?) as you have heard in these particulars; he is all sweets: there is nothing but comfort in him; and there is no com∣fort but in him; and this (if yee would know) is my Well-beloved; of so incomparable glory & worthines, that ye may easily discerne him from all others. CAP. VI. Forraine Congregations. 1 Whither is thy be∣loved gone? O thou fai∣rest among women? whither is thy be∣loved turned aside? that we may seeke him with thee.SInce thy well-beloved is so glorious, and amiable, (O thou which art for thy beautie worthy to bee the Spouse of such an husband) tell us (for thou onely know∣est it; and to seeke Christ without the Church, we know is vaine) tel us where this Saviour of thine is to be sought; that we (ravished also with the report of his beautie) may joyne with thee in the same holy study of seeking after him. 2 My beloved is gone downe into his garden: to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, & to gather lillies.My Well-beloved Saviour (if you would know this also) is to bee sought and found in the particular as∣semblies of his people, which are his Garden of Pleasure, wherein are varieties of all the beds of renewed soules; which both he hath planted, and dressed by his continuall care, and wherein he walketh for his delight; feeding and solacing himselfe with those fruits of righteous∣nesse
and new obedience, which they are able to bring forth unto him. And now loe,3 I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: he feedeth among the lilies. whatsoever hath happened crosse to me, in my sensible fruition of him; in spight of all tenta∣tions, my beloved Saviour is mine through faith; and I am his through his love; and both of us are by an inse∣parable union knit together; whose conjunction and love is most sweet and happie: for all that are his he feedeth continually with heavenly repast. CHRIST. Notwithstanding this thy late blemish of neglecting me, O my Church: yet still in mine eyes,4 Thou art beautifull, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Ierusalem, terri∣ble as an armie with ban∣ners. through my grace, upon this thy repentance, thou art beautifull, like unto that neat and elegant Citie Tirzah, and that order∣ly building of Jerusalem, the glory of the world: and with this thy lovelinesse, thou art awfull unto thine ad∣versaries, through the power of thy censures, and the majestie of him that dwelleth in thee. Yea, such beautie is in thee,5 Turne away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy haire is as a flock of goats, that appeare from Gilead. that I am overcome with the vehemencie of my affection to thee: turne away thine eyes a while from beholding me; for the strength of that faith, whereby they are fixed upon me, ravisheth me from my selfe with joy. I doe therefore againe renew thy former praise; that thy gracious profession, and all thy appendances and ornaments of expedient ceremo∣nies are so comely to behold, as it is to see a flocke of well-fed goates grazing upon the fruitfull hils of Gilead. Thy Teachers,6 Thy teeth are as a flocke of sheepe which go up from washing, where∣of every one beareth twins, and there is not one barren among them. that chew and prepare the heavenly food of thy soule, are of sweet accordance one with ano∣ther, having all one heart, and one tongue; and both themselves are sanctified and purged from their unclean∣nesse; and are fruitfull in their holy labours unto others: so that their doctrine is never in vaine, but is still answe∣red with plentifull increase of soules to the Church. That part of thy countenance which thou wilt have seene;7 As a piece of a Pome∣granate are thy temples within thy lockes. (though dimly and sparingly) is full of holy mo∣destie and bashfulnesse: so blushing, that it seemeth like the colour of a broken peece of Pomegranate. Let there be never so great a number of people and nations, of Churches and assemblies,8 There are threescore Queenes, and fourescore concubines, and virgins without number. which challenge my Name and Love, and perhaps by their outward pro∣sperity, may seeme to plead much interest in me, and much worth in themselves. Yet thou onely art alone my true and chaste Spouse,9 My dove, my unde∣filed is but one: she is the onely one of her mother, shee is the choice one of her that bare her. The daughters saw her, and blessed her; yea the Queens and the concubines, and they praised her.
pure and undefiled in the truth of thy doctrine, and the imputation of my holinesse: thou art she whom that Jerusalem which is aboue, (the mother of us all) acknow∣ledgeth for her onely true, and deare daughter. And this is not my commendation alone: but all those forraine assemblies, which might seeme to be Rivals with thee of this praise, do applaud and blesse thee in this thine estate, and say; Blessed is this people, whose God is the Lord. 10 Who is she that looketh foorth as the morning, faire as the moone, cleare as the sunne, and terrible as an armie with banners?And admiring thy goodnesse, shall say; Who is this that lookes so freshly as the morning new risen; which from these weake beginnings is grown to such high per∣fection, that now she is as bright, and glorious, as the Sun in his full strength, and the Moone in a cleare skie; and withall is so dreadfull through the majestie of her countenance, and power of her censures, as some terri∣ble armie, with ensignes displayed, is to a weake ad∣versary. 11 I went downe into the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, and to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranats budded.Thou complainedst of my absence, (O my Church:) there was no cause; I meant not to forsake thee; I did but onely walke downe into the well-dressed Orchard of thine assemblies, to recreate and joy my selfe with the view of their forwardnesse, to see the happy progresse of the humble in spirit, and the gracious beginnings of those tender soules, which are newly converted unto mee. 12 Or ever I was aware, my soule made me like the chariots of Amminadib.So earnestly did I long to revisit thee, and to restore comfort unto thee, that I hasted I know not which way: and with insensible speed I am come backe, as it were upon the swiftest chariots, or the wings of the wind. 13 Returne, returne, O Shulamite; returne returne, that we may looke upon thee: what will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two ar∣mies.Now therefore returne (O my Spouse, the true daughter of Jerusalem) returne to me, returne to my selfe, and to thy former feeling of my grace: returne, that both my selfe, and all the company of Angels, may see and rejoyce in thee: and what shall yee see (O all yee hosts of heaven) what shall yee see in my Church? Even such an awfull grace and majestie, as is in a well-marshalled armie, readie to meet with the enemie. CAP. VII. 1 How beautifull are thy feet with shooes, O princes daughter, the joints of thy thighes are like jew∣els, the work of the hands of a cunning workeman.HOw beautifull are thy feet, O daughter of the High∣est; being shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace, and readily addressed to runne the way of the commandements of thy God! thou art compassed about thy loynes with the girdle of verity; which is both preci∣ous for the matter of it, and cunningly framed by the skill of the Spirit of truth.
The navell,2 Thy navell is like a round goblet, which wan∣teth not liquor: thy belly is like an heape of wheat, set about with lilies. whereby all thy spirituall conceptions re∣ceive their nourishment, is full of all fruitfull supply, and never wants meanes of sustenance, to feed them in thy wombe: which also is so plenteous in thy blessed increase, that is is as an heap of wheat, consisting of infinite pure graines, which consort together with much sweetnesse and pleasure. Thy two Testaments (which are thy two full and comely breasts,3 Thy two breasts are like two yong Roes that are twins. by whose wholesome milke thou nou∣rishest all thy faithfull children, once born into the light) are for their excellent and perfect agreement, and their amiable proportion, like two yong Roes. Those,4 Thy necke is as a tow∣er of iuorie: thine eyes like the fish pools in Hesh∣bon, by the gate of Bath∣rabbim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which looketh toward Damascus who by their holy authoritie support thy go∣vernment (which are as some straight and strong neck to beare up thy head) are for their height and defence, like a Tower; for their order, purenesse and dignity, like a Tower of Iuory: thy Teachers and Ministers (which are thine eyes) are like unto some cleare and artificiall ponds of water, in a place of greatest resort: wherein all com∣mers may see the faces of their consciences; and whence they may plentifully draw the Waters of life. Thy nose by which all spirituall sents are convayed to thee, is per∣fectly composed, and featured like some curious Turret of that goodly house in Lebanon; so as thy judgement, and power of discernning the spirits, is admirable for the order and excellencie thereof. The whole tyre of thine head (which are the ceremo∣nies used by thee) are very gracefull,5 Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the haire of thine head like purple, the King is held in the galleries. and of high estima∣tion and price to all the beholders: and as for me, I am so enamoured of thee, that I am even tied by my owne de∣sire, to a perpetuall presence in thine holy assemblies. Oh how beautifull and lovely art thou therefore (O my Church) in all thy parts and ornaments!6 How faire, and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for delights! how sweet and pleasant art thou (O my Love) in whatsoever might give me true contentment! Thy whole frame is,7 This thy statute is like to a palme tree; and thy breasts two clusters of grapes. for goodlinesse and straight growth, like unto some tall Palme-tree; which the more it is depressed by the violence of persecutions, riseth the more; and the two breasts of thy Testamēts are like two full juicie clusters, which yeeld comfortable and abun∣dant refreshing. Seeing then thou art my Palme-tree,8 I said, I will goe up to the palme tree, I will take hold of the boughes thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy nose like apples. I have resolved in my selfe to adjoyne my selfe to thee; to enjoy thee, to gather those sweet fruits of thy graces, which thou yeel∣dest; and by my presence also will cause thee to be more plentifull in all good workes, and doctrine; so as thou shall affoard abundance of heavenly liquor unto all the
thirstie soules of thy children; and an acceptable verdure of holinesse and obedience unto me. 9 And the roofe of thy mouth like the best wine, for my beloved, that goeth downe sweetly, causing the lips of those that are a∣sleepe, to speake.And the delivery of my Word, by the mouthes of my Ministers, is like to the most excellent and pleasant wine; being both well accepted of that God in whose name it is taught, and most sweetly rellished of the receivers; which is of such wonderfull power, that it is able to put words both of repentance, and praise, into the lips of him that lies asleepe in his sinnes. The Church. 10 I am my beloveds, and his desire is towards me.Behold; such as I am, I am not my owne; much lesse am I any others: I am wholly my Saviours: and now I see, and feele, whatsoever I had deserved, that he is mine also in all intire affection; who hath both chosen me, and given himselfe for me. 11 Come my beloved, let us goe forth into the field: let us lodge in the villages.Come therefore, O my deare Saviour, let us joyne together in our naturall care: let thy Spirit and my ser∣vice be intent upon thy Congregations here below on earth; and let us stay in the place where our spirituall Husbandrie lieth. 12 Let us get up early to the vinyards, let us see if the vine flourish, whether the tender grape appeare, and the pomegranates budde forth: there will I give thee my loves.Let us with all haste and cheerfulnesse visit the fruitful vines of our beleeving children; and to our mutuall com∣fort, be witnesses and partakers of all the signes and fruits of grace, of all those good workes, and thanksgivings, of those holy endeavours and worthy practices, which they yeeld forth unto us: let us judge of their forwardnesse, and commend it: whereupon it will easily appeare, that the consummation of our happy marriage draweth neer, in which there shall be a perfect union betwixt us. 13 The mandrakes give a smel, and at our gates are all maner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my be∣loved.Behold, thy godly servants, which not only beare fruit themselves, but are powerfull in the provocation of others, present their best services unto thee; and even at our doores (not farre to seeke, not hard to procure) is offer made unto thee, of all varietie of fruit: whether from thy yong Converts, or thy more setled Professors: and all these I spend not lavishly; but in my loving care, duely reserve them for thee, and for the solemne day of our full marriage.
CAP. VIII. The Iewish Church. OH that I might see thee (my Saviour) clothed in flesh!1 O that thou wert as my brother that sucked the breasts of my mother! when I should finde thee without, I would kisse thee, yet I should not be despi∣sed. Oh that thou which art my everlasting Husband, mightest also be my Brother, in partaking the same hu∣mane nature with me; that so I finding thee below upon earth, might familiarly entertaine thee, and converse with thee without reproach of the world; yea, might be exalted in thy glory! Then would I (though I be now pent up in the limits of Judaea) bring thee forth into the light and knowledge of the universall Church, whose daughter I am:2 I would lead thee, & bring thee into my mo∣thers house, who would instruct me: I would cause thee to drinke of spi∣ced wine, of the juice of my pomegranate. and then and there, thou shouldest teach mee how perfectly to serve and worship thee, and I shall gladly entertain thee with a royall feast of the best graces that are in my holi∣est servants; which I know thou wilt account better cheare, than all the spiced cups, and Pomegranate wines in the world. Then shall I attaine to a nearer communion with him;3 His left hand should be under my head: and his right hand should embrace me. and both his hands shall be employed to sustaine, and re∣leeve me: yea, he shall comfort my head and my heart (my judgement, and affections) with the lively heat of his gracious embracements. I charge you (O all yee that professe any friendship to me) I charge you deeply,4 I charge you, O daughters of Ierusalem, that ye stirre not up, nor a∣wake my love untill hee please. as ye will avoid my uttermost censures; take heed how yee vexe and disquiet my mer∣cifull Saviour, and grieve his Spirit: and doe not dare, by the least provocation of him, to interrupt his peace. CHRIST. Who is this,5 (Who is this that commeth up from the wildernesse, leaning upon her beloved?) I raised thee up under the ap∣ple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth, there shee brought thee forth that bare thee. that from the comfortlesse deserts of ig∣norance, of infidelity, of tribulations, ascendeth thus up into the glorious light and libertie of my chosen? rely∣ing her selfe wholly upon her Saviour, and solacing her selfe in him? Is it not my Church? It is shee, whom I have loved, and acknowledged of old: for even under the tree of offence, the forbidden fruit which thou ta∣stedst to thy destruction, I raised thee up againe from death; Even there, thy first mother conceived thee; while by faith shee laid hold on that blessed promise of the Gospell, whereby shee and her beleeving seed were restored.
The Iewish Church. 6 Set me as a seale up∣on thy heart, as a seale up∣on thine arme: for love is strong as death, jealousie is cruell as the grave: the coales thereof are coales of fire, which hath a most vehement flame.And so have thou me still (O my Saviour) in a perpe∣tuall and deare remembrance: keepe me sure in thine heart, yea in thine armes, as that which thou holdest most precious: and let me never be removed from thy love; the least shew and danger whereof I cannot endure: for this my spirituall love is exceeding powerfull, and can no more be resisted than death it selfe: and the jealous zeale which I have for thee and thy glory, consumes me, even like the grave, and burnes me up like unto the coales of some most vehement and extreme fire. 7 Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drowne it: if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly bee contemned.Yea, more then any fire; for any flame yet may bee quenched with water: but all the water of afflictions and terrors (yea, whole streames of persecutions) cannot quench this love: and for all tempting offers of wealth, of pleasures and honour, how easily are they all contem∣ned for the love of my Saviour! 8 Wee have a little si∣ster, and she hath no brests; what shall we doe for our sister, in the day when she shall be spoken for?Wee have a sister (as thou knowest, O Saviour) or∣dained through thy mercy, to the same grace with mee: the uncalled Church of the Gentiles; small (as yet) of growth, through the rarenesse of her Converts, and desti∣tute of the helpe of any outward ministerie, whereby she might either beare, or nourish children unto thee: when shee growes unto her maturity; and the mystery of cal∣ling her universally to thee, shall be revealed to the world, and her selfe, what course will it please thee to take with her? CHRIST. 9 If she be a wall, wee will build upon her a Pa∣lace of silver: and if she be a doore, we will inclose her with boards of Cedar.If shee shall continue firme and constant, in the expe∣ctation of her promises, and the profession of that truth which shall be revealed; we will beautifie and strengthen her with further grace, and make her a pure and costly Palace, fit to entertaine my spirit: and if shee will give free passage and good entrance to my word and grace, we will make her sure and safe from corruption, and re∣serve her to immortalitie. The Iewish Church. 10 I am a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes, as one that found favour.Behold, that condition which thou requirest in the Church of the Gentiles, thou findest in me; I am thus firme and constant in my expectation, in my profession: and that want thou findest in her of ability to nourish
her Children, by the breast of thy Word, is not in mee; who have abundance both of nourishment and defence: upon which my confession and plea, I found grace and peace in the eyes of my Saviour; and received from him assurance of his everlasting love to me. CHRIST. My Church is my Vine,11 Salomon had a vine∣yard at Baal-hamon, he let out the vineyard unto kee∣pers: every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousād pieces of silver. and I am the Owner and Hus∣bandman: our thrift and profit thereof farre exceedeth the good husbandry of Salomon: he hath a rich Vineyard indeed in a most fruitfull soile; but he lets it forth to the hands of others, as not being able to keepe and dresse it himselfe: and therefore he is faine to be content with the greatest part of the increase, not expecting the whole. But my Vine is ever before me,12 My vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou (O Salomon) must have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred. I am with it to the end of the world, I reserve it in mine owne hands, and dresse it with mine owne labour: and therefore if thou (O Sa∣lomon) canst receive from thine, to the proportion of a thousand, thy workmen and farmers will looke for the fift part to come unto their share; whereas the gaine of my Vineyard ariseth wholly, and only unto my selfe. Sith therefore such is my care of thee,13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the compa∣nions harken to thy voice, cause me to heare it. and joy in thee (O my Church, which consistest of the particular assem∣blies of men professing my Name) see thou be diligent in declaring my will, and giving holy counsels to all thy fellow-members: speake forth my praise in the great congregations (which all attend willingly upon thee) and let me heare the voice of thy constant and faithfull confession of me before the world. The Church. I will most gladly doe what thou commandest, O my Saviour: but that I may performe it accordingly,14 Make haste, my be∣loved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a yong Hart up∣on the mountaines of spi∣ces. be thou (which art, according to thy bodily presence, in the highest heavens) ever present with me by the Spirit, and hasten thy glorious comming, to my full Redemption.
ISAIAH. CAP. I. 2 Heare, O heavens, & give eare, O earth: for the Lord hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have re∣belled against me.SInce that men are deafe unto my words, I will turne mee and my speech to the very heavens, and earth, and call them to witnesse against those which should be my people; heare therefore, O heavens, and give eare O earth; for it is not I that speake, but the Lord himselfe complaineth of the unthankfulnesse of Is∣rael, &c. 3 The oxe knoweth his owner, and the asse his masters crib.What a wonder & shame it is, that they which should be more then men, are indeed worse then beasts; for be∣hold, the very ox, and the asse, which are the dullest of all creatures, yet they take thankfull notice of their owner, and of the crib wherein they are fed, &c. 5 Why should yee bee stricken any more? ye wil revolt more and more: the whole head is sicke, and the whole heart faint.I have already tryed your reformation by many cha∣stisements, yea, judgements; yet yee will not amend; to what purpose should I correct you further? Since I see you doe still grow worse, and worse; those parts of you that should be best, and are most eminent, and of greatest use, are extremely out of order. 6 From the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no soundnes in it, but wounds & bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not beene closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.Even from the highest to the lowest; from the mean∣est drudge unto the greatest of your Princes, ye are all miserably disordered, and sinfull; and are accordingly plagued; so as none of you are free from some grievous judgement; and such are your sins, and your judgements, that they have made themselves incapable of remedy, or mitigation. 8 And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard.The country round about being wasted, Jerusalem it selfe is left standing alone desolate, as a cottage in a vine∣yard, &c. and hath no more recourse unto it, and traf∣fique in it, then if it were already besieged, as ere long it shall be. 9 Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us a ve∣ry small remnant, wee should have beene as So∣dome, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.If God had not been gracious unto us, contrary to our deservings, and restrained the fury of our enemies, and mercifully reserved this small remnant unto us, wee had bin utterly destroyed, and laid waste, like to Sodom and Gomorrah. 10 Heare the word of the Lord, ye rulers of So∣dome.Since ye have made your selves then as sinfull as those infamous cities, that were destroyed with fire from hea∣ven, let me give you the names of those, whom yee have
imitated; heare therefore the word of the Lord, O ye rulers of Sodom, &c. To what purpose is the formality of these your out∣ward sacrifices; as if the multitude of your oblations,11 To what purpose is the multitude of your sa∣crifices unto me, saith the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, &c. or the very act done, could please me without due af∣fections? Those your solemne Feasts, which I have instituted,14 Your new moones, and your appointed feasts, my soule hateth; they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to beare them. and doe therefore well approve in themselves, yet as they are celebrated by you, I loath and abhorre them, &c. Jerusalem was once my faithfull Spouse, an holy City,21 How is the faithfull Citie become an harlot? it was full of judgement. how is it that she is now turned strumpet, and become desperately leud, and debauched? &c. Those good graces that thou didst once professe to have, are now utterly corrupted, and depraved;22 Thy silver is become drosse, thy wine mixt with water. thine obedience, which was once sincere, and pure, is now a∣dulterated with abhominable wickednesse. Yet, in my judgement I will remember mercy;25 And I will turne my hand upon thee, and pure∣ly purge away thy drosse, and take away all thy tinne. I will not utterly destroy thee as I might, but I will turne my hand upon thee, for thy restauration; and, whereas I might burne thee quite up, yet I will onely purge away thy drosse, and take away the base metall from thee, that the small remainder of the pure and precious, may be reserved. They shall be ashamed of that foule Idolatry where∣with ye have beene tainted;29 For they shall bee a∣shamed of the okes which ye have desired, and yee shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen. and of those groves which ye have used to that purpose; and of those gardens, and orchards which ye have so imployed. And, if ye againe relapse,30 For yee shall be as an oke whose leafe fa∣deth, and as a garden that hath no water. ye shall be left like one of the oakes of those destroyed groves, without leafe or sappe, or like one of those gardens, which you have abused, in a time of drought, without water. And that mighty Idoll whereto ye trust,31 And the strong shall be as towe, and the maker of it as a sparke, and they shall both burne together, and none shall quench them. shall be as towe, and the maker and worshipper of that Idoll, shall be as a sparke, and both of them shall burne together with unquenchable fire. CAP. II. IT shall come to passe in the dayes of the Messias exhi∣bited, and the Gospell revealed,2. And it shall come to passe in the last dayes, that the mountaine of the Lords house shall be esta∣blished in the top of the mountaines, and shall bee exalted above the hills, &c. that the Church of God shall not be obscurely confined to a corner of the world, but shall be eminently conspicuous; and so fa∣mously noted, that the Gentiles shall come in, and gene∣rally adjoyne themselves unto it.
3 For out of Zion shall goe forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Ierusalem.For in the Evangelicall Church onely, which is figured by Zion, shall the truth of Gods sacred word be profes∣sed; and from it shall spread it selfe over the world. 4 And hee shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into Plowshares, & their speares into pruning hookes.And the true Messias shall by his spirituall governmēt, rule over many nations, and hold many severall kinds of people in an awfull subjection; and shall so calme, and quiet them, that they shall be altogether composed to peace; and therefore shall turne their swords, whereof they shall have no further use, into instruments of hus∣bandry, &c. 5 O house of Iacob, come ye, and let us walke in the light of the Lord?Yea those new-converted Gentiles shall be ready to provoke, and incite Israel to an holy and conscionable obedience, and say, O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walke together in the cleare and glorious light of the Gospell, to the praise and honour of him that hath cal∣led us. 6 Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the East, and are Sooth∣sayers like the Philistines, and they please them∣selves in the children of strangers.O God, whiles thou admittest of the Gentiles, thou findest too just cause to cast off thine owne people; for that they are full of the superstitions and Idolatries of the Syrians, and are given to magicall practices, like the Philistims; and take pleasure rather to imitate the false worship of forraine nations, then to keepe close to thy holy prescriptions. They give themselves over to the immoderate desire, and pursuit of wealth,7 Their Land also is full of silver & gold, neither is there any end of their trea∣sures: their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their charets. neither is there any end of their covetous endeavours, to heap up ill gotten treasures; they doe also in a proud, or distrustfull affection lay for abundance of horses of warre, neither can they bee satisfied with the number of chariots; as if these were the strength wherein they trusted. 9 And the meane man boweth downe, and the great man humbleth him∣selfe; therefore forgive them not.Oh God, since they are so vile, and will not be reclai∣med from their Idolatry, spare them not, but make them examples of thy Justice. 10 Enter into the rocke, and hide thee in the dust, for feare of the Lord, and for the glory of his ma∣jestie.And now, O thou wilfully Idolatrous, and rebellious people, since thou wouldst not prevent these judgements, see if thou canst withdraw thy selfe from them; Goe hide thee in the rock, or shrowd thy selfe, within the earth from his vengance &c. 12 For the day of the Lord of Hosts, shall bee upon every one that is proud, and lofty.For in that terrible day, the fierce judgements of the Lord of Hosts, shall seize upon every one, that hath proudly and stubburnly resisted his word and ordinance, &c. 13 And upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oakes of Ba∣shan.And vpon all those proud and lofty potentates, which beare themselves as high, as the Cedars of Lebanon, and as stiffe as the oakes of Bashan. 15 And upon every high Tower; & upon every fenced wall.And all those high towers, and strong forts, wherein
vaine men have wont to put their trust, shall be cast to the ground. And all that rich traffique which you were wont to have with Cilicia and the countries round about,16 And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and up∣on all pleasant pictures. shall be ut off; and those pleasant and costly Tapestries, and pictures, which you had wont to bring home, shall faile, and disappoint you. And those Idolaters,20 In that day a man shal cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made, each one for himselfe to worship, to the moales & to the bats. which had wont to pride them∣selves in the glory of their false worship, shall now be ashamed of their fopperies, and, in a just indignation, shal hide up their puppets in blinde corners from the view of men. I see, it is your vaine selfe-cōfidence,22 Cease ye from man whose breath is in his nosthrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of? that hath deceived you; if yee therefore regard your owne safety and peace, cast off this false trust, upon so poore and impotent a thing, as man, whose breath is in his nosthrills; for what can he availe you, or how can he give you any protection from the wrath of the Almighty? CAP. III. THat whereby the life of man is supported,1 For Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, doth take away from Ierusalem, and from Iudah, the stay and the staffe, the whole stay of bread, & the whole stay of water. and sustai∣ned, even bread, and whatsoever necessary food, will I take away from Jerusalem. And whatsoever else you are wont to put confidence in, the mighty and strong warriour, the awfull Judge,2 The mightie man, and the man of warre, the judge and the Prophet, and the prudent and the ancient. the holy and learned Prophet, the prudent counselour, the ancient and experienced senator. Whereas men usually are wont to affect preeminence and authority among their neighbours,6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, saying thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruine bee under thy hand. ye shall be driven to that straight, that ye shall be faine to force honor upō your brethren, where ye see but meanes to subsist, and live; and a man shall take hold of his brother, and im∣portune and constraine him, saying; Thou hast clothing; be thou our ruler; and let the reparation of this misera∣rable ruine (if it be possible,) be thy work. In that day he shall resist the motion,7 In that day shall hee sweare, saying, I will not be an healer: for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the people. and disclaime the government with an oath, saying; It is not for mee to medle with the command of you, or to undertake the reparing of your ruines, for I have neither bread nor clothing. They doe impudently make open profession of their sinne, even as Sodome did, without all feare or shame,9 And they declare their sinne as Sodome, they hide it not. &c.
12 As for my people, children are their oppres∣sours, and women rule over them: O my people, they which leade thee, cause thee to erre, and de∣stroy the way of the pathes.As for my people they have brought themselves to that passe, as that even very children trample upon them by proud oppressions, and they lie downe willingly un∣der them; and every effeminate usurper domineereth over them at pleasure; and, (which is worse,) those spiri∣tuall guides, which should lead them in the way of life, mis-lead them unto utter perdition. 15 What meane ye that ye beate my people to peices, and grind the faces of the poore? saith the Lord God of hosts.What meane ye, O ye governors, which should be the onely refuge and protection of my people, to offer this cruell violence unto them? how dare ye thus unmerci∣fully oppresse the poore? 16 Because the daugh∣ters of Zion are haughty, and walke with stretched forth necks.Neither only are the men thus vicious, but the women also are given over to a proud new-fanglenesse: Even the dames of Jerusalem goe in an haughty fashion, &c. As all the parts of their body are tainted with their disguise,17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crowne of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts. so the Lord will, in his justice, punish them in all parts, from the crown of the head to the sole of their feet, and will lay open this their loathsome and deformed nakednesse, to the eyes of the world. In stead of beauty, which they had wont so curiously to preserve,24 In stead of beauty shall be burning. that they would not so much as looke forth into the heate of the Sun, shall be a vehement burning, and scorching of the skinne. CAP. IIII. 1 And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eate our owne bread, and weare our owne apparell: onely let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.VPon that slaughter and vastation, there shall be so few men left, as that seven women shall lay hold, and hang upon one man, with importunate suit to yeeld but to their protection and cohabitation; saying, It shall cost thee nothing; we have food & raiment of our owne; onely doe thou beare the name of our husband; and take from us the reproach of our widowhood, and sterilitie. 2 In that day shall the branch of the Lord bee beautifull & glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely, for them that are escaped of Israel.In that day, the day of the blessed restauration of the Church, shall the Messias, as the branch of the Lord, sprout out gloriously, and happily, out of the seemingly-dead stocke of Judah; and excellent and pleasant fruits of his appearance shall glad the hearts of those that are the faithfull remainders of Israel. 3 And it shall come to passe, that hee that is left in Zion, and he that re∣maineth in Ierusalem, shall be called holy: even every one that is written among the living in Ierusalem.And it shall come to passe, that those who pertaine to the true Church of Christ, shall be holy; even every one that shall be a lively member of the mysticall body of Christ. When the Lord shall, by his severe judgments have washed,4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have pur∣ged the blood of Ierusa∣lem, from the middest thereof by the spirit of judgement, and by the spirit of burning. & wip'd away the blemishes, & grievous sins of
his Church; and shall have delivered his Jerusalem from all the pollutions, wherewith she was tainted, by the power of his Spirit, and the sharpnesse of his chastise∣ments. There shall be no corner of his Church, wherein the grace of God shall not marvelously appeare;5 And the Lord will create upon every dwel∣ling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, & the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shal be a defence. and where∣in he will not manifest himselfe, and his mercifull pre∣sence and protection, as he did to his ancient people of Israel, by a cloud and smoke by day, and by the shining a of flaming fire by night. And whereas the Church shall be still subject to the scorching heates,6 A there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heate, and for a place of re∣fuge, and for a covert from storme and from raine. and tempestuous stormes of persecuti∣on, God shall erect a safe tabernacle for her, to shade her from the heate, and shelter her from those violent tempests. CAP. V. I Will sing a Song to Christ the deare Bride-groome of his Church, concerning his vineyard of Israel;1 Now will I sing to my well-beloved a song of my beloved, touching his vineyard: my beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitfull hill. My God and Saviour had planted his Church of Israel, in a very fruitfull soile; with the greatest advantage of place, even in the highest eminence, where he might be likely to re∣ceive the most generous fruit of obedience. He fenced it about, with his gracious protection,2 And he fenced it and gathered out the stones thereof, & planted it with the choisest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a winepress therin: & he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wilde grapes. and good lawes, he removed out of it all the apparent im∣pediments of growth and fruitfulnesse, he furnished it with choice persons, and those persons with excellent graces, he gave to it proofes of his vigilant care over it, and meanes to expresse, and make use of that sweet fruit, which it should yeeld; and now, hee made account that it should returne unto him the pleasant clusters of holy obedience: and behold, it runnes forth into miserable disorder, and yeelds nothing but the sowre and distast∣full fruits of sinne and wickednesse. And now, O my people, I dare appeale to your selves,3 And now, O inhabi∣tants of Ierusalem, & men of Iudah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard. and make you judges of this case betwixt you and me; say whether you can choose but condemne your selves. Thus hath God pleased to reveale his will unto me, saying;9 In mine eares said the Lord of hosts, of a truth many houses shall be deso∣late, even great and faire without inhabitant. whereas these oppressors affect to joyne house to house, certainely, I will cause their houses to be desolate; and as they dispeopled townes and houses, their houses (though great and faire) shall be without in∣habitants.
10 Yea ten acres of vineyard shall yeeld one bath, and the seed of an homer shall yeeld an Ephah.Yea, so will I curse that ground, with barrennesse, which they have wrung from the poore owners, as that ten acres of vineyard shall yeeld but sixe gallons of wine, and so much ground as seven bushells is able to sow, shall yeeld but three parts backe againe to the owner. 14 Therefore hell hath enlarged her selfe, and o∣pened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pompe, and he that rejoyceth, shall descend into it.Neither shall the wrath of God stay here; and take up with their captivity, and famine; but he hath prepa∣red further judgement for these mercilesse oppressors, for he shall cause the insatiable gulfe of hell to devoure them, and to swallow up all their pompe and jollity. But, though the Lord will take this just vengeance o his rebellious enemies,17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste plas of the fat ones shall strangers eate. yet will he be ever gracious to his owne flocke; and shall cause the lambes thereof to feed comfortably, in their wonted pastures; and those places, which the insolent enemies had wasted, shall be againe possessed by his people, whom their long captivi∣ty hath made strangers to their owne land. 18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sinne, as it were with a cartrope.Woe be to them that are so set upon wickednesse, as that they use all possible perswasions, and provocations to draw themselves to a lawlesse commission of sinne, and continuance in it. 19 That say, let him make speed and hasten his workes that wee may see it: and let the counsell of the Holy one of Israel draw nigh and come; that we may know it.That make light of the threatned judgements, and i a scornfull distrust, dare say; why doth not God hasten these menaced plagues? faine would we see the perfor∣mance of these terrible threates; let not God say, but do; let that which God professeth to have determined against us, be speedily effected. 20 Woe unto them that call evill good, and good evill.Woe bee unto them that colour wickednesse with faire pretences, and cry downe goodnesse with slande∣rous calumniations, &c. 22 Woe unto them that are mighty to drinke wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drinke.Woe be to them that improve their strength to ex∣cesse, glorying that they are able to powre in, and to beare much wine; and affect to be thought and approved strong and mighty drinkers. 24 So their root shall be rottennesse, their blos∣some shall goe up as dust.So they shall be utterly destroyed, & shall be as a tree whose roote is rotten, and whose blossome flies away like dust, &c. 25 And the hills did tremble, and their carkei∣ses were torne in the midst of the streets: for all this his anger is not turned a∣way, but his hand is stretch∣ed out still.The neighbour hils did tremble with the noise and fury of that siege; and their carcasses lay torne, and mangled in the midst of the streets; yet all this cannot be warning enough to this stubborne people, to turne from their sinnes, &c. 26 And he will lift up an ensigne to the nations from farre, and will hisse unto them, from the end of the earth.He will raise up warre against them, even from nations that dwell afarre off; and will stirre up and provoke ene∣mies against them from the furthest parts of the earth, &c. 27 None shall be wea∣ry nor stumble amongst them, none shall slumber nor sleep.They shall come with such fiercenes and spirit to this
warre, that they shall not be sensible of any wearinesse; they shall march nimbly and boldly, no one shall give himselfe to slumber in the way, &c. There shall be both terrour and vigour in their horses prepared for this warre,28 Their horses hoofes shall be counted like flint, and their wheeles like a whirlewinde. and their chariot wheeles shall come ratling furiously on, like some dreadfull tempest, and flie swiftly like a whirlewinde. What speake I of the roaring of a Lion?29 And in that day they shall roare against them, like the roaring of the sea: and if one looke unto the land, behold dark∣nesse and sorrow, and the light is darkned in the hea∣vens thereof. yea these Chaldeans, which I will bring upon them, shall come roaring in, like a mighty sea, in a tempest; with such ter∣ror that all shall be filled with confusion, the earth shall be darkned with sorrow, and the heavens shall yeeld no glimpse of comfort to the distressed. CAP. VI. IN the yeare that King Vzziah dyed,1 In the yeare that King Vzziah died, I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his traine filled the temple. I had a vision from God; wherein it pleased the Lord to represent unto me a cleare signe of the majesticall presence of the Sonne of God, sitting on high, upon a glorious throne; and the traine of his shining robe filled the temple. Who as he was glorious in himselfe, so in his atten∣dants; for, over the throne stood the Angels of heaven;2 Above it stood the Seraphims: each one had sixe wings, with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twaine hee did flie. each one had sixe wings; with two whereof he covered his face, as not being able to behold the brightnesse of that divine majesty: with two he covered his feet, as fa∣vouring the weaknes of humane eyes, that cannot behold the least splendor of those celestiall creatures; with two he did swiftly move, and flie to execute the charge of God. So strong and dreadfull was that voice of theirs, that the very posts of the doores,4 And the posts of the doore moved at voice of him that cried, & the house was filled with smoake. and the pillars of the Tem∣ple were moved therewith; and (as it had wont to bee, when God would signifie his presence in that sanctuary,) the whole house was filled with smoake. Then said I, as one terrified with that sight;5 Then said I, wo is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of uncleane lips, &c. I dwell in the midst of a people of uncleane lips. woe is me there is no way but death with me; I have delivered messages from this holy God, but I am not, nor have beene so sanctified, as that I might be safely fit for this great service, &c. Then one of those bright Angels flew unto me,6 Then flew one of the Seraphims unto me, having a live coale in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar. having a live coale in his hand, (signifying the purging and pu∣rifying efficacy of the Spirit) which he had taken not from an ordinary, and common hearth, but from the al∣tar of God; the true type of Christ, the Saviour. Lo, this coale touching thy lippes, is a certaine signe,7 Loe this hath tou∣ched thy lips, and thine in∣iquitie is taken away, and thy sinne purged.
and representation of that powerfull operation of the spirit of God, whereby thy sin is purged away, and thou inabled to this great function. 8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord saying, Whom shal I send, & who will goe for us? Then I said: here am I, send me.Then the Lord represented a voice to my eare, saying after the maner of men; whom shall I send to this people? & who is willing to deliver this message from us? Then, when as once my lips had been thus touched, and sancti∣fied, I did gladly put my selfe forward, and said; Here I am, send me. 2 And he said, Goe and tell this people, heare ye indeed, but understand not: and see ye indeed, but per∣ceive not.Be not discouraged, I shall send thee to an obstinate people, whose perversenesse I doe so well know, that I would have thee tell them before hand, what I expect from them; viz. that they will heare indeed, but not care to understand, they will see, but not regard to per∣ceive. 10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their eares heavie, and shut their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and un∣derstand with their heart, and convert and be healed.Yea, more then so, through the occasion of thy pro∣phecie, and holy ministery amongst them, their hearts shall be hardened, and made obstinate; and their eares dulled, and deafened; that in my just judgement they may be given up to a spirituall insensiblenes, as a due punish∣ment of their carelesse neglects of my ordinances; and that thereupon may follow their deserved condemnati∣on. 11 Then said I, Lord, how long? and he answer∣ed, untill the cities be wa∣sted without inhabitant.Then said I, in a meet compassion of my people; But alas, Lord, how long shall this judgement lie upon thine Israel? and he said; untill the cities be utterly wasted, and left, &c. 13 But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall bee eaten as a Teyle tree, and as an oake, whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves, so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.But yet, there shall be a tenth part of Israel that shall returne after it hath beene dispersed, and consumed, and be a seed for the rest, even as it is with a tree, which ha∣ving cast her leaves, yet hides the sappe within the stock or bulk, which buds forth againe in due season; so shall the remainder of the holy seed, which for the time see∣med to lie dead, sprout forth into an abundant increase. CAP. VII. 2 And it was told the house of David, saying; Sy∣ria is confederate with E∣phraim, and his heart was moved, & the heart of his people as the trees of the wood are moved with the winde.IT was told to some of the family of Achaz, the King of Judah, saying; The King of Assyria is confederate with Israel, to make a second warre upon Judah. And the heart of Achaz, and his subjects were moved, and shaken with feare, as the trees of the wood are moved with a strong winde. Feare not these two Kings of Assyria, and Israel; for they are but as two short ends of fire brands,4 Feare not, neither be faint hearted, for the two tailes of these smoa∣king fire-brands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the sonne of Remaliah. not burning but smoaking, which may threaten, but can worke no
combustion amongst you; I meane Rezin the King of Sy∣ria, and Pekah the sonne of Remaliah. Let us, in stead of Achaz, set up a King in Jerusalem,6 —and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a King in the midst of it, even, &c. one of the most renouned peeres of Syria. Damascus is the head city of Syria, and Rezin is the head or King of Damascus; so let him still bee, and con∣tent himselfe with his owne territories;8 For the head of Sy∣ria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin and within threescore and five yeares shall Ephraim be broken, &c. but as for Ephra∣im, which joynes with Syria against thee, ere threescore yeares be expired, it shall be wasted and dispeopled. In the meane time, as Samaria is the head city of Isra∣el, so let Pekah the sonne of Remaliah content himselfe to be the head, or King of Samaria:9 And the head of E∣phraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Rema∣liahs son: if ye will not be∣leeve, surely ye shall not be established. These things I have fore-told you from God, O ye men of Jerusalem; if yee will not give credit unto them, the fault and the punish∣ment shall be yours, ye shall faile of that protection, and stability which you expect. I will demand no signe; for why should I?12 But Ahaz said, I will not aske, neither will I tempt the Lord. since I doe already beleeve the promise of God made to me; and why should I tempt God, by urging him to give proofe and evidence of that whereof I am sufficiently assured? Heare me now,13 And he said, Heare ye now, O house of Da∣vid; is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God al∣so? O yee of the house of my deare and faithfull servant David; whose sinne is therefore aggra∣vated by the holinesse of your fore-fathers; Is it a small thing for you, to reject and contemne me, that am a man like your selves, but yee will with your hypocrisie, and disobedience provoke, and abuse my God also, whose message I beare? are ye not ashamed, and afraid, under a pretence of piety to refuse the gracious offer and com∣mand of God that sent me? Therefore, the Lord shall, without your will,14 Therefore the Lord himselfe shall give you a signe: Behold, a virgin shall conceive and beare a son, and shall call his name Im∣manuel. or assent give you a signe; which shall be no other, then that anci∣ent ingagement of his, to his Church: Behold, in the ful∣nesse of time, a virgin shall miraculously conceive, and beare a sonne; and she shall, by the appointment of God himselfe, call his name, God with us. He shall have a true humane body,15 Butter & hony shall he eate, that he may know to refuse the evill, & chuse the good. and shall be sustai∣ned with that ordinary nourishment, wherewith chil∣dren are wont to be fed; and shall grow up in experimen∣tall knowledge, as well, as in stature; and shall thus ina∣ble himself (like us) to refuse the evill, & choose the good. But,16 For before the child shall know to refuse the e∣vill, and chuse the good, the land that thou abhor∣rest shall be forsaken of both her Kings. because you may plead that it will be long ere this promise be effected, behold, before this child of mine, Shear-jashub, shall come to the age of discretion, this land of Israel and of Syria shall be forsaken of both these Kings, Rezin, and Pekah; for they shall both, ere long, be swept away by an untimely death.
17 From the day that Ephraim departed from Iudah, even the King of Assyria.It was an heavie day to you, when the ten tribes de∣parted away from Judah; but this judgement which I will bring upon you, shall be rather worse then that; even the sword of the King of Assyria. 18 That the Lord shall hisse for the flie that is in the uttermost parts of the rivers of Aegypt, and for the Bee that is in the land of Assyria.The Lord shall call for, and excite mighty enemies a∣gainst thee, out from the further coasts of the river of Nilus, and out of Assyria; even Aethiopians, Edomites, and other puissant nations, which shall come, as thick as swarmes of flyes, or bees. 20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a ra∣sor that is hired, namely by them beyond the river, by the King of Assyria, the head and the haire of the feet, and it shall also con∣sume the beard.In that day, the Lord shall, by the hand of the Assyri∣ans and their associates, make utter strip, & waste of Ju∣dah, by the cruelty of those hired forces, which they shall bring up; even as if a man should be hired with his ra∣sour to shave off all the haire of the head, and the whole body, even to the very stumpes, so as there shall bee no mention where it grew. 21 And it shall come to passe in that day, that a man shall nourish a yong cow, and two sheepe.And it shall come to passe in those daies, that a man which had formerly wont to keep whole flocks, & droves shall now be glad to take up with one yong cow, and two sheepe. 22 And it shall come to passe for the abundance of milke that they shall give, he shall eate butter: For butter and hony shall eve∣ry one eate that is left in the land.And though this proportion be very small, yet it shall be answerable to the persons, which shall be left alive to spend it; who shall be so few, that this poore stocke of cattle shall be able to feed them: A small quantity of butter and hony shall be enough to sustaine that small re∣mainder of men. 24 With arrowes and with bowes shall men come thither, because all the land shall become bri∣ars and thornes.So desolate shall the country be, that where before were townes inhabited, and fields tilled, there shall bee now solitary deserts, the dens of wilde beasts, so as the hunters shall come thither with arrowes, and bowes to pursue their game. 25 And on all hils that shall be digged with the mattocke, there shall not come thither the feare of briars and thornes; but it shall bee for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattel.And men shall be glad to betake themselves into waste wildernesses, for their hiding places; and there shall bee glad to plant themselves, and imploy their husbandry upon the desert mountaines; which they shall digge with their mattocks, instead of plowing; in so much as there shall be no place for briars, and thornes to grow in those desolate hils, but they shall be improved to the use of their oxen, and lesser cattell. CAP. VIII. 1 Take thee a great roule, and write in it with mans penne, concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz.TAke thee a large roule, and write therein with large text letters, that word of threatned judgement, which thou shalt take for the name of thy sonne; even, Maher-shalal-hash-baz; those foure words compoun∣ded
in one shall be enough to fill thy scrole, & the hearts of the people, with an expectation of the destruction menaced. And I took unto me faithfull witnesses,2 And I tooke unto me faithfull witnesses to re∣cord, Vriah the priest. both of this act that I did, in fastening this roll upon the doores of the Temple, and of the name given to my said sonne, in his circumcision; even Uriah the priest, &c. For I had conversed with my wife the prophetesse,3 And I went unto the prophetesse, and shee con∣ceived and bare a son, then said the Lord to me, call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz. and she had conceived, and borne a sonne; and the Lord had appointed me to call his name; Make speed to the spoile, hasten to the prey; in a signe, and denunciation of that judgement, which the Assyrians shall bring upon Jerusa∣lem. For, ere the child shall come to the age of speech,4 For before the Child shall have knowledge to cry, my father and my mo∣ther, the riches of Damas∣cus, and the spoile of Sama∣ria shall be taken away be∣fore the King of Assyria. and discretion, to distinguish his parents from strangers, the generall of the King of Assyria, shall spoile the countries of Israel, and Syria; whereof the chiefe cities are Damas∣cus and Samaria. For as much as this people have not rested themselves upon the gracious promises of Gods protection,6 For so much as this people refuseth the waters of Siloah that goe softly, & rejoyce in Rezin and Re∣maliahs sonne. but be∣ing dishartened with their owne paucity, and weaknesse, have sought to other helpes, and depended upon Rezin, and Pekah; the Kings of Syria and Israel. The power of the King of Assyria shall spread it selfe over the whole land of Judah, to destroy it,8 And hee shall passe through Iudah, hee shall o∣ver-flow, and goe over, he shal reach even to the neck and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Im∣manuel. even over that holy land, which is consecrated to thy name, O thou Saviour of thy Church, God, and man; which yet, be∣cause it so nearly pertaineth unto thee, shall at last finde the benefit of thy protection. Goe to then, O ye enemies of Gods people; band your selves together; joyn your hearts and heads,9 Associate your selves (O ye people,) and ye shall be broken in peeces. and hands in one; yet yee shall in spight of all your power be crushed, and broken in pieces, &c. For the Lord did not only speake to me,11 For the Lord spake thus to mee with a strong hand, and instructed mee that I should not walke in the way of this people, saying; but with his mighty hand guided, and directed me, that I should not yield my selfe to a conformity with the sins of this peo∣ple, and give way to their infidelity, and obstinacy, saying; Say ye not out of your distrust, let us make a confe∣deracy with the Assyrians;12 Say ye not, A confe∣deracie to all them to whom this people shall say, A confederacie; neither feare ye their feare, nor be afraid. without whose aid we cannot stand against our enemies, neither be ye dejected with this cowardly feare of them, that rise up against you. Give yee glory to God, in the confidence, and praise of his Almighty power, whereby he subdueth all things, Let your holy and awfull feare be only bent upon him,13 Sanctifie the Lord of hostes himselfe, and let him be your feare, and let him be your dread. who can deliver, or destroy you, at pleasure. He shall be a rocke of sure defence to those that feare him, but a stone of stumbling,14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling, & for a rocke of offence to both the hou∣ses of Israel, for a gin, and for a snare to the inhabi∣tants of Ierusalem. and a rock of offence to
those that distrust and disobey him, even of both the houses of Juda, and Ephraim, and for a snare to those, that are godlesse, and rebellious, even in Jerusalem it selfe. Give full assurance to my people of the certainty of this prophesie,16 Binde up the Testi∣monie, Seale the law a∣mong my disciples. and seale it up as a law that shall not bee reversed. 17 And I will waite up∣on the Lord that hideth his face from the house of Iacob, and I will looke for him.For my part, however others entertaine these words of God, I will make account of their assured perfor∣mance; and depend upon the good providence of that just God, who deservedly withdrawes his favour from the rebellious house of Jacob. 18 Behold I, and the Children whom the Lord hath givē me, are for signes & for wōders in Israel, frō the Lord of Hostes, which dwelleth in mount Zion.Behold, I, and those faithfull disciples, whom the Lord hath by my meanes converted unto him, are made a ga∣zing stock, and wonderment to the children of Israel, and this is a judgement, that is justly comne upon them from the Lord of hosts, which hath, with so small effect, grati∣ously manifested himselfe in his Temple on mount Sion. 19 And when they shal say unto you, seeke unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards, that peep, and that mutter, should not a people seeke unto their God? for the living to the dead?What a madnesse is it in you not to cleave fast unto the Lord, your true and only God? For if the profane heathen shall thinke they have reason to perswade you to depend upon magicians, and wizards, that use divelish inchantments, is it not a shame that you should not finde cause to seeke, and cleave unto your only true God? should we be so foolish, as to seek in the case of the living to the dead? 20 To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speake not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.No; farre be that from us; let us have recourse to the Law and to the Testimony; that is it, which God hath given us for our infallible direction, and if any man speak either without, or against this word, it is because he hath not the true light of grace, or understanding in him. 21 And they shall passe through it hardly bestead and hungry, and it shall come to passe, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their King, and their god, and looke upward.And whereas they hoped to have beene fixed in this good land for ever; they shall now only passe through it, as fugitives; being hardly bestead, and pinched with hun∣ger; and then, they shall fret, and gall themselves with late, and vaine indignation, and shall curse their Idoll, and their King, whose confidence hath mis-led them; and when they are thus throughly distressed, they shall begin to look upward, to the hand of that God, by whom they are punished. 22 And they shall look unto the earth, and behold trouble and darknesse, dim∣nesse of anguish: and they shall be driven to darknes.Neither can they expect comfort any other way, for if they looke unto the earth, there is nothing but misery and affliction; yea even extremity of anguish; so as that sorrow and distresse whereunto they shall be plunged, shall drive them forceably to looke up to heaven for succour.
CAP. IX. YEt, though this calamitie shall bee exceeding great,1 Neverthelesse the dimnesse shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebu∣lon, and the land of Naph∣tali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the sea, beyond Iordan in Galilee of the nations. yet it shal not be utterly so extreme and disconsolate, as that former, which the land of Israel shall indure, when Tiglath Pilezer, King of Assyria, shall have mise∣rably afflicted it, and when it was conquered and wasted by Salmanasar; and those maritine parts thereof, which were beyond Jordan, bordering upon Tyre and Sidon, were utterly wasted. There is a comfortable assurance of delivery in this miserable captivity; for, behold,2 The people that walk∣ed in darknesse, have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shi∣ned. the Messiah shal certain∣ly come, and by his doctrine, and spirit shall inlighten those that sate in darknesse, and that abide in the sha∣dow of death, beginning his blessed Gospell in those utmost skirts of Galilee. When thou shalt thus gratiously visit thy people,3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increa∣sed the joy: they joy be∣fore thee, according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoyce when they divide the spoile. howsoever the nation shall not be greater then now it is, yet the joy of it shall be more; as now, contrarily, the people are more, but the joy is not more; then shall our rejoycing be great and unspeakable, such as is wont to be of the husbandman, when he fetcheth in a rich and sea∣sonable harvest, or of a souldier when he divideth the spoile. For thou shalt have delivered thy people from the slavish yoke of their tyrannicall oppressours,4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staffe of his shoul∣der, the rod of his oppres∣sour, as in the day of Mi∣dian. and from all their cruell impositions, as thou didst deliver them from the oppression of the Midianites, in the time of the Judges. Commonly every battle is with confused noyse,5 For every battle of the warriour is with con∣fused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fewell of fire. and fearefull effusion of blood, and wallowing therein; but here, the case was otherwise; God did fight from heaven for his people, and did, as it were, set a fire amongst his enemies, causing them to fall one upon another, and to consume themselves. Neither is it for Gods people to rest in the temporall deliverance from their captivity,6 For unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Sonne is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, &c. but to erect their thoughts unto higher hopes, even the happy assurances of salvation, by the true Messias, who is to come into the world, For unto us that Child is borne, and unto us that Sonne of God is given; who shall take upon his shoul∣ders the perpetuall government of his Church, &c. Behold, we will gaine by our ruines;10 The brickes are fallen downe, but we will build with hewne stones. for in stead of the brickes which shall be beaten downe, we will build more sumptuously with free stone, &c.
11 Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, and joyne his enemies toge∣ther.Because Israel doth so fondly rely upon Rezin, the King of Syria, God shall set up enemies against that King, on whose strength they have presumed; and shall conjoyne their forces to his destruction. 12 The Syrians before, and the Philistims behind, and they shall devoure Is∣rael with open mouth: for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.The Syrians from the East, and the Philistims from the West, shall set upon Israel, like to some ravenous beasts with open mouth; and yet God hath not utterly done with them; but hath still further judgements in store for them. Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel, both the noblest and basest of the people; the strongest and the weakest,14 Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel, head and taile, branch and rush in one day. and most contemptible of that nation. The prophet that teacheth lies, hee is the most vile and despicable of all the people.15 —and the Prophet that teacheth lies he is the taile. Your wickednesse is that, which the fire of Gods wrath taketh hold of; that is it, which shall devoure both your tall cedars,18 For wickednesse burneth as the fire: it shall devoure the bryers and Thornes. and your low shrubs; and shall not leave, till the very bryers and thornes bee consumed, &c. 20 And he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungrie, & he shall eate on the left hand and they shall not be satisfied; they shall eate every man the flesh of his owne armes.No Israelite shall spare his brother, but shall snatch on all hands, what he can get by extreme violence; and shall insatiably spoyle and devoure those, which are as his owne flesh. Those tribes which are in the highest league of love conjoyned together, shall fall into deadly hostility one against the other;21 Manasseh Ephraim: and Ephraim Manasseh: and they together shall be against Iudah. Manasseh shall fall foule upon his bro∣ther Ephraim; and Ephraim upon Manasseh, and both shall joyne in the quarrell against Judah, &c. CAP. X. 1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous de∣crees, and that write grie∣vousnesse which they have prescribed.TO begin with the governors; woe be to them, who make unjust and bloody decrees against their inferi∣ours, and that enact, and prescribe grievous things by way of oppression of the poore. 3 —to whom will ye flee for helpe? and where will ye leave your glory?What doe you thinke shall become of this glorious estate which you have scraped together by rapine, and extortion? 4 Without me they shall bow downe under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slaine.Though I should not denounce, or draw any judge∣ment upon them, they shall, of themselves, runne into such grievous calamity, as that they shall fall downe a∣mongst the prisoners, and amongst the slaine, &c. 5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, & the staffe in their hand is mine in∣dignation.Come hither then, O thou Assyrian, come and exe∣cute my just wrath upon my people; for thou art the rod of mine anger, and the weapons, which are in thine hand,
whereby thou fightest against Judah, are weilded by mine indignation. I will send this Assyrian against that dissembling na∣tion of the Jewes,6 I will send him against an hypocritical nation; and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoile. which make an hypocriticall professi∣on of my name; and against those Idolatrous Israelites, whom I hate, &c. But though I intend the Assyrian to be my scourge for Israel, and to execute my will upon them,7 Howbeit, he mean∣eth not so, neither doeth his heart thinke so, but it is in his heart to destroy, and cut off nations not a few. yet he hath no such meaning, as to fulfill my purpose herein; all his drift and intention is a cruell and bloody satisfying of his owne mercilesse, and ambitious minde; neither aimes he at any thing else, but a malicious destruction, and a con∣quest of many nations. Is not the strong city of Calno as unable to hold out against me, and as sure mine, as Carchemish,9 Is not Calno as Car∣chemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus? which I have already won? Is not Hamath as sure to be subdued by me, as Arpad, which I have taken? is not Samaria as sure to be mine, as Damascus now is? As I have vanquished those Kingdomes,10 As my hand hath found the kingdomes of the idols, and whose gra∣ven images did excell thē in Ierusalem and Samaria: which wor∣shipped those idols, which were accounted in the repu∣tation of the world, and outward glory, farre to surpasse the deities of Jerusalem, and Samaria: So, what should hinder me, to subdue these also?11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so doe to Ierusalem and her idols? The gods of Jerusalem are no other, no better then those of Samaria, Why should I not therefore subdue them as well as the other? As for all the riches of the nations about me (saith the proud Assyrian) are they not to me, as a birds nest;14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth, and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped. the egges whereof are left open, by the dam, to the hand of the passenger; which a man may take up quietly, and not have so much as a birds wing moved against him, nor so much as a chirping noise of complaint. Is not the Assyrian as my axe to hew downe Judah, my sawe to divide it, my rod to scourge it,15 Shall the axe boast it selfe against him that heweth therewith: or shall the sawe magni∣fie it selfe against him that shaketh it? as if the rod should shake it selfe against them that lift it up, or as if the staffe should lift up it selfe, as it were no wood. my staffe to beat it; and shall this axe, this sawe, this rod, this staffe magnifie it selfe against the hand that useth, and weildeth it? as if the instrument could doe ought, without, or a∣gainst the arme that moves it. Since the Assyrian hath so despised Israel, Israel shall be well avenged of him: for as commonly fire is not se∣parated from light; that light of my countenance which Israel shall have from me,17 And the light of Isra∣el shall be for a fire, and his holy one for a flame: and it shall burne and devoure his thornes and his bryers in one day. shall be as a fire to burne up the Assyrians; and this my people, which I have singled for my owne peculiar, shall be as a flame to those ene∣mies,
which shall consume them (even to the meanest of their host) in one day. 18 —and they shall be as when a standard-bearer fainteth.They shall be utterly disheartened, and give them∣selves up, to a weak, and heartlesse despaire, as a beaten troupe when their ensigne yeeldeth. 19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall bee few, that a child may write them.And the people of Assyria, which were a thick forrest, shall now bee brought to such a paucity of trees, that a child, which can scarce count his owne fingers, may rec∣kon their number. 20 Shall no more againe stay upon him that smote them: but shall stay upon the Lord, the holy one of Israel in truth.My people, thus instructed, and reformed by their affliction, shall learne now to trust no more to the arme of flesh, which they see may be easily made against them; but shall depend wholly upon the Lord for aid and pro∣tection. 22 For thogh thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shal returne; the consump∣tion decreed shall over-flow with righteousnesse.For though I have promised to thee, O Jacob, and to thy father Abraham, that thy seed shall be as the sand of the Sea, yet, since they have thus provoked me, and corrupted their wayes, onely a remnant of them shall re∣turne from their captivitie; and the consumption of the rest shall declare my righteousnesse abundantly to the world. 24 And shall lift up his staffe against thee after the manner of Aegypt.As the affliction which thou hadst from the Aegyptian bondage was grievous indeed, but not deadly; no more shall this be, which thou shalt suffer from the Assyrian. 26 And the Lord of hosts shall stirre up a scourge for him accord∣ing to the slaughter of Mi∣dian at the rocke of Oreb; and as his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Aegypt.The Assyrian is my rod to thee; but I will have a scourge for him, that shall plague him; as the Midianites were destroyed by Gedeon, at the rocke of Oreb; and as I plagued the Aegyptians, whom I overthew and de∣stroyed in the red Sea. The yoke of servitude shall be taken from thy necke, because thou art a people consecrated to me; for the sake of that Messiah,27 And the yoke shall bee destroyed because of the anointing. mine anointed, which shall descend from thee. Behold, the Assyrian is in his expedition against thee already,28 He is come to Ajath, he is passed to Migron: at Michmash he hath laid up his carriages. he is comne onwards his way to Ajath, and thence is he passed to Migron, and hath made Michmash the store-house for his provision, munition, & carriages. 29 They are gone over the passage, they have ta∣kē up their lodging at Ge∣ba, Ramah is afraid, Gibeah of Saul is fled.They have gone over the pssages of those rivers, which might seeme to have hindered their way; they are passed Iordan it selfe, and are comne to lodge at Gebah; and now the neighbouring cities, Ramah, and the rest quake for feare, the inhabitants of Gibeah are fled. 30 Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poore Anathoth.Yee cities that lie neare to the way of this mighty e∣nemie, lift up your voices, and weepe for your imminent desolation, and cause your cryes to be heard unto the fur∣thest parts of the land. 32 As yet hee shall re∣maine at Nob, that day he shall shake his hand a∣gainst the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Ierusalem.Ere a day be at an end, he will be at the towne of Nob,
hard by Jerusalem; and then he shakes his hand at the mount of Zion, and the Temple, whereon it stands. But howsoever he doe thus proudly exalt himselfe, and terribly bluster against Jerusalem, the Lord of hosts shall take him downe, and shall cut him off with terror.33 Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts shall lop the bough with terrour: and the high ones of sta∣ture shal be hewen down, the haughty shall be hum∣bled. The insolent Assyrian shall be hewen down suddenly, and the haughty enemie shall be humbled. These great and tall Cedars of Lebanon, that thus over-topt Gods people, shall be cut downe, and shall fall by the mighty hand of the destroying Angell.34 And he shall cut downe the thickets of the forrests with yron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one. CAP. XI. AT last, in the fulnesse of time,1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stemme of Iesse, and a branch shall grow out of his rootes. for the comfort of of Gods Church, there shall come forth a rod out of the seemingly withered stocke of Iesse, the father of David; and a flourishing branch, even the Messiah, shall grow out of his appearingly sere, and saplesse root. He shall receive the spirit, beyond all finite measure,2 And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisedome & understanding. for as much as in him the God-head shall dwell bodily, replenishing his humane nature with all wisedome and understanding, &c. And shall inable his humanity with a quicke and pierc∣ing understanding, to the perfect judging,3 And shall make him of quicke understanding in the feare of the Lord, and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his eares. and discern∣ing of those, that doe truly professe to feare and serve the Lord, from falsehearted hypocrites; and he shall not judge by the outward appearance; according to the evidence of the eye, or the eare. With the word of his mouth,4 And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall hee slay the wicked. which is the scepter of his Kingdome, shall he over-rule the earth; and with the same word (which is made a savour of death unto death, to the wicked) shall he slay the rebellious. He shall not come in the gorgeous attire of worldly Princes,5 And righteousnesse shall be the girdle of his loynes, and faithfulnesse the girdle of his reines. but shall bee clothed in the glorious robes of righteousnesse, and truth; which shall be closely girded about him, as those which can never be separated from his person, and government. This blessed Saviour, when he comes, shall reforme,6 The wolfe also shall dwell with the lambe, and the Leopard shall lie downe with the kid: and the calfe and the young Lyon and the fatling toge∣ther, and a little child shall lead them. and restore the world to the first peaceable disposition of the creature, so as the savage beast shall put off his bloody nature, and live quietly with his fellowes; and those men which are of a wolvish, and Lion-like disposi∣tion for fiercenesse, and cruelty, shall bee so changed by the power of his Gospell, that they shall meekly, and plausibly converse with those that are most weake, and innocent.
So also verse 7. and 8. 9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountaine: for the earth shall be full of the know∣ledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.All those that submit themselves to the power of the Gospell, shall live harmlesly; for they shall be taught of God to governe themselves accordingly; and all shall abound in the meanes of the knowledge of the Lord: so as the earth shal be no lesse over-spread with the Gospel, then the sea is covered with waters. In that day, the Messias shall arise from the stocke of David;10 And in that day there shall be a root of lesse, which shall stand for an ensigne of the people: to it shall the Gentiles seeke, and his rest shall be glorious. and to him, as to a standard erected, shall all the nations flocke; and so shall he be advanced, as that all the Gentiles shall seeke unto him, and submit themselves to his word, and power; and he shall settle his rest among them, which shall be glorious for himselfe, and happy for them. 11 And it shall comē to passe in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand a∣gaine the second time, to recover the remnāt of his people which shall be left, from Assyria and from Aegypt, & from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, & from the Ilands of the sea.Neither may this seeme hard, since the Lord will bee pleased in that day to set his hand to the worke, and, as he hath formerly shewed his power, in the miraculous deliverances of his people, so will he now againe migh∣tily recover the remainder of them, from the Assyrians, Aegyptians, Ethiopians, and other nations, amongst whom they shall be scattered; as the Parthians, Medes, Chaldees, Cilicians, and those countries which are divi∣ded by the sea. Gods people shall agree well together, and shall lay a∣side all envie,13 The envie also of E∣phraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Iudah shall be cut off. and heart-burning, which they had one towards another, &c. But they shall band together against the common ene∣mie of the Church; and with joynt forces set upon the Philistims,14 But they shall flie upon the shoulders of the Philistims toward the West. &c. And the Lord will utterly destroy that Baye of the Aegyptian sea, which carries the forme of a tongue, in the entring upon the continent;15 And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Aegyptian sea, and with his mighty winde shall he shake his hand o∣ver the river, and shall smite it in the seven streames, and make men goe over dry-shod. and with his mightie winde, shall, (as hee did once for the passage of the Israelites through the red sea) so divide Nilus, with all the seven streames thereof, as that men may goe over dry-shod. CAP. XII. MY salvation shall be as a full, & ever-flowing spring; out of which ye shall with joy of heart,3 Therefore with joy shall yee draw water out of the wells of salvation. draw up full vessells continually. Shout for joy, O ye inhabitants of Zion, for the holy one of Israel,6 Cry out and shout thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy one of Israel: in the midst of thee. your merciful God, shewes the greatnesse of his power, and the abundance of his grace, in, and up∣on you, in his manifold blessings and deliverances.
CAP. XII. THe heavie tidings of that prophesie,1 The burden of Baby∣lon, which Isaiah the son of Amos did see. wherewith Isai∣ah the sonne of Amos was sent to & against Babylon. I am commanded to proclaime an open warre which the Lord will raise against Babylon,2 Lift yee up a banner upon the high mountaine, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may goe to the gates of the Nobles. by the hands of the Medes and Persians; Lift yee up therefore a banner upon the highest mountaine (where it may be most conspicu∣ous) that the people may draw together, for this purpose, and incourage them both by voice, and gesture, that they may goe courageously up to the stately palaces of the Babylonian nobles. I have commanded (saith God) those, whom I have set apart for this great worke of Babylons destruction;3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoyce in my high∣nesse. I have called my mighty warriours of Media, and Persi∣a, to be the executioners of my anger; even them that shall goe chearfully forward, upon my setting on, to this conquest. This is so surely done,4 The noise of a mul∣titude in the mountaines, like as of a great people: as if yee did already heare the noise of a multitude in the mountaines comming downe to this spoile and slaughter, &c. They shall come, not only from Media, and Persia, but by their procurement, from farre-remote, nations,5 They come from a farre country, from the end of heaven. &c. They shall be amazed at the sight of each others mi∣sery, and for anguish and consternation,8 They shall be amazed one at another, their faces shall be as flames. their faces shall be as red as fire. God shall command both the heaven,10 For the stars of hea∣ven, and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the Sun shall be dar∣kned in his going forth, & the Moone shall not cause her light to shine. and earth to conspire against his enemies of Babylon; from whom (for their greater discomfort) he shall withdraw the light of those heavenly bodies (which they are wont most cu∣tiously to observe) so as both the stars, the sun, the moon, shall deny their light unto them. I will so give up Babylon to the slaughter,12 I will make a man more precious then fine gold; even a man then the golden wedge of Ophir. that there shall be very few left alive in it; and their enemies shall be so inexorable, that they shal rather care to shed blood then to take the richest ransome. By wonderfull signes in the heaven,13 Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of hostes, and in the day of his fierce anger and by terrible earth-quakes, (such as if heaven and earth did remove out of their places) will I testifie my fierce wrath against Babylon, in that day, when I shal execute my judgements upon it. Behold, I will stirre up the Medes against them, whose drift shall not so much be their wealth, as their blood;17 Behold I will stirre up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver, and as for gold, they shall not delight in it. that shall care only to kill, not to enrich themselves with ransomes.
20 Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there, neither shall the sheep∣heards make their folde there.It shall be so utterly desolated, that the very Arabi∣ans (who shift their habitations continually for change of pasturage) shall not so much as pitch a tent there; nor the shepheard shal make choice of these plaines, to make his fold there. 21 And their houses shall be full of doleful crea∣tures, and owles shall dwell there, and Satyrs shall dance there.Their houses shall be taken up with those dolefull creatures, that delight in solitude; and owles shall dwell there, and evill spirits shall haunt those habitations, &c. So also verse 22. CAP. XIIII. 1 For the Lord will have mercy on Iacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land, and the strangers shall bee joyned with them; and they shall cleave to the house of Iacob.THe Lord will yet by the renuing of his mercies, shew, that he hath a tender respect to the seed of Jacob; and that Israel is the people whom hee hath chosen to him∣selfe. And the Gentiles shall come in, and joyne with Gods faithfull people, and shall be one Church with the true Israel. And the Israel of God, which is the true Church, shall receive them into their family;2 And the house of Is∣rael shall possesse them in the land of the Lord for servants and handmaides. and unite them into one holy society, with themselves, &c. 4 That thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, how hath the oppressor ceased, the golden city ceased?Then shalt thou insult upon the proud King of Baby∣lon, and say; where is now this great Tyran, that so op∣pressed us? What is become of this glorious city of Ba∣bylon, that exacted so much tribute from us? 8 Yea the firre trees re∣joyce at thee, and the Ce∣dars of Lebanon, saying, since thou art laiddown, no felleris come up against us.Yea, the very senselesse creatures, the trees of the for∣rest triumph in thy ruine, O Babylon; and say, wee were wont to be cut downe to build thy palaces, but now wee can stand quietly, no feller offers to put an axe unto us. 9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meete thee at thy comming, it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chiefe ones of the earth, &c.Yea the very dead shall rise to applaud thy destructi∣on; hell shall send up her guests, to welcome thee with a scornfull gratulation; even all those great Kings, and Princes, whom thou hast tyrannized over. 10 All they shall speak and say unto thee: art thou also become weake as we, art thou become like unto us?All they shall scoffe, and jeere thee; and say, what is great Babylon become as weake as we? is the pomp ther∣of brought downe like to one of ours? 12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, soune of the morning? how art thou cut downe to the ground, which didst wea∣ken the nations.O thou proud King of Babylon, which shinedst in the world, like the glorious morning starre; how art thou now fallen from thy state and magnificence? how art thou, which hadst wont to tyrannize over many nations,
cut downe, and utterly destroyed. For thou in the pride of thy heart wouldst needs ex∣alt thy selfe above God himselfe;13 For thou hast said in thine heart, I will as∣cend into heaven, I will ex∣alt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the North. and saidst within thy selfe; Earth is too low for me, my throne shall be ad∣vanced above the stars of God; I will frustrate the de∣signes of the Almighty; and, in spight of him, will con∣quer the mount of Sion, the seat of his Temple. So verse 14. That held all nations captive,17 That opened not the house of his prisoners. and would not dismisse his prisoners, that they might returne to their owne home. Loe, now, how the world is changed, All others Kings,18 All the Kings of the nations, even all of them lie in glory, every one in his owne house. even those petty Princes whom thou subduedst, are in glory and magnificence, each one in his owne court. But thou shalt not be suffered so much,19 But thou art cast out of thy grave, like an abo∣minable branch: and as the raiment of those that are slaine, thrust through with a sword, that goe down to the stones of the pit, as a carke is troden under feet. as to enjoy thine owne grave; but art cast out as a rotten tree, that is not worthy to be set in the ground; or as a garment of a man slaine by the sword, which is all gashed, and soiled with blood, not worth taking up; or, as an abominable carcasse, which no man dares to come neare, for the ill savour it yeeldeth. O yee avengers of blood,21 Prepare slaughter for his children, for the in∣iquitie of their fathers, that they doe not rise nor possesse the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities. prepare yee an exquisite slaughter, not only for the King of Babylon himselfe, but for his progenie, and posterity; see that yee root them out: let them not live to be great in the world, either in possessions of land, or building of cities. I will turne the low-seated Babylon into a standing poole, and make it a possession for Bitterns,23 I will also make it a possession for the bit∣terne, and pools of waters. and for Ot∣ters, in stead of men, &c. But, before this time of the destruction of Babylon,25 That I will breake the Assyrian in my land, & upon my mountaines tread him under foot. I will overthrow the proud Assyrian, in the land of Judah, and will doe execution upon him, in the mountaines of Israel, sending away Senacherib, with a miraculous, and shamefull defeat, &c. Rejoyce not, O thou whole land of Palestine,29 Rejoyce not thou whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken, for out of the serpents root shall come forth a Cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fie∣ry flying serpent. for that the Jewes, which formerly subdued thee, are now driven out, and vanquished; for there is yet more mischiefe to∣wards thee from those, whom thou thinkest to be utter∣ly crushed; if the serpents egge be broken, as thou wee∣nest, yet a cockatrice (which is more deadly) shall arise, out of that cracked shell; and thou shalt be more annoy∣ed by this later brood, then thou wert by the former. And those miserably distressed Iewes (the heires of beggery and sorrow) shall be releeved,30 And the first borne of the poore shal feed, and the needy shall lie downe in safetie: and I will kill thy root with famine and he shall slay thy remnant. and dwell quiet∣ly; and for thee, O Palestine, I will kill the remainder
of thee with famine, and the sword of the enemy. 31 Howle, O gate, cry, O City, thou whole Pale∣stina art dissolved, for there shall come from the North a smoake, and none shal be alone in his appoin∣ted times.O yee defenced cities, and walled townes of Palestine, howle and lament; and thou whole country mourne, for thou art utterly wasted; There shall come from the north armies of Assyrians, and Iewes, which shall begin with a smoake, but end in a fire; they shall come banded toge∣ther, and no man shall be left at home, alone, in that day of thy intended destruction. 32 What shall one then answere the messen∣gers of the nations, that the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poore of his peo∣ple shall trust n it.What reason then shall be given to the world, when people shall be inquiring into the cause of this desolati∣on of Palestine? Even this; that the Lord hath had a gra∣tious respect unto Sion; and that he would have his poor despised people, to finde a sure refuge there, through his mighty protection, from the fury of their enemies. CAP. XV. 1 The burdens of Mo∣ab, because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste and brought to silence, because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence.THe heavy tydings, which God sends by his prophet to Moab; Because the two great cities of Moab, Ar, and Kir, are suddenly, and inexpectedly surprized, and sacked. Therefore the foolish Moabites are gone up to their high places to weep,2 He is gone up to Bai∣ith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep; Moab shal howle over Nebo, and o∣ver Medeba, on all their heads shall be baldnesse, and every beard cut off. and complaine to their Idoll Che∣mosh, they make moane for their other cities also, both those in the heart, and in the skirts of the land, and they testifie their mourning, by shaving of their heads, and beards. 4 And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh; their voice shall be heard even unto Iahaz: therefore the armed souldiers of Moab shall cry out, his life shall be grie∣vous uto him.Their two other famous cities, of Heshbon, and Ele∣aleh shall shriek, and howle, so loud, that their noise shal be heard to the utmost confines of the land; even the men of warre, which should by their courage, cheare up others, shall in a despaire of successe, cry and lament, and their life shall be but a griefe and burden to them, for that they are in a sad expectation of death. 5 My heart shall cry out for Moab, his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, an hei∣fer of three yeares old, for by the mounting up of I u∣hith with weeping shall they goe it up: for in the way of Heronaim, they shall raise up a cry of de∣struction.My heart tels me that Moab shall cry out to his co∣wardly fugitives, which run away to the utmost borders of Judah, even, as a yong heifer of three yeares old bel∣loweth after her fellowes, for they shall follow them, o∣ver hils and dales, from one side of the country unto a∣nother; and shall raise a woefull hubbub after them. And the waters that flow through the plaines of Mo∣ab,6 For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate, for the hay is withered a∣way, the grasse faileth, there is no greene thing. and the vale of Nimra, shall be utterly dried up, the grasse shall faile, the hay shall be parched up, and there
shall be no shew of ought, but drought and barrennesse. The fearefull cries and howlings of the Moabites are universall; no place is free; they fill the whole land,8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab, the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer Elim. and all the obscurest corners thereof. For the river of Dimon, which runs through Moab, shall (according to the name of it) be bloody with the slaughter of his people; and yet I have a further judge∣ment in store, beyond this staine of Dimon;9 For the waters of Dimō shal be ful of blood: For I will bring more up∣on Dimon, Lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land. for the man that escapeth from the sword of the enemie, in that vally will I give up to be a prey to the wilde beasts, the lions shall devoure him. CAP. XVI. YEt, Moab, if at last, thou shalt relent,1 Send ye the lambe to the ruler of the land, from Sela to the wildernesse, un∣to the mount of the daugh∣ter of Zion. there may be a possibility of life, and recovery; which if thou desire to hearken unto, send then, first, according to thy old promise, and ingagement, that tribute of lambes which thou oughtest to have paid to the King of Judah; send it humbly unto him, even all of you from the utmost boūds of Edom, to mount Sion, where his court resideth. Else, be sure ye shall be like a wandring bird,2 For it shall be, that as a wandring bird cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab shall be at the foords of Arnon. whose nest is pulled downe; disappointed of your habitations; so as the daughters of Moab. (though neare to you in blood) shall be glad to seeke their lodging in forraine parts. Goe to then, bethinke thy selfe of better courses,3 Take counsell, execute Iudgement, make thy sha∣dow as the night in the midst of the noone day, hide the out-casts, bewray not him that wandreth. doe right to all men, be thou harborous, and kinde to thy brethren of Israel, yeelding them as coole a shadow, in the midst of the heat of the day, as if it were mid-night; give shelter and intertainment to their chased, & distres∣sed exiles, and bewray not him that, in his wandring, seeks to thee for succour. For God hath put an end to the calamities of his peo∣ple, there shall be no more spoile,4 The spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consu∣med out of the land. no more oppression of their cruell enemies to waste them. And in great mercy to his Church shall the throne of the Messiah be established; and he shall sit upon it,5 And in mercy shall the throne be established, and he shall sit upon it in truth, in the Tabernacle of David. as a most just governour of his people; even in the place of his type and ancestor David, &c. But his lying and vaine boasting shall deceive him,6 But his lies shall not be so. neither shall they come to any effect. Therefore,7 Therefore shall Moab howle for Moab, every one shall howle, for the foun∣dations of Kir-hareseth shall yee mourne, surely they are stricken. one city of Moab shall condole with ano∣ther, and all shall howle together, for the razing down of the prime city, Kir-hareseth; for the razing, even of the very foundations thereof, shall ye mourne in vaine, not
one of the inhabitants shall escape, surely they shall bee all destroyed. 8 For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah, the lords of the heathen have bro∣ken downe the principall plants thereof, they are come even unto Iazer, &c.Yea, not only the chiefe cities, but the whole region shall be laid waste; the fruitfull fields and vineyards of Heshbon, and Sibmah, which were famous for their ex∣cellent grapes, shall be spoiled by the lords of the hea∣then; which shall not rest in the vastation of some parts of the land, but shall run over all, even to Jazer, which is in the utmost confines, &c. 9 Therefore I will be∣waile with the weeping of Iazer, the vine of Sib∣mah, I will water thee with my teares, O Hesh∣bon, and Elealeh, for the showting for thy summer fruits, &c.Therefore (shall the Moabite say) I will with a gene∣rall lamentation (such as shall be heard from the utter∣most skirts of the land) bewaile the desolation of the ex∣cellent vineyards of Sibmah; &c. for the joy and accla∣mations that were wont to bee at the gathering of thy summer fruits, and for thy plentifull harvest, is now at an end, and shall be heard no more. 11 Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harpe for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kirha∣resh.Wherfore, my bowels shal in their yearning (through the vehemence of my passion) make a loud noise, and mine inward parts shall be moved for the chiefe city of Moab, to see the wofull desolation thereof. It shall come to passe that Moab, finding no reliefe in the petty-idols of his high places,12 And it shall come to passe, when it is seen that Moab is weary on the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray, but he shall not pre∣vaile. shall come to his chiefe sanctuary, to implore the aid of Chemosh his god; but he shall not prevaile. Within three yeares (which shall be as precisely set and observed, as the hireling uses to keep account of the time agreed upon for his service) all the glory of Moab shall be dashed,14 Within three years as the yeares of an hireling and the glory of Moab shal be contemned: &c. CAP. XVII. 2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken, they shall be for flockes, which shall lie downe, and none shall make them afraid.THe cities of Aroer in the region of Syria, shall be for∣saken; and turned desolate; nothing shall be seen there but coates for sheepheards, and their flocks, which shall feed in those solitary plaines, without feare. 3 The fortresse also shal cease from Ephraim, and the Kingdom from Damas∣cus, and the remnant of Sy∣ria: they shall bee as the children of Israel, saith the Lord of hostes.And since Israel, and Syria will be joyning together against Juda, I will be avenged on them both; Ephraim (which is the prime tribe of Israel) shall lose his strength, and Damascus the prime city of Syria, shall lose his Kingdome; and so shall all Syria; it shall speed like to Israel, which it hath entised to joyne in this unjust warre. 5 And it shall bee as when the harvest-man ga∣thereth the corne, and reapeth the eares with his arme: and it shall bee as he that gathereth eares in the valley of Rephaim.And it shall bee as when the harvest-man gathereth close within his arme all those stalkes of corne, which he can reach, that he may cut them off together; so shall the enemie deale with Israel, hee shall cut them off, at
once; even as a labourers sickle cuts the eares of corne, in the fruitfull valley of Rephaim, where they stand thickest together. Yet, as in a field, after the most carefull harvestman,6 Yet gleaning grapes shalbe left in it, as the sha∣king of an Olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough: foure or five in the out-most fruitfull branches thereof, saith the Lord God of Israel. there will be some gleanings left; and some grapes, after the gathering of the vintage, may be hid under the leaves, and some Olives left upon the out-boughes, after the tree is most shaken; so shall it be here with Israel, some few of them shall yet bee reserved after the com∣mon destruction. And this correction shall have so prevailed, that now the remaining Israelites shall looke up to their Maker,7 At that day shall a man looke to his Maker. &c. In that day shall the strong cities of the ten tribes,9 In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsa∣ken bough, and an upper∣most branch, which they left, because of the chil∣dren of Israel; and there shall be desolation. be left unpeopled, and waste, even as a bough, whose Olives are shaken off; whose branch yet shall be left still for the sake of those Israelites, which I will reserve. Thou maiest bestow thy best husbandry upon thy plants, and upon thy seed,11 In the day shalt thou make thy plant to growe, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seede to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heape in the day of griefe, and of despe∣rate sorrow. and expect a plentifull in∣crease, but when it shall come to the harvest, thy hopes shall be utterly disappointed; and thou shalt finde no thing but cause of sorrow, and humiliation. Woe be to that great and numerous armie of the As∣syrians, & Ethiopians, which come up against Jerusalem,12 Woe to the multi∣tude of many people, which make a noise, like the noise of the seas. whose noise is loud, and hideous, like the noise of the sea, &c. The severall nations which shall bee confederate a∣gainst Judah, shall rush like the gushing of many waters,13 The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters. &c. Behold, in the evening, there is horror and confusion in the host,14 And behold at even∣ing tide trouble, and be∣fore the morning hee is not. through the slaughter made by the Angell of God; and in the morning, there is not one left of an hundred fourescore and five thousand men; &c. CAP. XVIII. WOe to the land of Ethiopia,1 Woe to the land sha∣dowing with wings, which is beyond the ri∣vers of Ethiopia. and that part especi∣ally, which is comprehended in Aegypt, and the Maritine coast, whose frequent shipping doth shadow, as it were, other nations with her sailes. That sendeth Ambassadors by sea,2 That sendeth ambas∣sadours by the sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon the water, saying, goe yee swift messengers to a na∣tion scattered & peeled, to a people terrible frō their beginning hitherto, &c. in vessells fit for that purpose, artificially framed of bulrushes, to a∣void the danger of that rocky passage; to call together
united nations from remote parts, to come up against that miserable and spoiled people of the Jewes; whose land is over-runne and over-spread with an inundation of enemies. 3 All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when hee lifteth up an ensigne on the mountaines: and when he bloweth a trumpet, heare ye.Let all the inhabitants of the world, every where, take notice of the Lords revenge, which he will take of the enemies of his people; when he therefore lifts up his ensigne on high, and bloweth his trumpet to call his troopes to this battell, let all men consider and observe the certaine and terrible successe. 4 For so the Lord said unto me: I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling place like a cleare heate upon herbes, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.I will for a time forbeare judgement, and be as a meete looker on, acting nothing, but in the meane time, I will have an eye to my Church, and people, and will bee to them, as a kindly heat is to the drooping herbes, or as a sweet dew in the scorching heat of harvest. 5 For afore the harvest when the bud is perfect, and the sower grape is ripening in the flower: he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hookes, and take away and cut downe the branches.Meane whiles, if their enemies prosper for a time, it shall not alwayes be so; for when their hopes are comne to the height, he shall defeate them; immediately before the autumne, when the bud is come to perfection, when the grape is upon the point of ripening, I will cut off their sprigs, and boughs, with pruning knives, and disappoint all their expectation. 6 They shall be left to∣gether unto the fowles of the mountaines, and to the beasts of the earth: & the fowles shall summer upon them, & all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.The carcasses of their enemies shall bee cast out as dung, and shall be a prey both to the foules of the moun∣taines, and the beasts of the field; and lie there rotting, both in the Summer and winter, till they be consumed. In that day, through the mercy of God remembring the miseries of his people;7 In that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts, of a peo∣ple scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their beginning hi∣therto: a nation meted out & troden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the mount Zion. the remaining Jewes shall of∣fer themselves to him, as an holy, lively, acceptable sa∣crifice; even that despised and forlorne people of the Jewes, that hath undergone all the despights, and op∣pressions of nations, and beene over-whelmed with the multitude of enemies, shall devote themselves to the Lord in mount Zion, and his holy Temple. CAP. XIX. 1 Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt, and the idols of Aegypt shall be moved at his pre∣sence, and the heart of Aegypt shall melt in the midst of it.BEhold, the Lord comes with a wonderfull swiftnesse, and unresistible power, to be revenged upon Aegypt, and the idols of the Aegyptians shall be cast downe be∣fore him; and the hearts of the Aegyptians shall be utter∣ly dismayed. And I will give over the Aegyptians into the hand of cruell tyrans,4 And the Aegyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruell Lord: and a fierce King shall rule over them. which shall oppresse them, as they have
done my people heretofore; both of their owne, and of the Assyrians, &c. And whereas,5 And the waters shall faile from the Sea, and the river shall be wasted and dryed up. they trust in the beneficiall waters of Nilus, which gives them both plenty and protection; be∣hold, their hopes shall deceive them, for those waters shall be intercepted, and dryed up, Even their channels shall be quite emptied,6 And they shall turne the rivers farre away, and the brookes of defence shal be emptied and dried up, the reeds and flagges shall wither. and the waters derived into other streames; so as the mud there∣of shall be hardned, and the reedes and flagges which grew therein shall be quite withered. That plant,7 The Paper reeds by the brookes, by the mouth of the brookes, and every thing sown by the brooks shall wither, be driven a∣way, and be more. which yeeldeth the rich commoditie of Paper, which grows along the brookes, and every other thing which is set, or sowne by those otherwise fruitfull bankes, shall now, through extremity of drought be de∣stroyed, and lost. Moreover, through the failing of Nilus, all those cu∣rious and wealthy trades of them,9 Moreover, they that worke in fine flaxe, and they that weave net workes shall be confound∣ed. who worke in fine flaxe, and weave net workes, the matter whereof had wont to be imported by those streames, shall be utterly undone, and disappointed. All they that live upon the benefit of their fishponds,10 And they shall bee broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluces and pondes for fish. and sluces; preserving in these commodious stewes, those fishes, which they take, and sell for advantage of gaine, shall be now defeated of their trade. Where now are those wise Counsellors,11 Surely the Princes of Zoan are fooles, the coun∣sell of the wise Counsel∣lors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the sonne of the wise, the sonne of ancient Kings? and great Peeres of Aegypt, that made themselves so sure and safe against all events, I doe now, by commission from God, tell them, they are no better then fooles, yea then bru∣tish, to what good issue are their fond bragges now comne, wherein they suggested unto Pharaoh the glory of his wisedome, and of his princely descent? The Lord in his Justice hath given them up to a spirit of giddinesse, and perversenesse;14 The Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Aegypt to erre in every worke thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit. justly punishing their pride, with the seduction of their leaders, who have caused Egypt to goe wrong in all their enterprizes, even as a man extremely drunke reeleth and staggereth out of his way. Nothing shall come to any good effect which the Aegyptians shall undertake,15 Neither shall there be any worke for Aegypt, which the head or taile, branch or rush may doe. from the highest to the lowest; all their attempts shall be unprosperous. In that day shall the Lord daunt the spirits of the Aegyptians, so as they shall become weake,16 In that day shall Aegypt be like unto wo∣men: and it shall be afraid, and feare because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which hee shaketh over it. and faint-hearted like women, and this shall be caused through their astonishment, and feare of the imminent judge∣ments of God.
18 In that day shall five cities in the land of Aegypt speake the lan∣guage of Canaan, and sweare to the Lord of hosts: one shall be called the citie of destruction.Yet, even upon Aegypt it selfe will God have mercy, and compassion; and shall, of sixe cities of theirs, preserve five still for himselfe; which shall be reclaimed from their superstition; and conspire in their holy worship and service with Gods people; and sweare by no other name but his; onely one of them shall be called a citie rejected, and destroyed. 19 In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Aegypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord.And the true religion of God shall be established, and flourish in the midst of the land of Aegypt, and in the ut∣most borders thereof shall be monuments of their holy devotion to the Lord. He shall send them a temporall deliverer from their outward oppressions,20 And he shall send them a Saviour, and a great One, and hee shall deliver them. and at the last a spirituall Saviour, and Almighty redeemer from the ghostly bondage of sinne, and Satan. 23 In that day shall there be a high way out of Aegypt, to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Aegypt; and the Ae∣gyptian unto Assyria, and the Aegyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.Neither shall this mercy be confined to Aegypt alone, but shall extend it selfe to other nations, no lesse averse from God, then it: both Aegypt and Assyria shall have free intercourse with each other; and shall communicate mutually in the same holy profession. And in that day, Israel shall come in as a third nation, to joyne with them both;24 In that day shall Israel bee the third with Aegypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land. so as Israel, Aegypt, & Assyria, shalbe blessed all together, & in each other, with an holy conjunction of mindes, in one, and the same truth of religion. CAP. XX. 1 In the yeare that Tartan came unto Ashdod (when Sargon the King of Assyria sent him)IN the yeare that Tartan the great Assyrian Captaine came unto Ashdod (a Philistim citie) when Sargon, or Senacherib (for he is called by both names) the King of Assyria sent him, &c. 2 Goe and loose the sackcloth from off thy loines, and put off thy shooe from thy foot, and he did so, walking naked and bare foot.Goe, and put off that hairy garment which is about thee, the ordinary habit of a Prophet, and put off thy shooe from thy foot; and hee did so, walking disro∣bed and barefoot. 3 Bare foot three yeares for a signe and wonder up∣on Aegypt, and upon E∣thiopia.For a signe and token, that three yeares after this Pro∣phesie, the forces of Aegypt and Ethiopia, led by Tirha∣ka, shall be utterly discomfited, and they stripped of that great power whereof they boasted. 5 And they shall bee afraid, and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectati∣on, and of Aegypt their glory.And my people the Jewes, shall be ashamed and con∣founded in themselves, to thinke they have beene so foolish, to put their trust in Ethiopia, and Aegypt, so impotent protectors.
And the inhabitants of this country,6 And the inhabitants of this Ile shall say in that day, Behold, such is our expectation whither wee flie for helpe to be delive∣red from the King of As∣syria; and how shall wee escape? which I have se∣questred for my selfe, from the rest of the world, shall say; See to what broken reeds we trusted for our deli∣verance; how vainely have we feared, that we could not possibly be safe, and escape without them? CAP. XXI. THe heavy tidings sent to Chaldea,1 The burden of the de∣sert of the Sea; Whirle∣windes in the South passe thorow: so it commeth from the desert; from a terrible land. and especially to Babylon; As those whirlewinds which arise from the South are most furious, so shall this be which shall passe over thee, O Babylon, from the Medes; who, like a vio∣lent tempest shall rush upon thee, and turne thee over. It is a grievous vision to thee, O Chaldea,2 A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, & the spoi∣ler spoileth: goe up, O E∣lam, besiege, O Media: all the sighing thereof have I made to cease. which is shewed unto me, concerning thee; wicked men do their kinde; The treacherous Syrian dealeth treacherously; and the cruell Babylonian spoileth unmercifully; & shall be dealt with thereafter; Goe up, O thou Persian, and besiege Babylon; O Media, doe thou joyne thy forces in this service; I will give no respect to any of the sighes of that oppressing nation, but will give them over to a just destruction. I am deeply afflicted in my selfe,3 Therefore are my loines filled with paine: pangs have taken hold up∣on me. to foresee these grie∣vous judgements which are comming upon these secure enemies of Gods Church, &c. Proud and secure Babylon, sayes;5 Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eate, drinke, arise ye Prin∣ces, and anoint the shield. Furnish the tables with all delicates; let us feast our selves merrily; dispose of our watches to make sure of a seasonable notice, and prevention of any enemie; eate, drinke, but in the meane time, arise O ye Princes of Media and Persia, and make your armour, and munition ready. Thus saith the Lord,6 For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Goe, set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth. these things which I bid thee de∣nounce against Babylon, are yet afarre off; Goe there∣fore and set a watchman upon an high tower, and let him declare to thee what he seeth. And hee saw farre off, and first discerned a chariot,7 And he saw a charet with a couple of horse men, a charet of asses, and a charet of Camels: and he hearkned diligently with much heed. then hee discried a couple of horse-men; and a chariot drawne by asses, & another drawn by Camels; as a lively representation of those enemies, and those meanes whereby the Babylonian should bee overthrowne, by Cyrus the King of Persia, &c. And hee cryed, with a strong voice, like a Lion;8 And he cryed as a lyon (as it is in the margin) My Lord I stand continu∣ally upon the watch tower in the day time, and I am set in my ward whole nights. My Lord as thou hast appointed me, so am I carefull to keep my station in this watch towre, continually, both night and day, to observe what it shall please thee to repre∣sent unto me.
9 And behold, here cometh a charet of men, with a couple of horse men: and he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen.And behold, whiles I am speaking, here commeth a chariot, &c. the interpretation of which vision is withall given to me, by the hands of these enemies, Babylon is sacked, and destroyed, &c. O how the mighty arme of the Lord will thresh Ba∣bylon,10 O my threshing, and the corne of my floore, &c. as the corne is threshed in the floore, that which, &c. 11 The burden of Du∣mah; He calleth to me out of Seir: watchman, what of the night? watchman what of the night?The children of Edom called to me out of mount Seir, as scoffingly desiring to know what I had to say a∣gainst them; watchman, what newes canst thou tell us of those calamities, which have beene threatned against us? Men have talked of a night that is comming upon us, What saist thou to it? 12 The watchman said, The morning commeth & also the night; if yee will inquire, inquire ye, re∣turne, come.The watchman said; Ye please your selves in the hope of a faire morning, but know also that there is night comming which shall bring much sorrow and confusion with it; but if ye have a desire of your owne safety, re∣turne to your God, inquire after him; and submit your selves humbly unto him. 13 The burden upon Arabia, In the forrest in Arabia shall yee lodge, O ye travailing companes of Dedanim.Ye shall bee glad to hide your selves in the desolate forrests of Arabia for feare of Senacherib; O ye travel∣lers of Dedanim. 14 The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that was thirstie, they prevented with their bread him that fled.The inhabitants of the land of Tema, in desert Arabia, pittying their chased neighbours, brought water to their thirsty companies, and bread to relieve their hunger, in that forced and sudden flight. Within a yeare, in the strictest account, even such as the hireling keepes for the stint of his worke and bon∣dage,16 Within a yeare, ac∣cording to the yeares of an hirling, and all the glory of Kedar shall faile. even within that precise space, shall all the glory of Arabia faile. 17 And the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the chil∣dren of Kedar shall be di∣minished.Their archers, and those other strong & mighty Ara∣bians, shall but cut off. CAP. XXII. 1 The burden of the valley of vision; What ail∣eth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the house tops?THe sad tydings sent to Judea; The region which (though low in scite) yet is advanced, and dignified with the manifold visions of God, & revelations of him, and his will, what is the matter with you, O yee men of Jerusalem that you are runne up, for shelter and feare, to the tops of your houses? 2 Thou that art full of stirres, a tumultuous citie, a joyous citie: thy slaine men are not slaine with the sword, nor dead in battell.Thou, O Jerusalem, that art so full of people, and full of noise; a populous, and jolly citie; how is it that thy citizens are so base, that they doe not stand it out in fight; neither are dead by the sword, but with feare rather?
The rulers of Judea fled hither, to thee al together,3 All thy rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers, all that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from farre. as to a sure fortresse; and now they are all taken by the enemy, they are all chained together, as captives, which fled from the remotest parts, for safegard unto thee. I know, how little extremity of sorrow becomes the face of a prophet, looke not on me therefore,4 Therefore said I, Look away from me, I wil weep bitterly, labour not to com∣fort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people. whiles I weepe bitterly; neither let any man goe about to com∣fort me, for I am resolved to mourne deeply for the spoi∣ling of Jerusalem: A day of flying to the mountaines, for an escape,5 And of crying to the mountaines. not without bitter lamentation, and feare of being found. The men of Persia bare the quiver that their archers might second, and gard the chariots, and horsemen,6 And Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and Kir uncovered the shield. and those of Media addressed their Target for a present de∣fence. And here one discovered the closely-reserved maga∣zins of Judea;8 And he discovered the covering of Iudah, and thou didst look in that day to the armour of the house of the forrest. and thou on the other side wert glad to run for munition to that common armoury, in that house which Salomon built in the forrest of Lebanon, all shall be glad to bustle into armes for their defence. Ye were glad to survay diligently the breaches of the wals of the inner cittadell, to make them up,9 Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of Da∣vid, that they are many, & ye gathered together the waters of the lower poole. how many soever; and dammed in the waters of the lower poole for the necessary use of the besieged. Ye have made good provisions both for your water,11 Ye made also a ditch between the two wals for the water of the old pool, but ye have not looked to the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long agoe. and for your fortifications of the city, but in the meane time, ye have not looked up to the hand of the Almighty who hath made all these creatures, and can either curse them, or use them to your comfort and defence. It was the carelesse and desperate resolution of too many amongst you; what doe wee make spare of these provisions? Let us feed, and drinke liberally;13 Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die. Our time is but short, let us spend it merrily; sorrow will come too soone, to morrow we shall die. Goe, get thee to this perfidious officer,15 Goe, get thee unto this Treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over the house; and say, even to Sheb∣na, who though a forrainer in blood, and false in heart, yet hath command in the house of Ezekiah; and say, What dost thou, being a stranger here,16 What hast thou here, and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a se∣pulchre on high, and that graveth an habitation for himselfe in a rocke? goe about to build thee a stately toomb in Jerusalem, as if thou wert some great Prince; and wouldest leave some worthy mo∣nument of thy undeserving name, to all perpetuity of times. Those chariots which thine ambition had prepared for thy glory and greatnesse,18 And there the cha∣riots of thy glory shall bee the shame of thy lords house. shall be the shame and re∣proach
of Ezekiah, amongst forrainers; for that he en∣tertained so wicked and unworthy an officer. 22 And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so hee shall open and none shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open.I will put into his hand (as a faithfull officer) the whole administration of the court, and will trust him with the managing of the weighty affaires of the Kingdome, un∣der his soveraigne; if he command, none shall forbid; and if he forbid, none shall obtaine. 23 And I will fasten him as a naile in a sure place, & he shall be for a glorious throne to his fathers house.And I will set him firme, and sure in this place of au∣thority, so as he shall no more be removed, than a naile, that is driven up to the head; and he shall be an honour both to the royall throne, which he shall attend, and to his fathers house. Vpon him shall depend all the glory of his fathers house,24 And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his fathers house, the off∣spring and the issue, all ves∣sels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups even to all the vessels of flaggons. both for the present, and for the future; and his government shall be so just, that all affaires both great, and small, of the Kings houshold, or the common wealth, shall be devolved upon his fidelity. In that day, shall the present steward Shebna, (who seemed sure enough established in his place) be removed and put out of office.25 In that day, saith the Lord of hostes, shall the naile that is fastened in the sure place, be removed, & be cut downe and fall. CAP. XXIII. 1 The burden of Tyre, Howl ye ships of Tarshish for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no en∣tring in; from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them.THe heavie tidings sent to Tyre, That famous and rich city of Tyre shall be laid waste; howle therefore, and lament, O all ye sea-faring men, which had wont to make your traffique there; for now there is no harbour for you any more; they shall heare of this fearefull newes from the Grecians, and other westerne nations, whose helpe shall be used by Nebuchadnezar, in this warre. 2 Ye inhabitants of the isle, thou whom the mer∣chants of Zidon, that passe over the sea, have repleni∣shed.Ye inhabitants of Tyre, and the neighbouring Isles, which have had so rich trading with the Zidonian mer∣chants, may now sit still at home, there shall be no more worke for you. And by the commodity of the sea, on which it stands, the flaxe that growes in Sihor,3 And by great waters, the seed of Sihor, the har∣vest of the river is her re∣venue, and she is a mart of nations. and all other the profits that are brought downe by the waters of Nilus, have beene, as it were, a constant revenue to it; and it hath beene the universall staple of trade for all nations. 4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon, for the sea hath spoken even the strength of the sea, saying, I travell not, nor bring forth chil∣dren, neither doe I nourish up yong men, nor bring up virgins.And thou the famous port of Zidon neare adjoyning, be thou also out of countenance; for the sea, over which Tyre hath wont to rule, hath now disclaimed all benfit of trade, and intercourse; and hath professed a barrennesse of all further profits, and a cessation of navigation here∣after; whether for the increase of wealth, or for the mul∣tiplying of colonies, deduced thence.
As these bordering nations were troubled at the newes of Aegypts overthrow,5 As at the report con∣cerning Aegypt, so shall they be sorely pined at the report of Tyre. so they shall be extreamely affli∣cted at the like report, concerning Tyre. All ye inhabitants, and neighbour merchants,6 Passe yee over to Tar∣shish; Howle yee inhabi∣tants of the isle, &c. now turne your trade another way, passe over to Cilicia, and there fixe your traffique, &c. Is this the glorious, and jocond city,7 Is this your joyous city, whose antiquitie is of ancient daies? her owne feet shall carry her afar off to sojourne. that was wont so to boast of her antiquity above all others, as founded by the ancient Phenicians, beyond the memory of records? now, shee shall be pulled low enough, for her owne feet shall carry her afarre off into captivity, and exile. Say then, in whose power was it,8 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, crow∣ning the city, whose mer∣chants are Princes, &c? or can it be to bring this desolation upon the mighty and rich state of Tyre, that royall city, whose merchants are as wealthy as the Princes of other countries, &c? Passe away through thine owne land into captivity,10 Passe through thy land, as a river, O daughter of Tarshish; there is no more strength. O thou renowned daughter of the sea, as swiftly, as an head∣long river through his channell; There is no more strength in thee to hold out, or subsist any longer. Get thee for shelter to Cilicia, or to Greece,12 Passe over to Chit∣tim, there also shalt thou have no rest. but there thou shalt have no rest. Behold the Chaldeans and Assyrians; they shall be thy destroyers, neither thinke thou strange of this, O Tyre;13 Behold, the land of the Chaldeans, this people was not till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wildernesse, they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof, and he brought it to ruine. for consider well, the Chaldees were no people of note, till the Assyrians raised them up from a wilde unsetled course of life in the wildernesse; yet now these Chaldees shall be imployed for to overthrow the Assyrians, how much more shall both of them bee able to overthrow thee? Tyre shall lie waste, and remaine in bondage, accord∣ing to the just number of yeares of the captivity of my people, even for the space of seventy yeares,15 That Tyre shall bee forgotten seventy yeares, according to the daies of one King, after the end of seventy yeares shall Tyre sing as an harlot. according to the utmost extent of the life and raigne of any one King, in common account, and after that seaventy yeares expired, Tyre shall beginne to draw customers to her, by her plausible allurements, even as a beautifull harlot entiseth her lovers by the voice of her singing. So verse 16. She shall returne to her wonted trading;17 She shall turn to her hire, and shall commit for∣nicatiō with all the King∣domes of the world, upon the face of the earth. and shall ex∣ercise her deceitfull, and meretricious traffique with all the nations of the world; enriching her selfe by the utter∣ing of those adulterated commodities, which shee shall put off to all other Kingdomes. But, at last, both Tyre it selfe, and her merchandise,18 And her merchan∣dize, and hire shall be holi∣nesse to the Lord: it shall not be treasured, nor laid up, for her merchandise shall bee for them that dwell before the Lord, to eate sufficiently, and for durable clothing. and trade shall be sincerely consecrated unto the Lord;
shee shall not covetously scrape together, and lay up treasure for the inriching of her selfe, but shall distri∣bute it rather, and lay it forth for the benefit and behoof of Gods Saints. CAP. XXIV. 1 Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, &c.BEhold, the Lord will bring great judgements, and fearefull desolation, upon all the regions round a∣bout, &c. 2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the Priest.All shall fare alike from the hand of God, for they shall be swept away at once, as well the people, as the Priest, &c. 10 The citie of confu∣sion is broken downe: every house is shut up, &c.And as other nations about shall be thus plagued, so even Jerusalem it selfe shall be broken downe, and laid in confused heapes, &c. 13 There shall bee as the shaking of an Olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done.Yet, there shall be reserved a small number, on whom I will have mercy, as some few olives, that are left upon the tree after the shaking thereof, and some few grapes left growing after the vintage. 14 They shall cry a∣loude from the sea.They shall sound forth their thankfull acknowledge∣ments of Gods mercy, and the professions of their holy confidence in him, even from remote countries. 16 From the uttermost parts of the earth, have we heard songs, even glo∣ry to the righteous: but I said, my leannes, my lean∣nes, Wo unto me: the trea∣cherous dealers have dealt treacherously, ye the trea∣cherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.Even from the Gentiles in all parts of the world have we heard songs of rejoycing, and praises given to the righteous and mercifull God. But, yet I felt within me a sensible apprehension of the secret complaints of Gods Church, in the sense whereof, I could not but cry out, Woe is me, I am even consumed with sorrow, to see the miscarriage of men, to see the bosome-enemies of the Church, trecherously conspiring against her. 17 Feare, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.O yee inhabitants of the earth, there are unavoidable judgements prepared for you; ye shall be sure not to escape the hand of God; he will certainly meete with you; and if you can eschew one plague, yet ye shall bee sure to fall into another. So verse 18. 18 For the windowes from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth doe shake.For, be ye assured that the Lord will arme heaven and earth against you; neither shall any place be able to se∣cure you from his judgements. 20 The earth shall reele to and fro, like a drun∣kard, and shal be removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavie upon it, and it shall fall, and not rise a∣gaine.I will testifie my wrath by fearefull earth-quakes, whereby the earth shall be so moved, as that it shall tot∣ter and reel on all sides, like a drunken man; and so will I revenge the sinnes of the inhabitants thereof, upon
them, as that they shall bee pressed downe under the weight thereof, and not be able to rise any more. And it shall come to passe in that day, that the Lord shall not forbeare to punish the greatest Potentates of the earth, as well as the meanest of their subjects;21 And it shall come to passe in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the Kings of the earth upon the earth all shall tast alike of his wrath. They shall be all shut up in one common destruction, reserved for the just revenge of God;22 And they shall be ga∣thered together, as priso∣ners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many dayes shal they be visited. But yet after the patient induring of many calamities, shall God, in his great mercy, condescend to have compassion on the rem∣nant of them. Then the Lord shall be pleased to erect such a glori∣ous government in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem,23 Then the Moone shall be confounded, and the Sunne ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reigne in mount Zion, and and in Ierusalem, and be∣fore his anciēts gloriously. as that it shall put downe the glory and brightnesse of the Sun, and Moone in the heavens, it shal out-shine those bright, and lightsome planets; whē the Messiah shall raigne with power, and majesty in his Church, before his holy, and eminent ministers. CAP. XXV. O God, this is thy just and mighty worke,2 For thou hast made of a citie, an heape: of a defenced citie, a ruine: a palace of strangers, to bee no citie, it shall never bee built. thou canst and dost demolish great and strong cities, at plea∣sure, thou hast made goodly palaces to be the lodgings of strangers; and those piles againe hast thou ruined, never to be repayred. Thou art a sure refuge for the poore oppressed;4 When the blast of the terrible ones is as a storme against the wall. when the blast of fierce and terrible tyrans beats upon them furiously, as a storme beates against a wall. Thou shalt abate the rage of violent enemies;5 Thou shalt bring downe the noise of stran∣gers, as a heat in a dry place, even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low. if their fury be as some scorching heat in a dry soile, thy mercy shall be as the shadow of a comfortable cloud, to refresh them; so as those that made account to triumph, and tyrannize over thy Church, shall be confounded. And in this mountaine (the figure of the Church) shall the Lord of hosts make a gracious,6 And in this moun∣taine shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well re∣fined. and blessed feast to both Jewes, and Gentiles, in which he shall feed them with all spirituall delicates, whereby they shall be nouri∣shed to everlasting life. And he will by that Gospell, which shall goe forth from his mountaine of Zion,7 And he will destroy in this mountaine the face of the covering cast over all people; and the vaile that is spread over all nations. remove all that vaile of ignorance, which is cast over the faces of all people; So
as they shall clearely see the great and wonderfull myste∣ries of salvation. 8 He will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God, will wipe away teares from off all faces, and the rebuke of his peo∣ple shall he take away from off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.And the life that he will give to his chosen, shall bee a glorious, and perpetuall one, such a one, as shall try∣umph over death, and alteration; in the issue whereof, all causes of mourning, and all pretences of reproach (which are wont to be cast upon Gods people) shall bee utterly and fully removed. For God shall settle his abode in his Church, for ever,10 For in this moun∣taine shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab shall be troden downe un∣der him, even as straw is troden for the dunghill. and shall tread downe all the most malicious ene∣mies thereof, even as straw is troden in the dunghill, to make compost for the earth. And he shall stretch forth his hand against them for their destruction,11 And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim. to enwrap them in his judgements; even as, &c. And the strong fortresse of that high fort of thine, O Moab,12 And the fortresse of the high fort of thy walls shall hee bring downe, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust. wherein thou didst so much pride thy selfe, as impregnable, shall he bring downe and lay levell with the dust. CAP. XXVI. 1 In that day shall this song bee sung in the land of Iudah, we have a strong citie, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarkes.IN the day of the returne frō captivitie, shall my people sing in the land of Judah, where they are replanted, this song: We have now a strong city; Jerusalem is abundant∣ly fortified; the protection and safegard of the Lord shall bee, and are the walls and bulwarks thereof. 2 Open yee the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth may enter in.Jerusalem hath beene leudly inhabited; but now after the gates thereof have beene so long broken downe, and are reedified, they shall be set open to receive righteous, inoffensive, and conscionable inhabitants. 3 Thou wilt keepe him in perfect peace, whose minde is staied on thee.O God, thou wilt continue true peace, and happi∣nesse, to that man, whose heart is fastned upon thee, &c. 9 With my soule have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seeke thee early.There is no time, that I have held unseasonable to thinke of thee, and to long for thee; even in the night season, when others sleepe, hath my soule beene taken up with thee, &c. 10 Let favour bee shewed to the wicked, yet will hee not learne righteousnesse, in the land of uprightnesse will hee deale unjustly.Howsoever it pleaseth the long-suffering and merci∣full God to shew favour to the wicked, in forbearing them, in provoking them with benefits, yet will they not be reclaimed and amended; but in the holiest place, and notwithstanding the most powerfull meanes, will they practice leudnesse, &c.
Yea,11 Yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devoure them. that fire of thy wrath which thou reservest for thine enemies, shall devoure them. Lord thou wilt worke out our peace and felicity, and wilt accordingly continue it to us;12 Lord, thou wilt or∣daine peace for us: for thou also hast wrought all our workes in us. for thou also hast done great things for us, and hast brought about all our affaires. O Lord, we,13 O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by thee onely will we make mention of thy name. who had not the grace to submit our selves wholly to thy governance, have been justly given over to the tyranny of wicked rulers, who have exacted sinfull obedience from us; but we will sticke close unto thee alone, and through thy gracious aid, will hold firme to thy truth, and yeeld to no other religion, but that which thou hast prescribed us. They, even our enemies,14 They are dead, they shall not live, they are de∣ceased, they shall not rise, therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them. are dead without hope of re∣viving againe; so are they brought downe by thy hand, that they shall never be restored, &c. Alas,18 Wee have not wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen. it was not in our power to worke any delive∣rance for our selves, upon earth; neither was it in our power to defeat the force of our enemies, and to dis∣comfit them. But it was thou, O Lord, that hast wrought it for us;19 Thy dead men shall live together, with my dead body shal they arise: awake and sing yee that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbes; and the earth shall cast out the dead. thou then in mercy, saidst; Be of good cōfort; Those whō thou gavest up for dead men, shall yet bee revived; yea, those that sleepe in the dust, yet shall one day arise, and live; with this body of mine, which I shall ere long lay downe, shall they arise from their graves; Awake there∣fore, and rejoyce, O ye my faithfull ones, who are now resolved to the very dust of the earth; for ye shall be hap∣pily restored; as ye see the hearbs, which in winter lay as dead, by the sweet dewes of the spring are revived, so shall it be with you; ye shall then spring up gloriously, the earth cannot hold you from your happy resurre∣ction. Betake thy selfe to a sure confidence in mine assured mercy, and protection, and retyre thy selfe a little,20 Hide thy selfe as it were for a little moment, untill the indignation bee over-past: till I have executed mine indignation upon thine enemies. For the Lord from heaven his dwelling place,21 For behold, the Lord commeth out of his place to punish the inhabitāts of the earth, for their iniqui∣tie. mani∣festeth his power, and justice, in executing judgements upon the inhabitants of the earth. CAP. XXVII. IN that day, the Lord, by his mighty power,1 In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish Leviathan the pier∣cing Serpent, &c. shall exe∣cute his due vengeance upon Satan, that old, and sub∣till serpent, and all his complices, the Kings of Aegypt, and those other malignant enemies of his Church.
2 In that day, sing yee unto her; A vineyard of red wine.In that day sing ye unto her; My Church is as a vine∣yard of the most rich, and precious wine. Howsoever I am provoked, yet I am patient; and give not way to a just fury;4 Fury is not in me: who would set the bryars and thornes against me in battle: I would go through them, I would burne them together. Oh that I had to doe rather with thornes, & bryers, then with my vineyard; I would soone make an end with them, and burne them at once; But, for my owne Israel, if (as he doth) he know my omnipotence,5 Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me: and he shall make peace with me. and how easily I can revenge my selfe, and thereupon bee desirous to humble himselfe, and make peace with me; let him make peace with me, I am ready to accept it. 6 He shall cause them that come of Iacob to take root: Israel shall blosome and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.And though the Lord might justly pull up the house of Jacob by the rootes, that it might never sprout a∣gaine, yet he remembring his mercy, shall onely so loppe the posterity of Israel, that they shall blossome, and budde forth againe, and fill the world with their in∣crease. 7 Hath he smittē him, as he smote those that smote him, or is he slaine accord∣ing to the slaughter of thē that are slaine by him?Hath not God put a difference betwixt his correct∣ing of them, and his punishing their enemies? or hath he destroyed them, in the same manner that he hath de∣stroyed those whom he intends utterly to root out? 8 In measure when it shooteth forth thou wilt debate with it, he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the East wind.When this house of Jacob then shooteth foorth, thou wilt not deale in rigor with it; if it beare not as it shold, thou wilt not cut it up by the rootes: And if thy cold and pinching winde blow upon this herbe, so that it wi∣thers the leafe, yet thou wilt so call in those bitter blasts, that they shall not utterly nippe that plant of thine, and bereave it of life. 9 By this therefore shall the iniquitie of Iacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sinne, when he maketh all the stones of the altar as Chalke stones, that are beaten in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up:It is onely Gods intention, that by these afflictions the iniquity of his people may be purged away; this is all the fruit he expects of his fatherly chastisements, to take away their sinnes; and namely, their idolatrie; which they shall so detest, that they shall make all the stones of their idolatrous altars, as chalke stones, beaten to powder; and shall cut downe, and deface the groves, and Images which had formerly deluded, and bewitched them. 10 Yet the defenced citie shall be desolate, and the habitation forsaken, & left like a wildernesse: there shall the calfe feed, & there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof.Yet, though God will at last shew this mercy, for all this, in the meane time, Jerusalem shall be desolate, and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wildernesse; the beasts shall feed, and lodge there, as in a waste ground; and the grasse, and bushes shall grow so ranke there, that the beasts shall onely crop the tops thereof. 11 When the boughes thereof are withered, they shall be broken off: the women come and set them on fire, for it is a people of no understanding.And when the boughes so browsed on, shall wither, they shall be broken downe; the very women shall burne them; this must be done; for it is an ignorant and diso∣bedient
people; so as, for the time, God will be very severe against them, &c. And it shall come to passe in that day, that since the house of Jacob is now as a little corne,12 And it shall come to passe in that day, that the Lord shall beate off from the channell of the river unto the streame of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel. left in a chaffe-heape, the Lord in his threshing floore shall beat off all the drosse from that graine of his; and shall call them home; both from the channell of Euphrates, and from the streames of Nilus, out of Assyria, and Aegypt, and ye shall be gathered, though not all at once, yet one by one, O yee children of Israel. So verse 13. CAP. XXVIII. WOe to the ten Tribes of Israel,1 Woe to the crowne of pride; to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glori∣our beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat valleies of them that are overcome with wine. which are both puft vp with pride, and growne to a shameful ex∣cesse of surfeting, and drunkennesse; Whose girlonds upon their heads (withering in the bankets, whiles they are worne) are a just resemblance of their fading glory, and beauty, who are the intemperate lands of those rich and plentifull vallies of Israel. Behold, the Lord hath a mighty,2 Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of haile. and strong Assyrian in store, which shall come upon them like a tempest of haile, &c. Those proud girlonds of the drunken Israelites shall be cast to the ground, and trampled under feet.3. The crowne of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim shal be troden under foot. The rich crop which crowneth the fat & fertile vallies of Israel shall be suddenly destroyed; yea,4 And the glorious beau∣ty which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the sum∣mer. shall be snatch∣ed up, before it can have leasure to ripen, &c. But, as for the tribe of Juda, in that day shall the Lord of hosts be, as a crowne of glory to it;5 In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a Crowne of glory, and for a diadem of beauty unto the residue of his people. and as a flourish∣ing and beautifull girlond to this residue of his people. He shall give true judgement, and discerning to the Iudge, and true valour, and courage to the Souldier,6 And for a spirit of judgement to him that sitteth in judgement, & for strength to them that turne the battle to the gate. that beates back the enemie, and assailes him in his owne gate. But yet even they also, (for a great part of them) have given themselves unto drunkennesse; and have beene miscarried through wine; not the baser sort onely,7 But they have also erred through wine, and through strong drinke are out of the way: the Priest & the Prophet have erred through strong drinke, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink, they erre in vision, they stumble in judgement. but even the Priest & the Prophet, which should have beene examples of holinesse, and sobriety, &c. So as they have failed, not onely in their other carriages and actions,
but in those very visions, which they have received from God, and in those sentences of judgement, which they should have given from God. To what purpose doe we cast away instruction upon an incorrigible people? it is all one, as if God should di∣rect his precepts and counsels to a child new weaned from the brest;9 That this is a rebelli∣ous people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord. so uncapable are they of wholesome do∣ctrine. To them, as unto new weaned children, there must be both leasure and assiduity in teaching,10 For precept must be upon precept, precept up∣on precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a little. one precept up∣on another, one rule after another; first they must bee taught to know their letters, then to spell them; by little at once must they be taught all that is put into them. 11 For with stammer∣ing lips & another tongue will he speak to this peo∣ple.So is God forced to deale with this people; he is faine to frame himselfe to speake unto them, as unto children, in a stammering and unperfit language, such as they can be able to pronounce. 12 To whom he said, this is the rest wherewith ye may cause the wea∣ry to rest, and this is the refreshing, yet they would not heare.For in his owne language they would not heare him; when God said; Loe, where you may finde true rest, and peace to your own hearts, and ability to comfort others, yet they would not understand him. But since the word of the Lord, which was delivered to them,13 But the word of the Lord was unto them pre∣cept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a little, that they might goe and fall backward, and be bro∣ken, and snared and taken. one precept upon another, one rule after ano∣ther, by a little at once, with all assiduity, and leasure, prevailed not with them, to their instruction, it shall be of force to obdure them, and an occasion of their fall, and further judgement. Because ye have vainly promised safety, and impunity to your selves, notwithstanding all the judgemēts threat∣ned against your sins, and have taken the more liberty to your leudnesse hereupon,15 Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement, when the overflowing scourge shall passe through, it shall not come unto us, for wee have made lies our refuge, and under falshood have we hid our selves. as if ye were at a fee with death and hell; and had said, when the fierce judgements of God shal come upon others, we shal escape well enough, for the very lies we have made shall secure us, and our falshood shall hide us from vengeance. Therefore, thus saith the Lord; what I have said, I will performe; and behold, for this purpose, I have appointed my sonne, the true Messiah, to be the foundation, to bee the sure, and precious corner stone of the everlasting fa∣brick of my Church,16 Therefore thus saith the Lord God, behold, I lay in Zion for a foundati∣on a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, he that beleeveth, shall not make haste. in whom all my promises, and judgements shall be fulfilled; he that beleeves shall rest himselfe contented with this alsufficient meanes of his comfort, and salvation, and shal not either hasten to look out for other helps, nor be ashamed of trusting to this. And upon this foundation, and this corner stone will I raise the structure of my Church; which shall be built up in judgement,17 Iudgement also will I lay to the line, and righ∣teousnesse to the plummet; and the haile shall sweepe away the refuge of lies. and righteousnesse, with wisedome and in∣tegrity;
as for those wicked hypocrites, that lurk under the false name and pretence thereof, the just judgements of God shall sweep them away, &c. And as for that false security,18 And your covenant with death shall bee disa∣nulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand when the overflowing scourge shal passe through, then ye shall be troden downe by it. wherewith ye fond hypo∣crites pleased your selves, as vainly bosting of a cove∣nant made betwixt you, and death, and hell, so as these judgements should not, either come neare, or not hurt you, ye shall finde, that it shall not hold; but that, contra∣rily, when the vengeance of God shall seize upon you, ye shall be utterly overwhelmed with it. After the time that the judgement is once begun;19 From the time that it goeth forth, it shall take you, for morning by mor∣ning shall it passe over, by day and by night, and it shall be a vexation, only to understand the report. it shall continue without intermission, morning and even∣ing, night and day, and it shall be no small part of afflicti∣on, but to heare and understand the report of those cala∣mities. These wicked ones shall have small ease during the continuance of their leudnesse;20 For the bed is shor∣ter, then that a man can stretch himselfe on it, and the covering narrower, then that he can wrappe himselfe in it. they shall bee as a man that lies upon a bed too short and strait for him; or that in a cold night, is allowed a narrow coverled only, that will not reach to wrap him over, so deficient, and unsa∣tisfying shall be all the comforts of the wicked. For the Lord will rise up, and shew his power against these wicked men, as he did against the Philistims,21 For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Pera∣sim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may doe his work, his strange work, and bring to passe his act, his strāge act. in Ba∣al Perazim, as he did against the Amorites, in the vally of Gibeon, that he may glorifie himselfe by doing some strange, and marvelous execution upon them. Doe not therefore mock at these fearefull denuncia∣tions of Gods wrath, lest your stubborne strugling a∣gainst the just proceedings of God,22 Now therefore bee yee not mockers, lest your bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord God of hosts a con∣sumption, even determined upon the whole earth. intangle you so much more, and make your bands more close and pinching; for certainly, God hath revealed to mee his certaine deter∣mination to bring a fearefull vastation upon the whole earth, which hath so grievously corrupted her waies. Doe ye not know that God hath his seasons and op∣portunities for al his proceedings with men?24 Doth the plowman plow all day to sowe? doth he open and breake the clods of his ground? he is not al∣waies taken up with one act; Doth the plowman spend his time altogether in plowing the ground, to prepare it for seed; doth he ever labour in breaking the clods? Hath he not other work to doe, after this?25 When he hath made plaine the face thereof, doth hee not cast abroad the fetches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principall wheat. when hee hath laid the earth smooth, and levell, doth he not cast the severall seeds, and graines into the bosome of the earth, in their meet seasons? &c. When he hath done that, and hath brought these seve∣rall kinds of graine into the barne,27 For the fetches are not threshed with a thre∣shing instrument, neither is a cart wheele turned upon the cummin, but the fet∣ches are beaten out with a staffe, and the cummin with a rod. he doth not thresh them out all after one fashion; for the fetches are not beaten out with the ordinary instrument of threshing, nor is the cummin crushed out with the cartwheele; but
lesser force will shake out these seeds, even a flaffe, or a rod. 28 Bread corne is brui∣sed, because he will not e∣ver be threshing it, nor breake it with the wheele of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen.But, that corne that is for bread, is bruised out with more force, by the strength of the flaile, or wheele; be∣cause he will not ever be working upon it, to fetch it out of the husks, wherein it lies, by those violent meanes which are used to this purpose. 29 This also commeth forth from the Lord of hostes, which is wonder∣full in counsell, and excel∣lent in working.Since the Lord of hosts hath given this wit, and un∣derstanding to plaine men, for the managing of their af∣faires, in due times, and fit waies; how much more shall he, who is infinite in wisedome, contrive his own works, both of mercy, and judgement with men? CAP. XXIX. 1 Woe to Ariel, to Ari∣el the citie where David dwelt, adde ye yeare to yeare, let them kill sacrifi∣ces.WOe to the Temple of Jerusalem, and thee, O Al∣tar, yea, to that whole city of David; let the de∣struction be a little deferred, from one year to another, and in the meane time doe ye fearelesly kill, and offer your sacrifices, as if ye expected no danger. 2 Yet I will distresse Ariel, and there shall bee heavinesse and sorrow, and it shall be unto me as Ari∣el.Yet in my appointed time I will distresse the Altar & Temple; and there shall be heavinesse and sorrow; and the whole city shall be to me, as an altar embrued with blood. 4 And thou shalt bee brought downe, and shalt speake out of the ground, and thy speech shal be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.And thou shalt speak hollowly, & faintly out of the low estate of humiliation, into which thou shalt be cast; thou that hadst wont to speake bigge, and loftily; now so shall thy voice be changed, that it shall sound weakly, and hol∣lowly, as one that hath a familiar, and speakes inwardly; or, as if it came like some soft whispering sound, out of the cranies of the earth. Moreover, those hired forces of strangers, to which thou trustest,5 Moreover, the multi∣tude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall bee as the chaffe that passeth away, yea it shall be at an instant sud∣denly. shall be dispersed, as small dust with the winde, and those powerfull and fierce warriours, where∣of thou boastest, shall be as chaffe, blowne away, in an in∣stant, suddenly. For God himselfe (who is the Lord of hosts) shall take upon him the execution of these judgements upon thee, and shall testifie his displeasure by thunders,6 Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of Hosts with thunder, and with earth∣quakes. and earth∣quakes, &c. 7 And the multitude of all the nations that fight a∣gainst Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distresse her, shall be as a dreame of a night vision.And the multitude of these nations, that fight against the Altar, temple, city of Jerusalem, and that distresse her, shall come upon her (in respect of her deep security)
as some fearefull dreame upon a sleeping man. And whereas the Jewes vainly pleased themselves with a false hope of deliverance from their enemies,8 It shall even bee as when a hungrie man drea∣meth, and behold he eat∣eth, but he awaketh, and his soule is emptie; or as when a thirstie man drea∣meth, and behold he drin∣keth, but he awaketh and behold he is faint, and his soule hath appetite, so shall the multitude of all the na∣tions be, that fight against mount Zion. and raising of their siege, they shall be no lesse disappointed then an hungry man that dreames of meat, and seemes to himselfe to eate, but when he awakes he findes that his stomack is still emptie, &c. So shall it be with the con∣ceit of defeating the multitude of nations, that fight a∣gainst mount Zion. Fixe your selves upon the thoughts of these judge∣ments, and wonder; yea, cry out, cry aloud in the sense of this wrath; But, alas, why doe I thus speake unto them? they are growne senselesse, and stupid; they are drunken,9 Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye out, & cry, they are drunken, but not with wine, they stagger, but not with strong drink. not so much with wine, as with their false security, and giddy imaginations, &c. For the Lord in his justice,10 For the Lord hath powred out upon you the spirit of deepe sleepe, and hath closed your eyes, the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered. for a punishment of your Idolatries, and excesse, hath given you up, to a secure in∣sensiblenesse; shutting up the eyes of your minde, that you should not see your fearefull condition; and that, not of the meaner sort only, but of your very prophets, and rulers, who should be the common seers for the rest. Their religion and devotion is such,13 And their feare to∣wards me is taught by the precept of men. not as God hath prescribed unto them, but such as they have received from the unwarranted precepts of superstitious men. Their wise men,14 For the wisedome of their wise men shall pe∣rish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. and their learned teachers shall bee besotted, so as they shall not be able, either to see the truth, or to deliver it unto others. Woe to those hypocriticall contemners of God, which thinke themselves so cunning,15 Woe unto them that seeke deepe to hide their counsell from the Lord. that they can elude either the knowledge, or proceedings of God, &c. Surely, these plots and devises that you have, for the turning of things upside downe,16 Surely your turning of things upside downe shall be esteemed as the potters clay; for shall the worke say of him that made it, he made me not? and working them to your owne purposes, are no lesse in my hand to over-rule then the clay is in the hand of the potter; Is it for you to take upon you the contriving of the events of things? is not this worke proper only to me? shall the work say of him that made it, he made me not? &c. However, your secure hearts may suggest to you,17 Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruit∣full field, and the fruitfull field shall be esteemed as a forrest? it shall be very shortly, that I will make these strange alte∣rations in the world; woody forrests shall be turned into fruitfull, and plaine fields, and those fields which were lately fruitfull, shall become a wilde desert forrest. But notwithstanding these judgements,18 And in that day shal the deafe heare the words of the booke, and the eyes of the blinde shall see out of obscuritie, and out of darknesse. I will be gra∣cious to mine owne remnant; and will open their eares,
that they may heare, and illighten their eyes, that they may see the things belonging to their peace. Those cruell men that are ready to take the utmost advantage against a man,21 That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that re∣proveth in the gate, and turne aside the just for a thing of nought. for but a word speaking, and lay twigs, and snares to catch the prophet, which openly reproves sin, and disgrace the upright, and conscionable, causelesly. They, that before, carelesly mocked at the prediction of these denounced evils,24 They also that er∣red in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmured, shall learn doctrine. shall now come to understand the truth of them. CAP. XXX. 1 Woe to the rebelli∣ous childrē, saith the Lord, that take counsell, but not of me, and that cover, with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may adde sinne to sinne.WOe to these rebellious Jewes (saith the Lord) that will be consulting with flesh and blood, in their affaires; & hiding their plots, as if they could keep them from mine eyes; and seeking other protections, then my spirit hath suggested unto them, they doe herein but adde one sinne to another. 2 That walke to goe downe into Aegypt, and have not asked at my mouth, to strengthē them∣selves in the strength of PharaohThat without ever asking counsell of me, go to crave aide, and succour of the Aegyptians; and make account to strengthen themselves with the forces of Pharoah, &c. For, no meane men, but the very Princes of Judah were sent as ambassadors,4 For his Princes were at Zoan, and his ambassa∣dours came to Hanes. to the furthest parts of Aegypt to treat with them upon this businesse. 5 They were all asha∣med of a people that could not profit them, nor bee an helpe nor profit, but a shame and also a reproach.But the end of that ambassage, is but shame and disap∣pointment; for it will appeare that those Aegyptians shall not be able to helpe them, yea, that their assistance shall turne to a reproach, and disadvantage unto them. 6 The burden of the beasts of the south into the land of trouble and an∣guish, from whence come the yong and old Lion, the viper and fierce flying ser∣pent, they will carry their riches upon the shoulders of yong asses, and their trea∣sures upon the bunches of Camels, to a people that shall not profit them.The sad tidings that are sent to the men of Judah, un∣der the name of those beasts, which shall be sent by them with presents into Aegypt; even into Aegypt which hath beene of old, a land of trouble, & anguish to Israel; from whence ravenous, and venomous beasts have wont too frequently to annoy, and indanger all passengers; yet thi∣ther will the men of Judah needs carry their rich gifts, up∣on the backs of asses, and the bunches of camels, to fee a people that cannot, that shall not availe them. The Aegyptians helpe shall be utterly in vaine; and therefore have I earnestly warned,7 For the Aegyptians shall helpe in vaine, and to no purpose, therefore have I cried concerning this, their strength is to sit still. and admonished the people of Judah; that their best strength had beene in sit∣ting still, and trusting to their God, without the imploy∣ment of these untrusty assistants.
Prophesie to us those newes that may please us; and,10 Prophesie not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesie deceits. tell us plausible tidings, how false and deceitfull soever. Let not the holy one of Israel trouble us any more,11 Cause the holy one of Israel to cease from be∣fore us. with these harsh, and unwelcome prophesies. Your state shall be, for this iniquity of yours,13 Therefore this ini∣quity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swel∣ling out in a high wall, whose breaking commeth suddenly at an instant. like to the case of a riven wall, whereof one part is ready to fall from the other; which buncheth out in the rupture ther∣of, as continually threatning a certaine ruine, that shall come suddenly upon it, and in the fall, a breaking in peeces. Thus are yee, and thus shall yee bee;14 And he shall breake it as the breaking of the potters vessell, that is bro∣ken in peeces. yea he shall yet breake you into smaller sheards; even like to the sheards of a broken pitcher, &c. Thus saith the Lord; did not I tell you,15 For thus saith the Lord God, the holy one of Israel; In returning and rest shall ye be saved, in quiet∣nesse and in confidence shal be your strength, and yee would not. that your sa∣fest, and surest way was to call backe your messengers from Aegypt, and to rest quietly and confidently upon the assured protection of your God; yet yee would not doe so; but would needs follow your owne projects. No, said ye; we will send speedy messengers to our neighbour Princes, and will trust to their aide,16 But ye said, No, for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee. therefore shall ye make as much haste to flee before your enemies, &c. For the Lord is a God,18 For the Lord is a God of Iudgement. full of mercifull moderation in the proceedings of his judgements, &c. Thou shalt enjoy the presence of thy priests,20 Thine eyes shall see thy teachers. and pro∣phets. And God shall blesse thee with pure,21 And thine eares shall heare a word behind thee, saying, this is the way walke ye in it. and wholesome doctrine, directing thee in the way of truth, and holines, saying to thee, upon all occasions of thy doubts, or tenta∣tions, This is the way, walke in it, &c. Thou shalt then,22 Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten I∣mages of gold. in an holy indignation conceived a∣gainst thy former Idolatry, defile, and deface all the or∣naments, and appurtenances of thy late images, of silver and gold, &c. Vpon which act of detestation of that Idolatry,23 Then shall hee give the raine of thy seed that thou shalt sow the ground withall. God shall blesse thee with a sensible benediction; he shall give sweet and seasonable raine to that seed thou hast fowne, &c. Thy very cattell shall be full fed,24 Shall eate clean pro∣vender which hath beene winnowed with the sho∣vell and with the fanne. even with well fan∣ned and pure graine, &c. Even upon the dry and barren hils, which are wont to be patched with a droughty heat,25 And there shall bee upon every high mountain and upon every high hill, rivers and streames of wa∣ters in the day of the great slaughter when the tow∣ers fall. shall springs of living waters breake forth, which shall flow forth into cleare and plentifull rivers; So will God have this land of his
to be richly refreshed, even then, whē the towers of their enemies shall be ruined, and demolished. 26 Moreover the light of the Moone, shall bee as the light of the Sunne, and the light of the Sunne shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven dayes, in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of the wound.And so glorious shall that restitution of the Church be, as that the estate thereof shall bee seven times more bright, and beautifull then it was before; and whereas formerly God gave illuminations to men in a weake im∣perfect degree, like to the light of the Moone, now he shall give them cleare and perfect, like the Sun; and if any were clearly inlightned before, now they shall bee raised to an height of knowledge, seuen sold more; and this shall be in the dayes of that blessed Gospel of peace, wherein God will bind up, and heale the wounds of his afflicted ones. 27 Behold, the name of the Lord commeth from farre, burning with his an∣ger.In the meane time, behold the power of the Lord shall manifest it selfe in grievous judgements upon the Assyrians, and those other banded enemies of his Church; so as, they shall see, and feele him comming a∣gainst them in a terrible manner, burning with anger, &c. 28 To sift the nations with the sieve of vanity, and there shall be a bridle in the lawes of the peo∣ple, causing them to erre.To sift the nations with that sieve, which shall dis∣cry their vanity, and cause their utter dispersion; and that bridle of correction, which is wont, in the mouth of tractable creatures to guide them; and keepe them in order, shall, in his judgement upon these stubborne ene∣mies, be an occasion of their erring out of the way. 29 As when one goeth with a pipe to come into the mountaine of the Lord to the mightie one of Is∣rael.As when a man goes with holy triumph, and melodi∣ous exultation up to the Temple of God, in an holy so∣lemnity, &c. And the Lord shall let the world see that this revenge upon the Assyrians,30 And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard; and shall shew the lighting downe of his arme. is his owne worke: which he shall declare, both by his fearefull thunders out of heaven, as also by that dreadfull execution which his powerfull arme shall performe amongst them, &c. 31 Which smite with a rod.Which was a cruell scourge unto other nations. So shall the Lord smite him againe, and smite him soundly, and deepe, so as the prints of his staffe shall be seene upon him;32 And in every place, where the grounded staffe shall passe which the Lord shall lay upon it, it shall be with Tabrets and Harpes, and in battles of shaking will he fight with it. and, wheresoever the Lord shall lay this heavy hand upon him, the judgement shall be entertain∣ed with the joy, and acclamation of all his oppressed neighbours, as a benefit to themselves; & in all his terri∣fying battles, will the Lord, with this staffe of vengeance fight against him. For God, from the foundations of the world hath or∣dained a place,33 For Tophet is or∣dained of old, yea for the King it is prepared, he hath made it deepe and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord, like a streame of brimstone, doth kindle it. and state of torment for his wicked, and reprobate enemies; yea; for the proud King of Assyria, and all those cruell tyrans, which doe here oppresse his Church, hath God prepared, a wofull, and inconcei∣vably
dreadfull damnation, in hell fire; which is poorely represented in that hidious vally of Benhinnom, wherein with much shrieking and horror, the bodyes of men are consumed in the fire; but alas, what is that flame, to this unquenchable one, which is kindled by the breath of the Lord, as with streames of brimstone; and therefore never can goe out, never can be abated. CAP. XXXI. YEt, they shall finde that,2 Yet he is also wise, and will bring evill, and will not call backe his words. though they vainly hoped to hide their counsells from the Lord, they shall have to doe with a God wiser then themselves; who will reso∣lutely bring evill upon them, and not retract it, &c. The Lord will no more forbeare to fight for Zion a∣gainst the Assyrian,4 So shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof. then a Lyon will forbeare his prey for the voyce of a shepheard. Yea, as we see some fowles,5 As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts de∣fend Ierusalem. in a care to preserve their yong, flie about the head of him that is climbing up to scale their nest, so carefull is the Lord to defend his Jeru∣salem, &c. The Assyrian shall fall by the sword,8 Then shall the Assy∣rian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man, and the sword not of a meane man shall devour him. not of a mighty man, but of a mighty Angell; and the sword, not of a meane man, but of a spirituall executioner shall devour him, &c. And Senacherib shall passe over to Ninive his strong hold, for feare, and with shame;9 And hee shall passe over to his strong hold for feare, and his Princes shall be afraid of the ensigne, saith the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and his fornace in Ierusalem. and his Princes and Cap∣taines shall bee afraid to gather any more under his en∣signe, saith God, who dwelling in his Temple at Ierusa∣lem, sends forth from thence his just vengeance upon his enemies. CAP. XXXII. BEhold the Messiah,1 Behold, a King shal reigne in righteousnesse, and Princes shall rule in judgement. the true King of his Church shall raigne in righteousnesse, and those who shall have the administration thereof, under him, shall rule in due e∣quity and moderation. And that man (God,2 And a man shall bee as an hiding place from the winde, and a covert from the tempest: as rivers of water in a drie place, as the shadow of a great rocke in a weary land. and man) shall be a sure refuge to his elect, in all their distresses, & calamities; and shall be a gracious refreshing to them, even as a cleare river in a dry wildernes, is to the thirsty traveller; or as the sha∣dow of a great rock, in an hote scorching season, and cli∣mate, is to the weary passenger.
5 The vile person shall be no more called liberall, nor the churle said to be bountifull.There shall be so right a discerning of all things, that vertues shall not passe for vices, nor vices be mistaken for vertues; but men shall be esteemed as they are. 9 Rise up ye women that are at ease, heare my vioce ye careless daughters give eare unto my speech.Rise up, ye nice and dainty dames of Judah, and Jeru∣salem, and give eare to this speech of mine, O ye carelesse women, who have given your selves hitherto, onely to ease, and delicacy. 10 For the vintage shal faile, the gathering shall not come.God will hold you short of those meanes of your riot, for the vintage shall faile, the harvest shall disappoint you. 12 They shall lament for the teats, for the plea∣sant fields, for the fruitfull vine.They shall lament for those plentifull meanes of suste∣nance, for the corne, and for the vines; the fruit of both which shall come short of their hopes. 15 Vntill the spirit be powred upon us, from on high, and the wilder∣nesse be a fruitfull field, and the fruitfull field be coun∣ted for a forrest.Vntill the spirit of renovation bee poured upon us from God; untill it please him to breath comfortably up∣on us, so as our wildernesse may be turned into a fruit∣full field, and that field, which now goes for fruitfull, be in comparison thereof accounted but as a desert forrest. 16 Then judgement shall dwell in the wilder∣nesse.Then there shall be an holy & wise administration of justice in those places, which were before reputed wild and desert, &c. 19 When it shall haile, coming downe on the for∣rest, and the cities shall be low, in a low place.When violent stormes shall bluster upon the earth; and fall both upon the forrest, and townes, with such fu∣ry, that the citie shall be uncovered therewith, & utterly abased. 20 Blessed are yee that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet of the oxe and the asse.Ye shall in the meane time be so blessed with increase, that wheresoever you sow your seed (though in morish and watry fennes) yet it shall abundantly prosper, and grow so ranke, as that ye shall be faine to send in your cattle to eate downe the first head thereof. CAP. XXXIII. 1 Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest trea∣cherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shalt cease to spoile, thou shalt bee spoiled.WOe to thee, O thou cruell Assyrian, that spoylest Gods people causelesly, and unprovoked; and dealest treacherously with those, that have offered no such measure unto thee; for God wil be sure to meet with thee in thine own way; when thou hast done spoyling the Iewes, the Chaldees shall beginne to spoyle thee, &c. 2 O Lord, be gracious unto us, wee have waited for thee, bee thou their arme every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.O Lord, be gracious to us thy chosen people; wee have ever hitherto depended upon thee, thou hast beene the refuge of our fore-fathers; as thou hast beene their God of old, so renew thy favour and protection to us, every day; and be thou our salvation in the time of trouble. 3 At the noise of the tumult, the people fled, at the lifting up of thy selfe the nations were scattered.Upon the noyse of the tumultuous onset of the Jewes,
the multitudes of the Assyrian armie fled; when thou, O God, didst but seeme to rouze up thy selfe, all those nations were suddenly dispersed. As when the country is annoyed with caterpillers,4 And your spoile shall be gathered like the ga∣thering of the caterpiller. all sorts of people runne forth (even women and children) to destroy them at once, and even the weakest can kill them with ease, so shall all the people runne forth to ga∣ther this spoile of the Assyrians, &c. The maine strength,6 And wisedome and knowledge shall bee the stabilitie of thy times, and strength of salvation: the feare of the Lord is his treasure. and stability which thy times shall have, shall consist in the true spirituall wisedome, and in the knowledge of God; and the greatest treasure of thy good King Ezekiah shall be the feare of the Lord. Behold, for the time,7 Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without, the Ambassadors of peace shal weepe bitterly. Jerusalem shall be put to great distresse; their Captaines and souldiers shall be discoura∣ged, and their Ambassadors, that went to treat for peace, shall returne discontented, and sorrowfull. The whole country mourneth, and languisheth,9 The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewen downe: Sharon is like a wildernesse, and Bashan, and Carmel, shake off their fruits. even those parts which are remotest; and every Province thereof beareth his owne proper share in this misery; The Cedars of Lebanon are cut downe, the corne of Sharon, and the fruitfull pastures of Bashan and Carmel are wasted. Now when things are comne to an extremity,10 Now will I rise, saith the Lord. will I rise, saith the Lord, &c. Ye have conceived great hopes of victory and triumph,11 Yee shall conceive chaffe, ye shall bring forth stubble, your breath as fire shall devour you. but you shall goe away with a shamefull foile; yea, yee shall perish by your own plots; the fire which your owne breath hath kindled, shall devoure you. Those that are prophane and godlesse in Jerusalem,14 The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearefulnesse hath surprised the hypo∣crites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? are, not without cause, much terrified; and those hypo∣crites, which would not beleeve the predictions of these evills, are now overwhelmed with fearefulnesse; and now they are ready to say; Alas, how shall we be able to indure this wrath of God, which is gone out against us? &c. He shall dwell in a safe place,16 He shall dwell on high, his place of defence shall be the munitions of rockes, bread shall be gi∣ven him, his waters shall be sure. inaccessible to all ene∣mies; and utterly impregnable; and shall have all things cast in his way, which are necessary for his sustentation. Whosoever thou art that walkest thus uprightly; thou shalt see the Court of Jerusalem restored to his full glo∣ry, though Ezekiah bee under hatches for the time,17 Thine eyes shall see the King in his beautie: they shall behold the land that is very farre off. yet thou shalt see him in his wonted port and magnificence; and thou shalt see him subduing other remote King∣domes, and ruling over them. Thine heart shall thinke upon the terrour thou wert in, when thou distractedly askedst for thy officers;18 Thine heart shall meditate terrour; where is the scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the Towers? where is the clarke of the band? Where is the receiver? Where
is the survaior of the workes? as if these could have avai∣led thee. Thou shalt not be forced to see and indure the tyran∣ny of those fierce and cruell Assyrians,19 Thou shat not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech then thou canst perceive; of a stam∣mering tongue, that thou canst not understand. to live under the servitude of a nation, whose barbarous and harsh lan∣guage thou understandest not. But there, (even in Jerusalem) will the Lord be unto us in stead of all the rivers, and ditches, and bulwarkes of defence which other cities boast themselves of;21 But there the glori∣ous Lord, will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streames, wherein shall goe no gally with Oares. yea he shall give Jerusalem protection without danger; In o∣ther cities and countries where they have the commodi∣ty of large rivers and inlets from the Sea, there may be perhaps some perill of advantage to an enemie; and oportunity of invasion, but here shall be no such matter, no galley shall go here with oares, &c. 23 Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not wel strengthen their mast: they could not spread the saile: then is the prey of a great spoile divided, the lame take the prey.But for thee, O Assyrian, howsoever thou camest like a well rigged ship to this siege, yet thy tacklings doe not hold, thy mast totters; yea, so shall God ply thee with stormes, that thou shalt not so much as spread a saile, but shalt be wracked, and spilt, and every one, though lame and impotent, shall share in the spoile of thee. 14 And the inhabitant shall not say: I am sicke; the people that dwell therein, shall be forgiven their iniquitie.But, my people shall, in the meane time, be kept in safety, and health; for so much, as the very cause of their suffering, which is their iniquity, shall be removed and forgiven. CAP. XXXIV. 3 And the Mountaines shall be melted with their blood.ANd the mountaines shall so runne down with blood as if they were melted and dissolved into it. 4 And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved.And in that great day of the Lord shall the very frame of heaven feele an apparent alteration, &c. 5 For my sword shall be bathed in heaven, be∣hold, it shall come downe upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse to judgement.For my judgement, decreed in heaven, shall be feare∣fully executed upon the knowne, and professed enemies of my Church; upon those people, whom I have accur∣sed to an everlasting condemnation. God shall take full vengeance on his enemies; his sword shall be,6 The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatnes: and with the blood of lambs, and goates, with the fat of the kidneies of rammes, &c. as it were, fed with the blood of his great and noted adversaries; this slaughter of his shall be like to that of an universall sacrifice, which shall be killed on the altar of the land of Edom, and all the regions of his proud opposites. Neither shall the tame cattle onely be the matter of this sacrifice,7 And the Vnicornes shall come downe with them, and the bullockes with the Bulls, and their land shall be soaked with blood. as the poore and quiet lambs, which have no power to resist; but the wildest and fiercest of all other creatures (as the Vnicorns, and Bulls, &c.) figuring
the most lawlesse and potent enemies of Christ, shall be exposed to this bloody oblation; and their land shall be drenched and soaked with their blood, &c. It is the time,8 For it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the yeare of recompences for the controversie of Zion. wherein God will give a full satisfacti∣on, and retribution of the wrongs that have beene done to his Church, in the consummate plagues of his ene∣mies. There shall be nothing but horrour, and burning;9 And the streames thereof shall be turned in∣to pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch. for in stead of streames there shall be liquid pitch; and in stead of dust, brimstone; and a fire shall be put to both of them; so as the whole world shall bee but as one flame. As for those hostile countries that have made havock of Ierusalem, they shall be laid waste in the meane time;11 The cormorant and the Bitterne shall pos∣sesse it, the Owle also and the Raven shall dwell in it, and he shall stretch out upon it the line of con∣fusion and the stones of emptinesse. and turned to an habitation of solitary, dolefull, and dis∣mall birds; God shall condemne them to perpetuall confusion and ruine, never to be either built, or inha∣bited. See Isa. 13.21.14 The wild beasts, &c. the Satyre shall cry to his fellow. Inquire after this prophesie which I have delivered to you from the Lord, and compare it with the event,15 There shall the great Owle make her nest, &c. 16 Seeke ye out of the booke of the Lord, and read, no one of these shall faile, none shall want her mate, for my mouth it hath commanded; and his spirit it hath gathered them. yee shall finde none of these particulars to faile; but these foules of solitude and desolation shall nest, and breed here; none of them shall want her mate; I have spoken it as from God, and his power shall call them thither, and fasten them there. He hath distributed the land to them for their use,17 And he cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it unto them by line: they shall possesse it for ever, from generati∣on to generation shall they dwell therein. and his just providence hath divided it to them, by line, there they shall take up their abode for ever. CAP. XXXV. THe Kingdome of Christ shall come,1 The wildernesse and the solitarie place shall bee glad for them, and the de∣sert shall rejoyce and blos∣some as the rose. wherein he shall rule by the Gospell of peace, at what time all things shall flowrish; even those places which now seeme to bee forlorne deserts shall then rejoyce, and blossome as the rose. That which was once a dry sandy desert,2 The glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellencie of Carmel and Sharon. shall be now as fresh and greene, as Lebanon, and as plentifull, and rich as Carmel and Sharon, &c. Comfort your selves therefore in the Lord,3 Strengthen yee the weake hands. O ye that are weake and dejected, &c. That barren soile that was parched,7 And the parched ground shall become a poole, and the thirsty land springs of waters, in the ha∣bitation of Dragons, wher each lay, shall be grasse with reeds and rushes. and burnt up
with drought, shall flow with abundance of water, &c. and those desolate and dry deserts which were wont to be the habitation of Dragons, shall now turne moist, and fruitfull, so as the rushes, and reeds shall cover it. It shall not only be civill, and accessible, but holy and gracious;8 And an high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holines, the unclean shall not passe over it, but it shall be for those, the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not erre therin. none shall dare to set their foot there, who are uncleane, and perversly wicked; but it shall be for those that are holy and conscionable; and the path shall bee so beaten with frequent passengers, that those which are o∣therwise simple and ignorant, cannot erre therein. Neither shall it retaine so much of the nature, and use of a wildernes, as to give harbour to Lions, or any other ravenous beasts;9 No Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shal goe up thereon, it shall not be found there, but the re∣deemed shall walke there. Men of a cruell, and bestiall disposition shall finde no place there, only the redeemed shall bee meet inhabitants thereof. CAP. XXXVI. See 2. Kings 18. CAP. XXXVII. See 2. Kings 19. 30 And this shall bee a signe unto thee, Yee shall eate this yeare such as groweth of it selfe, and the second yeare that which springeth of the same.ANd now for thee, O Ezekiah, that thou maist know that this deliverance comes only from the Lord, let me tell thee, that God shall second this mercy, with ano∣ther; thy freedome, with a plentiful increase of this land of thine, which is now wasted, and defaced with warre; which yet shall, through the miraculous blessing of God become so fruitfull, as that, for two yeares together, it shall yeeld thee a large and rich crop, without the la∣bour, or seed of the husbandman, &c. CAP. XXXVIII. See 2. Kings 20. 11 I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living.I Said, I shall no more have the comfortable fruition of Gods presence in his house, amongst the men that live here on earth. 13 From day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.This very day, ere the night come, wilt thou make an end of me. O Lord, by those words and powerfull acts that pro∣ceed from thee,16 O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit. is the life of man both had and maintain∣ed;
and, in speciall, this life of mine, whereby my breath is still kept in me, is an immediate worke of thine, &c. Man, when he is once dead,18 For the grave can∣not praise thee, death can∣not celebrate thee. can doe thee no more ser∣vice here upon earth, &c. CAP. XXXIX. I Doe in all humility submit my selfe to the good plea∣sure of God,8 Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, good is the word of the Lord, which thou hast spoken, he said more∣over, for there shall be peace and truth in my daies. and doe acknowledge that God hath dealt very graciously with me, howsoever, for though I had deserved a present punishment, yet it hath pleased him in mercy to respite it, and to vouchsafe to grant, that true religion and peace shall be continued all my daies. CAP. XL. SHe hath received from the hand of Gods justice a large proportion of misery; double to that, which,2 For she hath recei∣ved of the Lords hand double for all her sinnes. if their sins had not forced him to this necessary infliction, hee would have imposed on them. God shall have his prophets,3 The voice of him that crieth in the wilder∣nesse. who in the most forlorne estate of his Church, shall excite those Princes and go∣vernours, under whom his people shall be; for a prepara∣tion for their returne out of the Babylonish captivity; and as that returne shall be a type and figure of the deli∣very of Gods Church from spirituall tyranny; hee shall have his Evangelicall harbinger, before the comming of the Messiah; which shall be the voice of a cryer in the wildernesse, &c. God shall remove every difficulty,4 Every valley shall be exalted, and every moun∣taine and hill shal be made low. and impediment which shal ly in the way of the restauration of his Church and people, &c. As the grasse withereth, and, as the flower fadeth, up∣on every nipping winde, or scorching sun; so doe,7 The grasse withereth, the flowre fadeth, because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it, surely the people is grasse. and shall the most glorious of the sonnes of men, if God, in his displeasure shall but breath upon them never so little. O Sion, and Jerusalem, doe yee proclaime to all the world, the infinite goodnesse of your God to you,9 O Sion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountaine; O Ierusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength, lift it up, be not afraid, say unto the cities of Iudah, behold your God. and therefore take all advantage of the highest mountains, to publish it, that it may be most, and best heard; since it is to you that God imparts the first tidings of a saviour, do ye gladly, and zealously divulge it to all the earth, and say to the other cities of Judah, concerning the Messiah to be exhibited in the flesh, Behold your God. If there be any of his elect ones,11 He shall gather the lambes with his arme, and carry them in his bosome, and shall gently lead those that are with yong. that is weak and di∣stressed,
and that is over-pressed with the conscience of his owne unworthinesse, such a one will he pitty and re∣leeve. 15 Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance.What needst thou care, O Israel, for all the world, if thy God be for thee; alas, how poore a thing are all the nations of the earth, if they be compared to the power of the Almighty? they are but as one drop of a bucket to a whole spring, yea to the sea it selfe, &c. Lift up your eyes to heaven, and consider the mighty power of him that made all this glorious frame;26 Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number; he calleth them all by names, by the great∣nesse of his might, for that he is strong in power, not one faileth. that hath marshalled all those bright and goodly starres, like some mighty and innumerable host; he knowes them all seve∣rally, and distinctly, and hath ordained their severall times of rising, and when he bids them come forth, not one of them doe, or can faile of his appearance. CAP. XLI. 1 Keepe silence before me, (O ye lands) & let the people renew their strēgthI Have a contestation with my people, which I would have the very heathen to be the witnesses of; come therefore, O ye forraine nations, and give eare, &c. 2 Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule o∣ver Kings?Who was it that fetched faithfull Abraham from Vr of the Chaldees? and caused him to travell to the pro∣mised land, and gave him the victory over divers Kings? &c. I the Lord am he, that alters not with time, and oc∣casions;4 I the Lord the first, & with the last, I am he. as I was to the first, so am I to the last; as I was before all things, and had my being of my selfe, so I give being and sustentation to all things that shal be unto the very end. 5 The isles saw it, and feared, the ends of the earth were afraid, drew neere, and came.The nations round about were witnesses of the great workes I did for my people, in their deliverance, and feared; even the remotest of them were afraid, and com∣bined together, and assembled; 6 They helped every one his neighbour, and eve∣ry one said to his brother, Be of good courage.And incouraged themselves mutually, notwithstan∣ding, in their Idolatry; as though they would make head against the true God. 7 So the carpenter en∣couraged the goldsmith, & he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvill.The foolish artificers agreed amongst themselves to make an idoll, and one of them hartned another to the work, &c. 14 Feare not, thou worm Iacob, and ye men of Israel I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy redeemer the holy One of Israel.Be not dismaid, O ye my despised people of the Jewes; how base and despicable soever ye seeme in the eyes of your enemies, the world shall see, and finde, that yee are deare to me, and that I will help and deliver you. 15 Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth; thou shalt thresh the moū∣taines, and beat them smal, and shalt make the hils as chaffe.And, however the world doe now insult upon you, I
will raise you up, to a power of just revenge; and will in∣able you to subdue your greatest and proudest enemies, so as ye shall humble them to the very dust. And whereas the dry and barren wildernes may seeme a just discouragement of your passage, and returne,19 I will plant in the wildernesse the Cedar, the Shittah tree, and the myr∣tle, and the oyle tree, I will set in the desert the firre tree, and the pine and the boxe tree together. I will cause that to be pleasantly planted, and coolely shaded, with variety of goodly trees, of all growths and sta∣tures. He that maketh choice of such gods, as ye are to wor∣ship and adore, shall be no other then an abhomination unto the true God.24 An abomination is he that chooseth you. I will, in the fulnesse of time, raise up a Messiah,25 I have raised up one from the north, and hee shall come; from the rising of the Sun shall he call up∣on my name, and hee shall come upon Princes as up∣on morter, and as the pot∣ter treadeth clay. who shall call mine elect out of all coasts of the world, to my holy service; and he shall by his mighty power subdue those great potentates of the earth, who have opposed themselves to him. CAP. XLII. HEE shall make no noise in the world,2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. but shall come without either pompe or tumult. Those that are humbled, and contrite, shall he rather releeve, and comfort,3 A bruised reede shall he not breake, and the smoaking flaxe shal he not quench, he shall bring forth judgement unto truth. then adde any thing to their sor∣row and affliction, and those that have received but the weakest beginnings of grace, shall have no discourage∣ment from him, but shall be rather cheared up by him; yet so shall he be gracious to the penitently dejected, that he shall not beare with the obstinate sinner; but shall give severe judgement upon him, according to the justice of his demerits. The forraine nations, even of the Gentiles, shall yeeld themselves over joyfully to his government.4 And the isles shall waite for his law. I will give thee for that Saviour of the world,6 And give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. in whom my covenant of saving mankinde was founded of old e∣ven in those ancient promises, which I made, both in Pa∣radise to the first parents of mankinde, and after, to A∣braham the father of the faithfull; not onely to that one chosen nation, but even to the Gentiles also, to whom I have ordained thee as a light, to guide them unto salva∣tion. That,7 To open the blinde eyes, to bring out the pri∣soners, from the prison, and them that sit in darknesse out of the prison house. whereas mankinde was utterly bereaved of the light of all divine knowledge, now, by his illumination their eyes might be opened to see the things belonging to their peace; and whereas they were shut up in a mise∣rable bondage to sin and satan, he might graciously de∣liver them, &c.
11 Let the wildernesse and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabite: let the inhabitants of the rocke sing, let them shout from the top of the mountaines.Let the most barbarous of all nations know that they have cause to praise and magnifie the mercy of the Lord, for that interest which they shall have in this worke of redemption; let therefore the wildest Arabians sing and celebrate this great goodnesse of God our Saviour. 14 I have long time holden my peace, I have been still and refrained my selfe: now will I cry like a travailing woman, I will destroy and devoure at once.I have long time refrained my selfe from a revenge of mine enemies, and delivering of my Church; now I can forbeare no longer, but will suddenly expresse my love to the one, and my vengeance on the other; even as a woman, who hath long bitten in her paine, yet when the last throwes of her child-birth come upon her, cannot forbeare to cry out. 19 Who is blinde, but my servant? or deafe, as my messenger that I sent? who is blinde as he that is per∣fect, & blinde as the Lords servant?However the rest of the world may pretend for their ignorance, and blindnesse, yet my chosen people, who have had such meanes of knowledge from mee, might well put me into expectation of great skill in, and con∣scionable care of my commandements, and now behold (to their shame be it spoken) who is so blinde as their wilfulnesse hath made them? yea, not the ordinary sort of them only, but even my messengers and prophets, who have challenged much perfection to themselves, they have hood-winkt themselves from beholding the cer∣taine truth of my judgements. 21 The Lord is well pleased for his righteous∣nesse sake, he will magni∣fie the law and make it honourable.The Lord is well pleased, for his gracious promise sake, to make good all that ever he hath undertaken, con∣cerning his people, and to glorifie himselfe in the fulfil∣ling of his word. 22 But this is a people robbed and spoiled, they are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses, they are for a prey, & none delivereth, for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.But this people make themselves unworthy, and unca∣pable of the great mercies of God, and will needs bee guilty of those great miseries, and calamities that are comming upon them; for they shall be robbed, and spoi∣led, and fettered in dungeons, and be exposed to an ut∣ter vastation. CAP. XLIII. 1 I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine.I Have taken speciall notice of thee, above all other na∣tions; and have entred into termes of more neare and deare respects unto thee. 3 I gave Aegypt for thy ransome, Aethiopia and Se∣ba for thee.When Senacherib did so furiously besiege thee, I fetcht him off, and diverted his warres to Aegypt, and Aethiopia, and so made them to be thy ransome, and re∣scue. So also verse 4. 5 Feare not, for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the East, and ga∣ther thee from the West.I will bring all the true seed of Israel out of their spi∣rituall
captivity, from all the corners of the world, even from the East, and West. As also from the North and South;6 I will say to the North, Give up, and to the South, Keep not back, bring my sonnes from farre, and my daughters from the ends of the earth. so as all that be∣long to mine election shall in Christ be gathered unto mee. So also verse 7. Bring forth those people that were once blinde,8 Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deafe that have eares. but now I have given them eyes, and those who were once deafe, but now I have given them eares. It is for your sakes,14 For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought downe all their Nobles, and the Caldeans, whose cry is in the ships. (to contrive the returne of you my people from your captivity) that I wil send Cyrus against Babylon, where you are detained, and will give him vi∣ctory against those Princes and Nobles of the Chalde∣ans, whom ye are subject unto, who shall be glad to make use of their ships for their flight and escape. As I will addresse,19 I will make a way in the wildernesse, and ri∣vers in the desert. and accommodate all things for the returne of my people, from their captivity, (so as no convenience shall be wanting thereunto) so also, will I give all gracious helps to all my chosen ones from the ut∣most coasts of heaven, for their conversion to my true Church. Those that are the most bestiall and savage among all the people of the world,20 The beast of the field shall honour mee, the dragons and the owles, be∣cause I give waters in the wildernesse, and rivers in the desert. shall wonder at the great favors which I shew to my people, and shall give glory unto me both of power, and mercy. Those oblations, which thou hast formally made unto mee, have not beene such, as I cared to receive from thee;23 Thou hast not brought me the small cat∣tle of thy burnt offerings, neither hast thou honou∣red me with thy sacrifices, I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense. I have not been beholden to thee for a true devout con∣secration of thy selfe, and thy services unto me, all these have been only outward, and fashionable. So also verse 24. Thou hast cast heavie and intolerable burdens upon mee by thy sinnes;24 For thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities. as if my mercy served for nothing but to humour thy wickednesse; yea thou hast pressed me so farre, as that I am now weary of induring thy provoca∣tions. If thou hast any thing to say for thy selfe;26 Put mee in remem∣brance, let us plead toge∣ther, declare thou, that thou maist be justified. speak it out freely, I give thee full scope to plead thy owne cause with me; and, if thou canst, doe thou either justifie, or excuse thy selfe. Therefore I have determined to disregard,28 Therefore I have prophaned the Princes of the sanctuary, and have gi∣ven Iacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches. and ex∣pose to contempt the chiefe Priests and rulers of my san∣ctuary and to give up Jacob to destruction, and Israel to the reproach of all nations.
CAP. XLIV. 6 I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God.I Am the onely true, eternall God; without all possibi∣lity of alteration; and therefore will be ever approved most constant to my owne decrees, and purposes. 7 And who as I, shall call and shall declare it and set it in order for me?Since I decreed, before ever any of your Idol-gods were extant in the world, to select a people to my selfe frō the rest of the earth, which of your false gods could, or can order their vocation, and government as I have done, &c. 12 Yea hee is hungry and his strength faileth, he drinketh no water, and is faint.Weake, and foolish man will bee making a god to himselfe; and findes himselfe hungry, and thirsty, and faint, with the very worke, whiles hee makes it, yet so eager is he in that businesse, as that he forbeares his own necessary sustenance in his zeale to finish it. 18 They have not knowne nor understood: for he hath shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts, that they cannot understand.God hath in his just judgement, given them up to a strange besottednesse, and hath suffered their idoll to bereave them of their wits, and senses, so as, though they have both hearts and eyes, yet they neither see, nor un∣derstand. 20 He feedeth of ashes, a deceived hart hath turn∣ed him aside, that he can∣not deliver his house, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?That which should be his comfort, is his affliction and misery; he trusteth to his idol, and that shall no more helpe him, then ashes can feed and nourish him; he hath given way to these idolatrous fopperies; and now they have utterly infatuated him; so as he hath not the grace to bethinke himselfe of his fond and wicked courses. 28 That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepheard, and shall performe all my plea∣sure, even saying to Ieru∣salem, Thou shalt be built, and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.That saith of Cyrus, (that Persian Monarch, who shall after many yeares be borne) hee is the man that shall favour, and restore my people, and performe my pleasure concerning their returne from the Babylonish captivity: who shall also give order for the reedifying of the walls of Jerusalem, and the Temple. CAP. XLV. 1 Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him: and I will loose the loynes of Kings to open before him the two leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut.THus saith the Lord, concerning Cyrus, who is yet unborne, whō I have ordained to be the King of Per∣sia; whom I have decreed to prosper in all his designes, and to make him victorious over all nations, and to sub∣due mighty Kings, so as they shall be glad to open unto him their most defenced cities. 3 And I will give thee the treasures of darknesse, & hidden riches of secret places.I will give thee those treasures, which have beene long laid up in the secret store-houses of Kings, &c. 5 I girded thee, though thou hast not knowne me.I have girded thee with honor, and power, though
thou hast not considered whence these favours have comne, neither hast thou, O Cyrus, so well knowne me, as to abdicate thine Idolatry, and to worship me aright. Let all my creatures (saith the Lord) conspire toge∣ther to the furtherance of the restored happinesse of my people; let the heavens, and the clouds,8 Drop downe, ye hea∣vens, from above, and let the skies poure downe righteousnesse: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousnsse spring up together: I the Lord have created it. and the earth contribute all the blessings (which are committed unto them) to their inlargement, and prosperitie; and con∣vey unto them the just performance of all the mercifull promises they have had from me. Shall the worke rise up, and controll the workman, and say; He hath no skill?9 Or thy worke, hee hath no hands? I who am the faithfull Gardian of my Church have raised up Cyrus, who in future times shall come,13 I have raised him up in righteousnesse, and I will direct all his wayes, he shall build my citie, and he shall let goe my Cap∣tives, not for price nor re∣ward, saith the Lord of hosts. and prosper in his great enterprises; and he shall build up the walls of Jerusalem; and shall send back the captive Jewes into their country, not being hired thereto by any price, or reward, but by my immediate instigation. See Ezra. 1. The Aegyptians, and the Ethiopians,24 Thus saith the Lord, The Labour of Aegypt, and Merchandise of Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, men of stature shall come over un∣to thee, and they shall bee thine, they shall come after thee, in chaines they shall come over, &c. and Sabeans shall be tributary to Cyrus; and the benefit of their la∣bour and merchandise shall by him bee improved to the building of Jerusalem; so as the great enemies of Gods Church shall voluntarily submit themselves thereunto; and shall acknowledge that Gods presence is in her, and his power for her. All this shall be done for thy people; but, in the meane time they shall have need of patience;15 Verely thou art a God that hidest thy selfe, O God of Israel the Savi∣our. for thou wilt for a long while seeme to hide thy face from them, O thou God and Saviour of Israel, and wilt give them up into grievous affliction. CAP. XLVI. THe great idols of the Chaldees,1 Bell boweth downe, Nebo stoupeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattell: your car∣riages were heavie loden, they are a burden to the weary beast. in whom they so vain∣ly trusted, shall now be pulled downe, and carried a∣way in carts, as the spoiles of the Persian Conquerour, the beasts shall drag them away, and complaine of their weight. Remember this, and shew your selves to be not more brutish then beasts,8 Remember this; and shew your selves men: bring it againe to minde, O ye transgressours. to worship those things which your selves have made; but men, indued with reason, which alone is able to teach you to abhorre this grosse idola∣try, &c.
10 Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsell shal stand, and I will do all my pleasure.Who from the beginning of times, and ever since, have still foretold you what would come to passe, both till this present, and in the times yet to come; which I have so infallibly performed, that you may hereby well know the immutable certainty of all my decrees. 11 Calling a ravenous bird from the East, the man that executeth my Counsell from a farre countrey.Calling Cyrus from the East to execute my decree, who shall come swiftly upon the wings of speed, to doe what I have determined, and shall devour the King∣domes of the earth, before him, &c. 13 I bring neere my righteousnesse: it shall not be farre off, and my salva∣tion shall not tarry, and I will place salvation in Zi∣on, for Israel my glory.Howsoever ye have deserved to set me off from you, yet will I not suffer your incredulity to frustrate those gracious promises, which I have made for the delive∣rance of my people; but will, in my just time, performe them, and will bring salvation unto Zion, and there set∣tle it, for the happinesse of my people Israel. CAP. XLVII. 1 Come downe and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Caldeās: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.O Thou glorious citie of Babylon, which bragst of thine impregnablenesse, and might; come downe (for so thou shalt) and sit in the dust, for thither shalt thou be humbled; thou shalt no more rule over nations, but shalt be subject to anothers power; neither shal there be any more place for thy wanton delicacy, but thou shalt bee harshly and roughly intreated of thy Conque∣rour. 2 Take the milstones and grind meale, uncover thy lockes: make bare the legge: uncover the thigh, passe over the rivers.Make account to undergoe the cruellest bondage; wherein thou shalt be put to grinde in mills, & be whipt to all servile and base workes; and your coy dames, and proud wantons shall go now carelesly with their lockes uncovered, and neglected; and shall be forced to walke barefooted to their captivitie, through the stony wayes, and unknowne rivers. 3 I will take vengeance, and I will not meete thee as a man.I will not deale with thee in any gentle or moderate manner, but in all extremity; the revenge of men may be prevented, or mitigated, mine shall not. CAP. XLVIII. 7 They are created now, and not from the be∣ginning, even before the day when thou heardest thē not, lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew them.THey, even those hidden things are inexpectedly brought about, and were not revealed to thee before hand; lest thou shouldest say; I foreknew them well enough. 8 And wast called a transgressour, from the wombe.Thou wast a stubborne and rebellious people, even
from my first dealings with thee; ever since I sequestred thee for my peculiar. I have taken courses with thee for thine amendment,10 Behold, I have re∣fined thee, but not with silver: I have chosen thee in the fornace of affliction. not for thy destruction; I have tryed thee with the fire of affliction, but not with so extreame a fire, as where∣with silver is tryed, that would have burnt thee up, and not have refined thee; I have testified my choice and al∣lowance of thee upon this fiery try all. I will free you, O my people; behold,20 Goe ye forth of Ba∣bylon, flee yee from the Caldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth. ye shall goe forth of Babylon; yee shall be rescued from the hand of the Chaldees; goe ye therefore from thence with tri∣umph and exultation; and proclaime the great good∣nesse of your God to all the world, &c. CAP. XLIX. O All yee forraine nations of the world, listen unto me,1 Listen, O ye Isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from farre; the Lord hath called me from the womb, from the bowles of my mother hath hee made mention of my name. your Saviour, and redeemer; The Lord, who be∣fore all times, had decreed me to be the mediator of his Church, hath accordingly performed it, and hath from my miraculous conception, and birth, set me apart to the accomplishing of this great worke. He hath giuen power and efficacy to his word in my mouth, that thereby I may rule my Church,2 And hee hath made my mouth like a sharpe sword, in the shadow of his hand hath he hid mee, and made me a polished shaft, in his quiver hath hee hid me. and subdue my enemies; his almighty protection hath beene over me; and he hath destin'd me, from all worlds, to be a fit and perfect instrument of his service. Then I said, I have omitted nothing on my part,4 Then I said, I have laboured in vaine, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vaine, yet surely my judgement is with the Lord, and my worke with my God. that I might doe, for the gaining of my people, the Jewes, but all my cost and paines that I have bestowed upon them, is no better then cast away; but it is mine everlast∣ing father (with whom I am one) who gives full appro∣bation of all that I have done; who graciously accepts of both my active and passive obedience. So also verse 5.5 Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I bee glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. Though Israel be so obstinate that he will not reap the profered benefit of my redemption, yet my glory with the Lord shall be no whit the lesse. Yea this is not all the honor that God my father will put upon me; for behold, saith he,6 And hee said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Ia∣cob, and to restore the pre∣served of Israel: I will also give thee, for a light to the Gentiles, that thou maiest be my salvation, &c. it were a poore mat∣ter, if thy redemption and rule should be onely limited to the tribes of Israel; no, I will so extend, and advance this glorious and happie office, and worke of thine, that it shall reach unto the Gentiles, all the world over.
8 And give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth to cause to inherit the deso∣late heritages.I have given thee to renew, and establish that cove∣nant, which is betweene me and my Church; to raise up and settle all my chosen upon earth; and to bring in∣to my Church those which pertaine unto it, so as even the most desolate parts thereof may be furnished and peopled. 9 They shall feed in the wayes, and their pa∣stures shall bee in all high places.Such plenty of provision will I make for my people, that the very high wayes, and dry and barren moun∣taines shall yeeld them abundance of nourishment, and increase. 12 Behold, these shall come from farre: and loe, these from the North and from the West, and these from the land of Sinim.From all the coasts of the earth shall the Jewes re∣turne to Jerusalem, in figure of that generall recourse, which shall be from all the nations under heaven, to the holy Church of Christ, under the Gospell. 18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together and come to thee: as I live saith the Lord, thou shalt surely cloth thee with them all, as with an ornament, and binde them on thee as a bride doth.And now, O my Church, lift up thine eyes, and looke round about thee; Behold the multiplicity of all those nations wherewith thou art encompassed, all these shall come in and submit themselves unto thee; their number and accession shall be an excellent ornament unto thee, wherewith thou shalt decke thy selfe, as a Bride doth on the day of her wedding. The children, which thou, O my Church, shalt have of this new supply of the Gentiles,20 The children, which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shall say againe in thine eares, The place is too strait for mee. since the casting off thy former issue of the Iewes, shall be so multiplied, that they shall have cause to complaine of the want of roome. Then shalt thou have occasion to thinke; How comes it about,21 Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children and am desolate, a captive and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? that I am blessed with so large an issue, seeing my former brood is lost, and perished? O God, this is thy wondrous mercy, thus to comfort me in my extreme desolation, and captivity; thou, by the immortall seed of thy word hast begotten them to thy selfe; and hast nourished and bred up them accordingly, &c. Whereas now the Princes of the world are opposite unto thee,23 And Kings shall bee thy nursing fathers, and their Queenes the nursing mothers: they shall bowe downe to thee with their face towards the earth. then, Kings and Queens shall gladly take upon them thy patronage, and protection; yea they shall in all humility yeeld themselves over to thy spirituall authori∣ty, &c. But now your diffidence is ready to say; Is it possible that the Iewes should be taken out of the hands of so great a Monarch,24 Shall the prey bee taken from the mighty, or the lawfull captive deli∣vered? as the King of Babylon; or the captive, which was according to the law of warre seized upon, and possessed, rescued from so powerfull a victor? So verse 25. 26 And I will feed them that oppresse thee, with their owne flesh, and they shal bee drunken with their owne blood, &c.I will give them up to a civill and intestine warre, so
as they shall be the mutuall slaughterers of each other; and that with an insatiable fury, &c. CAP. L. HOw willing yee are to put off the fault,1 Thus saith the Lord, Where is the Bill of your mothers devorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your ini∣quities have you sold your selves, and for your trans∣gressions is your mother put away. and cause of your punishment from your selves, to me, saith the Lord; as if I had put you away, and cast you off, (being once my acknowledged wife) without all just reason? or (being once my acknowledged children) had sold you to my creditours; goe to then, let the bill of divorce be shewed, that it may appeare why I rejected you; and let it bee knowne how and to which of my creditors I have, upon any contract, put you over; No, ye people of Israel; ye are they who have sold your selves for your iniquitie, and for your wicked and adulterous mis-de∣meanours are ye put away. Whereas ye ought to have sought me,2 Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none to answer? is my hand shortned at all that it can∣not redeeme? I have sought you, and beene disregarded; when I came to you in my gracious solicitations, and invited and called you by my loving admonitions, you turned the deafe eare, and gave no respect unto me; What meanes this neglect of yours? am I now lesse able to help and redeeme you, then I for∣merly was? &c. As I did then over-spread Aegypt with a three dayes darknesse,3 I clothe the heavens with blackenesse, and I make sack cloth their co∣vering. so I can still (when I please) vaile the face of heaven with blacknesse, and put it into a mourning habit. God the Father hath given to me,4 The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speake a word in season to him that is wearie: he wakeneth morning by morning, hee wakeneth mine eare to heare as the learned. the Messiah his eter∣nall Word and Sonne, power to expresse him fully and exquisitely unto his people; that I should bee able to speak comfortably to the weary and distressed soules; he doth not intermit to furnish me continually with his good Spirit; but ever assisteth me with his divine and in∣separable grace to all the acts of my mediation. My God is with me, yea, He is in mee,8 He is neere that justi∣fieth me, who will con∣tend with me? and one with me, and I with him, so as I cannot but be borne out a∣gainst all that shall stubbornly contend with me, &c. That seeth nothing but cause of discomfort,10 That walketh in darknesse, and hath no light. and de∣jection without all appearance of mitigation. Behold,11 Behold, al ye that kin∣dle a fire, that cōpasse your selves about with sparkes: walke in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled: this shall you have of mine hand, yee shall lie downe in sorrow? all ye that out of your owne thoughts raise up to your selves imaginary comforts, not fetching true grounds of consolation frō above; make use of those your owne devices, please your selves in your owne projects; All that ye shall get at my hands, is sorrow and disap∣pointment.
CAP. LI. 1 Look unto the rocke whence ye are hewen, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.BEthinke your selves, and look back to your first origi∣nall, consider how easie it is for me, who gave you a being from the dry and barren loines and wombe of A∣braham and Sara, to revive and raise you up in your greatest distresse. 3 For he shall comfort Zion, he will comfort all her waste places, & he wil make her wildernesse like Eden.Thus shall the Lord comfort Zion, when shee is most hopelesse, he will so restore her, as that the most desolate parts of his Church shall be fruitfull, and beau∣tifull, as the Paradise of Eden, &c. 9 Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and woun∣ded the dragon?Art not thou he that hast pulled downe the pride of Aegypt, and discomfited Pharaoh that proud King? 14 The captive exile hasteneth that he may bee loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should faile.The captive Jewes now lying under an uncomfortable exile, shall soone addresse themselves to their returne, let them not faint under their bondage, for they shall not long continue under it. I have put my word into the mouth of thee, my Pro∣phet,16 And I have put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, & lay the foundations of the earth. and thy fellowes, but especially into the mouth of that great and divine Prophet and redeemer of my Church; I have held my safe protection over thee, and him, that by the saving doctrine which I shall send into the world, and that mighty and effectuall worke of his mediation, I may set at peace, and settle all things both in heaven and earth, &c. 17 Thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, & wrung them out.Thou hast drunke deepe of the grievousest of Gods outward afflictions, such, as thou mightst, and didst just∣ly tremble to tast of; even the bitterest part thereof hast thou beene forced to receive into thy soule. 18 There is none to guide her among all the sons whō she hath brought forth, neither is there any that taketh her by the hand, of all the sonnes that she hath brought up.She is left utterly disconsolate; those that should bee most deare, and most respective to her (.i. my Church) even those spirituall sonnes, whom shee hath brought forth to an outward profession, they ungratefully forsake her, and deny her their needfull offices and attendance. Yea, those unthankfull sons of thine are involved in the same calamity with thee;20 Thy sons have fain∣ted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wilde bull in a net, they are full of the fury of the Lord, and rebuke of thy people. if they would, they cannot help thee; they are caught, and intangled like some wilde bull in a royle, and so lye roaring in vaine, within thy streets; for the wrath of the Lord hath throughly seized upon them, without all possibility of redresse. 21 Therefore heare now this, thou afflicted & drunkē, but not with wine.Heare this, ye that are giddily distracted, not with wine, but with extremity of sorrow: Behold I have taken off from thee those heavie affli∣ctions under which thou didst justly tremble,22 Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling. &c.
CAP. LII. STirre up thy selfe, and rouze up thy drouping spirits,1 Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion, put on thy beautifull gar∣ments, O Ierusalem the ho∣ly city; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised, & the uncleane. O my Church, deck thy selfe with the robes both of joy, and holines; for my pure worship shall be restored unto thee; there shall be no place within thee for the in∣vasion of thine heathen enemies, and the pollution of the prophane. It was your owne iniquity that sold you into the pow∣er of your enemies, I took no price at all for you;3 For thus saith the Lord, yee have sold your selves for nought, and yee shall be redeemed with∣out money. and therefore am not bound to any restitution, which might be demanded of me, but will freely deliver you. Now therefore,5 Now therefore, what have I here, saith the Lord, that my people is taken a∣way for nought? what have I in lieu of this miserable affliction of my people; why should I forbeare to re∣venge it, &c? How welcome and pleasing are the Prophets of God,7 How beautifull upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, that pub∣lisheth salvation. who upon the mountaines of Judea preach these glad ti∣dings of peace, and deliverance; and how more welcome are those Evangelicall teachers that proclaime everla∣sting salvation to all beleevers, &c? This shall not be a thing muttered in secret; thy spiri∣tuall watchmen, the seers of God, shal lift up their voice,8 Thy watchmen shall lift up their voice, with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring againe Zion. and publish it to all the world, with joy and thanksgiving and shall be (some of them) eye-witnesses of this graci∣ous deliverance. The Lord hath shewed his mighty power to all the natiōs roūd about, in this rescue of his chosē people, &c. Make your selves ready therefore, O my people,10 The Lord hath made bare his holy arme in the eyes of all the nations. to de∣part out of Babylon, get you forth joyfully, from the place of your captivity; and in the meane time,11 Depart ye, depart ye, goe ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the middest of her, be ye cleane, that beare the vessels of the Lord. keepe your selves undefiled with the corruptions of that wic∣ked nation; and ye the Priests and Levites, that have charge of the holy things of God, see that yee sanctifie your selves, and hold cleare from all those Babylonish pollutions. For ye shall not goe out of Babylon,12 For ye shall not goe out with haste, nor goe by flight, for the Lord will goe before you; and the God of Israel will bee your rereward. as ye went out of Aegypt, with haste, and tumult, or, as people that flee from an enemie, but in a peaceable and triumphant fa∣shion; for the Lord shall goe before you, and follow you in so plaine a manifestation of his powerfull presence, that you shall finde no cause of doubt, or feare. Behold that Messiah,13 Behold, my servant shall deale prudently, hee shall be exalted and extol∣led, and be very high. by whom I shall fully restore my Church, shall worke wisely, and succeed prosperously in that glorious service; he shall be exalted and advan∣ced above all the Kings of the earth, yea, above all the powers of heaven.
14 As many were asto∣nied at thee (his visage was so marred more then any man, and his forme more then the sons of men.)Indeed, the outward appearance of that Son of God, was so exceeding meane, and contemptible (more then the ordinary fashion of the sonnes of men) as that those who beheld it, were astonished, to see such a majesty shrouded in so plaine and homely an outside. 15 So shall hee sprinkle many nations, the Kings shall shut their mouthes at him, for that which had not been tolde them shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall they consider.But yet, in the efficacy of his appearance, he shall be so glorious, as that, when he is graciously pleased to di∣still his holy word upon the nations, Kings shall stand a∣mazed at the power of him, who worketh so mightily by it, for they shall see, and heare that which they never could have imagined should possibly have comne to passe. CAP. LIII. 1 Who hath beleeved our report, and to whom is the arme of the Lord re∣vealed?BUt woe is me, though we bring such certaine and happy newes of a Messiah, into the world, yet, how is the incredulous world besotted, that it will not beleeve our report? what blindnesse hath darkned the eyes of men, that they wil not see the mighty power of the God∣head, in this weaknesse of humane flesh? 2 For he shall grow up before him as a tender plāt and as a root out of a dry ground, he hath no forme nor comlinesse.For, to the eyes of men he shall seeme despicable, at the first, and by degrees shall grow up to an acknow∣ledged perfection: He hath no lovelinesse or glory in his outward appearance, &c. 4 Surely he hath borne our griefes, and carried our sorrowes, yet we did e∣steeme him stricken, smit∣ten of God, and afflicted.It is for our sakes that he hath subjected himselfe to al those griefes and sorrowes, which hee underwent; that he might sanctifie our afflictions to us, and deliver us from greater judgements; Yet, our unthankfulnesse will not acknowledge it, but is ready to cast his sufferings up∣on his owne deservings, as if God had stricken him for his owne demerits. 5 The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed.He was chastised to work our peace, hee was smitten that we might be healed. 8 Hee was taken from prison & from judgement, and who shall declare his generation? forhe was cut off out of the land of the living.He was indeed arraigned, and adjudged to a shameful and painfull death, but that could have no power over him, he was mightily rescued from it, by the power of his Godhead; and now lives for ever; neither shall or can there be any end of his eternall duration, howsoever, for the time, he was cut off from living amongst men, &c. 9 And hee made his grave with the wicked, & with the rich in his death, because he had done no vi∣olence, neither was any de∣ceit in his mouth.He was given up into the hand of wicked and violent men, to be by them put to death amongst malefactors; although he had done nothing amisse, neither was any guile found in his mouth. Yet it pleased God the father to humble him, and standing in our stead,10 Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he hath put him to griefe, when thou shalt make his soule an offering for sin, he shal see his seede, he shall pro∣long his daies, and the plea∣sure of the Lord shall pro∣sper in his hand. to hide his face from him, but with
an intention of much glory to him, and happinesse to his Church; for, when thou, O Lord, shalt cause his life to be offered up for the satisfaction of our sins, he shall, by the efficacy of his blood, raise up a plentifull issue to his Church, and shall be everlastingly glorified, and worke happily for the good of his chosen; effecting all that which God hath determined for the salvation of man∣kinde. He shall see, and feel the happy successe of his labours,11 He shall see of the travell of his soule, & shall be satisfied: by his know∣ledge shall my righteous servant iustifie many, for hee shall beare their ini∣quities. and sufferings, and shall finde abundant comfort and sa∣tisfaction therein, herein shall many, yea all that belong to Gods election be justified, in that this righteous and perfect Saviour is knowne, and apprehended by them; and in that they are knowne and accepted of him, for he hath undertaken to satisfie for all their iniquities. Therefore,12 Therefore will I di∣vide him a portion with the great, and he shall di∣vide the spoile with the strong, Because he hath powred out his soule unto death, & he was numbred with the transgressours, & he bare the sinne of many, and made intercession for the transgressours. after he hath overcome the sharpnesse of death, I will honour him with a glorious triumph; wher∣in he shall, according to the manner of great conquerors, divide the spoile of his enemies; insulting over death, grave, and hell, because he hath beene obedient to the death, yea the death of the crosse; and was hanged on the tree of shame and curse, betwixt two malefactors; and upon that crosse bore the sin of all those that per∣taine to him; and, both at his death, prayed for his perse∣cutors and tormentors, and at my right hand makes per∣petuall intercession for his Church. CAP. LIIII. REjoyce, O thou Church of the Gentiles,1 Sing O barren, thou that didst not beare, break forth into singing, and cry aloude thou that didst not travell with childe, for more are the children of the desolate then the chil∣dren of the married wife, saith the Lord. which wert before utterly barren, and fruitlesse, yeelding no children to God; for now, the children of thee which wert not formerly regarded, as my spouse, are more then those of the Church of the Jewes, whom I professed to love and respect. So also verse 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Well may I compare the great inundation of thy sor∣row and affliction, to the deluge in Noahs time,9 For this is as the wa∣ters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworne that the waters of Noah should no more goe over the earth, so have I sworne, &c. where∣with the earth was overspread; and, as I then swore, &c. so have I now sworne that I will never give my Church over to any utter vastation. O thou my poore distressed Church,11 Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with faire colours, and lay thy foundations with Saphires which now seest no cause of joy, or mitigation of thy sorrow; comfort thou thy selfe with the expectation of what blessings I
have laid up for thee; for how despised soever thou now seemest, I will exceedingly adorne, and beautifie thee. 12 And I will make thy windowes of Agats, and thy gates of Carbuncles, & all thy borders of pleasant stones.I will make the Evangelicall Church far more glori∣ous, then that which was under the law, there shall no∣thing be wanting that may set forth the beauty, and ma∣jesty thereof. 13 And all thy children shal be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children.God will by the gracious illuminations of his spirit teach his will unto thy children; and shall by miraculous gifts upon them, testifie the descent of his holy ghost; and thy true and faithfull children shall enjoy a sweet and unspeakable peace in their consciences. 15 Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather together a∣gainst thee, shall fall for thy sake.Yet shalt not thou expect such a quiet condition, as may be free from all hostility, and opposition; no, there will be enemies banding together against thee, but with∣out all successe from me; they shall faile and miscarry in their designes against thee; for that I have undertaken thy protection. 16 Behold I have crea∣ted the smith that bloweth the coales in the fire, and that bringeth forth an in∣strument for his worke, & I have created the waster to destroy.It is my Almighty hand, that moderates, and over∣rules all those powers; that set themselves against thee; Are weapons the instruments of thy hurt? Behold, I have made the very smith that makes them, and the arme that useth them to destruction. 17 No weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in Iudgement, thou shalt condemne.Men may devise meanes to doe thee harme, but they shall not prevaile against thee; and those malicious tongues that stirre against thee, to accuse, and reproach thee, shall be shamed, and convicted by thee, &c. CAP. LV. 1 Ho, every one that thirsteth, come yee to the waters, and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eate, yea come buy wine & milke without money, and without price.HO, every one who is humbled under the conscience of his owne wants, and unworthinesse, let him now, under the raigne of grace, and the powerfull kingdome of Christ, have recourse to his gracious Saviour, and let him freely and fully partake of all spirituall comforts and blessings, whereby his soule may be refreshed and saved. 2 Wherefore doe yee spend money for that which is not bread, and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken di∣ligently unto me, and eate ye that which is good, &c.Why doe you, O ye vaine sons of men, spend your la∣bour, and cost, upon the search and pursuit of those com∣forts, which have no true and solid contentment in them? give care unto me with all diligence, and furnish your selves with those graces, which shall bee sure to nourish you up, unto eternall life. 3 Even the sure mer∣cies of David.Even those blessings and mercies which by my pro∣mise, and covenant I assured unto David my servant. 4 Behold, I have given him for a witnesse to the people, a leader and com∣mander to the people.Behold, I have ordained this successour of David to be a perfect mediator of the new Testament, for the be∣hoof of my people; to be the head, and leader of my elect.
Behold thou shalt call the Gentiles,5 Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and nations that knew not thee, shall run unto thee. which were hi∣therto unregarded of thee, to be thy Church; those that have hitherto walked, as without God in the world, shalt thou now convert unto thee, &c. However ye may fondly measure me by your selves,8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your waies my waies, saith the Lord. ye shall finde my thoughts and disposition is not like to yours, implacable in cases of offence, neither are my proceedings like yours. For ye, O my people the Jewes,12 For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace, the mountains and the hils shall breake forth before you, into sing∣ing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. shall goe forth of your Babylonish captivity, with joy, and be led peacea∣bly forth, towards your owne land; and all the creatures of God shall (as it were) rejoyce in your deliverance, and applaud your comfortable returne. And whereas, before, your land was annoyed with men, that were harmfully troublesome, and cruell,13 In stead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and in stead of the brier shall come up the mirtle tree, and it shall bee to the Lord for a name, for an e∣verlasting signe that shall not be cut off. like thornes that are ready to eare every passenger, now it shall be planted with persons inoffensive, and beneficiall, such as yield a pleasant and comfortable shade, and pro∣fitable use unto men; and this change shall be to the e∣verlasting praise of God, and for a memoriall of his ne∣ver-fading goodnesse to his Church. CAP. LVI. ANd now,1 Thus saith the Lord; Keep ye judgement, and doe justice, for my salva∣tion is neere to come, and my righteousnesse to bee revealed. that ye may be worthy of this high calling of God, doe ye approve your selves carefull to per∣forme all acts of charity, and justice one to another; so shall ye be capable of that deliverance, and salvation, which I have determined unto you. Neither let the man who is sensible of his owne defects and unworthinesse, say,3 Neither let the Eu∣nuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. Behold I am not a man meet to receive grace from God. For thus saith the Lord unto those selfe-dejected soules,4 For thus saith the Lord unto the Eunuches that keepe my Sabbaths & choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant; who yet make conscience of keeping my Sab∣baths, and desire to be approved of me, in those things which I have required, in an honest, and humble simpli∣citie. Even to them will I be gracious, above their desire,5 Even unto them will I give in mine house, and within my walls, a place & a name better then of sons and of daughters, I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off. and expectation, I will honour them in my Church, and more then supply unto them, those blessings, whose want they so much bewailed; and I will give them a bles∣sed, and lasting memory amongst my Saints. Those, who are the sonnes of them which are aliens from the common wealth of Israel, that yet are now,6 Also the sons of the stranger that joyne them∣selves to the Lord. by an holy profession joyned unto the Lord, &c.
7 Even them will I bring to my holy moun∣taine, and make them joy∣full in my house of prayer.Those will I gladly admit into thy Temple, and into that Church, whereof the Temple is a figure, and give them true spirituall joy in my service, &c. 8 The Lord God which gathereth the out-casts of Israel, saith, Yet will I ga∣ther others to him, besides those that are gathered un∣to him.The Lord God, whose onely grace and mercy it is to gather together his dispersed Church, saith; Yet will I also gather the Gentiles into the fold of Christ my Sonne; besides those which doe already professe his name. Yet before there be roome for these comfortable pro∣mises,9 All yee beasts of the field, come to devour, yea all ye beasts in the forrest. yee must make account of great calamitie, to be∣fall my people; Come therefore, all yee beasts of the fields, and forrest, ye savage Assyrians, Babylonians, E∣gyptians, and the rest, and for the time make havocke of my flocke. 10 His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumbe dogges, they cannot barke: sleep∣ing, lying downe, loving to slumber.Alas, the watchmen of my people, their spirituall over∣seers, are altogether blinde, and ignorant, & not so only, but as they are blind, so they are dumb also, not open∣ing their mouthes, to give warning of the dangers of my people, and the judgements which are imminent over them; even like unprofitable dogges, which being set to keepe the house, have no tongue to barke, nor eyes to see, but lie sleeping in a corner to no purpose. 11 Yea, they are greedy dogges, which can never have enough;Yea, as they are blind, and mute, so they are also rave∣nous, and devouring; their appetites is ever craving and insatiable, &c. 12 Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, & we will fill our selves with strong drinke? and to morrow shall bee as this day, and much more abundant.And besides all these, they pamper themselves, and flatter the security of my people; and are ready to say; Tush, however the Prophets foretell these grievous things, let us make much of our selves; and eate, and drinke, and be mery; These sad events shall not happen; wee shall in the times to come, speed as well, as wee have done, yea better, and more happily. CAP. LVII. 1 The righteous peri∣sheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and mercifull men are taken away, none considering that the righ∣teous is taken away from the evill to come.WHiles sensuall men doe thus please themselves, God takes away his godly & righteous servants from amongst them, and they have not the grace, or wit, to consider, that this is a presage of great judgement, which shall fall on the heads of those wicked ones, that are left behind. 2 Hee shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one walk∣ing in his uprightnesse.But that just and upright man, who walked consciona∣bly with God, howsoever the wicked thinke him a loser by his death, doth now enter into everlasting rest and happinesse; and shall sweetly sleepe in a bed of ease, till the morning of the resurrection.
But for you, ye wicked and rebellious seed,3 But draw neere hi∣ther, ye sonnes of the sor∣ceresse, the seed of the a∣dulterer and the whore. who are wont to bragge of your pedigree from faithfull Abra∣ham, when as indeed yee are a degenerate, and adul∣terous issue, draw neare, and heare my just contestation. Doe yee well consider,4 Against whom doe ye sport your selves? a∣gainst whom make yee a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? that it is against the Almighty God yee have scornfully set your selves? that yee have jeered and flouted at his dreadfull judgements, &c? Inflaming your selves with the abhominable lusts of your spirituall fornicatiō with your idols, in every grove,5 Inflaming your selves with Idols under every greene tree, slaying the children in the valleys un∣der the clifts of the rocks? and causing your children to be slaine in the valleys as sacrifices to your Moloch? Thou choosest thee an idol out of the river;6 Among the smooth stones of the streame is thy portion. even from amongst those rockes, or stones, which the streame hath smoothed; and this must be thy God, &c. Every hill hath beene an high-place,7 Vpon a lofty & high mountaine hast thou set thy bed: even thither wen∣test thou up to offer sacri∣fices. distinated by thee to thine idolatry; and thither hast thou climbed to offer thy sacrifices. Every where, even behinde the doores,8 Behinde the doores also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered thy selfe to another then me, and art gone up, &c. and posts of thine house, hast thou set up shamefull monuments of thine idolatry; For thou hast committed spirituall whor∣dome with other gods; and hast yeelded thy selfe over, to be defiled with their beastly abhominations, even up∣on the first fight. And thou madest meanes to the King of Assyria,9 And thou wentest to the King with ointment, and didst increase thy per∣fumes, and didst send thy messengers farre off, and didst debase thy selfe even unto hell. and temptedst him with thy precious presents (which thou fearest to him in great abundance, by thine ambassadors) to commit spirituall fornication with thee; and didst a∣buse thy selfe too shamefully unto that idolatrous pagan. The length of the way did not so discourage thee,10 Thou art wearied in the greatnesse of thy way: yet saidest thou not, there is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand: therefore thou wast not grieved. as to cause thee to desist from this journey of thine; thou wentest on, and, because thou foundest successe (as thou imaginedst) in thine enterprise, thou foundst no remorse for what thou hadst done. Thou hast had no feare of me before thine eyes,11 And of whom hast thou beene afraid or fear∣ed, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembred me, nor laid it to thy hart? have not I held my peace, even of old, & thou fearest me not? else thou couldest not; thou durst not have lied unto me, and dissembled with me; no, thou hast not remembred my presence, nor feared my revenge: and all this is, because I have forborne to execute speedy judgements upon thy sinnes. But now, I will lay thee open;12 I will declare thy righteousnesse: and thy workes: for they shall not profit thee. all the world shall see how just and righteous thou art; thy good carriage shall be discovered to thy shame and dishonor.
13 When thou cryest let thy companies deliver thee, but the winde shall carry them all away, vani∣ty shall take them.When thou cryest out in thy distresse, let these thy goodly associates helpe, and deliver thee; but for them, I will blow them away, as winde doth the dust, they shall vanish to nothing, &c. 14 And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stum∣bling blocke out of the way of my people.They shall againe inherit their old home, at Jerusa∣lem, and shall returne to my Temple, and shall incou∣rage and perswade each other to an holy, and conscio∣nable profession of godlinesse, and to a removall of all impediments, that might hinder their pietie, and obe∣dience. 16 For I will not con∣tend for ever, neither will I be alwayes wroth: for the spirit should faile be∣fore me.I will not alwaies bee exercising my people with hea∣vie afflictions; neither will I alwaies shew my selfe angry with them; for then the weake spirit of man must needs sinke under the burden, and be utterly daunted, &c. 17 I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.I was displeased with him, and withdrew my grace from him, and hee went on frowardly in those wicked waies which his owne heart suggested unto him. I have well seene the courses, which he takes; and might take just occasion to be revenged of him;18 I have seene his wayes and will heale him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. but I doe rather pitty his perversenesse, and will help him (though undeservedly) and restore his wonted comforts to him, and to those that are compassionately affected with his sorrowes. 19 I create the fruit of the lippes: peace, peace unto him that is farre off, and to him that is neare, saith the Lord, and I will heale him.I doe put into the mouthes of my Prophets, those ti∣dings of peace, whereby the hearts of my people shall be cheared; and have put the word of reconciliation into the mouthes of my Evangelicall preachers; whereby they may be saved; Both of these messengers shall come with the happy newes of peace, both unto Jewes and Gen∣tiles. CAP. LVIII. 2 Yet they seeke mee daily, and delight to know my wayes, as a nation that did righteousnesse.YEt, they doe, in an outward formality, make a good∣ly profession; as if they were zealous in seeking me, and delighted in knowing my Lawes, &c. 3 Wherefore have wee fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have wee afflicted our soules, and thou takest no know∣ledge? Behold, in the day of your fast, you find plea∣sure, and exact all your la∣bours.Will you know the reason why your fasts are not ac∣cepted of me? Behold, whiles you make a shew of au∣sterity therein, ye give your selves to carnall pleasures, and exact, on that day, which should be solemnely holy, the hardest labours, and most servile workes. 4 Behold, yee fast, for strife & debate, & to smite with the fist of wick∣ednesse, ye shall not fast as yee doe this day, to make your voice to be heard on high.Behold, though ye doe formally fast, yet you doe still give your selves to strife, and contention, to cruell ex∣tortion, and oppression; and colour these wickednesses,
with a shew of mortification, and holinesse; such a fast as this is, is not that, which shall winne any favour or acceptation to you, or to your devotions. Then shalt thou be blessed with an happie renewing of all comforts upon thee;8 Then shall thy light breake forth as the morn∣ing, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousnesse shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord, shall be thy re∣ward. thy prosperity shall be sudden∣ly restored; then shall all beholders acknowledge thee for just and righteous; and whereas now, thy shame is too apparent, then, the glory of the Lord shall encom∣passe, and deck thee. If thou shalt take off thine hand from oppressing thy poore brethren, and abstaine from all injurious actions,9 If thou take away from the middest of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanitie. which may be to their prejudice, and shalt refraine thy tongue from speaking vainly, or leudly. If in a feeling compassion of the miseries of the needy, thou shalt inlarge thy bounty, and reliefe to him:10 And if thou draw out thy soule to the hun∣grie, and satisfie the affli∣cted soule, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darknesse bee as the noone day. and shalt yeeld comfort to the afflicted soule; God shall turne thy sorrow and calamity, into joy and happinesse. And those that shalbe of thee, shall build againe the old neglected walls of the citie; and Temple of Jerusalem, and raise up those foundations which shall continue for many ages after, &c.12 And they that shall be of thee, shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the founda∣tions of many generations. If thou shalt refraine thy foot from walking (farre or servilely) on the Sabbath; and refraine thy selfe from doing thine owne workes, or taking thy owne carnall pleasures on my holy day; and shalt, contrarily,13 If thou turne away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honour∣able, and shalt honour him. take de∣light in a conscionable sanctifying of that day of the Lord, as that, which is by thee accounted a day of Con∣secration to thy God, and worthy of great reverence, and honor, &c. Then shalt thou find unspeakeable cōfort in the Lord; then I will cause thee to possesse, and rule over that high∣ly situated, and fruitfull land of Judea,14 Then shalt thou de∣light thy selfe in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Ia∣cob thy father, for the mouth of the Lord, &c. and will main∣taine thee with that inheritance, which thou hast now from thy forefathers. CAP. LIX. ALl their projects and actions are either vaine,5 They hatch Cocka∣trice egges, and weave the spiders web: he that eat∣eth of their egs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper. or wicked; full of deadly poison; to the invenoming of all that deale with them; whosoever therefore medleth with them cannot bee free from the danger of infection, and death. Their works, & designes, which are least harmefull,6 Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover them∣selves with their workes; of iniquitie, and the act of violence in their hands. are yet utterly vaine, and unprofitable; how ever they may undertake much, their labours come to nothing, either
for the benefit of others, or their owne safegard, &c. Whosoever walketh in them, shall never have and enjoy true peace in his soule;8 Whosoever goeth therein, shall not know peace. nor expect to bee blessed, and prospered from above. 9 Therefore is judge∣ment farre from us, neither doth justice overtake us: we waite for light, but be∣hold obscurity: for bright∣nesse, but wee walked in darknesse.Therefore hath God withdrawne the hand of his mer∣cifull protection, and gracious administration, from us; and we are yeelded up to be a prey of rapine and inju∣stice; Wee wait for comfort and prosperity, but wee finde nothing but sorrow, and misery. All the light of our former comfort is taken from us, and we are so affected with the judgements God, as that we know not how to guide our selves in our present con∣dition;10 Wee grope for the wall like the blinde, and we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble at noone day as in the night, we are in desolate places as dead men. we cast about for helps, and directions in vaine, and miscarry in the use of them, we are carried captive into desolate places, out of the society of men, as if we were dead carcasses, cast aside for the grave. We doe in all fashions of sorrow, bemoane our selves; either roaring out in the extremity of our griefe,11 Wee roare all like beares, and mourne sore like doves. as beares in a forrest, or more silently murmuring our com∣plaints, as doves on the house top, &c. 15 Yea, truth faileth, & he that departeth from evill, maketh himselfe a prey.Yea, truth and honest sincerity is failed amongst men; and hee that will not runne with men, into the same ex∣cesse of riot, but maketh conscience of their evill wayes, is exposed to the scorne, and spoile of the world, &c. 16 And he saw that there was no man, and wondred that there was no interces∣sour: Therefore his arme brought salvation unto him, and his righteousnes, it sustained him.And he saw that there was no man that would inter∣pose himselfe, and labour for the reforming of these foule corruptions, and wondred to see so generall a bar∣rennesse of grace, as that there was not one man to stand out for his Church, either to sue for it, or to indevour the redresse of it; Therfore God resolved, since there was no helpe, or hope in humane meanes, to take the cause into his owne hand; and to worke mightily the delive∣rance and salvation of his people, by his owne power, and justice. 17 For he put on righ∣teousnesse as a brest-plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head, and he put on the garments of venge∣ance for clothing, and was cad with zeale as a cloak.To which purpose, the Almighty hath compleately armed himselfe, with righteousnesse, and salvation, and zeale, and meanes of vengeance upon his enemies, that his people may well see, how both forward, and power∣full hee is, to rescue them, and to plague their oppres∣sours. 19 When the enemie shall come in like a flood, the spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him.When the enemie shall come furiously upon them, like a raging and impetuous flood, the Almightie shall wage warre with him, and joyne battle accordingly a∣gainst him to his destruction. 20 And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and un∣to them that turne from transgression in Iacob, saith the Lord.The Redeemer of the world shall, in his due time, be revealed, and shall personally come to mount Zion; and shall save all penitent sinners in his whole Church upon earth.
Amongst,21 My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart not of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever. and above all other testimonies of my fa∣vour to thee, my Church, this shall bee most remarka∣ble; that I will give thee my word, and my spirit, for instruction, for sanctification; the one shall not depart out of thy heart, nor the other out of thy mouth; but shall perpetually continue to thee, and to thy seed after thee, unto the end of the world. CAP. LX. ARise out of the dust, and sorrow,1 Arise, shine, for the light is come, and the glo∣ry of the Lord is risen up∣on thee. O thou my afflicted Church; & be thou glorious; for the time is comne, wherein God is purposed to comfort, and to honor thee, before the eyes of the world. For behold, the darknesse both of ignorance,2 For behold, the dark∣nesse shall cover the earth, and grosse darknesse the people, but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall bee seene upon thee? and ca∣lamity, shall be upon the rest of the earth; but, as it was with thee in Goshen, so it shall be now againe, the Lord shall cause the light both of knowledge and comfort to arise upon thee. Thou shalt assemble cheerfully together,5 Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall feare, and be enlarged, because the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. and thine heart shall bee full of astonishment, and wonder, and thankfulnesse; because the store of those foraine nations, which by divers seas are severed from thee, shall be con∣verted unto thee (my Evangelicall Church) all the for∣ces; and excellent graces of the Gentiles shall be added unto thee. The multitudes of severall nations shall come,6 The multitude of Ca∣mels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Median and Ephah: all they from Sheba shall come, they shall bring gold and in∣cense, and they shall shew forth the praises of the Lord. and send in, unto thee, according to their sundry commodi∣ties, and meanes of conveiance, all manner of rich and precious presents, whereby they shall testifie their ho∣mage, and joy in that God, which hath honoured them with the high calling of the children of his Church. So chearefull and so frequent and universall shall bee the sacrifices, which shall bee offered unto God,7 All the flockes of Ke∣dar shall be gathered toge∣ther unto thee, the rams of Nebajoth shall minister unto thee, they shall come up with acceptance on my altar, and I will glorifie the house of my glory? in joy and thanksgiving, as that all the Arabian flockes shall be gladly consecrated to this service; and shall ascend up in an holy smoke, to the God of heaven; and I will ex∣ceedingly glorifie my Church, wherein I am honoured. Then shall my Church, wondring at so frequent a confluence, say, Who are these that come flying,8 Who are these that flie as a cloud, and as the doves to their windowes? as thick as clouds, and as swiftly as the doves to their windowes. Surely the forraine nation, shall bee called into the Church, even from beyond the seas;9 Surely the Isles shall wait for me, & the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from farre, their sil∣ver and their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord. the ships shall bee imployed therefore, to bring in both their persons, and
their treasures to be dedicated to the service of God, &c. And in a type of the restauration of my Church, be∣hold the sons of strangers shall help to reedifie the walls of Jerusalem; and their Kings shall give bountifull gifts towards the repairing of the edifices thereof,10 And the sonnes of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee. &c. The doores of the Church under the Gospell shall be alwaies open, they shall not be shut, either by night, or day,11 Therefore thy gates shall bee open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought upon any man; but shall be wide opened, to receive all commers; that the riches of the Gentiles, and their Kings and Governours, may have a cleare, and free in∣gresse thereinto. As there neither is, nor can be any salvation out of Christ, or out of the Church; surely that person, or that nation,12 For the nation and Kingdome that will not serve thee, shall perish, yea those nations shall bee ut∣terly wasted. and Kingdome that commeth not in, and submit∣teth not to the government of Christ, in his Church, can∣not choose but perish. All the tall Cedars of Lebanon, and all those other varieties of trees, both for building, and sculpture, shall gladly be imployed to the reedifying of the materiall temple;13 The glory of Leba∣non shall come unto thee, the firre tree, the pine tree and the box together, to beautifie the place of my sanctuarie, and I will make the place of my feete glo∣rious. and all persons both honourable and mean, shall joyfully be imployed to be the pceces of my spirituall Church, and Sanctuary; so as the place, where I shall fix my foot, and dwell for ever, shall be beautifull, and glo∣rious. 14 The sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee.The posterity of those that persecuted thee (O my Church) shall come in, and with all reverence submit themselves unto thee, &c. The Gentiles, and their Kings, which heretofore have beene hostilely bent against thee,16 Thou shalt also suck the milke of the gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of Kings. shall now lay to nou∣rish, and sustaine thee, even as the mother doth her child, with the milke of their breasts; and shall yield thee their best succour, and assistance, &c. 17 For brasse I will bring gold, and for yron I will bring silver, and for wood brasse, and for stones yron, I will also make thy officers peace, and thine ex∣actors righteousnesse.I know you will much lament the ruines of the glori∣ous Temple; but, be of good cheare, it shall be better built, then before; in stead of the former brasse, it shall now be enriched with gold; and in all the whole fabrick the change shall be to the better; and whereas you have served under an hard bondage of the Babylonians; now, in stead of those tyrannous officers, you shall have peace; and in stead of exactors, justice. 18 But thou shalt call thy walls salvation, & thy gates praise.The safegard of God shall be in stead of walls unto thee, and thy gates shall be full of the praise of thy God. 19 The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, nei∣ther for brightnesse shall the Moone give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.There shall be a certaine stability, and fixednesse of the happy estate, wherein thou art; thou shalt not bee subject to any more interchanges of light, and darknesse, or depēd upon those outward meanes of comfort, which
are wont to convay it to the world; But the Lord him∣selfe, who is ever one, and unchangeable, shall be thine everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. So verse 20. Those that are the true, and lively members of the Church, shall be all sincere, and upright, not wicked,21 Thy people also shal be all righteous, they shall inherite the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the worke of my hand, that I may be glorified. not hypocriticall; they shal be unremoveably fastned in their holy station; as being the branches of my owne planting, and the worke of my owne hands, which I have made for the glory of my mercy. Though thou be now small in number,22 A little one shall be∣come a thousand, and a small one a strong nation; I the Lord will hasten it in his time. yet thou shalt become exceeding populous, and thou, which art now weake, shalt become a strong and mighty people; I the Lord will in due time (and that ere long) accomplish it. CAP. LXI. THe Spirit of the Lord is upon me, the Messiah,1 The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath annointed me, to preach good tidings unto the meek, he hath sent mee to binde up the broken hearted, to pro∣claime liberty to the cap∣tives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. and Mediator; and hath indued me with power, and ver∣tue from above, and authorized, and sent mee to preach the glad tidings of salvation to the humble, and contrite soule, to proclaime liberty to those which are now in miserable captivity under Satan; to release those which are bound with the chaines of their sins. To proclaime the acceptable time of redemption,2 To proclaime the ac∣ceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourne. now fully comne to the world; and of just vengeance of our God against the malicious enemies of his Church; to their confusion, and the comfort of those, whom they have unjustly afflicted. To set a day of deliverance to them which mourne in Gods Church, whether for their sins,3 To appoint unto them that mourne in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oyle of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of hea∣vinesse, that they might be called trees of righteous∣nesse, in planting of the Lord, that he might bee glorified. or under their affli∣ctions, to put off all the sack-cloth, and ashes, and sad ce∣remonies of their dejection; and in stead thereof, to give them chearefulnesse, and joy, and thankfull acknowledge∣ments of mercy, that those, which before were as fruit∣lesse, and saplesse stocks, may now be called (and so ap∣proved) the fruitfull and flourishing trees of righteous∣nesse; such as God hath by his spirit plāted in his Church for the glory of his owne mercy. In a just type of which restauratiō,4 And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desola∣tions. my people the Jewes shall build againe those ruinous walls that had lyen sea∣venty yeares waste, &c. And those which are strangers to you, both in nation,5 And strangers shall stand & feede your flocks, and the sons of the alient shall be your plowmen, and your vine dressers. and religion, shall be ready to be helpfull unto you up∣on
all occasions, of your outward and secular imploy∣ments. 6 But yee shall bee na∣med the priests of the Lord, men shal call you the ministers of our God, yee shall eate the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glo∣ry shall you boast your selves.Whiles ye shall be a royal priesthood, consecrated unto the Lord, & to his holy service; participating of all those comforts, which God hath laid up in store for them which now are called Gentiles; whose future glory and happinesse shall be an accession unto yours. For that shame, and griefe which ye have indured, you shall have an abundant recompence of joy and comfort; and in stead of your former confusion,7 For your shame you shall have double, and for confusion they shall re∣joyce in their portion: therfore in their land they shall possesse the double, e∣verlasting joy shall be unto them. yee shall now bee rewarded with contentment, and chearefulnesse, in the fruition of your manifold blessings; the happinesse of their returne to their owne land shall make double a∣mends for their captivity: and they shall finde cause of everlasting joy. I the Lord love sincerity, and true dealing in the carri∣ages of men;8 For I the Lord love judgement, I hate robbery for burnt offering, and I will direct their worke in truth. I cannot abide that men should pretend a sacrifice to be offered unto me, when they mean nothing but fraud, and violence; that they should hope to please me with a stolne oblation; I will direct and inable them to serve me faithfully, &c. 9 And their seed shall be knowne among the Gentiles, & their off-spring among the people.Their seed, which shall be appointed to carry the word of God unto the Gentiles, shall be highly honou∣red of them, and their off-spring, among that people with whom they shall be united, &c. CAP. LXII. 1 For Zions sake, will I not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will not rest, untill the righte∣ousnesse thereof goe forth as brightnesse, and the sal∣vation thereof as a lampe that burneth.FOr my Churches sake I will not cease, till I have ac∣complished the great worke of her redemption, and have fully finished, and openly manifested the glory, and salvation of mine elect. And those that are now farre off, even the now-despi∣sed Gentiles, shall acknowledge thy righteousnesse (O my Church) and that not the meaner sort, but even Kings,2 And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousnes, and all Kings thy glory, & thou shalt be called by a new name which the mouth of the Lord shall name. and Princes, shall blesse and celebrate thee; and thou shalt be honoured, as with a new estate, so with a name also which the Lord shall put upon thee. See verse 4. 3 Thou shalt also bee a crowne of glory in the hād of the Lord, and a royall diademe in the hand of thy God.God shall put exceeding glory upon thee; and shall cause to shine forth in thee, the praise of his wonderfull mercy; so as he shall unspeakably honour himselfe by ho∣nouring thee. 4 Thou shalt no more be termed forsaken, nei∣ther shall thy land any more be termed desolate, but thou shalt bee called Hephzi-bah, and thy land Beulah; for the Lord de∣lighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married.And that new name which he will call thee by, is this; now
whereas thou art, both in name, and condition, forsaken, then thou shalt no more either be so, or be so called; but shalt both be, and be called my delightsome spouse, for as much, as, both thy person, and thine obedience shall be graciously respected of me. The outward and bodily marriage is and shall be the image of this spiritual; behold as a young man espouseth a virgin,5 For as a yong man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee. so shall thy faithfull ministers espouse thee un∣to mee, &c. Behold, I have set over thee, O my Church, faithfull pastors, and teachers;6 I have set watchmen upon thy walls (O Ierusa∣lem) which shal never hold their peace, day nor night; ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence. who shall in season and out of sea∣son be instant to deliver my messages unto thee, ye that speake from the Lord, and are his ambassadors to his Church, doe your duty conscionably, hide no part of Gods counsell from his people; and be earnest with God in the behalfe of his Church. Oh, be ye ever importunate in your prayers;7 And give him no rest till he establish, and till he make Ierusalem a praise in the earth. not cea∣sing, till God have perfitted his great worke for his Church, which he hath determined and begun, investing his chosen ones with full glory. The Lord hath ingaged himselfe by his oath;8 The Lord hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arme of his strength, Surely, I will no more give thy come to be meate for thine enemies. and hath sworne by his power and omnipotence, that he will no more give over his Church to the utter waste and spoile of their enemies, &c. My Church shall be as a populous, and well traded ci∣ty, which shall be full of infinite resort; go to then,10 Goe through, goe through the gates, prepare you the way of the people, Cast up, cast up the high way, gather out the stones, lift up a standard for the people. O my spirituall overseers, passe through the gates diligently, & frequently; and make way for that happy concourse, which shall be thither; remove those hinderances, and scandalls, which may lye in the way of my people; and call all mine, to an holy, and constant profession, and maintenance of my truth. CAP. LXIII. WHo is this, (shall my wondring Church say,1 Who is this that commeth from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah, this that is glorious in his apparrell, travelling in the greatnesse of his strength, I that speake in righteousnesse, mightie to save. con∣cerning her God, and Saviour) who is this that comes out from among the troupes of his enemies, with garments distained with blood, even this, that is decked with the glory of his victory and triumph? Dost thou aske, who I am (O my Church) shall he say, I am thy righteous, and holy redeemer, mighty to save, and deliver mine elect. Wherefore then, O Saviour,2 Wherefore art thou red in thine apparrell, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine fatte? art thou thus suited in crimson, & dyed red with blood? If thou be so powerful to save us, how hast thou not delivered thy selfe from
this effusion of thine owne blood? Or is it the blood of enemies that hath thus drenched thy robes? so that thou lookest as one that hath been treading in the wine presse, all tainted with the blood of the grape? 3 I have troden the wine presse alone, and of the people there was none with me, for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall bee sprinkled upon my gar∣ments, and I will staine all my raiment.It is true, O my Church, I have beene indeed treading the wine-presse of my fathers wrath, I have beene cru∣shing & trampling upon all the clusters of mine enemies; even I alone, by my mighty power, have trod them un∣der my feet, without the supply of all other helps; the victory is mine alone, which I will in my good time fully accomplish; for I will, in my just anger, bee exquisitely avenged of all those that maliciously rise up against me; and will give proofes to the world of my vengeance, and their sufferings. 4 For the day of ven∣geance is in mine heart, and the yeare of my redeemed is come.For I have eternally decreed, and set the day, wherein I shall be perfectly revenged of the proud and wicked e∣nemies of my Church, and wherein I shall fully redeeme my faithfull people. 5 And I looked, and there was none to help, & I wondered that there was none to uphold.I saw there was no helpe to be expected from any fi∣nite creature; and being much affected to see so remedi∣lesse a desolation of my Church, I addressed my selfe to the work, and by my owne power wrought their delive∣rance, &c. 8 For hee said, surely they are my people, chil∣dren that will not lie, for he was their Saviour.For he said, surely, these are my chosen ones, my pecu∣liar people; they will stick fast to mee, and will not de∣generate into wicked and leud courses; so he, who expe∣cted this holinesse and perseverance from them, was a Saviour unto them. 9 In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence sa∣ved them.In all their afflictions he pittied them, and did (as it were) suffer with them; and the Angell of his covenant (who still appeares before his face to intercede for his Church) saved them from the dangers of manifold de∣structions, &c. 11 Then hee remem∣bred the daies of old, Mo∣ses and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the Sea, with the shepheard of his flocke; where is hee that put his holy Spirit within him?Then he remembred the daies of old; and those anci∣ent passages, that were betwixt Moses and his people, whose posterity in their present distresses, are ready to say; Where now is that God, that did so powerfully bring his people through the sea, by the hand of Moses their leader? Where is he that did then put his holy spi∣rit into that faithfull guide of his people? He, that led them through the red sea, with no lesse security and confidence,13 That led them through the deepe as a horse in the wildernesse. then an horse walkes in an even and smooth downe, &c. So verse 14. 15 The sounding of thy bowels, & of thy mercies toward me, are they re∣strained?The yearning of thy bowels, and thy tender compas∣sions towards thy people.
O God, how boldly may we sue to thee,16 Doubtles thou art our father, though Abra∣ham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not. since thou art our father; nothing in the world can strip us of this relation to thee; whatever become of all these termes of cognation, & consanguinity which the world can afford, surely nothing can hinder this our challenge of interest in thee, and however, we have made our selves by our sins unworthy to be owned by our father Abraham (if hee could take notice of these earthly things) yet doe not thou cast us utterly off, from the benefit of that covenant which thou madest with him, and his seed, &c. O Lord, we know, if thou guide us not,17 O Lord, why hast thou made us to erre from thy waies, and hardened our heart from thy feare? we cannot but erre; why hast thou withdrawne thy spirit from us, upon the just desert of our sins, so as we have thereupon gone astray from thy lawes? why hast thou, in the punish∣ment of our wickednesse, given us over to the harden∣ing of our owne hearts before thee, &c. It is but a little while (in comparison of the promise,18 The people of thy holinesse have possessed it but a little while, our ad∣versaries have troden downe thy Sanctuarie. and covenant made to thy people) that thy peculiar, and select nation have possessed this good land, and now our adversaries have destroyed thy holy Temple. They can challenge no part in thee; we are thine owne charge, and chosen inheritance;19 We are thine, thou never barest rule over thē, they were not called by thy name. thou hast given lawes to us, and hast exercised a speciall soverainty over us; thou hast not done so to them; they were never so indeared to thee, never so much graced by thee. CAP. LXIIII. OH that thou wouldest magnifie thy mighty power in the deliverance of thy people, and for that cause,1 Oh that thou would∣est rent the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountaines might flow downe at thy pre∣sence. that thou wouldst teare open the heavens before thee, that they may give way to thy comming downe; and the mountaines might melt, and flow like water, at the ter∣ror of thy presence. Oh that thy presence to the world,2 As when the melting fire burneth, the fire caus∣eth the waters to boile, to make thy name knowne to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence. might bee as fire to metall, or to water; to melt the one, to cause the o∣ther to boile; that all the adversary powers might with horror and confusion know thy greatnes & omnipotence and that all the nations (which now forget thee, & sleight thy power) might tremble at thy presence. Thou hast done many,4 For since the begin∣ning of the world, men have not heard, nor percei∣ved by the eare, neither hath the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he hath prepared for him that wai∣teth for him. and great wonders for thy peo∣ple of ancient times; such, as whereby thou hast appro∣ved thy selfe to be the only true God; so as the eare hath not heard, nor the eye seen the cleare demonstrations of any god, but thy selfe; of such infinite power and mer∣cy, to provide so graciously, and miraculously, for those that depend upon thee.
5 Thou meetest him that rejoyceth, and work∣eth righteousnes, those that remember thee in thy wayes: behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.Thou hast heretofore given mercifull proofes of thy favour to our forefathers, who rejoyced in thee, and li∣ved holily before thee; and so thou art ready to doe, to those that awfully and thankfully acknowledge thee, and adore thee, in the wayes of thy justice, and mercy; but as for us, thou art displeased with us, for wee have done wickedly before thee, whereas, if wee had the grace to continue in those wayes of thine, we should be sure to be saved. 6 But wee are all as an uncleane thing, and all our righteousnesses are as fil∣thy rags, & we all doe fade as a leafe, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away.But we are all very abhominably sinfull before thee, and our very best services and obediences are full of odi∣ous and shamefull corruptions; and therefore, under this displeasure of thine, wee cannot but fall away, as a dry leafe from the tree, and the just punishment of our iniquities, like a winde, hath blowne us away, and dis∣persed us. CAP. LXV. 1 I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found of them that sought me not, I said, be∣hold me, behold me unto a nation that was not cal∣led by my name.WHatsoever become of you, my late people of the Jewes, my covenant shall be made good with an∣other nation, whom ye thinke not of; Behold, the Gen∣tiles shall come in your roome, I am sought of them, which were before utter aliens from me, & my Church; and I am accordingly found of them, which heretofore sought me not; I called a people unto my Covenant of grace, which had before no relation unto me, either of name or interest: 2 I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good; after their owne thoughts.I have made continuall and important meanes to these rebellious Jewes, who yet will not be reclaimed, but walke on leudly, and stubbornly, in their owne vaine and sinfull lusts. That sacrificeth in those groves, which they have in their private orchards; and upon their owne-erected al∣tars,3 That sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth in∣cense upon altars of brick. according to their vaine and superstitious fancies, contrary to the charge of God, who hath confined their services, and oblations, to his Altar at Jerusalem. 4 Which remaine a∣mong the graves, & lodge in the monuments, which eate swines flesh, & broth of abominable things in their vessels:Which in devilish fashion gave themselves to the practice of necromancy, consulting with evill spirits, un∣der the forme of the dead; and making no difference of those meates, which the law hath made abhominably un∣cleane. 5 Which say: Stand by thy selfe, come not neere to me: for I am holier then thou: these are a smoake in my nose: a fire that bur∣neth all the day.Which in the pride, and scorne of their heart, are ready to say to the holy Prophets of God; admonishing them of their sinnes; Tush, I regard thee not, keepe thy coun∣sell to thy selfe; I am holier then thou; These are tedi∣ous
and noysome to me, and their proud hypocrisie is such, as shall provoke my perpetuall indignation to burne them up like an unquenchable fire continually. Thus saith the Lord;8 Thus saith the Lord, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not, for a bles∣sing is in it: so will I doe for my servants sake, that I may not destroy them all. As a man that intends to cut downe, or root up a sowre ill-fruited vine; and finding one branch of it, yeelding a kindly & pleasing grape, for∣beares to destroy it; So will I doe with my people; though, in a generality, they deserve an utter extirpati∣on; yet, for the sake of some of them, whom I have found carefull and conscionable, I have resolved not to destroy them all. A people that shall inherit and possesse that my moun∣tainous country of Judea.9 An inheritour of my mountaines. And there shall bee a frequent rehabitation of the whole land of Israel, and Juda;10 And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor, a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me. the late-desolate pastures of Sharon, and the fruitfull valley of Achor, shall bee againe put to use, and serve for the feeding, & grazing of your flockes, and heards. But ye are they that forsake the Lord,11 But yee are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountaine, that prepare a table for that troupe, and that fur∣nish the drinke offering, unto that number. that doe wil∣fully neglect my chosen mountaine of Zion, and my holy Tēple there, that offer sacrifice to a base rabble of coun∣terfeit gods; and furnish drinke offerings to all the in∣numerable hosts of heaven. Therefore will I designe you to destruction, &c.12 Therefore will I number you to the sword. Yee have made a fashionable profession of service to me; but there hath beene no truth therein;13 Therefore thus saith the Lord God: Behold, my servants shall eate, but ye shall be hungry: Behold, my servants shall drinke, but yee shall bee thirstie: behold, my servants shall rejoyce, but yee shall bee ashamed. and yee shall speed accordingly; for, behold, those that are indeed my true and faithfull servants, shall eate, and drinke, and rejoyce, and enjoy the good things of the land; when yee hypocrites, shall be held short of all these comforts, and shall be punished with shame, and want. So verse 14. And that name, whereof ye now vainely boast,15 And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name. shall no more be disgraced by you; but cōtrarily, in stead therof, your name and memory shall be execrable to all my cho∣sen, so as when they would curse another, they shall say, So may God curse thee as hee did the Jewes; For the Lord God shall destroy thee; and call his servants, out of other nations, and by other names; even by the glori∣ous names of Christians. And all the earth over,16 That hee that bles∣seth himselfe in the earth, shall blesse himselfe in the God of truth, and he that sweareth in the earth, shall sweare by the God of truth, because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes. men shall give themselves to the holy and conscionable worship of God; whether they pray, or whether they sweare, or whatsoever act
of religion they doe, it shall be directed to the onely true God; for God hath determined to put a finall end to the calamities of his Church, and not to see their grievous distresses any longer. Behold, I will renew all things by the power and government of my Sonne Christ;17 For behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth: and the former shall not bee remembred, nor come into minde. the whole world shall be then cast in a new mold; the former condition, which served only for a shadow of the future, shall then vanish, and be no more of use, or remembrance. Be ye glad, and rejoyce for ever, O ye faithfull soules, which shall receive the benefit of this happy renovation:18 But bee you glad and rejoyce for ever, in that which I create: for behold, I create Ierusalem a rejoycing, and her peo∣ple a joy. for, I will give fulnesse of joy unto my Church, and will make my people eternally blessed. There shall be a perfit age and stature in Christ; no deficiencie either in a nonage,20 There shall bee no more thence an infant of dayes, nor an old man that hath not filled his dayes: for the children shall die an hundred yeares old, but the sinner of an hundred yeares old shall bee accur∣sed. or a decrepit estate; but all shall attaine to their due growth; the child shall not die till he be an hundred yeares old; and shall reach to an happy maturity; & those that are old, shall injoy a strong and vigorous age; Thus spiritually blessed shall they be that are in Christ; but those who are out of him, are no lesse miserable; for the sinner, though hee enjoy a long life, here on earth, yet is, and shall be accursed; the length of his dayes shall adde to the extremity of his torment. 25 The wolfe and the lambe shall feed together, &c.See Esa. 11.6. CAP. LXVI. 1 Thus saith the Lord, the heaven is my throne, and the earth is my foot-stoole, where is the house that ye build unto me, and where is the place of my rest?WHy do yee, vaine Jewes, thinke to merit me, and boast your selves of a Temple built to me? as if that were a sufficient couer for all your hypocrisie and mis-behaviour; No; yee know well enough I have no need of an house of your making; I have another manner of house of my owne, even the heaven of heavens is the roofe of it, and the earth is the floore of it; in that I can and do gloriously dwell, without any materiall fabricke of yours. 2 But to this man will I looke, even to him that is poore, and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.My love and respect is to that man that is of a true, broken, penitent, faithfull heart, he is a fit Temple for me to dwell in, &c. Without this, all your legall complements of ceremo∣nies are not onely vaine,3 He that killeth an oxe, is as if he slew a man. but odious; he that killeth an oxe in a formall sacrifice to me, is as pleasing, as if hee had murthered a man, &c.
I will make choise of their owne delusions,4 I also will chuse their delusions, and will bring their feares upon them, &c. wherewith to punish them; they thought to deceive me with their hypocriticall devotions, and I will make their very hy∣pocrisie, their confusion; and will bring upon them those judgements which they most of all feared, &c. Those false brethren of yours that hated you for your piety and goodnesse, were ready to say,5 Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shal appeare to your joy, and they shall be a∣shamed. we are more carefull to glorifie God, thē your selves; or let God glori∣fie himselfe by his judgements where they are deserved, but, they shall once finde it otherwise with them; for God shall appeare to your joy, and their confusion. Behold, their judgement is not afarre off; harken;6 A voice of noise from the Citie, a voice from the Tēple: a voice of the Lord, that rendereth recom∣pence unto his enemies. me thinkes I doe already heare a voyce of noise, and tumult from the citie of Jerusalem, and from the Temple, which shall be wasted; even a fearfull voice of that just God which rendreth vengeance to his enemies. My Church under the Gospell shall be exceedingly fruitfull; she shall beare children unto her God,7 Before she travailed she brought forth: before her paine came, she was delivered of a man child. with great ease, and speed; yea, she shall beare a generous, and manly issue, before she findes the throwes of her travell. So verse 8. What marvell can there be of this easie, and speedy multiplication of the Church, when as the Lord him∣selfe hath undertaken the worke; Is there any thing im∣possible, or difficult to the Almighty? finite powers may faile; but shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth, saith the Lord,9 Shall I bring to the birth, & not cause to bring forth, saith the Lord? &c? Behold, I will give an happy,12 For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will ex∣tend peace to her like a ri∣ver, and the glory of the Gentiles, like a flowing streame, then shall yee sucke, yee shall be borne upon her sides, and bee dandled upon her knees. and glorious condition to my Church; her peace, and prosperity shall over-flow her, like a full river; and the glory, and excellency of the Gentiles shall come gushing in upon her, like a strong torrent. Then shall ye sonnes of the Church your mo∣ther, sucke the brests of her happy nourishment, and she, like an indulgent mother, shall beare you close to her, in her armes; and shall dandle you on her knees; and te∣stifie her deare love and care of your tendance, and edu∣cation. Ye, which lay like drie bones scattered upon the earth,14 And your bones shall florish like an herbe. shall then live againe, and flourish, as an herbe of the field, &c. For, behold, the Lord will come in a furious,15 For behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his Charets like a whirlewinde, to render his anger with fury. and ter∣rible manner, to take vengeance on his enemies; so as his adversaries shall bee confounded with the horror thereof, &c. 17 They that sanctifie themselves, and purifie themselves in the gardens, behind one tree in the midst, eating swines flesh, and the abominations, and the mouse, shall be consu∣med together, saith the Lord.They that give themselves to their idolatries in their
private groves within their Orchards, with all fond cere∣monies of superstition, making choice of some one tree above the rest, more peculiarly consecrated to their false God; & do wilfully transgresse the law of God, in eating those things which are forbidden, as abhominably un∣cleane; they shall be consumed together, both the super∣stitious, and the prophane, saith the Lord. 18 It shall come, that I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come and see my glory.The time shall come, when out of all nations and tongues I will gather mee out an holy Church to my selfe, and they shall be partakers of that grace, which hath hitherto beene appropriated to the Jewes, and as my truly adopted children, shall inherit my gory. 19 And I will set a signe among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal and Iavan, to the Iles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seene my glory, and they shall declare my glory a∣mong the Gentiles.And, amidst the common judgement, I will set a marke upon them whom I will have reserved; and those that doe escape of them, I will send as my messengers to the nations round about, to convert them unto me; I will send them, both by sea and land, to all parts of the earth, as to Cilicia, to Africk, to the lesser Asia, to the Parthians, Grecians, Italians, and to the Isles afarre off, that have not formerly heard of my name, nor seene my glory; and they shall publish my Gospell amongst the Gentiles. And they shall be a meanes to turne the hearts of the world,20 And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord, out of all nations, upon horses and charets, in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts to my holy Mountaine Ierusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a cleane vessell, into the house of the Lord. unto God, and to winne men from their supersti∣tions, and impieties, to the service of the true God; so as out of all nations, there shall bee some added to the Church, and shall hasten, by all the severall meanes of their conveiances, to joyne themselves to the assemblies of Gods people; with no lesse zeale, and purity, then now the children of Israel are wont to serve and worship God, in the house consecrated to his name. And of these converted nations, will I take some to my immediate service,21 And I will also take of them for Priests, and for Levites, saith the Lord. to be peculiarly devoted to me, in the publike ministration of my Church, saith the Lord. 22 For as the new hea∣vens, and the new earth which I will make, shall remaine before me.And this happy condition of my Church, shall be du∣ring, and permanent; so as there shall never want those, that shall professe my name upon earth, &c. 23 And it shall come to passe that from one new moone to another, & from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord.Whereas, under the law, there were set, and fixed solemnities, in which God was publikely attended upon with sacrifices, and thankfull celebrations; now these festivities, and religious duties shall be perpetuall, and continue without all intermission; and all nations shall, at all times, come to worship before me, saith the Lord. 24 And they shall goe forth and looke upon the cakases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worme shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.And those that have sincerely professed me, shall bee made the witnesses of the heavy vengeance of God upon
them that have wilfully rebelled against me; who shall be tormented with perpetuall anguish of conscience, and lie unrecoverably under the sense of the fearefull wrath of God; and bee a wofull and abhominable spectacle to Angells; and men. IEREMIAH. CAP. I. THe words of Jeremiah the sonne of Hilkiah,1 The words of Ieremi∣ah the sonne of Hilkiah, of the Priests that were in A∣nathoth in the land of Benjamin. that famous high-priest, who found the ori∣ginall booke of the Law; which Jeremy was one of the Priests that dwelt in Anathoth, a towne, within three miles of Jerusalem, which in the tribe of Benjamin was allotted peculiarly to the Priests. To whom the word of the Lord came,2 To whom the word of the Lord came in the dayes of Iosiah, &c. in the thirteenth yeare of his raigne. 3 It came also in the dayes of Iehojakin, &c. unto the end of the ele∣venth yeare of Zedekiah, &c. unto the carrying away of Ierusalem captive, &c. in the thir∣teenth yeare of King Josiah, and continued long with him, in so much as he prophesied one and forty yeares, under the raignes of Iosiah, Jehojakin, and Zedekiah, besides those yeares, which he lived after the captivity. Before ever thou wert conceived in the womb of thy mother,5 Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the wombe, I sanctified thee, and ordai∣ned thee a Prophet unto the nations. I fore-ordained thee in mine eternall coun∣sell, to be a worthy instrument of my glory; and before thou wert borne into the world, I set thee apart to this great service; and pre-determined thee, to be a Prophet to the nations. Then said I, Alas, O Lord God, behold, I am unfit,6 Then said I, Ah, Lord God, behold, I cannot speake, for I am a child. and unable, and unworthy to carry thy great messages to the Kings, and Princes of this world; I am a very child, both in yeares, and abilities. And the Lord said unto me; Never plead thine age,7 But the Lord said un∣to me, Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt goe to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee, thou shalt speake. or disabilitie; for I will give thee a mouth, and wise∣dome, I will send thee forth on my errand, and furnish thee sufficiently for the service thou goest about; goe therefore to all that I send thee, and speake all that I command thee. See, I have this day made thee a Prophet,10 See, I have this day set thee over the nations, and over the king∣domes, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw downe, to build, and to plant. not to the Jewes onely, but to the nations round about also; to se∣verall
countries, and kingdomes, with commission to deliver my messages, concerning the destroying, and roo∣ting out, the planting and establishing of their domini∣ons, and soverainties. 12 Then said the Lord unto me, Thou hast well seen, for I will hasten my word to performe it.It is true; thou seest indeed an almond tree, in a figure and representation of that haste, which I will make in the performance of my judgements; for as that is the first tree which puts forth, so it well betokens the speed of my executions. 13 And the face there∣of was towards the north.And the fore-part thereof to the fire-ward, was, by the situation of it, towards the North. 14 Then the Lord said unto me; out of the North, an evill shall breake forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.Then the Lord said, This caldron or boiling pot is Ju∣dea, this fire is the affliction, and vastation which it shall undergoe, and from out of the North, (even from the Babylonians) shall this desolation come upon all the in∣habitants of the land. 15 For loe, I will call all the families of the king∣domes of the North, saith the Lord.For lo, I will call the neighbouring kingdomes of the north, in assistance to the Babylonians, and they shall come, &c. Therefore, stirre up thy courage, and rouze up thy spirits.17 Therefore gird up thy loines. 18 For behold, I have made thee, this day, a de∣fenced city, & an yron pil∣lar, and brasen walls against the whole land.For behold, I doe this day confirme thee against all the opposition, which shall be made unto thee; thou shalt be more surely defenced from henceforth, then a strong∣ly walled city, more firme then a pillar of yron, or walls of brasse, &c. CAP. II. 2 Thus saith the Lord; I remember thee, the kind∣nes of thy youth, the love of thine espousalls, when thou wentest after mee in the wildernesse, in a land that was not sowen.I Remember well how graciously I dealt with thee of old, and how well thou wert affected to me in my first choice of thee for my people, and how we were mutual∣ly ingaged to each other, by covenants, and professions of love, when I led thee in the wildernesse, and carried thee, (with miraculous sustenance, and preservation) through an uncultured desert. 3 Israel was holines un∣to the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase; all that devoure him, shall of∣fend, evill shall come up∣on them, saith the Lord.Israel was then consecrated to the Lord, and set apart for his service, as the first fruits are wont to be sequestred and devoted to God; so as all that devoure them, bring evill upon themselves. The very priests which should be the leaders of my people,8 The Priests said not, where is the Lord, & they that handle the law, knew me not, the Pastors also transgressed against me, & the Prophets prophecied by Baal. doe not inquire after the Lord, but after their owne profits, and occasions, and they that handle the law, doe not acknowledge me, and give mee that obser∣vance, which they ought, &c. and the prophets turne from God to Baal, and prophesie in his name, &c.
Look about, where ye please,10 For passe over the isles of Chittim, and see, & send unto Kedar, and consi∣der diligently, and see if there be any such thing. take view of any what∣soever forrain nation, Grecians, Arabians, or whom else soever, and see if you finde the like inconstancie, and im∣piety amongst them. Is there any one of them that hath beene induced to change those deities,11 Hath a nation chan∣ged their gods, which are yet no gods? which they have professed to adore and yet they are no gods at all, &c? What dost thou make of thy selfe, O Israel?14 Is Israel a servant, is he a homeborn slave? why is he spoiled? Doest thou goe for a sonne, or for a slave rather, that thou art thus spoiled? Thy enemies have comne fiercely upon thee,15 The yong lions roa∣red upon him and yelled, & they made his lād wast. and have roared, and ramped upon thee, like Lions, &c. Yea,16 Also the children of Noph, and Tahapanes have broken the crowne of thy head. not only those Lion-like Assyrians have comne upon thee, but the weake effeminate Aegyptians have ri∣sen up, and prevailed against thee. And now, what hast thou to doe with ambassages to Aegypt; what vaine confidence is this,18 And now what hast thou to doe in the way of Aegypt to drinke the wa∣ters of Sihor? Or wht hast thou to doe in the way of Assyria to drinke the wa∣ters of the river? that thou puttest in treaties of aide with them? Or, wherefore doest thou send other ambassadors to Assyria, and cravest their friendship, and succour, as if the waters of Jordan were not for thee, but thou must drinke of Nilus and Euphra∣tes? I bestowed much care and cost upon thee,21 Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed. in my first choice of thee; then thou wert a peculiar and holy peo∣ple unto me, &c. And now, O Israel, thou art so foule,22 For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much sope, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord. that by no hu∣mane meanes whatsoever, which thou canst reach unto, it is possible for thee to cleanse and wash off the filthy spots of thine iniquities before me. See what thou hast done in the valley of Benhinnon,23 See thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done, thou art a swift dromedarie traversing her waies. and in those other dales, where thou hast sacrificed by the brookes; thou hast beene eagerly set upon thine I∣dolatries, and hast run to them with no lesse haste and speed, then the dromedary is wont to rid the way. Yea, thou hast beene utterly unreclaimable,24 A wilde asse used to the wildernesse, that snuf∣feth up the winde at her pleasure, in her occasion who can turne her away, al they that seek her, will not wearie themselves, in her moneth they shall finde her. like to a wilde asse in the wildernesse, which runs wilde and loose snuffing up the winde; scorning to be either bridled, or turned in her course; all they that pursue after her, doe but weary themselves in vaine; untill the time come that upon her impregnation, the burden of her wombe shall force her to rest. Refraine thy selfe, at last, from thine abhominable prostitutions,25 Withhold thy foot from being unshod, & thy throat from thrist: but thou saidst, there is no hope no, for I have loved stran∣gers, and after them will I goe. wherein thou hast laid thy selfe naked to the fornications of thine idolatry; and quench this wic∣ked thirst of thy sinfull lusts; but thou continuest obsti∣nate, and saiest secretly; There is no hope of my reclai∣ming; No, I have taken a deepe affection to the strange
gods of the Gentiles, and I will goe after them. 30 In vaine have I smit∣ten your children, they re∣ceived no correction, your owne sword hath devou∣red your Prophets, like a destroying Lyon.In vaine have I bestowed my chastisements upon you, for ye have not made any good use of my corrections; you have beene the murtherers of Gods prophets a∣mongst you; even as a fierce Lyon have yee devoured them. 31 O generation, see ye the word of the Lord, have I beene a wildernesse unto Israel, a land of dark∣nesse? wherefore say my people, We are lords, wee will come no more unto thee?O ye unthankfull generation; attend to this word of the Lord; have I been barren of my favours to you, have I yielded you no variety of comfortable fruits? have I not inlightned you with the knowledge of my name, & my lawes? and now, when I have brought thee into thy promised land, and setled thee there, thou art ready to say, in thy presumption; We are Lords, and have gotten to our selves these dominions, wee will regard thee no more. 33 Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? ther∣fore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy waies.What profit canst thou expect by seeking the friend∣ship, and aide of the Aegyptians? and trimming up thy selfe for their acceptation? thou art both infected by their wickednesse, and hast corrupted others by the wic∣kednesse wherewith thou art infected. 34 Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the soules of the poore inno∣cents, I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.Thou art plainly found guilty of the blood of my pro∣phets, which thou hast cruelly shed; there needs no se∣cret search for the finding out of this murther of thine, it is open, and apparent to the eyes of the world. Why goest thou about to alter thy dependance? and in stead of Babylon,36 Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Aegypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria. to relie upon Aegypt? that trust shall faile thee; thou shalt be ashamed of this vaine confidence of thine, as Ahaz was of his trust in the Assyrian. 37 Yea thou shalt goe forth from him, and thine hands upon thy head.Thou shalt goe forth from him with extreame mour∣ning and lamentation, &c. CAP. III. 1 They say, if a man put away his wife, and she goe from him, and become another mans, shall hee re∣turne unto her againe? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast plaid the harlot with ma∣ny lovers; yet returne a∣gaine to me, saith the LordO My people, thy wickednesses are many, & great, and yet (such is my mercy) I could be content, upon thy repentance, to pardon them. Thou art my wife, and hast committed whoredome; thou hast betaken thy selfe to another husband, and therefore hast made thy selfe unca∣pable of my reacceptance, by the law; Yet returne againe to mee; and I am ready to receive thee, saith the Lord. Thou hast frequently committed spirituall fornicati∣on in thine high places;2 Lift up thine eyes un∣to the high places, and see where thou hast not beene lien with; in the waies hast thou sate for them, as the Arabian in the wildernesse yea thou hast tempted others to these Idolatrous practises; and hast been ready to solicit, and draw on this sin with them, waiting for these opor∣tunities
of thine Idolatries, as the Arabian waits for a pray in the wildernesse, &c. Thou art growne impudent and shamelesse in thy .3 Thou hast an whores forehead, &c. Yet wilt thou not, after so many and grievous afflicti∣ons, begin to recollect thy self, and to acknowledge me,4 Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me. &c. Israel and Judah are both shamefully wicked, and yet,11 And the Lord said unto me, the backsliding Is∣rael hath justified her selfe more then treacherous Iu∣dah. of the two, Judah is worse then Israel; her trechery is so much more, as shee had more favours from me. Goe, and proclaime these words, even to those Israe∣lites, which are now captived amongst the Medians in the North; and since Judah will not heare, say to them, Returne thou backsliding Israel,12 Goe and proclaime these words toward the north, and say, Return thou backsliding Israel. &c. For I had made an holy covenant with you; and will,14 For I am married unto you; and I will take you, one of a city, and two of a familie, and I will bring you to Zion. upon your repentance, call some of you backe againe to your land, and to my Temple. They shall no more trust to the outward formalities of Gods worship,16 They shall say no more; the ark of the cove∣nant of the Lord, neither shall it come to minde, nei∣ther shall they remember it, neither shall they visit it, neither shall that bee done any more. and to the fashionable profession of re∣ligion, as if the very name, and presence of the Ark were enough to save them, neither shall their thoughts be up∣on these outward helps, as all-sufficient and acceptable, &c. At that day they shall acknowledge the true Church of God, as holy;17 At that time they shall call Ierusalem the throne of the Lord, and all the nations shall be gathe∣red unto it. and as the seat of Gods spiritual govern∣ment; and the Gentiles shall together with them flocke unto it, &c. They shall both come together out of their spirituall captivity, into the bosome of my Evangelicall Church,18 And they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheri∣tance unto your fathers. &c. But I said, How shall it come about that thou which deservedst not the name of a servant,19 But I said, How shall I put thee among the chil∣dren, and give thee a plea∣sant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations? and I said, Thou shalt call mee, my father, and shalt not turne away from me. shalt become a dear sonne unto me, and shalt have a pleasant and happy inhe∣ritance bequeathed unto thee; even a blessed roome in my Church? and I answered my selfe againe; It is by the meanes of thy faithfull invocation of me; and of thy true repentance, and holy obedience, that this shall bee effe∣cted. Even in those high places,21 A voice was heard upon the high places, wee∣ping and supplications of the children of Israel; for they have perverted their way, and they have forgot∣ten the Lord their God. where the offence was com∣mitted, a voice was heard of weeping and supplication of the children of Israel, lamenting their former wicked∣nesse; and calling for mercy, to that God whom they had forgotten.
23 Truly in vaine is sal∣vation hoped for from the hils, and from the multi∣tude of mountaines.In vaine is deliverance and salvation hoped for from those Idols, which we have worshipped on the hils, and hgh places, &c. 24 For shame hath de∣voured the labour of our fathers from our youth.This shamefull Idolatry is that which hath undone both our late forefathers, and us, &c. CAP. IIII. 3 Break up your fallow ground, and sow not a∣mong thornes.HItherto, O my people, your hearts have been like to a rough, thornie, uncultured ground; but now, break up this fallow ground of yours, by an unfained repen∣tance, and root up these thornes of your corruptions. 4 Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Iudah?As ye are outwardly circumcised, so also doe yee cut off the fore-skin of those inward corruptions, which your heart is defiled with, &c. 5 Declare yee in Iudah and publish in Ierusalem, & say, Blowe ye the trumpet in the land, cry, gather to∣gether, and say, assemble your selves, and let us goe into the defenced cities.Make proclamation in Judah, and Jerusalem; and mu∣ster your forces together; assemble your selves, and (for feare and expectation of the enemie) agree to goe up in∣to the defenced cities. 6 Set up the standards towards Zion, retire, stay not, for I will bring evill from the North.Draw your troupes towards Jerusalem, and make hast, for I will bring evill upon you from the Babylonians, &c. The Chaldean is comne forth, like a fierce Lion out of his thicket, or den, even Nebuchadnezar, the great conquerour of the Gentiles, is upon his way,7 The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way. &c. 10 Then said I, Ah Lord God, surely thou hast gret∣ly deceived this people, & Ierusalem, saying, Yee shall have peace, whereas the sword reacheth unto the soule.Then said I, Ah Lord God, surely this people and Je∣rusalem, will be ready to cast upon thee the imputation of deceiving them; in that those, which have pretended to prophesie in thy name, have said, ye shall have peace, whereas there is nothing but slaughter, and vastation. Nebuchadnezar came (like a boistrous winde upon the bleake hils,11 A dry winde of the high places in the wilder∣nesse toward the daughter of my people, not to fanne nor to cleanse.) up against Jerusalem; not to fan or win∣now my people, but to blow them quite away. Behold, he shall come up, as some blacke cloud that threatens a tempest;13 Behold, hee shall come up as clouds, and his Chariots shall bee as a whirlewinde. and his chariots shall come ratling swiftly as a whirlewinde, &c. 15 For a voice declareth from Dan, and publisheth affliction from mount E∣phraim.I doe already heare a voice from the remotest parts of the land which runs along towards Jerusalem, proclai∣ming with much horror and astonishment, the comming in of the enemie.
Yea, the very nations round about,16 Make yee mention to the nations, Behold, pub∣lish against Ierusalem, that watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against the cities of Iudah. take notice of that miserable desolation, which is comming upō. Jerusalem, and give intelligence to each other, of the fearefull mis∣chiefe, which is now towards them. The besiegers of Jerusalem shall keep so strict a watch over the city, as the keepers of the field are wont to doe of those cattle which are committed to their charge,17 As keepers of a field are they against her round about, because she hath beene rebellious against me, saith the Lord. so as not one man shall be allowed to stir out of the walls; and all this, because of their rebellions. O the unspeakable sorrow and affliction, that I feele for the misery of my people; my bowels yearne, and my heartakes within me,19 My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my heart ma∣keth a noise in me, I can∣not hold my peace, because thou hast heard (O my soule,) the sound of the trumpet, the alarme of war to thinke of this wofull destructi∣on which is approaching to Jerusalem; I cannot containe my selfe, but I must breake forth into lamentation; be∣cause I do, as it were, heare before hand, the sound of the Trumpet of Nebuchadnezar, and his alarme to this mi∣serable warre. So also verse 20.21. Alas,23 I beheld the earth, and loe it was without forme and voide; and the heavens, and they had no light. what a fearefull confusion doe I foresee every where; the earth shall be so laid waste, as if it had never had any forme; the face of heaven shall yield no light of comfort to the earth. So verse 24. I lookt, and saw all turned to a wofull solitude;25 I beheld, and loe, there was no man, and all the birds of the heavens were fled. there was not so much as one man to bee seene in a countrey; nay, the very birds of the aire had forsaken this desolate place, as not yielding them any meanes of repast. Thou which now art richly clad in crimson,30 And whē thou art spoi∣led what wilt thou doe? though thou clothest thy selfe with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thy selfe faire, thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life. and scar∣let, and decked with precious ornaments of gold, and which stainest thy skin with artificiall paintings, and all this to procure and draw on thy wanton lovers, what wilt thou doe? for those Aegyptians whom thou wouldst allure, will despise thee, and seek thy ruine. For I have heard a shrieking, and lamentation in Jeru∣salem, as the outcries of a woman in the very pangs of her travaile,31 For I have heard a voice as of a woman in tra∣vell. &c, CAP. V. ANd though they make an outward and fashionable profession of the name of the Lord,2 And though they say, the Lord liveth, surely they sweare falsesly. in worshipping
him, in swearing by him, yet it is but in falsehood, and hypocrisie. 4 Therefore I said, Sure∣ly, these are poore, they are foolish: for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgement of their God.Therefore I said, by way of excuse, Alas these are poore and silly men, ignorant of their duties, taken up wholly with servile trades; and have neither meanes nor leasure to know the waies of the Lord, and the laws, and statutes of their God. 5 I will get me unto the great men, and will speake unto them, for they have knowen the way of the Lord, and the judgement of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.I will get me to the nobler, and learneder sort, their Princes, and Priests, &c. and behold, I found these worse then the other; they have rebelliously broken the yoke of their obedience, and cast away the cords of Gods Law. 6 Wherefore a Lyon out of the forrest shall slay them, and a wolfe of the evening shall spoile them.Wherefore, I will give them into the hands of their cruell enemies, the Babylonians, which like ravenous beasts shall fall upon them and devoure them, &c. 7 How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworne by them that are no gods: when I had fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troupes in the harlots houses.How canst thou expect pardon, and favour at my hands, O Jerusalem? thy children have forsaken me, and betaken themselves to the worship of false Gods; and when I pampered them with my blessings, they made an ill use of my mercies, and riotously ranne forth into both bodily, and spirituall adultery; and impudently trouped together to worke filthinesse. 10 Goe ye up upon her walles, and destroy, but make not a full end: take away her battlements, for they are not the Lords.Goe ye Babylonians, goe upon the walls of Jerusalem, and destroy them; but yet make not an utter waste, and perfect havocke of that sinfull citie; demolish the battle∣ments, and turrets thereof, for now I the Lord doe not challenge an interest in them. 14 Because yee speake this word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this peo∣ple wood, and it shall de∣vour them.Because they have disparaged my word in the mouths of my Prophets, and have said, it is but winde, they shall finde it otherwise; Behold, I will make thy word to bee as fire, and this people as wood; so as this thy despised word shall be to the utter destruction of this nation. 15 Loe, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel.Behold, I will bring a nation upon you from out of Chaldea, &c. 16 Their quiver is an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men.Their quiver shall be full of deadly arrowes, that shall send many to their graves, &c. 24 That giveth raine, both the former and the latter in his season: hee re∣serveth unto us the ap∣pointed weekes of the harvest.That giveth seasonable raine in the autumne, and spring; and reserveth a drie season for the gathering in of the harvest. If ye have beene abridged of these comfortable and meet seasons,25 Your iniquities have turned away these things. ye may thanke your iniquities, which have justly procured it, &c.
CAP. VI. O Yee children of Benjamin,1 O ye children of Ben∣jamin, gather your selves to flee out of the midst of Ierusalem, and blow the trumpets in Tekoa, and set up a signe of fire in Beth-haccerem, for evill appeareth out of the North, and great destru∣ction. the inhabitants of Ierusa∣lem, gather you together, and agree to flee out of that your citie; and give warning to Tekoa, to doe the like; & set your Beacons on fire in Beth-haccerem; that all may understand that the enemie is comming downe a∣gainst you, out of Chaldea, with great fury, and vio∣lence. The great leaders of those Northren people with their troupes, shall come before Ierusalem, &c.3 The shepheards with their flockes shall come unto her. Then shall the eager and furious commanders say,4 Prepare yee warre a∣gainst her, arise and let us goe up at noone: woe unto us, for the day goeth a∣way, for the shadowes of the evening are stretched out. ha∣sten your preparations against her; arise, let us take the day before us; the time flees away, the evening hastens on, let no minutes be lost for our assault. At last yet, be thou warned, O Ierusalem, lest,8 Bee thou instructed, O Ierusalem, lest my soule depart from thee. (if thou continuest obstinately) I doe utterly cast thee off, and ab∣horre thee, &c. They shall make an exquisite dispatch of the inhabi∣tants; as the vine-gatherer,9 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, they shal through∣ly gleane the remnāt of Is∣rael as a vine: turne backe thine hand as a grape ga∣therer into the baskets. when he hath pulled off the most remarkable clusters, goes over the tree again, and gleanes those bunches that remained; so shall the Chal∣dean enemies, search for the remainders of the Iewes, escaped in the irst destruction. Therefore, I neither may,11 Therefore I am full of the fury of the Lord: I am weary with holding in: I will powre it out upon the children abroad. nor can containe my selfe from breaking forth into the expressions, of the fury of the Lord, I am weary with holding it in; I will freely de∣clare, and denounce it amongst you, &c. In stead of seasonable, and conscionable reproofes,14 They have healed also the hurt of the daugh∣ter of my people slightly, saying peace, peace, when there is no peace. they have gone about to salve up the spirituall sores of my people with flattering, and plausible words; saying, peace, peace, all shall be well; when there is nothing but feare, and danger. At least, if ye will not heare my Prophets, yet harken to the sound of the Trumpet, which tells you of the ap∣proch of the enemie; but they wilfully said, wee will not harken.17 Also I set watch∣men over you, saying, Hearken unto the sound of the trumpet: but they said, We will not hearken. To what purpose doe yee thinke to please me with sweet incense,20 To what purpose commeth there to me in∣cense from Sheba? and perfumes comming afarre off from Sheba, offered on my altars? &c. Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will prepare,21 Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will lay stumbling blockes before this people, and the fathers and the sonnes together shall fall upon them, &c. and lay before this people meanes of ruine and subversi∣on,
by which, both the fathers and children shall perish together. 22 Behold a people commeth from the North, &c.See Chapter 1. verse 14. and Chapter 2. verse 15. and Chaper 4. verse 7. 27 I have set thee for a tower and a fortresse a∣mong my people, that thou maiest know and try their way.As for thee, O my Prophet, I have set thee as in a watch-tower, to discry the wayes of my people; yea, I have made thee as a strong tower, and fortresse against all the rage of them: So that thou maist fearelesly dis∣cover, and repove them. 28 They are brasse, and yron, they are all corrup∣ters.Whereas they pretend to be of the best metall, gold, or silver; they are indeed no better then brasse and yron, they are all but falsifiers, and corrupters. 29 The bellowes are burnt, the lead is cōsumed of the fire, the founder melteth in vaine: for the wicked are not plucked a∣way.Whereas we went about to melt them, under that pretence of pure silver, the labour is lost, the bellowes are burnt, that lead (which is mixed to make it runne) is consumed of the fire; the founder tryeth to melt it in vaine, for that wickednesse which is in them, is tough, and unremoveable. 30 Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord hath rejected them.If they will needs therefore goe for silver, let them doe so, but they shall then goe for such silver, as they are, reprobate and drossie; for how ever they are repu∣ted amongst men, God hath rejected them. CAP. VII. 11 Is this house, which is called by my name, be∣come a den of Robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seene it, saith the Lord.YE thinke all is well, if yee present your selves into my Temple; though you bring with you the guilt of ma∣nifold sinnes; ye come hither full of theft, of oppression, of injustice; Is my temple, thinke ye, for such clients? Is this house, which is called by my name, fit to be a den of theeves and robbers? Behold, I have well seene, and noted with how wicked dispositions, and hollow hearts ye come hither, saith the Lord. 12 But goe ye now un∣to my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it, for the wickednesse of my people Israel.Looke backe now unto my place, which was in Shi∣loh, where my Arke was, for some time, kept; It is the holinesse of my Arke that makes my Temple holy, and behold, that Arke of mine was before in Shiloh: But did the presence of my Arke there shelter that place from sorrow and desolation, &c. 18 The children ga∣ther wood, and the fathers kindle the fire; and the women knead their dough to make cakes to the Queene of heaven, and to powre out drink offerings unto other gods.All the sort of them, of all ages, and both sexes, con∣spire together in their Idolatry, childrē, fathers, women, put their hands to the worke, and all agree to offer cakes, in way of sacrifice, to the Sunne or Moone, &c.
Thus saith the Lord God of Israel,21 Thus saith the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, Put your burnt offerings unto your sacrifices, and eate flesh. yee brag much of your costly sacrifices, that ye offer unto me; Goe, take your bullocks, and sheep, and make your selves good cheare with them. Mourne thou solemnly, O Ierusalem,29 Cut off thine haire, O Ierusalem, and cast it a∣way; and take up a lamen∣tation on high places. and expresse thy sorrow, by publike acts of humiliation, that the world may take knowledge of it, &c. They have set up altars to their idols,30 They have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to pollute it. in my very Temple, to pollute it, &c. As 2 Kings 21.4. They have built altars to Moloch, in the high places of Tophet,31 And they have built the high places of Tophet. &c. So great a slaughter shall bee therefore in Jerusalem, that there shall not be roome enough in the vally of To∣phet, for the buriall of the slaine; and thereupon,32 Therefore behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the sonne of Hin∣nom, but the valley of slaughter. that vally shall change the name, and bee called the valley of slaughter. CAP. VIII. THe calamity that I will bring upon the Iewes,1 At that time saith the Lord, they shall bring out the bones of the Kings of Iudah, and the bones of his Princes, and the bones of the Priests, and the bones of the Pro∣phets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Ierusalem out of their graves. and Ierusalem, shall not rest in the living, but shall reach to the very dead; for the very bones of their Kings, and Princes, and Priests and Prophets, shall be torne up out of their graves. Thus saith the Lord; The fall of Ierusalem is great, and fearefull; but yet, if they had grace to repent,4 Thus saith the Lord: Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turne away, and not returne? not despe∣rate; If they would returne to me, should not I turne in mercy unto them? How doe ye Priests and Scribes say;8 How doe ye say, We are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us? Loe, certainely in vaine made hee it, the penne of the scribes is in vaine. We are wise and learned; and the Law of the Lord is with us; when in the meane time ye live contrary to it? Certainely, if this be to know & make a right use of the law, the law should seem to be to small purpose either in the making, or wri∣ting of it. Those that have made this profession of wisedome,9 The wise men are a∣shamed, they are dismaied and taken, loe, they have rejeted the word of the Lord, and what wisedome is in them? have shamed themselves by their unanswerable practice; loe, they have cast off all care of doing that, which the word of God injoynes them, and how then can they challenge any true wisedome to themselves? See chap. 6. verse 14.11 For they have hea∣led the hurt of the daugh∣ter of my people, slight∣ly, &c.
14 Why doe we sit still? assemble your selves, and let us enter into the de∣fenced cities, and let us be silent there, for the Lord our God hath put us to silence: and given us waters of gall to drinke.Why doe we sit still (ye say) while the enemie shall come and cut our throats? let us enter into our strong cities and stand upon our defence; and rest there till these Babylonians be departed: Alas, yee shall rest there in∣deed, but for ever; for the Lord our God hath there in∣tended to give us up to the slaughter; he hath there ap∣pointed us that bitter potion which we must drinke up, &c. 16 The snorting of his horses were heard from Dan, &c.See Chap. 4. verse 15: 17 For behold, I will send Serpents, Cockatrices among you, which wil not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the Lord.Behold, I will send the Chaldees among you, cruell and implacable enemies, which will by no meanes bee wonne to relent, but shall oppresse you, even unto death. Faine would I put off this deepe sorrow, that I have conceived, for the imminent destruction of my country∣men,18 When I would com∣fort my selfe against sor∣row, my heart is faint in mee. and cheare up my heart with some kinde of com∣fort; but I cannot. For behold, me thinks I heare already, the shrieks, and cryes of the Jewes,19 Behold, the voice of the crie of the daugh∣ter of my people, because of them that dwell in a far countrey: is not the Lord in Zion, is not her King in her? Why have they pro∣voked me to anger, with their graven images, and with strange vanities? because of the Babylonians, that are comne in, upon them, from Chaldea; and yet they are still ready to presume upon their title, and interest in God; and say, Is not the Lord worshipped by us, in Zion; Doe not we professe him? doth not hee professe him∣selfe the King and God of Jerusalem? Alas; to what pur∣pose is this idle formalitie? they professe me indeed (saith God) but they provoke me, the whiles, to anger, with their idolatries. The harvest is past, and the summer is ended;20 The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved. which might have given us hopes and oportunities of succours, yet we heare of none from Egypt, or any other our asso∣ciates; so as we are now out of all hopes of deliverance. 21 For the hurt of the daughter of my people, am I hurt, I am blacke: asto∣nishment hath taken hold on me.Alas, how am I afflicted with this miserable conditi∣on of my people? How do I mourne for them; how am I astonished to thinke of the mischiefe that is towards them? Oh that there were any possible meanes of redresse of this calamity!22 Is there no balme in Gilead? is there no Phy∣sitian there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people re∣covered? Oh that there were any medicine for this sore, or any Physitian to apply it, for cure! But alas, it will not, it cannot be, there is no remedy to be hoped for (so as this people are affected,) there is no way but de∣struction. CAP. IX. 1 Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night for the slaine of the daughter of my people.OH that I could sufficiently bewaile (since I cannot re∣dresse) this wofull desolation of Jerusalem, and my
people; Oh that I were all dissolved into teares for this lamentable slaughter which is coming upon them. They bend their tongue for lies,3 And they bend their tongue like their bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upō the earth. and slacken it for the truth; having no courage to defend it, and too much to oppose it, &c. They pretend to be pure metall; behold,7 Behold, I will melt them, and trie them, for how shall I doe for the daughter of my people? I will melt them, saith the Lord, and try them in the fire of afflicti∣on; for how can I doe otherwise with them, since they are utterly unreformable? And if in the subversion of Ierusalem my people shall hope to finde succour in the mountaines,10 For the Mountaines will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the habitations of the wilder∣nesse a lamentation, because they are burnt up, so that none can passe through thē, neither can men heare the voice of the cattle, &c. and waste deserts, I cannot but weepe, and waile, to thinke how they will be miserably disappointed there; for the rage of the enemie shall reach so farre, as to burne up, and de∣stroy their most retired places; and to make them unfit for the use either of man, or beast. A place of horror and desolation.11 A den of dragons, &c. How lamentable it is that amongst all this people there should be so few (if any at all) that understands,12 Who is the wise man that may understand this, and who is hee to whom the mouth of the Lord, hath spoken that he may declare it? and will faithfully declare what it is that brings this de∣struction upon the Land, &c. Behold,15 Behold, I will feed thē, even this people with wormwood, & give them water of gall to drinke. in stead of comfort I will give this people the bitterest anguish & sorrow, and wil bring upon them the most grievous calamity that can be conceived. Call for those mourning women,17 Call for the mourn∣ing women, that they may come, and send for cunning womē, that they may come that are wont to be hired for the publike lamentations at funeralls, and let them be set on worke to practice the saddest expressions of their waylings and sorrow. For the Chaldeans have scaled our walls,21 For death is come up into our windowes, and is entred into our pa∣laces, to cut off the chil∣dren from without, & the young men frō the streets. and entred into our cities, and are now breaking upon us, in our houses, to inflict a sudden, and cruell death upon us, wherein they will spare no age, or sexe; but put all mer∣cilesly to the sword. Behold, the day is comne, saith the Lord,25 Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will punish all them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised. wherein I will punish all together, both Iewes which are circum∣cised, and their uncircumcised abettors; no difference shall be made in this slaughter. Yea, I will punish the circumcised,26 Aegypt, and Iudah, and Edom, and the chil∣dren of Ammon, & Moab, and all that are in the ut∣most corners, that dwell in the wildernesse: for all these nations are uncir∣cumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncir∣cumcised in the heart. in their inward and spirituall uncircumcision; The Gentiles that are in the remote corners of the world are indeed outwardly uncircumcised; but my people the Iewes are uncircumci∣sed in their harts; & this uncircumcision is so much more odious then the other, by how much the filthinesse of the soule is worse then that of the body.
CAP. X. 2 And bee not dismaid at the signes of heaven, for the heathen are dismaid at them.BEE not foolishly superstitious in observing those good or ill daies, and fortunes, (as they are called) which the vaine heathen think to be notified in the stars, the signes of heaven; it is for those pagans to be dismai∣ed with the predictions of those dismall events. 3 For the customes of the people are vaine.For, howsoever those nations, the Chaldees, and Ae∣gyptians carry a reputation of wisedome; yet sure their practices shew them to be vaine and sottish, &c. 5 They are upright as the palme tree, but speake not.They must be (such as they are carved) upright, as the palme tree, for they cannot bow themselves to alter their posture, &c, 14 Every man is bru∣tish in his knowledge, e∣very founder is confound∣ed by the graven Image: for his molten Image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.Every workeman is brutish, whiles he so imploies his skill, as to make a god to himselfe, by his owne art; every founder, if he had but reason to consider it, must needs be confounded in himselfe at the sight of his owne folly, in making that image which he will adore: wherin (mean while) there is nothing but falsehood, and deceit; for, though it counterfait a kind of life, yet there is no breath in it. 16 The portion of Ia∣cob is not like them, for hee is the former of all things.But the true God, who is the portion and happy inhe∣ritance of Jacob, is not like to these dunghill deities; he is the maker of all things, &c. Trusse, and packe up all thy precious commodities, O thou that inhabitest not the villages only,17 Gather up thy wares out of the land, O inhabi∣tant of the fortresse. but the stron∣gest fortresses; and addresse thy self for thy flight, or cap∣tivity. 18 Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this once.Behold, I will suddenly and violently cast out the in∣habitants of the land, as a stone out of a sling, &c. Wo is me, for that grievous case, wherein I am, my affliction is exceeding sore,19 Woe is mee for my hurt, my wound is grievous but I said, Truly this is a griefe, and I must beare it. and unspeakable; but, recol∣lecting my selfe, at last, I resolved, surely, this is the mis∣chiefe that I have brought upon my selfe, & which is just∣ly allotted unto me; I will therefore beare it, as I may, since I cannot avoide the undergoing of it. 20 My tabernacle is spoi∣led, and all my cords are broken; my children are gone forth of me, and they are not, there is none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my cur∣taines.My tent is spoiled, & those cords wherewith it should be stretched forth, are broken in peeces, so as mine ha∣bitation is wasted; and my children which should aide me, are carried away into captivitie; and there is none that may afford me any help to the setling of me againe. The spirituall leaders of my people are become bru∣tish, being indeed, the chiefe cause of this great desolati∣on; and have not sought the Lord,21 For the Pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord. &c.
See chap. 1.15. and 5. verse 15.22 Behold the noise, &c. See Prov. 16.1. and 20.24.23 O Lord I know, &c. O Lord, correct me, but in a gracious moderation,24 O Lord, correct me, but with Iudgement, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. not in the extreme rigour of thy justice, not (as we have deserved) in thy wrath, and displeasure. CAP. XI. ANd the Lord said unto me,9 And the Lord said unto me, A conspiracie is found among the men of Iudah, and among the in∣habitants of Ierusalem. The men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem have banded together, and conspired wilfully in evil; and have resolved to hear∣ten each other in wickednesse; yea, they have made an a∣greement with Idolatrous Israel, that they will goe on in their provocations of me. Every of thy cities, O Iudah, have had a severall god,13 For according to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Iudah, and ac∣cording to the number of the streets of Ierusalem, have ye set up altars to that shamefull thing, even altars to burne incense unto Baal. and every of thy streets, O Ierusalem, hath a severall al∣tar consecrated to a shamefull, and abhominable Idoll; even altars to burne incense unto Baal. What have the Iewes (once my beloved people) to doe in mine house (saith God) seeing they have commit∣ted spirituall fornication with many Idols,15 What hath my be∣loved to do in mine house, seeing shee hath wrought lewdnes with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee? when thou dost evill then thou rejoycest. and those sa∣crifices, which now they pretend to offer, are not holy oblations, but prophane and common flesh; yea, O my people, thou art comne to that height of impiety, as that thou rejoycest in evill. Thou seemedst, and accordingly hadst the name of a faire greene olive tree; and mad'st shew of goodly fruit; but when thou turnedst wilde, God hath set fire on thy boughes, and hath broken downe thy branches.16 The Lord called thy name, a greene Olive tree, faire and of goodly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken. Let us not only burne his prophesies, but kill the man;19 Let us destroy the tree with the fruit therof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living. let us dispatch him from off the earth, &c, O God, I do not desire it in any malice to thē, or thirst of revenge; but in an holy zeale of thy glory, being by thee so directed, I committing my cause to thee,20 Let me see thy ven∣geance on them, for unto thee have I revealed my cause. pray for a sight of thy just retribution to them. CAP. XII. IF striving with thine owne townes-men at Anathoth thou hast not prevailed,5 If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace, wherein thou tru∣stedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou doe in the swelling of Iordan? how shouldst thou thinke to doe good upon them of Jerusalem; since there is no lesse difference betwixt them in the headdy course of their
sins; then betwixt foot and horse; And if in thine owne quiet countrey they have wearied thee, how much more must thou expect this successe from the proud inhabi∣tants of Ierusalem? I the Lord, therefore, have for these wickednesses for∣saken my Temple, I have left that which was my profes∣sed heritage; and that people, which was the dearly be∣loved of my soule (being now degenerated) I have gi∣ven up into the hands of the enemie.7 I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine he∣ritage, I have given the dearely beloved of my soule into the hand of her enemies. That which was my deare people doth now rebell a∣gainst me, and roare out against me and my prophets, like a lyon in the forrest,8 Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forrest. &c. 9 Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird, the birds round about are a∣gainst her: come ye, assem∣ble al the beasts of the field come to devoure.Hereupon, the enemies of my people come up against them, by my just instigation; and all nations come up round about, as birds are wont to come wondring about some strange fowle; and invite each other to the spoile. See chap. 6. verse 3. I was once your pastor saith God; but, since ye would not be guided by me, now yee shall have store of other manner of pastors; that shall lead you in your kinde; that shall destroy my vineyard,10 Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard. &c. 16 And it shall come to passe, if they will diligent∣ly learne the waies of my people to sweare by my name (the Lord liveth, as they taught my people to sweare by Baal,) then shal they be built in the mid∣dest of my people.I will make one Church of Iewes, and Gentiles; and if those nations shall frame themselves to the true worship of my name, and to the profession of the religion of my people, then will I establish them in my Church, as true and lively members thereof. CAP. XIII. 1 Thus saith the Lord unto me, Go get thee a lin∣nen girdle, and put it upon thy loines, and put it not in water.GEt thee a girdle (the embleme of thy people, whom I have heretofore kept close unto me) and put it up∣on thy loines, in figure of what I have done for the Iews, and put it not in water, to shew how carefully I have kept the people hitherto from all adversity. See verse 11. 4 Take the girdle that thou hast got which is up∣on thy loines, and arise, goe to Euphrates.Then the Lord charged me, by way of vision; Arise, goe to Euphrates, &c. And behold, the girdle was marred, in figure that the Iewes should lie rotting,7 And behold, the gir∣dle was marred, it was pro∣fitable for nothing. and forlorne in the dungeons and caves of Chaldaea, and Assyria. 12 Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Every bot∣tle shall bee filled with wine, and they shal say un∣to thee; Doe wee not cer∣tainely know, that every bottle shall be filled with wine?Thus saith the Lord God of Israel; My people is like to an earthen bottle; and every bottle shall be filled up to
the brim with wine; Then shall the hearers take this prophesie in great scorne; and say, what wonders are these thou tellest us; as if we knew not that the use of bot∣tles is to be filled with wine; tell these things to chil∣dren that understand nothing. Then shalt thou say unto them;13 Then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the Lord; Behold I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the Kings that sit upon Davids throne, & the priests, and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Ierusalem with drunken∣nesse. even thus every inha∣bitant of this land, even, the Kings, Priests, Prophets, and all the inhabitants shall bee filled up with the wine of Gods wrath; and shall be (as it were) drunken therewith so as he shall no more know what to doe, or which way to turne him, then a drunken man. And those earthen pots of yours shall be dashed one against another,14 And I will dash thē one against another. &c. Before your feet (whiles ye are driving into captivity) stumble in your dark,16 Before your feet stumble upon the darke mountaines. & nightly passages over the moun∣taines, &c. Those cities of Aegypt, which ye trusted to, for a re∣fuge unto you, in your extremity, shall be shut up against you, for feare of the Chaldees; and none dare open them to receive you, there will be no remedy, Iudah must bee carried away captive.19 The cities of the South shall be shut up, and none shall open them, Iu∣dah shall be carried away captive. Lift up your eyes,20 Lift up your eyes, & behold them that come from the North, where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautifull flocke? and behold the troupes of the Baby∣lonians, that come up against you? Alas, what shall now become of that people which hath had thee all this while in possession, O miserable Iudaea? Thou that now cavillest, and despisest my word;21 What wilt thou say when he shal punish thee? for thou hast taught them to be Captaines & as chief over thee; shall not sor∣rows take thee as a woman in travaile? what wilt thou then say, when these cruel Chaldees shal come upon thee; (thou hast already inured them to be captains over thee, & hast acquainted them with thy government, and given them advantages, by calling them formerly to thine aide) shalt thou not then bee overwhelmed with sorrow and distresse? And if in thy secret murmur thou shalt expostulate,22 And if thou say in thine heart, Wherefore come these things upon me? for the greatnesse of thine iniquitie are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare. and say; wherefore is all this mischiefe comne upon me? the answere is ready, and easie; for the greatnesse of thy unreformable wickednesse, art thou thus exposed to the shame, and ignominie of the world. Alas, ye are so habituated in evill,23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Le∣opard his spots? then may ye also doe good, that are accustomed to doe evill. that there is no hope at all of your reclaiming; as soone may the Black∣more turne white, or the Leopard spotlesse, as yee may turne good, after so long & obstinate persistance in your wickednesse. I will put thee to the greatest shame and confusion that can be conceived;26 Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appeare. that thou maist appeare odious to the eyes of all beholders.
CAP. XIIII. 2 Iudah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish, they are blacke unto the ground.IUdah mourneth, all the inhabitants that goe through the gates of their cities, languish, they are discoloured with their famine, and are in the depth of their sorrow cast upon the ground, &c. 3 And their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters, they came to the pits, and found no water.Their Princes, and Nobles sent the meaner people to bring them water in that extremity of drought, but none was to be had, &c. 6 And the wilde asses did stand in the high pla∣ces, they snuffed up the winde like dragons, their eyes did faile because there was no grasse.Not men only, but the very beasts also shall feele the misery of this famine and drought; in so much as the wilde asses shall stand upon the rocks, and pant, and gape for the aire, and draw in the coole winde, to refresh their hotte, and thirstie throates, as dragons are wont to doe, in the sandy and scorching wildernesses; and their sight shall faile them for want of repast. 8 Why shouldst thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a way-faring man, that turneth aside to tarry for a night.Thou that wert wont to dwell, and continue amongst thy people, why shouldst thou be now, as a stranger, that passes through the land, and lodges there a night, and away. 10 They have not refrai∣ned their feet.They have not abstained from any evill way. 21 Doe not disgrace the throne of thy glory.Doe not utterly disgrace and cast off that Kingdome, wherein thou hast hitherto ruled, and raigned; and wherein thou hast so manifested the glory of thy power. 22 Are there any among the vanities of the Gen∣tiles that can cause raine, or can the heavens give showers?And now, O ye fond Iewes, are there any of those vaine Idols of the Gentiles, which ye have worshipped, that can cause the rain to descend upon this your drough∣ty earth? &c. CAP. XV. 1 Then said the Lord unto me, Though Moses & Samuel stood before mee, yet my mind could not be toward this people; cast them out of my sight, and let them goe forth.THe time was, when Moses and Samuel, in their seve∣rall seasons, interceded with me, for the ancestors of this people, and prevailed, but now, if they were both together upon earth, and should sue to me for this their posterity, they could not prevaile with me, to draw my affections to them, or to divert my judgements from them. 4 Because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah King of Iudah, for that which he did in Ierusalem.Because of that horrible Idolatry, and wickednes that was committed in Jerusalem, under the raigne of Manas∣seh, whose impiety is so much more aggravated, in that he was the sonne of good Ezekiah. 6 I am wearie with repenting.I have so oft suspended those judgements, which I threatned against thee, and so long forborne thee, as that now I can indure thee no longer,
I will tosse,7 And I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land. and scatter them in all the defenced cities of the land; as corne is shaken, and dispersed in the win∣nowing, &c. I have brought up against the mother city Jerusalem,8 I have brought upon them against the mother of the yong men, a spoiler at noone day; I have caused him to fall upon it sudden∣ly, & terrors upon the citie. a young and courageous victor, which shall spoile it, even the Chaldean, who shall make open havock of it, I have set him upon it in my justice, and have brought these ter∣rors and desolations upon it. Even the strong and vigorous woman,9 She that hath borne seven, languisheth, she hath given up the ghost; her sun is gone downe while it was yet day. that hath been the mother of many children, now languisheth, and gives up the ghost; her life is untimely ended, &c. Wo is me, that ever my mother bare mee to bee thus vexed with the contention, and opposition of all men;10 Woe is me, my mo∣ther, that thou hast borne me a man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth, I have nei∣ther lent on usury, nor men have lent to mee on usury, yet every one of them doth curse me. Yet, I have done, I have deserved nothing, that might procure me this heart-burning, & spight amongst them; I only followed my calling, close, and intermedled not with the affaires of the world; I have neither given, nor taken use, and yet every one is ready to revile me. If thy strength, O Judaea, be as yron, canst thou think thine yron so strong,12 Shall yron break the Northern yron, & the steel. as that it can breake the yron and steele of the Chaldeans. Least whiles thy long suffering,15 Take me not away in thy long suffering. and patience beares with them, I, in the meane time, be murthered by them. So soone as thy words were delivered to me,16 Thy words were foūd and I did eate them, & thy word was unto me the joy & rejoycing of mine heart, for I am called by thy name O Lord God of Hosts. I did re∣ceive them with a ready, and willing heart; yea thy word was my greatest joy, and honor; for I am called by thy name, O Lord; euen the prophet of the Lord of hosts. I sate mourning, and solitary, in sad and thoughtfull dumps, because of the sins of thy people,17 I sate not in the as∣sembly of the mockers, nor rejoyced, I sate alone be∣cause of thy hand, for thou hast filled me with indig∣nation. and because of thy judgements; for, upon both these, my heart was full of sorrow; And that sorrow was increased by the envie and indignation, which this prophesie (committed unto me) hath brought upon me. O Lord, thou hast promised to deliver, and free me;18 Wilt thou be alto∣gether unto me as a liar, & as waters that faile. and wilt thou be as one that breakes his word; and as some land-waters, that make a great shew, after a showr, but sinke away, and disappoint the passenger. If thou bethink thy selfe of this thine impatience,19 Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou returne, then will I bring thee a∣gaine, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto thee, but returne not thou unto them. and of thy too much regard to this murmuring, and disobe∣dient people, I will so confirme thee, that they shall bee forced to acknowledge thee my faithfull servant; And if thou doe wisely make difference betwixt erroneous do∣ctrine, and the truth, and betwixt the godly and pro∣phane persons, then will I admit thee to bee my mouth unto my people; doe not thou yield way unto them in their leud courses, but let them (if it may be) come in to thee.
20 And I will make thee unto this people, a fenced brazen wall, &c.See Chap. 1. verse 18. CAP. XVI. 6 Neither shall men la∣ment for them, nor cut themselves, nor make thē∣selves bald for them.THere shall be no body left in the land to make any passionate expressions of their mourning for them be∣ing dead; so as to cut their flesh, or to shave their haire: either to wound, or deforme themselves for their sakes. 7 Neither shall any (as in the margin) breake bread for them in mourning to comfort them for the dead; neither shal men give thē the cup of consolation to drinke for their father.Neither shall there be any left to make funerall feasts for them, to comfort them in their mournings for the dead; neither shall they (as the manner is in those feasts) give them the cup of consolation to drinke downe their sorrow for the deceased, &c. 14 Therefore behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said: The Lord liveth that brought up the Chil∣dren of Israel out of the land of Aegypt;The dayes come, wherein God shall not so much be celebrated by the memory of his deliverance of his people out of Aegypt, which was long since done, 15 But the Lord liveth, that brought up the chil∣dren of Israel from the land of the North, & from all the lands, whither hee had driven them.As by the fresh remēbrance of the great mercy that he hath wrought for his people the Jewes, in bringing them backe from their captivitie in Babylon, and all those lands, whither they were driven, &c. 16 Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them, and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountaine and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rockes.But, in the meane time, their desolation shall be grie∣vous, and universall; I will call for the Chaldeans, which shall be as so many fishers, to drag them out of their good land; and as so many hunters to chase them from their homes, and to drive them from all their refuges. 18 Because they have filled mine inheritance with the carkases of their detestable and abominable things.They have pestered, and defiled this land, which I chose for my inheritance, with the carcasses of their ab∣hominable sacrifices, which they have made to their I∣dols, and with those very shamefull idolds to which they have sacrificed. 19 And shall say: Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanitie, and things wherein is no profit.The Gentiles shall come, and say; Surely our fore-fa∣thers have beene miserably mis-led, and trained up in grosse Idolatrie, and false superstition; &c. 20 Shall a man make gods unto himselfe, and they are no gods?He that is man and not God, shall he be able to make gods? shall that power which is finite and weake, take upon him to make that which is infinite? 21 Therefore behold, I will this once cause them to know; I will cause them to know my hand and my might, &c.Therefore, I will with this one judgement convince them of my might, and omnipotence, and they shall know that there is no Lord, no God beside me.
CAP. XVII. THe state of Judah is desperate;1 The sinne of Judah is written with a pen of Iron, and with a point of a diamond, it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the hornes of your altars. their sinne is not slightly sprinkled upon their skins, but is deeply ingraven in their hearts; even with a pen of yron, with a point of a diamond; so as it may not be denied, and can∣not be amended; and if they would smother their secret inclinations, yet their Idolatries are publikly written, upon the hornes of their altars; that all the world may see them. So as their children and posterity,2 Whilest their chil∣dren remember their altars and their groves, by the greene trees upon the high hills. seeing these monu∣ments of their altars and groves, cannot but call to minde (and into practice also) the superstitions of their fore∣fathers. O thou, my chosen and defenced mountaine, in which my people doe so vainly trust, thou shalt be as un∣able to gard them from the furie of the enemie, as if thou wert but a plaine field; all thy riches, and treasures shall be a spoile to the Chaldean; and thine high places wherein thou hast sinned, shall be wasted alike through∣out all thy borders.3 O my mountaine, in the field I will give thy substance, and all thy trea∣sures to the spoile, and the high places for sinne, throughout all thy bor∣ders. And thou (O my people,4 And thou, even thy selfe shalt discontinue frō thine heritage that I gave thee, and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire in mine an∣ger, which shall burne for ever. the Jewes) shalt be taken a∣way from this thy native land of inheritance, which I gave thee, &c. ye have stirred up such mine anger, and indignation against you, as will not be againe appeased for ever. That man shall be like the heath in a dry wildernesse, that shall not partake of the sweet showers when they fall, &c.6 For he shall bee like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good commeth. The wicked and deceitfull man shall be disappointed of his hopes of gaine; as the partridge sits on those egges,11 As the Partridge sit∣teth on eges, and hatcheth thē not: so he that getteth riches & not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his dayes, and at his end shall be a foole. which she never laid, and can never hatch, and bring forth to perfection; so he that fraudulently, and unjustly gathers wealth, shall not injoy it, but shall leave it, in the midst of his dayes, and in the end, shall finde that he hath beene a foole. God hath highly honoured Judea above all the nati∣ons of the world, in that he hath erected in her,12 A glorious high throne from the begin∣ning, is the place of our Sanctuary. the place of his Sanctuary; which is that high and glorious throne, wherein God from the beginning ordained, & decreed to seate himselfe. They that take part against me,13 And they that de∣part from mee shall bee written in the earth. how ever they boast themselves to be the holy and noble ofspring of faithfull Abraham, and Gods peculiar people, yet their memory
shall be either base, or forgotten; their names shall bee written in the dust of the earth, &c. 15 Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word of the Lord? let it come now.Behold, this obstinate, & incredulous people, is ready to say, Where is this word of the Lord, which we heare so much talke of? we have been told of grievous things; of plagues, and famines, and the sword; but where are they? Why doe they not come; as it is foretold us? 16 As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastour to follow thee, neither have I desired the wofull day, thou knowest: that which came out of my lips, was right before thee.As for me, O Lord, it is thou that hast called mee; and I have not dared to bee averse from following thee, in that charge, which thou hast laid upon me; neither have I beene ambitious, and desirous of this sad, and busie taske, as thou well knowest, and that which I have spoken, is thy true message and no other. As yee Jewes have shamefully broken all my other commandements, so also this of my Sabbath; but now, recollect your selves; and reforme this abuse; see that you doe no servile worke on that day; Beare no burden on that day of the Lord, in, or out at the gates of Ieru∣salem.21 Thus saith the Lord, Take heed to your selves, & beare no burden on the Sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Ierusa∣lem. So verse 22. 23 But made their necke stiffe, &c.But wilfully hardned their hearts; and resolved to persist in their obstinacie, &c. 25 Then shall there en∣ter into the gates of this citie Kings and Princes, sit∣ting upon the throne of David.Then shall your Kings and Princes be established in this throne of David, and shall rule over you, and main∣taine that royall magnificence, which is meet for them, amongst you, &c. CAP. XVIII. 12 There is no hope, &c.See Chap. 2. verse 25. 13 Aske ye now among the heathen, &c.See Chap. 2. verse 10. & 11. 14 Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon which commeth from the rocke of the field? or shall the cold flowing waters, that come from another place, be forsaken?WIll any man be so foolish, as when he may make use of the pure snow of mount Lebanon, which he may take up from the cleane rocke of his owne field, to seeke afarre off for some dirty puddle? Or when hee may have the coole flowing waters from his owne chri∣stall Spring, to goe lade out of the muddy channell? 17 I will shew them the backe, and not the face in the day of their ca∣lamitie.I will not so much as looke at them, in their distresse, but turne my back upon them, as they have done upon mee. 18 Then said they, Come, and let us devise devices against Ieremiah: for the law shall not pe∣rish from the priest, nor counsell from the wise, nor the word from the Pro∣phet.Let us lay a plot for Ieremiah; he is a false Prophet doubtlesse: for (whatsoever he saith) it cannot be, that God should utterly take his Law from the Priest; or his
counsell from the wise, or his word from the Prophets; but so he hath done, so he shall doe, if this man may bee heard; come, let us raise slanders, and accusations a∣gainst him, &c. CAP. XIX. HAve filled this valley with the blood of those chil∣dren which they have offered unto Moloch.4 And have filled this place with the blood of in∣nocents. In this place,6 Therefore behold, the day is come, saith the Lord, that this place shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter. wherein you have pleased your Idols with innocent blood, shall your blood bee abundantly shed; so as, this valley shall change the name, and in stead of Tophet, be called a valley of slaughter. I will utterly crosse the hopes, and conceits of Iudah, and Ierusalem, concerning this very place; for whereas they thought to have indeared themselves to mee the more, by so zealous oblations of their owne children,7 And I will make voide the counsell of Iu∣dah and Ierusalem, in this place, and I will cause thē to fall by the sword be∣fore their enemies. they shall finde how much I hate this their cruell Idola∣try, by that destruction, which I will bring upon them, by the sword of the enemie, &c. I will make this whole city of Ierusalem,12 Thus will I doe un∣to this place, saith the Lord & to the inhabitants there∣of, and even make their ci∣tie as Tophet. like unto Tophet, a place of slaughter, and buriall for the inhabi∣tants. CAP. XX. NOw Pashur the sonne of Immer the Priest, who was next in place to the high Priest; (as being his vicar, or assistant in the government of the Temple) heard that Ieremiah, one of his owne order, prophesied these things.1 Now Pashur the son of Immer the priest, who was also chiefe governor in the house of the Lord, heard that Ieremiah pro∣phecied these things. The Lord hath not called thee Pashur which signi∣fies an enlarging of thy rule; or diffusing of terror,3 The Lord hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magor-missabib. and palenesse unto others; but he hath now called thee, Ma∣gor-missabib; that is, Feare on every side; which shall hereafter possesse thee, and thine. O Lord, this people are still crying out that I am de∣ceived in this my prophesie; but, if I be deceived,7 O Lord, thou hast de∣ceived me, and I was de∣ceived, thou art stronger then I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me. O yee fond country-men, know that I am deceived by him that can neither deceive, nor be deceived; even by thee O Lord, the God of truth; It is thou that hast put me upon this taske, I could not, I durst not withdraw my obedi∣ence from thee; and now, I am, for doing my duty, made a scorne, and derision to the world. For since I spake from thee, I am so rated, and reviled,8 For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoile, because the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision daily.
and persecuted on all sides, that I cannot but complaine and cry out of their intolerable violences, and cruelties; for I doe daily suffer reproach, and scornfull insultations on all hands, for delivering thy message. 9 Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speake any more in his name, but his word was in mine heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones.Then was I ready in my weaknesse, to give in, and to resolve not to speak any more these unpleasing things, in his name; But I had not the power to hold in that word which I had received, it was as a burning fire within my bosome, yea in my very bones, &c. 10 For I heard the de∣faming of many, feare on every side, report, say they, and we will report it, &c.For I heard the defaming of many, and especially of him whom I have justly named, Feare on every side: which said, raise scandalls and accusations against him, and we will second them, &c. 13 14 15 Sing unto the Lord, praise ye the Lord, for he hath delivered the soule of the poore frō the hands of the evil man. Cursed be the day, &c.I have cause to sing praises unto the Lord, who hath delivered me from the very mouth of the pit; out of that miserable condition, wherein I was overtaken with so weake, and sinfull an impatience, as to curse the day, wherein I was borne, &c. CAP. XXI. 4 Behold I will turne backe the weapons of war that are in your hands, wherwith ye fight against the King of Babylon.I Will utterly disable all your forces, and your weapons that are in your hands, from hurting or opposing your enemies, or helping your selves, &c. O thou King of Iudah, the heire of Davids throne; Do thou stir up thy selfe zealously and faithfully to doe ju∣stice in thy place;12 O house of David, thus saith the Lord, Exe∣cute judgement in the mor∣ning, and deliver him that is spoiled, out of the hand of the oppressor. deliver, and right the oppressed, &c. Behold, I am against thee, O Ierusalem, who hast vainely trusted hitherto in thy strength, and situation; it is not that defenced valley,13 Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, & rock of the plain, saith the Lord, which say, who shall come downe a∣gainst us, or who shall en∣ter into our habitations? wherein a great part of thee (towards mount Libanus) is seated, nor the forts of thy plaine, that can keepe out my power, or the power of that enemy (the Chaldean) which I shall stirre up a∣gainst thee. I will kindle a fire in the forrest of Libanus, and by the goodly Cedars thereof will set Ierusalem on a flame,14 I will kindle a fire in the forrest thereof, and it shall devoure all things round about it. which shall devoure it to ashes. CAP. XXII. 4 For if yee doe these things, then shall there en∣ter in by the gates of this house Kings, &c.See chap. 17.25. 6 For thus saith the Lord unto the Kings house of Iudah, thou art Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon, yet surely I will make thee a wildernesse, & cities which are not in∣habited.THus saith the Lord unto the Kings house, (which is his ancient court,) upon the hill of Sion; As mount
Gilead is the prime hill of all those mountaines, which goe under the name of Lebanon; so art thou the most e∣minent, and remarkable place in all Iudea; yet surely thou shalt (through my just judgement) become a very wil∣dernesse. They shall cut downe those choice Cedar-beames wherewith thou art built; and cast them into the fire.7 And they shall cut downe thy choice Cedars, and cast them into the fire. Never take up lamentations for them that are slaine in the siege, for they are past their paine;10 Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemone him, but weepe sore for him that goeth away; for hee shall returne no more, nor see his ntive countrey. but weepe for those miserable men, that are led into captivity; for they shall indure a lingring death, and never returne backe to their home. Woe be to thee, Iehoiakim,13 Woe unto him that buildeth his house by un∣righteousnes, & his cham∣bers by wrong, that useth his neighbours service without wages, and giveth him not for his worke. which buildest a goodly royall palace, out of the extreame oppressions of my peo∣ple; putting them to servile workes for that purpose without all recompence of wages for their labour. Which saist; I will not take up with the old and meane buildings of my Ancestors,14 That saith, I will build me a wide house, & large chambers. I will set up a sumptu∣ous pile, fit for a King to dwell in, &c. Dost thou thinke to raigne ever the more happily,15 Shalt thou raigne, be∣cause thou closest thy selfe in Cedar? did not thy fa∣ther eate and drink and do judgement and justice, and then it was wel with him? and securely, for that thou hast closed up thy selfe in ce∣dar? Thy father, good King Iosiah, lived in much con∣tent, and happinesse by doing justice, and right unto his subjects; and prospered in so doing. They shall make no publique lamentation for him,18 They shall not la∣ment for him, saying; Ah Lord, or Ah, his glory. at his funerall, as they are wont to doe for their former Princes. But his carcasse shall be shamefully left unburied, ex∣posed to the foules of the aire, or to ravenous beasts,19 He shall be buried with the buriall of an asse. e∣ven as the carcasse of an asse, which is left to rot in a ditch &c. Goe up then (O miserable Iudah) goe up to the high∣est mountaines, that looke towards Assyria, or Aegypt,20 Goe up to Lebanon, and cry & lift up thy voice in Bashan, and cry from the passages; for all thy lo∣vers are destroyed. and call for the aide of those thine associates, in whom thou hast trusted; thou shalt finde small comfort in them, they shall be destroyed together with thee. All thy great friends, and Patrons shall vanish into winde; and thy confederates shall goe into captivity,22 The winde shall eat up all thy pastors, and thy lovers shall goe into capti∣vity. &c. O ye citizens of Ierusalem,23 O inhabitant of Le∣banon, that makest thy rest in the Cedars, how graci∣ous shalt thou bee when pangs come upon thee, the paine of a woman in tra∣vaile? which dwell in goodly houses made of the Cedars of Lebanon; in how wofull a plight shall ye be, when your calamity shall come up∣on you? where will then be your pride and delicacie; wherewith ye now please your selves?
As I live, saith the Lord, if Iechoniah the sonne of Ie∣hoiakim King of Iudah, were as neare, and as precious to me, as the signet upon the right hand useth to bee to him that weares it, yet I would pluck him thence,24 As I live, saith the Lord, though Coniah the son of Iehoiakim King of Iudah, were the signet up∣on my right hād, yet would I plucke thee thence. and cast him away, into captivity. 28 Is this man Coniah a despised broken Idol? is he a vessell wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out? &c.Is this man (Jechoniah) then so vile, and base a thing, as thou makest him? is he a likely man to be cast out, to∣gether with his familie, and seed, into a forraine capti∣vitie? O ye inhabitants of the earth, take diligent heed to this which I shall now deliver unto you.29 O earth, earth, earth, heare the word of the Lord. Take notice, that it is enacted in heaven, that this Je∣choniah shall never have issue,30 Thus saith the Lord, Write yee this man child∣lesse, a man that shall not prosper in his daies, for no man of his seed shall pro∣sper, &c. that shall sit upon the temporall throne of David; no man of his seed, in succee∣ding times shall so prosper, as to be King in Judah. CAP. XXIII. 3 And I will gather the remnant of my flocke, out of all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them againe to their folds, & they shall be fruit∣full and increase.IN that happy time of restauration, I will gather the remnant of mine elect people, out of all countries (both them of Judah, and of Israel) into the bosome of my Church; where they shall be fruitfull of all good works. I will set over them, holy, conscionable, able pastors, which shall feede them with the food of life,4 And I will set shep∣heards over them which shall feed them. &c. 5 Behold the daies come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righte∣ous branch, &c.See Isai. 4. verse 2. 6 In his daies Iudah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his name whereby hee shall bee called, The Lord our righteousnesse.In his daies those that belong to his true Church, shall be saved; and delivered from their spirituall enemies; And he shall be indued with infinite wisedome, righte∣ousnesse, and holinesse; in so much, as we shall be made the righteousnesse of God in him. 14 They shall no more say, the Lord liveth which brought the children of Is∣rael out of the land of Ae∣gypt, &c.See chapter 16. verse 14. and 15. 9 Mine heart within me is broken, because of the Prophets, all my bones shake, I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, be∣cause of the Lord, and be∣cause of the words of his holinesse.My heart within me is extreamely grieved and vexed, because of the false prophets, which mislead the people; I am in a great agonie, and distresse for them; I am not my selfe for extremity of passion, to thinke of those heavy judgements, which the Lord hath intended, and threat∣ned (in his holy, and just vengeance) to bring upon this people.
The land groaneth,10 For because of swe∣ring the land mourneth, the pleasant places of the wil∣dernesse are dried up, and their course is evill, and their force is not right. and mourneth under that fearfull and ordinary prophanation of the name of God, by false, and rash oathes; the pleasant pastures of those plaines where their flocks had wont to feed; are now dryed, and parched; because the men of Judah take wicked courses, and imploy their power to violence, and oppression. They shall fall,12 Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery waies in the dark∣nesse: they shall be driven on and fall therein, &c. and perish in the just punishment of their sins, as those that in the night time, walke in slippe∣ry places; so shall they be driven hastily forward, and fall, and mis-carry under the vengeance. If we shall make comparison betwixt the late pro∣phets of Israel, or the ten Tribes, with those of Judah, and Jerusalem; surely the Prophets of Israel, or Samaria, were foolish, and superstitious; they prophesied in the name of Baal, and caused my people to erre13 And I have seene folly in the Prophets of Sa∣maria, they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to erre. through their false doctrine, and idolatrous practises. But I have noted the Prophets of Judah and Jerusalem to be extreamely vicious in life, and abhominably filthy;14 I have seene also in the Prophets of Ierusalem an horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evill doers, that none doth returne from his wickednesse: they are all of them unto me as Sodome, and the inhabi∣tants therof as Gomorrah. they doe not onely commit shamefull adulteries, and make a trade of lies; but they hearten and incourage wic∣ked men in their leudnesse; so as no man can be reclaimed in regard therefore both of their sinne, and punishment, they are in no better case to mee, then the inhabitants of Sodome and Gomorrah. See chapter 9. verse 15.15 Behold I will feed thē with wormwood, &c. Feare not the sad predictions of this man (say these false Prophets) for he speakes at randome;18 For who hath stood in the counsel of the Lord, and hath perceived and heard his word? who hath marked his word, and heard it? howsoever he pretends; who hath been of counsell with God? What man hath been so familiar with the Almighty, as to take messages from him? Behold, God shall rush suddenly,19 Behold, a whirle∣winde of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even a grie∣vous whirlewinde, it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked. and violently upon these men; and shall carry them away, like some furious whirlewinde, which cannot be either avoided, or resisted. At last, ye shall by wofull experience finde all this verified, and shall then be deeply affected with it.20 In the latter daies ye shall consider. I gave no commission to these prophets, yet they run,21 I have not sent these prophets, yet they ranne. as of their owne heads, &c. If they had received directions, and errands from me,22 But if they had stood in my counsell, and had caused my people to heare my words, thē they should have turned them from their evill way, &c. and had delivered them accordingly, to my people, they should have laboured to have turned them from their leud courses. What doe ye make of me, saith the Lord?23 Am I a God at hand saith the Lord, and not a God afarre off? Doe yee
thinke me a God that may be eluded, or fled from? Doe ye thinke that I take notice onely of that, which is done neare hand? and not of that which is done afarre off? They are their owne prophets, they are not mine; they have broched the deceivable imaginations of their owne hearts.26 Yea they are pro∣phets of the deceit of their owne heart. 28 The prophet that hath a dreame, let him tell a dreame, and he that hath my word, let him speake my word faithfully, what is the chaffe to the wheat, saith the Lord?Away with all fraud in this holy service; That prophet which hath but dreamed, let him confesse it is but a dreame; and he that hath indeed a vision, and word from mee, let him deliver it as my message, faithfully; for what hath this chaffe of idle dreames, to doe with the pure graine of my visions, and revelations? 29 Is not my word like as a fire, saith the Lord, and like a hammer that brea∣keth the rock in pieces?Is not my word a powerfull word? is it not as a fire to burne up all the chaffe, and stubble? is it not as an iron hammer to breake the hardest, and most rocky hearts in peeces? 30 Therefore behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that steale my word every one from his neighbour.I am against those prophets, saith the Lord, that frau∣dulently, and cunningly keep back the word of the Lord from the people; and that take from each other (by com∣pact and agreement) those prophesies, which themselves have falsely devised, and unjustly ascribed unto God. 31 Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that use their tōgues and say; He saith.I am against those prophets, which by their smooth tongues perswade the people, it is the word of the Lord, which they deliver; when it is nothing but their owne fancie. 33 And when this peo∣ple, or the prophet, or a priest shall aske thee, say∣ing; what is the burden of the Lord? thou shalt then say unto them, What bur∣den? I will even forsake you, saith the Lord.When they shall aske thee in scorne; Now, prophet, what is the burden from the Lord? thou shalt answere them; What is the burden, doe ye aske? Loe this is the burden, I will utterly cast you off, saith the Lord. 34 And as for the pro∣phet, and the priest, and the people that shall say, The burden of the Lord, I will even punish that man and his house.And that man, whether Priest, or Prophet, or whoso∣ever, that shall scornfully aske thee this question, I will plague both him, and his house. 35 Thus shall yee say every one to his neighbor, and every one to his bro∣ther, What hath the Lord answered; and what hath the Lord spoken?Neither would I have, indeed, any mention amongst men, of any burden in my messages; as if there were no∣thing but heavie tidings sent by mee to my people; In stead thereof, lot them rather say, What hath the Lord spoken? &c. 36 For every mans word shall be his burden.Though there were no prophet to denounce judge∣ment against men, yet every man would be a prophet to himselfe; his very conscience would sufficiently lay be∣fore him the just judgement of the Almighty.
CAP. XXIIII. ANd now all these threatned judgements,1 The Lord shewed me & behold, two baskets of figgs were set before the temple of the Lord, after that Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon had carried a∣way captive Ieconiah the son of Iehoiakim King of Iudah, and the Princes of Iudah, with the carpenters and Smiths from Ierusa∣lem, and had brought them to Babylon. being ac∣cordingly executed, upon Judah and Jerusalem, in so much as the King of Babylon had now carryed away Je∣choniah King of Judah, and the Princes of Judah, and their artificers, unto Babylon; yet so as that some of the peo∣ple remained still in the land, under Zedekiah King of Judah, who exalted himselfe against Nebuchadnezar the King of Babylon; God, willing to shew the estate of both those sorts of people, (those which yielded to goe into the captivity, and those that resolved to stand out and stay at home) shewed me two baskets of figs, as the em∣bleme and figure of them both. Thus saith the Lord;5 Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; like these good figs, so will I ac∣knowledge them that are carried away captive of Iu∣dah, whom I have sent out of this place, &c. That basket of good figgs re∣presents those Iewes, which are carryed away into the captivity of Babylon; who as they are humbled, and bet∣tered by their affliction, so shall be dealt with by me, ac∣cordingly. For I will take speciall care of them,6 For I will let mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them a∣gaine to this land. both to preserve them there, and to bring them back againe, &c. The other basket of ill figgs, which cannot be eaten, represents those Jewes that stay still stubbornly behinde,8 And as the evill figs which cannot be eaten, they are so evill: Surely thus saith the Lord, so will I give Zedekiah the King of Iudah, and his Princes, and the residue of Ierusa∣lem, that remaine in this land, and them that dwell in the land of Aegypt. and will needs follow Zedekiah, to rebell against the King of Babylon, and those that seeke harbour in Aegypt; and these shall speed accordingly, for I will give them up into the hand of the Chaldees, &c. CAP. XXV. BEhold I will bring against thee the Chaldeans and those other their Northren associates,9 Behold I will send, and take all the families of the North; saith the Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar the King of Babylon my ser∣vant, &c. with Nebu∣chadnezar the King of Babylon whom I shall employ for my executioner in this service, &c. I will take fro you all mirth and gladnesse; yea, all commodities for the use, and convenience of living;10 And the voice of the bride, the sound of the milstones, and the light of the candle. so as your life shall be dolefull and miserable. For those proud and imperious Chaldees, which held my people in servitude, for seventie yeares,14 For many nations & great Kings shall serve themselves of them also. will I give to be a prey to other great Kings and nations, and they shall share their dominions amongst them, &c.
15 Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand; and cause all the nations to whom I have sent thee, to drinke it.See Isa. 51.17. And doe thou denounce all these judgements unto all those severall nations to which I send thee; and assure them that they shall all drinke of this bitter cup, in their due seasons. 16 And they shall drinke, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send a∣mong them.They shall not be able to avoid those fearefull judge∣ments which thou threatnest from me; but shall so un∣dergoe them, as that they shall be astonished therewith, and grow madly impatient; because of the destruction that I will send amongst them. Then I tooke the cup at the Lords hand, and gave it to be pledged of all those nations to whom the Lord had sent me.17 Then took I the cup at the Lords hand, and made all the nations to drinke; unto whō the Lord had sent me. 20 And all the mingled people, and all the Kings of the land of Vz.To all those mingled people of severall nations which are hereafter mentioned, &c. And the Kings of those countries which are beyond the sea,22 And the Kings of the Isles which are beyond the sea. whether Isles, or continent. Take ye deepe of this cup of fury and vengeance, doe not thinke that a tast,27 Drink yee and bee drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you. or small draught will serve the turne; No, an easie revenge will not content me, saith God; ye shall be so punished, and plagued by my just hand, as that ye shall not be your selves; but in an amazed distractednesse, ye shall fall, and perish. 28 Ye shall certainely drinke.See verse 16. 30 The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habi∣tation, hee shall mightily roare upon his habitation, he shal give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, a∣gainst all the inhabitants of the earth.The Lord shal declare from heaven his great fury, and indignation against the wicked, he shall roar like a fierce Lyon, and shout out aloud, and call up the Babylonians to their taske of slaughter, as they that tread the grapes, doe, by their loud cries, incourage each other to the worke. As an earthen vessell that is curiously wrought, whiles it holds sound,34 And ye shall fall like a pleasant vessell. is well esteemed; but if it once fall, and breake, is worth nothing, and is only fit to bee cast upon the dunghill; so shall ye be unto me. 38 Hee hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is desolate.He hath forsaken his Temple, as a Lyon forsakes his den; whiles he abode in that Temple of his, hee was as a strong Lyon to defend his people; but now, hee hath gi∣ven them up to desolation, and spoile, &c. CAP. XXVI. 6 Then will I make this house like Shiloh.See chapter 7. verse 12. ANd sate downe in that new gate of the Temple,10 And sate downe in the entry of the new gate of the Lords house. which King Iotham had built, to appease the tumult
and to heare the cause of Ieremiah. See Genes. 6.7.13 The Lord will re∣pent him, &c. But though there was vehement importunity used for the putting of Ieremiah to death,24 Neverthelesse, the hand of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, was with Iere∣miah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death. both by the priests and people, yet Ahikam the son of Shaphan wrought so for him, that he was delivered out of their hands. CAP. XXVII. IN the beginning of the raigne of Iehoiakim,1 In the beginning of the raigne of Iehoiakim the son of Iosiah King of Iudah, came this word un∣to Ieremiah from the Lord, saying, when all things were quiet, and successefull; this word of the Lord came to Ieremiah, to be executed afterwards in the raigne of Zedekiah. The Kings of Edom, and of Moab,3 And send them to the King of Edom, and to the King of Moab, and to the King of the Ammo∣nites, and to the King of Tirus, and to the King of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers which come to Ierusalem unto Zedekiah King of Iudah. and the King of the Ammonites, and of Tirus, and Zidon will send ambas∣sadors to Zedekiah, to treat of a confederacie against the King of Babylon; doe thou therefore send unto them these fetters, and yoakes, to let them know, that they shal all come under the yoake & bondage of the King of Ba∣bylon. See Chapter 25. verse 9.6 The King of Babylon my servant. Vntill the time be expired, which God hath prefixed for the period of that monarchy; and then many nations,7 Vntill the very time of his land come, and then many nations and great Kings shall serve them∣selves of him. and great Kings shall come and divide it amongst them, as a common pray. If ye submit your selves to the Babylonians, yee shall both be preserved, and, in due time, restored.12 Bring your neckes under the yoke of the King of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live. And there they shall be, untill the time of their re∣stauration, and restitution by Cyrus,22 And there shall they be untill the day that I vi∣site them, saith the Lord, then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place. whom I will stir up to be gracious unto my people. CAP. XXVIII. I Will deliver, and free my people from the captivity,2 I have broken the yoke of the King of Baby∣lon. and bondage of the King of Babylon; Within the space of two full yeares,3 Within two ful yeares. &c. Thou, O Hananiah, hast broken the yokes of wood;13 Goe, and tell Hana∣niah, saying, Thus saith the Lord, thou hast broken the yokes of wood, but thou shalt make for them yokes of yron. but I am commanded, from the Lord, to make them yokes of yron; to signifie that this bondage, which thou saidst should be within two yeares, utterly freed and discharged, shall be continued in a more grievous, and
cruell manner, then before, and that without all possibi∣lity of escaping, or mitigation; untill the prefixed time of seventy yeares be expired. CAP. XXIX. 11 For I know the thoughts that I thinke to∣wards you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evill, to give you an ex∣pected end.I Know what I have decreed concerning you; even fa∣vour, and deliverance in my appointed time, and not extirpation, and destruction, so as ye shall, at the last, have that happy issue which ye desire, and expect. 17 And I will make thē like vile figs that cannot be eaten, &c.See Chapter 24. verse 8. For every one that in a franticke humor, takes upon him to be a Prophet;26 For every man that is mad, and maketh him∣selfe a prophet, &c. and delivers his owne distracted fancies for visions from God, &c. CAP. XXX. 3 For loe, the dayes come saith the Lord, that I will bring againe the captivitie of my people Israel and Iudah, saith the Lord, and I will cause thē to returne to the land, that I gave to their fathers.HOwsoever God will not so suddenly free his people from their captivity, as is falsely foretold by some flattering prophets, yet surely he hath set the time, wherein he will most certainly accomplish it, &c. It is not for a man (we know) to travell with child; how then is it,6 Aske yee now and see whether a man doth travell with child: wher∣fore doe I see every man with his hands on his loynes, as a woman in tra∣vell, and all faces are turn∣ed into palenesse. that the men hold their hands on their loines, and move their bodies in a wofull complaint of paine, as if they were women in the very throwes of their delivery; and all faces by the palenesse thereof bewray feare and astonishment? It is the time of the most grievous trouble, and cala∣mity to the posterity of Jacob;7 It is even the time of Iacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. but, at last it shall end well; and they shall be delivered from it. 9 But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King, whom I will raise up unto them.They shall serve the Lord their God, and Christ his Sonne, the successour of David, in his spirituall govern∣ment, whom I will in due time send into the world. 12 For thus saith the Lord, thy bruis is incurable.Thine affliction (in regard of any humane help) is ut∣terly remedilesse, &c. 13 There is none to plead thy cause, that thou maiest be bound up: thou hast no healing medicines.There is none so much, as to solicit for thy cure, and redresse; nor any meanes left, whereby it may be (in mans reason) effected. 14 All thy lovers have forgotten thee, they seeke thee not, for I have wound∣ed thee with the wound of an enemie.All those confederate nations that professed friend∣ship to thee, have quite forgotten thee; for I have deeply
afflicted thee, by the cruell hand of the Chaldeans, &c. Because they have insulted upon thy misery, and de∣spised thee, as an out-cast and forlorne people, saying;17 Because they called thee an outcast, saying, this is Zion whom no man seeketh after This is that goodly hill of Zion; once the pride, now the scorne of the world. CAP. XXXI. THe people,2 Thus saith the Lord; the people which were left of the sword, found grace in the wildernesse, even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest. which were left of the sword in the siege and sacking of Jerusalem, found favour in the land of their captivitie; even the remainder of the Iewes, when I tooke order for their setling, for the time, in the land of Chaldea. O Ierusalem, thou shalt be built againe;4 Againe I will build thee, and thou shalt be built, O Virgin of Israel, thou shalt againe bee a∣dorned with thy Tabrets, and shalt goe forth, in the daunces of thē that make merry. and shalt have againe minstralsie, and mirth within thy walls: O my Church, thou shalt be happily restored, and filled with true spirituall joy. Those fruitfull hills of Samaria, which have lien long waste, shall be stored with excellent vines;5 Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountaines of Samaria, the planters shall plant, and shall eate them as common things. and those that plant them, shall eate the grapes plentifully, and make no spare of them. Yea, not only those of Iudah,6 For there shal be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise yee, and let us goe up to Zion unto the Lord our God. but even those of the ten Tribes of Israel, which have beene long dispersed, and neglected, shall be gathered together to Ierusalem; and be incouraged by their spirituall watchmen, to joyne to∣gether in submission to the true Church. Behold,8 Behold, I will bring them from the North Countrey, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blinde, and the lame, the women with child, and her that travelleth with child together. I will bring them backe againe from Babylon and fetch them up from all coasts, and will make them a type of my Evangelicall Church; into which I will call all sorts of persons, even those that are most full, and most conscious of their owne infirmities, &c. I will lead them aright by the guidance of my word, in the safe, and happy wayes of life, holily,9 I will cause them to walke by the rivers of wa∣ters, in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first borne. and inoffen∣sively; for I am a father to my faithfull ones. Therefore they shall come, and sing in the great Con∣gregation, and most eminent assemblies; and shall meet chearfully together, to injoy the holy things of God,12 Therefore shall they come & sing in the height of Zion, & shal flow toge∣ther to the goodnesse of the Lord, for wheat and for wine, and for oyle, and for the young of the flocke, and of the heard: and their soule shal be as a watered gardē, & they shal not sorrow any mor eat all his word and Sacraments, and their soule shall be refreshed,
as a new-watered garden in a drought; and they shall have no more cause of dejection, and hopelesse sorrow. Methinkes I heare a voice in the high place, or moun∣taine, (whence it may sound furthest;) a voice of mourn∣ing and lamentation; Rachel the mother of Ioseph and Benjamin, seemes to mourne for her children (those of Ephraim and the other tribes) long since desolated;15 Thus saith the Lord, A voice was heard in Ra∣math, lamentation, and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children, refused to bee comforted for her children, because they were not. and will not admit of any comfort, because they are scat∣tered, and vanished without all hope of restauration, or returne. Thus saith the Lord to mourning Rachel, Refraine thy weeping, for those sonnes of thy wombe, the distres∣sed Israelites;16 Thus saith the Lord, Refraine thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from teares, for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the Lord, and they shall come againe from the land of the enemie. for that desolated region shall flourish a∣gaine; thou shalt receive comfort after thy sorrow; and those children, of thine, shall returne from the land of their captivity. In that end, which God hath prefixed to thy sorrows and sufferings, there is hope, yea assurance, that thy chil∣dren shall come againe to their native countrey.17 And there is hope in thine end, saith the Lord, that thy children shall come againe, &c. I have heard those of the ten Tribes bemoaning them∣selves,18 I have surely heard, Ephraim bemoaning him∣selfe thus, Thou hast chasti∣sed me, and I was chasti∣sed as a bullocke unaccu∣stomed to the yoake, &c. after their captivitie, thus; Thou hast afflicted me, O Lord, & I am humbled; I was as a wild yong bullocke, unaccustomed to the yoke, but now, thou hast caused me to stoope unto it, &c. Surely after that thou hadst wrought upon me, and shewd me my sinne, I repented,19 Surely after that I was turned, I repented. &c. 20 Is Ephraim my deare sonne? is he a plea∣sant childe? for since I spake against him, I doe earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowells are troubled for him: I will surely have mercy up∣on him, saith the Lord.Would any man thinke that Israel, thus afflicted, and (as it were) neglected, were my deare Sonne? that hee were a child wherein I take pleasure, and delight. Yet he is so, and howsoever I have dealt severely with him, both in my words and actions; yet I do in mercy still re∣member him; and the bowells of my compassion yearne towards him. 21 Set thee up way-markes; make thee high heapes: set thine heart to∣ward the hie way, even the way which thou wentest: turne againe.Thou shalt returne to thine owne land, O my people, and therefore set thee up way-markes, as thou goest; heap up stones, for the direction of thy passage, through the wildernesse; and set thy thoughts to remember all the turnings of the way; and addresse thy selfe towards thy returne, &c. 22 How long wilt thou goe about, O thou backsli∣ding daughter? for the Lord created a new thing in the earth: A woman shall compasse a man.How long wilt thou waver, and stagger in thy beliefe, O thou rebellious Israel? for the Lord, which hath un∣dertaken
this deliverance, shall doe a strange and mar∣velous thing in the earth; Though the strength of the e∣nemie be great, and terrible, and the weaknesse of my people is noted, and despicable, so as they are but as wo∣men, in comparison of their manly adversaries; yet these weake effeminate Iewes shall prevaile against those stout, and manly Chaldeans. When I shall have brought them backe from their captivitie;23 When I shall bring againe their captivitie, the Lord blesse thee, O habita∣tion of justice, and moun∣taine of holinesse. and planted them againe in their land of Iu∣dah; they shall with joyfull acclamations acknowledge the goodnesse of God, and pray for a continuance and in∣crease of mercy, saying, the Lord goe on to blesse and prosper thee, O Jerusalem, which now from thy ruines, and edsolation, art raised up to bee an habitation of justice; and blesse thy Temple, wherein now holinesse shall re-inhabite. Upon these sweet, and comfortable visions,26 Vpon this, I a wa∣ked, and eheld, and my sleepe was sweet unto mee. wherein the Lord revealed to me his good pleasure concerning his Church, I awaked; and was exceedingly cheared up, and delighted with the remembrance thereof. I will cause my Church (which now seemes to lie wast,27 Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will sow the house of Israel, and the house of Iudah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast. and barren) to yeeld so plentifull an increase of con∣verts to me, as the rich ground doth of the seed which is sowne in the furrowes of it,; and will also multiply unto it all outward helps for the maintenance and strength thereof. In those dayes, after I shall have humbled my people,29 In those dayes, they shall say no more, The fa∣thers have eaten a sower grape, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. & restored, and comforted them againe, they shal give mee the praise of my justice and mercy, and shall not be rea∣dy to murmur against my proceedings as too severe, and unjust, so as they have beene apt to doe in saying; The fathers have offended, and the children are punished. But shall willingly acknowledge that every man of them hath smarted for his owne iniquity;30 But every one shall die for his owne iniquitie, evrie man that eateth the sowre grape, his teeth shal be set on edge. and hath had sinnes enow of his owne, to warrant Gods proceedings against him. Behold, the dayes of the Messiah are comming,31 Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will make a a new Co∣venant with the house of Israel: wher∣in I will make a new covenant with my Church. Not according to the forme of that Legall covenant, which I made with their fathers,32 Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers. &c. But this shall be my covenant of grace, with them, under the Gospell (which shall bring with it the power of regeneration, and salvation by Christ;33 But this shall be the Covenant that I wil make with the house of Israel; After those dayes, saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God. In those daies of mine Evangelicall Church, I will worke mightily in the hearts of my people, and will bring them, by the in∣operation
of my spirit, to the obediēce of my law; which being formerly written in tables of stone, shall now bee ingraven so in the hearts of men, that they shall out of love, and willing obedience frame themselves thereun∣to, &c. 34 And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord.And there shall bee so cleare a light of my Gospell, shining forth unto men, as that they shall not so much need the helpe of others instruction, in the grounds and principles of religion; but shall be inlightned from God, with a competent measure of knowledge, even from the meanest and weakest novice in Christianity, unto the greatest proficient therein, &c. Hath ordained a due, constant, and regular motion of the moone, and starres, for a light by night.35 And the ordinances of the Moone, and starres, for a light by night. 36 If those ordinances depart frō before me, saith the Lord, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me for ever.If that course which I have set in nature, for the moti∣ons of the heavens, may be altered, then, may it be pos∣sible for my Church to faile upon earth. 37 If heaven, &c. then I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, saith the Lord.There can bee nothing more impossible, then that I should utterly cast off my people (notwithstanding their ill deservings of me) so as that not a remnant of them should be preserved. 38, 39 Behold, the daies come, saith the Lord, that the citie shall be built to the Lord from the towre of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner.The dayes shall come saith the Lord, that this citie of Jerusalem (which yet stands in her full glory) shall after the rasing and destruction of it, be fully built up againe, in all the whole compasse of it, from the one end to the other; And (which is thereby typified) my Evangelicall Church shall be built upon the ruines of the Jewish,40 And the whole val∣ley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and all the fieldes unto the brooke of Kidron, unto the corner of the horse-gate towards the East, shall be holy un∣to the Lord. in a complete forme, and bee wholly consecrated to the Lord. So also verse 40. CAP. XXXII. 5 There shall he be un∣till I visit him, saith the Lord.THere shall he be, untill the time that I shall put an end to his captivity by death, &c. 8 Buy my field I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the countrey of Benjamin, for the right inheritance is thine, and the redemption is thine, buy it for thy selfe, then I knew that this was the word of the Lord.Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth; It is true indeed, that the enemie is now in possession of it; so as no man may, or dare looke forth towards it; yet out of an assurance that it shall in due time be freed, and re∣delivered, doe thou give me mony for it, before hand;
since thou art the next of kinne, and the purchace per∣taines unto thee by the Law. And accordingly I bought the field of Hanameel, my Cozen german, that was at Anathoth,9 And I bought the field of Hanameel my un∣cles sonne, that was in A∣nathoth, and weighed him the money, even seventeen Shekles of silver. and paid him the mony for it. Lay up these evidences sure, in an earthen vessell, where they may bekt ep from rotting, for a long time;14 And this evidence which is open, and put them in an earthen vessell, that they may continue many dayes. as those whereof I shall have most certaine use hereafter; For this land shall be in due time repossessed, &c. Thou punishest the sinnes of the fathers in those chil∣dren, wherein they doe still live;18 And recompensest the iniquitie of the fathers into the bosome of their children after them. who being as it were parts of their parents, it cannot bee but their parents must justly (in temporall things) suffer in them. Behold,24 Behold the mounts, they are come unto the citie to take it. those mounts which are cast up for the siege of Jerusalem, &c. They have utterly neglected me, and wilfully refused to give eare,33 And they have turn∣ed unto me the backe, and not the face. and respect to that which I delivered unto them, &c. They have set up their abhominable altars to their I∣dols, in the Temple which is consecrated to my name,24 But they set their a∣bominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it. to defile it. I will unite them both in their judgements, and in their affections, and in their practices;39 I will give them one heart and one way, &c. so as they shall happily agree together, both to thinke and to doe the same things. There shall be an ordinary course of bargaines,44 Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe evidences, and seale them, and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Ierusalem. and purchases; and all those formes of legall transactions, which are wont to be in use upon these occasions, &c. CAP. XXXIII. IN those cities which are built upon the hills,13 In the cities of the mountaines, in the cities of the vale, and in the cities of the South, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Ierusalē, and in the cities of Iudah, shall the flockes passe a∣gaine under the hands of him that telleth them, saith the Lord. and those which are low built in the vallies; even in all the region of Judea, and Samaria, shall be a peaceable habitation of my people; so as the shepheard may there in their fields, & pastures, securely feed his flockes, and tell their number at his owne leasure. Behold, the dayes draw on,14 Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will performe that good thing which I have pro∣mised to the children of Israel, and to the house Iu∣dah. wherein I will performe those gracious promises of mercy, and deliverance, which I have made to my people of Iudah, and Israel.
15 At that time will I cause the branch of righ∣teousnes to grow up unto David, &c.See Isa. 4.2. 17 For thus saith the Lord, David shall never want a man to sit upon the thron of the house of IsraelHe that is the true Sonne of David, shall evermore sit in the throne, and rule and raigne over his Church, to the end of the world. Neither shall there be any interruption of that perfect Priesthood,18 Neither shall the priests, the levites want a man before mee to offer burnt offerings, and to kin∣dle meate offerings, and to doe sacrifice continually. which shall be performed, by that all-suffi∣cient Mediator, who shall offer up a full sacrifice to his Father, and present our praiers & spirituall sacrifices unto God. 20 If you can break my covenant of day and night, &c.See Chap. 31. verse. 36. CAP. XXXIIII. 5 But thou shalt die in peace, and with the burn∣ings of thy fathers the for∣mer Kings which were be∣fore thee, so shall they burne odours for thee, &c.BVt thou shalt die of thy faire death; not violent, but naturall; and shalt be honourably buried, after a princely manner, with store of sweet odors burnt about thy coffin, and in the vault where thou shalt be laid. After that King Zedekiah, being admonished of this point of the law,8 After that the King Zedekiah had made a co∣venant with all the people which were at Ierusalem to proclaime libertie unto them. had dealt with the people effectually, to dismisse those of their owne nation, out of their ser∣vice, in the end of the seventh yeare, according to the pre∣script of the law, and proclamation was made hereof accordingly. 10 Then they obeyed and let them goe.They yielded for the time, and gave way for the per∣formance of this edict; and gave freedome to their Jew∣ish servants. 11 But afterwards they turned, and caused the ser∣vants, and the handmaids, whom they had let go free to returne, and brought them in subjection for ser∣vants and for handmaids.But afterwards they repented of their good act, and injuriously recalled their lately-dismissed servants, and handmaids, into their former servitude. Behold, I doe give full liberty to the sword, and to the pestilence, and to the famine,17 Behold, I proclaime a libertie for you, saith the Lord, to the sword, to the pestilence, & to the famine. to seize upon you, &c. Ye know, ye made a covenant with me, in that anci∣ent solemne manner,18 And I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant, which have not performed the words of the covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the calfe in twain, and passed between the parts thereof. that was used by your father Abra∣ham; wherein you, dividing the calfe into halves, passed betweene the two halves of it, wishing, by way of execra∣tion, to be so divided, if you did not observe this pro∣mise, and covenant of yours; and now, yee have palpably broken this part of your covenant with me; therefore I will give the transgressors hereof into the hand of their enemies. Into the hand of the King of Babylons armie,21 Into the hand of the King of Babylons armie, which are gone up from you. which is now for the time departed from your siege, to goe up a∣gainst
Aegypt, but, however ye have vainely imagined, shall returne to your cost. See chap. 27.5. CAP. XXXV. ANd I brought some of the house of Jonadab the son of Rechab, into the court of the Temple,4 And I brought them into the house of the Lord, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah a man of God, which was by the cham∣ber of the Princes. and ledde them into one of those chambers, which are appointed therein for the Priests, & Levites; even into the lodging of one of the holiest of the Priests, next to the chamber of the chiefe governour of the Temple, &c. And in that holy place, I did set before those sons of Rechab, pots of wine, and cups, and, as of my owne mo∣tion, wished them to drinke wine.5 And I set before the sonnes of the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and I said unto them, Drink ye wine. For Jonadab the son of Rechab, three hundred yeares agoe, charged all us that should come of his loines, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever.6 For Ionadab the son of Rechab our father, com∣manded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever. That ye may live long in the land where your forefa∣thers, the Kenites were, and ye now are strangers.7 That ye may live ma∣ny daies in the land where ye be strangers. CAP. XXXVI. I Must keepe close, upon the command of the Lord,5 I am shut up. See Chapter 27.4. and not stirre forth. Now the King sate in the winter house; for it was in the moneth of November, when the season grew to bee somewhat cold, and there was a fire on the hearth burn∣ing before him.22 Now the King sate in the winter house, in the ninth moneth, & there was a fire on the hearth bur∣ning before him. But the Lord raised up meanes of hiding,26 But the Lord hid him. and con∣cealing him from the fury of King Jehojakim. CAP. XXXVII. IN stead of Jechoniah the sonne of Jehojakim,1 In stead of Coniah the son of Iehojakim. who took upon him to raigne, for three moneths, and then yiel∣ded to the King of Babylon. Then Jeremiah the prophet,12 Then Ieremiah went forth out of Ierusalem to goe into the land of Benja∣min, to separate himselfe thence in the mids of the people. taking the advantage of the removall of the Chaldean armie, from the siege of Ierusalem, went forth with the rest of his country-men, to goe into his native place, in the tribe of Benjamin, to live apart there, for a time. Thou hast hitherto set out the power,13 Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans. and future suc∣cesse
of the Chaldees, and now thou art secretly slinking away to them. 21 Then Zedekiah the King commāded that they should commit Ieremiah into the court of the prison and that they should give him daily a piece of bread out of the bakers street, un∣till all the bread of the city were spent.Then Zedekiah the King being moved with some compassion towards Ieremiah, commanded him to a lar∣ger custodie, where he had some more liberty, and gave charge that he should have (notwithstanding the ex∣treme scarcity of the time,) every day a peece of the or∣dinary and common bread of the city allowed unto him, &c. CAP. XXXVIII. 4 Hee weakneth the hands of the men of warre that remain in this citie, & the hands of all the people in speaking such words un∣to them.HEE discourageth the souldiers within the city, and all the inhabitants of Ierusalem, that they have no heart to make resistance unto the King of Babylon, &c. 5 For the King is not he that can doe any thing against you.For my power, you see, is growne into disregard a∣mongst you; you have the law in your owne hands. 7 The King then sitting in the gate of Benjamin,When the King was sitting in the publique place of ju∣dicature; Ebedmelech went purposely out of the Court unto him,8 Ebedmelech went forth of the Kings house, and spake to the King, saying, saying, &c. And those women shal make excuses for thee, and say; Thy Princes and followers have set thee on, to doe that which thou wouldst otherwise never have attempted,22 And those women shall say, Thy friends have set thee on, and have pre∣vailed against thee, thy feet are sunke in the mire, and they are turned away back namely, to revolt from the King of Babylon; their pow∣er and importunity hath thus swaied thee; and through their solicitation, thou art brought into this miserable inconvenience; and they have themselves also revolted. CAP. XXXIX. 9 And those that fell a∣way, that fell to him, with the rest of the people that remained.THose that stirred up Zedekiah to this defection, and joyned with him, in that revolt, together with the rest of the people, of any better fashion. 14 And committed him to Gedaliah, &c. that hee should carry him home, so he dwelt amōg the peopleHe commanded Gedaliah, to whom was committed the chiefe rule of all the affaires of Jerusalem, by Nebu∣chadnezar, that he should take Ieremiah home to his house; so Ieremiah lived at large, in free liberty, amongst the people. 17 Thou shalt not be given into the hand of the mē of whom thou art afraid.Thou shalt not be delivered into the hands of the courtiers of Zedekiah, whose envie thou hast drawne up∣on thee for my sake. 18 But thy life shall be for a prey unto thee, be∣cause thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the Lord.Thy life shall be reserved safe unto thee (whatever be∣come of thy outward estate) and shall be given thee, as a
reward of thy kindnesse to my prophets, and religious confidence in me, saith the Lord. CAP. XL. AFter this charge given,1 The word which came to Ieremiah from the Lord, after that Nebuzara∣dan the captain of the gard had let him goe from Ra∣mah, when hee had taken him being bound in chains among all that were caried away captive of Ierusalem and Iudah, &c. concerning the custody of Ie∣remiah, yet hee was, amongst the other captives, (which were carrying away towards Babylon) driven for∣ward in his chaines, as farre as Ramah; at which place, Nebuzaradan, the Captaine of the guard, took notice of him, and from thence gave him his liberty, and free option, either to returne, or to goe forward.4 Behold I loose thee this day frō the chains, &c. Now when those captaines of the Iewes (which had be∣fore saved themselves, by flight,7 Now when all the captaines of the forces which were in the fields, even they, and their men heard that the King of Ba∣bylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahiakam go∣vernor in the land. upon the first report of the approach of the Chaldean army, which were disper∣sed in the countrey) heard that the King of Babylon had made Gedaliah governour. CAP. XLI. FOurescore of those Iewes which remained still in the land of Iudea, came in a mournfull fashion,5 Even fourscore men, having their beards shaven and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with offerings and incense in their hand, to bring thē to the house of the Lord. to condole the late misery of their brethren, and their whole land; and brought with them oblation, and incense to offer unto the Lord in his Temple. Counterfaiting a mutuall sorrow with them, and ex∣pressing it very passionately all the way.6 Weeping all along as he went. CAP. XLII. WHether it be pleasing to us, or,6 Whether it bee good, or whether it be evill. whether it be grie∣vous, and displeasing, we wil be sure to do it, &c. See Genesis 6.7.10 For I repent me of the evill that I have done unto you. CAP. XLIII. ANd amongst the rest, Iohanan tooke with him (by strong hand) Ieremiah the Prophet, and Baruch the sonne of Neriah,6 And Ieremiah the pro∣phet, and Baruch the sonne of Neriah. downe into Aegypt. Nebuchadnezar,10 I wil take Nebuchad∣nezar the King of Babylon my servant, and I will set his throne upon these stons that I have hid, & he shall spread his royall pavilion over them. whom I employ in the executions of my judgements upon divers nations; and I wil cause him to raign over this land of Aegypt; and to erect his throne in this court, and city of Tahpenes.
12 And hee shall aray himselfe with the land of Aegypt, as a shepheard put∣teth on his garment.And he shall goe forth, thence, richly laden and aray∣ed with the wealthy spoiles of Aegypt; as a shepheard, in a bleake winde, wraps his cloake round about him, and so walketh compassed with that unweldy garment, &c. 13 He shall break also the images of Bethshe∣meth that is in the land of Aegypt.And he shall breake down all the images in the state∣ly Temples of Heliopolis, which is the mother-city of that infamous superstition, &c. CAP. XLIIII. 14 For none shall re∣turne but such as shall e∣scape.NOne shall returne into the land of Iudah, but such as shall speedily withdraw themselves out of Aegypt, & make an escape from this wicked Iohanan, who hath brought us hither. 17 To burne incense to the Queene of heaven, and to powre out drink-offe∣rings, &c.To burne incense to the Sun, or Moone; and to offer sacrifices unto them, &c. Did not our husbands both aide and animate us in those sacrifices which we thus offered?19 Did wee powre out these drinke-offerings to her, without our husbands? I will not indure that so much as an outward professi∣on shall be made of my name, and worship, by any man of Iudah, in the land of Aegypt.26 I have sworne by my great name, saith the Lord, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Iu∣dah, in all the lād of Aegypt CAP. XLV. 3 Thou didst say, Wo is me now, for the Lord hath added grief to my sorrow.THou madest great moane for the extreme misery of thy people; and cryedst out, Woe is me for the grie∣vous calamity that is comne upon us, &c. 4 Behold, that which I have built, will I breake downe, and that which I have planted, I will plucke up, even this whole land.I have determined to execute my decreed judgements against this whole land; it is not for thee to repine, or be too much moved at this just severity. And is it time for thee now, in this extreme desolati∣on,5 And seekest thou great things for thy selfe? seeke them not, for behold, I wil bring evill upon all flesh, saith the Lord, but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest. and danger of all things, to be casting for any great matters for thy selfe? For, behold, I will bring a com∣mon destruction upon this people round about; and thou maist thinke thy selfe well dealt with, if thou canst goe away with thy life; this is the best booty that thou canst hope for, which way soever thou goest. CAP. XLVI. 6 Let not the swift flee away, nor the mightie man escape, they shall stumble and fall toward the North by the river Euphrates.SWiftnesse of foot shall not availe the nimble, neither shall strength availe the mighty man; they shall all be cut off; and fall by the hand of the Babylonians. 7 Who is this that com∣meth up as a flood, whose waters are moved as the rivers?What mighty monarch is this that commeth in like a
swelling flood, and threats to sweep all before him like an impetuous torrent? It is even the proud King of Aegypt,8 Aegypt raiseth up like a flood, and his waters are moved like the rivers, and he saith, I will goe up, and will cover the earth, I will destroy the citie, and the inhabitants thereof. that riseth up thus like a flood; and swelleth like a furious river; who is ready to say; I will goe up to Chaldea it selfe, and will (by my powerfull inundation) cover all the face of the earth, I will destroy Babylon, and kill the inhabitants of it. Mount on your horses, O ye Aegyptians,9 Come up ye horses, & rage ye charets, and let the mightie men come forth, the Ethiopians and the Li∣byans that hādle the shield & the Lydians that handle and bend the bow. and drive your chariots, with a furious speed; let our mighty asso∣ciates of Ethiopia, and Lydia, &c. come forth, and joyn their invincible forces with ours. For this is the day wherein the Lord God of hosts hath a great slaughter to be made, and much effusion of mans blood, in the countrey of Chaldea,10 For this is the day of the Lord God of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his ad∣versaries, &c. by the river Euphrates. Goe ye vaine Aegyptians, goe up to Gilead, and take thence good store of balm with you, to cure the wounds which ye shall receive of the Chaldees; and yet, these precious applications shall bee to no purpose,11 Goe up into Gilead, and take balme, O virgine, the daughter of Aegypt: in vaine shalt thou use many medicines, for thou shalt not be cured. for thou shalt be past all possibility of curing. All the nations round about have taken notice of thy shamefull flight, and thine out-cries have filled the land; for in that numerous army of thine, when it was once disordered, and put to flight,12 The nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry hath filled the land; for the mighty man hath stumbled against the migh∣ty, and they are fallen both together. one of thy mighty men stumbled upon another, and hindered each other in their escape, so as they are fallen together, under the sword of the enemie. Let it be openly declared, and published in all the coasts of Aegypt, in Migdol, Eastward; in Noph, to the South, and in Tahpanhes, to the North,14 Declare ye in Aegypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in Noph, and in Tahpanhes; say yee, Stand fast, and prepare thee, for the sword shall devoure round about thee. that the Babylo∣nian shall come in upon them; bid them looke to them∣selves, and stand upon their guard, for danger and destru∣ction is neare unto them. The foraine souldiers, which were drawne into this war, shall fall out one with another; and, whether in their mutinies, or in their flight,16 He made many to fal, yea one fell upon another, and they said, Arise, and let us goe againe to our owne people, and to the land of our nativitie, from the op∣pressing sword. shall be an occasion of one anothers slaughter; and when it is too late, shall say, let us away from hence, & return to our owne country, and get us out of the reach of this destroying sword of the Babylonians. For as for this Pharaoh, the King of Aegypt, whom we came to aide in his warres; he is nothing but words;17 They did cry there, Pharaoh King of Aegypt is but a noise, he hath passed the time appointed. he talkes, and brags much; but he performes nothing; he undertakes, and disappoints, so as no trust is to be given to him. 18 Surely as Tabor is a∣mong the mountaines, and as Carmel by the sea, so shall he come.Mount Tabor is not more surely fixed among the rest
of the mountaines, nor Carmel is more unremoveably seated upon the sea-coast, then this word of mine is firm∣ly fixed in heaven, and shall undoubtedly bee perfor∣med: The King of Babylon shall come against Aegypt. 20 Aegypt is like a very faire heifer, but destructi∣on commeth, it commeth out of the North.Aegypt is wild, and wanton with her wealth and plea∣sure, as some young faire heifer never used to the yoke; but destruction is now comming upon her from the Chaldees. 22 The voice thereof shall goe like a Serpent, for they shall march with an armie, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.They shall no more loudly bellow out, but shall bee glad, like a Serpent, to creepe into holes, and by their secret hissings, and silent complaints to expresse their sorrowes, for the Chaldean armie shall march against them, and shall utterly overthrow them. 23 They shall cut downe her forrest, saith the Lord; though it cannot be search∣ed; because they are more then the grashoppers, and are innumerable.If Aegypt bee as a thicke well-growne forrest, they shall cut downe all the goodly trees therein; although they bee, indeed, so many, that they are past numbring. Behold, I will punish that populous citie of Alexan∣dria,25 Behold, I will pu∣nish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh. the rich staple of Aegypt; and Pharaoh, &c. CAP. XLVII. 2 Behold, waters rise up out of the North, and shall be an overflowing flood:BEhold, the Chaldeans arise out of the North, like mighty waters, and with their swelling flood shall over-flow the land of the Philistims, &c. 3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofes of his strong horses, at the rushing of his Charets, and at the rumbling of his wheeles, the fathers shall not looke backe to their children for feeblenesse of hands.Men shall be so amazed, and affrighted with the fear∣full noise of his armie; the stamping of his horses, and ratling of his Chariots; that the fathers shall not so much as finde time to looke backe to their children, in the haste of their flight. Extreme mourning is comne upon Gaza, and all those maritime parts of the countrey of the Philistimes;5 Baldnesse is come up∣on Gaza; Ashkelon is cut off with the remnant of their vally: how long wilt thou cut thy selfe? in so much as they teare their haire, and cut their flesh for sorrow. CAP. XLVIII. 1 Against Moab, thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, woe un∣to Nebo, for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded and taken, Misgab is con∣founded and dismaied.HOwsoever Moab (an ancient enemie, though neare in blood to Israel) may prosper for a time, after that both Israel, and Judah are overthrowne, yet he shall not escape the severe hand of God; Woe therefore unto the chiefe cities of the Moabites; to Nebo, to Kiriathiearim, and to Misgab, for they all shall be destroyed.
The like ruine shall befall to the rest of their cities, to Heshbon, and to Madmena; the Chaldees have resol∣ved, and threatned to cut off Moab from being a nation,2 There shall bee no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have de∣vised evill against it: come and let us cut it off from being a nation. &c. In the mountaines and vallies shall be nothing but howling and desolation;5 For in the going up of Luhith, continuall weeping shall goe up: for in the going down of Ho∣ronaim, the enemies have heard a cry of destruction. whiles the Moabites climbe up the hill to the high-seated citie of Luhith, and whiles they passe downe to the plaine of Horonaim; they shall not be able to containe themselves from lamentation; so as their very enemies shall heare their womanish, and fearefull ejulations. Away, and flee, if yee may, O yee Moabites;6 Flee, save your lives, and bee like the heath in the wildernesse. save your lives by a speedy flight; and get you into the wil∣dernesse, and live there, though ye be but like the shrub∣by heath, that hath a low and obscure being in the desert. And Chemosh thy false God,7 And Chemosh shall goe forth into captivitie with his Priests, and his Princes together. unto whose aid thou hast trusted, shall goe into captivitie with thee; and his Priests, and those Idolatrous Princes that worship him; ye shall all goe together. And now, O ye Chaldeans,10 Cursed bee he, that doth the worke of the Lord deceitfully, & cursed be he that keepeth backe his sword from blood. bestirre you in this slaugh∣tei, lay about you, and spare none, it is Gods revenge which ye doe now execute; Cursed bee ye if ye slacken your hands, and keepe backe your sword from blood. Whiles Israel was in continuall exercise,11 Moab hath beene at ease from his youth, and he hath setled on his lees, and hath not beene empti∣ed from vessell to vessell, neither hath he gone into captivitie: therefore his tast remained in him, and his scent is not changed. and correcti∣on, Moab hath a long time taken his ease; and hath been as a vessell of strong wine, that hath beene long setled upon his lees; not at all racked, or drawne out into an∣other vessell; so as hee hath his full vigor, and verdure of his long-continued pleasure and felicity still in him, with∣out all diminution, or change. I will therefore send enemies upon Moab,12 Therefore behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will send unto him wanderers that shall cause him to wander, and shall emptie his vessells, and breake their battells. which shall alter the case with him; which shall broach these their setled vessells, and draw them out into a grievous captivity; and breake their caske in peeces. And Moab shall be ashamed of his god Chemosh,13 And Moab shall bee ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence. as the house of Israel was ashamed of their calves in Dan, and Bethel, wherein they vainely trusted. How is this strong and glorious nation,17 How is the strong staffe broken, and the beautifull rod. on whom we leaned, as the staffe of our confidence, broken in peeces, &c. And thou, O Dibon, the faire city of Moab,18 Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon, come downe from thy glory, and sit in thirst: for the spoiler of Moab, shal come upon thee; and he shall de∣stroy thy strong holds. come downe from thy glory, and take up with the lot of thy
neighbours; thirst, distresse, destruction. And yee inhabitants of Aroer, who durst not trust to your walls,19 O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way and espie, aske him that fleeth, and her that esca∣peth, & say, What is done? but are fled into the desert, runne to the way-side, and aske of the still-fleeing passengers, even of the women that have escaped; what the Chaldees have done to your forsaken walls and houses. And judgement is comne upon all the parts of the land of Moab; both the mountainous tracts thereof, and the plaines; upon all the severall cities that appertaine thereunto, as upon Holon, Jahazah, Mephaath,21 And judgement is come upon the plaine countrey, upon Holon, and upon Iahazah, and upon Mephaath. &c. So verse 22, 23, 24. The pide of Moab is cut off, and the strength of it is broken, saith the Lord.25 The horne of Moab is cut off, and his arme is broken, saith the Lord. Lay deep and grievous afflictions upon him, O yee Chaldees;26 Make ye him drun∣ken: for hee magnified himselfe against the Lord, Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision: let him drinke largely of your vengeance; for he lifted himselfe up against the Lord; Let him be over∣filled with sorrow and anguish; and bee exposed to the scorne and derision of the world. For was not Israel a scorne and derision unto thee? Yea was he not causelesly so?27 For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among theeves? for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy. for what had he offended thee? however guilty he were in his cariage to mewards, Yet to thee he was inoffensive; not withstanding thou in∣sultedst in his fall, and joyedst in this miscarriage. O ye Moabites, runne from your cities, and defenced places,28 O yee that dwell in Moab, leave the cities and dwell in the rocke. and hide your selves in the holes of the rockes, &c. I know his great stomack, and his proud bragges, but it shall not bee so with him,30 I know his wrath saith the Lord, but it shall not be so, his lyes shall not so effect it. as he imagineth, his great words, and presumptuous undertakings shall not car∣rie it. 32 O vine of Sibmah, I will weepe for thee, with the weeping of Iazer: thy plants are goe over the Sea, they reach even to the Sea of Iazer.O thou citie and region of Sibmah, famous, for the excellency and fruitfulnesse of thy vines, I will weepe for thy destruction, as I wept before for the vastation of Jazer thy nighbour; thy citizens are transplanted, and caried over the sea, they are caried down to be shipped at the port of Jazer,34 From the cry of Heshbon even unto Elea∣leh. &. See Esa. 15. verse 4. and 5. and verse 6.34 As an heifer of three yeares old, &c. waters of Nimrim shall be desolate. 37 For every head shall be bald, and every beard clipt: upon all the hands shall be cuttings, and upon the loines sackcloth.There shall be all the signes and effects of an extreme mourning, all over the coasts of Moab; every head shall be shaven, every beard clipt, every skinne slashed, and every of their loines covered with sackcloth.
See Esa. 15. verse 8.38 There shall bee la∣mentation generally upon all the house tops, &c. The Chaldean shall come swiftly upon him, as an Eagle upon his prey, and shall spread his wings over Moab.40 For thus saith the Lord, Behold, he shall flie as an Eagle, & shall spread his wings over Moab. See Esa. 24. verse 17.43 Feare and the pit and the snare shall be upon thee, &c. They that fled,45 They that fled, stood under the shadow of Heshbon, because of the force: but a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and shall devoure the corner of Moab, and the crowne of the head of the tumultuous ones. thought they should finde good shel∣ter in the strong forts of Heshbon; but they shall be de∣ceived, for so farre shall Heshbon be from being able to defend it selfe, that the destruction which shall beginne there, shall reach unto all the utmost parts of the domi∣nions of Moab, and shall light upon the head of those in∣solent undertakers, that were the cause of these warres, and tumults. The people that worshipped their false god Chemosh, perisheth,46 The people of Che∣mosh perisheth. &c. CAP. XLIX. HAth Israel no posterity at all to inherit his lands?1 Hath Israel no sons? hath hee no heire? Why then doth their King inhe∣rite Gad, and his people dwell in his citie? How comes it then that the Ammonitish King takes upon him to inherit Gad, the possession of one of his tribes; and causeth his people to dwell in the cities of Israel? Then shall Israel come to take possession of the land of the Ammonites,2 Then shall Israel bee heire unto them that were his heires, saith the Lord. which had usurped the possessions of Is∣rael. Howle, O Heshbon,3 Howle, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry yee daughters of Rabbah. the chiefe citie of the Gadites (usurped by Ammon) for Ai the neighbour citie is spoi∣led, and let Rabbah the great citie of the Ammonites mourne, &c. Wherefore dost thou glory in thy rich and fruitfull vallies, O thou proud and rebellious issue of Ammon,4 Wherefore gloriest thou in the vallies, thy flowing valley, O backsli∣ing daughter? &c? Those of Teman in the land of Idumea had wont to be accounted wise men; What,7 Concerning Edom, thus saith the Lord of hosts, Is wisdome no more in Teman? Is counsell pe∣rished from the prudent? is their wisedome vani∣shed? is there no wisedome now left amongst them? hath their wit utterly failed them, that they cast not how to bee freed from the danger of the Chaldeans? Let the inhabitants of Dedan, a citie of Edom, flee;8 Flee ye, turne backe, dwell deepe, O inhabi∣tants of Dedan, for I will bring the calamitie of E∣sau upon him. For I will bring upon them that calamitie which is just∣ly
owing to the Sonnes of Esau, whom I have rejected; &c. 10 I have uncovered his secret places, and hee shall not bee able to hide himselfe: his seed is spoi∣led.But I have wholly dispoiled Edom; and have left him no hiding place; I have stript him of all his forces; his seed is destroyed, &c. If thou have any orphans, or any widowes left, I will take order for them,11 Leave thy father∣lesse children, I preserve them alive, and let thy widowes trust in me. saith the Lord; Yea, I will take or∣der that thou shalt have none left alive. 12 For thus saith the Lord, Behold, they whose judg∣ment was not to drinke of the cup, have assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shall altogether goe unpunished?For thus saith the Lord, Behold, even my people the Jewes, which in comparison of thee, had no reason to be put to these extremities of judgements, they have beene plagued severely, by my just hand, and shalt thou thinke to goe unpunished? &c. 13 For I have sworne by my selfe, saith the Lord, that Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a wast and a curse, and all the cities thereof shall be per∣petuall wastes.I have firmly and irrevocably decreed, that thy prime citie, Bozrah, shall bee perpetually desolated, and the daughter-cities that appertaine to it, shall be laid waste for ever. I have certaine and infallible revelation from the Lord;14 I have heard a ru∣mour from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent unto the heathen, saying, Gather ye together, and come a∣gainst her, and rise up to the battle. (and summons is gone out from him unto the Chaldeans, and Assyrians to that purpose) that God will send a powerfull and irresistible enemie against E∣dom; he calls together the dreadfull forces of these great Kings to set upon it. 16 O thou that dwel∣lest in the clifts of the rocke, that holdest the height of the hill: though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I will bring thee downe frō thence, saith the Lord.O thou, that hast wont to bragge of thy strong and impregnable forts, and Situation; that thy towres are high, and invincible; know, that if thou shouldest build as high, as the Eagle makes his nest, I will bring thee downe thence, saith the Lord. 19 Behold, he shal come up like a lyon from the swelling of Iordan, against the habitation of the strong: but I will sudden∣ly make him runne away from her, and who is a chosen man that I may ap∣point over her? for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? who is that shepheard that will stand before me?Behold, the proud Edomite comes up against the Chaldean, like some fierce Lyon that is driven by the swelling of the streames of Jordan to change his den, and to seeke his prey in the mountaines; but I will suddenly make him to runne away from that mighty enemie; And who is the man whom I shall chuse out to be the leader of this great designe? Even Nebuchadnezar the King of Babylon; I have thus decreed it; and, who shall alter my determinations? Who will take upon him either to di∣rect, or to oppose me? 20 Surely the least of the flocke shall draw them out.Surely the very meanest and basest of the Chaldean
armie shall discomfit, and overthrow the proud inhabi∣tants of Teman, &c. So great shall be the noise of the fall of those walls,21 The earth is moved at the noise of their fall: at the crie, the noise there∣of was heard in the red Sea. and the shouts, and shrieks of the people; as that it shall be heard very farre off; even as far as the red Sea, which is very remote from it. Concerning Damascus.23 Concerning Damas∣cus, Hamath is confound∣ed and Arpad, for they have heard evill tydings: they are faint hearted, there is sorrow on the Sea, it cannot be quiet. Antiochia and Arpad cities of Syria are dismaied, and confounded; for they have heard the fearefull rumours of the Chaldean preparati∣on; and are faint-hearted; and the Isles that lie neare a∣bout are extremely affrighted. How is it that so goodly and famous a citie as Damas∣cus, so praised, so admired,25 How is the citie of praise not left, the citie of my joy? hath not the favour to bee spared from sacking and vastation? I will cause a fire to bee kindled in the wall of Damas∣cus, which shall consume the palace of Benhadad,27 And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damas∣cus, and it shall consume the palaces of Benhadad. that ancient and cruell enemie of Israel. Arise, O yee Chaldeans,28 Arise ye, goe up to Kedar, and spoile the men of the East. goe up against those of Ke∣dar, or Arabia; and spoile those that dwell towards the Easterne coast. Arise, get ye up unto the wealthy nation of the Kedarēs,31 Arise, get you up into the wealthy nation that dwelleth without care, saith the Lord, which have neither gates nor barres, which dwell alone. that dwell without care in their tents; abounding with flocks and heards in the desert; where they dwell apart without cities, or townes. I will overthrow the archers of the Parthians,35 I will breake the bowe of Elam, the chiefe of their might. and their confines, on the Sea coasts; and breake their bowes wherein their chiefe strength consisteth. And I will bring upon them, enemies,36 And upon Elam will I bring the foure windes from the foure quarters of heaven, and will scatter them towards all those windes. from all the coasts of heaven, which shall prevaile against them, and scatter them to all the coasts of the world, &c. And I will be knowne to triumph over those Parthi∣ans,37 For I will cause E∣lam to be dismaied, before their enemies, and before them that seeke their life: and I will bring evill upon them, even my fierce an∣ger, saith the Lord, &c. and will erect amongst them a throne for that King whom I have designed to it; having utterly destroyed all their native Kings and Princes. But at the last under the raigne of the Messiah will I call these Elamites into my Church, saith the Lord.39 But it shall come to passe in the latter dayes, that I will bring again the captivitie of Elam, saith the Lord. See Act. 2.9.
CAP. L. 2 Say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Mero∣dach is broken in peeces, her Idols are consumed, her images are broken in peeces.THat Babylon, which hath beene a scourge to my people, and to all the nations round about, is now taken it selfe, and seized upon in my wrath; Their great Idol Bel, in whom they trusted, is confounded, their great Monarch is overthrowne; and all their petty gods, and Images are broke in pieces. For the mighty nation of the Medes and Persians shall come up against her,3 For out of the North there commeth up a nati∣on against her. &c. In those daies the children of Israel, and the children of Judah shall (through the favour of the Persian mo∣narchs) goe up together,4 In those daies, and in that time, saith the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the chil∣dren of Iudah together, go∣ing & weeping; they shall goe and seeke the Lord. weeping for joy, to returne to their countrey, and to the place of Gods worship and service. Their Kings, and Priests, and Prophets have mis-led them into abhominable Idolatries;6 My people hath been lost sheepe: their shep∣heards have caused them to goe astray, they have turned them away on the mountaines; they have gone from mountaine to hill, they have forgotten their resting place. they have seduced them to superstitious devotions, on their high places; perswading them to goe, one while to one Idoll, another while to another; till they had forgotten the Temple of God, to which God had appointed them to confine their service. Get you gone, O ye Jewes, goe with joy and gladnes, out of Chaldea,8 Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and goe forth out of the land of the Caldeans, & be as the hee-goates before the flocks. the land of your captivity; and goe forth with courage and speed, as the hee-goates are wont to goe before the rest of the flock. 9 From the North coun∣trey.See verse 3. 12 Your mother shall be sore confounded, shee that bare you shall be asha∣med: Behold the hinder∣most of the nations shall be a wildernesse, a drie land and a desert.Your mother-city, Babylon, shall be sore confounded &c. and Chaldea, which was the queene of all nations, shall now be cast behinde all the rest, and become a very wildernesse, a barren desert. 16 Cut off the sower from Babylon, & him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest: for feare of the oppressing sword, they shall turne every one to his people, and they shall flee every man to his owne land.Spare not so much as the husbandman that soweth the corne in the fields of Babylon, or the reaper thereof; let no man escape, though never so harmelesse, or never so usefull; as for the hired forces, they shall run away, every one to his owne home. Israel is as a sheep scattered from the flock; those hea∣thē Kings,17 Israel is a scattered sheep, the lions have dri∣ven him away: first the King of Assyria hath de∣voured him, and last this Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon hath broken his bones. which were fierce as Lions, have driven them
out of their countrey; first the Kings of Assyria made ha∣vocke of them; then, Nebuchadnezar the King of Baby∣lon hath perfected their destruction. I will bring Israel back from his captivity to his owne land,19 And I will bring Is∣rael againe to his habitati∣on, and hee shall feed on Carmel and Bashan. and he shall now be as a sheep grazing upon the fruitfull hils of Carmel, and Bashan, &c. There shall not be found in Israel those sins,20 In those daies, and in that time, saith the Lord the iniquitie of Israel shall bee sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Iudah, and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve. and that heynous iniquity, which was the cause of their late cap∣tivity; and the sins of Judah shall be done away, through my grace, and mercy. Goe up, Ye Medes and Persians, against the territo∣ries of Babylon, even against the land of these proud re∣bels, against the land of those who have visited my people with the sword, and mercilesse destruction, and doe yee utterly destroy them,21 Goe up against the land of Merathaim, even a∣gainst it, and against the in∣habitants of Pekod: waste and utterly destroy after them. &c. How is it that Babylon, which was the hammer to beate all other nations in peeces,23 How is the hammer of the whole earth cut a∣sunder and broken? is now broken in pee∣ces? &c. A sword shall be upon their lying Astrologers,36 A sword shall bee upon the lyers. and Diviners, unto whom they trusted. So verse 3.41 Behold, a people shall come from the North, &c. See Chapter 49.19. Behold the Babylonians shall come up, &c.44 Hee shall come up like a lyon from the swel∣ling of Iordan, &c. See chapter 49. verse 20.45 Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out. CAP. LI. A Furious adversary, which shall come in,1 A destroying winde. as a strong tempestuous winde. I will send unto Babylon the Medes and Persians,2 And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall fanne her, and shall empty her land. which shall put them to the fanne of tribulation, and di∣spersion, &c. Suffer not, O yee Medes,3 Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against him that lifteth himselfe up in his brigandine; and spare ye not her yong men the Babylonian archers so much as to bend their bowes, &c. But cut them off in the first offer of their assault; and make no spare of any of them, &c.
6 Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver e∣very man his soule, &c.See Chapter 50.8. Continue not in Babylon, whiles yee may be free; but depart away from the danger both of her sins, and judgement. 7 Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lords hand, that made all the earth drunken, the nations have drunken of her wine, therefore the nations are mad.Babylon hath been hitherto as a golden cup, out of which God would have all the nations of the earth drink their bitter draught of his wrath, and indignation; they have drunke out thence, and have beene so grievously af∣flicted by her cruelty, that they have been ready to runne mad with griefe. 8 Babylon is suddenly fallen & destroyed; howle for her, take balme for her paine, if so bee she may be healed.Babylon is suddenly fallen, howle and mourne, O ye her associates, for the down-fall of so great a Monarchy; and, if it may be, use some helps for her recovery. Alas, we have not slackened our indevours, (shall they say) to have succoured, and relieved her; but all in vaine; for her wound (which Gods wrath hath inflicted upon her) is utterly incurable;9 We would have hea∣led Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and let us goe every one to his owne countrey, for her Iudgement reacheth unto heaven. Away therefore, let us shift for our selves; let us run every man to his owne country; and leave her to the revenge of the Almightie; which is indeed so great, as that it reacheth to the very heavens, &c. 10 The Lord hath brought forth our righte∣ousnesse: come and let us declare in Zion the worke of the Lord our God.The Lord hath magnified his great mercy, and truth to us, in that he hath taken upon him the patronage, and protection of us his people; and hath beene thus openly revenged of our enemies: oh come therefore, and let us declare in his holy Temple, the great workes of our God. 11 Make bright the ar∣rowes, gather the shields.Now therefore, Yee Medes, and Persians, addresse your selves to the fight; scoure up your armours, brigh∣ten your arrowes, &c. 13 O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abun∣dant in treasures; thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousnesse.O thou great and wealthy Babylon, that wert seated upon the famous river of Euphrates; which divided it selfe for thy commodity, and made many Islands for thy profit, and defence; thine end is now comne. 14 Surely I will fill thee with men, as with ca∣terpillers, and they shal lift up a shout against thee.I will fill thee with enemies so thick, as if they were swarmes of caterpillers. See for the rest of the verse. chap. 25. verse 30. 17 Every man is bru∣tish by his knowledge, &c.See Chap. 10. verse 14. 19 The portion of Ia∣cob is not like them.See Chap. 10. verse 16. 20 Thou art my battle-axe and weapons of war, for with thee will I break in peeces the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdomes.O Babylon, I have hitherto made use of thee, for the subduing of divers Kingdomes, and for breaking of ma∣ny nations in pieces. 25 Behold, I am against thee, O destroying moun∣taine, saith the Lord, which destroyest all the earth, and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roule thee downe from the rocks, and will make, &c.Behold, I am against thee now, O Babylon, thou huge pile of perdition; which hath hitherto crushed the whole
earth with thy vastnesse, and power, &c. I will make thee like an hill of rubbish, an heape of burnt ruines. Muster up together the Kingdomes of both Armeni∣as, and of the lesser Asia;27 Call together against her the kingdomes of A∣rarat, Minni, & Ashchenaz: appoint a captaine against her; cause her horses to come up as the rough ca∣terpillers. set generalls and captaines over the appointed bands, cause the troupes of horses to come in, as thicke as the swarmes of caterpillers; and all, to goe up against Babylon. The citie of Babylon is like a threshing floore, the sheaves that are in her, must bee beaten,33 The daughter of Ba∣bylon is like a threshing floore, it is time to thresh her; yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come. and throughly troden out; her harvest is now neare at hand, wherein God wil lay upon her, with the flaile of his heavie judge∣ments. Nebuchadnezer the King of Babylon (shall Jerusalem say) hath devoured me, hee hath utterly destroyed mee,34 Nebuchadrezzar the King of Babylon hath de∣voured me, he hath crushed mee. &c. And now, let God repay to Nebuchadnezar, and his Babylonians, the violence which they did to me,35 The violence done to me and to my flesh. and my people, &c. They shal roare together in their paine, and horrour, like lyons,38 They shall roare to∣gether like lyons. that yell for hunger, &c. When they are heated with wine in their feasts,39 In their heat I will make their feasts, and I wil make them drunken, that they may rejoyce, and sleep a perpetuall sleep, and not wake, saith the Lord. and drunken in their merry bankets, quaffing healthes and praising their gods in the bowles of my Temple, even then will I bring the sword of Cyrus upon them; and smite them that they shall sleepe their last. See Daniel 5. What an incredible thing is this?41 How is Sheshach ta∣ken? and how is the praise of the whole earth surpri∣sed? How can it be that Babylon, the great mistresse of the world should thus be spoiled, and defaced, &c? The innumerable and mighty host of the Medes is, like a raging sea, broken in upon Babylon; &c.42 The Sea is come up upon Babylon. I will breake in peeces, and put to shame the Idol Bel,44 And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up. that was worshipped of the Babylonians, and will fetch out of his mouth those many and rich offerings which were made to that dunghill deity, &c. See verse 6.45 Goe yee out of the midst of her. Cyrus against Belshazzar.46 Ruler against Ruler. The heavens and the earth and all creatures shall re∣joyce,48 Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, shall sing for Ba∣bylon. and praise God for the just destruction that is brought upon Babylon. As Babylon hath slaine my people of Israel,49 As Babylon hath cau∣sed the slaine of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slaine of all the earth. so the Ba∣bylonians
shall be slaine, all the earth over; and in Baby∣lon, shal fal those of all the countries round about, which shall be there slaughtered. 51 For strangers are come into the Sanctuaries of the Lords house.Pagans have comne into the sanctuary of Gods Tem∣ple, and have defiled it, and razed it to the ground. Through all her land, those that are not slaine right out,52 And through all her land the wounded shall groane. shall lie groaning, and roaring for the paine of their wounds. 57 I will make drunke her Princes, &c.See verse 39. 58 And the people shall labour in vaine, and the folke in the fire, and they shall be weary.In vaine shall the people labour to quench that fire which is kindled for the consuming of Babylon. THE LAMENTATIONS OF IEREMIAH. CAP. I. 1 How doth the citie sit solitary that was full of people? how is shee be∣come as a widow? she that was great among the nati∣ons, and princesse among the provinces, how is shee become tributarie?WOe is mee for Jerusalem; how wofully is the case altered with her? she that was of late ex∣ceeding populous, & thronged in her streets with men, is now left alone, like a solitary widow: She that, of late, was a commander of many provinces, is now become a tributary to an u∣surping commander. 2 Shee weepeth sore in the night, and her teares are on her cheekes.No time gives her any respite from her mourniing; night and day doth shee poure out her teares, &c. Many Jewes, to avoid the miserable servitude of the Chaldees,3 Iudah is gone into captivity, because of affli∣ction, and because of great servitude, shee dwelleth a∣mong the heathen, she fin∣deth no rest: all her perse∣cutors overtake her be∣tweene the straits. have betaken themselves to a voluntary trans∣migration to other nations; hoping there to finde rest; but even there, have these Babylonian persecutors over∣taken them, so that they are surprised in those straits, which could no way be avoided. 5 Her adversaries are the chiefe.Her adversaries are her commanders, &c. Shee cannot hide her shame any longer; that loath∣some annoyance of hers,9 Her filthinesse is in her skirts, she remembreth not her last end, therefore she came downe wonder∣fully, she had no comforter. which shee would faine have concealed, appeares even in her very outward garments; and so faithlesse is shee growne, that she will not appre∣hend
the assurance of her finall deliverance, &c. O all ye passengers, that travell this way; stay a while,12 Is it nothing to you, all ye that passe by? behold and see, if there be any sor∣row like unto my sorrow. and behold my miserable ruines; and indeed, can ye passe by, and not view them; and not seriously consider of them? And, if ye doe seriously thinke of them, say then, was there ever city or people in so woefull a plight as I am, &c? God hath seemed from above to cast fire brands into my towres, and palaces,13 From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth against them. whereby my goodly buildings are consumed, &c. That yoke of my grievous servitude,14 The yoake of my transgressions is bound by his hand. under the Chal∣dees, which my sins have justly called for, is bound about my neck by his punishing hand, &c. Jerusalem is counted as an abhomination unto them,17 Ierusalem is a men∣struous woman among thē. as loathsome, and uncleane. I called for the aide of my associates, and allyes; but they deceived me,19 I called for my lo∣vers, but they deceived me. &c. Thou wilt bring upon them the judgements which thou hast threatned; and then,21 Thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called, & they shall be like unto me. they shall bee in the like plight that I am in. CAP. II. ANd remembred not his Temple, the place of his for∣mer abode, in the day of his anger.1 And remembred not his footstoole in the day of his anger. He hath, in his anger, weakned,3 He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the home of Israel. and cut off all the strength of Israel, &c. That Tabernacle of his,6 And he hath violently taken away his Tabernacle, as if it were of a garden, he hath destroyed his places of the assembly. which he had setled amongst us, for our comfort, and protection, he hath now turned up, as if it were a garden, fit to be digged up for the use of plantation, &c. As we had wont in our solemn feasts to make a noise of joy, and thankfull acclamations in thy Temple,7 They have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn feast so now they make no lesse noise of tumult, and insultation over us, He hath destinated, and appointed it to razing,8 He hath stretched out a line. and ruine, &c. With what example of like misery shall I goe about to comfort thee?13 What thing shall I take to witnes for thee, &c They have seene false visions,14 But have seene for thee false burdens, and cau∣ses of banishment. and pretended to bring those messages from God, which were never sent, and by this meanes have wronged thee, and have beene the cau∣ses of this thy captivity. Those whom I have borne, and bred up with all care, and anxious diligence, hath mine enemie consumed.22 Those that I have swadled and brought up, hath mine enemy consu∣med.
CAP. III. 1 I am the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.I Jeremiah am the man, that have seene this great affli∣ction which the Lord hath in just anger, brought upon his people. 2 He hath led me and brought me into darknes, but not into light.He hath brought me into the gloomy darknesse of affliction, and hath given me no glimpse of comfort. 4 My flesh and my skinne hath he made old.He hath worne out my body with sorrow, &c. 5 He hath builded a∣gainst me, and compassed me with gall and travell.He hath besieged me with evills; and compassed me about with misery and griefe. 6 Hee hath set me in darke places, as they that be dead of old.He hath shut me up under discomfort, and heavinesse, and laid me aside in the dungeon, as a dead man out of sight. 9 He hath inclosed my waies with hewen stones, he hath made my pathes crooked.He hath laid in my way unremoveable impediments, and hath crossed me in my designes. So also verse 11. 16 He hath also broken my teeth with gravell stones, he hath covered me with ashes.He hath beaten me downe with such force, as that my teeth are broken; and my mouth being dashed against the ground, is full of gravell with the fall. 21 This I recall to my minde, therefore have I hope.I recall to my minde these following meditations; and thereupon I conceive hope and comfort. 27 It is good for a man that hee beare the yoke in his youth.It is good for a man to be exercised early with afflicti∣ons, and to acquaint himselfe with Gods chastisements. 28 He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it upon him.Such a one will sit silently alone, and patiently beare that hand of God which is upon him. 29 He putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.And humbles himselfe under that good hand to the very dust; if there may be hope, by his true humiliation and fervent prayers, to obtaine favour from God. 30 He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him, he is filled full with re∣proach.In the meane time, hee meekly yeelds over himselfe to the oppressing hand of a persecutor; and patiently beares his reproach. 34 To crush under his feete all the prisoners of the earth.For, however the wicked impatience of men may suggest, it is not the manner of God to crush under his feet those that are already humbled. 35 To turne aside the right of a man before the face of the most High.Or, to shift off the tryall of any mans cause, that hee should not have a full hearing of his plea, before his great and righteous Tribunall. So verse 36.
Who is he that will undertake to effect any thing with∣out the Lord; or will say,37 Who is he that saith, and it commeth to passe, when the Lord command∣eth it not? that ought can be done which he willeth not? It is onely good, and just,38 Out of the mouth of the most high, proceedeth not evill and good. which can proceed from the mouth of God; there is no unrighteousnesse in his de∣crees, and proceedings. Why then doth any living man complaine of Gods hand? Why doth he murmur, when he suffers the due punishment for his sinnes?39 Wherefore doth a living man complaine, a man for the punishment of his sinnes. See Isai. 24.17.47 Feare and a snare is come upon us. I am the matter of their mirth and songs.63 I am their Musicke. CAP. IIII. WHiles Jerusalem stood upright with God,7 Her Nazarites were purer then snow. her vo∣taries were holy and innocent, &c. For this their cruelty they are stricken with the hand of God, so, as that they are driven to wander in the streets,14 They have wandred as blind men in the streetes, they have polluted them∣selves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments. without habitations; groping for the way like blindmen; being so defiled with innocent blood as that men could not touch their very garments, without uncleannesse. No part of the citie was free frō very foule pollution;15 They cried unto them, Depart yee, it is un∣cleane, depart, depart, touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the heathen, they shal no more sojourne there. on all sides might be heard that crie; appointed to the Le∣pers, Depart, depart; I am uncleane; at last, there was no way but to flee away frō that defiled citie; they fled ther∣fore at uncertaines, & wandered they knew not whither; so much as it was said among the heathen; There will be no more hope of their returne, to dwell in Jerusalem. We depended upon hope and aid from te Aegyti∣ans, which could not succour us,17 In our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us. nor preserve them∣selves. They hunt and chase us up and downe in our streetes;18 They hunt our steps that we cannot goe in our streets. they follow us at the heels, so as we cannot so much as looke out of our doores, &c. These Chaldean persecutors are so swift,20 The breath of our nostrills, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits. that it is vaine to hope for an escape from them, &c. Yea, which makes up the measure of our sorrow and misery, our King Zedekiah, the anointed of the Lord, who was deare to us, as our very breath and life, was ta∣ken by them in their pursuit, &c. Rejoice, O thou ancient enemie,21 Rejoice and be glad O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the Land of Vz: the cup also shall passe through unto thee: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thy selfe naked. the posterity of E∣sau, that dwellest in the land of Vz; rejoice thou in our ruine and desolation, as thou pleasest, but this cup of the Lords vengeance shal come (in due time) unto thee also;
and thou shalt drinke deepe of it, and the shame of thy wickednesse shall be discovered. CAP. V. 7 Our fathers have sin∣ned, and are not, and wee have borne their iniqui∣ties.See Ier. 31.29.. NOt only the Princes and great commanders of Chal∣dea have ruled over us,8 Servants have ruled over us. but even their very slaves in∣sult upon us, and exercise cruelty upon us, &c. 9 We gate our bread with the perill of our lives, because of the sword of the wildernesse.Even before this destruction, during the time of the siege, we were faine to get our bread with the perill of our lives; because of the sword of the enemie, that lay encamped about us. 12 Princes are hanged up by their hand.Our Princes were driven to make their owne hands their executioners, &c. 13 They tooke the yong men to grind, and the chil∣dren fell under the wood.They put our young men to all the servile and base drudgeries, that could bee devised, and compelled our children to undergoe those burdens, which they were not able to carry. 16 The crowne is fallen from our head: Woe unto us that we have sinned.All our glory is quite gone and utterly cast downe to the ground. The hill of Sion, where the Temple stood, which was so honored, so frequented, is now so desolate, that the very foxes walke upon it.18 Because of the moun∣taine of Zion, whch is desolate, the foxes walke upon it. EZEKIEL. CAP. I. 1 Now it came to passe in the thirtieth yeare, in the fourth moneth, in the fifth day of the moneth, as I was among the cap∣tives by the river of Che∣bar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.IT came to passe in the thirtieth yeare after the Jubilee, and the finding of the originall copy of the law, in the moneth of July, and the fifth day of that moneth; when I was among the Hebrew captives in Chaldea, by the river Chebar, that God revealed himselfe to me, and put into me the spirit of prophesie; and represented divers visions to the eyes of my minde. 2 In the fifth day of the moneth which was the fift yeare of King Iehoia∣chins captivitie.In the fift day of July which was in the fifth yeare of the first deportation into Babylon, and captivity there.
And the efficacy of Gods spirit did shew it selfe in,3 And the hand of the Lord, was there upon him. and upon me, in his holy revelations. And behold, I looked;4 And I looked, and behold, a whirle-wind came out of the North, a great cloud, and a fire un∣folding it selfe, & a bright∣nesse was about it, and out of the middest thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire. and God shewed me a repre∣sentation of those fearefull tempests of calamitie, which yet were to come upon his people, by a whirlewind, ari∣sing from the North, (whence their further persecution and captivitie was to come) by a darke cloud; and fire infolded within it, to signifie the triall which they are to undergo: but there was a pleasing brightnesse about that cloud, and out of the midst of that fierie splendor, there was, as it were, a shining colour of amber, to signifie the presence of Gods powerfull grace, and mercy, in the midst of all the fiery trialls of his Church. And out of the midst of that fiery brightnesse, came foure Angells, in the likenesse of foure living creatures, whose number was proportioned to the foure corners of the world; And this was their appearance; They had the shape and likenesse of a man.5 Also out of the midst thereof came the likenesse of foure living creatures, and this was their appea∣rance; they had the like∣nesse of a man. And every one of them had foure faces,6 And every one had foure faces, and every one had foure wings. to signifie their ready addresse to receive whatsoever command from God, which way soever it should be delivered, and every one of them had foure wings, to signifie their swiftnesse in execution of all the charges of God. The legges of these Angells were straight up, like the legges of a man, and their feet were round, as the circum∣ference of a calves foot; for the greater fitnesse of that turning motion, which they should be put unto; & they had a sparkling kinde of brightnesse in their moving, like to that of burnished brasse.7 And their feet were straight feet, and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calves foot, and they sparkled like the co∣lour of burnished brasse. And they had the likenesse of hands, to signifie their aptnesse to execute the will of God; and those hands were under their winges, to imply that their motion is not of themselves, but such as is regulated, & directed by the secret instinct of God; all the foure Angells had both faces and wings.8 And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their foure sides, and they foure had their faces and their wings. Their wings were joyned together, at their tops,9 Their wings were joyned one to another, they turned not when they went: they went every one straight forward. to signifie their full concord, and agreement in fulfilling Gods command; and they went unanimously together, and all moved right forward, without turning to the right hand or to the left. And for the liknesse of their faces,10 As for the likenesse of their faces, they foure had the face of a man, and the face of a lyon on the right side, and they foure had the face of an oxe on the left side: they four also had the face of an Eagle. it was according to the severall qualities, which are eminent in foure noted creatures; a Man, a Lyon, an Oxe, an Eagle; such were these Angels, to signifie that they were understanding as a man, strong as a lyon, serviceable as the oxe, as the Eagle, swift.
11 Thus were their fa∣ces: and their wings were stretched upward, two wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their bo∣dies.Such were their faces; as for their wings, two of them were stretched upward, to signifie their relation unto and dependance upon Gods charge; and were joyned together, in a signification of the perfect concord, and joynt agreement in all their services; & two of them co∣vered their bodies, to signifie the hidden nature of these celesticall spirits, beyond the reach of all humane com∣prehension. 12 And they went e∣very one straight forward, whither the spirit was to goe, they went: and they turned not when they went.And they went in this posture all together, straight forward, which way soever the Spirit of God moved them to goe; not turning at all to either hand. 13 As for the likenesse of the living creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, & like the appearance of lamps: it went up and downe a∣mong the liuing creatures, and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.As for the colour wherein these Angells appeared, they seemed to bee like unto burning coales of fire, or like to burning lamps; to represent both the glory, and the terror of those spirituall creatures; and this fiery glittering seemed to be diffused over all these Angells; and did cast out a bright luster from it, and did, as it were, dart out lightning upon the eyes of the beholder. 14 And the living crea∣tures ranne, and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.And the Angells made so speedy dispatch, as that their motion was as the sudden flash of the lightning. Now, as I beheld these foure Angells; behold I might see foure wheeles appearing upon the earth,15 Now as I beheld the living creatures, Behold, one wheele upon the earth by the living creatures, with his foure faces. by those foure Angells, to signifie the perpetuall mutability of all these inferiour things. The appearance of every one of the wheeles, and their worke,16 The appearance of the wheels, & their worke was like unto the colour of a Berill: and they foure had one likenesse, and their appearance & their worke was as it were a wheele in the middle of a wheele. was of a sea-colour, to shew the vanity and insta∣bility of these earthly things; and they foure had one likenesse, to shew the constant uniformitie of Gods pro∣ceedings with men; and their worke was, as it were of a Sphere, wherein one wheele seemeth to be set crosse to the other; to shew that however God hath most wisely and ordinately disposed all things, yet they seeme to us intricate and perplexed. 17 When they went, they went upō their foure sides: and they returned not when they went.When they moved, they moved all foure together; and went right on to the period appointed. 18 As for the rings, they were so high, that they were dreadfull, and their rings were full of eies round about them foure.As for the out-most roundells of those wheeles, they were of a vast and dreadfull height; and they were on all sides thereof full of eyes; to shew that there is not the least motion in any of these earthly things, which is not directed by an eye of divine providence. 19 And when the li∣ving creatures went, the wheeles went by them: and when the living crea∣tures were lift up from the earth, the wheeles were lift up.And to shew that all these worldly alterations, & chan∣ges have a dependance upon the powerfull preordinati∣on, and instinct of God, & are over-ruled by those mini∣string
spirits, to whom he committeth the managing thereof; When the Angells moved on, the wheeles mo∣ved by them, and when the Angells were lifted up, the wheeles were lifted up also. Which way soever the spirit of God directed them to goe, thither they went;20 Whithersoever the spirit was to goe, they went, thither was their spirit to goe, and the wheeles were lifted up over against them, for the spirit of the living crea∣ture was in the wheeles. and if by the power of that al∣mighty Spirit the Angells were raised upward, the wheeles were accordingly raised; for the same spirit that moved the Angells, did also move those wheeles to con∣curre with them; God by his Angells transfusing into these earthly creatures the power of their governance and motion. So also verse 21. And the colour of the firmament,22 And the likenesse of the firmament upon the heads of the living crea∣ture was as the colour of the terrible Chrystall stretched forth over their heads above. which was spred over the heads of these foure Angells, was as the colour of a glorious chrystall, which had in it a kinde of majesti∣call brightnesse. And under this shining firmament were the wings of these foure Angells reached straight forth, one towards another; which (as was formerly said) being foure to each; two of thē served to be stretched forth for the mee∣ting of the wings of their fellowes; and the other two covered their owne bodies.23 And under the fir∣mament were their wings straight, the one towards the other, every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side their bodies. And when they moved, I heard the noise of their wings,24 And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an host. in their motion, very loud and strong, as of gushing wa∣ters, or of thunder; and the noise of that voice which was heard over them, was as the shouting of an host, &c. So also verse 25. And to shew that all these motions both of the An∣gells, and the inferiour creatures,26 And above the fir∣mament that was over their heads, was the like∣nesse of a Throne, as the appearance of a Saphire stone, and upon the like∣nesse of the Throne was the likenesse as the appea∣rance of a man above up∣on it. proceed from the infinite wisedome, and power of God; above the firma∣ment that was over their heads, there was the likenesse of the glorious throne of the Almighty; bright and shi∣ning of a celestiall colour; & upon that throne was there the likenesse of a man sting; even that God, who would afterwards take upon him the shape of man, for mans redemption. And I saw the resemblance of a glorious amber-co∣loured brightnesse, and as of a perfectly-inflamed,27 And I saw as the co∣lour of Amber, as the ap∣pearance of fire round a∣bout within it: from the appearance of his loines even upward, and from the appearance of his loines even downeward, I saw as it were the ap∣pearance of fire, and it had brightnesse round about. and ardently red fire round about within it; from the appea∣rance
of his loins upward; and for the other part, which was from the appearance of the loins downeward, the resemblance of a bright fire, but lesse digested; to shew that the Sonne of God (though all glorious, yet) in that part which concerns his creatures, and wherein hee re∣veales himselfe to men, hee remits of that fiery and in∣comprehensible Majesty, and descends gratiously to our capacity, and apprehension. CAP. II. ANd the Spirit of God entred into me, and put cou∣rage into my heart, together with the outward sound of his word; and raised me up from my groveling, and set me on my feet.2 And the Spirit entred into me, when he spake unto me, and set mee upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me. 5 And they, whether they will hear, or whether they wil forbeare (for they are a rebellious house) yet shall know that there hath beene a Prophet a∣mong them.And they, whether they will heare, or will not heare (as they are more like; for they are a stubborne people) shall yet bee convinced of their rebellion by thy pro∣phesie, and shall, by the event, feele & find, that they have had a Prophet amongst them, whereby their sins are ei∣ther reformed, or shall be more deeply punished. 6 And thou Sonne of man be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though bryers and thornes be with thee, and thou dost dwell among Scorpions: be not afraid of their words, &c.Though this people shall be to thee as briers, and thornes, which shall prick and wound thy soule; and thou must dwell among scorpions, which shall sting thee unto death, yet be not afraid, &c. Open thy mouth, and in signification, and assurance that thou doest obediently receive these messages, which I deliver unto thee, and wilt be ready to utter them to my people, eate that which I shall give unto thee.8 Open thy mouth and eate that I give thee. CAP. III. 1 Moreover he said un∣to me, Sonne of man, eate that thou findest: eate this roule, and goe speake unto the house of Israel.MOreover he said unto me in this vision of mine, son of mane, ate that which I now offer thee. 2 So I opened my mouth, and he caused mee to eate that roule.See chap. 2. verse 8. Then me thought, I did eate up that roule, and though it were written within, and without, with lamentations, yet in my mouth,3 Then did I eate it, and it was in my mouth as honie for sweetnesse. as I was chewing it, it seemed to bee sweet as hony; so pleasing a contentment there is in an holy obedience to the commands of God. 8 Behold I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy fore∣head strong against their foreheads.Behold, I have given thee boldnesse, and courage, to beare up against their strong oppositions; so as thou shalt not be daunted with their out-facings.
Yea, I have put an invincible courage into thee,9 As an Adamant har∣der then flint have I made thy forehead. so as no force of theirs shall be able to prevaile against thee, &c. Blessed be the name,12 Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place. and praised be the glory of the sonne of God, who sits upon this throne of Majesty. And I heard the noise of the wings of those Angels,13 I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that touched one another, and the noise of the wheeles over against them, and a noise of a great rushing. which I saw, and the noise of those wheeles, which were moved by them, in an applause or acclamation to that praise, and celebration of the name of Christ, as that wherein all creatures conspire. So the Spirit of God lifted me up from the ground, on which I lay; and removed me from that place,14 So the Spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in bitternesse, in the heate of my spirit, but the hand of the Lord was strong upon me. separa∣ting me also (for the time) from the common society of men; and I went away very heavie, and pensive, and much troubled in my spirit, for the sad purport of this vision; but the power of Gods Spirit was forceable, and prevalent with me, so as I was not too much dejected, ei∣ther with that fearefull apparition, or that grievous er∣rand. Againe,20 Againe when a righ∣teous man doth turne from his righteousnes, and com∣mit iniquitie, and I lay a stumbling blocke before him, he shall die. when a man that carries himselfe as righte∣ous, and is in his whole course inoffensive doth turne a∣way from that his holy profession, and give himselfe o∣ver to a trade of wickednesse, and I meet with him in that sinful course, and surprise him with my judgements, he shall die, &c. Those good actions which he hath formerly done,21 Neverthelesse, if thou warne the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, & he doth not sin, hee shall surely live. and his fore-past holy carriage shall not be so respected, as to keep him from just condemnation, &c. And behold, there it pleased God to give me a repre∣sentation of his glorious presence, as before when I was by the river Chebar,23 And behold, the glo∣ry of the Lord stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river of Chebar. &c. See verse 14.24 Then the Spirit en∣tred into me, &c. Their wickednesse shall tye up thy tongue,25 They shall put bands upon thee, and shall binde thee with them. and cause thee to keep close from them, &c. I will impose silence upon thee for a judgement to them,26 And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roofe of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumbe, & shalt not be to them a reprover. so as thou shalt not reprove their mis-deeds any more. But when I renue my commission to thee,27 But when I speake with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, thus saith the Lord God, He that heareth let him heare, and he that forbeareth let him forbeare and bid thee to speake, I will then give thee a freedome of speech unto them; and thou shalt say; Thus saith the Lord; Whether they heare thee, or heare thee not; it is all one to thee; Doe thou thy duty, and it sufficeth, &c.
CAP. IIII. 1 Take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, & pour∣tray upon it the city, e∣ven Ierusalem.MAke thee upon a Tile, a modell or draught of the ci∣ty Jerusalem. 2 And lay siege against it, and build a fort against it: and cast a mount against it: set the campe also a∣gainst it, and set battering rams against it round about.And then make the modell of a siege laid against that so-pourtrayed city; in all the representations of those hostile actions, that are wont to be done against a city that is beleaguered. And, to signifie the strength, and invinciblenesse of that siege,3 Moreover, take thou unto thee an yron pan, and set it for a wall of yron be∣tween thee and the city, & set thy face against it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it: this shall be a signe to the house of Israel. set a pot of yron betweene thee and that city; and then doe thou set thy face against it, as if thou wert the besieger of it; and this shall be a signe to all the peo∣ple of Israel, what they shall really expect to be perfor∣med against them. Lye thou also upon thy left side, and by thy quiet and still lying thereon, represent unto the house of Israel (the Ten Tribes) how long I have lyen patiently under the many provocations,4 Lie thou also upon the left side, and lay the iniqui∣ty of the house of Israel upon it: according to the number of the daies that thou shalt lie upon it, thou shalt beare their iniquitie. which I have had from those rebel∣lious Israelites; according to the number of the dayes wherein thou shalt (in vision) lye upon that side, thou shalt represent my patience under the iniquity of the house of Israel. So many dayes as thou shalt (in the appointment of this vision) lye upon that left side,5 For I have laid upon thee the yeares of their in∣iquitie, according to the number of the daies, three hundred and ninety daies, so shalt thou beare the ini∣quity of the house of Israel for this purpose; so many have beene the yeares that I have quietly forborne to revenge the iniquities of Israel, that is, three hundred and ninety yeares, (answerable to so many dayes) since their defection under Jeroboam. And when thou hast done this, in a figure of what I have done for Israel,6 And when thou hast accomplished them, lie a∣gaine on thy right side, and thou shalt beare the iniqui∣ty of the house of Iudah forty daies, I have appoin∣ted thee, each day for a year then lye another while, upon thy right side, to represent my bearing with the iniquity of the house of Judah; Fourty daies are in thy vision appoin∣ted for this posture, in figure of fourty yeares that I have beene provoked by the sins of Judah. Thine arme shall be uncovered,7 Thine arme shall bee uncovered. to signifie the vehe∣mence, and readinesse of execution which shall be in the besiegers of Jerusalem. 8 And behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turne thee from one side to another, til thou hast ended the daies of thy siege.And to shew the immutable certainty of that my de∣cree for the besieging of Jerusalem, I will lay bands upon thee, in this vision, that thou maist not change sides, till the dayes of that fore-appointed siege be fulfilled. And, as thou shalt thus represent the siege, so also in the sequel,9 Take thou also unto thee wheate, and barly, and beanes, and lentiles, & mil∣let, and fitches, & put them in one vessell, & make thee bread thereof according to the number of the dayes that thou shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety daies shalt thou eate thereof. thou shalt represent the famine which shall fall upon Jerusalem; Take thee therefore all kinds of graine, wheat and barly, and beanes, and lentiles, and fit∣ches, and put them all together, and make bread of this
mesline; and eate thereof, for the space of three hundred and ninety dayes; to signifie that in that strait siege, there shall be such scarcity, as that they shall be glad of the coursest sustenance. And thy meate, which thou shalt eate,10 And thy meat which thou shalt eate, shall bee by weight twenty shekels a day, from time to time shalt thou eate it. shall be stin∣ted unto thee, according to five ownces, the day. Neither shalt thou have ful scope to drinke how much water thou pleasest,11 Thou shalt drinke also water by measure, the sixe part of an hin, from time to time shalt thou drinke. but shalt have it allowed thee by measure, about a pint a day; and so shalt continue. And thou shalt make it up in the form of barly cakes, and shalt bake it (in stead of coales) with mans dung,12 13 And thou shalt eate it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it with dung that commeth out of man in their sight. in the sight of the people; to signifie that extreme polluti∣on, whereto God will give over his people; among the Gentiles. Then said I; Ah Lord God, behold, as I have bin conse∣crated to thy service, in the priesthood,14 Then said I, Ah Lord God, behold, my soule hath not beene polluted, for frō my youth up even till how have I not eaten of that which dieth of it selfe, or is torne in pieces, neither came there abhominable flesh into my mouth. so I have careful∣ly kept my self from all legall pollutions from my youth; I have not eaten ought that is forbidden by thy law; but have avoided all those offensive meats of what kinde so∣ever; and now, thou knowest that this excrementitious fire which thou injoynest is (besides the loathsomenesse) uncleane by thy law. See Leviticus 26. verse 26.16 I will breake the staffe of bread. CAP. V. TO fore-signifie that variety of miserable desolation,1 And thou son of man, take thee a sharpe knife, take thee a barbours rasour and cause it to passe upon thine head, and upon thy beard: then take the ballan∣ces to weigh, and divide the haire. which shall come upon Jerusalem, take thee a sharpe knife, even a barbors rasour, and therewith cause all the haire of thy head, and beard to be shaven off; the haires of thy head and beard represent the numerous inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem; all they shall be cut, by severall waies of destruction; and therefore take thy ballances, and weigh thine haire into three equall parts. One third part shalt thou burne with fire,2 Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the citie, when the daies of the siege are fulfilled, and thou shalt take a third part, & smite about it with a knife, and a third part thou shalt scatter in the winde, and I will draw out a sword after them. to shew the extremity of that calamity which a third part of the in∣habitants shall indure in pestilence & famine in the siege; Another third part thou shalt smite about with a knife, to shew, that a third part of them shall fal by the sword; and one other third part of it thou shalt scatter in the winde, to signifie their dispersion in the captivity, which shall be attended also with much cruelty afterwards. See verse 12.
3 Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind thē in the skirts.But thou shalt take up a few of those haires, out of this division, and shalt blinde them in thy skirts; to signifie that there shall be a small remnant yet reserved of my people. 4 Then take of them againe and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burne them in the fire: for thereof shall a fie come forth into all the house of Israel.Then afterward, take of them againe which thou hadst reserved in thy skirts, and cast them into the midst of the fire, to signifie that those remainders shall put themselves into miserable affliction, and at last shall bring an utter destruction to all the house of Israel. I will send a grievous famine upon them, which like unto deadly arrowes,16 I will send upon them the evill arrows of famine. shall pierce through their souls. CAP. VI. 3 Ye mountaines of Is∣rael, heare the word of the Lord.THe men of Israel will not heare; heare therefore, O ye mountaines of Israel, which are lesse deafe then they, heare ye the judgmēts that God hath denounced against the sinfull remainders of Israel. 9 And they that escape of you, shall remember me among the nations, whi∣ther they shall be caried captives, because I am bro∣ken with their whorish hart which have departed from me, and with their eyes which goe a whor∣ing after their idols.And those that escape of you shall remember me a∣mong the nations, &c. and bethinke themselves how I have beene over-provoked by their wicked idolatries; in that they have departed from me; & have abandoned themselves, to their shamefull and abhominable Idols, &c. Be thou vehement, and passionate, in expressing thy sorrow and indignation for the sinnes and judgements of thy people; and therefore smite thine hands together, and stamp with thy feet, and say, Alas,11 Thus saith the Lord God, Smite with thine hand, and stampe with thy foote, and say Alas. &c. Yea, more desolate then the most horrid, craggie, for∣lorne wildernesse in the world.14 More desolate then the wildernesse towards Diblath. CAP. VII. 5 An evill, an onely e∣vill, behold, is come.THat evill is come upon thee, which alone shall make a dispatch of thee, there will need no other to se∣cond it. 7 The day of trouble is neere, and not the sound∣ing againe of the moun∣taines.The day of thy grievous trouble is actually, and really comne; which thou shalt finde sensibly, to be no empty and vaine sound of an echo among the mountaines, but a true and feeling destruction. 10 The rod hath blos∣somed, prid hath budded.That rod of punishment, wherewith they shall bee smitten, howsoever it come from Chaldea, and hath put forth thence, yet the root of it, is from themselves, even from their owne pride. 21 Violence is rise up into a rod of wickednesse: none of them shall remaine, nor of their multitude, nor of any of theirs, neither shall there be wailing for them.And from this root is growne up cruelty, and vio∣lence,
and that violence hath shewed it selfe in open wic∣kednesse, and outragious oppositions unto good; which shall bring upon them so perfect a destruction, as that none of them shall be left alive to bewaile the dead. The time of this judgement is at hand;12 The time is come, the day draweth neere, let not the buyer rejoyce, nor the seller mourne: for wrath is upon all the multitude thereof. wherein all shall be inwrapped in one common calamity; So as there shall be no difference betwixt the condition of the buy∣er, and the seller; for wrath is indifferently gone out up∣on all sorts. And, whereas in the ordinary sale of Israelitish lands,13 For the seller shall not returne to that which is sold, although they were yet alive: for the vision is touching the whole multi∣tude thereof which shall not returne: neither shall any strengthen himselfe in the iniquity of his life. the seller is wont, in the yeare of Jubilee, to returne to those possessions, which he hath aliened; now it shall not be so; though he be then alive, yet there shall be no chal∣lenge or recovery of that which hee hath sold; for this captivity shall be universall, which is foretold in this vi∣sion, and that which shall not admit of any such returne, as might restore this generation to their ancient inheri∣tance; neither shall any wicked man have cause to in∣courage himselfe in the vaine confidence of his impuni∣ty for his sinne. And though the men of Israel traine, and muster,14 They have blowne the trumpet, even to make all ready, but none goeth to the battell, for my wrath is upon all the multitude thereof. and make great preparations of a warlike resistance, yet all this shall be in vaine; for they shall never be able to stand in the day of battle; for my wrath fights against all the multitude of them. And if any of them shall escape (as some shall escape) the sword, & pestilence,16 But they that escape of them, shall escape, and shall be on the mountaines like doves of the vallies, all of them mourning, eve∣ry one for his iniquitie. yet their life shal be rather more miserable then death; for they shall bee faine to hide their heads in the desert mountaines; and shal be like the fearfull doves, that want shelter in the vallies; all of them protracting a wofull life, onely to suffer, and lan∣guish under the conscience of their owne wickednesse. And whereas they formerly trusted to their riches,19 They shall cast their silver in the streetes, and their gold shall be remo∣ved: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord, they shall not satisfie their soules, neither fill their bowels: because it is the stumbling blocke of their iniquity. now, they shall cast their silver and gold in the streets, as utterly unprofitable for their releefe, &c. now, they shall well finde, how little power this wealth of theirs hath to satisfie their soules; and to content their hearts; because it is that which they have made an occasion of their sinne, by their uniust, and wicked confidence, they have put in it. As for his beautifull, and glorious Temple, he placed it in great majesty among them,20 As for the beauty of his ornaments, he set it in majesty, but they made the images of their abho∣minations, and of their de∣testable things therein; therefore have I set it far from them. as that which might well be their best, and greatest ornament; but they have notoriously prophaned it, in setting up their abhomina∣ble idols therein; therfore, have I forsaken both them, and it, and give it over to the pollution, and vastation of the heathen.
Make thee a chaine of yron, to signifie the miserable bondage and captivity which is comming upon thy peo∣ple; for the land is full of bloody crimes,23 Make a chaine, for the land is full of bloody crimes. &c. 26 Then shall they seek a vision of the Prophet: but the law shall perish from the Priest, and coun∣sell from the ancients.Then shall they be glad to enquire after the Prophet of God, to know what the issue of things shall be: but in a just punishment of their former neglect, and security, God shall take away his gifts from their Priests, and Prophets, so as they shall not be able to declare his will unto them for their direction, and preservation. CAP. VIII. 1 That the hand of the Lord God fell there upon mee.THe Spirit of the Lord was powerfull with, and upon me, in a divine rapture, and vision. Then I beheld, and loe, there was shewed to me the likenesse of an humane shape;2 Then I beheld, and loe, a likenesse as the ap∣pearance of fire: frō the ap∣pearance of his loines even downward fire: and from his loines even upward, as the appearance of bright∣nesse, as the colour of am∣ber. whose lower parts from the loines downward, were as the colour of fire; and from the loines upward, of a cleare and pleasing bright∣nesse, like unto amber, to signifie that that God, who is graciously majesticall in himselfe, is terrible in the re∣venges of his wilfull enemies. 3 And he put forth the forme of an hand, & tooke me by a locke of mine head, and the spirit lift me up betweene the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Ierusalem, to the doore of the inner gate, that looketh toward the north, where was the seat of the image of jelousie, which provoketh to jelousie.And from this appearance of an humane shape, there was an hand put forth, which tooke me (as it seemed un∣to me in this vision) by a locke of the haire of mine head; and (me thought) the Spirit of God, lifted me up be∣twixt the earth and the heaven, and brought me (not in body, but in vision) to Jerusalem, to the very doore of the Inner gate of the common court; even that gate, which looketh towards the North; where was the shrine of that abhominable idol of Baal set up, which provoked the just jealousie of the Almighty. 4 And behold, the glo∣ry of the God of Israel, was there according to the vision that I saw in the plaine.And behold, there I saw the same representation of the glory of the God of Israel, which had beene formerly shewed unto me in the vision, which I had by the river of Chebar. Then said he unto me; Sonne of man, it is too much that thou seest this one shamefull Idol; but thou shalt yet see many more, and besides this open abhominati∣on, thou shalt see hidden, and secret; Dig now in the wall, and when I had (in my vision) digged in the wall, behold, a doore8 Then said hee unto me, Sonne of man, digge now in the wall: and when I had digged in the wall, behold a doore. seemed to appeare. 11 And there stood be∣fore them seventie men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Iaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand, and a thicke cloud of incense went up.And there stood before those Idols, all the Judges and rulers of Israel, which God had appointed to be seventy
in number; and in the midst of them, the president of that senate Jaazaniah, the sonne of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand, in which hee had offered in∣cense to all the abhominable Idols; and thesume thereof went up, as a thicke cloud, for the abundance thereof. Then said he unto me, Sonne of man, hast thou seene what the ancients of Israel,12 Then said he unto me, Sonne of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel doe in the darke, every man in the chambers of his ima∣gery? for they say, The Lord seeth us not. (who should be good exam∣ples of peiety and holinesse to the rest) doe in this secret, retired roome, unseene un-noted; how they heape up gods to themselves, every one according to his owne vaine imagination? For they say; Tush, not onely are we hid from the eyes of men, but even the eyes of the Lord himselfe descry us not, &c. And behold, there sate women, after the manner of the Aegyptian Idolatry, bewailing the losse of Osiris,14 And behold, there sate women weeping for Tammuz. the husband of their beastly goddesse Isis, whose super∣stition was joyned with abhominable filthinesse. And lo, they put forth accursed branches of severall wickednesses to the just provocation of Gods anger un∣to their owne destruction.17 And loe, they put the branch to their nose. CAP. IX. ANd behold,2 And behold, sixe men came from the way of the higher gate, which lieth toward the North, and e∣very man a slaughter wea∣pon in his hand, and one man among thē was cloth∣ed with linnen, with a wri∣ters Inke-horn by his side. there appeared sixe men (according to the number of the sixe princiall gates of Jerusalem, in representation of so many destroying Angells,) which came from the way of the North; which lieth towards Chaldea; and every man had a weapon of slaughter in his hand; and there was one amongst them, resembling the Sonne of God, the gratious mediator betwixt God and man, which was clothed with linnen, to signifie his e∣verlasting Priesthood; with a writers inkhorne by his side; for the resemblance of his eternall consignation of his elect, and his carefull marking them out for their pre∣servation, &c. And the glorious God of Israel;3 And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the Cherub where∣upon he was, to the thre∣shold of the house. who had wont to have his seate betwixt the Cherubims, which covered the Arke, went up from thence, to show them that hee meant to remove away from Israel; and yet, not all at once, but by degrees, and therefore he removed first only to the threshold of the Temple, &c. Goe through all the streetes of Jerusalem,4 Goe through the mid∣dest of the citie, through the midst of Ierusalem, & set a marke upon the fore∣heads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abo∣minations that be done in middest thereof. and set a note, or marke of distinction upon all those that sigh, and mourne for all the abhominations that are done therein; that those men may be mercifully reserved from the common destruction.
7 And hee said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slaine, goe yee forth: and they went forth and slew in the citie.And he said unto him; since my house hath beene so shamefully defiled by idolatries, doe not ye spare to de∣file it, (together with the courts there) with the blood, and the carcasses of the slaine. And it came to passe, whiles (in this visiō of mine) they were slaying them, and I was left, beholding this slaugh∣ter, that I fell upon my face8 And it came to passe while they were slaying them, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cri∣ed, and said, Ah Lord God. in an humble deprecation of further vengeance, &c. CAP. X. 1 Then I looked, and behold, in the firmament that was above the head of the Cherubims, there appeared over them, as it were a Saphir stone, as the appearance of the like∣nesse of a throne.THen I looked, and behold; the apearance of my first vision was presented unto me; in the firmament that was above the head of those foure Angells, there appea∣red the likenesse of a throne made of a bright, and glori∣ous Saphire-stone; to signifie the majesty of God, which over-ruleth, and disposeth of all those heavenly spirits. Then God Almighty, who sate upon this throne, spake unto that Angell of the Covenant,2 And hee spake unto the man clothed with lin∣nen, and said, Goe in be∣tweene the wheeles, even under the Cherub, and fill thine hand with coales of fire from betweene the Cherubims, and scatter them over the citie. And he went in my sight. who was clo∣thed with linnen, as being so the high Priest of his Church, that he is withall the just Judge of the world; and said unto him; Go thou amongst these Angelicall re∣presentations, (who hast most right to dispose of them) and fill thine hand with the coales of Gods vengeance (not from the altars which thy people have polluted, but) from betweene the Cherubims of heaven (who rejoyce to contrive just revenge against wicked men) and scatter them over the citie, that it may bee consumed with the fire thereof. 4 Then the glory of the Lord went up from the Cherub, &c.See Chap. 9. verse 3. 7 And one Cherub stretched forth his hand from between the Cheru∣bims, unto the fire that was betweene the Cheru∣bims: and tooke thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with linnen, who tooke it, and went out.And one of those foure Angells stretched forth his hand from betweene the other Cherubims, and reaching to that fire, which was ready betweene the Cherubims, tooke thereof, and as an obsequious minister unto Christ the Sonne of God, delivered it into his hand; who, ac∣cording to the charge given him by God, tooke it, and went out. 9 And when I looked, behold, the foure wheeles by the Cherubims, one wheele by one Cherub, &c. and the appearance of the wheels, was as the co∣lour of a Beril stone. So also verse 10.See chapter 1. verse 16.
See chapter 1. verse 17.11 When they went, they went upō their foure sides, &c. And the whole compasse and frame of the wheeles,12 And their whole bo∣dy, and their backes, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheeles were full of eyes round a∣bout, even the wheeles that they foure had. both in the upper, and lower parts thereof, were full of eyes round about; to shew, that however the course and events of things seeme so unstable, and uncertaine, as if all things ranne upon wheeles; and there doe also appear a certaine intricatenesse, and perplexitie in the pro∣ceedings thereof, yet that the infinite and most wise pro∣vidence of God hath fore-seene and fore-ordained all things to his owne holy purposes. And the voice of God spake to the wheele in my hear∣ing;13 As for the wheeles, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O wheele. as therein shewing that hee takes perfect notice of the events of things, and both gives and judges their motion. See chap. 1. verse 10.14 And every one had foure faces, &c. See chap. 1. verse 12.16 And when the Che∣rubims went, the wheeles went. Then the Lord removed the Testimony of his pre∣sence from the Temple;18 Then the glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the Cherubims. and forsooke even the very thre∣shold thereof; and stood on high over these foure Cheru∣bims; as signifying that for the great abhominations of Israel, he had withdrawne himselfe from them. And these foure Cherubims lifted up their wings,19 And the Cherubims lift up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheeles also were besides them, and every one stood at the doore of the East gate of the Lords house, and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above. and mounted up frō the earth, where they seemed formerly to stand, to heaven-ward, in my sight; and according to their motion also the wheeles were lifted up; & both the Cherubim, and wheeles stood over the outer-gate of the great court of the Temple; and the glory of the Lord appeared on high above them; to shew, that now hee would no more bee sought of them in that materiall house, but above in heaven. CAP. XI. I Was in vision brought to the East gate of the outmost court of the Temple; and behold,1 And brought me unto the East gate of the Lords house, which looketh Eastward: and behold, at the doore of the gate five and twenty men. at the doore of the gate there were five and twenty of the selected rulers of Israel, &c. Which say; Tush, this threatned destruction is farre enough off; It was an idle word of Jeremiah,3 Which say, It is not neere, let us build houses: this citie is the cauldron, and we be the flesh. that this citie is the cauldron, we the flesh, the Chaldees the fire;
well and long shall we, for all these menaces, enjoy our citie, and our selves. 7 Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Your slaine whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this citie is the cauldron: but I will bring you forth out of the mid∣dest of it.Yee that so pleasantly scoffe at the words of my Pro∣phets, know, that yee doe fulfill them too justly; Those men, whom your cruelty hath slaine, and laid in the midst of your city, they are the flesh; and this citie is the caul∣dron; but for you, I will take order you shall not bee boyled within these your walls; I will cast you out hence, and prepare judgement for you elsewhere. So also verse 11. And it came to passe, when I prophesied, that Pelati∣ah, being a man of great reputation among the people, and a prime ruler in Israel, died; Then as in his death see∣ing an image the of imminent destruction of the rest, I fell downe upon my face, and said,13 And it came to passe when I prophesied, that Pelatiah, the sonne of Be∣najah died: then fell I downe upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said. &c. Never complaine of the taking away of some noted governors of Israel,15 Sonne of man, thy brethren, even thy bre∣thren, the men of thy kin∣red, and all the house of Is∣rael wholly are they, unto whom the inhabitants of Ierusalem have said, Get ye farre from the Lord: unto us is this land gi∣ven in possession. as if the whole Church were in danger of extirpation by their losse; for both these proud and secure inhabitants of Jerusalem, are well worthy of this judgment; and when they are gone, my Church shall continue; for those thy brethren, & kinsfolke, & the rest of Israel which are now in captivitie, are they, in whom my Church shall live, and of whom these insolent inha∣bitants have said; They are gone farre enough from the Lord; as for us we shall surely continue safe in the land of our possession; 16 Yet will I be to them as a little sanctuarie, in the countries where they shall come.However, I have removed them from my locall and materiall sanctuarie, yet will I be to them in their exile, and captivity, in stead of an other sanctuary; for I will both protect them, and give them gratious testimonies of my presence with them. 19 And I will give them one heart, and will put a new spirit within you: and I will take the stonie heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh.And I will give them an holy and happy accordance in my Truth; and will renew a right spirit in you: and will take away that perverse and obstinate disposition, which is naturally in them, to that which is good; and will give them a endernesse of heart, such as may make them capable  the good impressions of my spirit. 21 But as for them whose heart walketh af∣ter the heart of their dete∣stable things, and their a∣bominations, I will re∣compence their way upon their owne heads, saith the Lord God.But as for those that walke on in their wicked and ab∣hominable idolatries, doing those things which may be pleasing to their false gods, I will requite them accord∣ing to their deservings, saith the Lord. 23 And the glory of the Lord went up, &c.See chap. 10. verse 18.
CAP. XII. THerefore, thou Sonne of man, prepare thee all neces∣sary commodities for a remove, and long exile; and pack up thy fardells by day, in their sight,3 Therefore thou Son of man, prepare the stuffe for removing, and remove by day in their sight. &c. And, that thy very actions may bee propheticall, Dig thou through the wall in their sight;5 Digge thou through the wall in their sight, and cary out thereby. to fore-shew unto them, that they shall not have a free egresse out of their citie, but shall be glad to seeke all secret evasions to save themselves. Thou shalt hoodwinke thy selfe, and hide thy face,6 Thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not the ground: for I have set thee for a signe unto the house of Israel. so as that thou see not the ground; to foreshew the great anxetie, and sorrow, wherewith the Jewes shall depart into their captivity, and withall, the excaecation of their King Zedekiah; who shall not behold that Babylonish earth, that he shall tread upon; for I have made and ap∣pointed this act of thine to be a presage of their future captivity. Say, God hath appointed to prefigure,11 Say, I am your signe, like as I have done, so shall it be done unto them. and fore-sig∣nifie in me, what he meanes to doe unto you, &c. I will encompasse,13 My net also will I spread upon him, and hee shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, to the land of the Chaldeans, yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there. and take him by the forces of the Chaldees, as a fish is taken by a net, &c. and I will bring him to Babylon, yet shall he not see the land before him, for his eyes shall be put out by the King of Babylon, there shall he live, and die in a woefull blindnesse. Those few will I purposely leaue alive,16 But I will leaue a few men of them from the sword, from the famine and from the pesti∣lence, that they may de∣clare all their abominati∣ons among the heathen whither they come, and they shall know that I am the Lord. that they may give glory to me, in cōfessing the shamfull abominations of their people, which brought all this fearfull desolati∣on upon them, so as the very heathen may herein justifie me and know me to be the Lord. Sonne of man, when thou eatest thy meales, doe thou, in thy feeding, expresse a kinde of trembling,18 Son of man, eate thy bread with quaking, and drinke thy water with trembling and with care∣fulnesse. and quak∣ing; and in thy drinking of water, expresse a frightful∣nesse, and amazed suspition of the approach of an en∣mie. What meane the Jewes to mocke at thy prophesies, and to say; Tush,22 Sonne of man, what is that proverbe that yee have in the land of Israel, saying; The dayes are pro∣longed, and every vision faileth? either it will be long ere these things fall out, or never; they are but vaine bugges wherewith the prophets would affright us?
CAP. XIII. 3 Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their owne spirit, and have seene nothing.WOe unto the foolish prophets that speake of their owne heads, even the fancies of their owne braines, and have had no vision at all, nor no commission from God. 4 O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts.Oh Israel, thy prophets taking advantage of the di∣spersion of those, which might keep them in order, doe nothing but spoile, and waste thy poore, and miserable remainders; as foxes are wont to spoile those vineyards that lye aloofe off from their owners. 5 Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel, to stand in the battell in the day of the Lord.Where the wickednes of the people had made brea∣ches in their walls, it had beene your part to have made them up, by wholesome doctrine, and admonition; that so the judgements of God might have beene kept out; but ye have not done so at all; nor used any wholesome preventions of these evils; that so Gods people might have beene able to stand in the face of their enemies, in the day of battle. 9 They shall not bee in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be writ∣ten in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shal they enter into the land of Israel, and yee shall know that I am the Lord God.They shall not be admitted, as prophets, in the assem∣bly of my people; neither shall they be registred in the roll of the house of Israel; neither shall they ever have the favour to returne unto that good land; but shall live and die out-casts from the holy common-wealth of my Church. 10 And one built up a wall, and loe, others daubed it with untempered mor∣ter.One laid false grounds of comfort, and the other flo∣rished them over with unsound, and plausible pre∣tences. 11 Say unto them which daube it with untempered morter, that it shall fall; there shall be an overflow∣ing shower, and ye O great haile stones shall fall, and a stormie winde shall rent it.Say unto them, which lay these false, and tottering grounds, that they shall fall, how faire soever they seem; their false doctrine of peace shall bee beaten downe by that inundation, that storme and tempest of the Chal∣dees, which shall come in upon them. 18 And say, thus saith the Lord God; Woe to the women that sow pil∣lowes to all armeholes, and make kerchiefes upon the head of every stature to hunt soules: Will yee hunt the soules of my peo∣ple, and will yee save the soules alive that come unto you?Woe to the false prophetesses also, that speake plea∣sing and plausible words to all hearers, & fit every mans humour with their flattering divinations, purposely that they may intrap, and beguile miserable soules; Will ye persist thus to beguile and ensnare the silly soules of your followers? and will you take upon you to pronounce sentences of life, and good speed where you please? 20 Wherefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I am against your pillowes, wherewith ye there hunt the soules to make them flie, and I will teare them from your armes, and will let the soules goe, &c.I am against those your fraudulent insinuations, and
plausible falseshoods, wherewith ye deceive and betray the soules of men; I will utterly frustrate and shame these your cunning suggestions; and deliver those soules which ye have insnared therewith. So also verse 2. Because with lying prophesies ye have made the heart of my faithfull people, sad,22 Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked. in terrifying them with those evils, which shall not come; and incouraged wicked men, by securing them, against those evils which shall surely fall upon them, &c. Therefore I will so shame and confound you,23 Therefore yee shall see no more vanitie, nor di∣vine divinations, for I will deliver my people out of your hand, and yee shall know that I am the Lord. that yee shall not dare to broach any more of your lying divina∣tions; and my people, whom ye have hitherto deluded, now being sufficiently assured of your falsehood, shall be delivered from the danger of your deceits. CAP. XIIII. SOnne of man,3 Son of man, these men have set up their Idols in their heart, and put the stumbling blocke of their iniquitie before their face: should I be enquired of at all by them. these men have given up their hearts to Idolatry; and have wilfully laid blocks of iniquity be∣fore their owne faces, that they may stumble thereat, and fall; contemptuously rejecting my counsels, and ordinan∣ces; and is it fit, that such mis-creants should come (as these hypocritically doe) to enquire ought from me? I the Lord will answere him that commeth;4 I the Lord will an∣swere him that commeth according to the multitude of his Idols. but not as he expecteth, and desireth; rather, according to his de∣servings, in judgement, and indignation, for those ma∣ny and abhominable Idolatries whereof he is guilty. That I may convince the house of Israel in their owne hearts,5 That I may take the house of Israel in their owne heart. of their foule impiety, and abominable wicked∣nesse, &c. I will oppose my selfe against that man,8 And I will set my face against that man, and will make him a signe and a pro∣verb, and I will cut him off from the midst of my peo∣ple. 8 nflict sen∣sible judgements upon him; and will make him a feare∣full example of my just revenge, in every mans mouth, &c. And if the Prophet be deceived, when he hath spoken a thing,9 And if the Prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing; I the Lord have deceived that Pro∣phet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him. I the Lord in my just judgement have given up that Prophet to deceit, for a punishment both of his owne sin, and of the notorious wickednesse of the peo∣ple, and I will accordingly stretch out my hand against him, in executing my vengeance upon him, &c. And the people also, which trusted to the counsels, and predictions of those false prophets, shall bee duely punished for their iniquity,10 And they shall beare the punishment of their in∣iquity. &c.
13 Will breake the staffe of bread, &c.See Leviticus 26.26. 14 Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, & Iob were in it, they should deli∣ver but their owne soules, by their righteousnes saith the Lord God.Though there were men never so gracious with mee, amongst you; even Noah, whom I saved from the de∣luge; Daniel, whom I saved from the common slaughter of the Chaldean-wise-men, (and after from the Lyons;) Job, whom I delivered from those extreme sufferings, under the hand of Satan, and whose intercession I accep∣ted for his friends; yet, they should no otherwise pre∣vaile with me, but for the preserving and rescue of their owne lives, by their righteousnesse, saith the Lord. Yet behold, all shall not be thus destroyed; but there shall be left a remnant, that shall be brought forth into captivity, in your sight; behold they shall bee brought forth unto you; and ye shall well see their waies, and do∣ings to have been so abominable, as that yee shall wil∣lingly justifie my proceedings against them, in all the e∣vill, that I have brought upon Jerusalem.22 Yet behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought forth, both Sonnes and Daughters: be∣hold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way, and their doings: and ye shall be comforted concerning the evill that I have brought upon Ierusa∣lem. So also verse 23. CAP. XV. 1, 2, 3, 4. Sonne of man, what is the vine tree more then any tree, or then a branch which is among the trees of the forrest? shall wood be taken thereof to doe any worke; or wil men take a pin of it, to hang any vessell thereon? Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel.THe vine is a noble plant, in respect of the fruit it bears, but in regard of the wood thereof, no shrub is so meane; it is so farre from yielding boards, or timber, as that there cannot so much as a pin be made of it, to hang ought thereon; Loe such is Israel, if it bore good fruit, it would be deare and precious to me; but, in it selfe, it is but meane, and base, in comparison of other nations, and that which is unfit for any service; It is only meet to bee cast into the fire for fuell, &c. CAP. XVI. 3 And say, Thus saith the Lord God unto Ierusa∣lem, Thy birth, & thy nati∣vitie is of the land of Cana∣an, thy father was an Amo∣rite, & thy mother an Hit∣tite.NEver brag of thy descent from Abraham; no, thou hast so utterly degenerated from the faith, and obe∣dience of that holy Patriark, that thou hast justly forfai∣ted all thy claime of him; rather thy birth, and thy nati∣vity may, and must be derived from those Canaanites, in∣to whose corrupt manners thou art declined; and so art thou incorporated into their wicked corruptions, as if thy father were an Amorite, thy mother an Hittite, nei∣ther
of them of the chosen and holy seed. And in how miserable a condition I found thee,4 And as for thy nativi∣ty, in the day thou wast borne, thy navell was not cut, neither wast thou wa∣shed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at all. all the world knoweth; even utterly languishing under the Aegyptian servitude, so as thy case was no lesse desperate then that a new borne child, whose navell is not cut, and, to whom the mid-wife performeth not those offices, which are necessary for the first entrance, and intertaine∣ment in the world. No eye pittyed thee,5 None eye pittied thee, to doe any of these un∣to thee, to have compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast borne. or was inclined to shew thee a∣ny mercy, or doe thee any favour at all; yea rather thou wert hated and despised by thine hosts, and neighbours of Aegypt; and wert left forlorne to the cruelty, & scorn, and intolerable oppression of those thy tyrannicall per∣secutors. And when looking downe from heaven,6 And when I passed by thee, and saw thee pol∣luted in thine owne blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live, yea I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live. I saw thee in this wofull, and loathsome plight; given up by the world, as lost, I then tooke compassion on thee, and even then, in thine utmost extremity determined thy preservati∣on, and said, yet Israel shall live. I have so blessed thee, that thou not only injoyest life,7 And thou hast increa∣sed and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent ornaments, thy breasts are fashioned, and thine haire is growne, whereas thou wast naked and bare. but, withall, art plentifully stored with those favors, and benefits, which serve for pleasure, and ornament; and thou art now grown to a great perfection, of knowledge and profession; whereas before thou wert utterly desti∣tute of all good things. And now,8 Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold the time was the time of love, & I spread my skirt over thee. when thou wert thus beautified by my gra∣ces and favours, I began to cast my affections upon thee, as that Church, whom I would espouse to my selfe; and immediately, professed my selfe to be thy spirituall hus∣band; contracting my selfe unto thee by a firme cove∣nant, mutually passed betwixt us; and thou becamest my peculiar people. Then I sanctified thee from thy naturall corruptions;9 Then washed I thee with water, yea I throughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I annointed thee with oyle. and cleansed thee from thy sins, and gave thee the an∣nointing of my spirit. And decked thee with all those varieties of graces,10 I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with badgers skin, and I girded thee a∣bout with fine linnen, and covered, &c. and vertues, which I plentifully communicated unto thee. So also verse 11.12. and part of the 13. I did not only make outward provisions for thee,13 Thou didst eate fine flower, and honie, and oile, and thou wast exceeding beautifull, and thou didst prosper into a Kingdome. but I fed thee also spiritually with those heavenly delicates of my Sacraments; and thou wert become glorious, and
beautifull, in the eyes of the world; and now, of an ob∣scure, and despised handfull, wert growne up into a King∣dome. 15 But thou didst trust in thine owne beautie, and playedst the harlot, because of thy renowne, and pow∣redst out thy fornications on every one that passed by; his it was.And now, being thus favoured, and graced by me, thou grewest proud of thine owne worth; and forgatest mee, and gavest thy selfe over to all uncleanesse; and now being sought to as some famous curtizan, thou hast yeelded over thy selfe to the spirituall fornications of all the nations round about thee. 16 And of thy garments thou didst take, & deckedst thy high places with divers colours, and plaidst the har∣lot thereupon; the like things shall not come, nei∣ther shall it be so.And thou hast abused my graces unto wantonnnesse; those ornaments of wit, of strength, of wealth, which I had bestowed upon thee, thou hast turned to the counte∣nancing, and furtherance of grosse Idolatries. So also verse 17. and 18. and 19. &c. 25 And hast opened thy feet to every one that pas∣sed by, and multiplied thy whoredomes.Thou hast communicated in Idolatry, with every nati∣on, that hath had any intercourse with thee. 26 Thou hast also com∣mitted fornication with the Aegyptians thy neigh∣bours, great of flesh, & hast increased thy whoredomes to provoke me to anger.Thou hast both renued leagues, and interchanged I∣dolatries, with the Aegyptians, which are noted for mon∣strous in this impiety; and hast increased thy spirituall whoredomes above measure. The like wickednesse hast thou also committed with the Assyrians,28 Thou hast plaid the whore also with the Assy∣rians, because thou wast unsatiable. as if thy lust after Idols were utterly unsa∣tiable, &c. So also verse 29. 30 How weak is thine heart, saith the Lord God, seeing thou dost all these things, the worke of an im∣perious whorish woman?How hast thou even spent, and exhausted thy selfe with this odious filthinesse, saith the Lord; as some no∣torious and most infamous strumpet. I will put thee to shame and confusion before the fa∣ces of those which consorted with thee,37 And will discover thy nakednesse unto them, that they, &c. in thine Idola∣tries. 41 And I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any more.I will so judge thee, that thou shalt be disabled frō any further commission of this spirituall whoredome; and shalt be stripped of any power to give the hire of forni∣cation, to thy mercenary lovers. 42 So will I make my fury towards thee to rest, and my jealousie shall de∣part from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angrie.So will I abundantly satisfie my selfe with that re∣venge which I shall take of thee; as that my fury and jea∣lousie shall be at an end, as having no further object to worke upon. Because thou hast not remembred, both the favours that I did thee,43 Because thou hast not remēbred the daies of thy youth, but hast fretted mee in all these things; behold therefore I also will recom∣pense thy way upon thine head, &c. and the covenants that thou madest with me, in my youth; but hast provoked me in all these things; I will bring thy deserved judgements upon thee; and will make thee sure enough from adding this leud∣nesse
to thine other abominations. Thy notorious sins shall be the ordinary by-word,44 Behold, every one that useth proverbs, shall use this proverbe against thee, saying, As is the mo∣ther, so is her daughter. and table-talke of the world, who shall say, As is the mother Canaan, so is the daughter Judah. Thou art just thy mothers daughter,45 Thou art thy mothers daughter, that loatheth her husband, and her children, and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which loathed their husbands, and their children, your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite. like her in wic∣kednesse, and sinne; as she, so thou, hast cast off thy God, and hatest all those that pertaine unto him, & the whole family of you, is all of one and the same straine; thy sister is of no other disposition; your mother (in respect of your manners and condition) was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite. And thine elder sister, is Samaria,46 And thine elder sister is Samaria, shee and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy yonger sister that dwelleth at thy right hand is Sodome, and her daughters. or the Ten Tribes of Israel, she, and those her daughter cities, that lie to the North, and thy yonger sister that dwels to the South∣ward, is Sodome, and the cities appertaining to her. Yet thou hast not contented thy selfe to doe after the example of their abominations, but, &c.47 Yet hast thou not wal∣ked after their waies, nor done after their abominati∣ons. Behold,49 Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodome, pride, fulnesse of bread, and abundance of i∣dlenesse. these were the most eminent sins of thy sister Sodome, even pride, excesse of diet, extreme idlenesse and security; and want of respect and mercy to the poore and needy, &c. Thou hast made thy sisters wickednesses to appeare small in comparison of thine.51 And hast justified thy sisters in all thine abo∣minations which thou hast done. Thou which hast passed thy sentence upon the foule sins of Sodome, and Samaria,52 Thou also which hast judged thy sisters, beare thine owne shame for thy sins that thou hast commit∣ted more abominable then they. now make account to un∣dergoe the shame, and judgement, which thy owne grea∣ter and more abominable sins have deserved, &c. And if the captivity of Sodome, and that of Samaria,53 When I shall bring againe their captivitie, the captivitie of Sodome and her daughters, and the cap∣tivity of Samaria, and her daughters; then will I bring againe the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them. and the townes round about them both, shall be ever re∣versed; then looke that thine also, O Judah, shall be so; but as there is no possibility in their returne, so there is none in thine. Thou never thoughtst of the judgement,56 For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride. which I brought upon thy sister Sodome, in raining fire and
brimstone upon their heads; whiles thou wert transpor∣ted with thy security, and pride. 57 Before thy wicked∣nesse was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that are round about her, the daughters of the Phili∣stims which despise thee round about.Before that God, by his inflicted judgements, brought forth thy wickednes to the notice of the world; and be∣fore he made thee a reproach to the Syrians, and their neighbouring nations, and to the Philistims, and the people adjoyning; all which have despitefully insulted upon thee. Then shalt thou bethinke thy selfe, and recall to re∣membrance those wicked wayes wherin thou hast walk∣ed,61 Then thou shalt re∣member thy wayes, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger, and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant. and be ashamed; when thou shalt also adjoyne unto thee, the Gentiles, as partners of thy happy conversion; whom thou shalt be a meanes to bring home into my Church; but not by vertue of any covenant of thine, but of my owne, which is the new Covenant that I shall make with my chosen under the Gospell. 63 That thou maiest remember, and bee con∣founded, and never open thy mouth any more, be∣cause of thy shame.That thou maiest remember thy old wickednesses, and be soundly humbled under the sense of them, and not have a word to say for thy selfe; because of the shame of thy former vilenesse, &c. CAP. XVII. NEbuchadnezer the King of Babylon is a great Eagle; his long wings, and many feathers are his severall dominions; Whose divers colours, are the rites, and va∣rious formes of government, in those sundry nations; he came into Judea, where Lebanon is renowned and con∣spicuous; and tooke away King Jechoniah, the highest branch of the Cedars there.3 And say, thus saith the Lord God, A great Eagle with great wings, long winged, full of fea∣thers, which had divers colours, came unto Leba∣non, and tooke the highest branch of the Cedar. 4 He cropt off the top of his young twigges; and caried it into a land of traf∣ficke, he set it in a citie of Merchants.He cropt off the top of his young twigs, all their prime nobilitie and able souldiery, and caried them into cap∣tivitie, and set them in Babylon. 5 He tooke also of the seed of the land, and plan∣ted it in a fruitfull field, he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow tree.He tooke also of the seed royall, even Zedechiah, and planted him in the fruitfull land of Judea; where he had store of meanes to have lived, and flourished. 6 And it grew, and be∣came a spreading vine of low stature, whose bran∣ches turned toward him, and the rootes thereof were under him; so it be∣came a vine, &c.And he grew up, and prospered exceedingly, and be∣came a great, and wealthy Prince; howsoever tributary to Babylon; both his family and his power were greatly inlarged. 7 There was also ano∣ther great Eagle with great wings, and many feathers; and behold, this vine did bend her rootes towards him, & shotforth her branches towards him, that hee might water it by the furrowes of her plantation.There was also another great King, of ample domi∣nions,
and mighty power; even the King of Aegypt, and behold, Zedechiah thus set up by Nebuchadnezer, yet did unthankfully incline unto, and relie upon that King of Aegypt, to bee supported by him in his revolt. He was (if he could have kept him so) well planted in his owne soile, which was rich and plentifull, &c.8 It was planted in a goodly soile, by great wa∣ters, that it might bring forth branches. Thus saith the Lord; shall this man prosper in his tre∣chery, and ingratitude? No, that great Monarch,9 Say thou, thus saith the Lord God, Shall it prosper, shall hee not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof that it wither? from whom he is revolted, shall take just revenge on him; and shall utterly defeat, and root him out, &c. So also verse 10. Thus saith the Lord, I will, at the last, worke out the delivery and redemption of my people;22 Thus saith the Lord God, I will also take off the highest branch of the high Cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the top of his young twiggs a tender one, &c. out of the seed of David, will I raise up the Messiah, and set him on high in mine holy Church. Even in my glorious Evangelicall Church, will I ex∣alt his power; and he shall spread my Gospell,23 In the mountaine of the height of Israel will I plant it, and it shall bring forth boughes, and beare fruit, and be a goodly Ce∣dar, and under it shall dwell all fowle of every wing, in the shadow, &c. and in∣large his spirituall dominions all the world over; and all his elect shall shroud themselves under his grace, and protection, &c. And all the people of the earth shall know, that I have brought downe the proud and mighty Tyrans of the world, and have exalted this meeke,24 And all the trees of the field shall know, that I the Lord have brought downe the high tree, have exalted the low tree; have dried up the greene tree, and have made the drie tree to flourish; the Lord have spoken, and have done it. and despised Savi∣our of mankind above every name, that is named in hea∣ven, and in earth. CAP. XVIII. See Ier. 31. verse 29.2 The fathers have eaten soure grapes, &c. YEe have no reason to murmur against me, as either partiall, or rigorous; for,4 Behold, all soules are mine, as the soule of the father, so also the soule of the sonne is mine; the soule that sinneth, it shall die. are not all soules the worke of my creation; one as well as another? and hath not e∣very workeman a will to wish well to his owne handi∣worke: were it not therefore for sinne, no soule should die. But if a man doe sincerely apply himselfe to the keep∣ing of Gods Law,5 But if a man bee just, and doe that which is law∣full and right. and carefully endeavor to doe that
which is just and right. 6 And hath not eaten upon the mountaines, nei∣ther hath lift up his eyes to the Idols of the house of Israel, neither hath de∣filed his neighbours wife, neither hath come neere to a menstruous woman.And hath not given way to superstitious, and idola∣trous sacrifices, neither hath given any worship to the idols of Israel; nor hath suffered himselfe to be defiled with Adultery, nor hath beene polluted with that legall uncleannesse of unseasonable copulation, with a woman set apart for her disease. He that hath not given forth his money upon usury, neither hath upon any pretence,8 He that hath not gi∣ven forth upon usury, nei∣ther hath taken any in∣crease. taken increase from the hands of the borrower, &c. 10 If he beget a sonne that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that doth the like to any of these things:If now this upright man, beget a son that is a robber, or a murderer, or is guilty of any other notorious viola∣tion of Gods Law: And doth not set himselfe to doe any of the holy du∣ties required,11 And that doth not any of these duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountaines, and defiled his neighbours wife; but yeeldeth to idolatrous practices, and to adulteries, and other uncleannesses; Shall that sonne, because he is descended of holy and good parents,13 Shall he then live? he shall not live. live, and have the blessings of a comforta∣ble life continued unto him? No; he shall not live, &c. 14 Now lo, if he beget a sonne that seeth all his fathers sinnes which hee hath done, and conside∣reth, and doth not such like.Now if this degenerated and wicked man beget a son, that seeth, these sinnes of his father, and, upon due consideration, avoideth, and abhorreth all his evill wayes. No soule shall be adjudged to death for any sinne, but his owne;20 The soule that sin∣neth, it shall die: the son shall not beare the iniqui∣tie of the father, neither shall the father beare the iniquitie of the sonne; the righteousnesse of the righteous shall bee upon him, and the wickednesse of the wicked shall be up∣on him. that universall contagion of our first parents sinne, hath spread it selfe over every soule; and by our proprietie therein, hath made us liable to death; but in our personall derivation from our following parents, there can be no guilt of death to any man; the sonne shall not be condemned to death, for the sin of the father, &c. But he that doth righteously, shall speed well with God, and be graciously accepted; he that doth evill, shall re∣ceive according to the wickednesse he hath committed. If that man who hath beene formerly wicked, shall now prove truly penitent,21 But if the wicked will turne from all his sins that he hath committed, and keepe all my Sta∣tutes, and doe that which is lawfull and right, hee shall not die. and turne from all his sinnes, and hereafter live holily, and conscionably in this pre∣sent world, he shall surely live, and not die. So verse 22. 23 Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, saith the Lord God, & not that he should returne from his wayes and live.Is it any pleasure to me that men should be wicked, or that those which are now wicked men, should die ever∣lastingly, saith the Lord God? Is it not rather my desire, that men should repent, and that the repentant should
live; is not this the very sum of my Gospell, which I send into the world? Doe not I call, and cry and sue to men that they would returne from their sinnes, and be saved. But when that man who hath, all the while,24 But when the righ∣teous turneth away from his righteousnesse, and committeth iniquitie, and doth according to all the abhominations that the wicked man doth shal, he live? all his righteousnesse that he hath done, shall not be mentioned in his trespasse that trespassed, & in his sin that he hath sin∣ned, in them shall he die. caried himselfe righteously, and unreproveably, shall now (as being weary of his holy courses) turne away from his up∣right disposition and conversation, and give himselfe over to all those abhominations, which wicked men commit, shall that man, (by vertue of his former in∣offensive cariage) live? No, all his formerly professed righteousnesse shall be forgotten, and qte unregarded; and he shall be dealt with according to the present con∣dition of his sinne. So also verse 26. CAP. XIX. WHat is Judea thy mother,2 And say, What is thy mother, a lionesse: she lay downe among lions, shee nourished her whelps a∣mong young lions. even the whole land wherein thou dwellest? she is no better then a fierce, and cruell lionesse; she consorted with other mer∣cilesse, and cruell nations; and framed her selfe, and her people accordingly. She brought forth one amongst the rest,3 And she brought up one of her whelpes, it be∣came a young lion, and it learned to catch the prey, it devoured men. noted for a lyon-like disposition, even Jehoahaz the sonne of good Josiah, who tyrannized for a time over his people. In so much, as the neighbour nations heard the same of his mis-government, and set upon him and tooke him violently away; and brought him captive in chaines unto Aegypt.4 The nations also heard of him, hee was taken in their pit, and they brought him with chaines, unto the land of Aegypt. Then,5 Now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she tooke another of her whelpes, and made him a young lion. when shee saw her selfe disappointed of the hope of his successe, she set up another of the seed royall by the allowance of Pharaoh Necho; even Jehoiakim, the sonne of Josiah. And he ruled fiercely,6 And he went up and downe among the lions, he became a young lion, and learned to catch the prey, and devoured men. and wickedly amongst his peo∣ple; and followed those courses of oppression, and vio∣lence, which his brother had led him to. And he usurped, and tooke to himselfe their wid∣dowed palaces, and laid waste their populous cities,7 And hee knew their desolate palaces, and hee laid waste their cities, and the land was desolate, and the fulnesse thereof by the noise of his roaring. through his cruell extortions; yea he made the whole land desolate, and by his unmercifull exactions, and cruell menaces, exhausted the fulnesse thereof. Then the nations being moved with his insolency,8 Thē the nations sent the against him on every side from the Provinces, and spread their net over him: he was taken in their pit. set
against him on every side, and both by force and policy, surprized him; and he was captived by them. 10 Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood, plan∣ted by the waters, she was fruitfull, and full of bran∣ches by the reason of many waters.Thy mother is like a vine in the time of her first peace∣able plantation; set in a moist and fruitfull soyle, and thereupon yeelded abundance of branches, and those branches, abundance of grapes. 11 And she had strong rods for the Scepters of them that beare rule, and her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared in her height by the multitude of her branches.And she brought forth many, and potent Princes, which bore rule over my people, and she grew populous and mighty; famous and renowned amongst the nations about her. But now, through her unanswerablenesse to Gods pro∣ceedings with her, and to her own good beginnings, she is justly plucked up in fury,12 But she was pluck∣ed up in furie: she was cast downe to the ground, and the East wind dried up her fruit, her strong rods were broken and wi∣thered, the fire consumed them. and cast down to the ground, and dried up, and withered, with the severe judgements of the Almightie; Her Princes, and all those of her blood royall are consumed, and utterly rooted out. And now, she is caried away (in a woefull captivitie) to be planted in the barren wildernesse13 And now shee is planted in the wildernesse. of Babylon, &c. 14 And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath devoured her fruit, so that shee hath no strong rod to bee a scepter to rule: this is a lamenta∣tion, and shall be for a la∣mentation.And a destruction is risen from among themselves, even from the trecherie of Zedekiah, which hath utter∣ly consumed the remainders of her hopes; so that now, there is no more likelihood of any of the royall blood to be exalted to her government, &c. CAP. XX. WIlt thou any more denounce, & inculcate my de∣spised judgements unto them? Or, wilt thou plead with me for them, any more? No; rather lay be∣fore them the abhominations of their fathers;4 Wilt thou Iudge them, Sonne of man, wilt thou judge them? cause them to know the abomi∣nations of their fathers. and so leave them to their deserved punishments. 5 When I lifted up my hand, unto the seed of the house of Iacob, &c.When I solemnly swore by my selfe for the confirma∣tion of that covenant, which I made with the seed of Ja∣cob, &c. 7 Cast yee away every man the abhominations of his eyes, &c.Cast ye away, every one of you, those abhominable Idols, which your eyes have seene, and affected. Moreover also, I gave them my Sabbaths, to bee a signe betweene me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctifie them.Moreover also, as I gave them (together with the rest) a royall law which was written in the very heart of man, so I did peculiarly give them my Sabbaths, as a speciall cognisance of my people; wherby they might be knowne
to be severed from all others; and might have this bond of sanctifying my name, above all other nations. Wherefore I did, in my just judgement,25 Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judge∣ments wherby they shold not live. give them up to their owne inventions, so as they made to themselves wicked lawes, and perverted their wayes before me. And I yeelded them over to a pollution with their owne gifts, and oblations;26 And I polluted them in their owne gifts, in that they caused to passe through the fire all that openeth the wombe. so as in those things wherein they vainely hoped, and pretended to please me, they foully defiled themselves; namely in their superstitious and Idolatrous lustrations; wherewith they wickedly thought to consecrate the fruit of their wombe, &c. Yet in this,27 Yet in this your fa∣thers have blasphemed me, in that they have com∣mitted a trespasse against mee. your fathers have shamefully reproched me, in that being so gratiously dealt with, by me, yet they demeaned themselves wickedly, and rebelliously against me. For,28 For when I had brought thē into the land, for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw eve∣ry high hill, and all the thicke trees, and they of∣fered there their sacrifices and there they presented the provocation of their offering. when I had brought them into the land of Ca∣naan, which I had promised, and swore to give unto them, they cast their eyes upon those hills, and groves, wherein the heathen had wont to offer their Idolatrous sacrifices; and there, contrary to my commandement, they made their sinfull oblations, to provoke mee to wrath against them, &c. Notwithstanding that I disswaded them for these Idolatrous courses; and sharply reproved them;29 Then I said unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye goe? expostu∣lating with them, the vanitie & wickednes of these servi∣ces of theirs; what meane you thus to frequent your forbidden altars? Doe you not know that I have con∣fined my worship to one place? Why will yee thus wil∣fully transgresse my law? &c. And I will bring you into the desert land of your cap∣tivity under the heathen;35 And I will bring you into the wildernesse of the people, and there will I plead with you face to face. and there will I argue this case with you; laying before you those offences, wherewith you haue justly provoked me. I will cause you to passe under the rod,37 And I will cause you to passe under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the Covenant. both of my correction, and my guidance; and will recall you to the memory, and recognition of that bond of mutuall cove∣nant, which hath beene made betwixt us. As for you, O ye house of Israel, thus saith the Lord; I will have none of your halfe-services; never hope to di∣vide betwixt me, and your idols; since yee will not bee wholly mine; Goe ye, serve yee every one his Idols,39 As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord God, goe ye, serve ye every one his Idols. &c. But for you,40 For in mine holy mountaine, in the moun∣taine of the height of Israel, saith the Lord God, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the land serve me, there will I accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the, &c. that are the true spirituall seed of faith∣full Israel, ye shall all serve me in mine holy Church, and I will both expect, and gratiously accept of those servi∣ces, and devotions, which ye shall offer unto me.
So also verse 14. and 42. 46 Sonne of man, set thy face toward the South, and drop thy word toward the South, and prophesie against the for∣rest of the South field.Sone of man, turne thy face toward Jerusalem, which lieth south-ward from the land where thou art, and utter thy words towards that coast; and prophesie against the sinfull land of Israel, which hath beene as some wild for∣rest in those Southerne parts. 47 And say to the for∣rest of the south, Heare the word of the Lord: thus saith the Lord God, Be∣hold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devoure e∣very greene tree in thee, & every dry tree.And say to the land of Israel; Heare the word of the Lord, &c. I will bring a grievous destruction upon thee, by the hand of thy mercilesse enemies, which like a furi∣rious, and unquenchable fire shall utterly consume thee, &c. So verse 48. 49 Then said I, Ah Lord God, they say of me, doth he not speake parables?Then said I, Ah Lord God, this perverse people are apt to take exceptions against mee; and now they quar∣rell me for the obscurity of my prophesies; and say, This man speakes riddles, and parables, we know not what he meanes. CAP. XXI. LOe then, without all parables, I say unto thee plain∣ly; O thou sonne of man set thy face towards Jeru∣salem,2 Sonne of man set thy face toward Ierusalem. &c. I will make no spare at all; but will sweep away eve∣ry living man in the common destruction; even the righ∣teous, and the wicked;4 Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked. the righteous will I remove to their advantage and glory, the wicked to their utter con∣fusion, &c. 5 That all flesh may know that I the Lord have drawne forth my sword out of his sheath: it shall not returne any more.That all flesh may know, it is my judgement, that is thus severely, and unpartially executed upon Israel. Sigh thou therefore, O thou sonne of man, sigh so deepely,6 Sigh therefore thou sonne of man with the bre∣king of thy loines, and with bitternes sigh before their eyes. and strongly, as to breake thy girdle from thy loines, and by this sighing of thine, intimate unto them that great sorrow which is comming upon them. This sharp sword is not for correction, or for the pru∣ning of superfluities, which I am wont to practise upon my beloved children;10 It contemneth the rod of my sonne, as every tree. but for an utter excision both of stock, and branches; and will leave no way, either for the amendment, or for the being of any in Israel. 13 Because it is a triall, and what if the sword con∣temne even the rod, it shall be no more, saith the Lord God.Because it shall be a fiery triall indeed; And what if this sword scorne to rest in an affliction onely of my peo∣ple; but shall at once cut them off, that they shall be no
more? Surely thus it shall doe, saith the Lord God. See chapter 16. verse 42.17 I will cause my fury to rest. Describe thou in a table, a draught of two waies,19 Also thou sonne of man, appoint thee two waies, that the sword of the King of Babylon may come, both twaine shall come forth out of one land; and choose thou a place, choose it at the head of the way to the city. by which the sword of the King of Babylon may come; Let the wayes runne on together, as comming from one place; and then, when they come to the parting of them, Let one way lead to Rabbah the city of the Ammo∣nites, and another to Jerusalem the chiefe and defenced city of Judah.20 Appoint a way, that the sword may come to Rabbah of the Ammonites, and to Iudah in Ierusalem the defenced. For the King of Babylon shall stand at the parting of two waies, and, being in a doubt whether way to take,21 For the King of Ba∣bylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two waies, to use divi∣nation. shall use divinations for his direction, &c. The sorcerers, and soothsayers shall agree upon his assaulting of Jerusalem;22 At his right hand was the divination for Ie∣rusalem, to appoint cap∣taines, to open the mouth in the slaughter. and shall thereupon give him advice, to prepare for that siege, to attempt the sacking, and destruction thereof with all courage and violence, &c. But this prophesie of thine shall seeme to them as a false prediction, even to them,23 And it shall bee un∣to them as a false divinati∣on in their sight, to them that have sworne oathes; but he will call to remem∣brance the iniquity, that they may be taken. which have dared to sweare the certainty of the contrary successe; But this great enemie will reckon with them, for all their for∣mer iniquity, and they shal be surprised with judgement. And thou, O prophane and wicked Prince of Israel,25 And thou prophane wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end. Zedekiah, whose time of just punishment is now comne, wherein thine iniquity shall be called to a full account, and dispatch. Thus saith the Lord;26 Thus saith the Lord God, Remove the diadem, and take off the Crowne: this shall not be the same: exalt him that is low, and a∣base him that is high. Take away the Kingdome from that treacherous Prince; he shall not rule any more; let Jechoniah, who is now unregarded, be exalted; and let Zedekiah, who is now advanced, be brought low. I will utterly overturne, for ever,27 I will overturne, o∣verturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more untill he come, whose right it is, & I will give it him. this Kingdome of Iudah and Israel; and it shall never be erected any more, untill the Messiah come whose right it is, and to him wil I spiritually give it. Thus saith the Lord concerning the Ammonites,28 And thou sonne of man, prophesie, and say, Thus saith the Lord God, concerning the Ammo∣nites, and concerning their reproach. and that their reproach, which they have beene ever apt to
cast upon my people; even thus say, Even for you, O ye children of Ammon, is the sword also prepared, &c. 29 Whiles they see va∣nitie unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee upon the neckes of them that are slaine of the wicked whose day is come, when their, &c.Whiles thy wisards feed thee with false predictions, to stirre thee up against those already miserable and di∣stressed Israelites, against those wicked revolters from me, whose judgement is now to be fully accomplished. 30 Shall I cause it to re∣turne into his sheath? I will judge thee in the place where thou wast created in the land of thy nativitie.Shall I cause that slaughter of thine to cease? No; I will inflict this vengeance upon thee, in thy very home, in the place where thou wert borne, and bred. 31 And I will powre out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath.I will come against thee like a mighty, and terrible tempest, in the fierce fury of my wrath, &c. CAP. XXII. 2 Wilt thou judge, wilt thou judg the bloody city?See chapter 20. verse 4. 9 In thee they eate up∣on the mountaines.IN the midst of thee, there are those that offer idola∣trous sacrifices to their false Gods, in their high places. 10 In thee have they discovered their fathers nakednesse; in thee have they humbled her that was set apart for pollution.Amongst thy people there are those, who have com∣mitted filthinesse with their owne parents; and have li∣en with those women, which have been separated for their legall, or naturall uncleanenesses. 18 Sonne of man, the house of Israel is to me be∣come drosse, all they are brasse and tin, and yron and lead in the midst of the fur∣nace; they are even the drosse of silver.Sonne of man, the house of Israel was to mee as the most precious mettall, but now, it is shamefully degene∣rated into drosse; and the best of them is either extream∣ly imbased with their sins, or else become nothing but mere offall, and corruption. 19. 20. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Be∣cause yee are all become drosse, behold therefore I will gather you into the midst of Ierusalem.Behold therefore (saith the Lord) Because ye are thus depraved, I will deale with you accordingly; I will ga∣ther you all up, as into one fornace, which shall be Jeru∣salem; and there I will send the fire of my judgement up∣on you, and consume you. So verse 21. and 22. 24 Sonne of man, say unto her, Thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor rai∣ned upon in the day of in∣dignation.Thou art a land notoriously uncleane with thine abo∣minable sins, and therefore shalt be seized upon by my judgements, without mitigation; when my fire shall flame up to consume thee, there shall not be so much as
a showre of raine to fall upon thee, for the quenching thereof. Their prophets have soothed them up in their sinnes,28 And her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, seeing vanity, and divining lies unto them. and, in a base flattery, have spoken plausible tidings to them, no lesse false then pleasing, &c. I sought for some faithful and innocent man amongst them, that might stand up,30 And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, &c. and intercede with mee fo the removall, or protraction of my judgements, &c. CAP. XXIII. SOnne of man, Israel, and Judah, which were in their originall but one people, now, since their division, were and are two daughters of one, and the same mo∣ther.2 Sonne of man, there were two women the daughters of one mother. They began to learne and practise Idolatries in the land of Aegypt;3 And they committed whoredomes in Aegypt, they committed whore∣domes in their youth, there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of their virginity. even from their first entrance into the calling of my people; there and then, were they corrup∣ted with the grosse superstitions of the heathen. Both of these divided people, had their names from a Tent, or Tabernacle; Israel,4 And the names of them were Aholah the el∣der, and Aholibah her sister, and they were mine, and they bare sons and daugh∣ters; thus were their names Samaria is Aholah, and Ie∣rusalem Aholibah. or the ten tribes (which is the greater part) is Aholah, his owne Tabernacle; which she would needs erect, according to her owne device, to draw away clients from my Temple; Iudah is Aholibah my Tent, or Tabernacle, fixed in her; because of the place of my worship, setled there; and both of these have their denominations from the two chiefe cities in them, Samaria, the chiefe city of Israel, is Aholah; and Ieru∣salem, the chiefe city of Iudah, is Aholibah. And Israel (which is Aholah) plaid the spirituall har∣lot, whiles she professed to be mine; and was miscarried into grosse Idolatry, by the Assyrians her neighbours.5 And Aholah plaid the harlot when she was mine, and she doted on her lo∣vers, on the Assyrians her neighbours. Which were rich and proudly set forth;6 Which were clothed with blue, Captaines and rulers, all of them desirable yong men, horsemen riding upon horses. men of great account, both for their wealth, and power, and valour. Neither yet did she give over those superstitions,8 Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Aegypt; for in her youth they lay with her, and they bruised the breasts of her virginity, and powred their whoredome upon her. which she brought with her, out of Aegypt; for, in her first beginnings they corrupted her with their Idola∣trous services; and infected her with their abominations. And she became a noted, and remarkable example of Gods judgements amongst the nations.10 She became famous among women.
11 And when her sister Aholibah saw this, she was more corrupt in her inordi∣nate love then she, and in her whoredomes more then her sister in her whor∣domes.And when Judah and Jerusalem saw this; in stead of being warned by her sister Israel, she drew her wicked practises into example; and became more leud, and ido∣latrous then shee. 12 She doted upon the Assyrians her neighbours, Captaines and rulers clo∣thed most gorgeously, horsemen riding, &c.She also fell into a sinfull league with the Assyrians, and into love of their Idolatries; being besotted with the admiration of their wealth, and power, and bravery. 14 For when shee saw men pourtrayed upon the wall, the Images of the Chaldeās pourtrayed with vermilion.For when she did but see the pictures of the Chalde∣ans set forth in lively colours, by the hand of the painter, ere she was acquainted with their persons; 15 Girded with girdles upon their loines, excee∣ding in dyed attyre upon their heads, al of them prin∣ces to looke to, after the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their nativitie.She did no sooner see their habit, and gorgeous attire (wherein they were set forth like so many Princes, to grace them in the eyes of the beholders) according to the proud fashions of the Babylonians of Chaldea, where they were borne, and bred; But presently, upon the first sight (like a wanton strumpet) she fell into extreme love with them,16 And assoone as shee saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea. and do∣tage upon them; in such sort, that she could not bee at rest till she had sent ambassadors into Chaldea to treat of a league with them. 17 And the Babyloni∣ans came to her into the bed of love, and they defi∣led her with their whore∣dome, and she was polluted with them, and her minde was alienated from them.And those Babylonians easily condescended to the motion, and entred into termes of friendship with her, and by this meanes had oportunity to infect her with their foule Idolatries. 20 For she doted upon their paramours whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.For she was besotted with a lust after their spirituall whoredomes; who were most notoriously Idolatrous; even above the common ranke of the other heathen. 21 Thus thou calledst to remembrance the leud∣nesse of thy youth, in brui∣sing thy teats by the Ae∣gyptians, for the paps of thy youth.Thus, thou didst revive, and recall the leud abomina∣tions of thy first times; when the Aegyptians defiled thee with their wicked Idolatry. 22 Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy minde is alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side.Behold, I will stirre up against thee those nations, up∣on whom thou wert so fond, to beleague thy selfe with them; with whom thou art now falne out, and art at deadly defiance; and I will bring them to invade thee on every side.
They shall set upon thee the markes of thine adulte∣ry; they shall slitt thy nose, and thine eares, for an harlot; and those that shall escape the shamefull reproaches of their whoredome, shall fall by the sword,25 They shall take a∣way thy nose and thine eares; and thy remnant shall fall by the sword. &c. They shall strip thee of all thine ornaments;26 They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy faire jewels and carry away all that wealth, wherein thou hast prided thy selfe. Thus will I make thee past the danger of committing leudnesse against me, any more,27 Thus will I make thy leudnes to cease from thee, & thy whoredome brought from the land of Aegypt. and of renuing thine old Aegyptian Idolatries, &c. I will make thee take deepe of those grievous judge∣ments, which thy sister Israel hath tasted of.31 Therefore will I give her cup into thine hand. So also verse 32.33.34. See Isaiah 51. verse 17.34 Thou shalt even drinke it, and suck it out. And how madly discontented soever thou shalt bee with this judgement,34 And thou shalt break the sheards thereof, and pluck off thine owne brests. yet shalt thou not be able to put it off; but shalt rather, in thine indignation, teare thine owne breasts, &c. And furthermore,And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom a messenger was sent, and loe they came for whom thou didst wash thy selfe, paintedst thy eyes, and dec∣kedst thy selfe with orna∣ments. that like a petulant harlot infla∣med with lust, thou hast sent thy pandar-like messengers afarre off, to fetch thine Idolatrous paramours unto thee; for whose leud intertainment thou didst make all kinde of lascivious preparation, addressing thy selfe to worke this spirituall wickednesse with them. So also verse 41. Yea,42 And a voice of a mul∣titude being at ease, was with her, and with the men of the common sort were brought Sabeans from the wildernesse, &c. not only these choise Idolaters were sought un∣to, but even the common rabble of all the most debaucht heathens, were brought unto thee, for the imployment of thy spirituall filthinesse; even base drunkards, from the most despised corners of the wildernesse; which set out themselves with those ornaments which their savage condition would afford. Then said I,43 Then I said unto her that was old in adulteries; Will they now commit whoredomes with her, and she with them? this people of Iudah is now growne old in her spirituall adulteries; It is more then time for her to leave off these sinfull courses; and will shee yet conti∣nue her whorish Idolatries with other nations, and they with her? Yet, I saw no end of those her odious fornications;44 Yet they went in un∣to her, as they goe in unto a woman that playeth the harlot; so went they in un∣to Aholah and unto Aholi∣bah the leud woman. but she persisteth in her abominable uncleannesses; the nations round about her, consort with her in her Idola∣tries; Thus they do with Israel and Iudah, without feare or shame.
45 Because they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.Because they are guilty both of Idolatries, and mur∣ders in a very shamfull measure; in that they have shed the blood of their children, in sacrifices to their false gods. 49 And ye shall beare the sinnes of your Idols.And ye shall beare the punishment of your odious idolatry. CAP. XXIIII. 3 Thus saith the Lord, set on a pot, set it on, and also poure water into it.THus saith the Lord God; I have appointed thy very actions to be significant, and propheticall; set on a pot therefore, &c. 6 Wherefore thus saith the Lord God, Woe to the bloody citie, to the pot whose scumme is therein, and whose scumme is not gone out of it, bring it out peece by peece, let no lot fall upon it.Wherefore, thus saith the Lord, Jerusalem that bloo∣dy citie is that boyling pot; whose scumme is in it, for that it is not purged from those foule sinnes, wherewith it aboundeth; The fire under it, is the extreme calami∣ty which it shall suffer; The flesh and bones which are in it, are those Jewes which have fled thither for safety, and defence; they shall be boyled therein, through the great misery they shall indure; put thou in thine hooke, and bring out the flesh, and bone, peece-meale, where soever it lights, without any choice, or deliberation, to shew that every one of them shall be fetcht out thence, with∣out difference. 7 For her blood is in the middest of her, she set it upon the top of a Rocke, she poured it not upon the ground to cover it with dust.For the blood which she hath shed, is conspicuous, even in the very midst of her; as if it had beene spilt up∣on some high eminent rocke, where it could not bee hid, nor soked in; she did not poure it upon the ground, that it should be couered with the dust, and so unseene. So verse 8. 9 I will make the pile for fire, great.I will greatly aggravate her judgements. 10 Heape on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burnt.See that full and exquisite vengeance be executed up∣on all the inhabitants of that wicked city. So verse 11. 12 She hath wearied her selfe with lies, and her great scumme went not forth out of her, her scum shall be in the fire.Shee hath wearied her selfe with her false worship, and with flatteries of her safe condition; and all her wic∣kednesse is still within her, unrepented of; unamended; and shall be, together with her, fit matter for my wrath to worke upon. 13 In thy fithinesse is leudnesse.That rust and scumme which is in thee, is thine ab∣hominable leudnesse, &c.
Sonne of man, behold,16 Sonne of man, be∣hold, I take away from thee, the desire of thine eye with a stroke, yet nei∣ther shalt thou mourne, nor weepe, neither shall thy teares runne downe. I take away from thee that deare wife of thine, in whom thou tookest true content∣ment: I will inflict the stroke of death upon her; and yet, I forbid thee to mourne, and weepe; shed no teares for this great losse of thine, for a signe to this people. Make no shew at all of mourning for that thy deare consort; but demeane thy selfe, so,17 Forbeare to crie, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shooes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eate not the bread of men. as if thou hadst no losse, or sorrow; neither make thou any funerall banquet, as the manner of the people is. Behold,21 Behold, I will pro∣phane my sanctuarie, the excellēcy of your strength the desire of your eyes, and that which your soule pittieth: and your sonnes and your daughters whom yee have left, shall fall by the sword. I will cause my Temple to be exposed to the profanation of the heathen; and I will give into their hands, your youngmen, your wives, your daughters, and whatsoever is deare and precious unto you; and they shall fall by the sword of the Babylonians. And ye shall doe as I have done, yee shall make no signe of any mourning, or lamentation for them, &c.22 And ye shall do as I have done: yee shall not cover your lips. So verse 23. Thus do I figure out,24 Thus Ezekiel is un∣to you a signe: according to all that he hath done. and act upon Ezekiel that which I will doe unto you, &c. CAP. XXV. LOoke thou towards the coast of the Ammonites, and in this posture, doe thou prophesie against them.2 Sonne of man, set thy face against the Ammo∣nites, & prophesie against them. Because thou didst insult,3 Because thou saidst Ah against my sanctuary, when it was prophaned, and against the land of Is∣rael. and rejoyce in the propha∣nation of my Sanctuary, and in the destruction of Israel, &c. Behold, therefore, I will deliver thee, and thy coun∣try to the hands of the Babylonians, for their possession,4 Behold therefore, I will deliver thee to the men of the East, for a pos∣session. and inheritance, &c. And,5 And I will make Rab∣bah a stable for Camels, and the Ammonites, a couching place for flocks: and yee shall know that I am the Lord. I will make thy chiefe citie Rabbah wherein are the palaces of thy great Princes, to become a stable for Camels; and the land of the Ammonites will I make a desert, for the pasturing of sheep;
8 Thus saith the Lord God, because that Moab and Seir doe say, behold, the house of Iudah is like unto all the heathen.Thus saith the Lord; Because the Moabites, and Edo∣mites have triumphed in the desolation of my people; and have scornfully said; We see no difference betwixt Judah, and other nations; their God hath had no mere power to preserve them, then the Gods of their neigh∣bours. 9 Therefore behold, I wil open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities, which are on his frontires, the glory of the countrie Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, & Kiriathaim.Therefore will I cast open the frontiers of Moab, how strongly soever defenced with their wasted cities; and will give up all the richest, and pleasantest part of their countrie. 10 Vnto the men of the East with the Ammonites, and I will give them in possession that the Ammo∣nites may not be remem∣bred among the nations.Unto the spoile of the Babylonians; and together therewith, will I deliver up the land of the Ammonites, to be so utterly wasted, that the memory of it may not remaine among the nations. I will make Edom desolate in all the coasts thereof, no part of the country shall be free from destruction.13 And I will make it desolate from Teman, and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword. 14 And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Is∣rael, and they shall doe in Edom according to mine anger, and according to my furie.And I wil execute my vengeance upon Edom, by the same hand that hath plagued my people Israel; even the Babylonians; who shall also imploy those captive Isra∣elites, which live unde them, in this service, &c. 16 And I will cut off the Cherethims, and de∣stroy the remnant of the Sea coast.I will cut off both those Philistims that dwell in the in-land; and those that inhabite along by the sea-coast. CAP. XXVI. 2 Sonne of man, be∣cause that Tyrus hath said against Ierusalem, Ah, she is broken that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me, I shall be replenished now, she is laid waste.BEcause Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, in rejoyc∣ing at her ruine; Ah, she that was the most populous, and best-traded city of the East, is now laid waste; all her trafique and wealth shall now be turned unto mee, I shall be inriched in her spoile, and decay. 4 I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rocke.I will cause not onely her rich treasures to be caried away, but her very soile and earth shall be taken off, and removed, that she may be left as barren as the rock. 5 It shall bee a place for the spreading of nets in the Sea.It shall no more be a frequented citie; but a wast place for fishermen to lay abroad their nets in, &c. 15 Shall not the Iles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded crie, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee.Shall not all the Sea-coasts round about, be afraid, and amazed at the fame of thy destruction, &c.
Then all the Princes of those maritime regions,16 Then all the Princes of the Sea shall come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put off their broidered garments: they shall cloth themselves with trem∣bling. on all sides, shall be disheartened with the newes of thy ruine; and shall lay aside their pomp, and jollity, and shall be wholly possessed with feare, and trembling, &c. When I shall bring the Babylonians upon thee, who like a deluge of waters,19 When I shall make thee a desolate citie, like the cities that are not inha∣bited, when I shall bring up the deepe upon thee. shall violently breake in upon thee, and swallow thee up. With those people which are long since dead and gone; then I shal, at the last, restore the former glory,20 With the people of old time, &c. And I shall set glory in the land of the living. with an increase thereof, unto the remainders of my Church; here upon earth. I will make thee a terrible example to all cities and countries, in my utter destroying thee, &c.21 I will make thee a terrour; and thou shalt be no more. CAP. XXVII. ANd say unto Tyrus,3 And say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the Sea, which art a merchant of the peo∣ple for many Iles, &c. O thou that art situate upon the Sea-coast, as a fit and famous Port; which art re∣nowned for the trafique of merchandise, all the world over. They have prepared all things that belong to thy ship∣ping, in a degree above necessity, and convenience;5, 6 They have made all thy ship-boards of fire trees of Senir: of the oakes of Bashan have they made thine oares: the companie of the Ashurites have made thy benches of yvorie. even to wantonnesse, and excesse-full curiosity: the timber thereof is not of any ordinary and base wood, but rare and precious; and thy benches, in stead of wood, which others use, are of the costliest yvory, brought from far. And where others sailes are of plaine canvase;7 Fine linnen with bori∣dered worke from Egypt. thine are of fine linnen curiously imbroidered with Egyptian worke, &c. Thy mariners were the slaves of Sidon,8 The inhabitants of Zi∣don, and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise men, O Tyrus, that were in thee were thy pilots. and Damas∣cus, both strong and skilfull; and thy pilots were the cunning Seamen of thine owne breeding. The ancient, and experienced men of Gebal,9 The ancients of Gebal, and the wise men thereof were in thee thy calkes. who were noted for most expert Ship-wright, were imployed in the building, and calking of thy vessells, &c. The Persians, and Lydians, & Moores,10 They of Persia, and of Lud, and of Phut were in thine armie, thy men of warre: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee. famous for their prowesse, and skill in military affaires, both by Sea and land; though farre distant from thee, yet are glad to bee intertained, for thy warriours; they have devoted their shields and helmets to thy service, &c. Thy valiant neighbours were,11 The men of Arvad with thine armie were up∣on thy walls round about, and the Gammadims were in thy towers, they hanged their shields upon thy walls: with thine owne for∣ces,
upon thy walls round about; and upon thy towres of defence: and have both garded, and beautified thee with their shields. All cities and countries round about strove to furnish thee with those commodities, which they yeeld; and the trafique whereof might be gainfull to themselves;12 Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kind of riches; with silver, yron, tinne. The famous port of Tarshish traded with thee in all variety of riches, in silver, yron, tinne, &c. The Grecians, and Iberians, and Cappadocians traded in the persons of men,13 Iavan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants, they traded the persons of men, and vessells of brasse in thy market. which they sold to thee, and in vessells brasse. So verse 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 26 Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters, the East winde hath broken thee in the midst of the Seas.Those that have the government of thee have brought thee into a sea of misery; Nebuchadnezar, like a boy∣sterous east-winde, hath broken thee in pieces. Shall fall into the hands of the Babylonians, and by them be destroyed.27 Shall fall into the midst of the Seas, in the day of thy ruine. The noise of thy victors shouting, and of thy citizens crying,28 The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots. and shrieking, shall be such, as shall make thy suburbes to shake therewith. 31 And they shall make themselves utterly balde for thee; and gird them with sackcloth, and they shall weepe for thee with bitternesse of heart.They shall by tearing their haire, and girding them∣selves with sacke-cloth, testifie their vehement mourn∣ing for thee, &c. In the time when thou shalt be destroyed by the Ba∣bylonian forces (which like a raging Sea shall come in upon thee) thy trade,34 In the time when thou shalt be broken by the Seas, in the depths of the waters, thy merchan∣dise, and all thy company in the midst of thee shall fall. and all the commerce that thou hadst with other nations, shall utterly faile. CAP. XXVIII. 2 And thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, &c. Though thou set thine heart as the heart of God.THou hast said; I am out of the reach of mans power; my seat is higher then that it can bee infested by the force, or malice of men, &c. though thou hast in thy proud thoughts equalled thy selfe with God. And, as thou art greater then all others, so, in thine owne conceit,3 Behold, thou art wiser then Daniel, there is no secret that they can hide from thee. thou art wiser then even Daniel himselfe; thou knowest all secret things, as well as he, in whom is the spirit of the most high God. 8 And thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slaine in the middest of the Seas.And thou, that hast fondly imagined thy selfe a God, shalt die the death of thine ordinary vassalls, notwith∣standing thy strong forts, and bulwarkes of the Sea.
Thou shalt die such a death, as an insolent,10 Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircum∣cised, by the hand of strangers. and God∣lesse pagan is worthy of, by the hand of the Babylo∣nians. Thou givest out thy selfe as absolutely perfect both in wisedome, and beauty;12 Thou sealest up the summe, full of wisedome and perfect in beauty. so as no addition can be made to thee in either of these. Thou hast abounded with all delicacies,13 Thou hast beene in Eden the garden of God; every pretious stone was thy covering: the Sardius, Topaze, & the Diamond, the Beril, the Onix, and Iasper, the Saphir, the E∣meraude, & the Carbuncle, and gold, the workeman∣ship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee, in the day that thou wast created. as if thou hadst lived in Eden, the garden of God; and where others make them coverings of homely, and ordinary matter, thy ca∣nopies are beset with all the precious stones, that can be reckoned: and with the best of metalls: neither hast thou needed to take any care for thy varieties of plea∣sures; for thy curious Musicke was prepared for thee, even from thy very birth. Thou advācest thy selfe to be as that glorious Cherub; which covereth the Arke of God; so dost thou spread thy protection over thy land; and,14 Thou art the anoin∣ted Cherub that covereth: and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy moun∣taine of God: thou hast walked up and downe in the middest of the stones of fire. so have I appointed thee to doe; yea thou tookest upon thee, as if thou wert that God, which is worshipped in his holy Temple, and as that Almighty one, who walketh above in the clouds, among the lightnings and thunder-stones. Thou didst arrogate a kinde of perfection to thy selfe, in all thy wayes; even from thy very nativity,15 Thou wast perfect in thy wayes, from the day that thou wast crea∣ted, till iniquity was found in thee. till thy wickednesse brake forth notoriously to thy just con∣viction. By the confluence of much people, upon the occasions of thy merchandise, and the oppressive bargaines,16 By the multitude of thy Merchandise they have filled the middest of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as pro∣phane out of the moun∣taine of God, and I will destroy thee, O covering Cherub from the middest of the stones of fire. that are used therein, thou art full of fraud and violence, and art thereupon growne exceedingly sinfull; therefore will I cast thee out from those vainely-pretended rights, which thou claimest in the Temple of God; I will de∣stroy thee, O thou false Cherub, from the Arke, whose covering thou wouldest resemble; and strike thee downe from those clouds, where thou affectest to walke among the fiery meteors. By the multitudes of thine iniquities thou hast defiled those places of majesty and devotion which thou wouldst have to be thought sacred, &c.18 Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniqui∣ties. The wounded and distressed inhabitants shall be cal∣led to reckoning, in the midst of her streets,23 And the wounded shall be judged in the mid∣dest of her by the sword, upon her on every side, and they shall know that I am the Lord. for their many and grievous sinnes; by the sword of her enemie, the Babylonian.
24 And there shall bee no more a pricking briar unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorne of all that are round about thē that despise them.I will put an end to the sorrowes of my Church; these heathens shall no more gall, and grieve them, neither shall the nations round about insult upon their miseries, and trample upon them, &c. 25 When I shall have gathered the house of Isra∣el from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall bee sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell in their land, that I have given to my servant Iacob.When I shall have gathered my chosen people out of all the nations of the earth, amongst whom they are di∣spersed; and shall be sanctified in them, before the rest of the world; then shall they enjoy a quiet rest, in my Church, which I have appropriated to them. So verse 26. CAP. XXIX. 3 Behold I am against thee Pharaoh King of Ae∣gypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his ri∣vers, which hath said, My river is mine owne, and I have made it for my selfe.BEhold, I am thy professed enemie, O Pharaoh, the proud King of Aegypt; who like a great dragon or whale, liest securely in those watery regions of thine; & hast said; Nilus is my owne, no enemy can take it from mee. 4 But I will put hookes in thy jawes, and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick unto thy scales.But I will put the hookes of the King of Babylon, into thy jawes, and will draw thee out of those watery forts of thine; and dragge thee up to the drie land; and, for thy Princes and people, which are as the lesser sort of fi∣shes, they also (as sticking to thy scales) shall be plucked out with thee, &c. 5 And I will leave thee throwne into the wilder∣nesse, thee and all the fish of thy rivers, thou shalt fall upon the open fields, thou shalt not be brought toge∣ther, nor gathered, I have given thee for meat to the beasts of the field, and to the foules of the heaven.And I will leave thee upon the Libyan sands, exposed as a prey to the soules of the aire, and the beast of the field; both thee, and thy Princes and people; thou shalt be slaine, and thine army in the open fields, and there shall ye lie scatterd, and shall not bee brought together for sepulture. They have beene a deceitfull, and untrusty stay to the house of Israel;6 Because they have beene a staffe of reede to the house of Israel. like a crazy reed, which breakes under the hand of him that leanes upon it. 10 From the towre of Syene even unto the border of Aethiopia.From the south borders of Aegypt, unto the North, shall the land be utterly desolate. 11 No foot of man shall passe through it, nor foot of beast shall passe through it, neither shal it be inhabited fourty yeares.It shall lie waste, and uninhabited; without traffique, without culture, for the space of fourty yeares.
They shall returne againe to reinhabit,14 And I will bring a∣gaine the captivitie of Ae∣gypt. as well the mid-land countrey, as the skirts and borders of Aegypt their native land; and they shall be there restored to a tributary state, under the Persians. Every man had worne his haire from off his head,18 Every head was made bald, & every shoul∣der was peeled, yet had he no wages, nor his armie, for Tyrus, for the service that he had served against it. and his skin from his shoulders, in carrying burdens for rai∣sing up mounts against Tyrus; yet did he not finde that booty for his armie therein, which he expected. In that day will I raise up Israel againe, to a recovery of strength, and comfort;21 In that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to budde forth, & I will give thee the open∣ing of the mouth in the midst of them, and they shall know that I am the Lord. and will cause the mouthes of my people to be opened, in the confession, and praise of my name amongst the Babylonians; and they shall know and acknowledge me to be the Lord. CAP. XXX. THe day is neare at hand, wherein the Lord will take vengeance on the heathen,3 For the day is neare, e∣ven the day of the Lord is neare, a cloudy day; it shall be the time of the heathen. which have oppressed his people. So verse 4. and 5. From the southerne coast of Aegypt along unto the North parts thereof, shall they be slaine with the sword.6 From the towre of Syene shall they fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord God. In that day will I cause messengers to goe forth by sea, in ships of speed;9 In that day shall mes∣sengers goe forth from me in ships, to make the care∣lesse Aethiopians afraid, & great paine shall come up∣on them, as in the day of Aegypt, for lo it commeth. to carry the sad newes of Aegypts destruction, to the Aethiopians; who shal be exceedingly affrighted therewith; and shall be no lesse pained with the feare of the same evill, then Aegypt is with the sense, and smart of it. I will deliver up the land into the hand of the Baby∣lonians; as if it were convayed to them,12 And sell the land in∣to the hand of the wicked. by bargaine and sale. And I will execute my utmost judgements upon the severall provinces, and chiefe cities of Aegypt,14 And I will make Pa∣thros desolate, and will set fire in Zoan, and will exe∣cute judgement in No. upon Pa∣thros, Zoan, and Alexandria. So also verse 15. and 16. and 17. At Daphnis there shall be a darke and gloomy day of slaughter and death,18 At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkned, when I shall breake there the yokes of Aegypt, and the pompe of her strength shal ceas in her, as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shal goe into captivitie. when I shall there make an end of the Tyrannicall government of Aegypt; & all her pomp, and glory of her strength shall utterly cease; and she shal be under a cloud of sorrow, and obscurity; and her peo∣ple shall be carried away into captivity.
21 Sonne of man, I have broken the arme of Phara∣oh King of Aegypt, and loe, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a rouler to binde it, to make it strong to hold the sword.Sonne of man, I have already discomfited a great part of the forces of Pharaoh, King of Aegypt; The losse that he hath already sustained, shall not be repaired a∣gaine by any meanes, for the preventing of his utter sub∣version. CAP. XXXI. 2 Whom art thou like in thy greatnesse?THink not that no King is comparable to thee in pow∣er, and greatnesse. 3 Behold, the Assyrian was a Cedar in Lebanon with faire branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature, and his top was, &c.Behold, the King of Assyria was a greater Monarch then thy self; he was (in comparison of thee) as a tall Ce∣dar in Lebanon, largely spread. 4 The waters made him great, the deepe set him up on high with her rivers.Whose roots were throughly watered with constant streames, &c. So verse 5, 6, 7. 8 The Cedars in the gar∣den of God could not hide him; the firre trees were not like his boughes, and the Chesnut trees were not like his branches, not any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his beautie.The greatest Princes in the most flourishing King∣domes of the world could not stand in comparison with him; but all of them were forced to vaile to him, as more powerfull and glorious then themselves. So verse 9. I have therefore delivered him, and his proud Ninive into the hand of Nebuchadnezar,11 I have therefore de∣livered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen, he shal surely deal with him, I have driven him out for his wickednes and his Babylonians; he shall deale with him as he deserves; I have rooted him out for his wickednesse. So verse 12. 14 To the end that none of all the trees by the wa∣ters exalt themselves for their height, neither shoot.To the end that none of the proud princes of the earth should hereafter dare to exalt themselves in the over-weening, and confidence of their owne strength, and glo∣ry, &c. 15 I covered the deepe for him.I caused those waters wherewith he was nourished, to take up a mourning, and lamentation for him. 18 To whom art thou thus like in glorie and in greatnes among the trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought downe with the trees of Eden unto the ne∣ther parts of the earth.O Pharaoh, thou that art thus like to the Assyrian, a∣mongst all the Kings of the earth, in glory, and magnifi∣cence; thou shalt also be like him in thy ruine; Thou, with the other Princes of the world, shalt be brought downe into the grave; & shalt be destroyed in the midst of thy fellow-heathens, &c.
CAP. XXXII. THou art a cruel Tyran among thy neighbour nations,2 Thou art like a yong Lyon of the nations. as a yong lyon is among the beasts. See chapter 29.5.4 Then will I leave thee upon the land, &c. And whereas thou now,6 I will also water with thy blood the land where∣in thou swimmest, even to the mountaines. like a whale swimmest in the great waters of thy land, in stead of those waters shall be the blood of thy people, wherein thou maiest swimme; which shall cover the earth up to the very mountaines, &c. And when thou, which art reputed the great light of the world, shalt be extinguished;7 And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof darke; I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and the Moone shall not give her light. the very face of the heavens shall seeme to be covered with darknesse; The Sun shall seeme clouded, and the moone without light; so great a change shall thy subversion seeme to make in the world. So also verse 8. I will also affright,9 I will also vexe the hearts of many people, whē I shal bring thy destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not knowne. and amaze the hearts of many na∣tions, round about thee, when I shall bring unto them, both the rumour, and the expectation of thy destructi∣on; even those countries shall be terrified which are not so much as knowne unto thee. So also verse 10. Then will I give those troubled nations rest,14 Then will I make their waters deepe, & cause their rivers to run like oile, saith the Lord God. and tran∣quillity, they shall be as calme as deepe waters, and their rivers shall flow as smoothly, as oyle, without any vehe∣ment, and unquiet agitation. Make thou some resemblance of the casting downe of Aegypt,18 And cast them down, even her, and the daugh∣ters of the famous nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with them that goe, &c. and the adjoyning nations (her partners) into the grave, as dead corpses. What nation is there,19 Whom doest thou passe in beauty? goe downe and be thou laid with the uncircumcised. whom thou thinkest able to compare with thee, in strength and glory? But now, how strong and goodly soever thou art, goe downe into the dust; and be laid together with thy godlesse, and leud companions, of the prophane heathen. The valiant and mighty warriour before-deceased,21 The strong among the mightie shall speake to him out of the midst of hel with them that helpe him: they are gone downe, they lie uncircumcised, slaine by the sword. shall, as it were out of his grave, speake to Aegypt, and his associates; and shall say that they are brought downe
as well as he; they lie slaine by the sword; and are taken away in their uncircumcision, and sinfulnesse. 22 Ashur is there, and all her companie, his graves are about him.The great King of Assyria, and all his company is comne downe to the grave, &c. The graves of his companies, and complices, are set in the sides of the buriall-place,23 Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit, and her company is round about the grave: all of thē slaie. round about the grave of Ashur, which lies in the midst of his attendants; all of them slaine, &c. There is the Prince of the Elamites, neighbours and assistants to the Assyrians;24 There is Elam, and all her multitude round about her grave, all of them slaine, fallen by the sword. and all their troupes; whose graves are round about the grave of their commander, all of them slaine by the sword, &c. 26 There is Meshech, Tubal and al her multitude, her graves are round about him.There are the Princes of the Cappadocians, and Ibe∣rians, and all their multitude round about their graves, &c. 27 And they shall not lie with the mightie that are fallen of the uncircum∣cised, which are gone downe to hell with their weapons of warre, and they have laid their swords un∣der their heads, but their iniquities shall bee upon their bones, though they were the terrour of the mighty in the land of the living.They shall not lie with those mighty ones of the hea∣then, who die naturally; being not stripped of their wea∣pons of warre, having their swords laid peaceably under their heads in their graves; but they shall lie amongst the mangled, and slaine; and shall carry the markes of their sins in their carcasses, though for the time they were ter∣rible to the world. verse 29.30. as verse 24. 31 Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comfor∣ted over all his multitude.Pharaoh shall, as it were, see this world of people comming downe to the grave with him; and shall com∣fort himselfe, with such store of company in death, &c. CAP. XXXIII. 5 But hee that taketh warning, shall deliver his soule.BUt he that taketh warning, stands upon his owne de∣fence, and preserveth his life. If (according to thy prophesies) God have determi∣ned to reckon with us,10 If our transgressions and our sins be upon us and we pine away in them, how should we then live. for our sins, and to bring judge∣ment upon us, to what purpose shall our conversion be? and how shall we live, though we doe amend? 12 The righteousnesse of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression. So also verse 13. See Ezek. 18. verse 24. 22 Now the hand of the Lord was upon mee in the evening, afore he that was escaped came, and had o∣pened my mouth, untill he came to me in the morning & my mouth was opened.The powerfull motion of Gods Spirit was upon mee, &c. in the evening, before the comming of that escaped
messenger from Jerusalem; & put words into my mouth not suffering me to keep silence any longer. If Abraham, being but one,24 Abraham was one, & he inherited the land. but we are many, the land is gi∣ven us for inheritance. had this land given to him for his inheritance; how much more may wee, his seed (to whom it is deduced,) being many, challenge a due interest in it. No, deceive not your selves,25 Wherefore say unto them, thus saith the Lord God, Ye eate with the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your Idols, and shed blood, and shall yee possesse the land? yee are not the sons of faithfull Abraham; your workes are contrary to his; Ye doe wilfully transgresse my commands; Yee eate the blood together with the flesh, which I have forbidden; Ye are guilty both of Idolatry, and murder; and can yee challenge to possesse the land in the right of Abraham. Ye relie upon the confidence of your owne sword, &c.26 Ye stand upon your sword. They come to thee with reverence, and respect, as the manner of my people is;31 And they come un∣to thee, as the people com∣meth, and they sit before thee, as my people, and they heare thy words, but they will not doe them. and they sit before thee to hear thy words, in an awfull and attentive fashion; but they will performe nothing of that which is commanded them, &c. They seeme to take much pleasure,32 And loe, thou art un∣to them, as a very lovely song of one that hath a ple∣sant voice, and can play well on an instrument. and contentment in thy sermons; even no lesse, then a man would doe in the hearing of an excellent song, of one that hath a plea∣sant voice, and plaies sweetly on an instrument, &c. And when these judgements shall come to passe,33 And when this com∣meth to passe, (loe it will come) then shal they know that a prophet hath beene among them. which I have premonished; then they shall know, and finde (too late) that they have had a true Prophet of God a∣mong them, whom they unworthily disrespected. CAP. XXXIIII. WOe to those rulers and to those teachers,2 Woe be to the shep∣heards of Israel that doe feede themselves, should not the shepheards feede the flockes. and spi∣rituall guides of Israel, that feed and pamper themselves; whereas their duty and office is, and should be, to feed the soules of my people; and to governe and rule them aright. Ye take of the best commodities of the people under your charge (neither is that grudged unto you;3 Ye eate the fat, and ye clothe you with the wooll, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feede not the flock.) and make use of their personall imployments, as occasion is offered; but ye doe not performe your duty to them a∣gaine; ye doe not teach, and governe them, as ye ought. Those particular offices which pertain to your charge,4 The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have you healed that which was sicke, neither have yee bound up that which was broken, neither have yee brought againe that which was driven a∣way, neither have yee sought that which was lost. as comforting the weake, healing the sicke, binding up the broken-hearted, reclaiming and reducing those that have erred; yee have not accordingly done; but rather
have tyranously, and cruelly exercised an imperious au∣thority over them. The same allegory holds verse. 5.6.7.8.9.10. Behold, since my shepheards are carelesse; I my selfe will make diligent search for my sheepe,11 For thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I, even I will both search my sheepe, and seeke them out. that are scatte∣red, and lost, and I will finde them wheresoever they are strayed. So verse 12. 13 And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their owne land, and feed them upon the mountaines of Israel by the rivers, &c.And I will fetch them from those severall lands, wher∣into they were driven by their miserable captivity; and will bring them backe into their owne countrey; and will feed them carefully, and plentifully, in my Church. So verse 14, 15, 16. 17 Behold, I judge be∣tweene cattell and cattell, betweene the rammes and the hee goats.Behold, I judge betweene one man, and another; be∣tweene the lambs, and kids; betweene the rammes and goates; as I doe now put a difference betweene those of my owne flocke, and the world; So, hereafter I will ex∣quisitely sever them; the one to my right hand, the o∣ther to my left. 18 Seemeth it a small thing unto you, to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread downe with your feet the residue of your pastures.Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have taken away from my people that wholsome doctrine which I pre∣pared for their spirituall nourishment; but yee must also foulely corrupt that which yet remaineth of my law, &c. 19 And as for my flock, they eate that which yee have troden with your feet.As for my people, they are faine to take up with that doctrine which ye have depraved by your unjust, and sin∣full glosses, and traditions, &c. Behold, I will judge betweene the proud justiciaries, who are puffed up with a conceit of their owne worthi∣nesse,20 Behold, I, even I will judge betweene the fat cattell, and betweene the leane cattell. and the poore dejected soules, that are meane in their owne eyes. Because ye have insolently despised, and scornfully in∣treated the weak-hearted;21 Because yee have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pusht all the diseased with your hornes till ye have scattered thē abroad. and in stead of easing their af∣flicted consciences, have beene ready to gaule and bur∣den them more, till ye have made them utterly weary of their stations in my Church. And I will bring my Church, both Jewes and Gen∣tiles,23 And I will set up one shepheard over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David: he shal feed them, and he shall be their shepheard. under the government of that one King, and Pro∣phet of my chosen; even the Messiah, the true heire and successor of David; and he shall both teach, and rule them.
So also verse 24. And I will make with them a covenant of everlasting peace, betwixt me and them;25 And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evill beasts to cease out of the land, and they shall dwell safely in the wilder∣nesse, and sleepe in the woold. and will keepe from them those spirituall dangers, and annoyances, that may be hurtfull unto them; and they shall be safe and secure, even in the places, that would seeme to threaten the greatest perill. And I will exceedingly blesse, and prosper them,26 And I will make them and the places round about my hill, a blessing, and I wil cause the showre to come downe in his sea∣son. and all that sincerely professe an holy relation to my Church, and will water them plentifully with heavenly doctrine, &c. And I will make them a glorious plant,29 And I will raise up for them a plant of re∣nowne, and they shall bee no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither beare the shame of the heathen any more. being fast rooted in that promised Messiah; and being incorpo∣rated in him; and they shall no more be consumed with a spirituall famine; nor be trampled upon by the enemies of my Church. CAP. XXXV. BEhold, I am against you, O yee children of Esau,3 Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thee. that inhabite mount Seir. In time of their calamity, which fell upon them,5 In the time of their calamitie, in the time that their iniquitie had an end. when the measure of their iniquity was full. Because thou hast said; These two nations of Israel and Judah, and their countries, wasted by the Assyrian,10 Because thou hast said, these two nations, and these two countries shall be mine, and we will pos∣sesse it, whereas the Lord was there. and Babylonian, shalbe mine, & we will possesse it; wher∣as, (how ever this land is abused) yet it is the Lords pe∣culiar; and therefore out of thy reach, and free from any challenge of thine. CAP. XXXVI. ANd your name is scornfully taken up in the lips of your busie, and insulting enemies;3 And ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the peo∣ple. and ye are made a by-word, and reproach of the people. I have sworne by my selfe; surely the heathen that are round about you, shall be put to that shame,7 I have lifted up mine hand, Surely the heathen that are about you, they shall beare their shame. and confu∣sion, wherein they have rejoyced to see you, and to in∣sult over you. Because they say unto you; Thou, O Land, art fatall to thine inhabitants,13 Because they say un∣to you, thou land devour∣rest up men, and hast berea∣ved thy nations. and hast consumed them in divers
successions; and hast made away with the nations that dwell in thee. 17 Their way was be∣fore me as the uncleannesse of a removed woman.Their continuall practice was as foule and odious to to me; as can be expressed by any legall uncleannesse. They caused my holy name to be scorned, and evill spoken of,20 They prophaned my holy name, when they said to them, these are the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his land. in that it was said of these so wicked and leud persons; Lo, these are the select people of the Lord, and those that were inhabitants of his holy Land. When I shal glorifie my selfe, by working your delive∣rance,23 When I shall bee sanctified in you before their eyes. and your apparent reformation before their eyes. 26 And I will take a∣way the stonie heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.I will take away your perverse, and rebellious disposi∣tion, and I will give you a tendernesse of heart, and an aptnesse to bee wrought upon by the motions of my spirit. 37 I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them, I will increase them with men like a flocke.I will so doe this; that yet, I will be sought, and sued to, by the house of Israel for this blessing upon them, and then I will give such an increase to the men, as I am wont to giue to their fruitfull flockes. 38 As the holy flocke, as the flocke of Ierusalem in her solemne feasts, so shall the waste cities bee filled with flocks of men, &c.As Jerusalem in her holy feasts, is filled with whole flockes, and heards of those cattle, that are brought up thither for sacrifice; so shall all the waste cities of Israel be filled with flockes of men. CAP. XXXVII. 1 The hand of the Lord was upon me, and caried me out in the spirit of the Lord, and set me downe in the middest of the val∣ley which was full of bones.THe powerfull motion of Gods Spirit was with, and upon me; and caried me, in vision, into the midst of a valley full of the bones of the slaine. 3 And he said unto me, Sonne of man, can these bones live? and I answe∣red, O Lord God, thou knowest.Sonne of man; Thinkest thou it possible that these bones should live, and be restored to that estate of this present life, which they were lately in? and I answered; O Lord God, this is more then flesh and blood can con∣ceive; humane reason cannot thinke so; but thou knowest what thou hast to doe; and to thee, nothing is impos∣sible. 7 So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied there was a noise, and behold a sha∣king, and the bones came together, bone to his bone.So I spake to those bones, as I was commanded; and whiles I was in speaking, the vision represented to me a noise that filled the valley, & a motion of those bones, and a meeting together of them, bone to bone. 8 And when I beheld, loe, the sinewes and the flesh came up upon thē, & the skin covered them a∣bove, but there was no breath in them.And the vision shewd me the sinewes, and flesh com∣ming upon them, and the skinne covering them; but as yet no life was inspired into them.
In a representation of that powerfull Spirit of God which gives life unto man,9 Then said hee unto me, Prophesie unto the winde, Prophesie sonne of man, and say unto the winde, Thus saith the Lord God, Come from the foure quarters, O breath, and breathe upon these slaine, that they may live. I was bidden in vision to call to the windes from all the coasts of heaven, to breath upon these new-reformed bodies; that they might live. So verse 10. Sonne of man,11 Sonne of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel, behold they say, our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, wee are cut off for our parts. these bones are a perfect resemblance of the whole house of Israel; Behold, they say; We are not onely dead, but our carcasses are dissolved, our bones dried, all our hopes and possibilities of life, and recovery, utterly cut off. Behold, O my people, I will so restore you,12 Behold, O my peo∣ple, I wil open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, & bring you into the land of Israel. as if I opend the very graves, and infused a new life into you; even so will I recover you to your former state in the land of Israel. Yea, there shall not onely be a life,16 Moreover thou Son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, for Iu∣dah, and for the children of Israel, his companions, then take another sticke and write upō it for Ioseph the sticke of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions. but a conjunction of Israel, and Judah; for the signification whereof take thee two stickes, & in the one of them write, For Judah, and the Benjamites his companions; In the other write, For Joseph, and his sonne Ephraim, and the rest of the ten tribes of Israel, their companions. And when thou hast so done, joyne one of the stickes to another; and they shall be so peeced together,17 And joyne them one to another into one sticke, and they shall become one in thine hand. in thine hand, as if they were but one sticke. Behold,19 Behold, I will take the stick of Ioseph which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellowes, and will put them with him, even with the sticke of Iudah, and make them one sticke and they shall bee one in mine hand. I will take the ten tribes of Israel (which are comprised under the name of Joseph, and Ephraim, and their fellowes) & will put them together with the tribes of Judah, and Benjamin, and will make them one nation, and they shall be one in my hand. And I will unite my Church, all the world over, in one, and one King (even the Messiah whom I shall send) shall be King to them all;22 And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountaines of Israel, and one King shall be King to them all, and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they bee divided, &c. & they shall no more be so di∣vided in profession, as if they were severall Kingdomes, ruled by divers Soveraignes; but in the maine substance of religion shall be one. See Ezec. 34.23.24 And David my ser∣vant shall bee King over them, &c.
26 I will make a cove∣nant of peace with them.See Ezec. 34.25. 26 And I will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for ever.I will set my Church in the midst of them; which shall continue to the end of the world; and I will dwell in their hearts, as in my Temple, for ever. So verse 27. CAP. XXXVIII. 2 Sonne of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chiefe prince of Meshech & Tu∣bal, and prophesie against him.SOnne of man, denounce thou judgements against those Princes, and countries of the Gentiles, which shall, before the restauration of the Church by the com∣ming of the Messiah, infest, and oppresse my people. Behold, I am against thee, thou King of Syria, and against all those assistant Princes,3 Behold I am against thee, O Gog, the chiefe Prince of Meshech and Tu∣bal. which aid thee in thy cruell dealings with my people. 4 And I will turne thee backe, and put hookes into thy chawes, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine armie, horses, &c.And I will bring thee backe againe from thine owne land, by my over-ruling power, and will set thee on, and all thy forces, against Judah; and thou shalt come up a∣gainst it with a mighty armie. 5 6 Persia, Ethiopia and Libya with them: all of them with shield and helmet.The rest of the nations also, even Persians from the East, Ethiopians from the South, the Moores from the West, the Phrygians from the North shall joyne with them in this onset. 7 And bee thou a guard unto them.And doe thou encompasse them round about with thy forces on every side; so as they shall not bee able to stirre forth. 8 After many dayes thou shalt be visited: in the latter yeares thou shalt come into the land, that is brought backe from the sword, and is gatherd out of many people against the mountains of Israel, which have been alwayes waste.After many yeares, I will visit thee, with my judge∣ments; for some two hundred yeares hence, thou shalt invade the land of my people; whō I shall have brought backe from their captivitie, and shall have gathered home out of many nations; even the mountaines of Is∣rael which have beene long wasted, &c. 9 Thou shalt ascend and come like a storme, thou shalt be like a cloud to co∣ver the land.Thou shalt for suddennesse, & fury, come like a storme, and for a multitude and frequence, like a darke cloud shalt cover the land. 10 And thou shalt thinke an evill thought.Thou shalt conceive, and harbour many subtile, and cruell thoughts, and projects, against my people. 11 And thou shalt say, I will goe up to the land of unhallowed villages: I will goe to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, & all of them dwelling with∣out walls, and having nei∣ther barres nor gates.I will goe up to a land, that is easily invaded, and over∣run; as that which consists of unwalled villages, not able to beare out an assault; I will goe to a secure people, that
dwell (as they thinke) safely, in the confidence of the strength, and number of the inhabitants. Those nations that have heretofore wont to live by sharking, and spoile, and those seafaring men, who,13 Sheba and Dedan, and the Merchants of Tar∣shish, with all the young lions thereof shall say un∣to thee, art thou come to take a spoile? hast thou gathered thy compaine to take a prey, to carie away silver and gold? upon the Sea-coasts, have exercised pyracie; shall say unto thee: Art thou comne to rob, and waste? Hast thou ga∣thered thy companie to take booties? to carie away silver and gold? Why didst thou not take us along with thee, &c? Thus saith the Lord, In that day, when my people of Israel give themselves over to security,14 Thus saith the Lord God, In that day when my people of Israel dwelleth safely, shalt thou not know it? and false confi∣dence in their owne strength, shall it not bee made knowne to thee, that thou maist bee the executioner of my anger against them? When I shall be acknowledged just and righteous in executing those judgements, which thy hand,16 When I shall be sanctified in thee, O God, before their eyes. O multi∣tude of adverse nations, shall inflict upon Israel, before their eyes. CAP. XXXIX. See chap. 38. verse 1.1 O Gog, the chiefe Prince of Mesheck and Tubal. I Will so consume thee, that onely the sixt part of thy forces shall be left alive; and I will,2 And leave but the sixt part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the North parts, and will bring thee upon the mountaines of Israel. in my just judge∣ment, fetch thee from the borders of the North, to fall upon my Church, in great fury, and malice. I will make void, and frustrate all the attempts and in∣deavours, which thou shalt use against my people;3 And I will smite the bow out of thy left hand, & wil cause thine arrowes to fall out of thy right hand. and disappoint all thy warlike preparations. I will send my fierce judgements upon the enemie of my Church; and upon those that,6 And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelesly in the Iles. being separated and garded by the sea, live securely confident of their owne safety, &c. Such store of these military weapons shall bee taken from their enemies, as that those bowes, and arrowes,9 The bowes and ar∣rowes, and the hand-staves and the speares; and they shall burne them with fire seven yeares. and staves, and speares shall yeeld them fire-wood for many yeares. I wil cause these cruell, & hostile nations to leaue their carcasses in great abundance behinde them,11 And it shall come to passe at that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passēgers on the East of the Sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers, and there shall they bury Gog, and all his multitude, & they shall call it the vally of Hamon-Gog. in the land of Israel; & there they shal be cast into pitts, & vallies, neare to the cōmon roade, So as all passengers shall stop their noses, by reason of the noysome scent of the dead bodies,
and the vally shall beare the name (for ever after) of this frequent sepulture of the nations. 12 And seven moneths shall the house of Israel bee burying of them, that they may cleanse the land.And so great shal be the multitude of the slain, as that my people of Israel (by whose hand this slaughter shall be done) shall bestow many monthes in burying them; not so much out of respect to their dead enemies, as for their owne sakes, that their land may be cleansed from the impuritie, and annoiance of those carcasses. So verse 13. and 14. 15 And the passengers that passe through the land, when any seeth a mans bone, then shall he set up a figure by it, till the buriers have buried it in the vally of Hamon-Gog.And the passengers that passe thorough the land, when any of them seeth a mans bone, then shall they lay an heape of stones upon it, to give notice to the buriers, that they fetch all those scattered bones to the common bu∣rying place of Hamon-Gog. 16 And also the name of the citie shall be Hamonah; thus shall they cleanse the land.And there shall be a city erected neare to this com∣mon buriall-place; and ye shall give it a name of multi∣tude; because of the innumerable company of those bo∣dies, which shall lie there interred. 17 Gather your selves on every side to my sacri∣fice that I doe sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountaines of Is∣rael, &c.Assemble your selves on every side, to that great slaughter, that I have made, of the bodies of men; where∣with ye may feast your selves abundantly. So verse 18. and 19. I have plentifully stored my Church with graces of sanctification,29 For I have powred out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord God. saith the Lord God. CAP. XL. 2 In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountaine, by which was as the frame of a citie on the South.I Was, in vision, brought (as mee seemed) into the land of Israel; and was, by the spirit of God, set upon a very high hill, even the hill of Sion, under the side whereof, was the frame of the city Jerusalem, on the south. 3 And he brought mee thither, and behold, there was a man whose appea∣rance was like the appea∣rance of brasse, with a line of flax in his hand, & a mea∣suring reed.And behold, there was a man (indeed the sonne of God) whose appearance was bright and glorious, like unto burnish't brasse; and he had in his hand a line of flax
to measure the outward and more spacious courts of the Temple; and a measuring reed for the walls, and build∣ings, &c. And behold, he shewed me a description of the Tem∣ple, in all the courts thereof;5 And behold, a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in the mans hād a measuring reed of sixe cubits long, by the cubite, and an handbredth, so he measured the bredth of the building, one reede, and the height one reede. and the three walls encom∣passing them; and first, of the out-most wall which envi∣rons the rest round about; and in his hand he had a mea∣suring reed of sixe cubits long; every cubit whereof had one handfull added to it, above the common and ordina∣ry length thereof; so as, whiles the common cubit was but of five handfulls, this cubit was according to the rate of sixe handfulls to each cubit, so he measured this out∣most wall, and found it one whole reed, that is, sixe cu∣bits in breadth, and one whole reed, or, sixe cubits in height. Then when he had measured the out-most wall that encompasseth the whole mount of Sion;6 Then came hee unto the gate, which looketh toward the East, and went up the staires thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate which was one reede broad, and the other threshold of the gate which was one reede broad. hee went right from the East to the West-ward, till hee came to the next inclosure of the Temple; and whereas there are five gates in that wall; one to the East, another to the West, one to the North, and two to the south, he went to the Easterne gate, and ascended up the staires thereof; and whereas the gate was double leaved he measured the breadth of the threshold, which was sixe large cubits broad, in either of the leaves of that gate. And whereas there were little roomes made in the in∣side of the gate, backing upon the wall,7 And every little cham∣ber was one reede long, & one reede broad, and be∣tweene the little chambers were five cubits. each of those roomes were sixe large cubits broad, &c. The rest unto Chapter 43. is a locall description only, of the measure of the severall buildings, pertaining to the Tem∣ple; which cannot be expressed in plainer termes: all the difficulty of those passages, being only in the apprehensi∣on of the fashion, and quantitie of that fabrick. CAP. XLIII. SOnne of man,7 Son of man, The place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feete, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Is∣rael for ever, and my holy name, shall the houe of Is∣rael no more defile, neither they nor, &c. I will hereafter purge my Church from those foule corruptions, wherewith it hath been ble∣mished; so as my people shall no more prophane my ho∣ly place, and defile themselves with their abominable I∣dolatries; nor by the carcasses of those which they offe∣red to their Idols, in the high places. In setting up their owne false,8 In their setting of their threshold by my thre∣sholds, and their post by my posts, and the wall be∣tweene me and them, &c. and superstitious wor∣ship,
together with the true worship of my name, and in contestation therewith, &c. Now, let them put away from me their Idolatries, and the murders they have done,9 Now let them put a∣way their whoredome, and the carkases of their Kings far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever. in sacrificing men to their Idols; and I will continue my gracious presence with them, for ever. CAP. XLIIII. NOw whereas there were two degrees, or distinctions of the sanctuary,1 Then he brought mee back the way of the gate of the outward sanctuary which looketh toward the East, and it was shut. the one which was called The holy place; the other called, The most holy place, or The ho∣ly of holies; he brought me, in the spirit, to the entring of the gate of the outer sanctuary, which looked East∣ward; and that gate, which I had seene formerly open (as that by which the glory of God visibly entred into the Temple) was now shut. 2 Then said the Lord unto me, This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, & no mā shal enter in by it, because the Lord the God of Israel hath entred in by it, therefore it shall be shut.Then said the Lord unto me, This gate shall continue shut; and no ordinary person shall ever enter in by it; because the Lord God of Israel hath honored, and hal∣lowed it by entring in thereby; therefore it shall never be put to any common use. 3 It is for the Prince, the Prince he shall sit in it to eat bread before the Lord; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate, & shall goe out by the way of the same.It is for the Prince of that holy Tribe, the high priest only; he alone shall be allowed to eate the consecrated bread, within the holy place; and to have ingresse, and e∣gresse that way. 7 In that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my Sanctuarie to pol∣lute it.In that ye have ordained, and appointed those to be priests in my sanctuary that are strangers both in blood, and in religion; and have given them a place of ministra∣tion in my Temple, to pollute it, &c. 9 No stranger uncircum∣cised in heart, nor uncircū∣cised in flesh, shall enter into my Sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel.No stranger that is uncircumcised, either spiritually, or corporally; wicked in heart, and life, and an alien from my Church, shall be admitted to serve in my sanctuary; although he be one that lives among my people. 10 And the levites that are gone away far from me when Israel went astray, which went astray away from me after their Idols, they shall even beare their iniquitie▪And those of the Tribe of Levi, which, being in the office of priesthood, were in the defection of the rest of Israel carried away to Idolatry; they shall undergoe pu∣nishment for their sin.
Yet they shall not utterly be excluded from the mea∣ner businesses, that belong to my Temple;11 Yet they shall bee ministers in my Sanctuary having charge at the gates of the house, and ministring to the house, they shall slay the burnt offering, and the sacrifice for the people, and they shal stand before them to minister unto them. as from taking charge of the gates of the house, &c. They shall be al∣lowed to slay the burnt offring, and the sacrifice for the people; and they shall minister to the people, but they shall not be admitted to offer any sacrifice to God, for them. Because they polluted themselves in ministring unto the people in their Idolatrous sacrifices, &c.12 Because they mini∣stred unto them before their Idolls, &c. They shall not gird about them any woollen gar∣ments, which may cause their bodies to sweat,18 And they shall not gird themselves with any thing that causeth sweat. that those holy vestiments may be soiled; or any outward unclean∣linesse may be caused thereby. When they are before God, in his Temple,19 And when they goe forth into the outer court, even into the court to the people, they shall put off their garments wherein they ministred, and lay thē in the holy chambers, and they shall put on other gar∣ments, and they shalt not sanctifie the people with their garments. and ser∣vice, they shall be clad with peculiar, & holy vestiments, but, when they goe forth amongst the people, they shall not weare those hallowed robes, as if in their familiar conversation, they would tie them to a religious obser∣vance, and an expectation of holinesse to be derived from them. CAP. XLV. WHen ye shall divide the land by lot for inheritance ye shall set apart a meet parcell thereof,1 Moreover, when yee shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, yee shall offer an oblation unto the Lord, an holy portiō of the land: the length shall be the length of five and twen∣ty thousand reeds, and the bredth shal be ten thousād. for holy uses, even for the service of God, and the maintenance of his priests; the length of it thus separated, shall be five and twenty thousand reeds, according to the large mea∣sure of cubits; and the breadth shall be tenne thousand, &c. Of this portion of ground,2 Of this there shall bee for the Sanctuary five hun∣dred in length, with five hundred in breadth square round about, & fifty cubits round about, for the sub∣urbs thereof. there shall bee a plot laid forth for the building of the sanctuary; which shall be in the whole extent thereof five hundred reeds in length, and so many in breadth; it shall be full square, and for fifty cubits round about the bounds hereof, shall be wast ground, free from any imployment of building. And, on both sides of that portion of land,7 And a portion shall be for the Prince on the one side, and on the other side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the posses∣sion of the citie, before the oblation of the holy porti∣on; and before the possessi∣on of the citie from the West side westward, and from the East-side East∣ward▪ and the length shall be over against one of the portions from the West border unto the East bor∣der. which is laid forth for the sight of the sanctuary, and of the city, and for the maintenance of the Priests, shall be a portion of land laid out for the Prince; on the west-side shall be his westerne portion; and on the East-side, his Easterne portion; and the length of it shall be over against each of
these portions from the West borders of it, to the East. I doe appoint him a constant and fixed possession of land in Israel;8 In the land shall bee his possession in Israel, and my Princes shall no more oppresse my people. for a royall maintenance of him, and his family; and my Princes and governours shall not be put (for want of a due and setled provision) to raise meanes to themselves by the oppression of my people, &c. CAP. XLVI. 1 Thus saith the Lord God, The gate of the inner court that looketh toward the East, shall be shut the sixe working daies, but on the Sabbath it shal be open∣ed, and in the day of the new moon it shall be ope∣ned.THe East-gate of the third wall, which is of the court of the Priests, wherein the Temple was built, shall be shut the sixe working daies; but on the Sabbath, and on the first day of the moneth, which is the day of the new-Moone, it shall be opened. 2 And the Prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate without and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priest shall prepare his burnt of∣fering and his peace offe∣rings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate.And the Prince only shall enter by the way of that gate; and when he is to enter, shall stand at the post of that gate, untill the priest shall have prepared his burnt ffering, and peace offering; and then when they have made this safe way for him, he shall come in, having first bowed downe, and worshipped at the threshold of the gate, &c. 3 Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the doore of this gate be∣fore the Lord, in the Sab∣baths, & in the new moons.Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the doore f this gate before the Lord; but they shall not presume to enter in by it; only they shall bow, and wor∣ship aloofe at that doore, on the Sabbaths, and new-Moones. 10 And the Prince in the midst of them when they goe in, and when they goe forth, shall goe forth.And the Prince shall observe the same times of my service with my people; both for his comming in, and for his going forth. 20 That they bear them not out into the outer court, to sanctifie the peo∣ple.There they shall boile the trespasse-offering, and bake the meat-offering; that they beare them not out into the outer court, where the people are allowed to assemble, as if the common sort of people should share with them in their sanctification, since this priviledge of these holy services, rests in their owne persons.
CAP. XLVII. AFterward, this heavenly,1 Afterward he brought me againe unto the doore of the house, and behold waters issued out from un∣der the threshold of the house East-ward, for the forefrōt of the house stood toward the East, and the waters came downe from under from the right side of the house, at the South side of the Altar. and divine guide of mine brought me back from this outer court, where were the boiling houses of the sacrifices, unto the doore of the Temple; and behold, from under that doore by which the glory of God had formerly entred, and which was now shut; there issued a streame of waters, to signifie the plenty of graces, which are derived from God to his Church; which are yet raised by degrees, & frō shallow, and weak beginnings arise to great height & perfection. So verse 2, 3, 4, 5. And,7 Now when I had re∣turned, behold at the banke of the river were very ma∣ny trees on the one side & on the other. to shew the plentifull fruit that arises from these graces of his Church and Children, behold, upon the bank of this holy and spirituall streame, there were ma∣ny, and fruitfull trees growing on both sides thereof. These waters shall passe through the whole land, for they shall flow towards the East-countrey,8 Then said he unto me, These waters issue out to∣ward the East countrey, & goe down into the desert, and goe into the Sea, which being brought forth into the Sea, the waters shall be healed. which is the higher part of Judaea, and from thence into the champain countrey thereof; and so fall into the sea, whose unwhole∣some waters shall be therewith healed; even so shall the sanctifying graces of Gods spirit be enlarged over his whole Church, through the world; and shall sweeten, and season all the soules that shall be therewith indued. And it shall come to passe,9 And it shall come to passe, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live, and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither, for they shall bee healed, and every thing shal live, whether the, &c. that all those which shall be partakers of these holy graces, shall live for ever; and there shall be very great increase of all good works, and conscionable obedience wheresoever they shal be found. So also verse 12. And it shall come to passe, that my Church shall be plentifully stored with holy, and able teachers,10 And it shall come to passe that the fishers shall stand upon it, from Engedi even unto Eneglaim: they shall be a place to spread forth nets, their fish shall be according to their kinds as the fish of the great sea. (which are fishers of men) and they shall spread abroad their wholesome doctrines, all over the earth, and they sall take large draughts of soules, which shall by their mini∣stery be converted to me. But those which are resolutely wicked,11 But the myrie places thereof, and the Marishes thereof, shall not be healed, they shall bee given to salt. and given up to a reprobate sense, they shall not be reformed or bet∣tered
by these meanes of Salvation; but shall bee left to their wonted obdurednesse, and corruption, and so to their finall condemnation. 15 And this shall bee the border of the land to∣ward the North side, from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as men goe to Zedad.And the extent of my Church shall be so inlarged; as that it shall reach all the world over, even from one end of the world to the other; which I would have to be figu∣red, by the extending of the bounds of this re-promised land towards the North, from the mediterranean Sea all along the coasts of the Kingdome of Damascus. So also verse 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. CAP. XLVIII. 8 And by the border of Iudah, from the East side unto the West side, shall be the offering which they shall offer of five & twen∣ty thousand reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the other parts, &c.ANd bordering upon the inheritance, or possession of Judah shall be (from the East to the West) that por∣tion of five and twenty thousand reeds, which is set a∣part for the sanctuary and the Priests, &c. Of that ground that is thus separated for publike use, (which is 25000. reeds) ten thousand reeds being set apart for the Priests,15 And the five thou∣sand that are left in the breadth, over against the five and twenty thousand, shall be a prophane place for the city. and ten thousand for the Levites, there will be five thousand remaining in the breadth thereof for secular use, even for the building of the citie, &c. And those that are appointed for the publike service, and ministration of the citie,19 And they that serve the city, shall serve it out of all the tribes of Israel. shall not onely be imploied in the attendance of the ordinary inhabitants thereof; but shall be serviceable to all that shall resort thither, from all the tribes of Israel. 20 All the oblation shall be five and twenty thou∣sand, by five and twenty thousand ye shall offer the holy oblation foure square, with the possession of the citie.All the portion that shall bee set apart for these holy uses, shall bee five and twenty thousand reeds square; the length being equall to the breadth; that parcell of the ground for the citie, being taken into the measure. And these are the utmost limits or reach of the grounds belonging to the citie,30 And these are the goings out of the citie, on the North side, foure thou∣sand and five hundred measures. of the North side 4500. measures, &c.
DANIEL. CAP. I. WHich he caried into the land of Chaldea to the temple of his false god;2 Which he caried into the land of Shinar to the house of his god, and hee brought the vessells into the treasure-house of his god. not so much for the ordinary use of his Priests, as to be laid up for monuments in the Treasure-house that pertained to his Idol god, even Bel, the god of the Babylonians, Assyrians, and Persians. Such as might bee fit both for birth, and person,4 And such as had abili∣ty in them to stand in the Kings palace. and parts, to be attendants upon the Kings person, &c. But Daniel, finding by the change of their names,8 But Daniel purposed in his heart, that he would not defile himselfe with the portion of the Kings meate, nor with the wine which he dranke, therefore he requested of the Prince of the Eunuches, that hee might not defile himselfe. that there was no other meant but a change of their religion, and manners, resolved to hold his owne holy courses; and determined in himselfe, not to eate of those Babylo∣nian dishes, that were prepared for him by the Prince of the Eunuches; which he could not possibly doe, without much danger of defilement; since both their meat, and manner of dressing had in them much contrariety to the Law of God; therefore he requested the Prince of the Eunuches that hee might enjoy the liberty of his consci∣ence, and might not be pressed to the use of a prohibited diet. They were specially appointed, therefore,19 Therefore stood they before the King. to wait up∣on the Kings person. CAP. II. IN the second yeare after Daniel and his fellowes were admitted to the attendance of Nebuchadnezar,1 And in the second yeare of the reigne of Ne∣buchadnezzar, Nebuchad∣nezzar dreamed dreames, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleepe brake from him. the King Nebuchadnezar dreamed a divinatory, and per∣plexed dreame, wherewith he was much disquieted; both, for the matter of the dreame, and for the losse of it out of his memory; the thought whereof did so afflict him, that his sleepe departed from him. I have utterly forgotten the thing that I dreamed,5 The thing is gone from me: if yee will not make knowne unto me, the dreame, with the in∣terpretation thereof. which for the time did exceedingly affect me; now then that which I require of you, is, to recall to my thoughts the dreame that I had, and to give me the interpretation of it, &c.
9 For ye have prepared lying, and corrupt words to speake before me, till the time be changed.Ye have intended onely to delude me with lying, and delatory answers, untill some other occasions may divert me from this earnest inquiry, &c. With him and in him is all perfection of knowledge, and power of illumination.22 The light dwelleth with him. 39 And after thee shall arise another Kingdome inferiour to thee, and ano∣ther third Kingdome of brasse, which shall beare rule over all the earth.After thy line is expired, there shall arise another Kingdome of the Medes and Persians, who shall sway the scepter, yet so, as they shall not arise to that glory, and magnificence which thou hast attained; These are the brest and armes of silver, which thou sawest joyned to the golden head of thine Empire; And after this suc∣cession of government is ended, there shall come a third Kingdome in the place thereof, which shall be that of the Grecians; lesse glorious and excellent then the other of the Medes,; which shall be, as brasse in comparison of their silver, or thy gold, the extent of which third Em∣pire shall reach to the rule of the whole earth. 40 And the fourth King∣dome shall bee strong as yron: forasmuch as yron breaketh in pieces, and subdueth all things, and as yron that breaketh all these, shall it breake in pieces, and bruise.The fourth Kingdome shall be that which shall arise out of the division of the Grecian Monarchy, upon the death of Alexander the great; in which, the severall Kings of Asia the lesse, and Syria, and Aegypt shall beare the sway; but especially, that of Seleucus Nicanor, which shall have the rule of Syria, and Babylonia, and shall over-top the rest, & offer most violence to the Church of God; which shall be as the legges of yron; in respect of strength and hardnesse; for as yron breaketh all things in pieces, so shall this tyrannicall government crush, and extremely oppresse Gods people. 41 And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters clay, and part of yron: the king∣dome shall be divided, but there shall be in it of the strength of the yron, for as much as thou sawest the yron mixt with mirie clay.And whereas thou sawest the feet, and toes, part of clay, and part of yron, it foreshewes to thee the same fourth Kingdome, divided in it selfe, and in processe of time, weakened, & sensibly abated of the former power; the yron of it figures strength, and power, but the clay, fragility, and weaknesse. And as the toes of the feet were part of yron, and part of clay,42 And as the toes of the feet were part of yron, and part of clay, so the kingdome shall bee partly strong, and partly broken. so those substitutions, and under-governments, which shall bee subordinated to this fourth Kingdome, shall be of a mis-tempered mixture, some of them strong and able to subsist, others weake, and brittle. 43 And whereas thou sawest yron mixt with myrie clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to ano∣ther even as yron is not mixed with clay.And whereas thou sawest yron mixed with a baser kinde of clay; it fore-signifies, that these Kingdomes thus divided, shal indevour to unite, and conjoine themselves by leagues of marriages, for Berenice the daughter of Ptolome Philadelphus, King of Aegypt, shall be matcht with Antiochus King of Syria; but this conjunction
shall not hold, neither shall be any more possible to con∣tinue, then it is possible that yron and clay should make, and hold a perfect mixture. And in the dayes of some of those Kings,44 And in the dayes of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a King∣dome, which shall never be destroyed: and the Kingdome shall not be left to other people, but it shall breake in peices, and con∣sume all these Kingdomes, and it shall stand for ever. which shall be derived from this stocke, (and namely of Herod; who shall tyrannically usurpe the Kingdome of Judah) shall the God of heaven send the Messiah, and shall erect that spirituall Kingdom of his, which shal never be destroied; and this Kingdome shall be proper to Gods Church, and shall be administred, & ruled only by his anointed King, the Saviour of the world, and shall out-weare the fore∣named Monarchies, and when they are extinct, and for∣gotten, shall last for evermore. This Messiah is the stone,45 For as much as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountaine without hands, and that it brake in pieces the yron, the brasse, the clay, the silver, and the gold. which thou sawest cut out of the mountaine, without hands, that is ordained, and sent from heaven, by the eternall counsell and decree of the Almighty; who by his omnipotent power, and infi∣nite wisedome, hath determined to subvert all these suc∣cessions of Kingdomes, and Monarchies, according to his good pleasure, &c. Then the King Nebuchadnezzar,46 Then the King Ne∣buchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped Da∣niel, and commanded that they shold offer an oblati∣on, and sweet odours unto him. as admiring the propheticall spirit of Daniel, and imagining some divine power to be in him, worshipped Daniel, and comman∣ded his people, and servants that they should offer sacrifices to him, as to a more then humane person. Then Daniel, as desiring to prefer his parteners,49 Thē Daniel requested of the King, and he set Sha∣drach, Meshach, and A∣bednego over the affaires of the province of Baby∣lon, but Daniel sate in the gate of the King. and colleagues, made suit to the King, that he would make Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, the chiefe rulers over the Provinces of Babylon; But Daniel was appoin∣ted to be the prime officer of the Kings court. CAP. III. THen the Chaldeās,1 Nebuchadnezzar the King made an image of gold, whose height was three score cubits, and the breadth thereof sixe cu∣bites, hee set it up in the plaine of Dura, in the pro∣vince of Babylon. moved with envie at these Jewish governors, and desiring to have some advantage a∣gainst the Jewes, moved Nebuchadnezzar to erect an image of gold (as a monument of his owne greatnesse) seventy foot high, and nine foot broad, which he set up accordingly, not in some obscure desert, but in the well knowne, and frequented plaine of Dura, in the province of Babylon; for the use of publike adoration. There are certaine Jewes, whom,12 There are certaine Iewes, whom thou hast set over the affaires of the province of Babylon, Sha∣drach, Meshach and Abed∣nego: these men O King, have not regarded thee, they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image, which thou hast set up. at the request of Da∣niel, thou hast made governours over the province of Ba∣bylon, even Shadrach, &c. these men, O King, have not given that respect to thee, which thy greatnesse
requires, they are refractary to thy commands, and e∣nemies to thy gods; refusing to serve them, or to wor∣ship thy golden image; which is so much more intolera∣ble, for that they have dared thus to affront thee in that very province, the charge whereof thou hast commited unto them. 16 O Nebuchadnezzar we are not carefull to an∣swere thee in this matter.O King Nebuchadnezzar, wee are not to seeke of a ready answer to this charge of thine; neither can we take any thought to avoid this danger, which thou threatnest unto us. 17 If it be so, our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us.If thou have firmely and resolutely determined to deale thus with us; we know that our God whom wee serve is able to deliver us, &c. 25 And the forme of the fourth is like the Son of God.And the forme of the fourth is very bright and glori∣ous, above the possibility of all humane beauty and re∣splendence. 28 And have changed the Kings word.And have boldly varied from that charge which was given by the King, &c. CAP. IV. 8 Whose name was Belteshazzar according to the name of my god.WHose name was (since his comming to Babylon) changed to Belteshazzar, in allusion to the name of Bel, the great God of the Babylonians, &c. 13 And behold, a wat∣cher and an holy one came downe from heaven.And behold, an holy Angell of God came downe from heaven; one, who is charged with the carefull inspection of these earthly things. And he cryed, &c. 17 This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones.This charge is not given by the sentence of one Angell alone, but by the joynt consent of all the powers of hea∣ven, &c. 19 Then Daniel (whose name was Belteshazzar,) was astonied for one houre, and his thoughts troubled him: the King spake and said, Belteshaz∣zar, let not the dreame, or the interpretation thereof trouble thee, Belteshazzar answered and said, my Lord, &c.Then Daniel (whose name was Belteshazzar) was much troubled in his thoughts for the space of a whole houre, not with the disquisition of the signification of the dreame, but with the consideration of those great, and fearefull things, which were portended, and fore-signified, by that dreame, unto King Nebuchadnezzar. It is decreed in heaven, and the execution of it, is committed to the Angells of God, that thou shalt be driven from the society of men,25 That they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eate grasse as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shal passe over thee, till thou know that the most high ruleth in the Kingdome of men. and in an extremity of a sottish melancholy, thou shalt both spend thy time a∣mongst the beasts of the field, and repute thy selfe as one of them, and accordingly demeane thy selfe, both for thy diet, and lodging; so as whiles thou liest abroad, thou shalt bee wet with the dew of heaven; and seven
yeares shall passe over thee, in this forlorne condition, till God have throughly humbled thee, and taught thee to know, and acknowledge his infinite power, &c. Wherfore, O King, as it hath pleased thee to inquire my interpretation of this dreame of thine,27 Wherefore, O King, let my counsell bee accep∣table unto thee, and break off thy sinnes by righteous∣nesse, and thine iniquities by shewing mercie to the poore, if it may be a length∣ning of thy tranquillitie. so now vouch∣safe to accept, and regard the counsell which I doe there∣upon give thee; since God hath threatned these things against thee, be thou carefull to turne away from those sinnes wherewith thou hast provoked him, unto an holy and righteous cariage before him; in stead of those sin∣full courses which thou hast hitherto taken, resolve now to demeane thy selfe religiously, towards God, and mer∣cifully towards his afflicted people; and if there be any possible meanes to continue thy peace, and welfare, this is it which I have now prescribed thee. All that time hee endured, abroad,33 And his body was wet with the dew of hea∣ven, till his haire was growne like Eagles fea∣thers, and his nailes like birds clawes. the extremity of the cold in winter, and of the scorching heat in summer; untill his haire was over-growne to cover his body, in a savage manner, and his nailes were growne over his fin∣gers like clawes, so as he was become not more neglect∣ed, then monstrous, and deformed. CAP. V. NOw when those seventy yeares were expired,1 Belshazzar the King made a great feast to a thousand of his Lords, and dranke wine before the thousand. which God had appointed for the reigne of Nebuchad∣nezzar, and his issue, Belshazzar, his debauched grand-child made a sumptuous feast, to a thousand of his Lords and (besides his custome) sat with them openly, at that royall banquet. Belshazzar whiles he was drinking wine,2 Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine, comman∣ded to bring the golden and silver vessells, which his father Nebuchadnez∣zar had taken out of the temple which was in Ie∣rusalem, that the King and his Princes, his wives and his concubines might drinke therein. commanded (in a scorne and reproach to God) to bring forth those vessells of gold, and silver, which his Grandfather Ne∣buchadnezzar had brought out from the Temple of God, which was in Jerusalem; that the King, and his Princes, his wives, and concubines, might please them∣selves in insulting upon that God, whose spoyles they were. So verse 3. And, as they dranke their wine in these once-hallow∣ed vessells; they triumphed over that God,4 They dranke wine and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brasse, of yron, of wood, and of stone. to whom they had beene consecrated; and magnified the power of their idolls of gold, and silver, &c. as if by their might these victories had beene atchived, and these rich spoiles obtained.
5 In the same houre came foorth fingers of a mans hand, and wrote over against the candlestick up∣on the plaister of the wall of the Kings palace, and the King saw the part of the hand that wrote.In the very same houre, whiles they were offering this affront to the God of heaven, it pleased the just & pow∣erfull God, to shew, that he tooke notice of this pre∣sumptuous impiety; and therefore hee caused a sudden and dreadfull apparition of the fingers of a mans hand, as it were, writing over against the Candlestick, where it might best be seene, upon the plaister of the wall of the banqueting house; and the King only, at first, saw these fingers that thus wrote. Then the Kings colour began to goe away, and he wa∣xed pale,6 Then the Kings coun∣tenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joynts of his loines were loosed, and his knees smote one against a∣nother. and gastly; and his minde was so troubled at this fearefull, and strange sight, that he grew (as it were) suddainly paralytick; his joynts seemed, as if they had beene quite loosed, and, in an extremity of trembling, his knees smote one against another. And this is the writing that is written, Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin;25 And this is the wri∣ting that was written, Me∣ne, Mene, Tekel Vpharsin; that is, God hath perfectly numbred and reckoned up the daies both of the Babylonish Em∣pire, and the Jewish captivity; and their utmost date is now comne; And the same God hath well considered all thy waies, and actions; and hath found thee utterly un∣answerable both to his benefits, and to thine owne place; and therefore hath determined to cast thee aside, as light gold, not fit for further use; And now hath ta∣ken a course to cut thee off from the earth; and to give thy Kingdome into the hands of the Medes and Persians. 30 In that night was Belshazzar the King of the Chaldeans slaine.And accordingly that very night Belshazzar the King was slaine by the hands of Gadata, and Gobrya, two of Cyrus his noblemen; who, that very night, surprized Babylon, and became Lord of that Monarchie. 31 And Darius the Me∣dian tooke the Kingdome, being about threescore and two yeares old.And Darius, the Median, father in law to Cyrus, by the consent and appointment of Cyrus, (whom he had aided in this warre) tooke upon him the Kingdome, be∣ing threescore and two yeares old. CAP. VI. 4 Then the presidents and princes sought to finde occasiō against Daniel con∣cerning the Kingdome, but they could finde none occa∣sion nor fault.THen the other two presidents, and the hundred and twenty Princes sought to get some advantage against Daniel, in matter of government, or accounts for the Kings profits, but they could finde none, &c. All we the presidents and governours, and Princes of thy Kingdomes,7 All the presidents of the Kingdome, the gover∣nours, and the Princes, the counsellers and the captains have consulted together to establish a royall statute, & to make a firme decree, that whosoever shall aske a petition of any god or mā for thirty daies save of thee O King, he shall be cast into the den of Lions. have consulted, which way we may doe thee the most honor; and most ingratiate thee with thy subjects, now, at thy first entrance into thy throne; and we have found no way more faire, and plausible then this
we have decreed, that none of thy subjects shall (for the space of thirty daies) make any petition to any God, or man, save to thee, O King; that by this meanes they may be brought and inured to an awfull, and divine conceit of thy greatnesse, and may be incouraged to have accesse unto thee, for the more indearing of thee to them, upon the grant of their suites; and, if any man shall violate this decree, we have sentenced him to be cast into the den of Lyons. Now,10 Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, hee went into his house, and his windowes being open in his chamber toward Ierusalem, he knee∣led upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, & gave thankes before his God, as he did afore time. when Daniel knew that this writing was signed (which he well understood to be irrevocable) he, not∣withstanding, continued his wonted devotions, to his God; He therefore, being in his house (not willing to conceale his pious exercises) opened the window of his chamber, to the south-west-ward, that he might (accor∣ding to Salomons word, and the practice of Gods peo∣ple) looke towards the Temple (though now demoli∣shed) and kneeling upon his knees, three times a day, at morning, noone, and evening, he prayed to God, and gave thankes before his God, as he had wont. He bent all his thoughts,14 And set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, &c. and laboured by all meanes possible to deliver Daniel. CAP. VII. I Saw in my vision by night; and behold,2 Daniel spake, and said, I saw in my visiō by night, and behold, the foure winds of the haevē strove upon the great Sea. to shew mee the blustring and unsteddy state of all these earthly Kingdomes, and affaires, me thought, the foure windes of the heaven blew, and fought (as it were) together up∣on the great sea. And from that sea (which signifies the world) there arose foure great beasts, divers one from another,3 And foure great beasts came up from the Sea, di∣vers one from another. to re∣present those foure great Monarchies, whereby the King∣domes of the earth are swayed; which had and shall have different formes of administration. The first, which was the Babylonian Monarchy,4 The first was like a Lion, & had Eagles wings, and I beheld till the wings thereof were pluckt, and it was lifted up from the earth, and made stand upon the feete as a man, and a mans heart was given to it. was a Lyon, in respect of the power and fiercenesse thereof; but this Lyon had Eagles wings, to shew the incredible swiftnesse, and speed of his conquests. And I beheld, till those severall regions, and commands, wherewith the Babylonian had fethered himselfe, and furnished his em∣pire, were pluckt away, by the hands of the Medes and Persians; so as now these wings of his soveraintie, being pulled and plumed, (wherewith he formerly soared up) he was faine to trust to his feet; and therein to finde his owne weakenesse; whereby his courage was so abated,
that in stead of the stoutnesse of a Lyon, he was glad to take up with the weake heart of a man. 5 And behold, another beast, a second like to a bear and it raised up it selfe on one side, and it had three ribs in the mouth of it be∣tween the teeth of it, and they said thus unto it, A∣rise, devour much flesh.The second Monarchie of the Persians, was figured by the second beast, it was like a beare, lesse noble, and generous then the Babylonian; more slow, and dull, but no lesse cruell; and it raised up one dominion of all those former Kingdomes, united to the Babylonian empire; and this devouring beast had three ribs in his mouth; to shew the torne and wasted remainders of all those King∣domes (in all the three coasts of the knowne habitable world,) which he hath greedily eaten up; to whom it was by the just decree of the Almighty encharged, that hee should rouze up himselfe, and destroy many nations, in revenge of those quarrells that God had against them. 6 After this I beheld, and loe, another like a leo∣pard, which had upon the back of it foure wings of a fowle, the beast had also foure heads, and dominion was given to it.After this, I beheld, and loe the third Monarchy of the Macedonian or Graecian, (being presented by a Leo∣pard) succeeded; more fierce and subtile then that other of the Medes; which, by reason of the exceeding swift∣nesse of dispatch (especially of Alexander the great, in his atchievements) had foure wings attributed unto it, This great Empire was divided (upon the death of Alex∣ander) into foure Kingdomes; and for the time, it was of great power, and large dominion. After this, there was in my night visions, represented unto me,7 After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast, dreadfull and terrible, and strong exceed∣ingly, and it had great yron teeth; it devoured & brake in peeces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it, and it was divers from all the beasts that were before it, and it had ten hornes. the tyrannous Asiaticke kingdome, in the fi∣gure of a fourth beast, which was dreadfull, and terrible, and exceedingly strong; it had great teeth of yron, to sig∣nifie those cruell pressures, wherewith it should teare and grinde the distressed remainders of Gods people; and it did accordingly exercise extreame tyranny over them, by devouring them, and crashing their bones in peeces, and stamping them under his feet; and this beast, as it could not (by reason of the many varieties which were found in this government) be figured by any one shape, so was it, in the fell and bloody disposition there∣of, quite different from the former; And in this regiment there shall ten Kings succeed; which were represented by the ten hornes of this beast. 8 I considered the hornes, and behold, there came up among them ano∣ther little horne, before whom there were three of the first hornes pluckt up by the rootes, and behold in this horne were, &c.And I tooke good view of those ten hornes, which signified the ten Kings; and I saw one little horne, which came forth amongst the rest, & the last of the ten, which in the comming up, defeated three of those ten; and be∣hold in this horne, there were eyes of sharpe understan∣ding, and quick conceit; but, withall, there was a mouth which was full of blasphemy. 9 I beheld til the thrones were cast downe, and the ancient of daies did sit whose garment was white as snow, and the haire of his head, like the pure wooll; his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheeles as burning fire.As in my vision I saw the erection, and the standing of these great Monarchicall thrones, so I saw the casting of
them downe, by the long-suffering, yet just hand of the Almighty: for which purpose, I saw a glorious repre∣sentation of his judgement set; and therein was a maje∣sticall resemblance of the Judge, even the eternall God, whose being was before all times; who was all compas∣sed about with perfect purity, and righteousnesse, signi∣fied by the whitenesse of his garment, and his haire; his throne was full of terrour, even like to a fiery flame; and the wheeles (on which it stood) were as a burning fire; to shew that his judgements will unavoidably finde out his enemies, and consume them. To the same purpose was there a representation of a fiery streame, issuing forth from before him,10 A fiery stream issued, & came forth from before him, thousand thousands ministred unto him, and ten thousand times ten thou∣sand stood before him, the Iudgement was set, and the bookes were opened. signifying the execution of his vengeance upon his enemies; infinite numbers of glorious spirits stood before him, to waite upon his Majesty; & according to the formes of humane Judicature, there were laid open the acts, and most cer∣taine records of those things which had beene done by these foure beasts; but especially by the last of them. I beheld then, and I saw the last Monarchie,11 I beheld then, be∣cause of the voice of the great words which the horne spake; I beheld even till the beast was slaine, and his body destroyed, and gi∣ven to the burning flame. and that proud horne thereof (the last King of that ranke) whose mouth had dared to speake those great blasphemies, cal∣led to reckoning for those notorious impieties, and him∣selfe destroyed, and cast into that unquenchable fire. As concerning the rest of those Monarchies,12 As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time. they had (by the just decree of this Judge,) their dominions wea∣kened, and in a sort extinguished; yet so, that they had some small remainders of a being, till the appointed time that God had set for the Romanes to put a full di∣spatch unto them. Moreover, I had, in my night visions,13 I saw in the night vi∣sions, and behold, one like the son of man, came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the ancient of daies, & they brought him neere before him. represented unto me one, like to Jesus Christ, the Son of man, (who is withall, the eternall son of God) who to shew his dei∣ty, came in the clouds of heaven to descend to the earth; and now, in the fulnesse of time, came to take our nature upon him, and to accomplish the great worke of mans redemption; who presented himselfe before God the Father, as the Mediator betwixt him, and mankinde. And there was all power given him in heaven,14 And there was given him dominion and glory, and a Kingdome that all people, nations and langua∣ges should serve him, his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not passe away, and his King∣dome that, which shall not be destroyed. and earth; and he was, by the eternall decree of God, appoin∣ted to be the glorious King of his Church for ever; so as there can be neither any bounds, nor any terme of his do∣minion.
15 I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the visions of my head troubled me.I Daniel was much perplexed in my thoughts at the consideration of these wondrous visions, and was unqui∣et in my selfe, till I might attaine to the interpretation thereof. 16 I came neere unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this; so he told me, and made me know the inter∣pretation.I came therefore (me thought) to one of those glori∣ous Angells, which stood about the throne, and inqui∣red of him the meaning, and purpose of these representa∣tions, &c. 17 These great beasts, which are foure, are foure Kings which shall arise out of the earth.These great beasts which are foure, are the resem∣blances of foure great Empires, which shall successively arise on the earth; The Babylonian, Persian, Macedo∣nian, Asian. 18 But the Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdome, and possesse the Kingdome for ever, even for ever and ever.But at last, after all the persecutions, and oppressions of violent enemies, the Church and Saints of God shall prevaile, and shall have, and enjoy, the benefit of the perpetuall and peaceable government of Christ, their King, for evermore. 19 Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast.Then was I earnestly inquisitive after the signification of the fourth beast, &c. See verse 7. and 8. 21 I beheld, & the same horne made war with the Saints, and prevailed against them.I beheld, and that last horne (which was the last of the race of Seleucus) persecuted Gods people exceed∣ingly, and prevailed against them. 23 Thus hee said, The fourth beast shall be the fourth Kingdome upon earth, which shall be divers from all Kingdomes, and shall devoure the whole earth, and shall tread it downe, and breake it in pie∣ces.Thus he said, the fourth beast resembleth the fourth of these great imperiall governments, which shall bee worse to Gods people then all the rest; this shall be the usurped Kingdome of the posterity of Seleucus Nicanor, which, upon the extinction of the line of Alexander the great, shall set up a new Kingdome in Babylon; and tyran∣nize most cruelly over the Church of God, the people of the Jewes; and waste, and destroy it, to his utmost. 24 And the ten hornes out of this Kingdome are tenne Kings that shall arise; and another shall arise after them, and he shall be di∣vers from the first, and hee shall subdue three Kings.And the ten hornes, are ten severall Kings, which shall arise and succeed, out of this stock, in this government; and the last of the ten (which shall be more cruell, then his fellowes) shall be that bloody King, Antiochus Epi∣phanes, who shall defeat, and displace three Kings, to make roome for himselfe. 25 And he shall speake great words against the most High, and shall weare out the Saints of the most High, and thinke to change times and lawes; and they shal be given into his hand, untill a time and times, and the dividing of time.And he shall blasphemously, and impiously oppose himselfe against the religion of the most high God, and shal indeavour, all he can, to root out the Jewish people, and shall goe about to change, or abrogate, their solem∣nities, and their lawes; and they shall (in the just procee∣dings of God) be given up into his hand, for the space of three yeares, and somewhat more.
But the powerfull and righteous Judge of the world,26 But the judgement shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to con∣sume, and to destroy it un∣to the end. who noteth all his wicked courses, shall soone call him to account for all his cursed impiety, and intolerable cruelty; and shall bring his Kingdome to utter ruine. And after this the Son of God being exhibited upon earth, his Church shall be enlarged,27 And the Kingdome and dominion, & the great∣nesse of the Kingdome un∣der the whole heaven, shal be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdome is an everlasting Kingdome, and all dominions shall serve and obey him. so as all the King∣domes & dominions upon earth shall submit themselves to the regiment of their God, and Saviour. Hitherto, I have related the speech, which the Angel had with me,28 Hitherto is the end of the matter; As for mee Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me but I kept the matter in my heart. concerning these great affaires of the Church, and the world; As for me Daniel, my thoughts were much perplexed with the consideration of these wonderfull visions; and my very countenance could not but bewray much trouble in my heart; but I did care∣fully lay up, and meditate on all these dreadfull repre∣sentations. CAP. VIII. THere was a second vision represented unto me,2 And I saw in a vision, and it came to passe when I saw, that I was at Shushan in the palace, which is in the province of Elam, and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river of Vlai. wher∣in, me thought, I was at Shushan, in the royall pa∣lace, within the borders of Persia; and was sitting by the river Ulai; which runneth by the said Palace, and city. Then I lifted up mine eyes, and I saw certaine other resemblances of those same three Kingdomes, and Mo∣narchies, which shall follow upon the expiration of this of Babylon, which is now neare to an end;3 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and behold, there stood before the ri∣ver, a ramme which had two hornes, and the two hornes were high, but one was higher then the other, & the higher came up last. the first wher∣of was represented to me, under the type of a ramme with two hornes, in signification of the two Kingdomes united of Media and Persia, and these two soveraignties were very high and great; but the Median government was in time before that of Persia; and the higher in pow∣er was the later in time. I saw this Persian Monarchy assayling all the nations round about, both towards the West, and the North,4 I saw the ramme pu∣shing west-ward, & north-ward, and south-ward, so that no beasts might stand before him, neither was there any that could deli∣ver out of his hand, but hee did according to his will & became great. and the South; neither could any Kingdome stand be∣fore it, or be free from the power, and subjugation there∣of; by the spoiles and ruines of all which, this Kingdome became great. And, as I was considering, behold a rough goate, fi∣guring the Grecian, or Macedonian Empire,5 And as I was conside∣ring, behold, an hee goate came from the West on the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground: and the goat had a notable horne betweene his eyes. came from
the West, and invaded all the Kingdomes of the earth; and he came on, so swiftly, as if he had not touched the ground in his passage; and this Empire was famoused, and enlarged by an eminent King, which was Alexander the Great, who is set forth by that notable horne, which arose betweene the eyes of this Grecian goate. 6 And hee came to the ram that had two hornes, which I had seen standing before the river, and ranne unto him in the furie of his power.And this Macedonian Monarch came to the Persian Ramme, which had those two great titles, & Kingdomes; and set upon him in the fury of his great, and unresistible power. And I saw him assault the Persian Monarchy, being moved with choler,7 And I saw him come close unto the ramme, and he was moved with chol∣ler against him, and smote the ramme, and brake his two hornes, and there was no power in the ramme to stand before him. and rage, and smite it, and break off his two great dominions of Media and Persia; and there was no power in the Persian to stand before him, &c. Therefore the Macedonian Monarchy waxed very great, and strong: and when it was at the strongest, A∣lexander the great (who was the remarkable horne be∣twixt the eyes of that goat) (in his returne from his Eastern conquest) died;8 Therefore the heegoat waxed very great, and when hee was strong, the great horne was broken, and for it came up foure notable ones, toward the oufre windes of heaven. and in his stead came up foure governours, which were the chiefe comman∣ders under him, and divided his Kingdomes amongst them; even in all the coasts of the world; Cassander pos∣sessed himselfe of Macedonia, Seleucus of Syria, Anti∣gonus of Asia the lesse, and Ptolomee of Aegypt. 9 And out of one of them came forth a little horne, which waxed ex∣ceeding great, toward the South and toward the East, and towards the plea∣sant land.And shortly after, the government comming into two hands, Seleucus of Syria, and Ptolomee of Aegypt, out of the one of them (namely Seleucus) there came forth, at last, a King, which seemed but of small power at his first beginnings; even Antiochus Epiphanes, who became afterwards exceeding great, extending his do∣minions both to the Southward, and to the East, and to the choice, and pleasant land of Judea. 10 And it waxed great even to the host of hea∣ven, and it cast downe some of the host, and of the starres to the ground, and stamped upon them.And this King grew mighty, and insolent; daring to warre against the God of heaven, & his Saints on earth; and against some o them he prevailed accordingly; cast∣ing to the ground, and trampling upon those that were most noted for piety, and holinesse. 11 Yea hee magnified himselfe even to the Prince of the host; and by him the daily sacrifice was ta∣ken away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast downe.Yea, he presumed to exalt himselfe so farre, as to offer defiance to the God of heaven; and by him, the daily sacrifice (which God hath injoyned to his people, and all the publike service required by Gods Law) was taken a∣way, and the place of his sanctuary defiled and broken downe. 12 And an host was given him against the dai∣ly sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast downe the truth to the ground, and it practised and prospered.And a whole armie of apostates were given over (by reason of their great sinnes and transgressions) to take
part with him against the holy worship of God; and they spightfully opposed the truth of God, and prevailed in their impious practices. Then I heard one Angell speaking;13 Then I heard one Saint speaking, and ano∣ther Saint said unto that certaine Saint which spake, How long shall bee the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the trāsgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary, and the host to be troden underfoot? even an Angell speaking to Christ, the eternall Son of God, who hath all secrets exactly numbred; and saying to him; How long shall be the continuance of the matter contained in this vision? how long shall the daily sacrifice be aboli∣shed, and interdicted? How long shall be the time of this desolation, which our transgressions have caused? How long shall it be, that the sanctuary, and the people of God shall be troden under foot? And he said unto me,14 And he said unto me, Vnto two thousand and three hundred dayes, then shall the sanctuary bee cleansed. (in whose behalfe this question was moved by the Angell) It shall bee for the space of two thousand, and three hundred naturall dayes, or, sixe yeares, three moneths, and eighteene dayes; at the end whereof the sanctuary shall be cleansed, and Gods wor∣ship restored. And I heard the voice of him,16 And I heard a mans voice betweene the banks of Vlai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vi∣sion. who was the word of his father, speaking in the tone of a man, betwixt the banks of Vlai; which called, and said, Gabriel, it is the plea∣sure of him who is the God of spirits, that thou make this man to understand the vision. Vnderstand, O Sonne of man;17 Vnderstand O Son of man, for at the time of the end shall be the vision. for at the expiration of the time determined, shall this vision be accompli∣shed. See verse 2. of this chapter. The interpretation of the rest of this Chapter is in the pre∣cedent verses.20 The ramme which thou sawest having two hornes, are the Kings of Media, and Persia. And towards the latter end of the Kingdome of the Seleucidae, when the transgressions of the world,23 And in the later times of their Kingdome, when the transgressions are come to the full, a King of fierce countenance, and understanding darke sen∣tences, shall stand up. and of my people are come to their full height, there shall arise a King of a fierce countenance, and disposition; and one that is of a great wit, and deepe understanding; even Antiochus Epiphanes. And his power shall be great; yet shall not hee doe so great things by his power, as by his craft, and suttlety;24 And his power shall be mighty, but not by his owne power, and he shall destroy wonderfully. by both, he shall destroy wonderfully, &c. By faire, and colourable treaties,24 And by peace shall destroy many, he shall also stand up against the Prince of princes, but he shall bee broken without hand. and pretences of
peace he shall destroy many; hee shall exalt himselfe a∣gainst God himselfe; but he shall speed accordingly; for he shall be brought to a most miserable death by the im∣mediate hand of God, plaguing him for all his wicked∣nesses. And the vision which concerned the continuance of this calamity for the space of so many naturall dayes,26 And the vision of the evening, and the morning which was told, is true; wherefore shut thou up the vision, for it shall be for many dayes. as are therein expressed (namely 2300.) is true, wherefore make thou ful account of the performance of all this visi∣on; and keepe it close to thy selfe; for it will be long, ere all things contained in these severall visions shall be ac∣cordingly accomplished; even no lesse then the space of three hundred yeares. I was secretly astonished in my selfe at the consideratiō of this vision,27 And I was astoni∣shed at the vision, but none understood it. but I kept it to my selfe, (according to the command of God by his Angell) and did not reveale it unto any man. CAP. IX. 2 I Daniel understood by bookes the number of the peeces, whereof the word of the Lord came to to Ieremiah the prophet that he should accomplish seventy peeces in the deso∣lations of Ierusalem.I Daniel understood by the relation of those histories, which were written of those affaires, & times, that the number of yeares, which God had in his word to Jere∣miah the Prophet, predefined, for the continuance of the captivity of the Jewes, and the desolation of Jerusa∣lem, viz. seventy yeares, were now neare to their expi∣ration. 14 Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evill, and brought it upon us.Therefore the Lord hath let slip no oportunitie, nor no meanes, that might inflict just punishment upon us, &c. 21 Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seene in the vision at the begining, being caused to flie swiftly, touched me about the time of the e∣vening oblation.Whiles I was uttering my prayer unto God; The Angell Gabriel, whom I had seene before in my late vi∣sion, being sent immediately from God, came to me, and cheared me up, about the time of the Evening sa∣crifice. 24 Seventy weekes are determined upon thy peo∣ple, and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconcili∣ation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousnes, and to seale up the vision and pro∣phesie, and to anoint the most Holy.Within the space of foure hundred, and ninety yeares (which are seventy weekes of yeares, or seventy times seven) the people of God shall have a double blessing happily conferred upon them; that is, a free and gratious remission of sinne, and everlasting righteousnesse, by the exhibition, and by the death, and passion of Christ the Saviour, who shall fulfill all those prophesies which have
beene before of him, and shall preach to the world that saving Gospell, which is only able to give them life; and by his eternall Priesthood shall make way for his Church, to the true Holy of holies, even the glorious sanctuary of heaven. Know therefore, and understand, that from the first yeare of King Cyrus,25 Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the com∣mandement to restore and to build Ierusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weekes, and three score and two weeks, the street shall be built againe, and the wall even in troblous times. wherein his edict goes forth for the returne of the Jewes to their native country, and for the building of Jerusalem, untill the death and ac∣complishment of the great worke of the Messiah, shall bee foure hundred and ninty yeares; or seventy weekes of yeares (accounting seven yeares to a weeke;) which said number of four hundred ninty yeares, shall be thus reckoned and subdivided; fourty nine of the first yeares (which are seven weekes of yeares) shall be taken up in the building of the Temple, and restauration of Gods worship, and service: from thenceforth to the last septenary of yeares, when the Messiah shall suffer death, shall be foure hundred thirty foure years; In which time the city and the walls shall indeed bee built up, but the people of the Jewes shall undergoe manifold troubles and vexations. And after the end of the said foure hundred thirty foure yeares, from the restitution of the Temple,26 And after threescore and two weekes, shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himselfe, and the peo∣ple of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the citie, and the sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the warre de∣solations are determined. shall the Messiah bee slaine, not for any cause that shall bee found in him, but for the sinnes of men, which by that redemption, he shall expiate; neither shall he have any more part in that city; for the Romans shall soone after come, and destroy Jerusalem, and the Temple; and shall sweepe away all before them, like some violent in∣undation of a flood; and, from the beginning to the very end of this warre, there shall be grievous desolations to this people. And in the last of those septenaries,27 And hee shall con∣firme the Covenant with many for one weeke: and in the midst of the weeke he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the over-spreading of abhominations hee shall make it desolate, even un∣till the consummation, and that determined shall bee powred upon the desolate. he shall by preach∣ing of the Gospell of peace and institution of Evangeli∣call sacraments, establish and confirme his everlasting Covenant with all beleevers; and in the midst of that septenary, he shall put an end to all the legall sacrifices, and rites, by his one all-sufficient sacrifice made for the sinnes of the world; And, for the sinfull citie Jerusalem, he shall cause it to be over-runne with the abhominable Legions of the Roman victors to the utter desolation thereof, and shall not cease till all the judgements which are determined unto it, be fully consummated, and pou∣red out upon that miserable citie.
CAP. X. 4 As I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel.I Was (in vision) by the side of the great river Tigris. 5 Then I lift up mine eyes and looked, & behold a certaine man clothed in linnen, whose loines were girded with fine gold of Vphaz.And behold, the Sonne of God stood before mee, in the forme of a man clothed in pure white linnen (to sig∣nifie his perfect holinesse) and his loines were girt about with a girdle of the finest gold. His body was of a bright celestial colour; and his face glorious, and shining, like the appearance of lightning; his eyes (from which nothing can be hid) were beamie,6 His body also was like the Berill, and his face as the appearance of light∣ning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his armes, and his feet like in colour to polished brasse, & the voice of his words, like the voice of a multitude. and piercing, like flames of fire; his armes, and feet were resplēdent, like to polisht brasse, to signifie the purenesse and unquestionable perfection of his proceedings; and the voice of his words was mighty, and forcible. And when I heard the dreadfull voice of his words, I was cast (as it were) into an extasie; with my face gro∣veling to the ground; being, for the time, bereft of the use of my senses,9 Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleepe on my face, and my face toward the ground. through astonishment. But that Angell which hath the guardian-ship of the Kingdome of Persia, pleaded earnestly with mee, for these one and twenty daies, in a desire to retaine thy people somewhat longer; but loe, Michael, one of the chiefe of Angels,13 But the Prince of the Kingdome of Persia withstood me one & twen∣ty daies; but loe, Michael one of the chiefe Princes came to helpe me, and I re∣mained there with the Kings of Persia. who standeth out in favour of thy na∣tion, came to advance, and to set forward the execution of my will, concerning my Church; But I decreed for ho∣ly and just causes, to withhold my appearance from thee, for a time upon the occasion of the affaires of the King of Persia. I am induced to interpret this Prince of the Kingdome of Persia, to bee an Angell; because, in the same verse, and verse 21. Michael is termed the Prince of Israel; and one Prince of these Spirituall governments is brought in pleading against another; Neither is it probable that Christ is here meant by Michael, sith it is▪ hee who in this glorious appearance speaketh to Daniel, concerning Michael. 20 Then said he, know∣est thou wherefore I come unto thee? and now will I returne to fight with the Prince of Persia: and when I am gone forth, loe the prince of Grecia shal come.Knowest thou wherefore I came unto thee? Even least thou shouldst thinke thy selfe neglected by my ab∣sence, or delay; and now, I will returne to plead with the Angell of Persia for your remove; and when I, toge∣ther with my people am gone forth thence, the Angell that is for Greece, shall come, & prevail mightily against the Persian Kingdome. 21 But I will shew thee that which is noted in the Scripture of truth, and there is none that holdeth with me in these things but Michael your Prince.But I will shew thee the particularities of these passa∣ges, which are enrolled in the counsell of Gods everla∣sting decree; wherein, I will let thee know, that neither
the Persian, nor the Grecian Monarchy shal long subsist; but ye, my Jewish people, shall not be cut off, notwith∣standing the great malice of your enemies, neither shall ye need to feare; for Michael your Prince, and spirituall Guardian, is ready at hand to attend your safety, and to yeeld his service to mee, in your protection. CAP. XI. ALso, I, in the first yeare of Darius the Mede,1 Also, I in the first yeare of Darius the Mede, even I stood to confirme and to strengthen him. even I (though insensibly to men) stood out for the confir∣mation of that Monarchy of his. And now I will shew thee the true event of future things. Behold,2 And now will I shew thee the truth, Behold, there shall stand up yet three Kings in Persia, and the fourth shall be farre ri∣cher then they all; and by his strength through his ri∣ches he shall stirre up all a∣gainst the Realme of Gre∣cia. there shall stand up three Kings succes∣sively in Persia, after this Darius, who shall yeeld up his Kingdome to his partner, and successor; namely Cyrus, Cambyses his sonne, and Darius Histaspis; And the fourth (which shall be Xerxes the son of that later Dari∣us) shall be farre richer then they all; both through the treasures left by his father, and his owne exactions; and in the pride and confidence of his strength, and great ri∣ches, he shall stirre up all those of the East, to warre a∣gainst Grecia. But, a mighty King, even Alexander of Macedon,3 And a mighty King shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and doe according to his will. shall stand out against him, and shal over-throw the Per∣sians; and shall rule very powerfully, & with great free∣dome, and absolutenesse. And when he shall have thus overcomne,4 And when hee shall stand up, his Kingdome shal bee broken, and shall bee divided toward the foure windes of heaven; and not to his posteritie nor accor∣ding to his dominiō which he ruled: for his Kingdome shall be plucked up, even for others besides those. and continu∣ed his Monarchy for seven yeares, his Kingdome shall be broken in peeces; and shall be divided amongst his foure peeres, towards all the foure coasts of heaven; di∣vided, I say, not to his posterity, for the two sons of A∣lexander the great, (namely Alexander, and Hercules) shall shortly after die without issue; but to foure of his chiefe commanders, Seleucus shall have Babylon, Cas∣sander Macedonia, Antigonus Asia, and Ptolomee Ae∣gypt; but these Kings shall not be able to carry that sway and greatnesse, (in this subdivision of their state) which that great Monarch bore before them; For his Kingdom shall be pluckt up, and parcelled out to others besides them of his owne loines. Now, I shall tell thee what shall befall,5 And the king of the south shall be strong, and of one of his princes, and hee shall be strong above him, and have dominion. after this di∣vision; in the intercourse of the affaires betwixt two of these great sharers of the Monarchy; The King of Ae∣gypt (who is the King of the south) shall be strong, and mighty; and one other of the posterity of one of those
Princes (even of Seleucus Nicanor) shal be stronger then he, &c. 6 And in the end of yeares they shall joyne themselves together: for the Kings daughter of the South shall come to the King of the North, to make an agreement, but he shal not retaine the power of the arme, neither shall he stand nor his arme, but she shall be given up, and they that brought her, and he that begat her, and hee that strengthened her in these times.And after some yeares these two Princes, the one be∣ing the King of Aegypt, or of the South; the other, the King of Syria, or of the North, shall joyne in a league together; For the King of Aegypts daughter (viz. Bere∣nice, the daughter of Ptolomee Philadelphus) shall match in mariage with Antiochus Theos, the King of Syria; But she shall not able to maintaine, and con∣tinue either her mariage, or the league betwixt those Kings; Neither shall the said Antiochus hold firme to his ingagements, but the said Berenice shall be forsaken, and given up by Antiochus, who shall receive againe his former wife Laodice, lately cast off, (to make way to that other wedlock with Berenice) and afterwards, upon warre hereupon raised betwixt Ptolomeus Euergetes, the brother of Berenice, and Antiochus King of Syria, she shall (together which her sonne, and all her retinue) fall into the hands of Seleucus Callinicus the Sonne of her rivall Laodice, and by him be miserably slaine. 7 But out of a branch of her roots shall one stand up in his estate▪ which shall come with an armie, and shall enter into the for∣tresse of the King of the North.But out of the same stock whence she came, shall one stand up, in revenge of her death, even her brother Pto∣lomee Euergetes, which shall come with an armie, and enter into the fortresse of the King of Syria, &c. So when these things are thus dispatched in Syria, the King of Aegypt shall come backe, and returne into his owne land.9 So the King of the South shall come into his Kingdome, and shall re∣turne into his owne land. But the sonnes of Seleucus Callinicus, King of Syria, (which were Seleucus, Ceraunus, and Antiochus the great) not digesting this defeat,10 But his Sonnes shall be stirred up, and shall as∣semble a multitude of great forces: and one shall certainly come, & overflow and passe through: then shall he returne, and bee stirred up even to his for∣tresse. and slaughter, shall raise a new warre against the King of Aegypt, and gathe∣ring great forces together, shall come powerfully up to invade, and recover those parts of Syria, whence they were driven; and one of them, shall so farre prevaile by his strong incursions, that he shall passe thorough Sy∣ria and Judea, and having rescued them, shall returne to his owne fortresse. And the King of Aegypt, Ptolomee Philopator, being herewith exeedingly moved to rage,11 And the King of the South shal be moved with choler, and shall come forth and fight with him, even with the King of the North: and hee shall set forth a great multitude, but the multitude shall be given into his hand. and desire of re∣venge, shall come forth the third time, and fight with the King of Syria, viz. Antiochus the great; and shall bring a great and mighty army against him; the issue whereof shall be, that the forces of Antiochus shall bee delivered into the hands of Philopator the King of Aegypt; and Syria, by this meanes, againe recovered from him. 12 And when hee hath taken away the multitude his heart shall be lifted up, and he shall cast down ma∣ny ten thousands, but hee shall not bee strengthened by it.And when he hath had this great victory, the heart of the King of Aegypt shall be lifted up with pride; and
he shall fall to a cruell persecution of Gods people, wher∣of he shall slay many thousands, but all this weakening of his pretended enemies, shall be no strengthening of his power. For the King of Syria (Antiochus the great) shall yet againe come upon the Aegyptian with greater forces,13 For the King of the North shall returne, and shall set forth a multitude greater then the former, & shall certainly come (after certaine yeares) with a great army, & with much riches. then the former, and shall set upon him more strongly, and fiercely then before. And in those daies many of the neighbour nations shall take part against the King of Aegypt;14 And in those times there shall many stand up a∣gainst the King of the South: also the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision, but they shall fall. also many of thy people shall turne Apostates, following Onias, and to fulfill that prophesie of Esaiah (That the altar of the Lord shall be in Aegypt) shall build a Temple at Helio∣polis; but they shall faile of their hopes, and utterly mis∣carry. So Antiochus the great King of Syria, shall come,15 So the King of the North shall come, and cast up a mount, and take the most fenced cities; and the armes of the South shall not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither shall there bee any strength to withstand. and besiege the strongest cities and forts of Aegypt, and shall take them; and the forces of Aegypt shall not be able to stand against him. But the said Antiochus comming against the Aegypti∣an, shall doe what he pleases,16 But he that commeth against him shall doe accor∣ding to his owne will, and none shal stand before him, and he shal stand in the glo∣rious land, which by his hand shall be consumed. and none shall so much as resist him; and when he hath subdued that land, he shall also seize upon Judea (that glorious land of Gods cho∣sen people) and shall lay it waste by his powerfull armie. And he the said Antiochus shall addresse himselfe and the whole power of his Kingdome,17 He shall also set his face to enter with the strēgth of his whole King∣dome, and upright ones with him: thus shall he do, and he shall give him the daughter of women cor∣rupting her: but shee shall not stand on his side, nei∣ther be for him. (and that not without faire and plausible conditions) to get the full and peaceable possession of Aegypt; for which cause, hee shall give his daughter Cleopatra, to wife, unto Ptolo∣mee Epiphanes; treating with her by corrupt counsell to destroy her husband; but she shall not be mis-carryed by that wicked counsell of her father, but shall rather favor and adhere to her husband. After this,18 After this shall hee turne his face unto the Iles, and shall take many, but a Prince for his owne be∣halfe shall cause the re∣proach offered by him to cease without his owne re∣proach, he shall cause it to turne upon him. shall Antiochus King of Syria set upon more remote nations, and shall take many of them; but the Romane Governour shall soone represse him, and take away the reproach cast upon that state, by those his victories, and shall returne the reproach of a foile upon
him, in forcing him to dishonourable conditions, of dis∣claiming any right in, or challenge to Europe, for ever after. 19 Then he shall turne his face towards the fort of his owne land: but hee shall stumble and fall.Then shall he be glad to retyre himselfe to his owne forts in Syria; but even there, he shall miserably mis-car∣ry; for, whiles he shall goe about a sacrilegious pillage of his Idoll Temple by night, the inhabitants shall fall (in great indignation) upon him and his souldiers, and kill them in the place. After him, there shall succeed in his roome, a sonne of his,20 Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the King∣dome, but within few daies he shall be destroyed, nei∣ther in anger nor in battle. Seleucus Philopator, or Soter, who shall be a great exactor upon his subjects, and a spoiler of the sacred trea∣sures of the Temple; but within a few daies after this sa∣crilegious practice, he shall be destroyed by poyson, in the hand of Heliodorus, by the subornation of his bro∣ther Antiochus Epiphanes, affecting the Kingdome af∣ter him. And, in his place, shall thereupon succeed a vile and no∣toriously-wicked,21 And in his estate shall stand up a vile person to whom they shall not give the honor of the king∣dome, but he shall come in peaceably, and obtaine the Kingdome by flatteries. and infamous person, even Antiochus Epiphanes; to whom, the States of that Kingdome shall not willingly yeeld the regiment thereof, but he shal by treachery, and secret circumvention worke himselfe into the throne, so as he shall come in, without any publike opposition, aad shall by fraud, and flattery possesse him∣selfe thereof. 22 And with the armes of a flood shall they be o∣verflowen from before him and shal be broken, yea also the Prince of the covenant.But, when he is once setled in the throne, he shall as it were, with a strong deluge, beare over, and kill those that stood against him, yea even his brother Seleucus; (or, rather Ptolomeus Philometor,) who joyned in the league with him, shall be spoiled by him. 23 And after the league made with him, hee shall worke deceitfully, for hee shall come up, and shall be∣come strong with a small people.And, after the league made thus with Philometor, he shall worke deceitfully, for he shall (upon faire pretences of friendship to his nephew) come into Aegypt with a very small troup; but such pick't and able men, as by whose hands he shall doe great matters. He shall upon these pretences enter peaceably upon those territories of Syria,24 He shall enter peace∣ably even upon the fattest places of the province, and he shall doe that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers fathers, he shall scatter among them the prey and spoile, and riches, yea and he shall forecast his devices against the strong holds even for a time. which were under the com∣mand of the Aegyptian, and shall set garison souldiers in the chiefe forts, which his fathers never did before him, and he shall corrupt the souldiers with bribes; to make them his; and shall lay plots for the taking of the stron∣gest holds of Syria; when he shall finde the time fit for his purposes.
And he shall raise great forces against the King of Ae∣gypt, his nephew, the son of his sister Cleopatra,25 And he shall stirre up his power, and his courage against the King of the South with a great armie, and the King of the South shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and mightie armie: but hee shall not stand, for they shall forecast devices a∣gainst him. namely Ptolomee Philometor; and shall set upon him with a great armie; And the King of Aegypt shall raise a pow∣erfull armie to meete him; but shall not be able to stand before him; for his nobles shall devise treacherous coun∣sells against him, to betray him. Yea, his very courtiers,26 Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meate shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow, and many shall fall downe slaine. and professed servants shall be the meanes of his destruction, and the army of Antio∣chus shall defeate that of Philometor, and many of them shall be slaine. And,27 And both these Kings hearts shall be to do mischeife, and they shall speake lies at one table? but it shall not prosper, for yet the end shall be at the time appointed. when Antiochus shall have over-run a great part of Aegypt, and this warre shall seeme to have an end, and a colourable reconciliation shall be treated; both these Kings hearts (viz. of Syria, and Aegypt) shall bee secretly set to doe mischiefe to each other; and they shall make false professions of friendship, at one Table; But their designes shall not prosper; for the time appointed for the issue thereof, is not yet comne. Then shall Antiochus returne into his land of Syria,28 Then shall hee re∣turne into his land with great riches, and his heart shall be against the holy Covenant, and he shall doe exploits, and returne to his owne land. with great riches, the spoiles of Aegypt; and his heart shall be set to oppose the ordinances, and true religion of God, professed by his people; which when hee hath bloodily persecuted, he shall returne into his owne land. At the time appointed by God (which is, two yeares after the peace made) when Philometor being falne off from him,29 At the time appoin∣ted hee shall returne and come toward the South, but it shall not be as the former, or as the later. shall have de meanes to procure the aide of the Romane forces all Antiochus returne, & come towards Aegypt; but it shall not bee with that prospe∣rous successe, that he had formerly; and shall once more have afterwards. For the Roman sea-forces,30 For the ships of Chittim shall come a∣gainst him, therefore hee shall be grieved & returne and have indignation a∣gainst the holy Covenant: so shall he doe, hee shall even returne, and have in∣telligence with them that forsake the holy Covenant which lie in the Mediter∣ranean Sea, shall come against him, and drive him backe; therefore hee shall returne with sorrow enough; and shall be full of indignation against the holy religion of the Jewes; He shall even returne; and shall hold intelli∣gence with Jason, and Menelaus, and other apostates from the true religion; to doe further mischiefe to the Church of God. And the Roman governors shall aid him in this horri∣ble profanation of Gods Temple, and worship,31 And armes shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and they shall place the abhomination that maketh desolate. and both he, and they, shall take away that daily sacrifice which
God hath appointed; and they shall place abhominable idols in Gods Temple, and shall fill the holy place with Pagan-souldiers, whose worke is nothing but ruine and desolation. 34 Now when they shall fall, they shall bee holpen with a littell helpe, but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.Now when they fall from their faith and religion, they shall have but small helps to raise them up, and recover them; yet the example of the constancy of some worthy Martyrs shall be a meanes to work upon divers of them; but very many shall through their flatteries, and plausi∣ble perswasions be drawne away. 35 And some of them of understanding shall fall to trie them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time appointed.And not onely those of the meanest ranke for know∣ledge, and understanding, but even those which are no∣ted, and eminent, shall fall; wherein Gods purpose is for the tryall, and purging of his Church, that the hypocri∣ticall professors being removed, it may be pure & holy; but this tryall and affliction shall not be perpetuall; it shall bee till the end of that time which God hath ap∣pointed unto it. 36 And the King shall doe according to his will, and he shal exalt himselfe, and magnifie himselfe a∣bove every god, and shall speake marvelous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation bee accompli∣shed.And this proud Antiochus shall doe what him listeth; and shall exalt himselfe, and magnifie himselfe above all that is called God; and shall speake horrible blasphemies against him, that is the onely true God, and shall goe on prosperously in his wicked courses, till the full measure of Gods indignation be made up against him; and till the time of his severe judgement shall come, &c. He shall be a perfect Antichrist, not regarding even those gods,37 Neither shall he re∣gard the God of his fa∣thers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god, for he shall magnifie himselfe above all. which his fathers worshipped, but scorning all whatsoever deities; and shall be void of those natu∣rall affections which are commonly incident into men; being only bent to fulfill his cruell▪ and bloody desires, without all respect either to m or to God himselfe, over whom he shall, in the pride of his heart, exalt him∣selfe. 38 But in his estate shall hee honour the God of forces: and a God whom his fathers knew not, shall he honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.But yet in the seat or Temple of God in Jerusalem he shall fashionably honour Jupiter Olympius, a Grecian god, whom his fathers knew not, (as being only acquain∣ted with the Syrian deities,) him, I say, he shall honor with gifts and offerings of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and pleasant things. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds of Judea; set∣ting up the image and worship of this strange god,39 Thus shall he doe in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge, and increase with glory, and he shall cause them to rule over many, & shall divide the land for gaine. in thē all; and, those base persons, whom he shall affect, he shall advance to great glory; and shall cause them to rule over many better then themselves; and shall share the land of Judea amongst them, for a reward of their un∣worthy service.
And at the time fore-appointed by God (which shall be two yeares after the setting up of this Idolatry in Ju∣dea) shall the King of Aegypt make head against this An∣tiochus King of Syria,40 And at the time of the end shall the King of the South push at him, and the King of the North shall come against him like a whirle-winde with cha∣rets. and the King of Syria shall come against him, like a whirle-winde, &c. And having over-runne Aegypt,41 And he shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be over-throwne. he shall againe enter into the goodly land of Judea, and many Countries shall be wasted by him, &c. And the Ethiopians shall submit themselves to him, and follow him in his warres.43 And the Ethiopians shall be at his steps. But tydings shall come to him, from the East,44 But tidings out of the East and out of the North shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy and utterly to make away many. which shall trouble him; viz. that the Parthians have invaded his coasts, and so also frō the North of Aegypt, where he shall then be; that the Jewes are endevouring a revolt from him; therefore he shall goe forth of Aegypt, with much fury, and revengefull resolutions to destroy many. And he shall resolve to settle his palace in Judea be∣tweene the Mediterranean, and the dead Sea,45 And hee shall plant the tabernacles of his pa∣lace betweene the Seas, in the glorious holy moun∣taine, yet he shall come to his end, and none shal help him. even in the glorious holy mountaine of Sion; yet he shall be de∣feated, and brought at last to his end; and when he shall have diverted his forces against the Persian, he shall be shamefully foyled, and none shall helpe him. CAP. XII. ANd at that time,1 And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which standeth for the children of thy peo∣ple, and there shall bee a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a natiō, even to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the booke. when Antiochus shall have left his affaires in Judea together with his sonne, to the charge of Lysias, and shall goe himselfe, upon his expe∣dition, against the Parthians, then shall Michael stand up, that great Archangel, which standeth for the children of thy people, very seasonably, in respect of the great trouble, and affliction of that nation; which shall have beene so great, as never was since there was a people upon earth; and at that time, shall be begunne the happy deliverance of thy people, even of every of my elect ser∣vants, whose names are written in the Booke of life. But the full deliverance of all my chosen ones (which is figured by that other) shall be onely accomplished in the day of their finall resurrection,2 And many of them that sleepe in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. wherein all flesh shall arise from their graves; though to different, and contra∣ry ends; for some shall rise to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting confusion. And they that are spiritually wise to know God, and themselves, shall have meet proportion of glory,3 And they that bee wise shall shine as the brightnesse of the firma∣ment, and they that turne many to righteousnesse, as the starres for ever and ever. and shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament; but, those
which are the meanes to convert, and save others, shall be yet more glorious, and shall shine as the starres in that firmament for ever. But thou, O Daniel, keepe thou these words to thy selfe;4 But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, & seale the booke even to the time of the end: many shall runne to and fro, and knowledge shall bee in∣creased. record them safely, but, when thou hast done, seale them up, till the determined time, when they shall bee communicated to the world; at which time many shall take paines to be informed of my truth, and the state of my Church; and knowledge shall be increased. Then I Daniel looked, and behold there stood two other Angels by the side of the bancke of the river Ty∣gris,5 Then I Daniel looked, and behold, there stood other two, the one on this side of the bancke of the river, and the other on that side of the bancke of the river: one on the one side, and the other on the other side. And the one of them, as desiring to looke into these great mysteries,6 And one said to the man clothed in linnen, which was upon the wa∣ters of the river; How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? said to Christ, the great Angell of the covenant, who was the man clothed in linnen; and who stood upon the waters by Tygris, all this while; How long shall it be to the end of all these wonderfull events? And I heard Christ, the eternall Sonne of God, to to answer him againe;7 And I heard the man clothed in linnen, which was upon the waters of the river, when he held vp his right hand, and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever, that it should bee for a time, times and an halfe: & when he shall have aacōplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be fi∣nished. who lifting up both his hands to∣wards heavē, the place of his throne, sware by Himselfe, and his eternall Father, and blessed Spirit: that this cala∣mity of his Church shall be but short, even for the space of onely three yeares, and some few dayes; after which, the true worship of God, (which shall be defaced at Hie∣rusalem) shall be restored; and at the end whereof, the hostile power of Antiochus, wherewith Gods people shall have beene annoyed, and grievously vexed, shall be scattered, and utterly defeated. And I Daniel heard, but I did not distinctly and clear∣ly enough understand the answer that was given; then I besought Christ,8 And I heard, but I un∣derstood not: then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things. the Word of his Father, that he would be pleased to give me a more cleare and full understand∣ing of these things. 9 And he said, Goe thy way, Daniel, for thy words are closed up, and sealed till the time of the end.And he said; Goe thy wayes Daniel, and content thy selfe with so much as is already revealed unto thee, for the particularities of these prophesies are not to be fully conceived, till the time of the fulfilling of them. In the meane time know, that this generall affliction which shall befall my Church,10 Many shall be puri∣fied and made white and tried, but the wicked shall doe wickedly, and none of the wicked shall under∣stand, but the wise shall understand. shall have different issues, for many who are Gods elect shall be bettered thereby, and made more holy and perfect; but others againe, shall rather be hardned in their wickednesse; and none of the wicked shall regard either the judgements, or mercies of
God, or take heed to these promises or threatnings, but the godly wise will lay both of them to heart accor∣dingly. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall bee taken away by Antiochus Epiphanes,11 And from the time that the daily sacrifice shal be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand & two hun∣dred and ninty dayes. and that abomi∣nable armie of his shall seize upon the Temple, and all the holds of Judea, untill the time that the same Antio∣chus shall be forced to yeeld to, and confirme the refor∣mation made by Judas Macabeus, shall be three yeares, seven moneths, and thirteene dayes; which shall be, seven moneths and three dayes after the banishing of that shamefull idolatry of Antiochus, and the beginnings of his happy restauration of Gods true worship. Yet, even after this blessing,12 Blessed is hee that waiteth, and commeth to the thousand three hun∣dred and five and thirtie dayes. there is another worth your expecting, which is the death of this cruell Tyran, Epiphanes; that shall fall about two moneths after this later period; happy is he therefore that waiteth patiently upon God, and lives to see this effected, at the end of three yeares, and about nine moneths from the first erection of that his detestable idolatry. But goe thou thy way, and rest in peace,13 But goe thou thy way till the end bee: for thou shalt rest and stand in the lot at the end of the dayes. contenting thy selfe with so much, as is revealed to thee; and quiet∣ly hold that station, wherein God hath placed thee, in an humble and silent expectation of these events, till the very end of thy dayes. HOSEA. CAP. I. WHen God first revealed his will to Hosea,2 The beginning of the word of the Lord by Ho∣sea: and the Lord said to Hosea, Goe, take unto thee a wife of whore∣domes, and children of whoredomes: for the land hath committed great whoredome departing from the Lord. and gave to him his first charge; the Lord said unto him; Thy very person, and thine acti∣ons are propheticall; and thou therein shalt carie a type of the relation betwixt me, and the Church of Israel; Goe therefore, and for a resem∣blance of my respects to sinfull Israel, take unto thee a wife, that hath heretofore beene noted for unchastity, (howsoever now reclaimed) and beget children of that wife, which was once blemished with knowne fornicati∣on; For such is the state of Israel towards me; the land
hath beene notorious for her spirituall whoredomes; de∣parting from the Lord to abhominable idols. 3 So he went and tooke Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, which conceived and bare him a sonne.So, in obedience to the command of God; and for a signe to Israel; the prophet went and tooke to wife Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, a woman formerly noted for incontinency; which conceived, and bare him a sonne. And the Lord said unto the Prophet Hosea; Call his name Iezreel;4 And the Lord said unto him, Call his name Iezreel: for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu, & will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel. for, ere long, I will avenge upon the poste∣rity of Iehu, the blood, which he in his cruelty and ambi∣tion shed in Iezreel; which slaughter however in my just judgement, it were deservedly executed, yet as it was the act of trechery, and undue affectation of domi∣nion in the chiefe agents therein, shall be accordingly punished; for Zacharias, the sonne of Ieroboam (the last of that line,) shall after sixe moneths raigne lose both his life and his Kingdom, by the hand of Shallum; and with him, the posterity of Iehu shall be extinguished. And, from that day, I will cause the state of Israel to impaire and sincke more,5 And it shall come to passe at that day, that I wil breake the bow of Israel in the vally of Iezreel. and more; till at the last, I shall cause the Kingdome thereof to cease by the hand of Sal∣manasar King of the Assyrians, and shall utterly over∣throw all the strength of Israel, in the vally of Iezreel. Now Israel thus wasted, shall be (as it were) changed to the condition of a weake and womanish remnant;6 And she conceived againe, & bare a daughter, & God said unto him, Call her name Lo-ruhamah: for I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I will utterly take them away. for the signification whereof, the Prophes once-infamous wife conceived againe, and bare a daughter, and God said unto him; Call her name, Lo-ruhamah; not obtain∣ing mercy; for Israel, being thus given over by me, shall receive no further mercy from me, but I will utterly leave them to spoile, and dispersion; neither shall they be any more a Kingdome. 7 But I will have mer∣cy upon the house of Iu∣dah, and will save them by the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battel, by horses, nor by hors-amen.But, as for the house of Iudah, I will have mercy upon them, and repaire their Kingdome; not by any force of armes, nor by the power of any warlike assistance, but by my owne effectuall inclination of the heart of Cyrus the King of Persia, whose favour shall reestablish them in their country. Now, when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, and God had for some yeares expected the amendment of his people Israel,8 Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived and bare a son. Gomer conceived, and bare a sonne. Then said God, Call his name, Not my people; for I had before cast off Israel from being a Kingdome:9 Then said God, Call his name Lo-ammi, for ye are not my people, and I will not be your God. now I will cast them off from being at all any people of mine; I will not owne them for mine any more. 10 Yet the number of the children of Israel, shall be as the sand of the Sea, which cannot be measured nor numbred, and it shall come to passe, that in the place where it was said unto them, Yee are not my people, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the Sons of the living God.Yet, for all this, know, that I will make good that promise, which I made to Abraham, concerning the
number of his seed, no lesse innumerable then the sand of the Sea; for, to my Spirituall Israel (which are the true seed of the promise) shall this word be surely fulfil∣led; they shall be happily increased; and of them, (where∣as there was no face of a Church, no appearance of a people of God) now it shall bee clearely manifest, that they are a chosen generation, and a peculiar people unto mee. Then shall my Church be gathered out of all coasts, and out of both Israel, and Iudah,11 Then shall the chil∣dren of Iudah and the children of Israel be gathe∣red together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come up out of the land: for great shall be the day of Iezreel. out of Iewes and Gentiles shall mine elect be called, by the voice of the Gospell, and shall submit themselves to one head, Christ Iesus; and shall be gathered into one Ierusalem, which is above, the mother of us all; Oh, how great and glori∣ous shall that day be, wherein, being delivered from the servitude and captivity of sinne, they shall be adopted for the Sonnes of God, and heires of glory. CAP. II. YEe Prophets of God, say ye unto those few of Israel,1 Say yee unto your brethren, Ammi, and to your sisters, Ruhamah. which are as yet mine, and those, to whom I have yet shewed mercy, in withholding them from the wicked∣nesse of their fellowes; say thus. Lay before the face of this Church of Israel,2 Plead with your mo∣ther, plead: for shee is not my wife, neither am I her husband, let her therefore put away her whoredomes out of her sight, and her adulteries from betweene her breasts. your common mother, boldly and freely, her notorious sins, and inforce them against her; let her know that this demeanure of hers is not such, as is fit for my wife, nei∣ther will I be to her, as an husband; charge and advise her to repent of all her wickednesse, to put away all those her spirituall fornications, wherewith she hath defiled her selfe. Lest I strip her naked of all those blessings,3 Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was borne, and make her as a wildernesse, and set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst. where∣with I have endowed her, and leave her in that forlorne estate, wherein she was, ere I chose her for my Church, lest I give her up to utter desolation, and barrennesse, leaving her destitute of all hope and comfort. As for those severall persons, which appertaine unto her, and are, (as it were) the sonnes of her wombe,4 And I will not have mercy upon her children, for they be the children of whoredomes. I will not have mercy upon them in forbearing their punish∣ment; for they are bred and borne in the practice of grosse Idolatry. For their mother,5 For their mother hath plaid the harlot: she that conceived them hath done shamefully: for she said, I will goe after my lovers, that give mee my bread and my water, my wooll and my flaxe, mine oyle, and my drinke. the Church of Israel hath given her selfe over to spirituall fornications; and hath said, I will follow the fashions of the Aegyptians, and Assyrians, to whose league and friendship I have betaken my selfe;
and from whose bountifull Gods, I have received my maintenance. Therefore behold, I will take a course to prevent thy gadding after these thy adulterous mates; I will set an hedge of thornes in thy way,6 Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way with thornes, and make a wall that she shal not find her paths. restraining thee by mine af∣flicting hand, yea I will wall up her passage by the siege of an enemie. I will frustrate all her hopes and desires; so as, how∣soever she be affected to her idols,7 And she shall follow after her lovers, but shee shall not overtake them; and she shall seeke them, but shall not finde them: then shall she say, I will goe and returne to my first husband, for then was it better with me then now. and her heathenish confederates, yet she shall not bee able to make any use of them; Then, when she is throughly crossed, and humbled by my afflictions, she shall beginne to enter∣taine penitent thoughts, and shall say within her selfe; I will returne to my God, whom I have offended; for it was better with me, whiles I kept me to his sincere, and holy service then it is now. For, whiles she tooke these leud courses, she had not the grace to consider,8 For she did not know that I gave her corne, and wine, and oyle, and multi∣plied her silver and her gold, which they prepared for Baal. that it was I, her God, to whom she was beholden for all those blessings, which she injoy∣ed, even for her wine, and oyle; yea, for that very silver and gold, which she wickedly bestowed upon her idols. And, because she would not acknowledge this, there∣fore I will bereave her of those my blessings,9 Therefore will I re∣turne, and take away my corne in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wooll and my flaxe, given to cover her naked∣nesse. & will take away from her my corne, and my wine, wherewith shee was wont to be fed & refreshed, even in that season, whē she makes most account of injoying it; and will take backe my wooll, and my flaxe, wherewith I clothed her; that she may learne to know whence she received these benefits. 10 And now will I dis∣cover her leannesse in the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of mine hand.And now, I will make her unthankfulnesse, and vaine confidence openly knowne to the world, and convince her of it, before her professed confederates; and none of them shall bee able to deliver her out of my afflicting hand. 11 I wil also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast dayes, her new moones, and her Sabbaths, and all her solemne feasts.I will take from her all her solemne rejoycings, in abridging her of her feast-dayes, and new moones, and Sabbaths, wherein she was wont to make publike pro∣fessions of mirth. 13 And I will visit upon her the dayes of Baalim, wherein she burnt incense to them, and she decked her selfe with her eare∣rings, and her Iewells, and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith the LordAnd I will then call her to account for those festivi∣ties of Baalim, wherin she did idolatrously burne incense to those her false Gods, and set out her selfe, in her best dresses, for the honor of her idols, and the pleasure of her heathenish confederates, and forgat me, saith the Lord. 14 Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wildernesse, and speak comfortably un∣to her.Therefore behold, I will take all courses to reclaime
her; I will earnestly solicit her with all wholsome coun∣sell; and will bring her into captivity, and will therein, yet speake comfortably to her; sustaining her in the midst of her grievous adversity. And in her returne from thence,15 And I will give her, her vinyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a doore of hope, and she shall sing there, as in the dayes of her youth, and as in the day when shee came up out of the land of Aegypt. I will give her those vineyards, which she had deservedly lost; and will re-admit her into that vally of Achor, which is on this side Jordan, as her entrance into that hoped, and promised land of her inheritance; and there she shall rejoice, and sing, and live chearefully, as she did in her first possession of it, when shee came out of the land of Aegypt. And, in that day, thou shalt call me, Ishi, my husband;16 And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord, that thou shalt call me Ishi, and shalt cal me no more Baali. and shalt no more call me, Baali, my Lord; which name, howsoever I mis-like not in it selfe, yet, because it caries with it, the sound and remembrance of your former idol, I will not abide to be put upon me. For I doe so hate and detest those your idols,17 For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more bee remem∣bred by their name. as that I will not indure the very mention of their names, but damne them to perpetuall forgetfulnesse. And, in that day, will I ordaine, and give charge to all creatures, that they shall bee helpfull unto them,18 And in that day will I make a Covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowles of heaven, & with the creeping things of the ground, and I will breake the bow and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to lie downe safely. and forbeare any annoyance of them; even to the beasts of the field, and fowles of the ayre, and to the creeping things upon earth; and I will pacifie all enemies; and prevent all those wars, that may be in danger to be raised against them, and will cause them to dwell safely, and peaceably. And I will renew my everlasting Covenant with thee, I will be thy God, thou shalt be my people;19 And I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me in righteousnesse, and in judgement, & in loving kindnesse, and in mercies. I will be thy husband, and Saviour, thou shalt be my Church and Spouse, inseparably united unto me; to whom I will gratiously communicate my perfect righteousnesse; and whom I will imbrace in my just acceptation, in loving kindnesse, and in mercies. I will even marrie thee unto my selfe,20 I will even betroth thee unto me in faithful∣nesse and thou shalt know the Lord. in all faithfull plighting of our mutuall troth, one to another; and thou shalt finde that I am, and will be a gracious Lord unto thee. And it shall come to passe in that day, saith the Lord,21 22 And it shall come to passe in that day, I will heare, saith the Lord, I will heare the heavens, and they shall heare the earth: and the earth shall heare the corne, and the wine, and the oyle, and they shall heare Iezreel. that all creatures shall receive a command from me to contribute their severall blessings to my people; as if the heaven, and the earth, and the wine, and oyle, and my people Israel, did joyne all together both to sue for, and to conferre those benefits unto my Church, which their severall natures and condition can, and doe yeeld unto them.
23 And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, & I wil say to them which were not my peo∣ple; Thou art my people, and they shal say, Thou art my God.And I will so multiply my Church in the earth, as if I had sowne it with men; and I will so alter the estate of things, as that my mercy shall magnifie it selfe upon that people, both of Jewes and Gentiles, that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to them which were not my people, I have chosen thee to be my people; and they shall say againe in a blessed restipulation, Thou art my God. CAP. III. 1 Then said the Lord unto me, Goe yet, love a woman (beloved of her friend, yet an adulteresse) according to the love of the Lord toward the chil∣dren of Israel, who looke to other gods, and love flagons of wine.THen said the Lord; Goe, and by this act that I doe now injoyne thee, shew to Israel their sinne, and their shame, and punishment; Goe then, and make profession of love to a woman beloved of her friend, yet an adul∣teresse; and bring her home to thee; and make it known, that thou dost it in a type of that love, which the Lord beareth towards the adulterous nation of Israel, who Idolatrously lookes after other gods, and gives her selfe to intemperate courses. 2 So I bought her to me for fifteene pieces of silver, and for an homer of Barley, and an halfe ho∣mer of Barley.So I went according to the command of God, and, for no great price, I porcured such a woman (beloved of friend; though otherwise infamous, and proclamed her a type of Israel. And for that purpose, I said unto her, Thou shalt continue as a widow in my house mourning for many dayes;3 And I said unto her, Thou shalt abide for mee many dayes, thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not bee for another man, so will I also bee for thee. and shall not be permitted to play the harlot, neither will I suffer thee to have the liberty of conver∣sing with any other man. Neither will I come to thee to converse with thee, The following words are  & etiam ego ad te; the negative particle () being here to be understood to be repeated; so as the words seeme to runne) Neither will I be to thee. For the children of Israel, who have beene guilty of these spirituall fornications,4 For the children of Israel shall abide many daies, without a King, and without a Prince, and without a sacrifice; and without an Image; and without an Ephod; and without Teraphim. shall (for a just punishment of their uncleannesse) bee left desolate for many yeares; (for from the time of their deportation into captivitie till the restauration of my Spirituall Kingdome, by the Messiah, shall be sixe hundred, and foure score yeares) in which time they shall bee without a King, without a Prince, without a sacrifice; and (in short) without any face either of a Church, or cōmon-wealth, yea even of so much as a Church miserably depraved by those supersti∣tions, & corrupt services, which are now in use amongst them.
Afterward,5 Afterward shall the children of Israel returne, and seeke the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall feare the Lord, and his goodnesse in the later dayes. when the Sonne of God shall be mani∣fested in the flesh, the children of Israel, together with all my whole Church shall returne, and submit them∣selves to the worship of the true God, and of the Messi∣ah, the true Sonne, and successor of David; and shall bee holily and religiously affected to God, and his service in the dayes of the Gospell. CAP. IIII. THey breake out into horrible outrages,2 They breake out, and blood toucheth blood. and murders are so frequent, as that one overtakes another with∣out any distance, or intermission of bloodshed. Yet let no man trouble himselfe,4 Yet let no man strive, nor reprove another; for this people are as they that strive with the Priest. and lose his labour in reproving those sinnes, which he sees committed; for thy people are obstinately bent to continue in their wickednesse; they are such as will be ready to brawle and quarrell with the messengers of God, that shall indea∣vour to reclaime them. Therefore will I bring swift judgement upon thee;5 Therefore shalt thou fall in the day, and the Pro∣phet also shall fall with thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother. thou shalt speedily fall, and thy Prophets with thee; for if thou fallest in the day, thy Prophets shall not be long after thee, they shall fall in the night, and I will destroy the very Church, and Kingdome, whereto thou apper∣tainest. My people are destroyed for lacke of the true know∣ledge of me their God, and of my Law, &c.6 My people are de∣stroied for lacke of know∣ledge. They make a gaine of the sinnes of my people,8 They eate up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their iniqui∣tie. and feed themselves fat with their sacrifices; willingly giving way to their sinnes, for the benefit of their obla∣tions; and being well pleased with their gainefull iniqui∣ties. So as they shall be all too like to each other;9 And there shall bee like people, like Priests; and I will punish them for their wayes. wicked people, and wicked Priests; The peoples sinnes deserved to be punished with such Priests; and such Priests have helped to make the people thus wicked, &c. They shall eate, and yet not finde the benefit of their sustenance, in an increase of strength,10 For they shall eate and not have enough, they shall commit whordome, and shall not increase, be∣cause they have left off to take heed to the Lord. or satisfaction of appetite; they shall spend their bodies in the acts of their lust, and shall have no increase of issue; for that they cast off all care of Gods service, and their obedience to him. They are so besotted with their whoredomes,11 Whoredome, and wine, and new wine take away the heart. and drunkēnes, that they have lost all the sense of whatsoever grace, and goodnesse; and are utterly bereft of all care of God, or themselves.
12 My people aske coun∣sell at their stockes, and their staffe declareth unto them: for the spirit of whoredomes hath caus∣ed them to erre, and they have gone a whoring from under their God.My people are so sottish, as to goe unto their wooden Images, for either counsell, or prediction of future e∣vents; a peece of a sticke is their god, and their oracle; for this grosse idolatrous disposition (whereto they have long inclined) hath drawne them into these foule enor∣mities, and hath drawne them a whoring, from under their onely true God. 14 I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredomes, nor your spouses when they commit adultery, for themselves are separated with whores, and they sa∣crifice with harlots, there∣fore my people that doth not understand, shall fall.I will not so farre favour you as to punish your daugh∣ters, or your wives, when they play the harlots; whiles I respected you, and tooke keepe of you, I was ready to correct you for your mis-deeds, but now, I have given up the care of you; and will not chastise that in your chil∣dren and wives, which ye, that are the parents and hus∣bands, are willingly guilty of; for ye your selves goe a∣side with your harlots; and spend the good chare of your sacrifices, upon whores; therefore (as I before de∣nounced the sentence) the people (both one, and other) that doe not understand, nor seek after God, shall perish. 15 Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Iudah offend; and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither goe yee up to Beth-aven, nor sweare, The Lord li∣veth.But though Israel (or, the tenne Tribes) be thus mis-caried with Idolatry, yet let not the infectious example of their sinne so farre prevaile, as that Judah, and Benja∣min should bee tainted therewith; Goe not yee, O men of Judah, so farre as Gilgal (the utmost bounds of your region on this side Jordan) upon any Idolatrous pilgri∣mage; neither goe yee up to the golden calfe of Bethel; (yea of Beth-aven rather, the house of vanity) neither do ye in your solemne oathes apply my name to your idols, as to say of them, The Lord liveth. 16 For Israel slideth backe, as a back-sliding heifer, now the Lord will feed them as a lambe in a large place.For Israel is sliden backe from her profession; as some wild and stubborne heifer drawes backe to pull his necke out of the yoake; and now, the Lord will lay them open to judgement, as if some silly lamb, in a large pasture should bee exposed to the violence of some devouring beast. 17 Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone.Ephraim (or the ten tribes of Israel) have given them∣selves over to Idolatry; meddle not thou with them, O Judah; If Israel will needs offend, let him sinne without thee. 18 Their drinke is sowre, they have com∣mitted whoredome, con∣tinually, her rulers with shame doe love, Give ye.Their intemperance is odious, they have committed whoredome continually; her rulers are all for bribes, and are not ashamed to say, Give. But they shall bee miserably dispersed; the winde of Gods judgements is ready to carrie them away, upon the wings thereof,19 The winde hath bound her up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed because of their safices. into fearefull desolation; and they shal rue the time that they yeilded themselves over to those their Idolatrous sacrifices.
CAP. V. ANd give yee eare, O house of the King of Israel;1 And give ye eare. O house of the King, for judgement is toward you, because ye have bin a snare on Mizpah, & a net spread upon Tabor. for judgment is towards you; because when as my people were, according to my command, to goe up to sacrifice at Jerusalem, ye procured wait to be laid for them, both at Mispah, at mount Tabor (as a fowler would lay nets, and snares for birds) to intercept them in their way, and to draw them backe to your owne Idolatrous altars. And the revolted Israelites are profound,2 And the revolters are profound to make slaugh∣ter, though I have beene a rebuker of them all. and subtile in their plots, to draw the slaughter of the sacrifices to the place of their owne choosing; though I have not for∣borne my vehement rebukes of them all. I know Ephraim, the chiefe of those ten Tribes;3 I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me, &c. and the rest, which make up the Kingdome of Israel, are not hid from me, &c. Judah also (since he would not be warned to avoid the sinnes of Israel) shall partake of their judgements,5 Iudah, also shall fall with them. as well as of their iniquity. They shall goe with whole flockes and heards of their sacrifices, to seeke the Lord, to appease his wrath,6 They shall goe with their flockes, and with their heards, to seeke the Lord: but they shall not finde him. and recover his favour; but they shall not finde grace and ac∣ceptation at his hands, &c. They have dealt trecherously against the Lord;7 They have dealt trea∣cherously against the Lord, for they have begotten strange children, now shall a moneth devoure them with their portions. for they have trained up their children in heathenish Idola∣try; now therefore in a very short space shall they, and their land be devoured by the enemy. Make speedy preparation therefore for the war; Blow the cornet in Gibeah, the utmost border of Judah,8 Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramah, crie aloud at Beth-aven, after thee, O Benjamin. and blow the trumpet in Ramah, the utmost border of Israel; cry a loud at Beth-aven that is betwixt both; and doe thou O Benjamin, consider what thou hast to doe when the enemie is at thy backe. Even that leading tribe of Ephraim shall bee desola in the day of my vengeance;9 Ephraim shall be de∣solate in the day of rebuke, among the tribes of Israel have I made knowne that which shall surely be. I have signified unto the tribes of Israel, what they shall surely finde, how incre∣dulous soever they may be for the present. The Princes of Judah were lawlesse in their cariage,10 The Princes of Iu∣dah were like them that remove the bound; there∣fore will I poure out my wrath upon them like wa∣ter. as men that resolved not to regard those bounds, and limits, which my law hath set unto them in their callings; therefore, I will abundantly poure out my wrath upon them. Ephraim is oppressed by the Assyrian,11 Ephraim is oppres∣sed, and broken in judge∣ment; because he willingly walked after the comman∣dement. and gone to wracke; because he willingly walked after the comman∣dement of their wicked, and Idolatrous governors.
12 Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Iudah as rottennesse.Therefore will I consume Ephraim, as a moth eateth a garment; and will consume Judah, as a worme (or rot∣tennesse) consumeth wood; so will I decay them by an in∣sensible, yet certaine judgement. When Israel saw the danger, wherein he was, he made meanes to the Assyrian for help;13 When Ephraim saw his sicknesse, and Iudah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Iareb: yet could he not heale you, nor cure you of your wound. and when Ahaz, the King of Judah was in distresse, he sends to Tiglath Pile∣ser, that should stand out for him, but all in vaine; neither shall any ayd of mortall man be able to cure you of those wounds, which the hand of my justice shal inflict upō you. I will goe, saith the Lord, and will withdraw my selfe from them;15 I will goe and re∣turne to my place, till they acknowledge their offence, and seeke my face; in their affliction they will seeke me earely. not giving them any testimony of my grace, or presence; till they shall be humbled in the sense of their sinnes; and seeke to recover my favour in their af∣fliction; And if any meanes can possibly prevaile with thē it must be this; In their affliction they will seeke me in∣stantly. CAP. VI. 1 Come, and let us re∣turne unto the Lord.ANd in their seeking after me, they shall exhort, and excite one another to repentance; Come and let us returne, &c. After a very short space of our afflictions he will be gracious unto us,2 After two dayes will he receive us. and so cheare and restore us, as if he had given us a new life, &c. Then shall we attaine to the perfect knowledge of the Lord,3 Then shall we know, if wee follow on to know the Lord, his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as the raine, as the latter and former raine unto the earth. if we doe carefully and constantly persist in using those good meanes that he hath appointed; he shall then so reveale himselfe to us, as the Sunne shewes himselfe to the world, in his morning-rising; by degres ascending to his full height, and he shall come to us (not at once) but as the raine, that falls downe by drops, even as the raine of the Autumne, and Spring, that descends sweetly in soft and gentle showers. 4 O Ephraim, what shall I doe unto thee? O Iudah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodnesse is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away."O Israel and Judah, what course should I take with you? I have neglected no meanes of your good; yet there is no hold to bee taken of you: some profession you make, but it is altogether fickle, and inconstant; your appearing goodnesse vanishes away, like as a morning cloud, or an early dewe in summer. Therefore, I have wrought upon them by my prophets, denouncing judgement against them;5 Therefore have I hewed them by the Pro∣phets, I have slaine them by the words of my mouth, and thy judgments are as the light that goeth forth. I have as it were, smitten them dead by the terrible threats of my punish∣ments; and I have given them such meanes of informa∣tion, as have beene no lesse cleare then the light it selfe, that goeth forth upon the world.
For it was true inward goodnesse, and mercy,6 For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God, more then burnt offerings. that I required of them, and not the outward formalities of sa∣crifice; and the true knowledge of God was that which I called for, more then their burnt offerings. But they (like the right sonnes of Adam) have trans∣gressed the covenant, that I made with them, &c.7 But the like men have transgressed the covenant. Even Gilead it selfe (a city of the Priests) is a society of notoriously wicked men; and is full of murders.8 Gilead is a citie of thē that worke iniquitie, and is polluted with blood. Also, O Judah, corrupted Israel hath prepared an har∣vest of revenge for thee,11 Also O Iudah, he hath set an harvest for thee, when I returned the capti∣vitie of my people. in sowing the seeds of Idolatry in thee; upon occasion of that captivity whereinto thy brethren of Israel led thee, under Pekah, the sonne of Remaliah, from which I procured and wrought thy deli∣verance. CAP. VII. WHen I would have healed those ten tribes of Is∣rael, by the medicines applied by my Prophets,1 When I would have healed Israel, then the ini∣quitie of Ephraim was dis∣covered, and the wicked∣nesse of Samaria: for they commit falsehood. then did the iniquitie of Ephraim, which was the chiefe of them, and the wickednesse of Samaria (the chiefe city of Israel) breake out most outrageously, &c. They are readily obsequious to their governors in all their wicked commands;3 They make the King glad with their wick∣ednesse, and the Princes with their lies. and doe gladly sooth them up with their lyes and flatteries. They are all adulterers, burning with filthy lust,4 They are all adulte∣rers, as an oven heated by the Baker: who ceaseth from arising after he hath kneaded the dough, untill it qe leavened. as hote as an oven heated by the Baker; who forbeares medling any further with that flame, whiles the dough, that hee hath kneaded, be sufficiently leavened; in which space the heat of the oven growes to the height. In the day of the solemnity of our King, there hath beene excesse of surfet and drunkennesse,5 In the day of our King, the Princes have made him sicke with bot∣tells of wine, he stretched out his hand with scorners. whereinto the Princes have not stucke to draw in their Soveraigne himselfe; so as he hath beene miscaried to consort with them, in their wicked debauchednesse. They have given up their heart to beastly concupi∣scences,6 For they have made ready their heart like an oven, whiles they lie in waite; their Baker sleepeth all the night, in the morn∣ing it burneth as a flaming fire. wherewith they have burned like an oven whiles they lie in wait for an opportunity of fulfilling those wicked lusts; even like an oven, which the Baker hath over-night filled with kindled wood, and awaking in the morning findes flaming with a strong fire. They have burned with uncleane,7 They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their Iudges: all their Kings are fallen, there is none among them that cal∣leth unto me. and with malicious desires, and affections, and have made away with many of their governors; All their late Kings have comne to an untimely end; and indeed there was none of them that had any piety, or goodnesse, or that cared to call upon mee.
8 Ephraim, he hath mix∣ed himselfe among the people, Ephraim is a cake not turned.For Ephraim, he hath mixed himselfe with heathens, and is a professed associate with them; Ephraim is grown irresolute in his religion; like a cake that is halfe dough, and halfe baked; so is he, halfe Israelite, halfe Pagan. 9 Strangers have devou∣red his strength, and hee knoweth it not: yea, gray haires are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not.God hath sent forraine enemies to spoile, and wast his country, and to carry away his substance, yet he is not sensible of this divine hand; yea, that part of his cake which is not turned is growne musty, and hoary, and worthy to be cast out, yet he perceiveth it not. 11 Ephraim also is like a silly dove, without heart; they call to Aegypt, they goe to Assyria.Ephraim is like a silly dove; going on without wit, without heed, into that net which is spread for him; they call to Aegypt, they goe to Assyria for help; whereas these will be their bane. 12 When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them, I will bring them downe as the foules of the heaven: I will chastise thē as their congregation hath heard.I will bee as a fowler to this silly dove of Ephraim, I will spread my net upon them, and catch them in their owne devices; I will fetch them into the compasse of my judgements, as the fowls of heaven are caught in a snare; I will chastise them, in the same manner that my Prophets have fore-warned them. 13 Woe unto them, for they have fledde from me; destruction unto them, be∣cause they have transgres∣sed against me: though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies a∣gainst me.Woe be unto them, for they have forsaken me; & have vainly sought help of impotent strangers; Destruction will fall upon them, because they have willingly trans∣gressed against me; though I have done much for them, and delivered them from their enemies, yet, they have falsly and injuriously imputed these benefits to their Ae∣gyptians, and Assyrians, and not to me. 14 And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds: they as∣semble themselves for corne and wine, and they rebell against me.And though they have made shew of some great re∣pentance, and humiliation, howling and crying upon the beds of their distresse, yet they have not, with their harts unfainedly sought unto me; They can meet together to consult how to prevent, or remedy their dearth; but they neverthelesse rebell against me, who do justly send it. 15 Though I have bound and strengthened their armes yet doe they imagine mischiefe against mee.And though I have deserved well of them in streng∣thening their hands against their enemies, and giving them many victories, yet doe they requite me with ima∣gining mischiefe against me, distrusting my prower or will to save them. 16 They returne, but not to the most High, they are like a deceitfull bow.They turne to their Idols, in stead of the most High God; they turne aside like a broken bow, shooting out their arrows at a wrong marke, &c. CAP. VIII. 1 Set the trumpet to thy mouth: he shall come as an Eagle against the house of the Lord.CAll the people to warre; The Assyrian enemie shall come like an Eagle against the professed Church of God, the people of Israel, &c. 2 Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee.Israel shall fainedly cry unto me, and challenge favour
from me; and say, My God, wee make profession of thy name. They have set up Kings, but,4 They have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made princes, and I knew it not: of their silver and their gold, haue they made them Idols, that they may be cut off. ever since their defecti∣on, I have had no hand in the appointment of them; for they have not beene of the seed of David, which I have chosen, but men of their owne designing. And as they have made Princes, so they have made gods to them∣selves; for of their silver, and gold have they made them idols; as if they had aimed at nothing else, but their owne destruction. O Samaria, (the chiefe citie of Israel,5 Thy calfe O Samaria, hath cast thee off, mine anger is kindled against them: how long will it be ere they attaine to inno∣cencie.) the calfe which thou hast made and worshipped, hath failed thee; and left thee miserable; Mine anger is justly kindled against those Idolaters; How long will it be, ere they bethinke themselves of their wicked wayes, and attaine to their former innocency. The Israelites did not receive it from the Gentiles,6 For from Israel was it also; the workman made it, therefore it is not God: but the calfe of Samaria shall be broken in peeces. but they themselves made it: and since it was of their making, it cannot be God; no it is nothing but meere metall, and shall be used accordingly, for it shall be bro∣ken in pieces. And as for them, they sall even reape,7 For they have sowne the winde, and they shall reape the whirle-winde: it hath no stalke, the bud shall yeeld no meale; if so bee it yeeld, the strangers shall swallow it up. as they have sowne, they have sowne the winde, and they shall reape the whirle winde; they have trusted to vanity, and they shall receive losse, and disappointment; A famine shall come upon them; The graine that they have sowne shall yeeld no stalke; or, if it have a stalke, yet that stalke shall yeeld no eare; or, if an eare, yet that eare shall yeeld no substance of meale; or, if it doe yeeld any, the strangers (their enemies) shall swallow it up. Israel is now swallowed up of their heathenish enemies,8 Israel is swallowed up: now shall they be a∣mong the Gentiles, as a vessell wherein is no plea∣sure. now shall they be to the Gentiles as broken vessells, that are put to base uses. For they are gone up to Assyria, to seeke for help,9 For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild Asse alone by himselfe; Ephraim hath hired lovers, like a wild asse that wanders alone by himselfe in a dry desert, to seeke that water which he cannot finde; Israel hath sent out to solicit, and hire confederates. But,10 Yea, though they have hired among the na∣tions, now will I gather them, and they shall sor∣row a little for the burden of the King of Princes. though they have hired abettors among the nati∣ons, yet will I fetch them up together, to a common de∣struction; and they shall now sorrow, too late, for the charge of that tribute, that was raised upon them to pay to the great King of Assyria. Because Israel hath set up many altars in Dan,11 Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sinne, altars shall be unto him to sinne. and Be∣thel, and other high places, to sinne in their Idolatrous devotions; those altars of theirs shall be unto them both
an occasion of their sinning, and a motive of my just judgements. 12 I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they were coun∣ted as a strange thing.I have given unto them my royall Law, and have left it recorded for them; that it might bee a perpetuall di∣rection to them; but they have sleighted it, as if it were a thing that concerned them not. 13 They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eate it: but the Lord accepteth them not, now will he remem∣ber their iniquity, and vi∣site their sinnes, they shall returne to Aegypt.They have made faire shewes of religious services; they have presented me with their sacrifices, and have eaten the flesh of them, accordingly, but the Lord regardeth not these outward formalities; now hee will rather re∣member their iniquity, and take account of their sinnes; they shall returne to an Aegyptian captivity. 14 For Israel hath for∣gotten his maker, & build∣eth temples, and Iudah hath multiplied fenced cities: but I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devoure the palaces thereof.For Israel hath forgotten his maker, and, contrary to his commandment, buildeth Temples to their Idols; and Judah (contrary to the command of the same God) hath multiplied fenced cities, as trusting in his owne strength; but I will send the Assyrian, as a fire, upon the cities of Israel, and the Chaldean into the cities of Judah, and they shall consume, and waste the palaces thereof. CAP. IX. 1 Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy as other people: for thou hast gone a whoreing from thy God, thou hast loved a reward vpon every corne floore.THou hast no reason, O Israel, to rejoyce, as other peo∣ple; because thou hast provoked thy God, by thine abhominable Idolatries; thou hast loved to give an obla∣tion to thy gods, in every corn-floore, of that wheat, the plenty whereof thou hast ascribed to the bounty of thine Idols. 2 The floore and the wine presse shall not feed them, and the new wine shall faile in her.And now because they have thus abused these bles∣sings of God, it shal be just with God, to withdraw them; I will send famine, and enemies, upon them; so as their corne, and wine shall faile them; neither shall they reap their expected comfort therefrom. 3 They shall not dwell in the Lords land, but E∣phraim shall returne to Ae∣gypt and they shall eate un∣cleane things in Assyria.They shall not dwell in this land of Israel, which God hath chosen; but Ephraim shall returne to a miserable captivity in Aegypt, and shall be forced to eate uncleane and forbidden meates, in the land of Assyria, whither they shall be caried. 4 Their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourners: all that eate thereof shall be polluted, for their bread for their soule, shall not come into the house of the Lord.Their Sacrifices shall bee utterly unpleasing unto him; even like such, as are offered by the sad heart, and hand of a professed mourner; which cannot but displease that God, who requires chearfulnesse in those that approach to his altar. All that eate thereof shall be polluted; for God hath ordained that their feasts for the dead, (being ever attended with sorrow) shall not be used in the house of the Lord.
What will yee doe, O ye Israelites,5 What will ye doe in the solemne day, and in the day of the feast of the Lord? when ye are once driven into your captivity; what will yee doe in the so∣lemne feast-dayes, which God hath appointed to bee chearfully celebrated? For loe, they shall be cast out of the holy land,6 For loe they are gone, because of destruction, Ae∣gypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall burie them; the pleasant places for their silver nettles shall possesse them, thornes shall be in their Tabernacles. and lie open to destruction; Aegypt shall take them up, and make them sure enough for returning; Memphis shall be their buriall place; those pleasant closets, and cabinets, wherin they had wont to hide their treasures and jewels, shal be over-growne with nettles; their neat Tabernacles shall be covered with thornes and bryers. Ye shall know, O Israelites,7 The Prophet is a foole, the spirituall man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquitie and the great ha∣tred. that those your false pro∣phets, which have said, Peace, peace, are but fooles, and those your spirituall guides, that have mis-led you, no better then mad men; whom yet God hath justly sent a∣mongst you, as a punishment of your iniquity, and of your hating to be reformed. Ye falsly imagined that these prophets of Ephraim,8 The watchmen of E∣phraim was with my God, but the Prophet is a snare of a fowler in all his wayes, and hatred in the house of God. were sent of God, and had familiar acquaintance with him; but ye shall finde your prophets to be but as a snare of the fowler, laid in your wayes to entrape you; & such, as have procured the hatred of your God against you. They have deeply corrupted themselves,9 They have deeply corrupted themselves as in the dayes of Gibeah. as in the daies of Gibeah, of Benjamin, when the shamefull outrages of the wicked inhabitants were abated by the strength of their tribe, &c. Israel was no lesse pleasing to me, at the first,10 I found Israel like grapes in the wildernesse, I saw your fathers as the first ripe in the figge tree at her first time, but they went to Baal-Peor, & sepa∣rated thēselves unto that shame, and their abomina∣tions were according as they loved. then ripe grapes would bee to a thirsty traveller, in a drie wilder∣nesse; I esteemed your forefathers, (those fruitfull Patri∣arkes,) as the most choice, and first ripe figges: but their sinfull progenie fell off, and degenerated to Idolatry, ap∣plying themselves to the worship of Ball-Peor; and sepa∣rating themselves to that shamefull Idoll; and chose to themselves severall abhominable deities, according as they were affected to the parties, that worshipped them. As for Ephraim; their glory, which is in their strength,11 As for Ephraim, their glory shall flee away like a birde, from the birth and from the wombe, and from the conception. and number, shall flie away like a bird; since their chil∣dren shall be slaine, even from their very birth, yea, even from their conception, by their cruell enemies. And though they doe live to bee brought up to mans estate, yet will I then so bereave them,12 Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left: yea woe also to them when I depart from them. that there shall not be a man left amongst them; Yea, they cannot but expect, and feele all manner of miseries, when I remove my presence, and protection from them. Ephraim, or Israel, is like unto Tyrus,13 Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a plea∣sant place, but Ephraim shall bring forth his chil∣dren to the murderer. and next in glo∣ry thereunto; it findes it selfe planted in a rich, and good∣ly,
and no lesse fortified place, and is thereupon puffed up with a foolish-selfe confidence. But Ephraim shall finde himselfe deceived, his hopes shall faile him; his children shall fall under the hand of a murdering enemie. 14 Give them O Lord: what wilt thou give? give them a miscarying womb, and drie breasts.Give them, O Lord; what shall I intreate thee to give them? even that which they would thinke to be a judge∣ment, mis-carrying wombs and dry brests; that they may never bring forth, or nourish up children to Idolatry, or slaughter. 15 All their wicked∣nesse is in Gilgal, for there I hated them: for the wic∣kednesse of their doings, I will drive them out of mine house, I will love them no more: all their Princes are revolters.Their old wickednesse cleaves unto them still, even that which they bewrayed in their ancient incircumcision; and in their humorous desire of the change of their government, and challenge of a King, even there I began to take displeasure against them for their wicked∣nesse; which still so continues, that I am resolved to drive them out of that good land of mine; I will love them no more, for all their Princes are revolters, both from their rightfull King, and from my true religion. CAP. X. 1 Israel is an emptie vine, hee bringeth forth fruit unto himselfe, accor∣ding to the multitude of his fruit, he hath increased the altars, according to the goodnesse of his land, they have made goodly images.ISrael is a vine indeed, but a fruitlesse one, or, if hee beare fruit, it is to himselfe; for the advancing of his owne profit, and pleasure: As his wealth and abundance increaseth, so doth his Idolatry; looke how much hee is pampered with his store, so much more doth he spend upon his goodly Images. 2 Their heart is divi∣ded, now shall they bee found faulty, hee shall breake downe their altars.Their heart is divided in the choice of their gods; now shall the jealous God finde out their guiltinesse; he shall in his just indignation breake downe their altars, &c. 3 For now shall they say, we have no King, be∣cause wee feared not the Lord, what then should a King doe to us?For now they shall say, we are left destitute & helpless; we have no King to defend us; because we feared not the Lord, who was wont to be our King; therefore he hath given us up; and what then can a King doe for us? 4 They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant, thus judgement springeth up as hemlocke in the fur∣rowes of the field.They have made no conscience of their oathes, and co∣venants; but have broken them at pleasure: Yea even judgement it selfe; which should be sincere, and sacred, is grown miserably depraved, and hatefull to my people, yea, no lesse deadly then the Hemlocke of the furrowes is to the taste. 5 The inhabitants of Samaria shall feare because of the calves of Beth-aven: for the people thereof shall mourne over it.The inhabitants of Samaria shall justly feare, because those calves which they worshipped in Beth-aven, are already destroyed; for the people thereof shall mourne, expecting (as they well may) the same measure; &c.
The nobles of Samaria shall be carried to Assyria,6 It shall be also carried unto Assyria for a present, to King Iareb, Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his owne counsell as a present to that great King. Ephraim shall receive shame by his projects, and Israel shall too late be ashamed of his vaine and wicked plots. As for Hoshea, the King of Samaria,7 As for Samaria, her King is cut off as the fome upon the water. he shall be cut off, and blowne away into captivity, and shall vanish and sinke as a bubble or fome in the water. The high places also of Bethel (or Beth-aven rather) wherein Israel hath so palpaply sinned,8 The high places also of Aven, the sinne of Is∣rael, shall be destroyed: the thorne and the thistle shall come upon their al∣tars, and they shall say to the mountaines, cover us, and to the hills, fall on us. shall bee utterly destroyed; and laid so waste, that the thorne and the thi∣stle shall come up on their very altars, & the inhabitants shall be so terrified with the sword of the enemie, that they shall wish themselves under ground; and speake to the hills and mountaines, to fall upon them, and shelter them from that fury. O Israel, thou hast sinned, ever since that foule offence,9 O Israel thou hast sin∣ned from the dayes of Gi∣beah, there they stood, the battell in Gibeah against the children of iniquitie did not overtake them. that was done in Gibeah of Benjamin; thou hast continu∣ed, and aggravated their sinne; yet thou hast not beene taken downe for it; here was no warre moved by the rest of the tribes (as was in Gibeah) against those children of iniquity which did that shamefull act upon the Levites concubine. But this shall be no aduantage to them;10 It is in my desire that I should chastise them, and the people shall be gather∣ed against them, when they shall binde them∣selves in their two fur∣rowes. For it is my purpose to take their punishment into mine owne hands; I will cause the Assyrians to bee gathered together a∣gainst them; when I shall correct them for their two calves in Dan and Bethel; betwixt the worship thereof, and my service, they have halted, as an oxe that passeth betwixt two furrowes. Ephraim is as a delicate young heifer,11 And Ephraim is an heifer that is taught and loveth to tread out the corne, but I passed over upon her faire necke, I will make Ephraim to ride, Iudah shall plow, and Ia∣cob shall breake his clods. that loves to treade out the corne, when it is in the floore, but cannot abide to draw the plough, or harrow; hee loves to injoy blessings, but not to earne, and worke them out; but I did put my hand upon the faire necke of Ephraim, and finde this heifer fit enough for the yoke; I will put all my people to those services they aret fi for; If neede be, I will put Ephraim to the saddle, Judah to the plow, Israel to the harrow. Give your selves to all holy & conscionable endevors;12 Sow to your selves in righteousnesse, reape in mercy, breake up your fallow ground: for it is time to seeke the Lord till he come, and raine righte∣ousnesse upon you. sow to your selves in holinesse, and righteousnesse; and reape mercy and loving kindnesse from the Lord; Break up the fallow grounds of your hearts, by a true, and seri∣ous repentance; For it is time for you to turne to the Lord, and to seeke to recover his favour; so farre, as that he may raine upon you the showres of his grace, and mercy, whereby ye may appeare righteous in his sight.
13 Yee have plowed wickednesse, ye have reap∣ed iniquitie, ye have eaten the fruit of lies.But, alas, contrarily, yee have plowed up deepe fur∣rowes of wickednesse, and have reaped a large crop of in∣iquity; ye have fed your selves with the lying hopes of your vaine selfe-confidence, &c. 14 As Salman spoiled Beth-arbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children;As Salmanasar spoyled Beth-arbel, amongst other the cities which he conquered; wherin he was so cruell, as to dash the mother, and children one against another; So shall the Idolatry wrought in Bethel, bring the like destruction upon you,15 So shall Bethel doe unto you, because of your great wickednesse: in a morning shall the King of Israel be utterly cut off. because of your great wicked∣nesse; in one morning shall the King of Israel, be utterly cut off; there shall no long time neede for the accom∣plishment of this judgement. CAP. XI. 1 When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my Sonne out of Aegypt.WHen Israel was but newly entred into league and covenant with me, then I loved him; and called that Sonne of my love out of the bondage of Aegypt, by the hands of Moses and Aaron. 2 As they called them, so they went from them: they sacrificed ūto Baalim.As those their holy leaders, and their insuing succes∣sors called them; So they perversely turned their backes upon them; and sacrificed to Baalim, &c. 3 I taught Ephraim al∣so to goe, taking them by their armes: but they knew not that I healed them.I did with Ephraim, as mothers, or nurses doe by their little infants. I taught him to goe; holding him by the arme, whiles he moved his feet; but they considered not the great favours that I did them, and did neither answer, nor acknowledge my mercies. I drew them unto me by the strong perswasions of rea∣son, and with bonds of love; and I did to them, as a kind husbandman to his well-respected teame; I tooke off the yoke from them, and I laid meat unto them;4 I drew them with cordes of a man, with hands of love, and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jawes, and I laid meat unto them. I with∣drew their burdens, and refreshed them with mercies. 5 He shall not returne into the land of Aegypt, but the Assyrian shall bee his King, because they re∣fused to returne.He shall not goe any more into the land of Aegypt, to seeke aid; but the Assyrian shall surprise him, and be his King; because they refused to returne to me. 7 And my people are bent to backsliding from me, though they called thē to the most high, none at all would exalt him.My people Israel are bent to backe-sliding from mee; although my Prophets called unto them, and perswaded them to turne unto the most high; yet they would not obey, nor be won to exalt and glorifie their God. 8 How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Ad∣mah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repē¦tings are kindled together.O Ephraim, how shall I carry my selfe towards thee? If I shold regard thee according to thy demerits, I shold give thee up, O Israel, to my fearfullest judgements; but how can I endure to deale thus with thee? how can I make thee a sad spectacle of my wrath, like those five ci∣ties of Sodom, which were consumed with fire from hea∣ven? Surely it goes against my heart to thinke thus to
proceed with thee, I cannot but revoke that dreadfull sentence which I was ready to passe against thee. For I am a gracious and immutable God;9 I will not execute the fiercenesse of mine anger, I will not returne to de∣stroy Ephraim, for I am God and not man, the holy One in the midst of thee: and I will not enter into the citie. and not a man subiect either to passion or change; I that am the ho∣ly one of Israel am yet still in the midst of thee, by my favour, and thy (howsoever impared) worship: and I will not turne to thee in the extremity of my wrath, to consume thee. Those of my Church, whom I shall choose from both Jewes, and Gentiles, shall walke holily and obediently,10 They shall walk af∣ter the Lord: Hee shall roare like a Lyon: when he shall roare, then the chil∣dren shall tremble from the west. in the wayes of God; He shall send forth the strong, and mighty voice of his Gospell; and shall call all his elect ones; and when hee shall powerfully speake unto their hearts, his children shall awfully submit themselves to him, even from the utmost ends of the world. They shall come with an awfull reverence unto God,11 They shall tremble as a bird, out of Aegypt: and as a dove out of the land of Assyria: and I will place them in their houses, saith the Lord. and shall hasten their addresse unto him; upon the wings of their holy desire, out of all lands, even out of Aegypt, and Assyria, and all those parts where they have beene most distressed; and I will establish them in my Church, saith the Lord. In the meane time Ephraim makes a profession of my name, but false and counterfeit;12 Ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: but Iudah yet ru∣leth with God, and is faithfull with the Saints. and the house of Israel serves me, but in hypocrisie; as being full of Idolatry, & section; But Iudah, are yet, had not swerved from God, but continued faithfull, as the true children of those holy Patriarkes. CAP. XII. EPhraim pleaseth himselfe with following vaine and idle hopes; he daily addes to his owne disappointment,1 Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the East winde, he daily increaseth lies and desola∣tion, and they doe make a covenant with the Assyri∣ans, and oyle is caried into Aegypt. and desolation; they project how to make themselves strong by their leagues with the Assyrians; and they send of their most precious presents to insinuate with the Aegyptians. Neither is Judah altogether free;2 The Lord hath also a controversie with Iudah, & will punish Iacob accor∣ding to his waies: accor∣to his doings will hee re∣compence him. God hath just quar∣rells against this better part of the posterity of Jacob, and will proceed against them according to their doings. Israel is a crafty deceitfull merchant; he makes use of false balances; and loves to oppresse his brethren.7 He is a Merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand. And Ephraim said; yet I am become exceeding rich;8 And Ephraim said, yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance: in all my labours they shall finde none iniquitie in me, that were sinne. I have prospered wondrously in the increase of my sub∣stance;
and yet, I have so carried the matter, that in all my labours, & contracts, no man can accuse me of iniqui∣tie, or say, herein thou hast sinned. 9 And I that am the Lord thy God, from the land of Aegypt, will yet make thee to dwell in Ta∣bernacles, as in the dayes of the Solemne feast.And I that am the Lord thy God, and have so approved my selfe ever since I brought thee out of the land of Ae∣gypt, doe yet offer in my long suffering to continue thy peaceable habitation, and to give thee oportunity of ce∣lebrating thy feast of Tabernacles as thou wert wont. I have also sent my Prophets unto thee, and have by them declared my will,10 I have also spoken by the Prophets, & I have multiplied visions & used similitudes, by the mini∣stery of the Prophets. and purposes towards thee, and have given them visions, and revelations concerning thee: and have used all cleare and familiar meanes of thine instruction by them. 11 Is there iniquitie in Gilead? surely they are va∣nitie, they sacrifice bul∣locks in Gilgal, yea their altars are as heapes in the furrows of the field.Doe ye thinke there was more iniquitie in the Gilea∣dites that are already carried away captive, then in you? Surely the rest of Israel is in the same case; they all lie open to the same judgement; they sacrifice to their idols, in Gilgal also; yea their altars are as frequēt every where, as the clods are in the furrowes, of the fields. 12 And Iacob fled into the countrey of Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheepe.I have not deserved this at their hands, I have beene alwayes graciously ready to preserve them; I protected Jacob, when he fled into the country of Syria; where Is∣rael your father served Laban for a wife; and, for a wife kept the sheepe of that hard father in law. 14 Ephraim provoked him to anger, most bitter∣ly: therefore shall he leave his blood upon him, and his reproch shall his Lord returne unto him.Notwithstanding all the mercies of God, both late, and ancient, Ephraim provoked him to anger, most grie∣vously; therfore shall God lay upon him the punishment of his own sinne; and that reproch which his wickednesse hath cast upon God, will God justly returne upon E∣phraim. CAP. XIII. 1 When Ephraim spake, trembling, he exalted him∣selfe in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died.EPhraim was once very awfull to the rest of his fel∣lowes, so as whiles he spoke, the other tribes were ready to tremble; but when he once fell to his Idolatry, in worshiping Baal, hee lost his reputation, and no rec∣koning was made of him. 2 They say of them; let the men that sacrifice kisse the calves.They say to them; let those that would sacrifice to God, doe honor to those calves of Dan and Bethel, in which God is worshiped. 5 I did know thee in the wildernesse.I did not onely bring thee out of the land of Aegypt, but I bestowed many favours upon thee in the wilder∣nesse, &c. 6 According to their pasture, so were they filled, they were filled and their heart is exalted.According to the height of their feed, so was their pamperednesse, and pride; they were no sooner filled,
then their heart was exalted; &c. O Israel,9 O Israel, thou hast de∣stroyed thy selfe, but in me is thine help. I have not beene wanting to thee in my fa∣vours, and blessings; thou canst not taxe me of any defect of mercy; but thou wouldest not hearken to me, but wouldest needs procure thine owne destruction; so as thy misery and undoing is thine owne; all the hope and re∣mainder of thine help and salvation, is in, and from me. I will be thy King;10 I will be thy King: where is any other that may save thee in all thy cities, and thy judges of whom thou saidst, Give me a King and Princes. in vaine hast thou trusted to any o∣ther; thou hast found it to thy sorrow; where is there any other in all thy cities, that can deliver thee; where are those judges of thine, those great rulers, of whom thou saidst; give me a King, and Princes? What were they, what are they able to doe for thee? Thou seest how I gave thee thy first King, Saul,11 I gave thee a King in mine anger, and tooke him away in my wrath. in mine anger, and now take away thy last King Hoshea, in my wrath. Let no man be offended that I tooke not a sudden re∣venge on Ephraim;12 The iniquitie of Ephraim is bound up: his sinne is his. I have bundled up all his sinnes toge∣ther, and trussed up his iniquities, for a meet day of pu∣nishment. His calamities shall come upon him,13 The sorrowes of a travelling woman shall come upon him, hee is an unwise son, for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children. as the paines of child-birth upon a woman; It is his fault, and his mise∣ry that he sticks so long in the birth; were Ephraim wise, he would make his peace with God; that he might by his mercy bee delivered fully from those miserable straits wherein he is. Let them repent,14 I will ransome them from the power of the grave: I will redeeme them from death; O death I will bee thy plagues: O grave, I wil be thy destru∣ction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes. and I will deliver them from all their distresses; yea, even from death it selfe, and from the power of the grave. O death, I will vanquish & consume thee; O grave, I will destroy thee for ever, and will never repent me of that victory. But now, as the case stands with Ephraim,15 Though he be fruit∣ful among his brethren, an East-wind shall come, the winde of the Lord shall come up from the wilder∣nesse, and his spring shall become drie, and his foun∣taines shall be dried up: hee shall spoile the treasure. though hee be fruitfull among his brethren, yet I will fetch the As∣syrian upon him; who, like an East-winde from the wil∣dernesse, shall blast him; and utterly dash all his hopes, and carry away all his treasures, &c. CAP. XIIII. GOe unto him with humble submission,2 Take with you words and turne to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all in∣iquity, and receive us gra∣ciously: So will we render the calves of our lips. and turne to the Lord, and say; O God, forgive all our iniquity, and receive us to mercy; so will we offer up unto thee the sacrifices of our thanksgivings.
3 Ashur shall not save us, wee will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the worke of our hands, ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherlesse findeth mercy.We will no more trust to the King of Assyria, to save us; we will no more trust to our owne munition, and warlike preparation; neither will wee any more make Idols of the works of our owne hands; for now we finde and professe, that thou only art that God, in whom the fa∣therlesse and distressed can, and shall finde redresse, and mercy. 5 I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the Lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.I will be comfortable and refreshing unto Israel, even as the dewe is to the mowne grasse; so as hee shall grow up in beauty, as the lily, and in strength, and height, as the Cedar in Lebanon. 7 They that dwell un∣der his shadow, shall re∣turne: they shall revive as the corne, and grow as the vine, the sent theraof shall be as the wine of Lebenon.They that dwell under the shadow of my Church shall there finde comfort, and rest; they shall grow up fruitful∣ly, as the corne in a well tilled field, and sprout forth, as the most generous vine, to the great joy & contentment themselves, and others. I shall be to thee as a tall, and shadie firre tree; and whatsoever fruit thou yeeldest,8 I am like a greene firre tree, from me is thy fruit found. it shall bee of my giving; thou shalt be beholden to me for it. IOEL. CAP. I. 4 That which the Palmer worme hath left, hath the Locust eaten; & that which the Locust hath left, hath the cankerworme eaten; & that which the canker∣worme hath left, hath the caterpiller eaten.THe famine wherewith I have plagued Israel is very grievous; which I have caused through the strange increase of noysome wormes in the land, all which have as it were agreed to waste all the fruites of the earth; for that which the Pal∣mer worme hath left, the locust hath consumed; & if the locust hath left any thing, the cankerworme shall de∣voure it, &c. every one of these shall come after other, in a succession of spoyle; and all of them shall destroy the fruits of the land. 5 Awake ye drunkards, and weepe and houle all yee drinkers of wine, be∣cause of the new wine, for it is cut off from your mouth.Even ye drunkards, which are wont to be most insen∣sible of judgements, shall now have reason to howle, and mourne; because the hopes of your new wine is utterly cut off, even, when it was ready to fall into your mouthes; you vintage is forestalled by these consuming vermine, in the very height of your present expectation. 6 For a nation is come up upon my land, strong and without number, whose teeth are the teeth of a Lyon.For there are infinite troupes of noysome vermine
comne upon my land, strong, & numberlesse, which shall so devoure the fruite thereof, as if they had the teeth of Lyons, &c. The branches thereof appeare white by reason that the barke is eaten off from the boughes.7 The branches thereof are made white. O destressed Judea,8 Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth, for the husband of her youth. doe thou mourne and lament for this plague of famine, as a virgin girded with sackcloth, mourneth for the death of her betrothed husband. The earth yeeldeth not so much,9 The meate offering and the drinke offering is cut off from the house of the Lord; the Priests the Lords ministers mourne. as wherewith to make a meate offering, or drinke offering unto the Lord; the corne, and wine, and oyle is so utterly consumed; so as the Priests, the Lords ministers, have just cause to mourne. So also verse 10.11.12.13. Alas, wretched men that we are,15 Alas for the day: for the day of the Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shal it come. wee doe already in∣dure much misery frō rhe afflicting hand of God, but yet more is comming; Oh (woe to us) how shall we be able to abide the extremity of those his plagues which are at hand- O Lord, to thee will I cry,19 O Lord to thee will I cry: for the fire hath de∣voured the pastures of the wildernesse, and the flame hath burnt all the trees of the field. who onely art able to re∣dresse this wofull estate of ours; for the scorching drought hath devoured all the herbage of the wildernes; and the fiery beames have burnt up all the trees of the field. So also verse 20. CAP. II. O Yee Priests and Levites of the Lord,1 Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an a∣larme in my holy Moun∣taine, let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord com∣meth, for it is nigh at hand? call ye the peo∣ple together in Zion; give warning to all the inhabi∣tants of Judea, of that sad and fearefull day of revenge, which the Lord denounceth against them; for it is nigh at hand. A day of heavinesse and sorrow,2 A day of darkenesse and of gloominesse, a day of clouds and of thicke darkenesse, as the morning a spreadeth upō the moun∣taines: a great people and a strong, there hath beene never the like, neither shal be any more after it, even to the yeares of many ge∣nerations. a day of utter dis∣comfort, such a one, as is quite over-spred with hor∣rour and darknesse, like a gloomy morning which hides the light of the Sunne from all beholders; or to a world of noysome creatures, in strong & mighty bands, comne upon your land to devoure it; such as the like hath never beene, never shall be in succeeding generations.
3 A fire devoureth be∣fore them, and behind them a flame burneth: the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and be∣hinde them a desolate wil∣dernesse, yea, and nothing shall escape them.In the fore-part of their troupes, they devoure all be∣fore them, like a fire; and behinde them all lookes as if the flames had burnt it up; where they have not yet been, the land lookes richly, & plentifully, and pleasantly, like to the garden of Eden; but where they have passed, it lookes like a desolate wildernesse, all is consumed, no∣thing can escape them. 4 The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses, and as horsemen so shall they runne.Their appearance shall be terrible to the people, like to the appearance of horses, armed for the warres; and they shall hastily over-runne the land, as if they were horse-men that ranne in their full speed. 5 Like the noise of Chariots on the tops of mountaines shall they leape.The noyse which they shall make in their swarmes, and motions, shall be like to the noyse of chariots on the tops of mountaines, &c. 7 They shall runne like mighty men, they shall climbe the wall like men of warre, and they shall march every one on his wayes, and they shall not breake their rancks.There shall be no place free from their assault and an∣noyance; they shall creep up the walls of the cities; as va∣liant men are wont to scale them in a siege; they shall march on in those wayes which God hath appointed them, as if they were men trained to the warres. So also verse 9. 8 And when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.They shall be such enemies, as the sword cannot bee able to destroy; & such, as if they do fall upon the sword, yet their lightnesse shall deliver them from hurt. 10 The earth shal quake before them, the heavens shall tremble, the Sunne and the Moone shall bee darke, and the starres shall withdraw their shining.They shall come upon you in such number as shall a∣maze, and affright the world; and shall by their infinite and thicke swarmes, obscure the very light of the Sunne, and Moone, and starres. 11 And the Lord shal utter his voice before his army, for his camp is very great: for he is strong that execu∣teth his word, for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible, and who can abide it?And the Lord shall, as the great Generall of these his forces, incourage, and stirre them up to this their ex∣ecution; whereto they shall be inabled by him, both in their number, and power to performe it. Do not rest in an outward ceremony of sorrow, viz. in the rending of your garments,13 And rent your heart and not your garments: & turne unto the Lord your God. but see that yee humble your hearts and soules before God, &c. 14 Who knoweth if he will returne and repent, and leave a blessing behind him, even a meate offering and a drinke offering, unto the Lord your God.Who knoweth whether your humiliation may not yet prevaile with him, and cause him to deject, and take off his judgements; and in stead thereof, to bestow a bles∣sing of plenty upon us; So as there may be both matter and occasion of the sacrifices of our thanksgiving unto the Lord.
Let al sorts and degrees & ages be assembled together,16 Gather the people, sanctifie the congregatiō: assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that sucke the brests, let the bridgroome goe forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. for a solemne humiliation; both the ancient, and the chil∣dren, & sucklings; let all be afflicted with a generall absti∣nence; and let the Bridegroome and the bride forbeare the pleasures of their new-made mariage & shut up their wedding with mourning. Let the Priests, the ministers of the Lord, weepe,17 Let the Priests, the ministers of the Lord, weepe betweene the poarch and the altar. and mourne, even in that place, where all sorrow and lamen∣tation was wont to be interdicted, betweene the poarch and the altar, &c. Then will the Lord be graciously affected towards his people, and, in a mercifull compassion of them,18 Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pittie his people. will call off those evills, which they groane under. But I will remove farre off from you,20 But I will remove farre off from you the Northern armie, and will drive them into a land, barren and desolate, with his face toward the East sea, and his hinder part to¦wards the utmost sea, and his stinke shall come up, and his ill savour shall come up, because he hath done great things. this mighty armie of noysome creatures, which came upon you, from the Northern coasts; and will drive them into the dry, and barren wildernesse, which lies towards the South, yea I will disperse them into the foure windes, so as the fore-part or van-gard of them shall flie to the East sea; and the hinder part, or the reare shall bee carried to the West-sea; And the stinke of this vermine, where it shall fall, shall be exceeding offensive and contagious, &c. Be comforted againe, O ye beasts of the field, for now that this plague is removed,22 Bee not affraid yee beasts of the field, for the pastures of the wildernesse doe spring. the grasse of your pastures begins to spring againe, &c. And he will cause the raine to descend upod the earth,23 And hee will cause to come downe for you the raine; the former raine, and the later raine in the first month. in all fit seasons; both the former raine (which is in au∣tumne after your seed is cast into the earth;) and the la∣ter raine, which is in the spring in March or Aprill, for the filling of the eare. Neither will I content my selfe with the abundance of my temporall blessings conferred upon you,28 And it shall come to passe afterward, that I will powre out my spirit upon all flesh, and your Sonnes and your daughters shall prophecie: your old men shal dreame dreames; your young men shall see visi∣ons. but I will poure upon you my spirituall gifts, also; and will, in the daies of the Gospel, give you plentifull revelations; filling your sons and daughters, your young men, and old, with a large measure of the true sauing knowledge of me and my Name; as also inriching them with miraculous graces and abilities by the descending of my Spirit upon them; induing them with power of tongues, and with the gifts of Prophesie. So also verse 29. And after those times, both before the destruction of Jerusalem, and before the last judgement,30 And I will shew wonders in the heavens, and in the earthblood, and fire, and pillars of smoake. I will shew
wonders, and fearfull signes, both in heaven, and in earth; the heavens shall seeme red, and fiery, and vaporous. 31 The Sunne shall bee turned into darknesse, and the Moone into blood, be∣fore the great and the ter∣rible day of the Lord come.The Sunne shall leese his light, and shall seeme uterly darkened, the Moone shall be turned into the colour of of blood, before that great and terrible day of the Lord come. 32 And it shall come to passe that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be delivered, for in mount Zion and in Ierusalem shall bee de∣livernce, as the Lord hath said, and in the rem∣nant, whom the Lord shall call.Neither is there any way, or meanes to escape the ter∣riblenesse of this judgement, but by beleeving in the Lord Christ, and calling upon his name; for in the Church of God shall onely Salvation be had, and delive∣rance from the wrath to come, which salvation shall lie open, both to the beleevers of the Gentiles, and to the remnant of those Jewes, whom the Lord shall call. CAP. III. 1 For behold in those dayes, and in that time whē I shall bring againe the captivitie of Iudah and Iervsalem.FOr, behold in those dayes of my Gospell, wherein I shall restore my Church, and deliver it from the spiri∣tuall captivity wherein it hath lien destressed. 2 I will also gather all nations, and will bring them downe unto the val∣lie of Iehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people, and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land,I will gather all nations and will bring them into the face of my Church; and argue there with them, for the wrongs they have offered to my chosen servants, whom they have persecuted in their severall nations; and made havocke of mine inheritance. And they have scornfully, and proudly tyrannized over my people,3 And they have cast lots for my people, and have given a boy for a har∣lot, and sold a girle for wine, that they might drinke. and have cast lots upon them, as some sleight commodities for sale, or exchange; and have gi∣ven a boy for the price of their lust, to an harlot; and sold a girle onely for a cup of wine, to drinke. 4 Yea, & what have you to doe with me, O Tyre and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine, will ye render me a recompence; and if yee recompence me, swiftly, and speedily will I returne your recompence upon your owne head.And for you, O yee neighbour nations of Tyre and Zidon, and all the coast of Palestine, what can ye have to plead for your selves with me? are yee able to make me amends for the wrongs yee have done mee? or doe ye thinke thus to recompence unto me the hard measure which you may pretend to have received from me? Sure∣ly if you thinke thus to recompence mee with injuries to my servants, I shall speedily returne unto you the due re∣compence of your sinnes, upon your owne heads. 10 Beate your plow∣shares into swords, and your pruning hookes into speares, let the weake say, I am strong.Turne the instruments of your husbandry into wea∣pons of warres; and let those that are weake and fearefull pull up their spirits and rouze up their courage.
Thy Saints and Angells.11 Thy mighty ones. Let the heathen bee stirred up,12 Let the heathen bee wakened, and come up to the valley of Iehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge al the heathen round about. by my summons and come together into the valley of judgement, which is in the face of my Church; there will I shew my selfe a just and unpartiall retributor of all the wrongs of the hea∣then, round about. Put ye in execution,13 Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come, get you downe, for the presse is full, the fattes overflow, for the wicked∣nesse is great. those iudgements which I have awarded to the enemies of my Church; for the time of my vengeance is now fully comne; their wickednesse is comne to the height. Oh what multitudes, what infinite multitudes of wick∣ed sinners shall then, and there be adjudged to torments,14 Multitudes, multi∣tudes in the valley of de∣cision, for the day of the Lord is neere in the valley of decision. in that place of the great and last judgement; For that great day of the Lord is neare at hand; the terror where∣of shall be unspeakeable in that dreadfull place of judi∣cature. See chapter 2.31.15 The Sunne and the Moone shall bee darkned, &c. Christ the Lord shall passe a most fearfull sentence of judgement from heaven upon the ungodly;16 The Lord also shall roare out of Zion, and ut∣ter his voice from Ierusa∣lem, and the heavens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel. which shall be so terrible, that even the heavens and the earth shall shake therewith; but the Lord will be a gracious, and mercifull redeemer, and comforter to his chosen ones, in the midst of all those terrors. So shall ye mine elect know,17 So shall yee know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion my holy mountaine: then shall Ierusalem bee holy, and there shal no strangers passe through her any more. that I am the Lord your God, who dwell in the highest heaven (figured by Zion in earth;) Then shall my Saints be gathered into that celestiall Jerusalem, which is above, into which no un∣cleane thing can, or shall enter. And it shall come to passe in those last times,18 And it shall come to passe in that day, that the mountaines shall drop downe new wine, and the hills shall flow with milke, and all the rivers of Iudah shall flow with wa∣ters, and a fountaine shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim. wherein the Gospell shall be published, that God shall give plenty of spirituall nourishment unto his Church; so as every part thereof shall abound with effectuall helpe, and meanes of salvation; and from thence, shall flow forth those waters of like which shall water and refresh the soules of all that pertaine to the election of God. As for those of Aegypt, and Edom,19 Aegypt shall be a de∣solation, and Edom shall be a desolate wildernesse, for the violence against the children of Iudah, be∣cause they have shed inno∣cent blood in their land. and all other the professed enemies of his Church, they shall be confound∣ed and brought to nought; for the violences which they have offered to Gods children; and for the innocent blood which they have shed, in their cruell persecutions.
20 But Iudah shall dwell for ever, and Ierusa∣lem from generation to generation.But the elect of God shall dwell for ever in his holy habitation; and after their translation from the Church militant on earth, shall raigne everlastingly in the glory of heaven. 21 For I will cleanse their blood, that I have not cleansed, for the Lord dwelleth in Zion.For I will cleanse, and purge away the sinnes of those mine elect, which I had not before done away; and will deliver the chosen of the Gentiles from those iniquities wherewith they were polluted; which done, and the number of the elect being fully made up the Lord shall dwell everlastingly with them in his heavenly Zion. AMOS. CAP. I. 1 The words of Amos, who was among the heard-men of Tekoah, which he saw concerning Israel in the dayes of Vz∣ziah King of Iudah, and in the dayes of Ieroboam the Sonne of Ioash King of Is∣rael, two yeare before the earthquake.THE words of Amos, who was one of the heard-men of Tekoah in the land of Judah, which hee received from God, concerning the ten tribes of Israel especially; in the dayes of Vzziah King of Judah (who was noted for his presumption in daring to offer incense in the Temple,) and in the dayes Jeroboam the son of Joash King of Is∣rael; two yeares before that famous earth quake which fell out in the dayes of Vzziah. 2 And he said, the Lord wil roare from Sion, and utter his voice from Ierusalem, and the habi∣tations of the Shepheard shall mourne, and the top of Carmel shall wither.And he said; The Lord, who hath hitherto kept him∣selfe silent, and exercised his patient long suffering, shall now shew himselfe terrible to the world; his judgements shall no lesse affright the people, then the roaring of a Lyon shal terrifie the beasts of the field; so as his drought shall scorch the pastures, & cause the fruitfullest grounds to wither. 3 Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Damascus, and for foure I will not turne away the punishment thereof, be∣cause they have threshed Gilead, with threshing instruments of yron.Thus saith the Lord, for the manifold trasgressions of Damascus I will surely punish that wicked city and peo∣ple; because they have grievously oppressed Israel, and especially the nearest border thereof, which is Gilead. 4 But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael which shall devoure the palaces of Benhadad.But I will send a destruction upon the house of Haza∣el, the King thereof; which shall not rest in his person, but shal wast and devoure the palaces of his sonne Benhadad;
and this will I cause to be done by the hands of the King of Assyria. By whose power I will breake downe the forts of Damascus,5 I will breake also the barre of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from the plaine of Aven, and him that holdeth the scepter frō the house of Eden, and the people of Syria shall goe into captivitie unto Kir, saith the Lord. and cut off the inhabitants of the borders of Syria; and slay Rezin their King, from his palace of plea∣sure; and the people of Syria shall goe into captivity into Kir. as 2 Kings 16. For the many & great offences of the Philistims,6 Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Gaza, and for foure I will not turne away the punish∣ment thereof: because they caried away captive the whole captivitie, to deliver them up to Edom. & par∣ticularly, of their city Gaza, I wil be sure to inflict punsh∣ment upon them; because they carried away my people into an absolute and remedilesse captivity to the Edo∣mites. I will therefore plague them accordingly;7 But I will send a fire on the wall of the Gaza. for I will send the sword, and the fire of the enemie upon all the land of the Philistims, and specially, upon the walls of Gaza, &c. And I will cut off the inhabitants of all the severall cities thereof;8 And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holdeth the scepter from Ashkelon, and I will turne mine hand against Ekron, & the rem∣nant of the Philistimes shal perish, saith the Lord God. and the King of that people will I cut-off from his royall palace, and I will set my selfe against all the strong holds; and shall utterly extinguish the remain∣der of the Philistins, saith the Lord. And remembred not that friendly league,9 And remembred not the brotherly covenant. and cove∣nant, that was betwixt Hiram their King, and Salomon. Because he hath beene ever too forward to pursue the posterity of Jacob (brother to their ancestor Esau) in an hostile fashion; without all pitty;11 Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Edom, and for foure, I will not turne away the punish∣ment thereof, because hee did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pitty, and his an∣ger did teare perpetually, and kept his wrath. and would not admit of any reconciliation, but hath still raged incessantly against those of his owne blood. But I will send Nebuchadnezzar into his country, to waste and spoile it,12 But I will send a fire upon Teman, which shall devoure the palaces of Bozrah. who shall destroy the city and region of Teman, and raze the palaces of Bozra. Because they used extreme cruelty towards Israel,13 Because they have ript up the women with child of Gilead that they might enlarge their border rip∣ping up the women with child; that there might bee no posterity left of them, to inherit those parts, which they had now taken in, to inlarge their owne borders. But I will bring upon them Nebuchadnezzar,14 But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devoure the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of bat∣tell, with a tempest in the day of the whirlewinde. who shall invade their countrey, and set a fire on their chiefe city Rabbah; and shall come upon them with great fiercenesse and fury, like a tempestuous whirle-winde, and shall vtterly destroy all before him.
CAP. II. 1 Because he burnt the bones of the King of E∣dom into lime.BEcause he so hated the Jsraelites, as that whē the Edo∣mites joyned thēselves to the ayd of Israel; Moab, for extrem despight therof burnt the very bones of the King of Edoms sonne to ashes, in way of sacrifice to his gods. 2 But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall de∣voure the palaces of Keri∣oth, and Moab shall die with tumult, with shout∣ing, and with the sound of a trumpet.There I will send Nebuchadnezzar, as a fire upon Moab; which shall utterly destroy the chiefe city Keri∣oth; and Moab shall die in much horror in the midst of the tumults, and shrickes of warre. For that upon every base, and worthlesse bribe, they have yeelded so farre to bee corrupted,6 Because they sold the righteous for sil∣ver, and the poore for a paire of shooes. as to sell justice, and to betray innocence, and to undoe the poore, and helpesse. All their desire is after this unprofitable dust of the earth,7 That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poore, and turne aside the way of the meeke, and a man and his father will goe into the same maide, to prophane my holy Name. silver and gold; which they eagerly affect to gaine, even by trāpling on the heads of the poore; & those that are meeke spirited doe they tyrannize over, and proud∣ly oppresse; and so are they given over to their filthy and incestuous lust, as that the father, and the sonne shame not to defile themselves with one and the same strumpet, to the great profanation & dishonor of my Name, which they have professed. 8 And they lay them∣selves down upon clothes laid to pledge upon every altar, and they drinke the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.In their feasts, which they make to their Idols, they lay themselves downe upon the carpets, which are laid to pawne for the neede of their bretheren; wherein their Idolatry is not lesse odious, then their cruelty; for thus doe they before every altar; and in the same feasts, they drinke that wine, which is bought with the fines, and mulcts of those, whom they have unjustly condemned; even in the house of their Idols. 9 Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of the Ce∣dars, and he was strong as the oakes, yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his rootes from beneath.Yet I had deserved better things of them; for I destroy∣ed the Amorites before them; which were tall and mighty Gyants; above the ordinarie proportion of strength, or stature; yet I utterly rooted them out, for the sake of my people, and left no remnant of that race for their annoyance. But ye, contrary to my law, gave the Nazarites wine to drinke,12 But yee gave the Nazarites wine to drinke, and commanded the Pro∣phets, saying, Prophesie not that ye might corrupt them, and injoyned si∣lence to my Prophets, whom I sent to tell you of your sinnes, and my judgments. Behold I am even over-laid with your wickednes, it is with me as with a cart that is over-pressed with a loade of sheaves,13 Behold, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pres∣sed that is full of sheaves. which goes heavily, and is ready to breake under the burden.
CAP. III. YOu onely have I chosen out from all other nations for my peculiar people,2 You onely have I knowne of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for al your iniquities. and have bestowed much cost and care upon you; therefore, since you have abused my mercies, and rebelled against me, yee shall be sure to be punished. Ye did walke holily with me,3 Can two walke toge∣ther, except they bee a∣greed. and then I walked gra∣tiously with you; but now since we are falne out by rea∣son of your great iniquities, it is not to be expected, we should hold together any longer, in those faire correspon∣dences which were betweene us. Will the Lyon roare in the forest when he hath no prey? or the young Lyon in his den,4 Will a Lyon roare in the forrest, when he hath no pray? will a young Lyon cry out of his den, if hee have taken nothing? when he hath ta∣ken nothing? No more will the Lord denounce, or in∣flict his fearefull judgements upon a people, but where there is just matter of their sinnes, to be avenged. Ye are as the bird, Gods judgements are as the gin,5 Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth where no ginne is for him, shall one take up a snare from the earth, and having taken nothing at all? or snare; yee can not fall into the snare, or gin of my judgements, if your sinnes had not cast you thereinto; the snare is not wont to be taken up, if it have caught nothing; neither shall the judgements bee removed till they have effected that which they were sent for. Shal a Trumpet be blowne in the city,6 Shall a trumpet bee blowne in the citie, and the people not be afraid? shall there be evill in a citie, and the Lord hath not done it? to summon the inhabitants to the walls, when as the people find no cause of the feare of an enemie? no more would God by his Prophets denounce these imminent judgments, if there were not just cause to expect, and feare their speedy execution; and who shall, or can execute them, but the just and powerfull hand of God? can there be any evill of punishment in the city, yea in the world, which is not of his sending, his inflicting? The Lord, like a dreadfull and strong Lyon,8 The Lyon hath roar∣ed, who will not feare? the Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophecie? hath roar∣ed out these menaces of judgements, who can choose but feare? The Lord hath committed his word of reproofe and threatning to his Prophets; who can then hold his peace, and forbeare to publish it? Yee, O my Prophets,9 Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the pala∣ces in the land of Aegypt, and say, Assemble your selves upō the mountaines of Samaria, and behold the great trumpets in the midst thereof, and the oppres∣sed in the midst thereof. publish this in the very palaces of the Philistims, and of the Aegyptians; and call to those heathenish nations, to bee witnesses, and judges of the hainous sinnes of my people; wish them to assemble themselves into the midst of Israel, and to take view of the great oppressions, and tumultuous disorders that are amongst them.
10 Who store up vio∣lence, and robbery in their palaces.Who store up in their houses those treasures which they have gotten together by rapine, and violence. 11 Therefore thus saith the Lord God, An adversa∣ry there shall be, even round about the land.Therefore, thus saith the Lord; A mighty adversary, even the Assyrian shall come and invade thy land, and shall spoyle and waste it round about, &c. As the shepheard, when a Lyon hath beene devouring amongst his flocke,12 Thus saith the Lord, as the shepheard taketh out of the mouth of the Lyon two legges, or a piece of an eare, so shall the children of Israel be ta∣ken out, that dwell in Sa∣maria in the corners of a bed and in Damascus in a couch. findes left some mangled remnants of a leg, or an eare, which hee carries home, to shew the spoyle that hath beene done by that fierce beast, so shall it be with Israel; of all the body of Samaria, there shall be some one, or two left undevoured, for proofe of that generall slaughter & captivitie; & those two perhaps sick and feeble persons; which were not able to stirre out of their beds, or couches; and thus shall it be both with Sa∣maria, and Damascus. 14 That in the day that I shall visit the transgres∣sions of Israel upon him, I will also visit the altars of Bethel, and the hornes of the altar shall bee cut off, and fall to the ground.In the day that I shall punish Israel, and call him to ac∣count for his many sinnes, I will reckon with him for his Idolatries in Dan, and Bethel; and for those altars which he hath erected there; and will cause those mis-erected al∣tars to be beaten downe to the ground. 15 And I will smite the winter house, with the summer house, and the houses of ivory shal perish, and the great houses shall have an end, saith the Lord.And the stately houses of their Kings; both their warme winter houses, and their pleasant summer houses, and their curious and beautifull houses of Ivory shall be utterly demolished, and perish. CAP. IV. 1 Heare this word, yee kine of Bashan, that are in the mountaine of Samaria, which oppresse the poore, which crush the needy, which say to your masters; bring and let us drinke.HEare this, O ye great, and rich men of Samaria that feed full & carelesly, like the Kine in the fat pastures of Bashan; yee who oppresse the poore, and crush the needy, and say to your princes and Judges, set deepe fines, and condemne freely, that we may feast upon the offences of the people. That he will by the power of the Assyrian snatch you away,2 That he wil take you away with hookes, and your posterity with fish-hookes. out of your country, as the fish is caught up out of the water, by the hooke of the angler. And yee shall goe forth of your cities, (as an heard of cattell out of a close; every cow through that gappe of the hedge which lies before her;3 And ye shall goe out at the breaches, ever cow at that which is before her, and ye shall cast them into the palace, saith the Lord.) so shall ye passe through the next breaches which are made in your walls, and shall cast away whatsoever is deare and precious to you in your forsaken palaces. 4 Come to Bethel and transgresse, at Gilgal mul∣tiplie transgression, and bring your sacrifices eve∣ry morning, and your tithes after three yeares.Go ye up now, O ye foolish Israelites, to your Bethel, if you please, and sinne your fill; goe up to Gilgal, and glut your selves with the full scope of your iniquities;
bring those your morning sacrifices (which are due unto God) bring and offer them to your Idolls; and, that which the law of God requires of you, for the mainte∣nance of his Levites, (viz. to lay aside the tithes every third yeare for sacred use) doe ye that to the priests of your Idolls. So also verse 5. Also, I have desired to reclaime you by afflictions,6 And I also have given you cleannesse of teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet have yee not returned unto me, saith the Lord. and therefore have sent want and scarcity amongst you, in all your cities, &c. I have sent unto you a very noisome and deadly pe∣stilence; such a one as I sent upon the land of Aegypt,10 I have sent among you the pestilence, after the manner of Aegypt. &c. I have overthrowne some of your cities by the fire of the Assyrians,11 I have overthrowne some of you, as God over∣threw Sodome and Go∣morrah, and ye were as a firebrand pluckt out of the burning: yet have ye not re∣turned unto me, saith the Lord. as Sodome and Gomorrah were destroy∣ed with fire from heaven, and ye of Samaria were left out of the common destruction, as a brand taken out of the fire; yet all this hath not moved you to returne unto me, saith the Lord. Therefore since thou hast sleighted all these judge∣ments, and mercies, I am resolved to execute upon thee the severest of all my vengeances;12 Therefore thus wil I doe unto thee, O Israel: and because I will doe this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. and since thou hearest I have taken up this determination to proceed against thee, therefore prepare thy selfe, O Israel, to meet thy God, with unfained humiliation and repentance. For well thou knowest, it is no hoping to resist the power of the Almighty;13 For loe, he that for∣meth the mountaines, and createth the wind, and de∣clareth unto man, what is his thought, that maketh the morning darknesse, & treadeth upon the high places of the earth: the Lord the God of hosts is his name. it is he that formeth the moun∣taines, and infuseth the spirit into man, and knoweth, and declareth the thoughts of mans heart before he con∣ceives them; it is he that can cloud the brightest day at pleasure; and can bring downe the highest and strongest fortifications upon earth; he is the Lord of hosts, all things are at his command. CAP. V. THat Israelitish common-wealth which was as a vir∣gin untouched,2 The virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no more rise: she is forsaken upon her land, there is none to raise her up. is now falne under the yoake of bondage; and so falne, as that she shall no more rise; so is she forsaken, as that there is none to raise her up a∣gaine. For so few shall be left alive, after the hard,3 The city that went out by a thousand, shall leave an hundred. and long sieges of the Assyrians, that in those cities of Israel, whereout a thousand able men had wont to goe forth to war, there now shall be left but an hundred, &c.
5 But seeke not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and passe not to Beersheba.But goe not up to the calves of Bethel, nor to the high places, and Idolatrous altars of Gilgal, and Beersheba; for, &c. 6 Lest hee breake out like fire in the house of Io∣seph.Lest he send the enemy upon you, which like a con∣suming fire shall devoure the royall tribe of Ephraim, the posterity of Joseph, &c. 7 Ye who turne judge∣ment to wormewood.Ye, who corrupt judgement, and make it grievous, and hatefull to my people, &c. 8 Seeke him that ma∣keth the seven starres and Orion, and turneth the sha∣dow of death into the morning, and maketh the day darke with night: that calleth for the waters of the sea, and powreth them out upon the face of the earth, the Lord is his name.Seeke yee him who maketh the great frame of the heaven, and all the glorious starres therein, who turn∣eth the blackest night into a cleare morning, and causeth the brightest day to end in a darke night; who causeth the waters of the sea to over-swell their bankes, and to drowne the face of the earth; the Lord is his name. They hate him that judgeth uprightly, and that doth freely and unpartially rebuke the wicked man upon the bench of justice;10 They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhorre him that speaketh uprightly. and they abhorre him that speaketh justly. Forasmuch therefore, as ye doe grievously oppresse the poore;11 Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poore, and ye take frō him burdens of wheat, yee have built houses of hew∣en stone, but yee shall not dwell in them. and extort from him costly gifts; howsoever ye have by your bribes, and exactions, built unto your selves houses of hewen stone, yet yee shall not dwell in them, &c. Therefore those that are prudent, when they shall see these fore-told calamities to fall upon Israel, shall lay their hands upon their mouthes, in an humble silence, and acknowledge the justice of God in these events;13 Therefore the pru∣dent shall keepe silence in that time, for it is an evill time. for the times shall be very grievous and miserable. Wherefore, that ye may avoid these plagues, frame your selves to all holy,14 Seeke good and not evill, that ye may live. and good waies, and avoid those wicked courses of the rest of Israel; so shall yee live, &c. 16 And they shall call the husbandman to mour∣ning, and such as are skilful of lamentation, to wailing.And husbandmen shall have their part in the common sorrow, for so much as their corne shall bee wasted and devoured, and those, whose trade and practice is to make common lamentation, shall now mourne in earnest, without an hyre. 18 Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord: to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darknesse, and not light.Woe to those amongst you that mock at the tidings of this sad day of the Lord, and scornfully aske why it doth not come; and when it will come; they shall finde that it will come, smally to their comfort; they shall finde it is not a day for mirth, or pleasure, but for heavi∣nesse and sorrow. 19 As if a man did flee from a lyon, and a beare met him, or went into the house and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bitte him.It shall be with you, as with a man, who flying from a Lyon, meets in his way, with a Beare; and, to escape both, flyes into an house; and laying his hand upon the wall, to get over, is bitten by a Serpent; so shall you shunning one danger, fall into another.
Doe not thinke to please mee with the musicall har∣monie of your formall devotions; whiles I heare,23 Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs. and ab∣horre the discordous noise of your sins, &c. No,24 But let judgment runne downe as waters, and righteousnesse as a mightie streame. notwithstanding all these your outward services I will cause my judgements to gush out upon you as wa∣ters; and my righteous vengeance as a mighty streame shall beare you over. Have ye not whole fourty yeares together,25 Have ye offered un∣to me sacrifices and offe∣rings in the wildernesse fourtie yeares, O house of Israel? in the wil∣dernesse, bewrayed your aversenesse from me, and your inclination to Idolatrie, was it to me, that in this while ye offered your sacrifices; O ye house of Israel? No,26 But yee have borne the tabernacle of your Mo∣loch and Chiun your Ima∣ges, the starre of your god, which yee made to your selves. howsoever ye pretended to beare my Taberna∣cle, yet indeed ye did your services and oblations to your god Moloch, and the other images of those planetary gods, whom ye worshipped. CAP. VI. WOe to those that live securely,1 Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountaine of Samaria, which are named chiefe of the nations, to whom the house of Israel came. and pleasurably in Zion, and that trust to the impregnable situation of the citie of Samaria, the mountaines whereof are held the strongest forts of that nation, whereto the house of Israel resorts. Look ye unto the most famous and best traded cities,2 Passe ye unto Calneh, and see, and from thence goe yee to Hemath the great, then goe downe to Gath, of the Philistims. Be they better thē these king∣domes, or their border greater then your border? and countries round about you; looke to Calneh that wealthy citie of Assyria; looke to the great citie Antio∣chia, then take view of Gath the well-knowne citie of the Philistims, and compare your blessings with theirs; and tell me whether these kingdomes be richer, and stronger, and larger then yours; yet these shall ye short∣ly see brought downe. Yet ye are carelesse, and confident,3 Ye that put farre a∣way the evill day, and cause the seate of violence to come neere. and put away from you all feare of danger; and thereupon grow out∣ragious, and cruell; in so much as ye strike into others a feare of your violence, and oppression. Ye give up your selves to pride, and ease,4 That lie upon beds of yvory, and stretch them∣selves upon their couches, and eate the lambes out of the flocke, and the calves out of the midst of the stal. and delica∣cie: stretching your selves upon your soft couches, and beds of yvorie, and pamper your selves with the dainti∣est fare. They make themselves merry with the most pleasant musicke;5 That chaunt to the sound of the viol, and in∣vent to themselves instru∣ments of musicke, like Da∣vid: and devise instruments of melodie for their vaine and wanton mirth, such as David invented for the praising and cheerfull service of God. They let themselves loose to all intemperance and car∣nall pleasure, powring in wine out of their large bowles and anointing themselves with the most precious,6 That drinke wine in bowles, and anoint them∣selves with the chief oint∣ments, but they are not grieved for the affliction of Ioseph. and
fragrant ointments; but in the meane time, they are not sensible of the miserable condition of Gods wrongfully oppressed servants. 7 Therefore now shall they goe captive, with the first that goe captive, & the banquet of them that stret∣ched themselves shall bee removed.Therefore, since ye are the prime offenders, and (as it were) leaders of these sinnes, ye shall bee the first in the punishment thereof, even in that wofull captivity, which shall shortly insue; and then there shall be an end of these your riotous and wanton pleasures. 8 I abhorre the excel∣lencie of Iacob, and hate his palaces: therefore will I deliver up the citie, with all that is therein.I abhorre this proud excesse of my people of Israel, and hate those their palaces, which they have built in blood, and oppression, and therefore I will deliver up Samaria, and all that is therein to the hands of the Assy∣rians. 10 And a mans uncle shall take him up, and hee that burneth him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the house; is there yet any with thee? and hee shall say, no; Then shall he say, hold thy tongue, for wee may not make mention of the name of the Lord.And a man shall not have a brother, or a sonne left, to doe him the last offices of his buriall, but if his uncle or kinsman shall undertake to bring out his corps, he that is the overseer of these funerall rites of burning the dead joyning with him in that worke, shall say to that one which is left alive in the house, Is there any more remai∣ning of the whole number of the family? and hee shall say, no; Then shall the other answere againe; Rest thou humbly, and silently in the just pleasure of the Almigh∣ty; this is his worke; as for us, our sins have beene so grie∣vous, that in the conscience thereof, it is not for us to call upon the name of the Lord, for a release, or mitigation of his judgement. 11 For behold, the Lord commandeth, and he will smite the great house with breaches, and the little house with clefts.For behold, the Lord whom we have provoked, com∣mandeth these executions from the hands of the Assy∣rians; and will by their arme smite both the small and the great. 12 Shall horses run up∣on the rocke? will one plow there with oxen? for ye have turned judgement into gall, and the fruit of righteousnesse into hem∣lockeIs it possible, that horses should run upon the steepe and craggy cliffes? or can it be that the husbandman should draw his plow through those hard rocks? So im∣possible is it that yee Israelites should continue to pro∣sper, whiles ye remaine thus sinfull; for ye have corrup∣ted judgement, and justice, and made it hatefull, and deadly to the innocent. 13 Ye which rejoyce in a thing of nought, which say, have wee not taken to us hornes by our owne strength.Ye which rejoyce in your owne strength, which is vaine, and nothing worth; and say in the pride of your heart, have we not made our selves strong and impreg∣nable by our wit and power? 14 But behold, I will raise up against you a nati∣on, (O how of Israel, saith the Lord the God of hosts) and they shall afflict you from the entring in of He∣math unto the river of the wildernesse.But behold, I will raise up against you (O house of Is∣rael) a mighty nation, even that of Assyria, and they shall plague you, even from the one end of your country to the other; from Hemath, which is in the borders of the North, to Sihor the river of the wildernesse, to the South.
CAP. VII. THus hath the Lord God shewed me the judgement which he is about to bring upon the land;1 Thus hath the Lord God shewed unto me, and behold he formed gras∣hoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter grouth, and lo, it was the latter grouth after the Kings mowings. even that extreame famine which he shall cause through the abun∣dance of locusts, and other noisome wormes, which hee will send upon the earth; early therefore in the shooting up of the grasse, after the first mowing thereof for the Kings use (which is wont to be sooner then the common mathe) he formed store of those hurtfull vermine, and sent them upon the land. Then I, seeing the proceedings of this famine, said,2 Then I said (O Lord God) forgive, I beseech thee, by whom shall Iacob arise? for he is small. O Lord God, forgive us I beseech thee; if thou goe on thus to plague us, who shall be left alive to continue the name and generation of thy people? For even now, as it is, the number of thy people is but small. The Lord thereupon ceased from this plague,3 The Lord repented for this, It shal not be, saith the Lord. and did, as it were, say; No, it shall not proceed; Israel shal not be quite wasted. The Lord God fore-shewed me the judgement that he meant to bring upon Israel by the sword of Tigleth Peleser, King of Assyria,4 Thus hath the Lord God shewed unto me, and behold the Lord God cal∣led to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep and did eate up a part. (represented by a fire which should devoure up the deepe, and did eate up a part;) signifying that the fury and force of this King of Assur should utterly swallow up the Kingdome of Syria first, and afterwards that part of Israel, which is beyond Jor∣dan. As I have built up Israel by line and levell,8 Behold, I will set a plumbe line in the midst of my People Israel, I wil not againe passe by them any more. so will I also now make an exquisite destruction of it; and will lay it levell with the ground; and I will not any more par∣don, and passe by their wickednesses. Amos hath conspired against thee in Bethel,10 Amos hath conspi∣red against thee in the midst of the house of Israel the land is not able to bear all his words. where is the greatest confluence of thy subjects. The words of his prophesie are intolerable; for hee dishartneth the people; and works in them a meane and dishonourable opinion of thy governement; and de∣spaire of their owne safety. And Amaziah said to Amos; what makest thou here,12 Also Amaziah said unto Amos, (O thou Seer) goe, flie thee away into the land of Iudah, and there eate bread, and prophesie there. O thou prophet, out of thine owne countrey; goe thy waies home; take this friendly and private counsell from mee, retire home closely to thy owne countrey of Ju∣dah; and there maintaine thy selfe; and there bestow thy paines, and admonitions. But venture not any more to vent thy prophesies in Bethel; for thou knowest the condition of this place,13 But prophesie not a∣gaine any more at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chappel and it is the Kings court. it is both the Kings sanctuary, for his devotion, and the
Kings court, for state; meddle not any more with pro∣phesying here, lest thou provoke the Kings anger against thee. 14 Then answered A∣mos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither was I a prophets sonne, but I was an heardman, and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit.I was no Prophet by my breeding and institution, I never was trained up to any such vocation, but was by my profession an heard-man, and spent my time amongst my cattle; and in that solitary life contented my selfe with such wild diet, as the Sycomores did afford me. 15 And the Lord tooke me as I followed the flock and the Lord said unto me Goe prophesie unto my people Israel.And even then when I little thought of any such mat∣ter, it pleased the Lord to take me from that homely imployment, and injoyned me this taske of prophesying. 16 And drop not thy word against the house of Isaac.Doe not let fall the menaces of judgement upon the chosen people of God. Because thou hast forbidden me to prophesie, thus saith the Lord,17 Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Thou shalt die in a polluted land. &c. thou shalt die in the land of Assy∣ria, which is polluted by detestable Idolatries, &c. CAP. VIII. 2 And I said, A basket of summer fruit: then said the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel, I will not againe passe by them any more.ANd I said, a basket of summer fruit; then said the Lord unto me; I have heretofore gathered, and plucked off some of thy fruits, that is thy people; but now I come to thee, with a basket, to gather all that growes upon Israel; and will so make an end of this ga∣thering, that there shall be no more of this kinde left for hereafter. 3 And the songs of the temples shall be howlings, in the day, saith the Lord God.Instead of the songs, and musicke of the Temples of Bethel, and other high places, there shall be nothing but howlings, and shriekings of those that are slaine, &c. 5 Saying, when will the new moone be gone, that we may sell corne, and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the Ephah small, and the she∣kle great, and falsifying the balances of deceit.Saying, when shall we have done with these solemne feasts, wherein we are not allowed to buy and sell; would to God these new moones and Sabbaths were once past, that we might sell our corne at an high rate; making the measure of the wheate small, and the weights (where∣in the silver is weighed) great and heavie; and falsifying the balances by deceit. 6 That we may buy the poore for silver, and the needy for a paire of shooes and sell the refuse of the wheat.That we may cause the poore to sell themselves to our servitude, for a little silver, as being not able to su∣staine themselves; and that we may buy the needy for a paire of shooes, even for the basest necessaries; Yea and that by this meanes, we may put off, at an unreasonable rate, the very refuse and offall of the wheat. 8 And it shall rise up wholly as a flood: and it shall be cast out and drow∣ned, as by the flood of Ae∣gypt.And the judgement of God shall rise up, and over∣flow the land, as a flood; and the whole countrey shall∣be overspred, and drowned therewith, as the plaines are wont to be by the inundations of the river Nilus.
Your sorrow shall be so extreme in that day;9 And it shall come to passe in that day, saith the Lord God, that I will cause the Sunne to goe downe at noone, and I will darken the earth in the cleare day. and that day shall be to you so blacke and gloomy, as if the Sunne were gone downe at noone-day; and as if darknesse had covered the earth in the clearest day. Such a mourning will I cause amongst you,10 And I will make it as the mourning of an only sonne. as when a mother mournes for her onely sonne, &c. Not a famine of materiall bread,11 Not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for wa∣ter, but of hearing the words of the Lord. &c. But a spirituall famine of the word of God which is onely able to feed, and save your soules. And they shall wander from the sea of Galilee,12 And they shall wan∣der from Sea to Sea, and frō the North even to the East, they shall run to and fro, to seeke the word of the Lord, and shall not finde it. to the Mediterranean Sea, and from the North a-crosse unto the East to seeke the word of the Lord at the mouth of his Prophets, and shall not finde it. Those Idolatrous Israelites that sweare by the molten Images of Samaria; and say;14 They that sweare by the sin of Samaria, and say, thy God, O Dan, liveth, & the manner of Beersheba liveth, even they shall fall, and never rise up againe. As the God which is wor∣shipped in Dan, and the author of the religion of Beer∣sheba liveth; even they shall fall into utter perdition, and never rise againe. CAP. IX. IN my vision I saw the Lord (having left the Temple) to stand upon the altar without,1 I saw the Lord stand∣ing upon the altar, and hee said, smite the lintell of the doore, that the posts may shake, and cut them in the head, all of them, and I will slay the last of them with the sword. and hee commanded his Angell saying, smite thou the lintell of the doore of the Temple, so vehemently, that the posts thereof may shake; in signification of that maine stroke, which I will give the rulers of Israel; for I wil cut them in the head (or prin∣cipall men) every one of them; and as for the posts, which are the inferiors,2 Though they digge into hell, thence shall mine hand take them. I will slay them with the sword of the Assyrian, &c. Neither shall they ever be able by any power, or poli∣cie, to escape my judgements,3 Thence will I com∣mand the Serpent, and hee shall bite them. though they should digge into hell, there shall my hand finde them, &c. There will I command my Leviathan to swallow them up, &c. See chapter 8. verse 8.5 And it shall rise up wholly like a flood, &c. It is he that hath built,6 It is he that buildeth the stories in the heaven, and hath founded his troupe in the earth, he that calleth for the waters of the Sea. and preserved the severall con∣tignations of his orbes in the heavens, and hath made provision of those infinite armies of his creatures, to ex∣ecute his revenges upon earth; it is hee that by his com∣mand lets loose the waters of the Sea, &c.
7 Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel, saith the Lord, have not I brought up Israel out of Aegypt, and the Philistines from Caphtor and the Syrians from Kir?Is there any reason in you, O ye children of Israel, why I should respect you more than the very Ethiopians? Why should I make any difference betwixt you, and very Philistims? If you say, I brought up Israel out of Aegypt, so also did I bring the Philistms out of Caphtor; and the Syrians from Cyrene, where they were cap∣tived. 9 Yet, shall not the least graine fall upon the earth.Yet shall not the least graine scape unsifted by falling to the earth, without agitation; every Israelite shall bee tossed up and downe and dispersed in this captivity, no one shall be free. 11 In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I wil raise up his ruines and I will build it as in the dayes of old.In that day will I raise up my Evangelicall Church, which is the Tabernacle of the true and glorious sonne of David, the Messias of the world, even upon the ruines of the Jewish Church; which I will repaire, and so make up the breaches thereof as that, both Jewes and Gentiles, shall make up one Church; which shall be made as spiritually complete, as ever the Temple was materially of old. 12 That they may pos∣sesse the remnāt of Edom, and of all the heathen, which are called by my name, saith the Lord that doth this.That the bounds thereof may be extended over all the earth, even to the remotest heathen, which shall then be called by my name, saith the Lord that doth this. Behold I will continue such plentifull increase of my blessings under the Gospell, that one shall over take an∣other,13 Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that the Plowman shall over∣take the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed, & the moun∣taines shall droppe sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt. in a perpetuall succession; as it is in a rich & fruit∣full soile, that the harvest is no sooner in, than the plough is put into the ground for another crop; and the vintage is no sooner done, that the seed is sowne for a new har∣vest; thus shall it be with my Church, where one blessing endeth, another shall begin. Then even the dryest and barrennest hearts shall yeeld excellent fruits of grace in very great abundance. 15 And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pul∣led up out of their land which I have given them, saith the Lord thy God.I will settle my Church upon earth, never to be rooted out by the violence of men, never to be prevailed against by the gates of hell, saith the Lord God.
OBADIAH. 1 Wee have heard a rumour from the Lord, and an ambassadour is sent among the heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battell.WE that are the prophets of God, have heard the Lord declaring his purpose cōcerning Edom; & sending his Angel to stirre up the Chaldees against him, saying,2 Behold I have made thee small among the hea∣then, thou art greatly de∣spised Arise ye (and I shall assist you) to make warre against the Edomites. Behold, though thou art but an handfull, in respect of the rest of the heathen round about thee, and art but meanly thought of, for thy power; Yet thou art foolishly lifted up in the pride of thine owne heart; and deceivest thy selfe,3 The pride of thine heart hath deceived thee: thou that dwellest in the clifts of the rocke, whose habitation is high, that saith in his heart, who shall bring mee downe to the ground? with a false confi∣dence in thine impregnable situation; thou dwellest aloft in the clefts of the rocks, which thou thinkest inaccessible, and sayest in thine heart, who shall bee able to bring me downe? But know, that though thy forts,4 Though thou exalt thy selfe as the Eagle, and though thou set thy nest a∣mong the starres, thence will I bring thee downe saith the Lord. and castles were as high, as the Eagle can build her nest, or flie; yea, though thou couldst build as high as the starres, this shold not a∣vaile thee; thence will I fetch thee downe, saith the Lord. How art thou, contrary to thy expectation,5 If theeves came to thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou cut off,) would they not have stollen, till they had enough; if the grape gathe∣rers came to thee, would they not leave som grapes. utterly cut off, O Edom; without all remainders of hope of re∣covery? If theeves, if robbers by night come to steale from thee, they would onely take their bouty, so much as they can thinke enough to serve their turne, and leave the rest; If the grape gatherers come to pull the clusters from thy vine, they would leave some grapes for the gleaners, that shall come after. But as for thine enemies, the Chaldees,6 How are the hings of Esau searched out? how are his hid things sought up? they shall ransacke, and rifle all the things of Edom; and shall search out all thine hidden commodities,7 All the men of thy confederacie have brought thee even to the border: the men that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee, they that eate thy bread have laid a wound under thee, there is none understanding in him. and carry them away at once. All those of thy confederacy, to whom thou trustedst, even the Moabites, and Ammonites, which were in league with thee, have deceived thee, and have driven thee out of thy owne seat, even to the utmost borders of thy country; thine intire associates have craftily drawne thee into that inconvenience, which thou canst not a∣void, nor remedy; and (for all thy pretence of wisedome) thou hast no understanding of this plot laid for thy ruine. As thy wise men, so thy valiant soldiers,9 And thy mighty men, O Teman, shalbe dismayed, to the end that every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter. even those of Teman (which are most famous for skill and courage)
shall be utterly cut off; that there may be none left alive in all the mount of Esau. 11 In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the stran∣gers carried away captive.In the day of battle, thou stoodst opposite to thy bre∣thren, the issue of Jacob; and wert willing enough, that the enemies should carry them away captive, &c. 13 Thou shouldest not have entred into the gate of my people in the day of their calamitie.Thou shouldest not have entred into the gates of the cities of Israel, my people, in the day of their calamity, to help to spoile, and sacke them, &c. 16 For as yee have drunke upon mine holy mountaine, so shall all the heathen drink continually, yea they shall drinke, and they shall swallow downe, and they shall be as though they had not beene.For, as ye my people, which dwell and worship upon mine holy mountaine, have drunke up the cup of my bit∣ter affliction; so shall all the heathen pledge you conti∣nually of the same cup; yea, they shall drinke it to the very dregges, and shall swallow it downe; and they shall bee so cut off, as if they had never beene. 17 But unto mount Zion shall bee deliverance, and there shall be holinesse, and the house of Iacob shall possesse their possessions.But, in the end, upon mount Zion shall be an happy restauration of my people; there shall be holy service performed to my name, in the re-edified Temple; and the sonnes of Jacob shall bee restored to their old pos∣sessions. 18 And the house of Iacob shall bee a fire, and the house of Ioseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devoure them, and there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau for the Lord hath spoken it.And I will make the house of Jacob, (both Judah, and Ephraim) to be as a fire, whiles the posterity of Esau, is as stubble; so as the fire of Israel shall consume the stub∣ble of Esau, till there be none left of that accursed gene∣ration. And they of the South (which are the tribe of Judah) shall possesse the mountainous Country of Edom; and they of Benjamin,19 And they of the South shall possesse the mount of Esau, and they of the plaine, the Philistimes; and they shall possesse the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria, and Ben∣jamin shal possesse Gilead. which are of the plaine, shall possesse the cities of the Philistims; and the rest of Israel shall re∣turne to, and recouer their ancient bounds of inheritance, with much inlargement; in a figure of the spirituall ex∣tending of the borders of my Church, under the Gospel, over all the coasts of the earth. And the host of those Israelites, which shall be returned from their captivity,20 And the Captivitie of this hoste of the chil∣dren of Israel shall possesse that of the Cananites, even unto Zarephath, and the captivitie of Ierusalem which is in Sepharad, shall possesse the citie of the South. shall possesse the land of the Cana∣anites, even to the utmost bounds thereof, which is Sa∣repta, as they formerly injoyed it; And the returned, captives of Juda (which are in Sepharad, the remotest part of Babylon) shall possesse those cities of the South, which are their ancient limits. 21 And Saviours shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau, and the Kingdome shall be the Lords.And God shall, from time to time raise up mighty, and gracious deliverers of his people in that his royall, and holy hill of Zion, which shall represse the
rage of his enemies, and pull downe the pride of Edom; and God shall challenge to himselfe the right and pro∣tection of his Kingdome of Israel. IONAH. CAP. I. ARise; goe to Niniveh, the great city of the Assyrians,2 Arise, goe to Nini∣veh that great citie, and cry against it, for their wickednesse is come up before me. and denounce my judgements against it; for their wickednesse is growne to that height, that I can no lon∣ger forbeare it. But Jonah, fearing that the mercy of God in sparing the city would leave him suspected of a false prediction,3 But Ionah rose up to flee unto Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord, and went downe to Ioppa and he found a ship going to Tarshish, so he paid the fare thereof. bent his course another way, and going downe to Joppa and finding a ship, ready bound for her passage, into the Mediterranean sea, he put himselfe into her, and paid the fare thereof, &c. Then, when Jonah had told the men, both his nation,10 Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, why hast thou done this? for the mē knew that hee fled from the presence of the Lord, because he had told them. and his religion, and his profession, and his haynous sin, in fleeing from the charge that God had laid upon him; they were exceedingly afraid; as being strickē both with the sense of their owne danger, and of compassion to∣wards a person of such quality, who had so freely confes∣sed himselfe, and his offence. Then the men were struck with an awfull feare of the power, and majesty of that God,16 Then the men fea∣red the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, & made vowes. whereof they saw such proofe, before their eyes; the sight whereof being ad∣ded to the religious sermon of Jonah wrought so with them, that disclaiming all their Idoll gods, they offered a sacrifice to the only true God, and made vowes to him (which they would carefully performe upon their re∣turne) to worship him at Jerusalem. CAP. II. THen Jonah spent that time of the three daies (where∣in he was thus wofully imprisoned,1 Then Ionah prayed unto the Lord his God, out of the fishes belly. in the belly of the Whale) in his earnest prayers unto God, and in his hum∣ble,
and hearty confessions of his great sinne, against his God. 2 And said, I cried by reason of, &c.And after, when he was by the power of God deli∣vered from that death, he uttered, and penned this song of thanksgiving, for so wonderfull a mercy, &c. —out of the belly of hell cryed I, and thou hear∣dest my prayer.Out of that place of unspeakable horror, wherein I was for the time buried, as in the belly of a living and moving grave; I then failed not to cry unto thee, and thou heardest me. 3 For thou hadst cast me into the deepe, in the midst of the seas, and the floods compassed me a∣bout: all thy billowes and thy waves passed over me.It was not the act of the mariners, Lord, it was thy just act to cast me into the deepe; there I was by thine appointment in the midst of many seas; (for so did that fearefull monster carry me from one sea to another) and the floods compassed me about. 4 Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight: yet I will looke againe toward thy holy Temple.Then said I; Lord, I am justly cast out of thy sight, in∣to this place of horror; yet since thou still givest me life, and being, I will trust in thy mighty power, and infinite mercy, that thou hast reserved me for some further ser∣vice to thee, in thy Church. 6 I went downe to the bottomes of the moun∣taine: the earth with her bars was about me for e∣ver.I went downe, in the maw of that vast and dreadfull beast, to the bottome of the sea, even to the lowest foun∣dations of the mountaines; the earth with all her rocks and hils was over my head, beyond all naturall possibili∣ty of recovery, &c. 8 They that observe ly∣ing vanities, forsake their owne mercie.Those foolish men that worship vaine Idolls, (which are nothing but lies and falsehood;) forsake all the be∣nefit of thy mercifull protection, and deliverance. But I, &c. 10 And the Lord spake unto the fish, and it vomi∣ted out Ionah upon the dry land.And the Lord commanded the Whale, and it accor∣dingly did cast up Jonah upon the drie land. CAP. III. 4 And Ionah began to enter into the city a daies journey, and he cryed and said, yet forty daies, and Niniveh shall be over∣throwne.ANd when Jonah had spent one day in his preaching, and had gone through one third part of the city cry∣ing and saying, There are but yet fourty dayes to come, ere Niniveh (except it repent) shall be destroyed. 5 So the people of Ni∣niveh beleeved God, and proclaimed a fast.The people of Niniveh beleeved that word of God, delivered to them by his Prophet, &c. Let not the very beasts feed, nor drinke water; that the men may be the more moved with that woefull moane,7 Let them not feed, nor drinke water. which those dumbe creatures must needs make in their extremity.10 And God repen∣ted, &c. See Amos 7.3.
CAP. IV. DOst thou thinke this is a just cause for thee to be mo∣ved with anger, for that I have spared the Ninivites? And he said, in much weaknesse, and rash passion;4 Then said the Lord, dost thou wel to be angry? I doe well to be angry, and thinke that I have just cause to be so fretted with this, which thou hast done, as to wish,9 I doe well to be an∣gry, even unto death. in the bitternesse of my soule, to be rid of my life. Then said the Lord, I have done this purposely to shew thee thine owne error, and weakenesse; thou hadst pitty on a sorry plant, which cost thee no labour,10 Then said the Lord, thou hast had pitty on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow, which came up in a night, and pe∣rished in a night. which received no life from thee; which suddainly came up, & suddainly vanished. And should not I spare Niniveh, that great city, wher∣in are sixe score thousand infants, that have not lived to offend, and much cattle which are not capable of offence? how much are these better then the senselesse plants of the earth? and these are the worke of my hands,11 And should not I spare Niniveh that great city, wherein are more then sixe score thousand persons, that cannot dis∣cerne between their right hand, and their left hand, and also much cattle? and have cost me much care and regard; and such as require time, and leisure for their perfection; bethinke thy selfe therefore how just reason I have to be angry at thy un∣mercifulnesse, which art angry at my forbearance of Ni∣niveh. MICAH. CAP. I. THe Lord will, in a terrible sort,3 For behold, the Lord commeth forth out of his place, and will come down and tread upon the high places of the earth. manifest his power from heaven; and, as in the height of his furie, com∣ming downe from above, will trample upon the lofti∣est tops of the mountaines. In such manner, as that the great mountaines shall (as it were) melt, and dissolve under his feet,4 And the mountaines shal be molten under him, and the valleyes shall bee cleft, as waxe before the fire, and as waters that are powred downe a steepe place. and the deepe vallies shall be cleft asunder, and severed from the hills; the mountaines (I say) shall melt like waxe, and the val∣leyes
shall run from the hils, as waters that are powred out from a steep place, run downe from the place where they are powred. In short, all the hole earth shall be exceedingly mo∣ved, and affected with the dreadfull presence of God de∣scending to punish the wickednesses of his people. 5 For the transgression of Iacob is all this, and for the sinnes of the house of Israel, what is the trans∣gression of Iacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Iudah? are they not Ierusalem?And all these judgements shal be for the Idolatries of Israel, and Judah: What then or who is the authour of this great sin of Israel? Is it not the mother city Sama∣ria, whose princes have erected and maintained those golden calves? And who is the authour of those offen∣sive high places of Judah? Is not Jerusalem, and those her Kings that have set them up, and countenanced them? 6 Therefore I will make Samaria as an heape of the field, and as planting of a vineyard, and I will powre downe the stones thereof into the valley.Therefore, I will raze and pull downe Samaria, by the hands of the Assyrians; and make that high built city as an heape of stones laid together carelesly in the field; or as those hillocks of earth which are cast up for the planting of a vineyard; And I will cause the goodly stones of their stately palaces to be tumbled downe into the valley, &c. 7 And all the heires thereof shal be burnt with the fire, and all the Idols thereof wil I lay desolate, for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall returne to the hire of an harlot.And all those costly offerings, and presents that were brought to their Idolls, as the hire of their spirituall fornication, shall be burnt with fire &c. as they have i∣magined foolishly that they have received their wealth, as the reward of their Idoll-service, which they have bor∣rowed of the heathen; so shall they know, that it shall goe backe againe the same way; for the Assyrians, who shall carry it away, shall impute it to their gods, as a re∣ward of their Idolatry. 8 Therefore I will waile and howle, I will go stript, and naked: I will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owles.Therefore, since these great evills are comming upon my nation, I, for my part, will spend my time in mour∣ning, and bitter lamentation; I will lay downe my Pro∣phets weed; and goe up and downe heavily, and fore∣lornely. This destruction by the hand of the Assyrians is uncu∣rable;9 For her wound is in∣curable, for it is come unto Iudah, he is come unto the gate of my people, even to Ierusalem. for it is passed from Samaria, and is comne for∣ward to Judah; and is now drawing on, towards the ve∣ry gates of Jerusalem. Let no man tell the newes of this calamity at Gath, the city of the Philistims,10 Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all, in the house of Aphrah roule thy selfe in the dust. lest they rejoyce, and triumph in our misery; oh let no man there bemoane our sor∣rowes; & ye inhabitants of Aphrah (a city of Benjamin) rowle your selves in the dust, for the miserable desolati∣on that is comming upon you. 11 Passe ye away thou inhabitant of Saphir, ha∣ving thy shame naked, the inhabitant of Zaana came not forth in the mourning of Bethezel, he shall re∣ceive of you his standing.Passe ye away into a wofull captivity, O yee inhabi∣tants of the beautifull city of Saphir, passe along in your
shame and nakednesse; The inhabitants of Zaanan stood upon their gard, and came not forth as yeelding to the enemy, upon the sad taking in of Bethezel; the enemie shall therefore receive of you, O Zaananites, the full re∣compence of that long siege, to which ye have put him. The inhabitants of Maroth,12 For the inhabitant of Maroth waited careful∣ly for good, but evill came downe from the Lord un∣to the gate of Ierusalem. shall bee much grieved for the failing, and disappointment of their hopes; they made account to have escaped this misery, but evill came downe upon them from the Lord, and shall not stay there, but shall proceed on, till it come to the very gates of Jerusalem. As for you, O ye inhabitants of Lachish,13 O thou inhabitant of Lachish, binde the chari∣ot to the swift beast, she is the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion, for the transgressions of Isra∣el were found in thee. make all possible speed to escape by flight; put your swiftest beasts into your chariots, and drive away hastily; taking the advantage of your remotenesse; Try if you can thus avoide the judgement, who were the authours of sin to the rest of Judah, next after the revolt of the ten tribes to their molten calves. Lachish was the first of the tribe of Juda, that both received, and diffused the infection to the daughter of Zion; The Idolatries of Israel were first found in thee, O Lachish. Therefore shalt thou be faine to give vaine presents unto the Philistims to helpe thee,14 Therefore shalt thou give presents to More∣sheth Gath, the houses of Achizib shall be a lie to the Kings of Israel. thou shalt have re∣course to those false, and lying succours, which have beene ever deceitfull to the Kings of Judah, and so shall be still unto thee. As for thee O Mareshah,15 Yet will I bring an heire unto thee, O inhabi∣tant of Mareshah, he shall come unto Adullam, the glory of Israel. which hast thy name from inheritance, I will bring such an heire to thee, for thy land, as thou shalt never be able to dispossesse, even the enemy which shall seize thee for ever; And he that is the glory and God of Israel shall execute his justice upon Judah, even as farre as Adullam, the utmost coast thereof. Make thee balde, O land of Israel,16 Make thee balde, & poll thee for thy delicate children, inlarge thy bald∣nesse as the Eagle, for they are gone into captivity from thee. in token of ex∣treame mourning; and cut off thine hayre in sorrow for thy delicate children which are slaine, and captived; yea, inlarge thy baldnesse (the signe of thy griefe) as the Eagle, which moults with age, being left without feathers, till her renovation; so doe thou leave thy selfe without haire, or comfort for thy children, for they are gone into captivity from thee.
CAP. II. 3 An evill from which ye shall not remove your neckes, neither shal ye goe haughtily, for this time is evill.AN evill which shall presse you so heavily, that you shall neither be able to remove your necks from un∣der it, nor lift them up in an haughty carriage; for it is a time of exceeding great affliction. 4 We be utterly spoy∣led, he hath changed the portion of my people, how hath hee removed it from me? turning away he hath divided our fields.Wee be utterly spoyled, he hath altered the property of the land, and the condition of the people; for he hath put Assyrians into the possessions of Israel, and hath re∣moved Israel into Assyria; yea, rather instead of return∣ing to us in mercy, and restoring our land, he hath divi∣ded our fields to our enemies. 5 Therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast a cord by lot in the congre∣gation of the Lord.Therefore when this judgement shall bee effected, there shall none remaine of you, who shall have any lot or inheritance in the land of Israel. 6 Prophesie ye not, say they to them that prophe∣sie; they shall not prophesie to them that they shall not take shame.Yet they are ready to say unto my Prophets, (who fore-tell these judgements) prophesie not; neither will they allow my Prophets to say, that this shamefull foile shall happen unto them. 7 O thou that art named the house of Iacob, is the spirit of the Lord straitned are these his doings? doe not my words doe good to him that walketh up∣rightly?O thou, that wouldst bee named the house and seed of Jacob, is it for thee to hinder the spirit of prophesie? Is it not Gods doing to put these words into their mouthes? And if ye were so affected to God as yee ought, and so well disposed, as ye pretend, surely my predictions of these judgements would be greatly for your good. 8 Even of late my peo∣ple is risen up as an enemy, ye pull off the robe with the garment from them that passe by securely, as men averse from warre.Now of late, my people (as if they needed no enemie) are turned enemies to each other; yee strip the garments from the backs of travellers, that passe by securely, with∣out any thought of such cruell, and hostile measure. And, as not content with this cruelty towrds men, ye offer violence to the women also; whom ye have forcea∣bly taken from their owne houses,9 The women of my people have yee cast out from their pleasant, houses from their children have ye taken away my glory for ever. where they lived con∣tentedly with their husbands; and to their children also, from whom ye have taken those priviledges, & liberties of freeborne Israelites, which was the glory of that na∣tion, and for which I had wont to receive glory frō them. 10 Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest: because it is polluted, it shall destroy you even with a sore destruction.Away therefore, arise, and get you into captivity; for this land is no place for you; since ye have thus defiled it by your sinnes; it shall cast you out; and deliver you up to be destroyed by your enemies. 11 If a man walking in the spirit & falsehood doe lie, saying, I will prophesie unto thee of wine and of strong drinke, hee shall even be the prophet of this people.I know well enough how I might please you; If a man would walke in a vaine light fashion; and yeeld to pro∣phesie nothing but lies unto you; and sooth you up in gluttonie & drunkennesse; and tell you of that free scope ye shall have to wine, and strong drinke; he should be a welcome prophet to this people.
But for me, I am not of that straine;12 I will surely disem∣ble O Iacob, all of thee: I will surely gather the rem∣nant of Israel, I will put them together as the sheepe of Bozrah, as the flocke in the midst of their fold. They shall make great noise by reason of the multitude of men. I have other ti∣dings to deliver to you, from the Lord; which is this; I will (saith God) gather up all my people of Israel toge∣ther, as a shepheard gathers his whole flocke together into a fold; and (as it uses to be in such concourse) there shall be a great noyse, and murmure in that thronged multitude. But this assembly shall not bee for their ease or com∣fort, but rather for their more full destruction;13 The breaker is come up before them: they have broken up and have passed thorow the gate, and are gone out by it, and their King shall passe before them, and the Lord on the head of them. The As∣syrian shall come in upon them, and breake into this fold, and spoile and ravine, as he pleaseth; and my people shall be carried away through those breaches, into a misera∣ble captivity, and their King shall be led manicled before them; and the Lord of hoasts (who hath justly contrived this desolation of his unworthy people) shall leade the way to the accomplishing thereof. CAP. III. O Ye rulers,1 And I said, heare I pray you, O eads of Ia∣cob, and yee Princes of the house of Israel: is it not for you to know judge∣ment? and governors of Israel (to you I speake) is it not your part both to know how to doe justice to the oppressed, and to performe it accordingly? How is it then that you doe contrarily? yee hate the good, and love the evill,2 Who hate the good and love the evill, who pluckt off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones. and offer all cruelty and violence to them; as some unfaithfull shepheard, who in stead of feeding his flocke, fleas off their skinnes, and devoureth their flesh. So also verse 3. Who,5 That bite with their teeth and cry peace, and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare warre against him. so as they may bee fed up with the largesses of the people, cry peace and happinesse; but if they have not their mouthes filled with gifts, are ready to load their niggardly hearers with threates of judgements. I will therefore utterly withdraw from you all vision,6 Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision, & it shall be darke unto you, that ye shall not divine, and the Sunne shal goe down over the Prophets, and the day shal be darke over them. and ye shall no more see ought from me, than a man can see ought before him in the darkest night, my Spirit, which is as the Sunne, shall be fully set, and gone downe upon your Prophets and there shal be nothing but dark∣nesse of ignorance before them. So also verse 7. But as for me, I am none of your soothing Prophets,8 But truly I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgement, and of might to declare unto Iacob his transgressi∣on. no I am by the Spirit of the Lord filled with courage,
and undaunted zeale; with true judgement, and bold re∣solution to declare unto Jacob his transgression, &c. They build them stately houses in Zion, and in Jerusa∣lem,10 They build up Zion with blood, and Ierusalem with iniquitie. with those summes which they have extorted from the very bowells of the oppressed innocents. Therefore, for your sakes shall mount Zion be so rased and levelled by the Chaldees,12 Therefore shall Zi∣on for your sake be plow∣ed as a field, and Ierusalem shall become heapes, and the mountaines of the house as the high places of the forrest. that it may be plowed as a field; and Jerusalem shall become heapes of rubbidge; and mount Moriah shall lie like the rockey, and wild hills of the desert. CAP. IV. 1 But in the last daies it shall come to passe that the mountaine of the, &c.See Isa. 2.2. 2 He shall judge among the people, &c. and they shall beate their swords into plowshares.See Isa. 2.4. 5 For all people will walke every one in the name of his God, and wee will walke in the name of the Lord our God for e∣ver and ever.WHiles those that are without the pale of the Church walke after the false religion of their Idol-gods, we will walke in the profession of the holy truth of God for ever. 6 In that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I will ga∣ther her that is driven out, and her that I have affli∣cted.In those dayes of the Gospell, will I call home to my Church, the Synagogues of the Jewes; even those despi∣sed people, which are justly driven out of their land, and deservedly afflicted by me. 7 And I wil make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast farre off a strong nation, and the Lord shall reigne over them in mount Zion from henceforth even for ever.And I will reduce those rebellious, and out-cast peo∣ple, to the profession of my truth; and will make them true members of my Church; and the Lord Christ shall reigne over that Evangelicall Church of mine, (consist∣ing of Jewes and Gentiles) in his heavenly Zion, from henceforth, even forever. 8 And thou O towre of the stocke, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first domi∣nion, the kingdome shall come to the daughter of Ierusalem.And to thee, O thou famous hill of earthly Zion, shall this blessing first come; there shall be the first beginning of this glorious and powerfull Gospell, and Kingdome of Christ; and from thee shall goe forth to the whole Church of God. 9 Now why dost thou cry out aloud? is there no king in thee, is thy coun∣seller perished, for pangs have taken thee, as a wo∣man in travell.Now therefore why art thou dejected, as if thou wert utterly cast off, as if there were no King to uphold and
defend thee, no counseller to take care for thee? Why art thou in these pangs of distresse, as a woman in tra∣vell? And indeed, O my Church of Judea,10 Be in paine and la∣bour to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travell, for now shalt thou goe forth out of the city, and thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go even to Babylon, there shalt thou be delive∣red, there the Lord shall redeeme thee from the hand of thine enemies. I give thee leave to be grieved, and pained for a time; for thou shalt be driven forth of thy cities, and carryed away into the captivity of Babylon; but thou shalt not long lie un∣der this affliction; the Lord thy God shall fetch thee thence, in his appointed time, and shall redeeme thee from the hand of thine enemies; and all this shall be, in a type of the state, and deliverance of my Church, from the hands of their spirituall enemies. Even at this time many nations of the Assyrians and their assistants are conspiring together against thee;11 Now also many na∣tions are gathered against thee, that say, let her bee defiled, and let our eyes looke upon Zion. that say, let us defile her streets with blood; and let our eye see Zion razed, and ruined. Bur they little know what the Lord hath designed to them; they know not his counsell and purpose;12 But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his counsell, for he shall ga∣ther them as the sheaves into the floore. viz. that he intends their destruction, and will suddainly gather them into their graves, as the sheaves, in the time of har∣vest, into the barne. Arise then, O Jerusalem,13 Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion, for I will make thine horne y∣ron, and I will make thy hooves brasse, and thou shalt beate in pieces many people, and I will conse∣crate their gaine unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. the type of my Evangelicall Church; and be victorious over thine enemies, bee not thou wanting to the exercise of that power, which I have given thee; for I have made thee able to subdue all that rise up against thee, in which successefull victories, thou maist not challenge ought unto thy selfe, but shalt ascribe the gaine, and praise thereof wholly unto the Lord of the whole earth. CAP. V. NOw, O ye troupes of Assyrians, and Babylonians,1 Now gather thy self in troupes, O daughter of troupes, he hath laid siege against us, they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheeke gather your selves together, to lay your siege against Jerusalem; they shall offer scornfull usages to Ezekiah King of Judah. And thou Bethleem Ephratah, though thou bee but one of the smallest cities, both for extent,2 But thou Bethleem Ephratah though thou be little among the thousands of Iudah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in Is∣rael, whose goings forth have beene from of old, from everlasting. and for num∣ber of inhabitants, amongst all those of Judah; and therefore art easily taken, and over-runne by the great
Assyrian invader; yet thou hast wherein thou maist ex∣ceedingly comfort thy selfe, and rejoyce above all other cities upon earth; for in thee shall the great Saviour of the world be borne; even that glorious King of his Church, who after his eternall generation of his Father, hath from the first beginnings of the world manifested and revealed himselfe to men. 3 Therefore will hee give them up untill the time that she which tra∣vaileth hath brought forth; then the remnant of his brethren shall returne un∣to the children of Israel.But in the meane time, he shall suffer his Israel to be grievously afflicted; his Church shall be in travaile of great sorrow, till she have received a deliverance there∣of, by the birth of the blessed Messiah, who shall bee borne into the world; And then, the elect amongst the Gentiles, shall joyne themselves with the beleeving Is∣raelites, and both shall make up the Church, and king∣dome of Christ. 4 And he shall stand & feed in the strength of the Lord, in the majestie of the name of the Lord his God, and they shall abide, for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.And that great redeemer of the world shall continue and grow mighty in and through the strength of the Lord, and the Majesty and power of the Lord his God, wherewith his humane nature is inseparably united for ever; and shall be received, and adored to the very ends of the earth. 5 And this man shall be the peace when the Assy∣rian shall come into our land, and when hee shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seaven shepheards, and eight principall men.And this Saviour shall be our peace, and deliverance from all our enemies, even from the Assyrians, when they shall invade our land, and when they, and the Ba∣bylonians shall have taken our palaces and possessed them, then shall the power of Christ raise up unto us, many gracious Kings and Princes of the Medes and Per∣sians which shall procure our restauration. 6 And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof.And those Persian Kings shall make waste the land of Assyria, with the sword, and the land of Babylon in the entrances thereof, &c. 7 And the remnant of Iacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a dew from the Lord, as the showres upon the grasse, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sonnes of men.And those Jewes which shall be called into the Church, shall be dispersed amongst many people, for their conversion; even as the dew or showers that God sends downe upon earth to fruiten it, without the aide or labour of man; so shall they be a meanes from God to diffuse the Gospell all over the world to the great be∣hoofe and comfort of mankinde. 8 And the remnant of Iacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people, as a Lyon a∣mong the beasts of the for∣rest.And those that are converted to the Church, shall be so strong, and powerfull amongst the Gentiles, in the greatest part of the world, as that they shall bee able to prevaile against their opposers, and shall be awfull unto them, even as a Lyon amongst the beasts of the forrest, &c.
Thine hand, O my Church,9 Thine hand shall bee lift up upon thine adversa∣ries. shall prevaile against thine adversaries, &c. And in those daies of the Gospell, I will give an hap∣py peace unto thee, O my Church,10 And it shall come to passe in that day, saith the Lord, that I wil cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy Chariots. so as thou shalt have no use of horses, or chariots for thy defence. And I will take from thee all use of thy walled cities, and strong holds; since my protection, and thy peace shall be guard enough for thee.11 And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strong holds. Or, I will take from thee all confidence in thy hor∣ses and chariots, and defenced cities; and thy trust shall be wholly set upon me. As for those wicked practises of sorcerers,12 And I will cut off witch-crafts out of thine hand, and thou shalt have no more soothsaiers. and sooth∣sayers, whereof thou hadst wont to make use in thy doubts, and extremities, thou shalt have no more re∣course unto them; but thou shalt consult with me in all occasions. When all this shall be performed on thy part,14 So will I destroy thy cities. I will not be wanting unto thee; but will then destroy those cities of thine enemies which shall rise up against thee. CAP. VI. ARise (saith God to me) and call the very senselesse earth; even the hils and mountaines to record,1 Heare ye now what the Lord saith arise, con∣tend thou before the moū∣taines and let the hills heare the voice. of what I have to say against my people. Now therefore, O ye mountaines of Israel and Judah whose roots seeme to reach downe to the foundations of the earth, heare ye, since men will not heare;2 Heare ye, O moun∣taines, the Lords contro∣versie and the strong foun∣dations of the earth, for the Lord hath a controver∣sie with his people. for the Lord hath a just quarrell against his people, &c. Remember what answeres I did put into the mouth of Balaam, the son of Beor; how I drew blessings, even from his mouth, upon you, in stead of the curses,5 O my people, remem∣ber now what Balak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the sonne of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the righte∣ousnesse of the Lord. which Balak would have hired him, to utter against you; re∣member all my gracious dealings with thee in all the passages of the wildernesse, even from Shittim unto Gilgal, till thy very entrance into the land of promise; that ye may acknowledge the righteous proceedings of the Lord with you. And that, in a true remorse of soule,6 Wherewith shall I come before the Lord. ye may humble your selves before him, and say within your selves, wherewith shall I come before the Lord, &c. And if thou shalt once enter into these holy,8 Hee hath shewed thee, O man, what is good. and pe∣nitent thoughts, O man, thou shalt not need to stay for a cleare and full direction from him; Loe, he hath alrea∣dy shewed thee what course to take; hee hath taught
thee what is good, and acceptable to him, &c. 9 The Lords voice cry∣eth unto the city, and the man of wisedome shall see thy name, heare ye the rod and who hath appointed itThe voice of the Lord calleth (by me his Prophet) to the city of Jerusalem (and those that are wise-hearted will have a due and awfull respect to thy name, O Lord,) heare O Jerusalem, heare thou the sad newes of that sharpe rod of affliction, which is prepared for thee; and consider, who it is that hath appointed it, for thy cor∣rection. 10 Are there yet the treasures of wickednesse in the house of the wic∣ked, and the scant measure that is abominable.Notwithstanding all the reproofes, and menaces of my Prophets, are there not ill gotten goods scraped to∣gether, and hoarded up in the houses of thy wicked in∣habitants? are there not false and scant measures which are abominable? 13 Therefore also will I make thee sicke in smi∣ting thee.I will make thee sicke (even to death) with my sharpe and wounding stripes of affliction, &c. 14 And thy casting downe shall bee in the middest of thee, and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliver, & that which thou deliverest, will I give up to the sword.Thy casting downe shall be in the midst of thine own streets, thou shalt fall, even within thine owne walls; and thou shalt take hold on thy children, to deliver them from the enemie, but thou shalt not rescue them; and those, whom thou hast obtained to deliver from the present slaughter, will I soone after give up to the sword. 16 For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the workes of the house of A∣hab, and ye walke in their counsels, that I should make thee a desolation, & the inhabitants thereof an hissing, therefore ye shall beare the reproach of my people.For those impious statutes of Omri the Idolatrous King of Israel, the father of Ahab, are still kept by you and all the wicked practises of the house of Ahab, and Jezebel, are in use amongst you; and ye walke in their counsells, &c. Therefore ye shall justly undergoe that reproach, which is due to a people, of whom I have de∣served so well, and have beene so ill requited. CAP. VII. 1 Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathe∣red the summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage, there is no cluster to eate, my soule desired the first ripe fruit.WOe is me, that I can finde so small comfort of my labours; it is with me, as with a man that after the vintage is past, seeks for a cluster of grapes, but can finde none to eate; even so hath my soule desi∣red (after all my preaching) to finde some godly men, (which would have beene to mee no lesse pleasing than the first ripe grape is to the palate) and behold, there is none to be found. 3 That they may doe evill with bth hands ear∣nestly, the Prince asketh, & the Iudge asketh for a re∣ward: and the great man he uttereth his mischie∣vous desires, so they wrap it up.That there may be no slackening of their indevours to doe evill, on all hands; the very Princes and Judges of my people seeke after bribes, to corrupt justice; the great man doth not modestly smother his wicked de∣sires of unlawfull gaine, but openly professeth it; and so they contrive their mischiefe accordingly.
The very best of them teares,4 The best of them is as a brier the most upright is sharper then a thorne hedge, the day of thy watchmen, and thy visita∣tion commeth, now shall be their perplexity. and scratches like a bri∣er; the most upright wounds, and prickes deeper then a thorne hedge; therefore there is judgement ready at hand for them, the day is comming of thy sharp visitati∣on, wherein thy rulers, and false prophets shall be pla∣gued for their corruption; even now is their perplexity at hand. Ye shall be put to such straits,5 Trust ye not in a friend put ye not confidence in a guide, keepe the doores of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosome. that every one shall be glad to shift for himselfe in silence; not daring to trust to a friend, or to a guide; or to disclose his counsell to the wife that lies in his bosome. But every one shall be so intent upon his owne escape,6 For the sonne disho∣noureth the father, the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law, a mans enemies are the men of his owne house. and preservation, as that the sonne will not spare the honor of his Father, if that shall lie in his way; the daughter will be casting off the respects due to her mo∣ther, and much more the daughter in law will put off all regard of her mother in law; and a man shall be justly suspicious of his owne followers, and domesticke ser∣vants, lest they shall betray him. Thus shall men be distracted with their feares,7 Therefore I will look unto the Lord. but as for me, I will looke unto the Lord, &c. Rejoyce not too much in my misery, O Idumea,8 Rejoyce not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall arise. and Babylon; though I fal into captivity, yet I shal arise, &c. Now shall Babylon be subdued,10 Now shall shee bee troden downe as the mire of the streets. and trampled under feet by the Medes and Persians. In that day that thy walls,11 In the day that the walls are to be built, in that day shall the decree be far removed. O Jerusalem are to be re-e∣difyed, in that day shall the decree that was procured, for the hinderance of the worke, be laid aside, and the in∣deavour of thine opposites shall be frustrated. In that day shall those of Juda, and Israel,12 In that day also hee shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from the fortified cities, and from the fortresse, even to the river, and from sea to sea, and from mountaine to mountaine. flocke to thee out of Assyria, and from the strong cities of Aegypt and shall be re-established in their wonted fortresses, e∣ven as farre as to the bounds of Euphrates, and from one sea to another, all the land over. Notwithstanding, in the meane time, for a space the land shall be desolate, &c.13 Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate. In this meane time, O God, take thou care of thy people; Oh doe thou feede, and governe them;14 Feede thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage which dwel solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel, let them feede in Bashan and Gilead, as in the daies of old. by thy gracious protection; lead thou this flocke of thine heri∣tage, which now dwell solitarily in the wildernesse of their captivity, into the midst of thy fruitfull pastures of Carmel; let them feed in the rich fields of Balan, and Gilead, as in former times. Thy prayer is heard (saith the Lord;) I will doe thus for thee, O my people;15 According to the daies of thy comming out of the land of Aegypt will I shew unto him marvel∣lous things. and as I did in the daies of thy comming out of Aegypt doe marvellous things for thee,
so will I doe againe in thy comming out of Babylon. 17 They shall licke the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their holes like wormes of the earth.The nations shall be humbled under the hand of my Church; they shall give way to them, to take possession of their former inheritance, and shall therefore move out of their places, as wormes move out of the holes of the earth, &c. NAHVM. CAP. I. 1 The burden of Nini∣veh.THe heavy tidings that God sent to Niniveh, and to the whole kingdome of Assyria, &c. 3 God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth and is fu∣rious, the Lord will take vengeance on his adversa∣ries, and hee reserveth wrath for his enemies.The Lord comes to revenge in fury, and terror, as in a whirlewinde and tempest; and as the march of a great hoast raises dust in their passage, so in this motion of the Lord to his vengeāce, the clouds are as the dust of his feete. The fruitfullest regions of Bashan, and Carmel, and Lebanon,4 Bashan languisheth, and Carmel & the flowre of Lebanon languisheth. at his command grow seare, and barren. 7 The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knoweth them that trust in him.He takes gracious notice of them that trust in him; & will deliver them. 9 Affliction shall not rise up the second time.God will make so full dispatch of his enemies the As∣syrians at once, that there be no place for a second onset. 10 For while they bee folden together as thorns, and while they are drun∣ken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stub∣ble fully drie.For, whiles they combine themselves, and plot toge∣ther in wickednesse, as thornes are folded up together in an hedge; and whiles they are consorting together in their drunkennesse, and excesse, then, even then, shall the judgement of God fall upon them, and devoure them, as the fire consumes the drie stubble. 11 There is one come out of thee, that imagineth evill against the Lord, a wicked counseller.There is one comne out of thee, even Rabshakeh, that both imagineth, and dareth to utter evill, against the Lord; a man that speaketh blasphemous words, and gives wicked counsells to my people. 12 Thus saith the Lord, though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet thus shall they be cut downe, when hee shall passe tho∣rough, though I have affli∣cted thee, I will afflict thee no more.Thus saith the Lord; Though the Assyrians be secure
and many, and strong, yet they shall be cut downe, when the destroying Angell shall passe through their campe; and for thee, O Jerusalem, if I have afflicted thee by his siege, yet I will afflict thee no more. For now I will confound his power,13 For now will I breake his yoake from off thee, and will burst thy bonds in sunder. and disappoint that yoake of servitude, which he had intended to thee; and free thee from the bonds of his subjection. And the Lord hath decreed concerning thee, O Se∣nacherib, that thou shalt be slaine of thine owne sonnes,14 And the Lord hath given a commandement concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sow∣en, out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the gra∣ven image, and the molten image; I will make thy grave, for thou art vile. and shalt have no more of thy posterity to succeed in the following generations; and out of the house of Nisroch thy god, and other of thine Idoll Temples, will I cut the graven, and molten images; I will prepare for thee a speedy and miserable death, for thou art vile. Behold, upon the mountaine of Sion,15 Behold, upon the mountaines the feet of him that bringeth good tidings that publisheth peace: O Iudah keepe thy solemne feasts, performe thy vows, for the wicked shall no more passe through thee, he is utterly cut off. and the other mountaines of Judah and Israel, there shall be a joyfull gratulation of thy deliverance and peace, O Judah; and doe thou rejoyce accordingly, in thy God; Keepe thou thy solemne feasts, and performe thy vowes cheerfully to the Lord thy deliverer; for this wicked Tyran shall no more passe through thy borders, he is utterly cut off. CAP. II. THe King of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar,1 He that dasheth in peeces is come up before thy face, keep the muniti∣on, watch the way, make thy loines strong, fortifie thy power mightily. who subdu∣eth all before him, is comne up before thy gates; looke well to thy selfe therefore; stand upon thy gard, fortifie thy bulwarks, and rouze up thy courage to de∣fend thy selfe. But notwithstanding all thy preparation,2 For the Lord hath tur∣ned away the excellency of Iacob, as the excellency of Israel, for the emptiers have emptied them out, & marred their vine branches and war∣like forces, he shall prevaile against thee, O Niniveh; For, if the Lord have turned away the excellency of Ja∣cob, and Israel; and hath given it over to the spoile of the Assyrians; who have destroyed their vineyards, how much more will he deface the glory of Niniveh? Thine enemy of Babylon shall come fiercely upon thee, and with great pompe of terror;3 The shield of his migh∣tie men is made red, the valiant men are in scarlet, the chariots shall be with flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and the firre trees shall be terribly shaken. the shield of his mighty warriours shall glitter with brightnesse, his va∣liant men shall be deckt with scarlet; his charets shall whirle with such fury, that the fire shall sparkle out of their wheeles; and the earth, and woods adjoyning shal shake with the noise.
So also verse 4. 5 He shall recount his worthies, they shall stum∣ble in their walke, they shal make haste to the wal thereof, and the defence shall be prepared.Then shall the Assyrian muster up his forces, and call together his choise commanders; they shall so hasten towards Ninivehs defence, that they shall stumble in the way; they shall make speed to the wall thereof, and prepare their best fortifications. 6 The gates of the ri∣vers shall be opened, and the palace shall be dis∣solved.But all in vaine, for those ports which lead to the ri∣ver, shall be broken open; and the palace of the King, and Temple of Jupiter Belus shall be demolished. 7 And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves, tabring upon their breasts.And the Queene shall be led away captive; shee shall be led away with her maids following her in a sad mour∣ning, and lamentation, like to the dolefull voice of doves, and beating their breasts for the anguish of her deportation. 8 But Niniveh is of old like a poole of water, yet they shall flee away; stand, stand, shall they cry, but none shall looke backe.Though Niniveh be noted of old, for rich and strong, and furnished with multitudes of inhabitants, as a pond with spawne of fishes; yet all this shall not availe her; for, all her inhabitants shall betake themselves to flight; they shall call up to each other to stand▪ but all shall run away; no one shall dare so much as to looke backe. 9 Take ye the spoile of silver, take the spoile of gold; for there is none end of the store and glory out of all the pleasant furni∣ture.Goe to then, ye Babylonians, take yee the spoile of the silver and gold, which the fearefull citizens have left behinde them; neither can ye be able to carry away that store of glorious, and rich furniture wherewith that ci∣ty aboundeth. 10 She is emptie and voide and waste, and the heart melteth, & the knees smite together, and much paine is in al loines, and the faces of them all gather blacknesse.Now is that great city empty, and voide, and utterly despoiled; the hearts of the Ninivites melt with griefe, their knees knocke together with feare; they lay their hands on their loines (as if those were pained) in the vehement gesture of their lamentation, and the fa∣ces of them all are deformed with passion, and astonish∣ment. 11 Where is the dwel∣ling of the lyons, and the feeding place of the young lyons, where the lion, even the old lion walketh and the lyons whelp, and none made them afraid.Where now is the place that was the feared dwelling of the Lyon-like Assyrians? What is becomne of the place, where the old Lion, even the Tyrans of Assyria walked, and where his Princes made themselves so se∣cure, that nothing could affright them? 12 The Lyon did teare in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dennes with ravine.These Assyrian Tyrans did not only take that prey from other nations, which might suffice themselves; but they purvayed for their children, for their followers, for their wives; and filled their store houses with abundance of the rich booties of the world.
There shall be no more regard had to thine ambassa∣dors, nor to those commanding officers of thine,13 And the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard. which lately held the world in awe. CAP. III. WOe to the bloody city of Niniveh,1 Woe to the bloody citie, it is all full of lies, and robbery, the pray depar∣teth not. &c. thou canst not make an end of fraud and rapine. Vengeance is neere thee;2 The noyse of a whip, and the noyse of the rat∣ling of the wheeles. I doe already heare the noise of the Babylonian whips in the hands of the chare∣tiers, driving them furiously against thee, &c. Because of the multitudes of those spirituall fornica∣tions, whereinto (like some faire and tempting harlot,4 Because of the mul∣titude of the whoredomes of the well-favoured har∣lot, the mistresse of witch∣crafts, that selleth nations thorow her whoredomes, and families through her witchcrafts. the mistresse of witchcrafts) thou hast drawne other na∣tions; having so besotted them that thou hast made them the slaves of thy lust. See Ezek. 36. verse 37.5 And I will discover. Art thou better then the famous and populous city A∣lexandria, in Aegypt,8 Art thou better then populus No, that was sci∣tuate among the rivers, that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the sea. which is situate upon the river Ni∣lus, and had the waters to environ it; and is defenced with that great and Sea-like lake of Mareotis? O Alexandria, besides thine owne strength, Aethiopia and Aegypt were thy sure stay;9 Aethiopia and Aegypt were her strength, and it was infinite, Put and Lubim were thy helpers. thine assistants were with∣out number; all the Africans, and, above all, the Libyans were thy helpers. Even so thou also, O Niniveh, shalt drinke deepe of the cup of Gods vengeance;11 Thou also shalt bee drunken: thou shalt be hid. thou that wast once renowned over the world, shalt be glad to bee wrapped up in ob∣scurity, and forgetfulnesse, &c. Thy people in the midst of thee are faint hearted as women, &c.13 Behold thy people in the midst of thee are women. Goe to then,14 Draw the waters for the siege, fortifie thy strong holds, goe into clay, and tread the morter, make strong the bricke hill. furnish thy selfe with provision for a siege; fill thy cisternes with water, fortifie thy strong holds, make ready store of bricks to repayre thy battered walls. But, all this shall availe thee nothing;15 There shall the fire devoure thee: the Sword shall cut thee off: it shall eate thee up like the can∣ker-worme: make thy selfe many as the canker-worme: make thy selfe many as the locusts. notwithstand∣ing all thy preparation, the fire, and the sword shall de∣voure thee, it shall eate thee up, as the canker-worme doth the greene leafe: were thy troupes as many, as there are caterpillers upon the boughes; this number shall doe thee no good for thy defence.
16 Thou hast multipli∣ed thy merchants above the starres of heaven, the cankerworme spoyleth & fleeth away.Neither art thou any better for those multitudes of merchants, that pertaine unto thee, (as thou hast many, like the starres in the heaven for number) for they (like to those canker-wormes) when they have spoyled what they may in their deceitfull trade, flie away from thee, and leave thee destitute. So also verse 17. 17 The crowned are as the locust.Thy rulers also are like unto locusts, &c. 18 Thy Shepheards slumber, O King of Assyria, thy nobles shall dwell in the dust.Thy Princes, O King of Assyria, shall bee dull, and dead-hearted; & they together with thy Nobles shall be laid in the dust mangled, and slaine, &c. There is no hope of healing this deadly wound, which thou shalt receive from the Chaldees;19 There is no healing of thy bruise, thy wound is grievous: all that heare the bruit of thee, shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickednesse passed continually. no, rather all nati∣ons round about shall applaud thy ruine, and clap their hands, for joy of thy destruction; for whom hast not thou provoked by thy wickednesse continually? HABAKKVK. CAP. I. 3 Why dost thou shew me iniquitie, and cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and con∣tention.IT is but a vexation to me, O Lord, to see that iniquitie which I cannot reforme; I see every where cruelty and oppression before me; and when I reprove them, there are those that raise up strife, and contention against me. 4 Therefore the law is slacked, and judgement doth never goe forth: for the wicked doth compasse about the righteous: there∣fore wrong judgement proceedeth.Hereupon it comes to passe, that the law is not pres∣sed home, and judgement is neither denounced, nor ex∣ecuted; for the righteous are in the power and mercy of the wicked; so as it cannot be but that wrong judgment must needs proceed against the just, and innocent. 5 Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder maruelously: for I will worke a worke in your dayes which ye will not beleeve, though it bee told you.But, to take away the ground of all this complaint, behold, O yee degenerated people of the Jewes, and looke upon those heathen, whom ye hate and contemne; and wonder at that, which I will bring to passe by their
hands against you; even a worke, which to your incredu∣lity and selfe-confidence will seeme incredible. They shall have the law in their owne hands,7 Their judgement and their dignity shall proceed of themselves. and they shall carve themselves, of your punishment, and their owne advancement, at their pleasure. They shall come purposely to waste, and spoyle;9 They shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the East winde, and they shall ga∣ther the captivity as the sand. their very lookes shall blast all before them like an east-winde; and they shall carry away a number of captives, as the sand of the Sea for multitude. They shall make a mocke at those Kings, and Princes that will offer to resist them, &c.10 And they shall scoffe at the Kings, and the Prin∣ces shall be a scorne unto them. Then shall their King Nebuchadnezzar,11 Then shall his minde change, and hee shall passe over, and offend, imputing this his power unto his God. alter his de∣termination of prosecuting his forraigne invasions, and returning home to Babylon, shall bee puffed up with these his victories, and shall foolishly impute them to his god Bel. But, that I may turne my thoughts,12 Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy One? we shall not die: O Lord thou hast ordained them for judgement, and O mighty God, thou hast established them for correction. and my speech to thee, O Lord my God, mine holy One, I hope thou hast not designed us to utter extirpation; thou hast ordained these Chaldees, most justly, for our punishment, and set them on worke for our correction, not for our destru∣ction. Thou art of purer eyes, than to behold evill,13 Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evill, and canst not looke on ini∣quity: wherefore lookest thou upon them that deale trecherously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devou∣reth the man that is more righteous than thee. &c. Wherefore shouldest thou give way to the wicked Chaldees, to devoure thy people that are more righteous than they. Wherefore shouldst thou put men into the same con∣dition with the fishes of the sea;14 And makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no rule over them? amongst whom the greater devoures the lesse, without al regard of any thing but power; or, into the same case with creeping things, which having no ruler, have therefore no protection, or safety from mutuall violence? Even as such fishes doth Nebuchadnezar take thy peo∣ple of Judah; hee takes them up with the angle; and,15 They take up all of them with the angle: they catch them in their net, and gather them in their dragge, therefore they rejoyce and are glad. lest that dispatch should not be speedy enough, he catch∣eth them in his net, and gathers them in his dragge, to cast them out into captivity; and rejoyceth, and triumph∣eth in this his advantage. And hereupon he and his Babylonians sacrifice to this net of their policy,16 Therefore they sacri∣fice unto their net, and burne incense unto their dragge: because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. and burne incense to the dragge of
their power, because they have, by them, increased their dignity and dominion. 17 Shall they therefore emptie their net, and not spare continually to slay the nations?Wilt thou therefore, O Lord, still suffer them to empty their net for a new draught? Wilt thou not re∣straine them from making spoile of the nations round a∣bout continually? CAP. II. 1 I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the towre, and will watch to see what he will say un∣to me, and what I shall answere when I am repro∣ved.SInce God hath appointed me to bee a watchman for his people, I will performe the charge committed un∣to mee; I will stand upon my watch, and set me up∣on the Tower, and carefully view, and listen what his pleasure is to doe with them, and to reveale unto mee; that I may give a good account of this my station, and message, when I shall be challenged for it. 2 And the Lord answe∣red me and said, Write the vision and make it plaine upon tables, that he may runne that readeth it.Write thou this thing, that I doe now declare unto thee, in great text letters; and fixe the writing publikely, upon many posts; and let it be so legile, that hee who runnes, may read it as he passes. 3 For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speake and not lie.For this vision is not to be presently fulfilled, but hath a time set, and determined, wherein it shal be accompli∣shed; at the expiring whereof, it shall be apparently ve∣rified to the world, &c. 4 Behold, his soule which is lifted up, is not upright in him, but the just shall live by his faith.In any case, give thou full beleefe to this word of the Lord; for behold, that man which withdraweth his soule from trusting unto God, and will bee raysing to himselfe projects of his owne, as he is unsound and faithlesse to God, so is accordingly displeasing to him; but the just & upright man will depend upon the promises of God, and speed thereafter;5 Yea, also because hee transgresseth by wine, he is a proud man, neither keepeth at home, who en∣largeth his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all peo∣ple, who enlargeth his de∣sire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all na∣tions, and heapeth unto him all people. for his faith in God shall both uphold his life here, and crowne it with glory hereafter. Know therefore, that this proud Babylonian, under whom thy nation shall suffer, shall at last be met with, in his owne kinde; he is now transported, and (as it were) in∣toxicated with his ambition, as with wine; which carries him from home, to the invasion of other countryes; and makes him as insatiable as hell it selfe, and as death, which can never be satisfied; whereupon hee gathers unto him, all the Kingdomes round about, and heapes up Crownes and Scepters to himselfe, over all the regions of the earth. 6 Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting pro∣verbe against him, and say, Woe to him that increa∣seth that which is not his: how long? and to him that ladeth himselfe with thicke clay.But, when his turne comes, shall not all these nations, whom hee hath subdued, seeing his overthrowe, and utter ruine, insult upon him, and take up a taunting pro∣verb against him and say; What is now become of the
man that raked up those Kingdomes whereto he had no right? How long hath hee enjoyed these ill-gotten crownes? Where now is he that ladeth himselfe with extent of earth; and with the unprofitable weight of this base earthly trash? Shall not the Medes and Persians rise up suddenly a∣gainst thee? and set upon thee, and spoile thee?7 Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee? and awake that shall vexe thee? and thou shalt be for booties unto them? and thou shalt be for booties unto them? Woe be to thee O insolent Babylonian,9 Woe to him that co∣veteth an evill covetous∣nesse to his house, that hee may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evill. that out of a covetous, and ambitious desire, scrapest together the wealth of the world, that thou mayst make thy nest on high in this Babylon; and that thou maist be freed from all the feare, or power of an enemie. Thou vainely devisest thus to advance thine house,10 Thou hast consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and hast sinned against thy soule. but thou shalt finde this to be the way to bring shame, and ruine upon it; even in this bloody violence, which thou hast used, in the cutting off many people, thou hast brought confusion upon thy house, and hast sinned against thy soule. For, if men should hold their peace,11 For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beame out of the timber shall answere it. the very stones out of the wall, which thou hast raised by this cruelty, shall cry out against thee; and the beame out of the tim∣ber-worke shall second this clamour against thine un∣justice, and violence. Woe to him that buildeth,12 Woe to him that buildeth a towne with blood, and stablisheth a citie by iniquitie. and enlargeth his city Ba∣bylon with those bloody spoiles, and rapines of other in∣nocent nations. Behold, shall it not be just with the Lord of hosts,13 Behold, is it not of the Lord of hostes, that the people shall labour in the very fire, and the peo∣ple shall weary themselves for very vanitie. to crosse, and defeat all thy projects? and to cause this peo∣ple whom thou settest on worke in these buildings, to lose their labour; in that, they shall finde they have wearied themselves vainly in raising up that pile, which shall soone be consumed with fire? The notice of which just revenge from God,14 For the earth shall be filled with the know∣ledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. shall so fill the world, as that it shall bee over-spred with the ac∣knowledgement of Gods just proceedings herein, (even as the sea is covered with waters, and shall give glory to his infinite justice. Woe to thee, O Nebuchadnezar,15 Woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drinke: that puttest thy bottell to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou maiest looke on their nakednesse. that forcest thy neighbour Princes to drinke deepe of the cup of thy cruell affliction; & when thou hast brought them downe into extreme misery, makest thy selfe merry by insulting upon their calamity. Thou art requited accordingly,16 Thou art filled with shame for glory, drinke thou also, and let thy fore∣skinne be uncovered: the cup of the Lords right hand shall bee turned unto thee, and shamefull spew∣ing shall be on thy glory. for in stead of that glory, which thou promisest thy selfe, thou art filled with
shame; Now shalt thou also drinke deepe of the cup of Gods anger, and thy shame and miserable impotencie shall be discovered to the world; thou shalt bee made drunke with this bitter draught, from the hand of God, and thy shame and disgrace shall bewray it selfe palpably in a lothsome fashion, to the eyes of men. 17 For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee: and the spoile of beasts, which made them afraid, because of mens blood, and for the violence of the land of the citie, and of all that dwell therein.For it shall be with thee, as with the wild beasts in the forrest of Lebanon, which are violently chased by the hunter, and terrified in their pursuit; even so shalt thou be hunted by the Persian, because of the blood of men, which thou hast shed, and the violence that thou hast done to the lands, and cities of thy neighbours. 18 What profiteth the graven image, that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten Image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his worke trust∣eth therein, to make dumb Idoles?What then shall the Chaldean finde himselfe benefi∣ted by his graven Images which he hath made; and what stay and safety (worthy of his reliance) shall he meet with in his molten Image, which is no other then a teacher of lies; to what purpose hath he made these dumb Idols of either kinde? 19 That saith to the dumb stone; Arise, it shall teach.That saith to the senselesse stone; Arise; and shall adde; This image shall teach us future things; this oracle shall instruct us,20 Let all the earth keepe silence before him. &c. Let all the inhabitants of the earth be awfully affected, before his Majesty. The Title. CAP. III. 1 A propheticall and supplicatory song of Ha∣bakkuk, set to mixed tunes.O Lord, I have heard the words spoken by thee, con∣cerning the future captivity of thy people,2 O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid; O Lord revive thy worke in the midst of the yeares, in the middest of the years make knowne: in wrath remember mercy. and was much troubled with them; And now O Lord, since they must lie under thi grievous affliction, for a time; make good upon them, the worke of thy gracious preservation of them; uphold them, whiles those yeares of their mise∣ry continue; let thy mercifull protection be made known to the world, &c. 3 God came from Te∣man, and the holy one from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.God hath given abundant proofe of his power, and care over his Church; if we looke to his ancient mercies, and dreadfull manifestations of himselfe; when the Lord God came before his people from the South, even from Aegypt through the wildernesse, heaven and earth were full of the Majesty of his glory. 4 And his brightnesse was as the light: he had hornes comming out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power.His brightnesse was as the light of the Sunne; he had radiant beames that came streaming out from him; and
under those glorious raies his power was rather hid, then manifested. Before him, he sent the pestilence;5 Before him went the pestilence, and burning coales went forth at his feet. and other consu∣ming judgments were ordained, and executed by him upon his enemies, and rebells. When he fixed his station in Canaan,6 He stood and measu∣red the earth: hee beheld and drove asunder the na∣tions, and the everlasting mountaines were scatte∣red, the perpetuall hils did bow: his wayes are ever∣lasting. and gave order by Joshua, for the dividing of the land of promise; hee (by his very looke) drove out the nations before Israel; those mountaines, which from their first creation, had beene fixed to their places, were now so shaken at the awfull presence of God, as if they had been scattered and removed from their foundations; those hills which had ever stood upright, now bowed; so dreadfull and glori∣ous is God for ever, in the manifestation of himselfe to his creatures. I saw the neighbouring nations of the Arabians,7 I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtaines of the land of Midian did tremble. and Aethiopians, in great distresse; and the Midianites trem∣bling under the expectation of his judgements, which he was ready to bring upon them, in the behalfe of his people. O God, when thou dividedst the red Sea,8 Was the Lord dis∣pleased against the rivers? was thine anger against the rivers? was thy wrath against the Sea; that thou didst ride upon thy horses, and thy charets of salva∣tion. and driedst up the river of Jordan, was it upon any displeasure that thou conceivedst against those waters? or wa it out of a desire to triumph over the sea, that thou didst, as it were, passe, in state, upon the horses, and charets of salvation, and deliverance, before thy people, through the channell thereof? or was it not for the confusion of those proud Aegyptians which pursued thine Israel. Thou didst draw forth,9 Thy bowe was made quite naked, according to the oathes of the tribes, even thy word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers. and bend the bowe of thy migh∣ty power among thine enemies, according to the oathes, which thou swarest to the tribes of Israel; even the word of promise which thou gavest them to settle them in that good land. Selah. Thou didst cleave in sunder the rivers which runne upon the earth, to give way to thy people. The very mountaines felt the terriblenesse of thy pre∣sence, and shooke withall,10 The mountaines saw thee, and they trembled: the overflowing of the water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high. the over-flowing streame of the red Sea, and Jordan passed backward in their chan∣nells; the deepe made a noyse in his running together on heapes, & did lift vp his waves, as so many hands to praise and magnifie thy power. The Sunne,11 The Sunne and Moone stood still in their habitation, at the light of thine arrowes they went, and at the shining of the glittering speare. and the moone stood still upon the com∣mand of Joshua, for the time, in the orbes of their hea∣ven; in which extraordinary light of those stāding plants, thy thunder and lightening and hailestones flew abroad, as so many arrowes, or glittering speares, to wound thine enemies.
12 Thou didst march through the land in indig∣nation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger.In despight of which enemies, thou didst march through the land of Canaan, before thy people, in great indigna∣tion at their resistance, and didst subdue the heathen be∣fore them, in thine anger. 13 With thine annoin∣ted, thou woundedst the head out of the houses of the wicked, by discove∣ring the foundation, unto the Necke. Selah.With Moses thy servant, thou didst cut off the Kings, and Princes, which were the heads of those seven wick∣ed nations, and leftest them destitute; even as when the head is cut off by the sword, the junctures thereof unto the necke and shoulders, are fully discovered. 14 Thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his villages, they came out as a whirlewinde to scatter me: their rejoycing was as to devoure the poore secretly.Thou didest with thine immediate judgements, and by the weapons of thy people, overthrow those which were the Princes, and leaders of those hostile forces; they came out furiously as a whirle winde to scatter & defeat Israel; and they rejoyced to think how easily their power and subtilty should be able to consume this poore hand∣full of thy people. 15 Thou didst walke through the sea with thine horses, through the heape of great waters.When thou led'st thy people through the Sea, thou didst, as it were, passe triumphantly with thine horses of warre through the heapes of the great waters. 16 When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rot∣tennesse entred into my bones, and I trembled in my selfe that I might rest in the day of trouble; whē he commeth up unto the people, hee will invade them with his troupes.I heard thy speeches, O Lord, as I before said, concern∣ing those grievous afflictions, which thou hast threatned to bring upon thy people; and when I heard thereof, I was moved with much feare, and compassion; my heart trembled, my lips shooke; and I was even consumed with inward griefe and heavinesse; and all this sorrow, and consternation, should I thinke well bestowed; on condi∣tion, that I might rest in the day of the common calami∣ty; when the Chaldees come up against my nation, and invade Judah with their troupes. 17 Although the fig-tree shall not blossome, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labour of the Olive shall faile, and the fields shall yeeld no meat, the flocke shall bee cut of from the fold, and there shall bee no herde in the stalles.Although God should so crosse us, as that none of these outward comforts should prosper in our hands; though our fig-trees should not yeeld us any blos∣somes, nor our vines yeeld us grapes, though our olive trees should faile us, after the labour and cost bestowed on them, though our fields should yeeld us no graine, nor our folds any flocks, nor our stalls any heards. 18 Yet I will rejoyce in the Lord: I will joy in the God of my salvation.Yet I will depend chearefully upon the Lord, even against hope, and joy in the God of my salvation. 19 The Lord God is my strength, and hee will make my feet like hindes feet, and he will make me to walke upon my high places, to the chiefe singer on my stringed instru∣ments.See 2 Sam. 22. verse 34, &c.
ZEPHANIAH. CAP. I. I Will utterly waste and consume all things from off this land of Judea,2 I will utterly con∣sume all things from off the land, saith the Lord. which hath so grievously provoked me, saith the Lord; And I will destroy those abhominable Idols which have beene stumbling blocks to their follow∣ers; together with their Idolatrous clients.3 And the stumbling blockes with the wicked. I will cut off those that remaine of the worshipers of Baal, from this place;4 And I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarins with the Priests. and the name of those Idolatrous Priests of his, together with those corrupt ministers of my sanctuary. And those that build altars on the roofes of their houses to the hosts of heaven, &c.5 And them that wor∣ship the host of heaven: Do thou with an awfull feare, & silence,7 Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God: for the day of the Lord is at hand, for the Lord hath prepared a sa∣crifice, hee hath bin his guests. make account to see the execution of these judgements, from the Lord; for the day thereof is nigh at hand; the Lord hath made preparation to a very great slaughter, which he shortly intendeth. So also verse 8. In that day will I punish those, which violently breake into the houses of their peaceable neighbours,9 In the same day also will I punish all those that leape on the threshold, which fill their masters houses with violence and deceit. and take away their goods forceably, filling their masters houses, with treasures gotten by rapine and fraude. There shall be a generall lamentation and shrieking in all the street, of Jerusalem,10 And it shall come to passe in that day, saith the Lord, that there shall bee the noyse of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing frō the hills. from the fish gates which is in the upper part of the cities to the lowermost gate, there∣of; and great noyses of the falling of houses, & out-cryes of men, from the hills, in the remotest parts of Jerusa∣lem. Howle ye inhabitants of the hollow valley of Cedron,11 Howle yee inhabi∣tants of Maktesh, for all the merchant people are cut downe: all they that beare silver, are cut off. for all the merchants which dwelt in those parts are cut off; all those rich men which had wont to drive a great trade with their silver, are now perished, and gone. And it shall come to passe in that day,12 And it shall come to passe at that time, that I will search Ierusalem with candles, and punish the men that are setled on their lees, that say in their heart, the Lord will not do good, neither will he doe evill. that I will make a curious search, in Jerusalem, and will leave no corner
thereof unsought for the fetching out, and punishing of those soule, and secure offenders, which have hardned themselves with resolutions of wickednesse; and have determinately setled themselves to live in their knowne sinnes, and say in their hearts; Tush, it is all one whether wee doe good, or evill, the Lord will not regard it, whe∣thersoever we doe. 14 The great day of the Lord is neere.The great day of Gods revenge upon Jerusalem is neare at hand, &c. So also verse 15. and 16. CAP. II. 2 Before the decree bring forth, before the day passe as the chaffe.BEfore the command of God bring forth all this heavy judgement upon you; before the day of your captivi∣ty come upon you; which is comming upon you with such speed, and violence, as the chaffe is driven with a strong winde,3 Seeke yee the Lord, all ye meeke of the earth which have wrought his judgement, seeke righ∣teousnesse seeke meek∣nesse: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. &c. Pray to the Lord, O all ye that are well disposed, & cō∣scionable upon earth, ye which have indevoured to doe that which is just and right before him; goe ye on still to approve your selves to him in your holy carriage, and good affections, it may be, that God will be pleased to deliver you from the common judgement. 4 For Gaza shall be for∣saken, and Ashkelon, a de∣solation, they shall drive out Ashdod at the noone day, and Ekron shall bee rooted up.For ye shall see the hand of God (by way of fore-warn∣ing) upon all those cities, that belong to the Philistims, upon Gaza, and Ashkelon, and Ashdod and Ekron; all these shall be destroyed, and rooted up openly before your eyes. 5 Woe unto the inha∣bitants of the Sea coast, the nation of the Cherethites, the word of the Lord is against you, O Canaan, the land of the Philistims.Woe to the inhabitants of the coast of the Mediter∣ranean Sea; even to the Cherethites, that dwell there; the word of the Lord threatens speedy destruction against thee, O thou region of Canaan, which art possessed by the Philistims, &c. 6 And the Sea coast shall be dwellings and cot∣tages for shepheards, and folds for flocks:And those Sea coasts shall bee left desolate, and un∣peopled; onely there shall be some solitary cottages for shepheards, and folds for flocks, along those shores. 7 And the coast shall be for the remnant of the houses of Iudah, they shall feed thereupon, in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie downe in the evening, for the Lord their God shall visite them and turne away their captivity.And afterward, this whole tract shall be repossessed by those of the house of Judah; they shall bee settled in this country; and after their captivity is past, (as it were in the latter end of the day) they shall be the owners of the land and cities of the Philistims; for the Lord their God shall in mercy remember them, and returne them from their captivity.
For he will destroy all the Idolls of the earth,11 For he will famish all the gods of the earth, &c. and fa∣mish all those false deities, in withdrawing from them the offerings, and gifts of their deluded followers, &c. And not only Moab and Ammon,12 Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slaine by my sword. but ye Ethiopians also, shall be slaine (at my appointment) by the sword of Nebuchadnezzar. So also verse 13. Even Niniveh, that mighty city,13 And he will stretch out his hand against the North, and destroy Assyri∣a, and will make Niniveh a desolation, and drie like a wildernesse. shall be so desolated by the sword of the Babylonian, as that flocks shall lie downe in the midst of those, which were her streets; all the beasts of the countries round about may either passe or feed there; all the birds of solitarinesse, and desolati∣on shall take up their lodgings, in the ruinous remain∣ders of that goodly city; and the cedar-feelings thereof shall lie uncovered. So verse 15. CAP. III. WOe to Jerusalem which is filthy,1 Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing citie. and polluted with abominable wickednesse; Woe to the cru∣ell and oppressing city, Jerusalem. Her Princes are fierce, and cruell, like roaring lyons;3 Her Princes within her are roaring Lyons, her Iudges are evening wolves they gnaw not the bones till the morrow. her judges are covetous, and greedy, like the hungry wolves, which range forth in the evening, which when they finde a prey, devoure it at once, and stay not to gnaw upon the bones, but swollow them downe hastily. They have violently strained the law of God to their owne senses, and to the favour of their wicked practices.4 They have done vi∣olence to the law. The holy and just God is in the midst of her;5 The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not doe iniquitie, every morning doth he bring his Iudgement to light, hee faileth not, but the unjust knoweth not shame. both to observe her carriage, and to instruct her in the waies of his lawes, and to punish her sinfull failings, and doth, and will proceed accordingly; he will not be unjust in the forbearing her; but doth every day shew some judg∣ment, or other upon her wicked inhabitants; he faileth not, thus to correct, and warne her; but the unjust are not sensible of any shame, or danger that is towards them. I have given them sufficient warning by those judge∣ments,6 I have cut off the na∣tions. which I have brought upon the nations about them, &c. I said of thee, O Jerusalem▪ surely thou wilt be pre∣monished by my judgements, to feare me:7 I said, surely thou wilt feare me, thou wilt receive instruction, so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them; but they rose early, and corrupted al their doings. Thou wilt
receive good counsell, and instruction, that so I might turne away my threatned destruction from thee, how∣soever I might afflict thee for a time; but they contra∣rily gave themselves to an eager, and wilfull pursuit of their sinnes, and have shamefully corrupted all their doings. Therefore since both the nations, and ye, are so unre∣claimably sinfull,8 Therefore waite yee upon me, saith the Lord, untill the day that I raise up to the pray; for my de∣termination as to gather the nations that I may as∣semble the kingdomes, to powre upō them mine in∣dignation, even all my fierce anger. make account of an heavie day; where∣in I will rise up to execute my vengeance upon you, and them; for my determination is, to gather the nations, and assemble the kingdomes, that I may enwrappe them in one common destruction, &c. 9 For then will turne to the people a pure lan∣guage, that they may all cal upon the name of the LordAfter which, I will restore peace to my people; and will so worke with them, that abandoning all false wor∣ship and Idolatry, they shall with pure hearts and lips confesse me their Lord Christ, &c. 10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my sup∣pliants, even the daughter of my dispersed shal bring mine offering.From the remotest parts of the world shall suppliants be gathered into my Church; both Jewes and Gentiles shall bring offerings unto me; and subject themselves to my Gospell. 11 In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed a∣gainst me, for then I will take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoyce in thy pride, & thou shalt no more be hauty because of mine holy mountaine.In that day thou shalt have no cause to be ashamed of all thy former offences; wherein thou hast transgres∣sed against me; since both I have fully forgiven them, and reformed them also; for then I will take away from thee that vaine pride and confidence, which too many of my people put in the holinesse of mount Zion, and the Temple there; as if that alone could secure them from all evills, and procure all blessings. 12 I will also leave in the midst of thee an affli∣cted and poore people and they shal trust in the name of the Lord.Rather, in the stead of these proud boasters, I will leave in the midst of thee, those meek, and humble soules which shall be vile in their owne eyes, and shall place all their trust in Christ their Saviour. 13 The remnant of Is∣rael shall not doe iniquitie nor speake lies; neither shal a deceitfull tongue bee found in their mouth, for they shall feede, and lie downe, and none shall make them afraid.And those selected people, which shall give up their names to mee, in my Church shall make due conscience of their waies; not daring, either to doe wickedly, or speake deceitfully; for they shall be under the leading of a faithfull shepheard; under whose power and mercy they shall feed safely and quietly, and none shall make them afraid. 14 Sing O daughter of Zion.Sing praises therefore unto the Lord, O thou Church of the faithfull, &c. 15 The Lord hath ta∣ken away thy judgements, he hath cast out thine ene∣mie, the King of Israel, e∣ven the Lord is in the midst of thee.The Lord hath removed away both thy sins, and his judgements, from thee; he hath subdued thy spirituall
enemies under thee, &c. Thou shalt not have cause to feare any evill that may befall thee. So also verse 16.17. I will gather together, and comfort them that mourn after the solemne assemblies of Sion,18 I will gather them that are sorrowfull for the solemne assemblie, who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a bur∣den. grieving at their withholding therefrom, by their forced captivity; who are a feeling part of thee my Church; to whom the re∣proach of their long restraint was a burden. I will save the remnant of Israel that were maimed, and halting under too much oppression, &c.19 I will save her that halteth, &c. HAGGAI. CAP. I. THe people make excuses for their neglect,2 This people say, the time is not come, the time that the Lords house should be built. and say, the time is not yet comne for the building up of the Temple; faine would we be reedifying it, but we see opposition made by our envious neighbours, so as it is not yet seasonable to goe about it. Is it time for you, O yee Jewes,4 Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your seeled houses, and this house lie waste? to build for your selves, faire houses, and to take your pleasure in injoy∣ing of them, whiles ye suffer Gods house to lie waste? Consider well the courses that ye take,5 Consider your waies. & the successe of your affaires. God hath justly crossed you in all your hopes,6 Ye have sowen much, and bring in little, ye eate, but ye have not enough, ye drinke, but ye are not fil∣led with drinke, ye cloath you, but there is none warme, & he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes and en∣deavours; Ye have sowne much, expecting a goodly crop, but ye finde little to reape, &c. and he that ear∣neth wages, is never the better, never the richer; his gaines doe not prosper in his hands. Goe yee up to mount Libanus, cut downe cedars,8 Goe up to the moun∣taine, and bring wood, and build the house, and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the Lord. and bring them up to Sion, and build this Temple of mine, and though it be not done with that state, and magnificence, wherewith it was formerly, yet I will
take pleasure in it, and account my selfe glorified in, and by it, saith the Lord. 9 I did blow upon it, &c.I crossed your hopes and designes in it, &c. CAP. II. 3 Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory, and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?IF there be any yet alive amongst you, that saw this Temple in her first glory, as it was built by Salomon, ere it was rained by Nebuchadnezzar, and sees it now in the present homely estate, wherein it is; will he not thinke meanely of it, as a thing not worthy to be regar∣ded? 4 Yet now bee strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the Lord, and be strong O Io∣suah, sonne of Iosedech the high priest, and bee strong all ye people of the land, saith the Lord, and worke, for I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts.Yet now be of good courage, O Zerubbabel, &c. and be strong, and goe forward cheerefully with the worke, O ye people of the land; for I doe both graciously ac∣cept, and will mercifully blesse your indeavours herein. According to the word of my covenant with you, when ye came out of Aegypt,5 According to the word that I covenanted with you when yee came out of Aegypt, so my spirit remaineth amōg you, feare ye not. that ye should be my peo∣ple, and I would be your God; so will I performe my protection, and the presence of my spirit with you; feare ye not. For thus saith the Lord of hosts; Once I did in great terrour deliver my law;6 For thus saith the Lord of hosts, Yet once it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth and the sea, and the drie land. and now ere any long time, I will once more worke a great change in my Church, by the bringing in of my Gospell; before, and in the exhi∣biting whereof, as I did formerly, in the delivery of the law, I will doe wondrous things, both in heaven and earth, to the astonishing of the inhabitants thereof. 7 And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts.And besides the prodigies in heaven, and earth, wher∣with men shall be moved to amazement, I will cause great commotions of warres, amongst all nations, who shall be grievously embroyled; and then immediately, peace being restored to the world, the promised and de∣sired Messias, the Saviour of the world shall come; and I will fill this house with the glory of his presence in it; for he shall come under the roofe thereof. 8, 9. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the Lord of hosts, the glo∣ry of this later house shall be greater then of the for∣mer, saith the Lord of hosts, and in this place wil I give peace, saith the Lord of hosts.Thinke not that I stand upon matter of cost, or price of metalls; all the silver and gold which is hid in the bowells of the earth, is mine, and how easie were it for me, thus to adorne my house; but I would have you to know that the glory of this house of mine doth not con∣sist in these outward things; no, the glory of this later house (though meaner in structure) shall be greater, then
of the former, saith the Lord; in that my sonne the Sa∣viour of the world, being cloathed in flesh, shall come personally, and visibly under the roofe of it; and that from thence shall the Gospell goe forth to all the world even that Gospell of peace, which shall worke a true and blessed tranquillity to every beleever.12, 13, 14. If one beare holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt doe touch bread or pottage, or wine, or oile, or any meate, shall it bee holy? and the priests an∣swered and said, no: then said Haggai if one that is uncleane by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be uncleane? and the priests answered and said, it shall be uncleane; then answered Haggai and said, so is this people, & so is this nation before me, saith the Lord, and so is every worke of their hands, and that which they offer there, is unclean. As a man that toucheth, or carrieth about him a san∣ctified thing, is not thereby made cleane and holy; nei∣ther doth thereby sanctifie or make holy those other things, which he toucheth; So yee Jewes, though yee have an holy altar, and there bee holy sacrifices offered thereon, yet this holinesse of your altar cannot sanctifie you; But, as contrarily, if a man that is uncleane, through any occasion of legall impurity, touch bread, or flesh, or any such thing, that very thing, which he toucheth, is by that touch made uncleane; so ye Jewes being moral∣ly polluted, and uncleane, doe by your sinfull impurity pollute my altars, and offerings, and all the services that ye goe about. And now I pray you, consider,15 And now I pray you consider from this day, and upward, from before the stone was laid upon a stone, in the Temple of the Lord. and look backe from this day, unto the time that the first stone was laid in the foundation (which is above one hundred yeares) since when there hath not beene a stone laid upon it. In all that time of your slacknesse, and neglect,16 Since those daies were, when one came to a heape of twentie measures there were but ten. I did so sensibly crosse you, that you might well finde it, in your corne, and oile, and wine, in all which your hopes failed you notably;18 Consider now from this day, and upward from the foure and twentieth day of the ninth moneth, even from the day that the foundation of the Lords Temple was laid, consider it: where one made account to have ga∣thered twenty measures, he found but ten, &c. And now, that ye may see Gods blessing upon you, for setting your hands, to the building of his Temple, consider his dealings with you ever since the foure and twentieth day of November (when yee beganne to re∣new the worke of this building) consider. As yet the seed is so farre from yeelding an harvest-increase to the barne, that it is scarce sprouted up;19 Is the seed yet in the barne? yea, as yet, the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate & the olive tree hath not brought forth: from this day, will I blesse you. as yet there is no proofe of your other fruits, the vines, pome∣granates, olives; but marke how plentifully from this ve∣ry day, God will blesse you in all these. I will make a sensible and wonderfull alteration in the world.21 I will shake the heavens and the earth. For I will overthrow the tones of divers King∣domes,22 And I will over∣throw the throne of king∣domes, and I will destroy the strength of the King∣domes of the heathen, and I will overthrow the cha∣riots, and those that ride in them, and the horses and their riders shall come downe every one by the sword of his brother.
and will cause the opposite Kingdomes of the heathen, to subdue one another; and besides the broiles of forraine warres, I will cause the power of great king∣domes to be impaired, and overturned by civill divisi∣ons. 23 In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the sonne of Shealtiel, saith the Lord, and will make thee as a signet: for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord of hosts.But as for thee, O Zerubbabel, my faithfull servant, which hast beene zealous to advance my service, and to build my Temple; I will take thee and thy posterity in∣to my dearest respects, and speciall care; for I have made choise of thee, as the man, from whose loines, in the ful∣nesse of time, I will take that flesh, wherewith I shall be cloathed, saith the Lord of hosts. ZECHARIAH. CAP. I. 5 Your fathers, where are they? and the pro∣phets, doe they live for e∣ver?YOur Fathers are dead; It is true, you say; and so are the Prophets too; both of them were men; it was not for them to live here,6 But my words and my statutes, which I com∣manded my servants the Prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned, & said, Like as the Lord of hosts thought to doe unto us, ac∣cording to our waies and according to our doings, so hath he dealt with us. for ever. But though my Prophets died, yet the words both of counsells, and menaces, which they delivered to your fathers, live still; and were acknowledged by those your fathers to be justly verified in, and upon them; whiles they freely confessed to Gods glory, and to their owne shame; Right so as God threatned to deale with us ac∣cording to our doings, even so hath he done; we are sin∣full and miserable, and he is just. In the foure and twentieth day of the eleventh moneth,7 Vpon the foure and twentieth day of the ele∣venth moneth, which is the moneth Sebat. which was the moneth of our January, &c. I had a vision by night; Christ the Angell of the co∣venant represented himselfe to me as a man riding upon a red horse;8 I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood upon the mirtle trees that were in the bottome, and behind him were three red horses, specled and white. by that fiery colour implying his readinesse to be revenged on the enemies of his Church; and hee stood among the myrtle trees, that were in the valley, to signifie the low and dpressed condition of the Jewes
in their Babylonish captivity; and behinde him were severall Angels, that were ready to attend his cōmands, furnished with great power for that purpose. Then said I to the Angell, which shewed me this vi∣sion; O my Lord, what are these? and the same Angell answered me, I will shew thee what these be.9 Then said I, O my Lord, what are these? and the Angel that talked with me, said unto me, I will shew thee what these be. And the great Angell of the Covenant (Christ Jesus) who stood among the myrtle-trees,10 And the man that stood among the mirtle-trees answered, and said, these are they, whom the Lord hath sent to walke to and fro through the earth. (as taking the an∣swer out of the mouth of that Angell who spake in me) answered, and said; These are ministring spirits, whom the Lord hath sent to take view of all the parts of the world, and to give an account of the estate of earthly af∣faires.11 And they answered the Angell of the Lord that stood among the mir∣tle trees, and said, wee have walked to and fro through the earth, and be∣hold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest. And those ministring spirits accordingly gave answer unto Christ, the Sonne of God; We have according to our charge, and commission, passed to and fro, through the world; and behold, all the earth is now free from warres and open hostilities; for the Babylonian having tyranically spoyled thy people and his neighbours, is now at rest, and findes no opposition.12 Then the Angell of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Ierusalem and on the cities of Iudah, against which thou hast had indignation these three score and ten yeares. Then Christ the mediator of his Church, answered and said: O Lord of hosts, how long will it be, ere thou shew mercy to to thy chosen people, to Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah; whom thou hast now these seventy yeares afflicted, with a miserable captivity? I am much affected with the miseries of Jerusalem, and of Zion;14 I am jealous for Ie∣rusalem, and for Zion with a great jealousie. and conceive great and just indignation against the enemies thereof. I am highly offended with these Chaldees, which are now at ease, and take their pleasure; for,15 And I am very sore displeased wath the hea∣then that are at ease: for I was but a little displea∣sed, and they helped for∣ward the affliction. I was indeed displeased with the sinnes of my people, and intended to chastise them for their offences; but these Chaldees pro∣secuted their owne malice, and ambition, and aggravated their afflictions to their utmost. And Jerusalem shall bee built againe after so long ruine, and desolation.16 And a line shall bee stretched forth upon Ieru∣salem. And behold, foure hornes of yron were represented unto me. Then said I, to the Angell,18, 19 Then I lift up mine eyes, and saw & be∣hold foure hornes. And I said unto the Angell that talked with me, What bee these? and he answered me, these are the horns which have scattered Iudah, Is∣rael, and Ierusalem. who shewed me this vision, what be these; or what do they signifie? and he an∣swered me. These are the enemies of my Church, which from all the foure coasts of heaven have set upon, and spoiled Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. As those hornes represented the enemies of the Church,20, 21 And the Lord shewed mee foure car∣penters; then said I, what came these to doe? and he spake saying, these are the hornes which have scatte∣red Iudah, so that no man did lift up his head, but these are come to fray them, to cast out the hornes of the Gentiles, which lift up their horne over the land of Iudah to scatter it. which should push downe all the cities of Ju∣dah,
and Israel; so these carpenters represent the friends & favourers of my Church, which come to repayre that which the despightfull heathen have demolished; and to redresse all that mischiefe which those foure hornes have done. CAP. II. ANd said unto him; Make haste, speake thus to Zecha∣riah, saying; Jerusalem shall not onely be re-inhabi∣ted,4 And said unto him, Runne, speake to this yong man, saying, Ierusalem shal bee inhabited as townes without walles, for the multitude of men and cat∣tell therein. but shall so abound with people, as that the walls thereof shall not be able to containe the multitude of them, which shall dwell there. For I, (saith the Lord) will be a sure protection unto her,5 For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her. against her enemies; and with my presence will en∣compasse her, as with a wall of fire, which none dare ap∣proach: and as I will be her safety, without; so I will be her glory, within; for I will bee knowne to be her God, and manifest my presence there.6 Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the North, saith the Lord, for I have spread abroad as the foure windes of the heaven saith the Lord. Say then to the Jewes; Ho, all ye my people, come away out of that land of your captivitie; saith the Lord, for now I have enlarged you; and blessed you both with liberty, and such increase, that ye shall spread your selves abroad all the world over.7 Deliver thy selfe, O Zion, that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon. Make haste therefore, O ye the ancient inhabitants of Jerusalem, which dwell as yet in Babylon; and come out of that your exile, and servitude. 8 For thus saith the Lord of hosts, after the glory hath he sent mee un∣to the nations which spoi∣led you; for he that touch∣eth you, toucheth the apple of his eye.For thus saith the Lord of hosts; After the restoring of glory to thee, O Jerusalem, I will not rest there; but will call unto reckoning (by him who is the mediator, and King of my Church) those nations which have spoil∣ed you; and I will let the world know how tenderly I am affected to you; and they shall finde that he that touch∣eth you, doth, as it were, touch the apple of mine eye. 9 For behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall bee a spoile to their servants.For behold, I will but give a signe to those nations, by shaking my hand to them, that I have given way to the destruction of these your enemies; and they shall imme∣diately become a spoile to those, which lately were their tributaries and servants, &c. 13 Be silent O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.O all ye sonnes of men, be yee awfully affected to this great, and just God; whom ye have thus seene to mani∣fest his power from heaven, for the deliverance, and pre∣servation of his Church.
CAP. III. ANd he shewed me in vision,1 And he shewed mee Ioshua the high Priest, standing before the Angell of the Lord, and Satan standing at this right hand to resist him. Joshua the sonne of Je∣hosedech the high Priest, (bearing the type of the Sonne of God who is the everlasting high-Priest of his Church) standing before the Lord, to intercede for his people, and Satan (the adversary of Gods Church) stand∣ing ready to resist him.2 And the Lord said unto Satan, the Lord re∣buke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that hath chosen Ierusalem, rebuke thee: is not this a brand puluckt out of the fire? Then Christ the Lord, (who was here resembled and represented in both his natures, in his humanity by Jo∣shua, in his deity by the Angell) said unto Satan; God, even the eternall Father, rebuke thee, O Satan; the Lord who hath chosen Jerusalem for the place of his worship rebuke thee, for that malicious opposition, which thou makest to his Church, and to this faithfull high-Priest thereof; whom yet thou shalt in vaine strive to resist; for is not he as a brand pluckt out of the fornace of Babylon? dost thou not see Gods good purpose to him, and to his Church, in his delivery? Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments,3 Now Ioshua was clothed with filthy gar∣ments. as the ragges of his captivity; representing the high-Priest of the new Testament, who tooke upon him our sinnes, and infirmities, &c.4 And he answered, and spake unto those that stood before him, saying, take away the filthy gar∣ments from him; and unto him hee said, Be∣hold, I have caused thine iniquitie to passe from thee, & I will clothe thee with change of rai∣ment. And he said to those ministring spirits that stood be∣fore him; Take away from him these filthy garments, the base and loathsome weeds of servitude and sorrow; And to Joshua himselfe he said; Behold, I have determi∣ned to restore thee to the glory which pertaines to thy great function; in token whereof, I have caused these ragges, (the monuments of that thy bondage, and of those sinnes, which thou undertakest to expiate,) to be put away from thee; and I will clothe thee gloriously, in stead of these nasty garments.5 And I said, let him set a faire miter upon his head, so they set a faire miter upon his head, and clothed him with gar∣ments. And accordingly, I command you to set a faire mirer upon his head; let him be endowed, with all those gra∣ces, and abilities that may bee fit for the discharge of his office, and for his owne ornament, and glory, &c. Then shalt thou,7 Then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keepe my Courts, and I will give thee places to walke among these that stand by. (and thy sonnes after thee) rule over my house, as chiefe Priest; and have the prime over sight and command of my courts; and at last will give thee a place in everlasting glory, so, as thou shalt walke glori∣ously in white, amongst these blessed Angells. And now O Joshua the high Priest, harken thou,8 Heare now, O Ioshua the high Priest, thou and thy fellowes that sit be∣fore thee; for they are men wondred at, for Be∣hold, I will bring forth my servant the branch. and those thy assistants in thy sacred function, that sit before thee; (they are by their places men whose persons doe portend future things, to the Church; being made the
signes of things to come, and therefore fit to know, and foreshew this great mystery) for behold, I will exhibite unto the world Christ the Saviour; whom I have or∣dained to worke that great businesse of mediation for my Church; whose visible presence shal grace that Tem∣ple, which ye are now to build. In signification of which Saviour, I have laid before Joshua,9 For behold, the stone that I have laid before Io∣shua; upon one stone shall be seaven eyes, behold I will engrave the graving thereof, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will remove the iniquities of that land in one day. a stone, to resemble him who is the chiefe cor∣ner stone of his Church; whereon it shall bee firmely built; behold, he shall be a stone of note; all eyes of An∣gells and men shall be upon be him; all the graces of my Spirit shall be powred on him; and he shall be polished, and set forth with all the gifts thereof, above measure; and I will, for his sake, doe away all the iniquity of my people, at once; so as it shall no more bee imputed to them. 10 In that day saith the Lord of hosts, shall ye call every man his neighbour, under the vine, and under the fig tree.In that day shall my servants injoy a true spirituall peace, and an happy communion with each other, in the favours, and blessings of God. CAP. IIII. 2 And behold a candle∣sticke all of gold, with a bowle upon the top of it, and his seven lampes there∣on, and seven pipes to the seven lampes, which were upon the top thereof.ANd behold a candlesticke all of gold, resembling the Church of God; with a bowle upon the toppe thereof (whence the severall lampes were deduced) re∣sembling Christ, the authour of all the spirituall lights of his Church; seven lampes were thereon, resembling the teachers, and governours of the Church; seven pipes appertained to those seven lampes; resembling those meanes and conveiances of grace by which God inableth his servants to give light to his Church. 3 And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowle, and the other upon the left side thereof.And two olive trees stood by it; resembling the plen∣tifull graces of Gods Spirit, & ever-flourishing doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, which are alwaies ready at hand, to furnish those holy lampes, with sufficient a∣bilities and matter of instruction to his Church. 6 This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel saying; not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit saith the Lord of hosts.This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, who is now in hand to build the Temple. Thinke not that by thy might, and power thou art able to compasse this great worke; that this candlesticke is furnished with these shining lampes; and that these lampes are furni∣shed with a supply of oile, and that these olives live to yield that supply, it is not from man, but from the pow∣er of my holy Spirit who worketh al things for the good of my Church.
Who are ye, O ye professed opposites to my people,7 Who art thou, O great mountain, before Ze∣rubbabel? thou shalt be∣come a plaine, and he shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings, crying, grace, grace unto it. Sanballat, Tobiah, Rehum, Shimshai, and the rest of that wicked combination, which set your selves against this worke of mine; were ye as some huge mountaine, yet before Zerubbabel, ye should be as a low, and levell plaine; In despight of you, he shall bring forth the head stone of the roofe of my Temple, even the last stone, that shall make up the battlements thereof; and shall lay it upon the finished walls, with the shouting, and joyfull acclamation of all my people; who shall praise God for his mercy, and pray to him for an happy bles∣sing upon his Temple. So also verse 9. Why did ye, O ye faithlesse Jewes,10 For who hath de∣spised the day of small things? for they shall re∣joyce and shall see the plummet, in the hand of Zerubbabel with those se∣ven: they are the eyes of the Lord which run to & fro through the whole earth. looke so discon∣tentedly upon the meane foundations of this Temple? and weepe to thinke of that goodly structure of Solo∣mons, compared with this? there shall bee no cause of this disparagement; ye shall rather finde reason to re∣joyce in this noble worke, which ye see Zerubbabel in hand to finish, whiles, besides the glory of this worke, ye shall acknowledge the abundant graces of Gods spi∣rit powred out upon men (under this Temple;) and the infinite protection, and providence of God, which as it diffuseth it selfe to all the corners of the world, so espe∣cially hath magnified it selfe in the care of this Temple, and Jerusalem. See verse 3.11 What are these two olive trees. Those two olive branches resemble the speciall gra∣ces,14 Then said he, these are the two anointed ones that stand by the Lord of the whole earth. which God hath bestowed upon these two anointed servants of his, that stand before him, Zerubbabel, and Joshua; by whose meanes it pleaseth God to convey many favours and blessings to his Church. CAP. V. ANd I said; I see a roll of paper flying in the aire,2 And I answered, I see a flying roll, the length thereof twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof tenne cubites. of very great extent; for it is twenty cubits in length, and ten in breadth; so as it containes great store of wri∣ting therein. Then said hee unto mee;3 Then said he unto me, this is the curse, that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth, for e∣very one that stealeth shall be cut off, as on this side; according to it, and everie one that sweareth, shall be cut off, as on that side, ac∣cording to it. In this large roll is written that curse, which perraines to all wicked sinners, over
the face of the whole earth; for every one that stealeth shall be punished, and cut off, according to the judge∣ment set downe in that roll; and on the other side, eve∣ry one that sweareth, shall be cut off, according to the judgement specified therein. And he said, this is an Ephah that is now represented unto thee,6 And I said, what is it? and he said, this is an E∣phah that goeth forth. Hee said moreover, this is their resemblance through all the earth. as passing forth, before thee; to signifie the measure of the iniquity of my people, made fully up; and he said, This Ephah is the resemblance of the great measure of all the sinnes of Israel, heaped up together a∣gainst mee by them, all the world over. 7, 8. And behold, there was lift up a talent of lead; and this is a woman that sitteth in the midst of the Ephah. And he said, this is wickednesse, and he cast it into the midst of the E∣phah, and hee cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.And behold, there was also represented unto mee a leaden weight; and withall, a woman sitting in the midst of the Ephah. That woman which he cast into the midst of the Ephah, resembled the person of those wicked Jewes, which hee meant to cast out of his Church; of whom he said; These are so wicked; that they are as wickednesse it selfe, that leaden weight, which he laid upon the mouth of the Ephah, (to depresse the woman there inclosed) resembled that heavy weight of judge∣ment, wherewith he decreed to load, and humble those wicked ones, of the Jewes; from which they should not rise up, till his season appointed. 9 Then lift I up mine eyes, and looked, and be∣hold, there came out two women, and the winde was in their wings, (for they had wings like the wings of a starke) and they lift up the Ephah between the earth.Then lifted I up my eyes, and looked, and behold the executioners of Gods just sentence (resembled by two women,) which had the winde in their wings, (to resem∣ble the exceeding speed which they should make in the performance of their charge) lifted up the Ephah, to carry it away with them. 11 And hee said unto me, to build it an house in the land of Shinar, and it shall be established, and set there upon her owne base.And he said unto me; These carry away the wicked∣nesse of the Jewes, together with the owners thereof, into Babylon, whence it came; and there shall it settle and grow; where it first had its accursed originall. CAP. VI. 1 Went out from be∣tweene two mountaines, and the mountaines were mountaines of brasse.WEnt out from the unchangeable decree of God. 5 These are the spirits of the heavens, which goe forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.These are foure Angelicall, and heavenly powers, which upon the command, & mission of the Lord of the whole earth, goe forth to all the parts of the world, to execute his will amongst men. 6 The blacke horses which are therein go forth into the North countrey' and the white goe forth af∣ter them, and the grisled goe forth toward the south countrey.Those Angels which are represented by the blacke
horses, are they, which goe forth into Babylon for the punishment of those Chaldees, which have afflicted Gods people; and those that are represented by the white horses, goe forth thither also, for the comfort and preservation of those Jewes, which are left there; Those which are represented by the grisled, goe forth towards Judea, to take order with those neighbour ene∣mies, which resist the worke of the Lord in the hands of Gods people. Those which were represented by the bay (as not be∣ing designed to any particular place,7 And the bay went forth, and sought to goe, that they might walke to and fro through the earth.) went forth to passe to and fro through the whole earth; to take charge of the Church of God, scattered in all the parts of the world, &c. Behold,8 Behold, these that go toward the North country have quieted my spirit, in the North countrey. those Angels that were sent to Babylon∣ward have done that acceptable service, on which they were sent; both in comforting Gods people, and puni∣shing their enemies which are in those parts. Then take of the silver and gold which is offered to the Lord,11 Then take silver, and gold, and make crownes and set them upon the head of Ioshua the sonne of Iosedech the high priest by those Jewes which are comne from Baby∣lon; and make two crownes thereof; and set them upon the head of Joshua the sonne of Josedech, the high-priest who represents him who is the eternall High-priest, and King of his Church. Saying, Behold the man, who is the true type of the Messiah, that flourishing branch of the stocke of Jesse;12 Saying, behold the man whose name is the branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord. even this Joshua; he shall grow up and prosper out of Sion, and shall build up the Temple of the Lord; in type of Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, who shall fill heaven and earth with his glory, and shall build up a spirituall Temple, which shall endure for ever. So also verse 13. He shall be both a Priest in his Temple,13 He shall be a Priest upon his throne, and the counsell of peace shall bee betweene them both. and a King in his throne; and a Prophet to his Church, giving coun∣sells of peace and eternall salvation to both Jewes, and Gentiles. And those crownes shall be kept,14 And the crownes shall be to Helem, and to Tobiiah. and hanged up in the Temple of the Lord, as a memoriall and monument of the liberall offering made by Helem, and Tobiah, &c. Vpon whose laudable example,15 And they that are farre off, shall come and build in the Temple of the Lord. not only those which are neare, but those which are farre off in place of habi∣tation, shall come up, and offer munificently towards the building of the Temple of the Lord, &c.
CAP. VII. 1 In the fourth day of the ninth moneth even in Chisleu.IN the fourth day of the moneth of November. 2, 3. When thay had sent unto the house of God. Sherezer, and Re∣gem-melech, & their men to pray before the Lord, & to speake unto the Priests, which were in the house of the Lord of hosts, and to the Prophets, saying, should I weepe in the fift moneth, separating my selfe as I have done these, so many yeares.When the body of the then-Jewish Church which were returned from the captivity, and planted in Judea, sent certaine deputies, or messengers, in the name of the whole, to offer up their religious devotions in the Tem∣ple; and to inquire of the Priests of the Lord, and the Prophets, concerning the anniversary observation of that fast, which they had hitherto kept in the fift moneth upon the sad remembrance of the destruction of the Temple; saying, Wee have hitherto duely kept this so∣lemne fast for many yeares; but now, we desire to be in∣formed by you, since that the Temple is now repaired, and finished, whether it be fit and requisite, that wee should continue that fast of the fift moneth any more, afflicting our selves with the memory of the demoli∣shing of that, which is now so happily re-edified. 5 When ye fasted and mourned in the fift and se∣venth moneth, even those seaventie yeares, did ye at al fast unto me, even to me?When ye fasted and mourned both in the fift moneth for the Temple, and in the seventh for Gedaliah, did ye doe this (even all these seventy yeares) out of any charge of mine; or did ye it out of any true remorse for those sinnes of yours, which pulled these judgemēts upon you, and not rather out of a sense of your owne sorrow, and misery? 6 And when yee did eate, and when yee did drinke, did not ye eate for your selves, and drinke for your selves.And contrarily, when, on your other solemne festi∣vall daies, ye did eate, and drinke, and make merry; was it out of any spirituall joy yee had in mee, and my ser∣vice, and not rather for your owne pleasure, and jollity. 7 Should yee not heare the words, which the Lord hath cryed by the former Prophets when Ie∣rusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, when men inhabited the south of the plaine.Should ye not rather have harkened to the words which the Lord spake loud in your eares, by the former Prophets; when Jerusalem was in her glory and prospe∣rity: and all her daughter cities round about her; when the plains of the South parts were fully, and richly inha∣bited? which if ye had done, this misery and desolation had not seized upon us; wee had had no need of these mourning fasts. Yea, they wilfully hardened their hearts against the counsells given them by the Lord; and made them as hard as an adamant stone,12 Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant stone. which is utterly impeirceable, &c. 14 For they laid the pleasant land desolate.They by their great sinnes exposed this pleasant land to utter spoile and desolation.
CAP. VIII. See Zechar. 1. verse 14.2 I was jealous for Zi∣on, with great jealousie, and I was jealous for her with great, &c. IF it seeme a thing strange and difficult unto you, (the remnant of the people) that Jerusalem should be thus blessed with peace & prosperity;6 If it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these daies, should it also be marvel∣lous in my eyes, saith the Lord of hosts? it is no whit strange or difficult unto me; saith the Lord of hosts. Behold, I will both preserve,7 Behold I will save my people from the East countrey, and from the West countrey. and fetch home my people from all the coasts of heaven; from the East and West-countries; and from the North (viz. of Babylon) much more. Be ye of good courage,9 Let your hands bee strong. and goe cheerfully about the worke. For before these daies,10 For before these daies, there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast, neither was there a∣ny peace to him that went out, or came in, because of the affliction; for I set all men, every one against his neighbour. whiles ye slackened the buil∣ding of the Temple, ye lived in penury and want; your labours were hartlesse, and unsuccessefull; yee were in∣fested, and indangered with enemies, so as ye could not stirre out of your houses, without perill; for, as a just pu∣nishment of your neglect, I did cause both outward, and inward broiles and quarrells, to be raised up amongst you. But now, it shall be otherwise;11 But now I will not be unto the residue of this people, as in the former daies, saith the Lord. since ye addresse your selves to this worke, heartily and willingly, I will bee fa∣vourable, and gracious to you, saith the Lord. &c. As I justly decreed to punish you,14 As I thought to pu∣nish you, when your fa∣thers provoked mee to wrath, saith the Lord of hosts. when your fathers provoked me to wrath by their sinnes, and by their wil∣full neglect of my worke; and accordingly performed it, faith the Lord. So againe, &c. Thus saith the Lord;19 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the fast of the fourth moneth, and the fast of the fift, and the fast of the seaventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall bee to the house of Iudah joy and gladnesse, and cheerful feasts, therefore love the truth and peace. Be not carefull of the keeping of those your solemne fasts; for I will turne all those fasts of yours, (both that which you keepe in the fourth moneth, in memory of the breaking downe of the wall of Jerusalem; and that which you keepe in the fift, in me∣mory of the burning of the Temple; and that which yee keepe in the seventh, in memory of the murder of Ge∣daliah; and that which ye keepe in the tenth, in memory of the first siege laid to Jerusalem) all these will I turne to joy and gladnesse, and cheerfull feasts unto the house of Judah; therefore, be ye carefull to carry your selves holily, justly, peaceably, before your God.
20 21 Thus saith the Lord of hosts, It shall yet come to passe, that there shall come people and the inhabitants of many cities, and the inhabitants of one citie shall goe to another, saying, let us goe speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seeke the Lord of hosts.And more then so, I will give an happie increase to my Church; many people and nations shall be added un∣to it; and shall chearefully joyne together, and incourage each other in my service, both by their hearty counsells, and examples. So also verse 22. 23 In those daies it shall come to passe, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nati∣ons, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Iew, saying, we will goe with you, for we have heard that God is with you.In those dayes it shall come to passe, that the Gentiles shall be added to the Church; in such number, and zeale, as that many of them shall resort to one well-informed convert of the Christian-Jewes, and shall desire to bee taught by him in the truth of godlinesse. CAP. IX. 1 The burden of the word of the Lord in the land of Hadrach, and Da∣mascus shall bee the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, shall be toward the Lord.THe heavy message that God sends to those cities and countries which have offered cruell violence to his people; in particular, this errand of judgement shall light upon the region and citie of Damascus; which shall be accordingly executed upon them; since the eyes of the neighbour nations round about, but espe∣cially of all the tribes of Israel, are earnestly intent to ex∣pect this revenge from the hand of the Lord. 23 And Hamah also shall border thereby, Tyrus and Zidon, though it bee very wise, and Tyrus did build her selfe a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust.Neither shall Hamath be freed there from; nor Tyrus and Zidon, though they be crafty and subtle enough, to use all humane power, and wit, for their owne safety, and evasion; and though Tyrus have built strong holds for her defence, and have heaped up great treasures of wealth, &c. 4 Behold, the Lord will cast her out, and hee will smite her power in the sea, and she shall be devoured with fire.But the Lord will send an enemie against her, even Alexander of Macedon, which shall subdue and van∣quish her, and defeat her power by sea, and she shall bee consumed with fire. 5 Ashkelon shall see it, and feare, Gaza also shall see it, and be very sorrow∣full, and Ekron, for her expectation shall be asha∣med, & the King shall pe∣rish from Gaza, and Ash∣kelon shall not be inhabi∣ted.The confederate cities of the Philistims, Ashkelon, Gaza, and Ekron, shall see it, and feare, for that confi∣dence which they had put in the strength of the Tyrians, shall now disappoint them, to their shame and losse; for Gaza shall no more have a King, nor Ashkelon, an in∣habitant.
And Ashdod shall be inhabited by a people,6 And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, & I will cut off the pride of the Philistims. not her owne; and I will, in all these territories, pull downe the pride of the Philistims, by stripping them of their domi∣nions. And I will by this meanes so humble them,7 And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abhomina∣tions from betweene his teeth; but he that remain¦eth, even he shal be for our God, and he shall bee as a Governor in Iudah, and Ekron as a Iebusite. that they shall be no more bloodily minded toward my people; & shall grow up to a religious care of avoyding all legall pollutions; and those that remaine of them shall be con∣scionably devoted unto God; and shall become friends and patrons of my people, within my Church; yea, even those of Ekron shall so have a part in my Church, as the Jebusite hath in the materiall and outward Jerusalem. And I will protect, and defend my Temple,8 And I will encampe about mine house, be∣cause of the armie, because of him that passeth by, and because of him that return∣eth, and no oppressor shall passe through them any more, for now I have seen with mine eyes. (as it were by a camp pitched about it) against any enemie whatsoe∣ver, that shall offer any violence against it; for I have well noted, and pittyed thy late affliction. Rejoyce greatly, O ye inhabitants of Zion, and shout for joy, O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem,9 Rejoyce greatly O daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of Ierusalem; be∣hold, thy King commeth unto thee: hee is just, and having salvation, lowly, and riding upon an asse, and upon a colt the foale of an asse. for yee shall see the Messiah, the everlasting King of the Church com∣ming personally into your streets; he is just, and righte∣ous, and brings salvation with him to all beleevers; And withall, he is lowly and meeke; not making his approch in a royall, pompous, and majesticall manner, (though he could command all the glories of heaven and earth to attend him) but in a meane, and homely fashion, riding upon an asse, with her colt following her; even like to him that came to take upon him the estate of a servant. I will draw my Church to an happie accordance,10 And I will cut off the charet from Ephraim, and the horse from Ieru∣salem: and the battell bow shall be cut off, and he shall speake peace unto the hea∣then, and his dominion shall be from Sea, even to Sea, and from the river, even to the ends of the earth. so as both Jewes and Gentiles shall be linked together in the bonds of peace; there shall therefore be no more need of your charriots, O Israel; or of your horses O Judah; or, of any weapons of war; for the common Saviour of both, shall unite them together, and shall extend the bounds of his spirituall dominion, all the world over. As for thee, O Zion, whose covenant with me, is made, and confirmed by the precious blood of the Messias,11 As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy pri∣soners out of the pit wherein is no water. in that new and everlasting Testament, I doe herein give thee a type of thy future deliverance from all thy spi∣rituall miseries, in that, I have brought forth thy cap∣tives, out of the miserable captivity of Babylon, where∣in they were wofully distressed.
12 Turne yee to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope, even to day doe I declare that I will render double unto thee.Returne ye then, to the forts of Zion, and Jerusalem, O yee hopefull captives, that are yet remaining in Babylon; for I doe this day declare unto you, that I have prepared blessings for you aboue your expectations; and (whereof this is a type) turne ye into my Church, all yee that pertaine to mine election, out of the world, where∣in ye are held captive; and know, that I have prepared happinesse for you above the thoughts, and desires of your hearts. 13 When I have bent Iudah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sonnes O Zion, against thy sonnes, O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty man.But in the meane time, I shall make some war-like use of Judah and Ephraim, and raise the forces of Jerusa∣lem, against the Grecians, and Syrians, wherewith they shall be vexed, and will give good successe to their cou∣rageous, and well-fought battells. 14 And the Lord shall be, seene over them, and his arrow shall goe forth as the lightning.And the Lord shall give good proofe of his gracious protection of them; and shall manifestly shew that hee fighteth for them from heaven, &c. They shall subdue their enemies afarre off, as with sling stones,15 The Lord of hosts shall defend them, & they shall devour, and subdue with sling stones, and they shall drinke and make a noyse, as through wine; and they shall bee filled like bowles, and as the corners of the altars. and with other killing engines of warre; and they shall rejoyce in their victorie; and shall feast for joy, and shout out in their triumphes, as men filled with wine: and shall, in the chearfulnesse of their hearts, offer store of sacrifices of praise unto God; so as, both the bowles of the Temples, and the hornes of the altar shall carry an abundant testimony of their frequēt devotions. And, however they have beene formerly despised, and trod upon,16 For they shall be as the stones of a crowne, lif∣ted up as ensigne upon his land. yet they shall now be advanced to such honor, that they shall be as the precious stones of a royal crowne, or as an ensigne, which is lifted up with honour over the heads of the people. 17 For how great is his goodnesse, and how great is his beauty? come shall make the young men chearefull, and new wine the maides.For how great is the blessing, how great is the beauty wherewith God shall, upon those victories, grace, and adorne his people? there shall be prosperity, and plen∣ty, every where amongst them, so as they oung men shall be full fed with feasts, and their very maides shall bee re∣freshed with new wine: all sorts and ages shall have cause to rejoyce in their God. CAP. X. 1 Aske ye of the Lord raine in the time of the later raine, so the Lord shall make bright cloudes and give them shoures of raine, to every one grasse in the field.ASke yee of the Lord, raine, in the due season there∣of; even the later raine for the filling up of the fruits of the earth; so the Lord will, according to his promise, heare you, and give change of weather; causing
in the clouds, to lead in store of raine; such as may plentifully water the earth, that it may yeeld store of grasse in every field. It is the Lord that must helpe you; as for your Idolls,2 For the Idols have spoken vanity, and the di∣viners have seene a lie, and have told false dreames, they comfort in vaine, therefore they went their way as a flocke, they were troubled because there was no shepheard. whereto ye have hitherto trusted, they have vainely de∣luded you; and your wizards have abused you in false visions, and dreames, and have pretended to give you those comforts which have failed you in the issue; there∣fore, both they and you were driven into captivity, as a flocke of sheepe into the fold, and found no protection, but rather much discomfort and misery, because of the want of a shepheard to guide, and defend you. Mine anger was kindled against the false Prophets,3 Mine anger was kin∣dled against the shepherds, and punished the goates, for the Lord of hosts hath visited his flock the house of Iudah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in the battle. and wicked rulers of my people; and I punished those (rather goates, than bel-weathers) which led my flock out of their way; for the Lord of hosts hath sharply cha∣stised the people of Judah; and hath designed them to hard conflicts, even as some stout horse is made for the day of battle. From his decree came forth all the plots of the siege,4 Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the naile, out of him the battle bow, out of him every oppressour together. the tents pitched before their walls, the weapons of warre, which were used in that assault, and every op∣pressour that offered violence to them, did but execute his just pleasure upon them. But this sad condition of theirs shall not last alwaies;5 And they shall be as mighty men which tread downe their enemies. for the Lord hath determined happy successe, and victo∣ries unto his people; they shall be as mighty men, which tread upon their enemies, &c. And I will, by the voice of my word,8 I will hisse for them & gather them, for I have redeemed them; and they shall increase as they have increased. call them toge∣ther into one Church; for I have redeemed them; and they shall multiply exceedingly. And I will so dispose of them, that they shall be sent all the world over, for the gathering of my Church,9 And I will sow them among the people, and they shall remember mee in farre countries, and they shall live with their chil∣dren and turne againe. e∣ven as the seed is cast into severall furrowes of the large field, for a more plentifull increase; and they shall pub∣lish my Gospell in remote countries; and both they, and the children whom they beget unto the faith, shall live, and turne to their God, and Saviour. And I will gather my Church out of all the coasts un∣der heaven, out of Aegypt, and Assyria,10 I will bring them a∣gaine also out of the land of Aegypt, & gather them out of Assyria, and I will bring them into the land of Gilead & Lebanon, and place shall not bee found for them. and all other countries; and, in type thereof, I will fetch up my peo∣ple the Jewes, from those regions, where they have beene captived, and bring them againe into Judea; and they shall grow to such numbers there, that the place shall not bee able to hold them. No seas,11 And hee shall passe through the sea with affli∣ction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all the deepes of the river shal drie up: and the pride of Assyria shall be brought downe, and the Scepter of Aegypt shall depart away. or rivers shall hinder the propagation of the
Gospell; as, in type thereof, when the Jewes shall re∣turne towards their countrey, God will rather worke miracles for them, than that they shall be hindred in the way; he will againe cause the sea to give them passage, and will dry up Jordan before them; and subdue all those their proud enemies of Assyria, and Aegypt, which had prevailed against them. CAP. XI. 1 Open thy doore, O Lebanon: that the fire may devoure thy cedars.A Grievous destruction will light upon thee, O thou ingratefull land of Judea, for those repulses, and in∣dignities, which thou shalt offer to the Lord of life; O∣pen thou therefore thy doores (O thou Temple of Jeru∣salem) that the fire may devoure thy cedars. 2 Howle firre tree, for the Cedar is fallen, because all the mightie are spoiled Howle O ye oakes of Ba∣shan, for the forrest of the vintage is come downe.Howle, and lament, O ye nobles, for your Princes are fallne; all the men of power in Judea are spoiled; make lamentation, O ye of the meaner ranke of Israel, for your great men are cut off. 3 There is a voice of the howling of the shep∣heards, for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roa∣ring of yong Lions, for the pride of Iordan is spoiled.There is great wailing, and mourning of the rulers, and Priests, (who should have fed and guided my peo∣ple) for their glory is at an end; all the stout gallants of Judea doe now roare, and lament; for the magnificence of Jerusalem, and the strength of Jurie is utterly wasted and comne to nothing. 4 Thus saith the Lord my God, feed the flocke of the slaughter.Thus saith the Lord, my God; yet amongst these Jewes, which I have justly set out for this slaughter, there is a flocke of mine, whom I have due care of, let them be carefully fed, and lookt unto. 5 Whose possessours slay them, and hold them∣selves not guilty, and they that sell them say, blessed be the Lord; for I am rich, and their owne shepheards pitty them notThey are in a perilous, and wofull case; for their owne governours, and spirituall guides slay them, and thinke they doe therein good service, and their victors (Titus, and his Romanes) sell them as merchandize; and rejoyce in the wealth which they have raised from their price: and their owne governours doe not so much as pittie them. 6 For I will no more pitty the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord: but loe, I will deliver the men every one into his neighbours hand, and into the hand of his King, and they shall smite the land.For the rest, I will have no more compassion on the inhabitants of the land, who have called for the blood of that just one, to be required of them, and their children; for I will deliver them into the hand of each other, to be slaine in civill discord; and into the hand of the Ro∣mane, whom they professed to be their King; and by both these meanes they shall be consumed, &c. 7 And I will feed the flocke of slaughter, even you, O poore of the flocke, and I tooke unto me two staves: the one I called beautie, and the other I cal∣led bonds, and I fed the flock.As for that part of my flocke, which are appointed as
sheepe to the slaughter, for my names sake; I will care∣fully feed them; even you, O my poore little flocke; and for this cause I tooke unto me two pastorall staves; the one, which I called Beauty, was the staffe of mercy, and gracious and pleasurable protection; the other, which I called Bonds, was the staffe of unity, for the conjoyning of my Church; or of correction, and just censure of the offenders; and with these, I guided my little flocke ac∣cordingly. Your three sorts of leaders, Kings, Priests, and Pro∣phets, I cut off together, in a very short space;8 Three shepheards al∣so I cut off in one moneth, & my soule loathed them, and their soule also abhor∣red mee. they were well worthy of my just extirpation; I loathed them for their corruption and wickednesse, and they no lesse ab∣horred my lawes, and justice. Then said I of this refractary,9 Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dieth let it die, and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off. and perverse people of the Jewes; I will take charge of you no more; whatsoe∣ver calamity befall you, I will not put my hand to re∣dresse it, &c. And I tooke my staffe,10 And I tooke my staffe, even beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might breake my covenant which I had made with all the people. even the staffe of my safegard and protection, which I called Beauty, and cut it in sun∣der; that I might thereby signifie; that, as this people had broke the covenant which they made with mee, by their wilfull disobedience, so that I would free my selfe from regarding my promise of favour, and preservation made to them. Those humble and meeke servants of mine,11 And so the poore of the flocke that waited upon me, knew that it was the word of the Lord. that waite conscionably upon me (in that sinfull and perverse generation) well knew that this was the just will, and pleasure of God; to deale thus severely with so rebelli∣ous a people. Thus I fed my charge, and at the last,12 And I said unto them, if yee thinke good, give me my price: and if not, forbeare: so they weighed for my price thir∣ty peeces of silver. I said unto them; if I be approved of you as your shepheard, give ye me a returne of those respects that are due to mee, and that price and reward, which my over-sight and labour calls for at your hands; but if otherwise ye accept not of mee, and my function, forbeare. This I required of them, but they, in stead of returning their holy obedience, and due thankfulnesse unto mee, weighed out thirty peeces of silver, which they gave unto a traitor, as the price of my life, which should by his perfidiousnesse bee betray∣ed into their hands. And the Lord said unto mee;13 And the Lord said unto mee, cast it unto the potter; a goodly price, that I was prized at of them, and I tooke the thirty pee∣ces of silver, and cast them to the potter, in the house of the Lord. make knowne by this thy prophesie unto the people, that this thirty peeces shall be cast unto the potter; say to them, it is a goodly price whereat ye have valued mee; And accordingly in vision, I tooke those thirty peeces of silver; and shewed them, that this summe (which should be offered to bee
delivered backe to the high Priests in the house of the Lord) should by them be put into the hands of a potter, for the purchase of a field for buriall. 14. Then I cut asunder mine other staffe, even bonds, that I might breake the brotherhood between Iudah and Israel.Then I cut asunder mine other staffe of unity, which I called Bonds, that I might thereby signifie, that I had let loose all brotherly, and peaceable respects betwixt the true professours of the Gospell, which are the spiri∣tuall Judah, and the revolted, and erroneous sons of the spirituall Israel. 15 And the Lord said unto me, take unto thee, yet, the instruments of a foolish shepheard.Doe thou (for a signe unto them) take unto thee such a staffe, and such a scrip, as no wise shepheard would beare, as being mis-fashioned, and use-lesse; and let thy gesture and carriage be thereafter. 16 For loe, I will raise up a shepheard in the land, which shall not visite those that be cut off, nei∣ther shall seeke the young one, nor heale that that is broken, nor feede that that standeth still: but he shall eate the flesh of the fat, and teare the clawes in peeces.And this shall fore-signifie unto them, that I will give way to a shepheard, not more foolish then wicked, to arise in my Church; even the Antichrist of the latter times; who shall cast off all care of my flocke; either of seeking the strayed, or fetching in the weake and tender ones, or healing the broken, or carrying the lame and impotent; but contrarily, he shall persecute my Church, and make a prey thereof; feeding himselfe fat, with the rich meanes, which he shall take from the great, and mighty; and cruelly tyrannizing over the weake, with ex∣treame violence; smiting, and wounding them, that they may be disabled to stand up against him. 17 Woe to the idoll shepheard, that leaveth the flocke: the sword shall bee upon his arme, and upon his right eye; his arme shal be quite dryed up, and his right eye shall bee utterly darkened.But, woe be to that false pastor, which onely carries the name and semblance of an Evangelicall shepheard, who leaveth the flocke to be wasted and spoiled; the just revenge of God shall be, both upon the power, and po∣licie of that man of sinne, his power shall be abated, and utterly weakned, by the breath of the mouth of God; and his craft & policy shall, at the last, end in disappoint∣ment, and confusion. CAP. XII. 1 The burden of the word of the Lord for Isra∣el saith.THe heavie message which God sends to the world, in the favour and behalfe of his Church; Thus saith, &c. 2 Behold, I will make Ierusalem a cup of trem∣bling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Iudah▪ and against Ierusalem.Behold I will make my Church to be unto all the ene∣mies thereof, as an intoxicating cup; which they shall no sooner offer to touch, by a wilfull siege, or oppositi∣on but they shall be either giddy, or senselesse. 3 And in that day will I make Ierusalem a bur∣den some stone for all peo∣ple, all that burden them∣selves with it, shall bee cut in peeces: though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.And in that day will I make my Church as some weighty, and unweildy stone; which when the enemies thereof shall lift at, and strive to raise it up, it shall fall
upon them, and crush them in peeces, Yea, though all the people of the earth should joyne their forces toge∣ther to remove it, yet they should mis-carry under the burden. The malicious world may combine together against my Church, but it shall not prevaile,4 In that day, saith the Lord, I will smite every horse with astonishment, & his rider with madnes, and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Iudah. I will defeat all their hostile attempts; their horses of warre will I smite with astonishment, and their riders with stupidity, and senslesnesse; and I will looke downe graciously upon my Church, for their deliverance and preservation, &c. And the governours of my people shall say,5 And the governours of Iudah shall say in their heart, the inhabitants of Ierusalem shall bee my strength, in the Lord of hosts their God. in their heart; There is al sufficient strength, and safegard to mee, and to all the true members of the Church of Christ, in the Lord of hosts, our God, so as wee need not feare what man can doe unto us. Yea,6 In that day will I make the governours of Iudah like a hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheafe, and they shall devoure all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left; and Ierusalem shall be inhabited againe in her owne place, even in Ieru∣salem. I will not only give a defensive power to my people, but will make them prevalent, and victorious over their enemies, so as I will cause the governours of my Church to be as coales on the hearth, whiles their e∣nemies are as a fagot laid thereupon; or, to be as a torch of fire, in their enemies sheafe; which shall soone con∣sume them to ashes, and my Church shall continue it selfe in despight of all opposition; and the gates of hell shall never be able to prevaile against it. The Lord shall save first those that are of the villages of Judah; that is, the weakest of his people,7 The Lord also shall save the tents of Iudah first, that the glory of the house of David, and the glory of the inhabitants of Ierusalem do not magnifie themselves against Iudah. and those of the out-skirts of his Church; that the glory of the more noble and couragious champions of Christ may not magnifie it selfe, over the feeble and obscure, but that all may ascribe their salvation to the Lord. He that is weake in himselfe,8 And he that is feeble among them, at that day shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angell of the Lord before them. shall bee as strong as David, (who overcame the beare, and the lion, and the Philistim) in the power of his God; and those that are eminent in this holy profession of Christianity, shall bee as the Angells of God, invincible, and able to doe all things, through him that strengthens them. And I will powre out upon my Church,20 And I will powre upon the house of David, & upon the inhabitants of Ierusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall looke upon me whom they have pier∣ced, and they shall mourne for him, as one that mour∣neth for his onely sonne. (beginning at Jerusalem and Zion) a great and apparent measure of my Spirit; and, besides those common gifts, I will indue them with the sanctifying graces of my Spirit, and with the spirit of prayer, and supplication; and they shall, by a lively faith, look up to me their Saviour and redeemer, whom they have pierced upon the crosse; and they shall mourn for that violence which was offered to the Lord of life, dying for them, even as one mourneth for his on∣ly sonne, &c.
11 In that day shall there be great mourning in Ieru∣salem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the val∣ley of Megiddon.In that day, wherein the Messiah shall suffer, there shall bee great mourning, both in Jerusalem, and in all the tribes of Israel; all those many disciples of Christ, whom he shall have won by his wonderfull miracles, and heavenly doctrine, shall mourne, and lament, even like as the Jewes mourned for the death of Josiah, in the val∣ley of Megiddon. 12 And the land shall mourne, every family a∣part, the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart.And all that beleeved in him, throughout all Judea, and Samaria, and Galilee, shall take up a solemne mour∣ning for the death of him, from whom they expected the redemption of Israel; the family of the house of Da∣vid apart, as that which shall be more nearely interessed in him, by consanguinity, and kindred, &c. CAP. XIII. 1 In that day there shal be a fountaine opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Ierusa∣lem, for sinne, and for un∣cleannesse.IN that day of the passion of the sonne of God, there shall be a fountaine opened, even in the side of that blessed redeemer, which shall flow forth, for the clean∣sing of all penitent, and true beleevers, from all their sinnes, and all their spirituall uncleannesses; that preci∣ous blood, which shall issue thence, shall bee an al-suffi∣cient laver for all repentant, and faithfull soules. 2 And it shall come to passe, in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, that I will cut off the names of the I∣dolls out of the land, and they shall no more bee re∣membred, and also I will cause the Prophets, and the uncleane spirit to passe out of the land.That grosse Idolatry, wherewith the world was in∣fected, shall now cease; and the very names and menti∣on of those Pagan Idols shall be forgetten; and the ora∣cles, whereto they resorted in all their doubts, shall cease; and those Prophets, and Priests, which attended upon the uncleane spirits (who were agents in these wic∣ked delusions) shall be cut off. 3 And it shall come to passe, that when any shall yet prophecy, then his fa∣ther and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him, thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies, in the name of the Lord: and his father and his mother that begat him, shall thrust him through when he prophe∣cieth.And if any false Prophet shall yet take upon him to use these wicked divinatiōs; his very parents that begat, and bore him, shall rise up against him, and out of their detestation of his sin, shall be both his accusers, and his executioners; so shall the zeale of Gods glory prevaile with them above all naturall respects. 4 And it shall come to passe in that day, that the Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophecied; neither shall they weare a rough garment to deceive.And the false teachers, which shall arise in the Church shall be convinced of their errors; & so laid open by the light of the Gospell, that they shall not any more, under
colourable pretences, deceive Gods people. But contrarily,5 But he shall say, I am no prophet, I am an hus∣bandman: for man taught me to keepe cattell from my youth. the false teacher shall be confounded in himselfe; and be forced to confesse that he hath erred; and that God hath not given him any warrant for the broching of his erronious doctrines, or any lawfull cal∣ling in his Church; but that his education and breeding hath beene in another way, even in secular imployments from his youth.6 And one shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thine hands? then he shall answere, those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. And when one shall say unto him; what are these grievous censures that are inflicted upon thee? Then, he shall answer? These are just censures, wherewith I was branded in the holy Church of God, by them which did seriously and lovingly seeke my conversion. O thou, my sword of affliction, awake, arise,7 Awake O sword a∣gainst my shepheard, and against the man, that is my fellow, saith the Lord of hosts; smite the shephard and the sheepe shall bee scattered, and I will turne mine hand upon the little ones. and lay about thee; smite him that is nearest and dearest unto me; even him that is my coequall, and coetrnall Son, the image of me the invisible God, saith the Lord of hosts; smite thou this great shepheard of my Church, and his sheep, (.i. his disciples, and followers) shall be scattered; and shall both forsake him, and be severed from each o∣ther; for, even against those disciples also (as well as a∣gainst their master) will I stirre up enmitie, and opposi∣tion in the world. And, it shall come to passe,8 And it shall come to passe, that in the land, saith the Lord, two parts there∣in shall be cut off, and die; but the third shall be left therein. that if Judea be divided in∣to three parts, equally; two of those three shall die, and miscary under the great judgements which I will bring upon the land, for this murder of the Lord of life; and onely the third part shall be left alive. And that third part, which shall bee left alive,9 And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined. shall passe under many fiery tryalls of grevious afflictions, wherewith they shall be refined, as silver is refined, &c. CAP. XIV. BEhold then, O Judea, and Jerusalem,1 Behold the day of the Lord commeth and thy spoile shall bee di∣vided in the midst of thee. the day of the Lords vengeance commeth; the Romans shall divide thy spoiles in the midst of thee. For I will gather an armie of all nations,2 For I will gather all nations against Ierusalem, to battell, and the citie shall be taken. brought to∣gether against thee, by the Romans; and Jerusalem shall be taken, &c. Onely, a remnant (viz. the third part) of the people,3 Then shall the Lord goe forth and fight against those nations, as when hee fought in the day of bat∣tle. have I reserved, which shall not be cut off with the rest,
but shall still continue the name of my Church and peo∣ple. 4 And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Ierusalem on the east, and the mount of O∣lives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east, and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley, and halfe of the mountaine shall re∣move toward the North, and halfe of it toward the South.After this, the Lord Christ shall in a terrible manner come to judgement; when he shal descend downe to the earth, the mountaines shall bee cloven in sunder before him, in a fearfull motion at his appearance: even the mount of Olives (where he set his last foot-step upon earth) shall be divided in the midst, to the East, and to the West, and there shall be a great valley betwixt these two halves, thus dissevered; whereof one halfe shall be falne to the North-ward; and the other halfe to the South. 5 And yee shall flee to the valley of the moun∣taines: for the valley of the mountaines shall reach un∣to Azal; yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from before the earth-quake in the daies of Vzziah King of Iudah, and the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee.And yee shall flee through this new valley, which is made by this division of the mountaine, for it shall bee very large, and reacheth farre, yee shall flee away in great feare, and astonishment, like as ye fled from before that terrible earth-quake, which was in the daies of Uzziah; & the Lord my God shall then come in glory, together with all his Saints, and Angels. 6 And it shall come to passe in that day, that the light shal not be cleare, nor darke.And it shall come to passe in that day, that there shall not be a vicissitude, or interchange of light and darke∣nesse. 7 But it shall bee one day, which shall be known unto the Lord, not day nor night, but it shall come to passe that at evening time it shall be light.But it shall be perpetually lightsome, as one continu∣ed day, which the Lord shall make to hold for ever; without this variety of sun-shine, and darknesse; so as when by the wonted naturall course of time, it should be evening, it shall then be as bright as at the high noone. 8 And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall goe out from Ierusa∣lem, halfe of them toward the former sea, and halfe of them toward the hinder sea, in summer and in win∣ter shall it be.And in that day, the waters of life, and everlasting re∣freshing, shall flow forth from the midst of the heavenly Jerusalem, to all the Saints of God, every where, without all stoppe and intermission. 9 And the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one.And the Lord shall be King over all the earth, having subdued all his enemies, there shall then be none, that shall make head against him, but all shall adore him, as their only Lord and God. 10 All the land shall be turned as a plaine from Geba to Rimmon, south of Ierusalem, and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited, in her place: from Benjamins gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananiel, unto the Kings wine presses.All things shall be then made even, and smooth in the whole Church of God; and there shall bee infinite store of eternall mansions, prepared for all the elect of
God; even as if (in type thereof) the whole coast about the materiall Jerusalem should bee leveled, and stately built, and populously inhabited. So also verse 11. Such shall bee the day, and the issue of the last judge∣ment;12 And this shall bee the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people, that have fought against Ierusalem. but, in the meane time also, God will punish the enemies of his chosen; even all those that fight against his Church shall have visible judgements inflicted upon them, &c. Neither shall God onely punish them with his owne immediate hand,13 And it shall come to passe in that day, that a great tumult frō the Lord shall be among them, and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall raise up against the hand of his neighbour. but he shall cause thē to be the executi∣oners of each other, in those civill tumults, which they shall raise up amongst themselves. And, even the Jewes themselves shall be the first that shall fight against this spirituall Jerusalem,14 And Iudah also shal fight at Ierusalem, and the wealth of all the heathen round about shal be gathe∣red together, gold and silver, and apparell in great abundance. the Church of Christ; and together with them, all the heathens round about shall oppugne it; and make use of all their power, and riches for the suppressing of it. But they shall not prevaile; for both they,15 And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camell, and of the asse, and of all the beasts that shall be in these tents as this plague. and all their substance, and might shall mis-carry; and the punishing hand of God shall fall heavily both upon them, and their assistants in this evill quarrell; they shall be all enwraped in the same common destruction. And it shall come to passe, that those,16 And it shall come to passe, that every one that is left of all the nati∣ons which came against Ierusalem, shall even goe up from yeare to yeare to worship the King the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of Tabernacles. which are left alive of the nations, (which made opposition to the Gos∣pell of Christ) shall humbly, and gladly submit them∣selves to the worship, and service of God their Saviour; and shall cheerfully joyne themselves to his Church, in the religious adoration of him, upon all occasions. Those,17 And it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the families of the earth unto Ierusalem, to worship the King the the Lord of hosts, even up∣on them shall be no raine. who wilfully refuse to joyne themselves to the Church of God, under the Gospell, from them will God sensibly withhold his blessings, even his seasonable raines, and the plentifull increase of the earth. And if those of Aegypt,18 And if the family of Aegypt goe not up, and come not that have no raine, there shall bee the plague wherewith the Lord will smite the hea∣then, that come not up to keep the feast of Taberna∣cles. which have ordinarily no raine (being supplied by the fruitfull waters of Nilus)
shall forbeare, and refuse to joyne in the service of God with the rest of his Church, they shall be no lesse plagued with drought, and scarcity, than the other nations that depend upon the moisture that descends from above. 20 In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses, Holinesse unto the Lord, and the pots in the Lords house shall bee like the bowles before the altar.In that day there shall bee so generall and happy a peace, that there shall be no need of horses of warre; but the bells wherewith those horses were wont to be ador∣ned, shall be consecrated to the Lord, and converted to the holy use of the Temple; and there shall be such store of offerings, on all hands, as that the pots of the Temple which are for the use of the sacrifice, shall be as frequent, as the small bowles that stand before the altar. Yea, such exceeding store shall there be of sacrifices, as that all the pots in Jerusalem and Juda,21 Yea every pot in Ierusalem and in Iudah shall be holinesse unto the Lord of hosts, and all they that sacrifice, shall come & take of them, & seethe therein: and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts. shall bee put to this holy imployment; In a type that every one that is a true Israelite shall offer up himselfe a living sacrifice to God, and shall present unto God, liberall gifts, and thankfull oblations for the maintenance of his Church, and service; and there shall no impure person, nor stran∣ger from the common wealth of Israel bee admitted to challenge a place in the holy Church of God. MALACHI. CAP. I. 2 I have loved you, saith the Lord: yet ye say, wherein hast thou loved us? was not Esau Iacobs brother, saith the Lord, yet I loved Iacob.I Have loved you, O my people Israel, saith the Lord, ye that are returned from the late Ba∣bylonish captivitie, I have loued you and done great things for you; yet ye (unthankfull as ye are) will not acknowledge it, but are ready to say; wher∣in hast thou loved us? let me then convince you of my fa∣vours. Were not Esau and Jacob brothers, did they not both proceed from one wombe, & from one loines? yet without all merit of yours, or his, I loved Jacob freely, and graciously. 3 And I hated Esau, and laid his mountaines, and his heritage waste, for the dragons of the wilder∣nesse.And in comparison of you, hated Esau, and his po∣sterity the Idumeans, so, as that I have, for your sakes,
laid wast those cities, which they inhabited in the moun∣taines, and desolated his heritage by the sword of the Babylonian unrecoverably; so as it is turned desert, and fit only for wilde beasts, and dragons; whereas I have returned you to your old inheritance, in peace. And howsoever these sonnes of Esau, say;4 Whereas Edom saith, we are impoverished, but we will returne, and build the desolate places; thus saith the Lord of hostes, they shall build but I will throw downe; and they shall call them the border of wickednesse, and the people against whom the Lord hath indignation for ever. wee are in∣deed brought downe, and our cities are spoiled, but why should not we returne (as well as ye the sons of Ja∣cob) and build up our ruined townes also; yet, thus saith the Lord; In vaine shall they attempt to repaire their wasted cities; for, if they build, I will pull downe; and I will cause them to be branded with the sensible marke of my displeasure; so as, all the regions about, shall call them; The countrey noted for wickednesse; and the peo∣ple against whom the Lord hath conceived an everla∣sting indignation; whereas you, O Israel, are embraced with mercy and compassion, and restored to your anci∣ent territories. And behold your very eyes shall be witnesses,5 And your eyes shall see, and yee shall say, the Lord will bee magnified from the border of Israel. both of these my favours to you, and of this my severity to the sons of Esau; and ye shall be forced to say, the Lord hath well deserved to be praised and magnified, from all the coasts of Israel. This indeed I have deserved from you;6 A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master, if then I be a father, where is mine honour, and if I be a master, where is my feare, saith the Lord of hosts, unto you O Priests, that despise my name, and ye say, wherein have wee despised thy name? but how is it performed on your part? A sonne is wont to honour his father, and a servant his Master; yee call mee your father, your selves my sonnes, ye call me your master and your selves my servants, if then I bee your Father, &c. saith the Lord of hosts, even to you, the guides of my people, O ye the Priests of my sanctuary; for even yee, who should be exemplarily holy; even ye have despised my name; and yet ye stand in your owne justification, and say, wherein have we despised thy name? Let me tell you then, and convince you of your sinne;7 Yee offer polluted bread upon mine altar, and ye say, wherein have wee polluted thee, in that yee say, the Table of the Lord is contemptible. ye have cast contempt upon mee, in that ye have offered base, and unworthy oblations upon mine altar, yet still ye stand upon your innocence, and say; wherein have we cast contempt upon thee? I tell you againe, in that yee have a base opinion of the table of the Lord, and thinke any thing good enough for it. Hath not the Law of God expresly forbidden you to offer the blinde, or lame, or sicke beasts,8 And if ye offer the blinde for sacrifice, is it not evill? and if ye offer the lame and sicke, is it not evill? offer it now unto thy governour, will he bee pleased with thee, or ac∣cept thy person, saith the Lord of hosts? in sacrifice to God? and is there not good reason? goe ye and present such like gifts to your very governours (men like your selves) will they take them well from your hands; and not rather thinke that you put a scorne upon them; will they not accordingly send you away with a just scorne, saith the Lord of hosts?
9 And now I pray you beseech God, that he will be gracious unto us, this hath been by your means, will he regard your per∣sons, saith the Lord of hosts?And now, if ye like well of these courses, goe on to offer these unmeet and disgracefull oblations to God; and call to him, notwithstanding, that he will bee well pleased with them, and with you, for them, (thus ye have done hitherto, and have provoked God against us) see yet whether he will accept of such offerers, and sacrifices; saith the Lord of hosts. 10 Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for nought, neither doe ye kindle fire on mine altar, for nought; I have no pleasure in you.I have not dealt thus with you; but have abundantly recompensed all your services; which of you is there a∣mong all the Levites of my Temple that hath shut the doores of my house, unrewarded? which of you is there that hath so much as kindled a fire on mine altar, for nought? yet ye have had no regard unto me againe; I will be affected to you accordingly; behold, I have no pleasure in you, &c. 11 For from the rising of the Sun, even to the go∣ing down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offe∣red unto my name, and a pure offering.Neither shall my worship, and service be confined to you; but I will hereafter enlarge it to all the ends of the world; for, from the rising of the sun, to the going down of the same, my name shall be honoured, and adored of the Gentiles (who are as yet without God in the world) and they shall in every place (not in my Temple onely) offer pure and holy sacrifices unto me, &c. 12 But ye have profa∣ned it, in that ye say, the table of the Lord is pollu∣ted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contem∣ptible.But, as for you, yee have profaned, and abused my name, in that ye have entertained base conceits of my sa∣crifices; and have held the oblations offered unto mee, as meate vile, and contemptible, and unworthy of any o∣ther respects than scorne. 13 Ye said also, behold what a wearines is it, and ye have snuffed at it, saith the Lord of hosts, and yee brought that which was torne, and the lame, and the sicke.Ye said also, what a toile is this we are put unto, in killing, and dividing these base, and worthlesse sacrifices? whereas, would ye but have signified the least dislike of these unmeet oblations, they would have beene exchan∣ged for better; but all was alike to you, ye were willing enough to take what was brought you, and to offer that which was torne, and lame, and sicke, &c. 14 But cursed bee the deceiver which hath in his flocke a male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing, for I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadfull among the heathen.But, cursed be that hollow, and falsehearted Jew, who having in his flocke a male, without spot, or ble∣mish, fat, and well liking; yet (after his vow) sacrificeth unto the Lord a leane, blemished, unsound female; for I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts; I looke for the best, who have made all; and my name is great and dreadfull in all the world; the Gentiles shall adore, and magnifie it, how ever it be sleighted of my unworthy people of Israel.
CAP. II. BEhold, I will punish you with dearth;3 Behold, I will cor∣rupt your seed, and spread doung upon your faces, e∣ven the doung of your so∣lemne feasts, and one shall take you away with it. your seed shall corrupt; and your fields shall yeeld you no increase; and I will scornefully cast the dung of your sacrifices (in your solemne feasts) upon your faces, and so cover you o∣ver with it, that ye shall be carried away, as an heape of compost; so basely will I cause you to be reputed of my people. And ye shall know that I have decreed,4 And yee shall know that I have sent this com∣mandement unto you, that my covenant might bee with Levi, saith the Lord of hosts. and comman∣ded this contempt to be powred upon you; that ye might repent of your sins, wherewith ye have provoked mee, that so, I might continue that covenant, which I made with the tribe of Levi, saith the Lord of hosts. I covenanted with my priesthood of that Tribe, to give them preservation, and welfare;5 My covenant was with him of life and peace yea the life of grace and true spirituall peace, &c. For it is required,7 For the Priests lippes should keepe knowledge, and they should seeke the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. and expected of the Priests of Gods Sanctuary, that they should be men of knowledge, and heavenly wisedome; so as their breasts should keepe, and their lips should expresse to the people, the right under∣standing of divine things; and to them should the peo∣ple resort for their information in the law of God; for God hath appointed them to be his messengers, to deli∣ver his will to men. Why doe ye taxe us for our unlawfull marriages with infidels? was not Adam one common father to us all?10 Have we not al one father? hath not one God created us? why doe wee deale treacherously every man against his brother, by prophaning the covenant of our fathers? hath not one God created us all? why doe ye therefore charge us with treacherous dealing with our brethren, and profaning the covenant of our forefathers in that we doe promiscuously match with our heathen neighbours? Yes, O ye Jewes thinke not to evade thus,11 Iudah hath dealt treacherously, and an abo∣mination is committed in Israel, and in Ierusalem: for Judah hath prophaned the holinesse of the Lord, which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strang god. Judah hath dealt treacherously with God, and with those law∣full wives whom they had formerly taken; and an abo∣mination is committed in Israel, and in Jerusalem it selfe; for Judah hath profaned the holy institution of marriage, which the Lord hath both made, & highly re∣spected; and hath taken (as an addition of a second mar∣riage) unto his bed, the daughters of Pagans and Infi∣dels. The Lord will not suffer these wicked conjunctions to prosper; he will cut off the man that doth this,12 The Lord will cut off the man that doth this, the master of the scholler out of the tabernacles of Iacob, and him that offe∣reth an offering unto the Lord of hosts. toge∣ther with his posterity; and his abettors, out of the con∣gregation of Israel; and though he should thinke to pa∣cifie God with offerings, yet God will not accept them, or spare him.
13 And this have yee done againe, covering the altar of the Lord with teares, with weeping and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or re∣ceiveth it with good will at your hand.And this ye have added unto your other sinnes; yee have dealt so cruelly, and unjustly with your wives, as that ye have caused them to wash the altars of God, with the teares of their weeping, and complaints, so as that God (who hateth all iniquity) regardeth not the offe∣rings you present unto him, any more, &c. Yet yee stand stiffely upon the justification of your innocence, and say, What have we done, or wherein have we deser∣ved this disrepect to our sacrifices? Know then, that it is for your treacherous and unjust dealing with the wife of your youth, with whom you were lawfully married; of which solemne contract, the Lord himselfe (the insti∣tutor of mariage) hath beene witnesse; even those your lawfull wives have ye abused; yet they are ordained of God for the comfortable companions of your life; and by a firme, and indissoluble covenant, conjoyned unto you. 14 Yet ye say, Where∣fore? Because the Lord hath beene witnesse be∣tweene thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt tre∣cherously, yet is shee thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.Your selves, if ye shall but look backe to the first ori∣ginall act of God, shall necessarily be convinced: for did not God make one woman onely for one man? yet hee had power (who was, and is the God of the spirits of all flesh) to have made more; this had beene as easie for him; wherefore did he therefore conjoyne one woman onely to that one man, and why doth he still continue his ordinance of the same single copulation? but, that here∣in he tooke care that the children (the issue of such wed∣locke) should be holily, and lawfully begotten: Take heed to your selves therefore, and keepe your selves within the compasse of Gods ordinance, and suffer not your unbridled spirits to breake forth into these inordi∣nate desires, and wicked concupiscences; let no man of∣fer wrong to the wife of his youth, in taking in a stranger unto his bed. 16 For the Lord the God of Israel saith, that he hateth putting away, for one covereth violence with his garment, saith the Lord of hosts, therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deale not treache∣rously.For the Lord God of Israel (howsoever yee may un∣justly pretend his allowance of this common dimission of your wives, upon every fleight occasion) professeth to hate these your causelesse repudiations of them; and whosoever doth this (what colour soever he set upon it) yet doth but cloake a violence, and wrong, which God will revenge, &c. 17 Yee have wearied the Lord with your words; yet ye say, Wher∣in have wee wearied him, when yee say, every one that doth evill, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them, or where is the God of judg∣ment?Moreover, besides all these actuall wickednesses, yee have extreamely urged the patience of the Lord, with the words of your blasphemies; yet ye are ready to face out this sinne also, and say, Wherein have we thus offen∣ded in our speeches? Know then, that yee have shame∣fully
blasphemed God, in that ye say; It is all one whe∣ther a man be good, or evill; every one that doth evill, speeds as well at Gods hands as the best; and he delights in wicked doers; else they should not so prosper as they doe; Where is the justice of God in the meane time? or how is he a God of such integrity and unpartiall retribu∣tion, as he is reported? CAP. III. BEhold,1 Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the messenger of the co∣venant, whom yee delight in, behold, hee shall come saith the Lord of hosts. I will stoppe the mouthes of all such blasphe∣mous cavillers; I will, in my appointed time, send my messenger John the Baptist, and he shall prepare the way before my personall and visible comming; Loe the Mes∣siah, even the Lord, whom ye waite for, shall ere long come into his Temple; that great messenger of the E∣vangelicall covenant, whom with joy of heart yee, my faithfull ones, have long expected, behold, he shal come, saith the Lord of hosts. But how shall the guilty and wicked ones of the world abide the day of his comming?2 But who may abide the day of his comming, & who shall stand when hee appeareth, for he is like a refiners fire, & like fullers sope. how shall they be able to stand before him, when he appeareth? for hee shall come to purge, and refine his Church. And he shall addresse himselfe zealously, and exqui∣sitely,3 And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of sil∣ver, and he shall purifie the Sonnes of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousnesse. to rid his Church of all that corruption of do∣ctrine, and manners, wherewith it is defiled; and especi∣ally, he shall reforme the Priests of the new Testament, and quit them of that drosse of errour, and unrighteous∣nesse, wherewith that holy calling hath beene formerly impured; that they may with cleane hands offer up holy sacrifices unto their God. Then shall all the services of his holy Church be plea∣sing, and acceptable unto the Lord;4 Then shall the offe∣rings of Iudah and Ierusa∣lem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the daies of old and as in former yeares. no lesse then the best sacrifices of Abel, and Melchisedech, and of all the holy fathers in the old Testament. And whereas ye lately said,5 And I will come neere to you to judgement, and I will be a swift wit∣nes against the Sorcerers. Where is the God of judgement? behold, now ye shall see, and finde where he is; I will come close to you in judgement, and will take a speedy course of vengeance against the sorcerers, &c. FINIS.
A PARAPHRASE VPON THE HARD TEXTS OF THE NEW TESTA∣MENT. By Jos. Exon. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Nathaniel Butter. Anno Dom. 1632.
THE GOSPELL OF S. MATTHEVV. CAP. I. THE rolle,1 The booke of the generation of Iesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. or catlogue of the Pedi∣gree of Iesus Christ; according to the flesh, derived from those two most remarkeable progenitors, David and Abraham; to whom the promises were most clearly and ful∣ly made of the Messiah, to be dedu∣ced from their loines. And Salmon begat Booz of Rahab,5 And Salomon begat Booz of Rahab, and Booz begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat lesse. who received the spies in Jericho; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth, the Moabitesse; which two women, being forainers from the common-wealth of Israel, were both mercifully re∣ceived into the Church of God, and honoured with the progeniture of Christ. Of Joram was descended Ozias; betwixt whom were interposed three Kings, (Ahaziah, Joash,8 And Ioram begat O∣zias. and Amasiah) whereof mention is not made (whether for that they were of the seed of Ahab; or for that, there being no danger of omission in so knowne a pedigree, there might be a just observation of the intended number, of the generations specified.) And Josiah begat Joakim and his bretheren;11 And Iosias begat Ie∣chonias and his brethren, a∣bout the time they were carried away to Babylon. and that Joakim begat Joachin, or Jechoniah, neare to the time that they were carried away captive to Babylon; so as Josiah was the Grandfather of Jechoniah. In the time of the captivitie,12 After that they were brought to Babylon, Iecho∣nias begat Salathiel. Jechoniah (whom God pronounced childlesse, in respect of any succession to the throne) begat Salathiel his second sonne.
And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary,16 And Iacob begat Io∣seph the husband of Mary. being of the same Tribe and family; so as they had the same common Ancestors;17 So all the generati∣ons from Abraham to Da∣vid, are fourteene genera∣tions: & from David un∣till the carrying away in∣to Babylon, are fourteene generations. which were therefore wont to be reckoned by the males, and not by the females. So in the line or pedigree of Abraham to David, are fourteene descents; and from David to the carrying a∣way into Babylon, fourteene descents, &c. Then Joseph her betrothed husband, being a just man,19 Then Ioseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to make her a publike example, was minded to put her away privily. and therefore not willing to cloake that unchasti∣ty, when he suspected in his espoused wife; and on the other side as a mercifull and loving husband, being not willing to prosecute the rigour of the law against her, re∣solved to put her away privily. 20 Feare not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that is conceived in her is of the holy Ghost.Feare not to acknowledge Mary for thy wife, and to make a rituall consumation of that marriage, which is contracted betwixt you; for that which is conceived in her, is not of any mortall seed, but is miraculously wrought by the power, and operation of the holy Ghost. 25 And knew her not, till she had brought forth her first borne sonne, and he called his name Iesus.And Joseph in reverence of that divine worke of the holy Ghost, and that blessed conception which was wrought in her; yeelded so much honour to the body of Mary his wife, as that hee altogether abstained from all carnall knowledge of so holy a vessell: and when this onely child of hers was borne, according to the vision and premonition, which he had from God, he called his Name Jesus, or Saviour. CAP. II. 1 Now when Iesus was borne in Bethleem of Iudea, in the daies of He∣rod the King; behold, there came wise men from the East, to Hierusalem.Now, when Jesus was (upon occasion of the Tribes going up to their severall Cities to be taxed) borne at Bethleem (not that of Zebulon but of Judah) in the reigne of Herod the first, being a Tributary King of the Iewes, under the Romanes, there came wise men from the Easterne coasts, (whether of Chaldea, or rather) of Persia, to the City of Jerusalem. 2 Saying, where is he that is borne King of the Iewes: for we have seene his starre in the East, and are come to worship him.Saying, where is hee, whom we know by assured re∣velation from God, to bee borne the true King of the Jewes; and that not a Prince of any naturall, and ordi∣nary ranke, but such a one, as is designed, and notifyed from heaven, for some marvelous purpose: for there hath appeared unto us in the East a miraculous starre which signifieth his comming into the world, and wee are come afarre off, to present our homage, and wor∣ship unto him.
See Micha 5. vers. 2.6 And thou Beth∣leem, &c. That very starre,9 When they had heard the King, they departed, and loe the starre which they saw in the East, went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was. which they had formerly seene in the East, & had guided them to Jerusalem, now appeared unto them againe, and (as moving lower in the aire) went visibly before them, till it came to Bethleem, and there stood still over the house, where the new-borne child was. And notwithstanding the homelinesse of the place,11 And fell downe and worshipped him: & when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrhe. and the meane appearance of the parents, and the poor∣nesse of the furniture, and provison for that birth, they acknowledging some more than humane Majestie in that child, fell downe and worshipped him; and pre∣sented unto him the most precious gifts which their country yeelded, even gold, frankincense and myrrhe. So as herein was fulfilled and verified,15 That it might bee fulfilled which was spo∣ken of the Lord, by the Prophet, saying; Out of Aegypt have I called my Sonne. in an higher nature and degree, that which was spoken by the pro∣phet Hoseas, saying; Out of Aegypt have I called my sonne; for that, which he spake of the people of Israel, which were the sonnes of God by choice, and adoption, was now fulfilled in him, who was the naturall, and eter∣nall Sonne of his Father. And slew all the children that were in Bethleem &c. and that were two yeares old and under,16 And slew al the chil∣dren that were in Beth∣leem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two yeares old and under, according to the time, which he had diligently enquired of the wisemen. that he might make sure worke, and might certainely light upon the child, whose birth the wisemen had signified unto him; he did therefore resolve to cast beyond the time decla∣red by them so farre backe, as there should bee no like∣lihood of possibilitie for that designed child to escape. Then was againe fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet,17 18 Then was ful∣filled that which was spo∣ken by Ieremy the Pro∣phet, saying; In Rama was there a voice heard, la∣mentation, and weeping, & great mourning; Rachel weeping for her children, and would not bee com∣forted, because they are not. concerning Rachels weeping for her sonnes of the Tribe of Benjamin; shee being buried at Bethleem, was brought in, as it were in her grave, so deepely lamenting the losse of her posterity, carried a∣way captive into Babylon, as that the voyce of her wee∣ping was heard a farre off, even at Ramah in the Tribe of Benjamin; and now, well may she renue that her la∣mentation, when so many innocent children were thus cruelly slaine within the sight of her grave. And he came, and abode in a City of Galilee,23 And hee came and dwelt in a City called Na∣zareth, that it might hee fulfilled which was spo∣ken by the Prophets, hee shall be called a Nazarene. called Nazareth, that in the very place of his dwelling, there might bee an allusion to that stile, or title which is frequently given to him of the Prophets, by whom hee is called Netzar: so as, out of this ground, the appellati∣on which is given him of a Nazarene, how ever it be ob∣jected
to him, by way of reproach, is rather a notable proofe of his answerablenesse to that prediction of the Prophets; especially that of Esay, who by the root of Jesse, whence he should come, describes Bethlehem (the dwelling of Iesse) for the place of his birth, and by that Netzar, which should arise from that root, meant to al∣lude to the place of his abode and education. CAP. III. 4 And the same Iohn had his rayment of Ca∣mels haire, and a leatherne girdle about his loynes, and his meate was locusts, and wilde honey.ANd the same Iohn preached in those villages which were scattered in the desert, lived in an austere, and retired fashion, being cloathed in an unusuall, rough, neglected habit; and feeding on such homely, and vo∣luntary diet, as that wilde place would afford, that by this strange manner of his life, the mindes of men might be raised to a conceit of some extraordinary mat∣ter, both in his person and message. O ye Pharisees, and Saduces, who are rather venomous serpents, than men, so full are ye of despight, and wick∣ednesse;7 O generation of vi∣pers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? how comes it about that ye are growne thus spiritually wise, to seeke thus seasonably to avoid the wrath and judgements of God to come; by betaking your selves to this holy institution of baptisme, and washing in this sacred laver of regeneration? Who hath put this into your hearts? Can this be any other, but a motion of the spirit of God, whose blessed suggestions, if ye would follow to purpose. 8 Bring forth there∣fore fruits meet for repen∣tance;See that your repentance be serious, and effectuall; do not content your selves what this formall profession, but bring forth such fruits both of good affections, and of good workes, as may be meet for true penitents; and as will necessarily flow from true grace wrought in the heart. 9 And thinke not to say within your selves, wee have Abraham to our fa∣ther: For I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.Do not rest in this, or boast of it as an all-sufficient priviledge, that Abraham is your fater afther the flesh: the thanke of this, is Gods, and not yours; neither is this any more then the power of God is able to do for these very stones of the wildernesse; of which hee is no lesse able to make children unto Abraham, then hee was to make Adam of the clay, or Eve of his ribbe. 10 And now also the axe is laid to the root of the trees: Therefore every tree which bringeth not foorth good fruit, is hew en downe and cast into the fire.Please not your selves therefore with these pretences, but know, that now God intends to take a severe and round course, with all the hypocriticall, and fruitlesse professors of his name; Grant that Abraham is your
root, & that yee are sprung up from him, yet know that Gods judgement, like an axe, is now laid to you, to hew you downe speedily, (that ye may be cast into hell fire) if ye bring not forth good fruit, such as may beseeme the trees that grow from such a root. I indeed, as being a meere man,11 I indeed baptize you with water unto re∣pentance; but he that com∣meth after me, is mightier than I, whose shooes I am not worthy to beare: hee shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. can onely apply unto you the outward signe of Baptisme, which is a Sacra∣ment of repentance, and spirituall regeneration; and can goe no further; but the great Messias of the world, whose fore-runner I am, and whose shooes I am not worth to beare, hath a power infinitely above mine, hee shall conferre upon you the inward graces of his spi∣rit, which is of a purging and cleansing quality, and shall so worke upon your soules, as the fire doth upon me∣talls; which Spirit of his, shall on the day of Pentecost descend upon your heads in the forme of fiery tongues. The Church of God is like a corne floore,12 Whose fanne is in his hand, and he will tho∣rowly purge his floore, & gather his wheate into the garner, but will burne up the chaffe with unquench∣able fire. wherein there is not onely wheate, but chaffe, and strawes, and drosse, and much offall. The Messiah, whom I fore-run, comes with a fanne in his hand, whereby he will cleanse and purge his Church, by the effectuall and powerfull preaching of his Gospell, which shall seale up the good unto everlasting life; so as they, like unto pure wheate, shall bee by him set apart for the garner of heaven: whiles the wicked, as the chaffe and soile of the floore, shall bee swept up, and cast by him into unquenchable fire. It is not for thee to stand upon these points of the excellency of my person, above thine;15 And Iesus answer∣ing, said unto him; suffer it to be so now: for thus it becommeth us to fulfill all righteousnesse, then he suf∣fered him. now at this time when my Baptisme is in hand; Doe thou readily yeeld to that which I require of thee; as that which God the Father hath willed both me to undergoe, and thee to performe; for thus it is fit for us to acomplish (in all due obedience) all that part of Gods will, which con∣cernes us. And there was a visible kinde of opening in the hea∣ven, as if the curtaine of the skie had beene drawne,16 And loe the heavens were opened unto him, & hee saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. and a glorious brightnesse shew'd it selfe, as it were, above the firmament; and hee, who had before received the Spirit, not by measure, now that hee was to enter upon the execution of this worke of mans redemption, hee saw the Spirit of God descending upon him, in the forme of a Dove, and lighting upon him; as in a gracious and publike attestation from heaven of the designation, and inabling of him to so great a worke.
CAP. IV. 1 Then was Iesus led up of the Spirit into the wildernesse, to be tempt∣ed of the devill.THen was Iesus moved by the Spirit of God, to go aside into the wildernesse, that hee might there enter the combat with the greatenemy of mans salvation; that so he might begin this great office in many and strong temptations. 4 It is written, Man shall not live by bread a∣lone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.It is not the very materiall substance of bread that can, or doth maintaine the life of man, but the blessing of God, giving power to that bread to nourish; neither is Almighty god tyed to the ordinary meanes of bread, as if without that he could not sustaine mans life, but hee is able by his infinite power, either to create new meanes, or to worke without, or against the meanes. Then Iesus, that hee might give all advantage to the challenges of Satan,5 Then the devill taketh him up into the ho∣ly city, and setteth him on the pinnacle of the Temple. suffered himselfe to be led to Ieru∣salem, and to be set upon an high pinnacle of the Temple. 7 Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.See Deuteron. 6. Verse 16. 8 Againe the devill taketh him up into an ex∣ceeding high mountaine, and sheweth him all the kingdomes of the world, and the glory of them.And represented to his eye diverse countries round about, and withall represented to his imagination all the kingdomes of the world, and the magnificence and glory thereof, setting them forth in all their pompe, and pleasure, and royalty. Hee departed into the upper Galilee,12 Hee departed into Galilee. which was out of Herods dominions, called Galilee of the Gen∣tiles. 16 Galilee of the Gen∣tiles, the people that sate in darkenesse &c.See Isay. 9. Verse 1. and 2. 19 And hee said unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.Follow me, and I will preferre you to an higher fun∣ction; for whereas now your trade is this toylesome fishing in the sea, I will advance you to that spirituall calling, wherein you shall take men in stead of fishes; by the nets of wholsome doctrine, drawing them up out of the sea of the world, into the ship of my Church. CAP. V. 2 And hee opened his mouth, and taught them, saying,ANd he composed himselfe to speake unto the multi∣tude; and taught them, saying. 3 Blessed are the poore in spirit: for theirs is the kingdome of heaven.Blessed is the end ye all ayme at; and that which
the most men are apt to mistake; ye are wont common∣ly to account them blessed, which abound with wealth, & honour, & pleasure; & those (on the contrary) misera∣ble, who are wanting in any of these: but I must teach you other Doctrine; would ye therefore know who are truly blessed. Howsoever then the world esteemes them, they are blessed, who being dejected by the hand of God, have learned to make a good use of his affliction, being there∣by inwardly humbled under that mighty & just hand; for God will recompence their want with abundance, their abasement with heavenly glory. And whereas the world accounts none blessed but the merry and joviall;4 Blessed are they that mourne: for they shall be comforted. I tell you that they are blessed who mourne for their sinnes; and are sadly affected, whether with their owne, or others evills; for this sorrow shall end in joy and comfort. Blessed are the lowly and gentle, and patient and long-suffering; for God shall reward their humilitie,5 Blessed are the meeke: for they shall in∣herit the earth. and meeke and quiet disposition, with a comfortable fruition of these earthly blessings, and of better above. Blessed are they,6 Blessed are they which do hunger & thirst after righteousnesse; for they shall be filled. who when they have so moderated their appetite, that their desires are no other than just and equall, yet wait and languish under the forbearance and want thereof, and doe eagerly affect spirituall bles∣sings; for God will finde a time to satisfie their longing, and to fill them with all good things. Ye my Apostles and Disciples are unto the world as salt is to meat;13 Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it bee salted: it is thenceforth good for no∣thing, but to cast out, and to be trodden under foote. without your Doctrine the world would be altogether unsavory; consider therefore in what state ye are; the greater your use and service is, the more is your danger and judgement. Other things when they have lost their savour, recover it by the vertue of salt applyed unto them; but if salt it selfe have lost the sa∣vour, what can be able to fetch it againe? Even so, yee serve to season the gracelesse hearts, and lives of men, by your good Doctrine and life: but if yee your selves become gracelesse, what remedy can there be for you? Other things when they have lost their nature and good qualities, yet even after their corruption may bee use∣full for some purposes; but for salt, if that have once lost the savour, it is, it can bee good for nothing; and therefore must necessarily bee cast out as utterly unpro∣fitable. Even so it is with you, if yee shall degenerate from this holy calling, wherein yee are set. God hath not given unto you, these stations,15 Neither doe men light a candle, and put it under abushell. or these graces, that yee should keepe them to your selves, and smother them in an obscure privacie; but that ye should
bring them forth to the benefit of the world, and im∣prove them to the direction and salvation of many, as men do not light a candle to hide it, &c. 17 Thinke not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.Because ye heare some doctrines from mee, whereto your eares were not formerly inured, do not imagine, or conceive, that I am come to make any innovation, or change of that doctrine, or holy covenant that is con∣tained in the law of Moses, or the Prophets; no, it is so farre from that, as that I am come to make good, and ratifie, and perfect the same; in that by my spirit I shall quicken the dead letter of the law; and really exhibit and performe that which was shadowed out by the fi∣gures of the Law. 18 For verily I say un∣to you, till heaven and earth passe, one jot, or one tittle, shall in no wife passe from the Law, til all be ful∣filled.For verily, I say unto you, the truth of this law is firme, and stable, and inviolable; as soone shall the frame of heaven and earth be dissolved, as any the least part of the law shall miscarry and fall to the ground unfulfil∣led; or as the truth, and equity of any clause of the mo∣rall law of God shall cease or be abrogated. 19 Whosoever there∣fore shall breake one of these least commande∣ments, and shall teach men so, hee shall be called the least in the kingdome of heaven? but whosoever shall doe, and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdome of heaven.Whosoever therefore shall breake any one of these Commandements (which in the opinion of men shall seeme the very least and sleightest) and shall either by example, or doctrine, draw men to a neglect, or viola∣tion thereof, hee shall justly be held unworthy to su∣staine any the meanest place, or charge in the Church of God, under the Gospell; but on the contrary, hee who both in life and doctrine shall set forth, and commend this law of God to his people, that man shall be accoun∣ted worthy of great honour, and respect in Gods Church. 20 For I say unto you that except your righte∣ousnesse shall exceed the righteousnes of the Scribes and Pharisees, yee shall in no case enter into the king∣dome of heaven.The Scribes and Pharisees take upon them to be the great masters of the law, and professe much rigorous austeritie in their traditionall observations, but in the meane time, they place the breach, and fulfilling of the law, in outward actions, and do by their false glosses corrupt the holy law of God: except therefore ye go fur∣ther than they, both in the understanding, and observing of this law, yee shall not enter into the kingdome of heaven. 21 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time: Thou shalt not kill: and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of judgement.Ye have heard that it hath beene taught of old, by those which have taken upon them to be expositors of the Law. Thou shalt not kill: and whosoever shall out∣wordly violate this law, by an actuall and malicious shed∣ding of innocent blood, shall be in danger of a capitall punishment. 22 But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall bee in danger of the judgement; & who∣soever shall say unto his brother Racha, shall be in danger of the Counsell: but whosoever shall say, Thou foole, shall be in dan∣ger of hell fire?But I say unto you, that not onely the outward act of murder is a breach of the Law; but the inward mis∣passion
of the heart also; and therefore (that I may ex∣presse the degrees of Gods displeasure, and wrath by those three degrees of punishment, which are wont to be inflicted in those three severall orders of Courts, and proceedings of judicature amongst you; amongst whom the lesser offences are punished by the judgement of three authorized officers; the greater by the Sanhedrim or Counsell of three and twenty: the greatest of all by the Supreme Sessions of sixty one) I say unto you, that even rash, and causelesse anger (as comming under the first head) deserves a just punishment from Gods hand; but if that anger breake forth into gestures of scorne, and disgrace, it goes yet higher, and deserves a further degree of judgement, but if it shall yet proceed further into words of reviling, and contumely: it then, as a notorious offence, incurres the danger of the highest degree of punishment; such as is reserved for the hai∣nousest malefactors. And there remembrest that thy brother hath a just quarrell against thee,23 And there remem∣brest that thy brother hath ought against thee. and that thou hast given him cause of unkindenesse. And if there bee a controversie betwixt thee and thy neighbour, so as you are going to law about it;25 Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the ad∣versary deliver thee to the Iudge, and the Iudge de∣liver thee to the officer. be thou so inclined to peace, as to take up the matter speedily, betwixt you two, ere ye come to a publike triall of it; lest, upon the pursuit of thine adversary, thou bee foy∣led in the cause, and the Judge deliver thee into the hands of the officer, &c. But I say unto you;28 But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed adul∣tery with her already in his heart. That adultery doth not onely consist in outward act onely, but in the wicked concupi∣scences of the heart, so as whosoever looketh lasciviously upon a woman, with a will & desire to feed his lust after her, hath already cōmitted adultery with her in his heart. And if this bee difficult for a man to avoyd all lustfull glances, yet it must be laboured for,29 And if thy right eye offend thee, plucke it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish. and there must bee a firme resolution taken up in the soule, rather to part with the dearest part or member of our bodies, than to yeeld it up as a weapon of unrighteousnesse unto sinne. For it were much better for thee that one &c. So also vers. 30. Ye doe easily yeeld that the name of God may not bee taken in vaine in your oathes,34 But I say unto you, sweare not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods throne. but ye thinke it not unlawfull (according to your common practise) to sweare by heaven, or by earth, or by the Temple, or Je∣rusalem, or by your head, or any such like created sub∣ject,
and herein ye thinke ye may have liberty enough, so as these names cannot be taken in vain, nor make you li∣able to perjurie: but I say unto you, Sweare not unneces∣sarily by God himselfe: neither sweare at all by these creatures, as they are such; and if ye do sweare falsely by them, as in relation to God their maker, ye make your selves no lesse guilty of perjury; for there is none of them which hath not some reference unto God: heaven is his throne, the earth his footstoole, &c. 38. 39 Ye have heard that it hath beene said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you, that ye resist not evill, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheeke, turne to him the other also.Ye have heard the glosse of the Scribes and Pharisees, warranting retaliation of injuries, even in the cases of private revenge: but I say unto you, Do not returne one evill turne for another: but be so inclinable to peace and meekenesse, that yee rather be ready to take a second wrong, than to returne the first. So also verse 40. and 41. 48 Be ye therefore per∣fect, even as your Father, which is in heaven, is per∣fect.Do yee labour and strive towards perfection; and propound unto your selves the patterne of God your heavenly Father; imitate ye his holinesse; and though ye may never hope to attaine to a full measure thereof, yet indeavour that your holinesse may be conformable to his in the manner of it, for truth and sincerity; and that it may not rest in any measure which it hath atchieved, but may still aspire unto more. CAP. VI. 3 But when thou dost almes, let not thy left hand know what &c.DO thine almes so secretly, that, if it were possible, thou might'st even hide them from thine owne selfe. 17 But thou, when thou fastest, annoint thine head, and wash thy face.When thou fastest privately, upon the occasions of thine owne humiliation, make no shew of it, outward∣ly to others, but rather compose thy selfe to cheerful∣nesse in the view of thy neighbours. 11 Give us this day our daily bread.See Luke 11.3. 13 Lead us not &c.See Luke 11.4. 22 The light of the bo∣dy is the eye; if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.As the eye is to the body, so is reason to the soule; the light and direction to all the other parts, and facul∣ties: if the eye of the body be cleare, all the members of the body receive perfect direction for their mo∣tions.
But if there be a blemish, or defect in the eye,23 But if thine eye bee evill, thine whole body shall bee full of darknesse: if therefore the light that is in thee bee darknesse, how great is that dark∣nesse? all the body wants guidance: so, if the reason, or understan∣ding facultie be rightly informed; all the other powers of the soule are steered aright; but if that be corrupted, there is nothing but darknesse, and disorder, and mis∣carriage in the soule. No man can serve two opposite masters,24 No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else hee will hold to the one, and de∣spise the other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon. neither can he divide himselfe betwixt them, to please them both: if he love the one, hee must disrespect the other. If hee lay to please the one, the other will be offended: So it is betwixt God and riches. If yee bee the servants and vassalls to your wealth, yee cannot bee the servants of God. Be ye not anxiously, distrustfully,25 Take no thought for your life, what yee shall eat, &c. carkingly careful for the things of this life, for your food, or apparrell, or any other necessary or convenient thing for the mainte∣nance of your present life. Every day hath trouble and care enough pertaining to the present occasions thereof,34 Sufficient unto the day is the evill thereof. we need not burden it besides, with a sad and afflictive thoughtfulnesse for the affaires and events of future times. CAP. VII. DOe not presume to passe a rash and uncharitable judgement upon others,1 Iudge not, that yee be not judged. that God may not enter in∣to a severe judgement with you. Doe not impart the holy things of God,6 Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, nei∣ther cast yee your pearles before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turne againe and rent you. the divine mysteries of salvation, unto profane and irreligious, and malicious scorners, neither doe ye cast away the most precious counsells, and ordinances of God upon filthie persons, who are resolved to wallow in their knowne uncleannesses; Lest they do both contemne those sacred institutions, and returne unto you scoffes, indignities, persecutions. See Matth. 3.30.19 Every tree that bring∣eth not forth good fruit, is hewen downe, &c I never tooke any approving knowledge of you;23 I never knew you. yee may perhaps have made formall professions of mee, but I never gave allowance either to you or them. And he taught them with much power,29 For he taught them as one having authority, & not as the Scribes. and evidence of the Spirit, stirring their hearts with his effectuall and heavenly doctrine, which hee delivered, and incli∣ning
them to beleeve, & imbrace what he taught them, and not in that fashionable, cold, and heartlesse fashion which the Scribes used in their expositions of the Law. CAP. VIII. 4 And Iesus saith un∣to him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way, shew thy selfe to the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a testimo∣ny unto them.IT is not yet seasonable for thee to divulge this cure, that I have wrought upon thee; & therefore I do, for the time, enjoyne thee silence; but in the meane time, neglect no duty that the Law requireth of thee, though thy healing have beene thus extraordinary, yet doe not thinke that it exempteth thee from that charge, which God by Moses imposeth upon thee; goe therefore, and shew thy selfe to the Priest, that he may passe his allow∣ance of thy full recovery; and offer thou the gift prescri∣bed in the Law that by this act of thine, my very ene∣mies may be convinced of the truth, and certaintly of this miracle. 9 For I am a man un∣der authority, having soul∣diers under me; and I say to this man, Goe, and hee goeth: & to another, come and he commeth: and to my servant, doe this, and hee doeth it.If I that am a man under the authoritie of another, (viz. the Tribune of my band) have yet this power, that my word can bee obeyed by those that are under my command; so as if I say to my servant, Goe; hee goeth: if I bid him come, he commeth: how much more shall thy word alone, who art so powerfull, and absolute, be prevalent to effect that which thou commandest. Doe thou therefore but speake the word onely, and my ser∣vant shall be healed. 10 Verely, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith; no, not in Isra∣el.This Centurion, yee see, is a Gentile; yet hath hee shewed in this suit of his, such a marvelous strength of faith, that I have not found the like, even in Israel, which should have more reason to beleeve. 11 And I say unto you, that many shal come from the East and West, and shall sit downe with Abra∣ham, and Isaac, and Iacob, in the kingdome of hea∣ven.But thus it shall bee, as in him, so in others also, that are yet strangers, and aliens from the Church of God; for I say unto you, that beyond, and out of the bounds of Iudea, from all the remote regions of the world, there shall many be called into my Church; who from the East and West, shall bee admitted into the participa∣tion of the same glory, with Abraham, Isaac, and Ja∣cob, (the holy Patriarchs of my ancient Church) in the kingdome of heaven. 12 But the children of the kingdome shall bee cast out into utter darke∣nesse: there shall be wee∣ping & gnashing of teeth.But many of those, who by their priviledge and pro∣fession are my selected people, even the Jewes (to whom the Church of God seemes now to be confined) shall be utterly disclaimed, and rejected; and in the end shall be
cast downe into hell, where there is nothing but horror, and extremity of sorrow, and paine, and torment. That even in this sense also might bee fulfilled that word of Isaias the prophet; viz.17 That it might bee fulfilled which was spo∣ken by Isaias the Prophet, saying: himselfe tooke our infirmities, and bare our sickenesses. That as he did in his owne person undertake to beare our sorrowes; and in∣firmities: so also, by his divine power hee removed and tooke away the bodily complaints and sicknesses of men, as he did away their sinnes, which are the causes of their sufferings, so also their diseases and infirmities, which are the effects of their sinne. And Jesus saith unto him,20 And Iesus saith un∣to him; the foxes have holes, and the birds of the aire have nests: but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. If in the purpose of follow∣ing me, thou hast any aime at thine owne ease, or ho∣nour in the world, thou shalt bee much mistaken; for though I be the true Son of God, yet now I have taken upon me the forme and estate of a servant; and, in this humbled condition of mine, I do not so much as provide a set house-roome for my selfe and my family; wherein I have willingly abased my selfe below the very fowles of the aire, and the meanest beasts upon earth. The Fox∣es have holes, &c. But Jesus said unto him;22 But Iesus said unto him: follow me, and let the dead burie their dead. Those that are truely called by me, must not delay their answerable obedience; no not for a day; but must presently addresse themselves to my service: as for that excuse which thou makest of bu∣rying the dead, it is a worke needfull indeed to be done; but there are enow besides fit for this businesse; even those which lye still dead in their sinnes, and have not entertained any good purposes of betaking themselves to the seeking and following the meanes of salvati∣on. O thou Jesus the sonne of the everliving God,29 And behold, they cried out, saying: what have we to do with thee Iesus, thou Sonne of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time? it is our great misery that wee are fallen into thine hands; what wilt thou now doe with vs? doest thou meane now to accomplish our full torment before the day of finall judgement? CAP. IX. ANd Jesus seeing the faith both of the palsied man,2 And Iesus seeing their faith, said unto the sicke of the palsie: Bee of good cheare, thy sinnes be forgiven thee. and of those that brought him, said unto the sicke of the palsie: Sonne, be of good cheere, thou art comne hi∣ther, in desire and confidence of cure, I will give thee more than thou askest; thou commest hither for the recovery of thy bodily health, I give thee (besides that) an happy restitution to a good estate of soule; thy pal∣sie
is healed, thy sinnes (the cause of this evill) are for∣given thee. 6 But that yee may know that the Sonne of man hath power on earth to forgive sinnes: then saith he to the sicke of the palsie: Arise, take up thy bed, and goe unto thine house.Ye know well, that no finite power can forgive sinne, which is an offence of an infinite Majestie; onely there∣fore an infinite power can remit it: and now that yee may know the Sonne of man hath this power in his hand, I will demonstrate it to you, by this miraculous effect; None but an infinite power can so farre tran∣scend nature, as by a meere command, instantly to re∣store legges and strength to this impotent man; you shall now see it done by me. Then saith he to the sicke of the palsie; Arise, take up thy bed and goe to thine house. 9 Sitting at the receit of custome.Sitting in the Tole-booth of the Publicans, to gather up the rents, and taxes that the Jewes were to pay unto the Romanes; their masters. 10 Behold many Pub∣licanes and sinners came & sate downe with him and his disciples.Many Publicans and persons that had beene noted for infamous, and knowne offenders, as consorting toge∣ther (being abandoned by their neighbours in a conceit of the unlawfulnesse of their conversation) came, and sate downe with him, and his Disciples. 13 I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.See Hosea 6. vers. 6. For I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.I come not to call them that are just, and righteous in their owne conceit; but those that are convinced in themselves of their owne sinfulnesse, those am I comne to call home to me, by a true and hearty repentance: as for those other, how can they be capable of repentance and conversion, when they thinke they have done no∣thing worthy to be repented of. 15 And Iesus said unto them, Can the children of the Brid-chamber mourne as long as the bridegroome is with them: But the daies wil come, when the Bride∣groome shall bee taken from them, and then shall they fast.There is a time for all things; there are times of feast∣ing, and times of mourning and abstinence; marriage feasts are of all other wont to be times of mirth, and jol∣lity. Looke then how unproper it would bee for the Bride-men that attend the wedding to fast, whiles the Bridegroome is celebrating his marriage, with great cheare, and mirth; so unfit would it be for my disciples to fast and mourne, whiles I, their master and Saviour, am personally present with them; but as when the wed∣ding feast is over, and the Bridegroome is gone, the guests may then give place to fasting, and sad austerity, and it is seasonable so to doe; even so shall my Disci∣ples, when I am taken from them, finde it meete to mourne, and humble themselves by fasting, and such like bodily exercises.
There must be great wisedome and discretion in making choice of those things,16. 17 No man putteth a peece of new cloth unto an old garmēt; for that which is put in, to fill it up, taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse: nei∣ther do men put new wine into old bottles, else the bottles breake, and the wine runneth out, and bot∣tles perish: but they put new wine into new bot∣tles, and both are preser∣ved. which are fit to be impo∣sed upon severall persons; that which is meet for one, is not meet for another; my Disciples are like unto a cloth, or a bottle; an austere course of life is like to a new rough cloath, or to new wine, that is full of strong and busie spi∣rits. Now looke how unmeet, and dangerous it is to peece a new cloath to an old, or to put new wine into an old crasie caske (for hence the rent in the garment growes greater, and the wine breaking the caske is spilt and lost:) so unfit & inconvenient it might be, to put my disciples (which are yet but novices in this holy professi∣on, they have undertaken) to overstrict, and difficult, and severe courses; which afterwards upon better expe∣rience, and more seasoning they may be fit for. He saw the minstrels that were wont to be hired for funerall lamentations,23 Hee saw the min∣strels, and the people ma∣king a noise. and the people also with much noise expressing their sorrow. The maid is not in such a state of death,24 For the maid is not dead, but sleepeth; and they laughed him to scorne. as under which shee shall continue, but she shall be so soone revi∣ved, as if shee had onely stept for a while, and were now to be awaked; and when ye shall see her presently to be raised up, and move, ye will be ready to imagine it was no other, &c. Here is a great and plentious harvest towards,37 The harvest truely is plenteous; but the la∣bourers are few. of ma∣ny soules, that are to be gathered into the barnes, and granaries of the Church, and of heaven; but the la∣bourers and teachers, by whose painfull ministrie they are to be gathered in, are but few. CAP. X. IT is not yet time to preach these glad tidings of salva∣tion,5 Goe not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samari∣tanes, enter ye not. to the Gentiles; they shall in their season be cal∣led, but onwards, do ye confine your paines and preach∣ing, within the bounds of Judea; and do not so much as goe aside into any of the cities of the Samaritans, who though they challenge an affinitie and interest both of blood, and religion, yet for those grosse mixtures of hea∣thenisme, and heresie, and idolatry, which they have en∣tertained, are not worthy to be so farre respected by me, as to be priviledged with this my first mission unto them. But goe ye rather to those my peculiar,6 But goe ye rather to the lost sheepe. and selected people of Israel, who are (as it were) lost in their owne
infidelity, and disobedience, and labour to reclaime them. 9 Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brasse in in your purses,Make no provision of money for the charge for your journey; as if ye should labour, and travell upon your owne cost. 10 Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shooes, nor yet staves: for the workeman is worthy of his meat:Neither carry with you provision of victuals, neither take with you change of suits; whether of coats for your backes, or of shooes for your feet, or of staves for your hand, but content your selves with what you have then about you; and if any of these should faile you, in your way, they shall be supplyed unto you, by those among whom ye bestow your paines, for the workman is worthy of his maintenance, whithersoever he goes. 11 And into whatsoe∣ver city or towne ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy, and there abide till ye goe thence:When yee enter into a city, or towne, inquire who may bee the fittest host for you, and most worthy (through his good report, to be graced by your pre∣sence; and when yee have pitched in any house, do not change your lodging, whiles ye remaine in that city, that ye may not seeme inconstant, or delicate, and may by this meanes give discontent to your first host. 13 And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it be not worthy, then let your peace returne to you.And if the house be worthy, let that blessing which your prayers have wished thereunto, fall upon it; but if it be not worthy, those well-wishes of yours shall return backe into your owne bosomes. Shake off the dust of your feet, to signifie unto them that yee do not meane to have ought to do with them,15 Shake off the dust of your feet. and to let them see that their contempt of my message hath made them so odious to God, that the very dust of their streets, is a kinde of pollution to the feete of those that tread upon it. 17 But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the Councels, and they will scourge you in their Synogogues.They are wolves and not men, amongst whom I must send you; take heed therefore of these wolvish men, for they will persecute you for your message sake, and deli∣ver you up, as offenders, into the hands of authority, and scourge you in their assemblies. 19 But when they de∣liver you up, take no thought, how or what ye shall speake.When they deliver you up to their rulers, be not yee too fearefully solicitous what answers yee shall give; neither do herein trust too much to your owne wit, and dexterity of replying; but know that the spirit of God shall be present with you, and shall put answers into your mouth &c. 23 But when they per∣secute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.It is not enough for you, that ye have in one city indu∣red persecution, but when ye have suffered there, ye must betake your selves to another city. For verily I say unto you, all the cities of Israel must have this Gospell of mine, preached unto them by you, but ere ye can have gone through them all, I the Messiah who send you,
will personally second you in this mission of mine; and make manifest to the world my power and king∣dome. I am the great master of the familie, my Church:25 If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household? yee are my servants, and attendants therein, if they have not stucke to cast reproaches upon mee your master, in so high a degree, as to call me a devill; how much lesse do ye thinke will they spare you of my household?26 Feare them not there∣fore: for there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, and hid that shall not be knowne. Feare them not therefore: neither be discouraged with the obscurenesse of this errand of the Gospell which I do now commit unto you; for, howsoever it be now onely preached in corners, in some little parcell of the world, it shall spread forth to all the utmost coasts of the earth; and howsoever the despightfull world do now load you with slaunders, and unjust reproches, yet the day shall come, wherein your innocence and their malice shall be openly manifested unto all the world. Be not therefore afraid to publish this message of mine; What I deliver to you in private, speake ye open∣ly;27 What I tell you in darkenesse, that speake yee in light: and what ye heare in the eare, that preach yee upon the house tops. and what I speake to you alone, do yee proclaime it aloud from those places whence your voice may be best heard. Let the tyrants of the world threat what they please;29 Are not two spar∣rowes sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground with∣out your Father. they cannot do ought against you, but what is limited by my providence: even the meanest of all the creatures are not exempted from the care and over-ruling power thereof: what bird is more cheap, and worthlesse than a sparrow, whereof two are sold for a farthing? and yet the eye of divine providence is so over them, that no∣thing can befall to one of them, but what your Father in heaven hath predetermined. But for you,30 But the very haires of your head are all num∣bred. so pretious is your life in the sight of God, that every thing that pertaines unto you, even the very haires of your head, is regarded by him; so as your enemies cannot touch one of those haires without the allowance of the Almighty. You are mistaken,34 Thinke not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. if ye thinke that upon the comming of the Messiah, there shall be nothing but outward peace in the world; no, make account rather of the contrary, for it will fall out, through the corruption of mans na∣ture, that he shall take occasion from the Gospell to be moved to unquietnesse, both in himselfe, and with o∣thers; and Satan, the common enemie of mankinde, being enraged with the publication thereof, shall stirre up broyles and oppositions against it: so as not peace, but warre and contention will (through the wickednes of devils and men) follow upon the preaching of this Gospell of peace.
35 For I am come to set a man at variance against his father.For it will follow upon my comming (as if it had been a thing intended by mee therein) that the sonne hating and persecuting my truth, will make head against the father, which imbraceth and professeth it, &c. 39 Hee that findeth his life shall lose it.Hee that makes so dainty of his life, as that, (when he is thereto called) he will not expose it to danger, or losse, for my names sake, shall be sure to loose it everla∣stingly. CAP. XI. 2. 3 He sent two of his Disciples, saying, Art thou hee that should come, or do wee looke for another?IOhn sent two of his Disciples to Jesus to inquire of him; whether hee were the Messiah that should come. Not for that John the Baptist did any way doubt of this truth; who had heard the voice from heaven ac∣knowledging Jesus to be the sonne of God, and had seen the Spirit descending upon him; and had said so often, and long before, Behold the Lambe of God, &c. But that by this meanes hee might procure a full confirmation hereof to his disciples; who (he knew) would be sent back by Jesus fully convinced; and setled (by his wonderfull miracles, and heavenly doctrine) in this perswasion and assurance. 5 And the deafe heare, the dead are raised up, and the poore have the Gospell preached to them.The deafe heare, the dead are raised up, so as I have by many undeniable miracles made good unto the world the truth of this, whereof ye inquire; and moreover, tell your master, that in mee is fullfilled that which Esaias fore-prophecyed of the Messias to come, that the Gos∣pell is preached to the poore. 6 And blessed is he who∣soever shall not be offend∣ed in mee.And blessed is hee that doth not take occasion to be offended at my meane and homely condition; but sees and acknowledges majesty and power in this my out∣ward povertie and infirmities. 7 What went ye out in∣to the wildernesse to see? a reed shaken with the winde.To what purpose went yee out into the wildernesse, to see John Baptist? What conceit, or expectation drew you thither? Did you thinke to see there a man light, and unconstant to his owne courses and resolutions? 8 But what went ye out for to see? A man cloath∣ed in soft rayment: behold they that weare soft cloathing are in Kings houses.Or did you thinke there to see a man gayly, or richly cloathed; this kinde of outward bravery of apparell is to be look't for in the courts of Kings and Princes; not in a rude desert. No, ye say ye went out to see a Prophet, for such in∣deed yee acknowledge him;9 But what went ye out for to see? a Prophet, yea I say unto you, and more then a Prophet. and yet ye regard not the testimony that hee gives concerning me; herein yee are not mistaken, that ye hold John no lesse then a Prophet;
yea, let mee adde somewhat to your valuation of him; I say he is more than a Prophet. See Malach 3.1.Behold I send. Verily I say unto you,11 Verily I say unto you, Among them that are borne of women, there hath not risen a greater than Iohn the Baptist: not∣withstanding, hee that is least in the kingdome of heaven, is greater than he. that among all those ancient Prophets which have beene most famous in the world in former times, there hath not arisen one greater, or more honoured in his function, than John Baptist. They all have spoken of the Messias to come, and this hath beene their principall glory, that they have fore-shewed him to the world, long before he was exhibited: but this is the priviledge and honour of John, that he points to that Saviour, and Messias already exhibited. And in the very same regard, the meanest minister under the Gospell, may justly challenge to have a more excellent office and function than John the Baptist; for that hee preacheth the same Saviour, as having fully satisfied for mankinde, triumphed over death and hell, ascended in∣to the glory of heaven. Ever since the dayes of Johns first preaching,12 And from the dayes of Iohn the Baptist, untill now, the kingdome of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force. untill now, there hath beene much zealous search after the Gospell; and such confluence of holy clients to the Evangelicall Church, as if they would forceably thrust themselves into it; with such eagernesse doe men follow the ordinances of God, the meanes of grace, as if they would offer a kinde of religious violence to heaven. Neither is it any wonder,13 For all the Prophets and the Law prophecied untill Iohn. that God workes now so strongly and vehemently in the hearts of men; for now in the dayes and preaching of John, the Gospell which was formerly hid under types and shadowes, is cleare∣ly opened, and revealed to the world; so as hee doth fully make up all that which in the Law and Prophets was fore-signified. And if yee had grace to know, and acknowledgee it;14 And if yee will re∣ceive it, this is Elias which was for to come. whereas the last Prophet Malachy told you of an Elias, that should come before the day of the Lord; yee should see and finde that this John is the fore-promised Elias, in whose power and Spirit hee is come, to prepare the way before me. He that hath not an outward onely,15 Hee that hath eares to heare, let him heare. but an inward and hearing eare, let him heare, and receive this which I deliver unto you. But alas, what shall I say to this generation,16 But whereunto shal I liken this generation? or where∣to shall I liken them? It is just with them, as in the or∣dinary proverbe of the boyes playing with their fel∣lowes in the market place.
It is like unto children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows.Whose word (in their sport) to each other, is, We have piped to you, and yee have not danced, &c. Even the very same word may I take up against this people; we have spoken comfortable things to them, and they have not so farre beleeved, as to rejoyce therein: we have justly bewailed their dangerous condition, and they have not beene affected with sorrow, and feare. 18 For Iohn came nei∣ther eating nor drinking, and they say, Hee hath a devill.Neither way are they to bee reclaymed, whether by austerity, or sociablenesse: by gentlenesse or rigour. for John came severely, and sadly to them, in a retired and hard course of life; and they say, Hee hath a De∣vill. 19 The Sonne of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of Publicanes and sinners, but wisedome is justified of her children.And againe, the Sonne of man came in a kinde, affa∣ble, and plausible manner, conversing with them soci∣ably, at their tables; and they say; Behold a man that loves his panch and his palate well; a Glutton, a Wine∣bibber, a friend of Publicanes and sinners; with whom he freely eates and drinkes, at Matthews late feast, and upon every occasion. But however, the false preten∣ders unto wisedome, are ready to passe these unjust ver∣dicts, and to spend their censures thus injuriously; yet those who are the true sonnes of wisdome, can, and will give a justifying, and approving testimony of me, and of my carriage and Doctrine. 21 For if the mighty workes which were done in you, had beene done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long agoe in sackcloth and ashes.For the mighty and admirable miracles which have beene done in you, had beene enough to have converted those impious, and infamous Cities of Tyre and Sidon; and in all humane probability, had those workes beene done amonst them, they would have beene convinced thereby, and have beene drawne to a serious, and so∣lemne repentance. So also, the latter part of vers. 23. 23 And thou Caperna∣um which art exalted un∣to heaven, shalt be brought downe to hell.And thou Capernaum, which hast beene so frequen∣ted by me, as if thou hadst beene my native City, and by this honour of my presence, and continuall Doctrine, and miracles, hast beene exalted farre above all other Cities, and hast had better, and more meanes of salva∣tion, than they all; shalt for thy unproficiencie, and con∣tempt, be cast downe unto hell, &c. 25 I thanke thee, O Fa∣ther, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.I thanke thee O Father, who being Lord of heaven and earth, having therefore absolute power to dispose of all things, according to thy good pleasure; hast thought good to hide the great mysteries of salvation from the worldly wise and great clerkes of the world, and to reveale them to plaine, simple, unlearned soules.
In your recourse unto me,29 Take my yoke upon you, and learne of me, for I am meeke and lowly in heart: and yee shall finde rest unto your soules. doe not dreame of liberty and ease, as if the following of mee should secure you from all troublesome restraints of your corrupt nature; but know that you must submit your selves to the disci∣pline of my Spirit; and yeeld your selves over to the obedience of my command; and learne of me that les∣son of meekenesse and humility, which you see so plaine∣ly and eminently practised in me. Which if yee shall compose your selves unto,30 For my yoke is easie, and my burden is light. yee shall finde the obedience which I require of you, to bee easie, and pleasant. CAP. XII. OR have ye not read in the Law,5 Or have ye not read in the Law, how that on the Sabbath dayes the Priests in the Temple pro∣phane the Sabbath, and are blamelesse? how that on the Sab∣bath dayes, the Priests are appointed to undertake laborious workes, in the Temple, concerning the sacri∣fices, (which are double offered that day) and are not∣withstanding blamelesse? See Hose 6.6.7 I wil have mercy, &c. See Esa 42.1.19 He shall not strive, nor cry, &c. See Esa 42.3.20 A bruised reed shall he not breake. Is this that Messiah,23 Is this the sonne of David? that was promised should come from the loines of David, and succeed in his king∣dome? Wee cannot denie indeed,24 But when the Phari∣sees heard it, they said: this fellow doth not cast out devills, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devills. but that this man doth cast out devills; but this is done of him by way of com∣pact, not by way of command; hee useth the aid and power of a greater Devill to eject the lesse. Howsoever there may bee much collusion amongst the evill spirits,26 Aand if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided a∣gainst himselfe: how shal then his kingdome stand? voluntarily yeelding to a seemingly forceable action, for the deceiving of men, yet a true hostility there is not amongst them; and if one devill should cast out another by strong hand, as yee see mee doe, the kingdome of darkenesse could not stand. Yee see some of your owne nation and bloud,27 And if I by Beelze∣bub cast out devills, by whom doe your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your Iudges. who make use of my name for the ejecting of Devills; so as in their mouthes, my name is allowed as powerfull to prevaile against the evill spirits; they shall bee sufficient witnesses to convince you, and judges to sentence you; for yee give approbation to them which make use of my
name to this purpose, and yet make opposition to mee whose power enables them hereto. 28 But if I cast out De∣vills by the Spirit of God, then the kingdome of God is come unto you.But if I by the divine power of the Almightie Spi∣rit of God, doe cast out devills; this, as it is a just ho∣nor to me, so it is a great privilege and hapinesse unto you, for hereby you are assured that that kingdome of the Messias, which ye have so long expected and desired, is now come unto you. 29 Or else, how can one enter into a strong mans house, and spoile his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoile his house.Which kingdome of mine cannot possibly take place, unlesse Satan bee first powerfully ejected by mee; for, since that evill spirit hath gotten so strong possession (as he hath done) of the world; how is it possible to enter upon his hold, and to spoile and defeat him, in all his wic∣ked practices, except he be first disabled, and personally vanquished? 30 He that is not with me, is against me: and hee that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad.It had beene your parts, both for your owne honour and safetie, to have set forward, and advanced this spi∣rituall kingdome of mine; which if yee doe not, I can account you no better than the enemies thereof; for, in this case there is no neutrality; hee that is not for mee, is against me; and hee that doth not bestirre himselfe to gather with me, even whiles hee stands still, scattereth a∣broad. 31 Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sinne and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not bee forgiven unto men.And now whereas the Scribes have not stucke, against the light of their owne conscience, to accuse me of ca∣sting out devills, through Beelzebub, their case is feare∣full, for herein they have maliciously sinned against the evidence of Gods Spirit, convincing their hearts of the truth; and this condition is wofull, and desperate; for I say unto you, that all those sinnes which wee com∣mit against God upon frailtie, or ignorance, or sud∣daine and forceable prevalence of a temptation, are yet capable of forgivenesse; but the malicious blasphemie that a man utters against the knowne truth of God, wilfully opposing the illumination, and conviction of Gods Spirit, is a sinne, as uncapable of remission, as of repentance. 32 And whosoever speaketh a word against the Sonne of man, it shall be forgiven him: but who∣soever speaketh against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.And whosoever out of ignorance, or mistaking, or by the seducement of others, shall speake words of re∣proach, and blasphemie against mee, the sonne of man, under the colour of this outward infirmity, and meane∣nesse which appeareth in me, it may bee forgiven to him; but whosoever doth despitefully, against his owne knowledge and conscience, and against the light of Gods Spirit shining into his soule, make opposition to the Sonne of God, or that saving truth that concerneth him; it shall never be forgiven to him.
There is nothing more odious to God,33 Eeither make the tree good, and his fruit good: or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is knowne by his fruit. than a false and counterfeit profession of holinesse; I could there∣fore wish you Scribes and Pharisies to bee such as yee seeme, either be good, and shew to be such by the fruits which ye beare; or, if yee will needs be corrupt, and wicked, let the world know you for such; howsoever your workes will descry you one time or other; the tree will be knowne by his fruit. Yee have out of the evill treasure of your heart brought forth blasphemies against me,36 But I say unto you that every idle word that men shall speake, they shall give account there∣of in the day of judge∣ment. whereof ye shall one day give a fearefull reckoning; for I say unto you, that even for those words which are but idle, uselesse, unprofitable, men shall be called to a strict account, in the day of judgement; how much more for wicked, and blasphemous? Nothing will satisfie the Jewes,39 But he answered and said to them, An evill and adulterous generation seeketh after a signe, and there shall no signe be gi∣ven to it, but the signe of the Prophet Ionas. who are a wicked and adulterous brood, but signes and wonders, whereby their infidelitie might be throughly shamed and repel∣led; still therefore they call for strange and miraculous workes: wherewith, although in my owne due time I shall abundantly convince them; yet now, for the pre∣sent, Jonas the Prophet shall be in stead of many signes unto them. For as Jonas the Prophet, after three dayes,40 For as Ionas was three dayes, and three nights in the whales belly: So shall the Sonne of man be three dayes and three nights in the heart of the earth. and three nights, spent in the whales belly, was restored to the light againe, and preached to the Ninivites: So shall the Sonne of man, after part of three dayes, and nights, spent in the grave, be restored to life againe, and publish, and confirme the glad tidings of salvation to men. That Ethiopian Queene which came out of the South from Saba shall rise up in judgement &c.42 The Queene of the South shall rise up in the judgement. Certainly,43, 44, 45. When the uncleane spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh tho∣row drie places, seeking rest & findeth none, Then he saith, I will returne in∣to my house, from whence I came out: and when hee is come, he findeth it emp∣tie, swept and garnished; then goeth hee, and taketh with himselfe seven other spirits more wicked then himselfe, and they enter in and dwell there, and the last state, &c. it must needs be that the Jewes are in worse case, then if they had never received the knowledge of God, and of his law; for the devill hath more advantage over them, that have once knowne the will of God, and have for the time beene freed from his tyrannie, if they doe againe give way to the entertainment of his wicked motions; for then the evill spirit, finding (by consent) a second harbour there, seizeth on their hearts with more power, and freedome, then ever, and tyrannizeth over them without all controlment. Behold, his mother,46 Behold his mother and his brethren stood &c. and his kinsmen stood without &c.
49. 50. And he stretched forth his hand towards his Disciples, and said, Be∣hold my mother and my brethren: for whosoever shall doe the will of my Father which is in hea∣ven, the same is my bro∣ther, and sister, and mother.And hee stretched forth his hand towards his disci∣ples, and said to the messenger, Behold, you tell me of my mother, and neare kinsfolke; I do not deny due re∣spects to my parent, according to the flesh, and to those which are of my naturall and bodily kinred; but I would have you know, that it is the spirituall kinred that I doe most affect, and stand upon; These therefore that by a true and lively faith are spiritually incorporated into mee; these that doe carefully and conscionably give up themselves to the obedience of God, my heavenly Fa∣ther, these are they that may justly challenge an holy consanguinity with mee; and this conjunction of grace in the soule doth more indeare my mother and kinsmen unto me, then all earthly, and bodily regards whatso∣ever. CAP. XIII. 3 Behold a sower went forth to sow.BEhold, the word of God is as the seed; the preacher is the sower or seedsman; men are the soyle; Gods messengers by his appointment go forth to preach his word, and Gospell to men. 4 By the way side.See our Saviours exposition. Vers. 19. 5 Some fell upon stony places.See verse 20, 21. 7 Among thornes.See Verse 22. 11 Hee answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the king∣dome of heaven, but to them it is not given.Although I doe speake in these riddles, or parables, yet the illumination of that spirit which is given to you, will sufficiently cleare these things unto you, who are ac∣quainted with these divine mysteries; but as for those that have not this light from above, they understand them not, their infidelity is justly punished with igno∣rance of all saving doctrine. 12 For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and hee shall have more bun∣dance: but whosoever hath not from him shall be taken away, even that he hath.For whosoever through my goodnesse and mercy hath any measure of grace wrought in him, that man in the effectuall use of those meanes which I afford unto him, shall have yet more; but whosoever hardneth his heart to refuse those gracious offers which are made un∣to him, it is and shall be just with God, to take away from him those helpes, and tenders of meanes and pre∣vious dispositions which are made unto him. 13 Therefore speake I to them in parables: be∣cause they seeing, see not; and hearing, they heare not.Therefore speake I unto them in parables, because
they have brought this willing blindenesse upon them∣selves, that in seeing they see not; and this willfull deaf∣nesse, that in hearing they heare not &c. See Esay. 6. Verse 9.14 By hearing ye shall heare, and shall &c. See Esay 6. Verse 10.15 This peoples heart is waxed grosse, and their eares are dull of hearing &c. & should be cōverted, and I should save them. See our Saviours exposition of this parable, Verse 37,25 But whiles he slept his enemie came, and sow∣ed ares. 38, 39, 40. of this Chapter. The Gospell of my kingdome,31, 32 The kingdome of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man tooke and sowed in his field, which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is growne, it is the greatest among hearbs, and becommeth a tree: so that the birds of the aire come and lodge in the branches thereof. in regard of the hap∣py grouth and successe thereof, may well be resembled to a graine of mustard-seede; which being one of the least of all seedes, at length growes up to a strong and branch∣ed plant; and exceeding the quantity of an hearbe, be∣comes, as it were, a little tree, able to yeeld sufficient perches for the birds that resort unto it; even so my Gospell from weake and contemptible beginnings shall spread forth to that largenesse of extent, as that it shall reach unto all the nations upon earth. Or,33 Another parable spake hee unto them; The kingdome of heaven is like unto leaven which a woman tooke and hid in three measures of meale, till the whole was leaven∣ed. upon the same reason this Gospell of mine is like unto leaven, which though in a very small quantity it be hid amongst much dough, yet seasoneth the whole batch: so shal this Gospell of mine diffuse the power and vertue thereof to all the whole masse of the habitable world. As the Church or spirituall kingdome of God here upon earth,47, 48, 49. Againe the kingdome of heaven is like unto a net that was cast into the sea, and ga∣thered of every kinde, which when it was full, they drew to shore, and sate downe and gathered the good into the vessels but cast the bad away: so shall it be at the end of the world: the Angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just. is thus largely diffused through efficacie of his Gospell; so it may not be conceived to be pure, and free from all sinfull mixtures, whiles it is here below; rather it is like unto a dragge-net, which is cast into the sea, and fetches up much variety, not of great, and little fishes onely, but of stones, and sea-weed, and shels, and mudde, altogether; which when it is drawn to the shore, is disburdened of all the unprofitable load thereof; and yeeldeth the good provision of fish unto the vessels of the owner; so doth the Church of God, here, for the outward, and visible composition of it, it containeth not onely sound, and holy, and faithfull men, but even the secretly vitious, slye hypocrites, hollow, and faithlesse professors; but at the end of the world, when
this great net is drawne up to the shore, the Angels shall come forth, and make a due separation of the wicked from among the just. 52 Then said hee unto them; Therefore every Scribe which is instructed unto the kingdome of heaven, is like unto a man that is an housholder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure, things new and old.These parables I have delivered, and expounded unto you, not onely for your owne information, but also for the instruction of others; for know, that it is not onely required of you to understand the mysteries of my kingdome, your selves; but to be able to teach them un∣to others also: so as if yee will be meete doctors of my Evangelicall Church, ye ought to be furnished with all varietie of divine knowledge; that as a good housholder layes up, and fetcheth forth store and change of good provision for his guests and familie, so may ye that are my ministers, and messengers to the world be stored with plenty of saving knowledge, and heavenly do∣ctrine.54 And when hee was come into his owne coun∣trie, And when hee was come to Nazareth, where he was brought up, &c. 54, 55, 56. Whence hath this man this wisedome, and these mighty workes? is not this the Carpenters Sonne? is not his mother called Mary? and his bre∣thren Iames, and Ioses, and Simon, and Iudas? and his sisters, are they not all with us? whence then hath this man all these things?Do not we know the birth and breeding of this man? Is he not the sonne of Joseph the carpenter? Is not his mother called Mary? Are not his cosens and neare kins∣men, James and Joses men well known of us? Are not his kinswomen here amongst us? Whence is it, that having not beene trained up in the Schooles, hee should come by this marvelous wisedome and knowledge, and whence are these his miraculous workes? CAP. XIV. 22 And straightway Iesus constrained his Disci∣ples to get into a ship, and to goe before him unto the other side, while hee sent the multitudes away.IEsus laid a vehement charge and command upon his Disciples (who were otherwise unwilling to have left him) that they should take ship, and goe before him to the other side of the lake. 25 And in the fourth watch of the night, Iesus went unto them, walking on the sea.In the last quarter of the night, which was the morning watch, when they had beene long tossed in the sea with contrary windes, Jesus came unto them; walking on the sea.29 And he said, Come. And when Peter was come downe out of the ship, he walked on the water to goe to Iesus. Lord, since it is thou, I am so confident of thy power, that if thou shalt but bid mee, I dare venture to set my foot upon the waves, and walke to thee. 30 But when hee saw the winde boisterous, hee was afraid: and beginning to sinke, he cryed, saying, Lord save mee.But when hee found that the winde was strong and
boistrous, and the billowes rough, hee was afraid, and now as his faith bore him up before, so his feare made him beginne to sinke, &c. CAP. XV. THou know'st that we have a tradition from our late Elders,2 Why do thy disciples transgresse the tradition of the Elders: for they wash not their hands, when they eate bread. (though no law of God for it) that for the feare of many incident pollutions, wee should both be∣fore, and in our meales wash often; why do thy disciples violate and neglect this good order, set by our wise El∣ders in their repast? But hee answered, and said unto them;3 But he answered and said unto them, why do you also transgresse the commandement of God by your tradition. ye are apt to take exceptions at my Disciples for transgressing the traditions of men; but in the meame time ye your selves make no conscience of transgressing the commande∣ments of God, by these your vaine, and ill grounded tra∣ditions. But ye say, whosoever shall say to his father or mo∣ther;5 But ye say, Whosoe∣ver shall say to his father, or his mother, it is a gift by whatsoever thou might∣est be profited by me. Content your selves my parents; I have vowed and consecrated unto God that part of my substance which might have beene beneficiall, and helpefull unto you; and now I may not alienate or revoke it. And thereupon give no aid or assistance to his father or mother,6 And honour not his father, or his mother, hee shall be free. hee is free from this bond wherein he is tyed by the law both of God and nature, &c. In vaine do they worship mee,9 But in vaine they do worship me, teaching for doctrines, the Comman∣dements of men. whiles in stead of my holy lawes (which onely are able to binde the conscience) they obtrude upon men the devices of their own braines; and require the strict observation thereof, with the neg∣lect of Gods precepts. The Scribes and Pharisees have found fault with my Disciples for eating with unwashen hands;11 Not that which go∣eth into the mouth defi∣leth a man: but that which commeth out of the mouth, this defileth a man. but know ye that the soule of a man is not polluted with that which he puts into his mouth; the creatures of God are in their nature good: and these outward foulenesses of the hand have no morall guilt in them; but those things which defile a man, are the wickednesses that come forth from an uncleane heart; and so breake forth into the expres∣sions of the mouth, and hand. See verse 17, 18, 19. Master,23 Send her away, for she cryeth after us. thou art not wont to repell importunate suitors; be pleased to grant her request, for she cryeth fter us.
24 But to the lost sheepe the house of Israel.See Matt. 10.6. 26 But hee answered, and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread and to cast it to dogs.The Jewes are the select familie of God, and the chil∣dren of the house; the Gentiles are but as dogs; despised and hated, as those that are without God in the world; it is not meete to communicate those favours and bles∣sings which I have intended to the children of my Church, to these contemptible aliens from the common∣wealth of Israel. 27 Truth Lord: yet the dogs eate of the crummes which fall from their ma∣sters table.O Saviour, I do not expostulate with thee for this so hard appellation; I do meekely yeeld my selfe such as thou hast termed mee; but if I be a dogge, give mee at least the common priviledge of this despised creature. I require not a whole morsell, I desire but a crum of thy favour: the dogges are allowed to licke the crummes that fall from their masters table, vouchsafe me but this small offall of thy mercy, and it shall be enough. CAP. XVI. 3 O ye hypocrites, ye can discerne the face of the skie, but can yee not discerne the signes of the times?O Ye hypocrites, can ye prognosticate faire or foule weather by the face of the skie, which is more diffi∣cult and uncertaine, and can ye not by those cleare pre∣dictions of the Prophets, and the miraculous demon∣strations of my power, discerne the time of my comming into the world? 6 The leaven of the Pha∣rises.The sowre and faulty doctrine: the vicious and di∣stastfull glosses of the Pharisees. See verse 11, 12. 17 And Iesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven.Blessed art thou Simon the sonne of Joanna, who hast thus believed with thy heart, & thus confessed with thy mouth; for it is not from any power of nature, that thou couldst have conceived thus of me, it is my Father which is in heaven who by his holy Spirit hath wrought this faith in thee. 18 And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not prevaile against it.And I say unto thee: that it was not for nothing, that I have heretofore given thee the name of Peter, which signifies a stone; for thou hast herein approved thy selfe a living stone in that foundation of my Prophets and Apostles, whereof I my selfe am both the chiefe corner stone: & also the firme rocke (by thee confessed) on which
that foundation of my Church is so surely laid, as that the powers of hell shall never be able to prevaile against it. And I will give unto thee, as my prime Apostle,19 And I will give un∣to thee the keyes of the kingdome of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt binde on earth, shall bee bound in heaven; whatso∣ever thou shalt loose on earth, shall bee loosed in heaven. and to the rest of thy fellowes (in whose name thou hast made this gracious confession) and to their lawfull suc∣cessours, the keyes of the kingdome of heaven; so as by their censures, and Doctrine, they shall either open the gates thereof, to the faithfull and penitent: or shut them upon the impenitent, disobedient, unbeleevers; And what sentence they shall herein passe (in a right and well-grounded proceeding) shall bee accordingly ratifyed in heaven; whether it bee to binde over men to condemna∣tion, or to acquit them of their sinnes, to their justifica∣tion, and salvation. Then Peter tooke him aside,22 Then Peter tooke him, and began to rebuke him saying; Bee it farre from thee Lord: this shall not be unto thee. and began to expostu∣late with him, saying; Lord, have not I confessed, (and thou hast approved it) that thou art the Sonne of the living God; how is it then that thou talkest of suffering, and dying? these things cannot agree; doe not boad so ill things to thy selfe; rather thou shalt live & reigne, and make all us great and happy. But he turned to Peter, and said;23 But he returned and and said unto Peter, Get thee behinde mee Satan, thou art an offence unto me: for thou savourest not the things that bee of God, but those that bee of men. When thou saidest well, I gave thee a title of love and honour; but now when thou speakest thus carnally, I cannot but give thee thine owne; It is Satan that suggests this lewd coun∣sell to thee, and thou sufferest thy tongue to be misgui∣ded by that tempter; since therefore thou playest his part, I shall justly call thee by his name: Get thee be∣hinde mee Satan, for these motions of thine, argue a minde that is fleshly, and sensuall, and not holy, and rightly informed in, and disposed to the things of God; who by my sufferings and death, hath graciously pur∣posed the redemption of mankinde. If any man will professe to bee my disciple,24 Then said Iesus un∣to his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him denie himselfe, and take up his crosse, and fol∣low me. let him deny and renounce his owne will, and resigne himselfe wholly over to be guided, and disposed of by my Spi∣rit; and let him resolve to undergoe all crosses and affli∣ctions, that shall bee laid upon him for my Names sake; and so let him follow me. Verily I say unto you,28 Verily I say unto you, there bee some stand∣ing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man comming in his kingdome. yee shall have no cause to thinke it long, ere I the Sonne of man shall come in the glory of my Father; for I will ere long give you very glorious representations, and tastes of this insuing Ma∣jesty. Some of you shall live to see, not onely the image of my future glory in my transfiguration, but the en∣trance and progresse of my kingdome, both in my pow∣erfull
resurrection, and glorious ascention, and in the happy successe of my Gospell, thorow many parts of the world. CAP. XVII. 4 Lord, it is good for us to bee here, if thou wilt let us make here three Ta∣bernacles; one for thee, & one for Moses, and one for Elias.OH Lord, how glorious a light is this? how happy were it if wee might continue here, and injoy this blessed sight still. Below there is nothing but trouble and danger towards thee; let us keepe our selves well where wee are; and if it please thee, let us build three Tabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, one for Elias; as for us, wee could bee content to lye abroad, so wee might be sure of such a presence. 9 And as they came downe from the moun∣taine, Iesus charged them saying; Tell the vision to no man, untill the Sonne of man bee risen againe from the dead.Doe not make report of this my glorious transfigura∣tion to any man whomsoever; till that my resurrection shall have convinced the world of my divine power; which in the meane time must lye shrouded under my manifold infirmities. And his disciples hearing him to speake of his resur∣rection,10 And his disciples as∣ked him, saying; Why then say the Scribes that Elias must first come? and supposing that his glorious manifestation of his kingdome to the world should be effected, before any suffering that hee should undergoe; asked him say∣ing, Master, if thy kingdome bee so neare, how is it that wee heare not of the comming of Elias? for we have beene taught by the Scribes, that Elias must come be∣fore that great day. 12 Elias is comne alrea¦dy.See Matth 11.14. 15 Lord, have mercie on my sonne, for hee is lu∣naticke, and sore vexed: for oft times he falleth in∣to the fire, and oft into the water.Lord, have mercy on my son, for hee is at certaine set seasons of the Moone, sore vexed with a devill; who violently handleth him, and casteth him sometimes into the fire, and sometimes into the water. O ye faithlesse and perverse Scribes and Pharises; ye have beene insulting upon my disciples,17 O faithlesse and per∣verse generation, how long shall I bee with you? for that they could not eject this devill, and now thinke to finde the same advantage against me; how long shall I be pay∣ned by being amongst you? &c. 21 Howbeit this kind goeth not out, but by pray∣er and fasting.Howbeit, this kinde of Devills requires more than the ordinary meanes of ejection, to dispossesse them: for whereas yee have cast out others by your sole com∣mand, there must bee more done to these more stiffe, and tenacious Spirits; besides command, here must be earnest prayer unto the God of Spirts; and because de∣votion
is apt to grow dull and faint, here must bee an ex∣ercise of fasting & abstinence to set an edge upon it, and to stirre it up. What thinkest thou Simon;25, 26. What thinkest thou, Simon? of whom doe the Kings of the earth take custome or tribute? of their owne children, or of stran∣gers? Peter saith unto him, of strangers. Iesus saith un∣to him; Then are the chil∣dren free. Caesars officers call for that tribute from us, which was instituted and a pointed to be paid for sacred uses; wee are privileged persons; is it due to bee paid by us? Doe earthly Princes require these payments of their children and familiars? how much lesse fit is it then that hee who is the King and Pos∣sessor of all the world, the Lord of heaven and earth should pay tribute to any earthly Soveraigne for him∣selfe, or his? Yet, however I might iustly challenge this freedome,27 Notwithstanding, lest wee should offend them, goe thou to the sea, and cast an hooke, and take up the fish that first commeth up: and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt finde a peece of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee. lest they, who know not the just ground of my immuni∣ty, should be scandalized at my forbearance, as if I did not yeeld due homage and respect to secular powers, goe thou to the sea, and cast in an hooke, and take up the first fish that is caught, and in his mouth thou shalt finde a peece of silver, of the valew of two shillings sixe pence; that take, and give it to them for mee, and for thy selfe; in whose house I abide. CAP. XVIII. MAster,1 Who is the grea∣test in the kingdome of heaven? which of us shall be the greatest in that glo∣rious kingdome, which thou art about to restore unto Israel?3 Verily I say unto you, except ye be conver∣ted, and become as little children, yee shall not en∣ter into the kingdome of heaven. Verily, I say unto you; Except yee put off all ambi∣tious thoughts, and become meeke and humble as little children; yee shall not be meet to take up any stations, in this my spirituall kingdome heere, and much lesse in the glorious kingdome of heaven above.4 Whosoever there∣fore shall humble himselfe as this little child, the same is greatest in the king∣dome of heaven. It is my rule to measure greatnesse by humility, who∣soever shall so humble himselfe, as this little child, aba∣sing himselfe in his conceits, below all others, that man is, and shall be, the greatest in my kingdome.5 And who so shall receive one such little child, in my Name, recei∣veth me. And whosoever shall shew kindenesse to one of these my lowly, and meeke-spirited servants, for my sake, I shall esteeme it as done to my selfe. And whosoever shall offer any wrong or indignity to any one of these humble clients of mine,6 But who so shall offend one of these little ones, which beleeve in me, it were better for him, that a milstone were hanged about his necke, & that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. that beleeve in me; it were better for him, that hee were drowned in the depth of the sea, or under-went any other temporall death; for this unjust measure of his shall be punished with eternall.
7 Wo unto the world, because of offences; for it must needs bee that offen∣ces come, but wo to that man by whom the offence commethWo bee to the world, because of those many stum∣bling blockes, which men lay in each others way to sal∣vation: such there will be every where, but wo to those, by whom they are layd. 9 And if thine eye of∣fend thee, &c.See Matth. 5.29. 10 For I say unto you, that in heaven their An∣gels doe alwayes behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.For they are in so high, and deare respect with God, that hee that appointed his Angells in heaven to take charge of them here on earth, and they are ever ready, pitching their tents about them; and doe ever attend either to their safegard,13 And if so bee that he finde it, verily I say un∣to you, he rejoyceth more of that sheepe, than of the ninety & nine, which went not astray. or revenge. Hee is more affected with the recovering of that one sheepe which was lost, than with the safety of the rest of the flocke; because the danger wherein that one sheepe was, and the care, and feare that he was in, for it, caused his joy to be thereupon increased. 15 Moreover if thy brother shall trespasse a∣gainst thee, goe and tell him his fault, betweene thee and him alone: if hee will heare thee, thou hast gained thy brother.When thy brother hath done an offence, whereto thou onely art privy, doe not at the first bring him to publike censure, but first deale privately with him, for his repentance, and reformation; and if hee shall receive the good counsell and admonition thou gavest him, thou hast gained thy brother. 17 And if he shall neg∣lect to heare them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to heare the Church, let him bee unto thee as an heathen man, & a publicane.And if hee shall neglect the advice and reproofe of them, make thy complaint to them who have the mana∣ging of the publike censures of the Church, that they may proceed against him accordingly. But if hee neg∣lect or disregard those publike courses of his reforma∣tion, let him bee avoyded of thee as a man unworthy of thy conversation, or respect; no lesse, than as if hee were a meere heathen or publican; the one whereof religion makes odious, the other his trade of life. 18 Whatsoever yee shall binde on earth, shall be bound in heaven, &c.See Iohn 20.23. 19 Againe, I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as tou∣ching any thing that they shall aske, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven.The single prayers of faithfull suppliants shall not want audience and respect from God; but when they are doubled, by the conjunction of the hearts of more suitors, and the united forces of many fervent desires, they cannot but be more effectuall; and shall receive a gracious acceptation from my Father which is in hea∣ven. 20 For where two or three are gathered toge∣ther in my name, there am I in the midst of them.For, so highly doe I respect the assemblies of my faithfull servants, that where any number of them shall be met together in a sincere desire to doe me service, I will be there present with them by my Spirit, for the
exciting, and directing, and accepting of their holy in∣deavours. I say unto thee,22 I say not unto thee, un∣till seven times: but untill seventie times seven. thou mayest not be too severely nig∣gardly of thy remissions, to bound them within a set and small number; but must bee open-handed to a free for∣givenesse, though it be never so oft, where thou shalt see likely arguments of repentance; and hopes of amend∣ment. CAP. XIX. NEither God,8 He saith unto them, Moses because of the hard∣nesse of your hearts, suffe∣red you to put away your wives: but from the be∣ginning it was not so. nor his servant Moses ever allowed this course of your frequent, and mis-grounded putting away of your wives, upon slight and unwarran∣table occasions, onely God by Moses, because hee saw your cruelty and hard-heartednesse towards your wives, (to avoid further extremities,) gave order that since yee would needs put off your wives, upon undue causes, or else doe worse, yee should give them such a writing, as might testifie that this dismision of theirs was not for any crime by them committed, but upon som other dis∣likes. But if yee looke to the first institution of marri∣age, ye shall finde that from the beginning it was not so: this liberty was not granted to the husband to put away his wife. His disciples say unto him; If it bee so,10 His disciples say un∣to him, if the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry. that what dis∣taste soever the wife give unto her husband, hee may not (save onely in the case of adultery) put her away, it is the best way for a man to avoyd this yoke of bondage; and not at all to marry. Ye say it is the best way to abstaine from marriage;11 But hee said unto them, all men cannot re∣ceive this saying, save they to whom it is given. but all men are not capable of this resolution; but only they who by a speciall gift of God, have the power of continencie. For, there are two sorts of Eunuches: some of neces∣sity,12 For there are some Eunuches, which were so borne from their mo∣thers wombe: and there are some Eunuches which were made Eunuches of men: and there be Eu∣nuches which have made themselves Eunuches for the kingdome of heavens sake: he that is able to re∣ceive it, let him receive. and some of will. Those which are Eunuches of necessity, are such, as either are borne such, or such as are made so by men, forceably. The other, which are voluntary Eunuches, are those, who by the power of the holy Spirit, have subdued their lustfull desires, and so brought their bodies in subjection, as that being freed from the inordinate heate of their unruly affecti∣ons, they give themselves freely over to the service of God. He who findes himselfe able by the helpe of pray∣er and abstinence to maintaine and receive this state and
gift of continencie, let him receive it. 14 But Iesus said; Suf∣fer little children, and for∣bid them not to come un∣to me: for of such is the kingdome of heaven.For of them, and such as they are, so humbly and meekely affected, doth the kingdome of heaven con∣sist. Upon what ground is it that thou givest mee this ti∣tle of Good;17 And hee said unto him; Why callest thou me good; there is none good but one, that is God; but if thou wilt enter into life, keepe the Commande∣ments. for herein thou affirmest a greater truth than thou art aware off. There is none good but one, and that is God, onely; he is truely and absolutely good, and he alone; so as, whiles thou callest mee good, thou implyest me to be, what I am, the true God. It is a great and good demand which thou hast made, how thou mayest come to heaven; although if thou knewest the exactnesse of the Law, and thine owne weakenesse, thou wouldest easily finde that it is not doing, that can bring thee thither, but beleeving; but, if thine aime bee to purchase heaven by thy workes, behold thy taske lies open before thee, keepe all the lawes and commande∣ments of God; which if a man doe, he shall live in them. 20 The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth up: What lacke I yet?Lord, if this bee all that is required of me, I am safe enough; for all these have I kept exactly, and carefully, ever since I came to the yeares of discretion; having not fayled (in respect of any maine violation) in any of them; I there no further matter then to be performed for the attaining of eternall life? 21 Iesus said unto him; If thou wilt be perfect, goe and sell that thou hast, and give to the poore, and thou shalt have trea∣sure in heaven, and come and follow me.Alas young man, they selfe-love hath made thee apt to mistake thy selfe, and thy condition; the truth is, there is no one of these commandements which thou hast not broken; for the law of God is Spirituall, and doth not onely reach to the outward act, but to the inward mo∣tions, and dispositions of the heart; but since thou standest upon thine owne abilities, and perfections, herein shalt thou give proofe of thy sincerite in loving God above all things, (which the Law requireth) goe thy wayes, sell that which thou hast, and give it to the poore, for the sake of that God, who shall remunerate this bounty of thine with better treasures in heaven: and when thou hast done, come and follow me, as a true and constant disciple. 24 It is easier for a Ca∣mell to goe thorow the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heaven.There is nothing in the world more difficult, than for that man, who hath set his heart upon his riches, to enter into the kingdome of God. Verily I say unto you, yee that have followed mee in this mine humbled estate upon earth,28 Verily I say unto yee, that yee which have followed me; in the rege∣neration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve thrones judgeing the twelve tribes of Israel. shall in the day of the great restauration of all things, when the elect shall enter into a new life of unspeakeable glory; even in that great and dreadfull day, when the Sonne of man shall
sit upon his throne of majesty, to judge the quick and the dead; then shall ye my Apostles, (who are now despicable and meane) have the honor to sit upon severall thrones, to second and assist this awfull act of finall judgement, of the rebellious tribes of Israel. As for those, who have not gone so farre, as to forsake,29 And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or fa∣ther or mother, or wife or children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall in∣herite everlasting life. & abandon all things, but only some particular comforts, whether houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father or mo∣ther, or childrē, or lands for my names sake, because they could not injoy any of these together with the professi∣on of my Truth, and Gospell, they shall receive (in lieu thereof) that true and solid consolation, which shall be more unto them, than an hundred fold so many severall favours, and blessings here, and at last, everlasting glory and happinesse. But let none of you, my Disciples,30 But many that are first, shall be last, and the last shall be first. presume of his for∣wardnesse and precedencie of time, as if therefore hee should out-strip all others in the favour of his remune∣ration: for many of those which are now (as in the first houre) called to the profession of my Gospell, shall yet be cast behinde diverse others, which shall be later in time: and even those which shall come latest in time may be the first in dignity, and glory. CAP. XX. AS some great and carefull housholder that hath hi∣red laboures at a set rate into his vineyard;1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 13, 14. For the kingdome of heaven is like unto a man that is an housholder, which went out earely in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard: And whē he had agreed with the labourers for a penie a day, hee sent them into his vineyard: And hee went out about the third houre, and saw others standing idle in the market place, and said un∣to them, goe ye also into the vineyard, and whatso∣ever is right I will give you, and they went their way; and when they came that were hired about the eleventh houre, they recei∣ved every man a pennie: But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more, and they likewise received every man a pennie. But hee an∣swered one of them and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst thou not a∣gree with me for a pennie? Take that thine is, and go thy way, I will give unto this last, even as unto thee. calling in other workemen at severall houres, at the later end of the day, is pleased to give an equall retribution to those that came latest into the vineyard, with those that came in first: making good his promise and agreement with the first, whiles hee is bountifull unto the latter; can∣not be chalenged to have done any wrong to the first, in his liberality to the last: even so, God the great master of this earthly familie, having called some more early to the service and profession of his name, some later, if hee shall please to give a like gracious remuneration to all, cannot justly be excepted against: since if some have cause
to magnifie his bounty, yet no man hath cause to com∣plaine. Lord, thou knowest I am thy kins-woman: and therefore worthy to be respected of thee before a stran∣ger: two of my sonnes have attended thee thus long: we are perswaded that thou being the Messias,21 Grant that these my two sonnes may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left in thy kingdome. shalt restore a glorious temporall kingdome to Israel, grant mee this favour, that these two sonnes of mine may be chiefe Peeres under thee, and may be next of honour to thy owne person. 22 But Iesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye aske: Are ye able to drinke of the cup that I shall drinke of, and to be baptized with the bap∣tisme that I am baptized with? they say unto him, we are able.I know there are more hands in this suit, then thine owne: thy sonnes have set thee on to move this. But yee know not what it is, that ye sue for; yee thinke of raign∣ing, and jollitie, and magnificence, but I must call backe your thoughts to sadnesse and suffering: much sorrow must be indured by mee, ere I can raigne, and triumph: neither is my soveraigntie such as yee fondly imagine, outward and earthly. Tell me then, have yee fully di∣gested the expectation, and resolution of those crosses, and afflictions which ye must undergoe? can yee drinke of that bitter cup, wherein I shall begin to you? Can yee indure to be baptized in blood, as ye shall see mee to be? They say to him; Wee are resolved, both that wee are able, and to be willing to take part with thee in whatso∣ever measure shallbe offered unto thee. 23 And he saith unto them, Ye shall drinke in∣deed of my cup, and be baptized with the bap∣tisme that I am baptized with; but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them, for whom it is prepared of my Father.And hee saith unto them: as ye are my Disciples, and followers, ye shall indeed take part with mee in my suf∣ferings, make account of smarting and bleeding for mee, and with me: but as for that glory which ye sue for, know that it is mistaken: my kingdome is spirituall, and my glory is, and shall be heavenly: there are indeed de∣grees of honour and happinesse above; but I came not now to dispose of them: my Father in heaven hath or∣dained and predetermined, before the foundations of the world, upon whom he will conferre these celestiall
honours and precedencie, and eminence of glory; the end and purpose of my comming is, to purchase heaven for you and the rest of my Church: as for the principall roomes, and rankes of glory, there is a bold ambition, and curiositie in you to move for them, and it is no part of my commission to give you satisfaction therein. When the other ten Apostles heard of this high,24 And when the Ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against the two brethren. and ambitious motion, which was made for their two fel∣lowes, the sonnes of Zebedee, they swelled with envie, and secret indignation, to thinke that these two should make such earnest suit, to outstrip all the rest of their so∣ciety; and every one began to compare himselfe with others, and to put himselfe forward into a competition of the like honour. But Jesus called them aside and rebuked them, saying,25 But Iesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise do∣minion over them, and they that are great, exer∣cise authority upon them? ye do utterly mistake the matter; ye thinke belike that it is, & shall be in the governing of the spirituall kingdome of my Church, as it is in the temporall regiments, and courts of earthly Princes, ye dreame of secular soveraign∣tie, and rule each over other; but the case is quite other∣wise here; here is no dominion to be exercised by any of you over the rest; as if ye were great Soveraignes, and your brethren base subjects, thus it is indeed in the government of earthly Princes. But it shall not be so among you,26 But it shall not bee so among you: But who∣soever will be great a∣mong, let him be your Mi∣nister. my Apostles and Disciples: there must needes indeed be distinct orders in my Church: neither is it possible that there should be a meere parity without confusion; but this necessary in∣equality must be without a proud overlinesse, and inso∣lent domineering over your brethren: all the ambition that I do allow amongst you, is, who shall be most ser∣viceable to my Church, and most obsequious to the rest of his fellowes. CAP. XXI. See Zachar. 9. verse 9.5, 7. Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold thy king commeth unto thee, meeke and sitting upon an asse, and the colt, the foale of an asse, and brought the asse, and the colt, and put on them their cloathes, and they set him thereon. ANd they brought both the asse, and her colt, and put their cloathes upon them, and they set him upon the asses colt thus clad, which had never beene used to the yoke, or carriage; and he rode thereon in great humili∣ty and homely state from Bethphage to Jerusalem. O Lord do thou save and maintaine,9 Hosanna to the sonne of David: Blessed is hee that commeth in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. and prosper the kingdome of this true sonne of David; Blessed is this
true and onely Messiah, which commeth unto us, in the power and authority of the God of heaven. O God, do thou in the highest heaven blesse and save him, and give happy successe to his rule over us. 10 And when hee was come into Hierusalem all the citie was moved, say∣ing, who is this?And when hee was come into Jerusalem with this joyfull acclamation of the people; all the city was full of noise, and stirring: and as he passed the street with this attendance, the multitude seeing the traine, asked, who is this that is followed with such confluence of people, and such loud gratulations? 12 And Iesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of them that sold doves.And Jesus went up (in this equipage) to the Temple of God; and did now (the second time) cast out all them that bought and sold cattell and doves, and other things usefull for their sacrifices from the courts of the holy Temple; and overthrew the tables of those mony-chan∣gers, which were imployed in these bargains, and the seats of them that sold turtles, and pidgeons for their oblations. 13 And said unto them, It is writen, my house shal bee called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a denne of theeves.And said unto them: It is written by the Prophet Esay: My house is consecrated to holy devotion, to the use of prayer, and all other the sacred services of God; but now, well may the complaint of Jeremie be taken up: ye have made it a den of theeves, in mis-imploying it to your fraudulent bargaines, and griping transactions. 19 And when he saw a figge tree in the way hee came to it, and found no∣thing thereon, but leaves onely, and said unto it, let no fruit grow on thee hence forward for ever; and presently the fig tree withered away.And when hee saw a figge tree in the way, hee came purposely to seeke that fruit which hee knew hee should not finde ripe and seasonable, that hee might hence take occasion to worke that exemplary miracle upon it, which ensued; for when he found onely store of leaves upon it, and no fruit, that hee might in this tree shew how much hee hates, and will punish a formall profession (such as the Jewes made) of religion, without an answerable fruitfulnesse, he cursed the fig tree, and said; let that which is thy fault, be thy punishment; thou bearest no fruit at all; whereas the nature of thy kinde is ever to have one fruit under another, alwayes some, though not ever in a full maturity; since therefore thou bearest no fruit at all, never maist thou more beare any fruit: and presently the fig tree, as blasted with that word of judgement, withered. 21 Verily I say unto you, if ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not on∣ly do this which is done to the figge tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountaine, be thou remo∣ved and be thou cast into the sea, it shall be doneVerily I say unto you; that which ye have seene me to do, by my divine power, the same shall ye doe by the power of your miraculous faith; if ye can stedfastly be∣leeve, without wavering and doubts, ye shall not one∣ly be able, by your command to remove the sappe from a tree, but ye shall be able to remove the greatest moun∣taine, by your word, out of the place wherein it is, and to cast it into the sea.
The question you aske me,24, 25. And Iesus an∣swered & said unto them, I will also aske you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in likewise will tell you by what authority I doe these things. The baptisme of Iohn, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? and they reasoned with themselves, saying, if wee shall say from heaven, hee will say unto us, why did ye not then beleeve him? can proceed out of no∣thing but a wilfull cavillation; ye will see such divine power shining forth in my miracles, as may well con∣vince you of the certainty of my mission, and authority from God himselfe. But since ye will needes move this doubt, I shall give you a full resolution, out of your owne answer; if ye shall but tell me whence John, my fore-run∣ner, had his warrant, and authority, both for his preach∣ing, and baptisme; herein may ye give your selves full satisfaction: for if he were an holy Prophet (as ye all ac∣count of him) and served onely to make way for me, as his Lord and Saviour, and pointed to me, as that Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world; how can ye make any scruple of receiving mee, as sent from God, for the worke of mans redemption? Yee Priests, and Elders of the people,31 Whether of them twaine did the will of his father; They say unto him, the first; Iesus saith unto them; Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and the harlots goe into the kingdome of God, before you. and ye Scribes and Pharisees are as the undertaking sonne, that pro∣mised well, but did nothing: Publicans and sinners are as the refusing sonne, which denyed to worke, and yet performed it in their conversion: therefore even Pub∣licans and sinners shall enter into the kingdome of hea∣ven, how ever now by you despised, when ye shall be excluded. See Esa 5.1.33 There was a certain housholder that planted a vineyard, and hedged it &c. And after that he had seene all the indignities that they had offered unto his servants the Prophets,37 But last of all he sent unto them his sonne, say∣ing, they will reverence my sonne. he resol∣ved to send his onely sonne Jesus unto them, whose di∣vine miracles hee well knew might justly convince them of their dutie to him. But when these wicked Jewes saw that the sonne of God was come personally amongst them, they said;38 But when the hus¦bandmen saw the sonne, they said among them∣selves, this is the heire, come let ut kill him and let us sease on his inheri∣tance. come let ut kill him, and then there shall be none to challenge the inheritance and command of us: we may then live lawlessely without any controll. Ye thinke now that ye are utterly free from the dan∣ger of this accusation; and presume of your owne judge∣ment;42 Iesus saith unto them, Did yee never read in the Scriptures: whereas he whom ye reject shall be approved that true Messias on whom the Church of God is built, ac∣cording to that of the Psalmist.43 The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner. See Psal. 118.22.
44 And whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall bee broken; but on whomso∣ever it shall fall, it will grinde him to powder.Christ is as a rocke every way as in regard of the use of that spirituall building, so in respect of the danger of opposing him: whosoever will be dashing upon him, shall but split and breake himselfe in peeces; and if hee fall (in just revenge,) upon any that makes head against him, hee shall crush and grinde him to powder. CAP. XXII. 9 Goe yee therefore into the high wayes, and as many as yee shall finde, bid to the marriage.SInce the Jewes, my selected people will not obey these gratious invitations, nor approve themselves worthy of this mercy; goe ye to the despised Gentiles, and call them to this spirituall marriage feast. 10 So those servants went out into the high wayes, and gathered to∣gether all as many as they found both good and bad.So those my Apostles, and Evangelists, went to call those that are without; the contemptible heathen, that lay by the high wayes, and hedge-rowes of the world, as unworthy of the house-roome of my Church, and ga∣thered them, &c. 11, 12, 13. And when the King came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wed∣ding garment, and he saith unto him; friend how ca∣mest thou in hither, not having a wedding gar∣ment? and he was speech∣lesse: then said the King to the servants, Binde him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him in∣to utter darkenesse, there shall be weeping & gnash∣ing of teeth.But though God vouchsafed to call even the Gentiles to the participation of the privileges of his Church, yet he will not abide that they should dishonour his ho∣ly vocation by their knowne filthinesse and pollution; the King of glory, the God of his Church, takes notice of his guests, and markes how they come dressed and habited to his spirituall feast; and if hee see a man, who professing Christ, shall notwithstanding continue in the old rags, and filth of his naturall corruption; he cannot but bee highly offended with this foule hypocrisie and presumption; and after a sharpe expostulation, shall adjudge that man to a just and heavie damna∣tion. 14 For many are called, but few are chosen.For, thinke not that all who are outwardly called by the sweet invitations of the Gospell, are made parta∣kers of grace and salvation. God calleth all sorts of men, and men of all sorts, and they doe outwardly answer this voyce of God; but his inward and effectuall calling, and the election of grace is but of few. 16 And they sent out unto him their disciples, with the Herodians, say∣ing; Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the person of men.And they sent unto him their disciples, together with them which were of the faction, and clientage of He∣rod; messengers divided both in opinion and affection? the one part standing for the liberty of the Jewes, the other part for the impositions of Caesar and Herod, saying; Master we know that thou art true, and without all respects to the persons of one side or other, teachest unpartially the way of God in sincerity and truth.
Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou of this point?17 Tell us therefore, what thinkest thou, is it lawfull to give tribute un∣to Caesar or not? Thou knowest that God hath imposed upon us a sacred tribute to bee paid unto himselfe; now, our Romane usurpers require us to pay this very tribute unto their cofers; who doe justly challenge to be Gods free people; now then, what saist thou? Is it lawfull for us thus to yeeld unto their exactions, and abdicating their just pri∣vileges, to pay this tribute unto Caesar or not? And Jesus,18, 19, 20, 21. But Iesus perceived their wicked∣nesse & said; Why tempt ye me, yee hypocrites: shew me the tribute mony. And they brought unto him a pennie, and hee saith unto them; Whose is this image and superscription? they say unto him, Caesars; then saith hee unto them: Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesars; and unto God the things which are Gods. who knew the very secret thoughts of their hearts, perceiving their wicked conspiracie against him, said; Why doe yee thus seeke to intrap me, under a colour of respect and reverence to me, O ye hypocrites; Ye thinke, yee now have mee in a snare; for if I say, it is not lawfull, yee Herodians are ready to accuse me as se∣ditious; if I affirme it lawfull, ye disciples of the Phari∣ses are ready to load mee with the envie of the people: But ye shall well see how easily I can avoid this net, yee have laid for me; Shew mee the tribute money. And they brought him a Roman penny (to the valew of seven pence halfe-penny of the present coine:) And hee saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription, which is stamped upon this mettall? They say to him, Caesars; then saith hee unto them; Yee have answered your selves, this very coine convinces you; yee stand up∣on your freedome from the subjection to the Roman empire; yet in this very stampe ye reade your owne sub∣jection; yee are mistaken if ye thinke that your spirituall interest in my Father or me, discharges you from obliga∣tions and duties to your earthly Princes; your soule doth or should beare the image of God, and therefore is justly claimed by him, as his; your coine is stamped with Caesars image, to shew his claime unto such part of it, as pertaineth unto him. Give therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods. Ye Sadduces doe erre grossely,29 Iesus answered, and said unto them; Yee doe erre, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. and damnably in this your mis-conceit of the resurrection; and the ground of your errour, is your ignorance both of the Scriptures, which have clearly revealed the truth thereof, and of that omnipotent power of God, whereby onely this (other∣wise impossible) worke shall be effected. As for that absurdity,30 For in the resurrecti∣on they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angells of God in heaven. which yee suppose would fol∣low upon the certainty of a resurrection, compared with the Law of Moses; had ye any true insight into the state of heavenly things, ye would easily see, how it vani∣sheth of it selfe.
For in the resurrection, and life to come there is no such matter as marrying, and giving in marriage; no more than there is now among the Angells in heaven; for the condition of the Saints shall then bee like unto that of the celestiall Spirits, equally free from all these earthly relations, and carnall respects. 32 I am the God of A∣braham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Ia∣cob; God is not the God of the dead, but of the li∣ving.Hee doth not say, I was the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; or, I am the God of Abraham that once was; but, as implying his owne eternall being, and the certaine being of those holy Patriarchs; he saith; I am the God of Abraham, &c. Now God is not the God of those that are not, and have no existence at all, but of those that have a being; so as, ye Sadduces are in this palpably disproved, whiles yee grossely hold, that the soules of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are utterly ex∣tinct, and have ceased to bee; they are, and expect the full accomplishment of that happinesse and glory, which God by vertue of his covenant hath assured unto them. 42, 43, 45. Saying, what thinke ye of Christ; whose sonne is hee; they say unto him, the sonne of David, he saith unto them, how then doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying, If David then call him Lord, how is he his sonne.I shall need no other proofe of the Deitie of the Me∣diator then your owne mouthes, and your owne attesta∣tion to this very Scripture. Ye grant that the Christ is, and must bee the sonne of David, according to the flesh, as I am: this is assurance enough of his humanity; the truth of this deitie is sufficiently evicted by that title and compellation which David gives him, in calling him (by the direction of the unfaileable spirit of God) my Lord: how can he (being Davids sonne) be Davids Lord, if herein David meant not to acknowledge the Messias for his God. 44 The Lord said, &c. sit downe on my right hand, &c.See Psal. 110. verse. 1. CAP. XXIII. 2 Saying, the Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat.THe Scribes and Pharisees, which are the teachers and expounders of the law of God, however they set false glosses upon many precepts thereof, and corrupt it with their owne traditions, yet they do out of Gods law shew you how ye ought to live, what sins ye ought to avoid, what good duties ye ought to performe. 3 And therefore what∣soever they bid you ob∣serve, that observe and do, but doe not ye after their workes, for they say and doe not.Their counsels and doctrines carry in them much shew of holinesse, and austerity; but their practises are full of loosenesse, and iniquity; whatsoever therefore they injoine you out of the law of God, that observe,
and do; but follow not the examples of their actions; for they say well, and do evill. They do, in their many and strict traditions,4 For they binde heavie burthens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on mens shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers. impose heavie charges of busie and troublesome observations upon the people; but they themselves will be sure to ease their owne shoulders, and take the freedome of a law∣lesse kinde of licentiousnesse. They make great ostentation of the outward signes of holinesse; enlarging those parchment-guards,5 But all their workes they doe for to be seene of men, they make broad their Phylacteries, and en∣large the borders of their garments. which they weare about them, as containing the parcels, and monuments of Gods law; that they may be noted for great professors of sanctitie. But do not ye arrogate to your selves any such power,8 But be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your ma∣ster, even Christ, and all ye are brethren. or title, as may derogate from the absolute autho∣rity of him who is the word of the Father: Doe not ye take upon you to deliver any doctrine, as of your own head, but onely that which yee shall receive from your heavenly Master: Christ is your Father and Master to teach and command; yee are brethren to joyne toge∣ther in observance and obedience. So also verse 9. and 10. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites;13 But woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hy∣pocrites: for ye shut up the kingdome of heaven a∣gainst men: for ye neither goe in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are en∣tring, to goe in. for whereas by your office and profession, ye should by the key of knowledge open the kingdome of heaven unto men; ye doe contrarily defraud the people of the true understanding of Gods law, and by that meanes, doe as it were shut the gates of heaven, against both them, and your selves; your false glosses & vicious practises exclude you; and by the impossibility of observing your many & vaine traditions, yee do in your judgement exclude o∣thers; and as for matter of faith, ye do neither beleeve in mee (the true Saviour) your selves, neither suffer o∣thers that would gladly embrace the truth of my Gospell, to cleave unto mee. Ye leave no meanes un-attempted, ye spare no paines,15 For ye compasse sea and land to make one pro∣selyte, & when he is made, yee make him twofold more the child of hell, then your selves. nor cost to winne a Gentile, to your Jewish religion; and when ye have drawne him to you, ye do so fully cor∣rupt him, that he is a much worse Jewe then hee was a Gentile; and ye doe more damne him by a sacrilegious pretence of religion, then he did before damne himselfe by an heathenish civility. Wo unto you, ye blind guides,16 Woe unto you yee blinde guides, which say, whosoever shall sweare by the Temple, it is no∣thing; but whosoever shall sweare by the gold of the Temple, he is a debter. which lead Gods people into grosse and foule errours, by your false and absurd expositions, whiles ye teach, that the gold of the Temple
is more holy then the Temple it selfe: and therefore that if a man sweare by the Temple, the oath bindes not; but if he sweare by the gold of the Temple, now hee is bound to performe it. So vers. 18. 20 Whoso therefore shall sweare by the Altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon.Whatsoever the formes of your swearing be, it is God onely that is, and must be sworne by; and the creatures are only mentioned, as in relation to their maker; who∣so therefore shall sweare by the Altar, sweares by that which is sacrificed upon it, and by that God to whom that Altar, and that Sacrifice is consecrated and of∣fered. So also 21, 22. 23 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye pay tithe of Mint, & Anise, and Cummine, and have omitted the weigh∣tier matters of the law, Iudgement, Mercie, and Faith: these ought yee to have done, and not to leave the other undone.Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye are curious and scrupulous in performing small and trifling matters: but are carelesse and unconscionable in the maine points of Gods law: if it be for the tithe of a few worthlesse herbes, or seedes, ye will rather over-run the precept of God; but the great duties of justice in your decisions of mercy to the helpelesse, of fidelity, and up∣rightnesse of carriage towards men, these are sleightly passed over by you. Those petty observations, (being that they are prescribed) doe challenge their due place, but so, that the greater and more important duties ought first and chiefly to be regarded. 25 For ye make cleane the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excesse.Yee are all for the outside; onely caring to appeare faire and glorious, without all regard to inward sinceri∣tie; as if a man should be curious in washing the outside of his cup, or platter; never caring whether it be cleane within: thus doe yee, being externally holy, but in∣wardly full of extortion, and excesse. 26 Thou blinde Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup, and plat∣ter, that the out-side of them may be cleane also.Thou blinde and hypocriticall Pharisee, doe thou by thy selfe, as any wise and cleanly man would do by his cup or platter, care first and chiefly that the inside bee cleane & bright, that so (if thou wilt) it may be scowred on both sides; thy owne safety calls thee to the respect of the inside: in the care of the outside, thou shalt onely regard the eyes of others. 29 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because yee build the tombes of the Prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous.Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; be∣cause yee professe much honour to the memory of the holy Prophets, and can be content to beautifie their tombes, as if yee were conscionable observers of that which they spake, and wrote in the name of the Lord.
In that yee are so busie in garnishing the tombes of the Prophets, slaine by your progenitors,31 Wherefore yee be witnesses unto your selves; that ye are the children of them which killed the Prophets. ye proclaime your selves to be the children of murderous parents; so as ye have no reason at all to boast of your pedigree. But herein ye do too well approve your selves the sonnes of those wicked parents,32 Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. in that ye imitate them in their bloody practises; persecuting and killing the righteous and innocent, now, as they did in their times before you, so as what they wanted of cruelty, is fully made up by you. That since yee succeed in the bloodie crueltie of your predecessours,35 That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias sonne of Barachias whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar. ye may also inherit their judgements; and may make your selves liable to the punishment of all the innocent blood, that hath beene shed by them, even from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the sonne of Jojada, or Barachias, whom your progenitors cruelly flew in the court of the Temple, be∣twixt the entring in thereof, and the Altar. How oft and how earnestly have I offered unto thee,37 How often would I have gathered thy chil∣dren together, even as a hen gathereth her chic∣kens under her wings, and ye would not? the meanes of thy salvation, and tendered unto thee my gratious protection, if thou would'st have approved thy selfe capable thereof? and thou hast wilfully cast off, and disregarded all my mercifull profers made unto thee. Behold your Temple, your City,38 Behold your house is left unto you desolate. your country shall be (by reason of your sinnes) given over to utter spoile and desolation. For I say unto you:39 For I say unto you, ye shall not see me hence∣forth, till ye shall say, bles∣sed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord. Hitherto I have lovingly and fa∣miliarly conversed amongst you, as a gratious Redee∣mer, inviting you to your conversion; but now since ye have despised my mercy, I will depart from you, and ye shall no more see me, till you shall be forced to mag∣nifie me in the terrour of my judgement, and in the glo∣ry of my majesticall appearance. CAP. XXIV. TEll us these two secrets;3 Tell us when shall these things be, and what shall be the signe of thy comming, and of the end of the world. When the time sh of this miserable destruction of the the Temple  thou foreshewest us: and what signes shall goe  thy comming to judgement, and the end of the wor Both before the time of the destruction of Jerusa,5 For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. and before my second comming (wich yee ignorantly imagine shall be together, and at once) there shall arise many impostors, who shall give out themselves for the Messias, and shall deceive many.
14 And this Gospell of the kingdome shall be preached in all the world, for a witnesse unto all na∣tions, and then shall the end come:This Gospell, whereby the kingdome of Christ is both gathered, & erected, and governed, shall before my last comming, and the end of the world, be preached to all the nations of the habitable world: so as they shall have no excuse from their ignorance, but shall be fully convinced of the truth thereof. 15 When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy place, (who so readeth let him understand:)When ye shall see the abominable pollution of the Temple (which is the just cause of the utter desolation thereof;) yea, when yee shall see the heathenish armies (consisting of idolatrous Pagans) according to the pro∣phesie of Daniel (which I would have you diligently to peruse and consider) taking possession of the holy Temple: 16 Then let them which be in Iudea, flee into the mountaines.Then, it is time for every one in Judea, to shift for himselfe, and to betake himselfe into the deserts, and mountaines for safety. 19 And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give sucke in those dayes.Their case shall be very miserable and desperate, whose necessary burdens forceth their stay, or hindereth their speed of escape, namely those that are with child, or those who giving such to their little infants must needs carry their deare charge in their armes. 20 But pray yee that your flight bee not in the winter, neither on the Sab∣bath day.But pray ye that this flight of yours, for your owne preservation, be not cast upon such a time, and season, as may be to the disadvantage, either of your life, or your conscience: that it fall not out in the deep of winter, when through the foulenesse of the way, or extremitie of wea∣ther ye cannot passe, to save your selves, or upon the Sabbath day, when (as men are informed and affected) the scruples of enthralled consciences forbid them to take laborious journeyes for their escape.21 For then shall bee great tribulation, such as was not since the begin∣ning of the world, to this time, no nor ever shall be. Except it should please God so to contrive it, that this siege and misery of Jerusalem, should receive a quick dispatch, it would make an end of all the inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem;23 And except those dayes should be shortned, there should no flesh be saved; but for the elect sake those dayes shall be shortened. so as not so much as a remnant of them should escape; but God shall so order it for his elects sake (who are therein) that this their extremitie (though very grievous) yet shall be short. 24 And shall shew great signes and wonders inso∣much that (if it were pos∣sible) they shall deceive the very elect.The delusions of their signes and wonders shall be so strong, that the world shall be utterly carried away therewith: and (if it were possible that the very elect of God could be miscarried by them) they should also be deceived; were it not more of the grace and mercie of that powerfull God, who sustaineth them, and that in∣fallible decree, whereby they are ordained unto life, than of any power or wisedome of their owne, they could not stand against these strong deceptions.
Wherefore if the disciples of these vaine impostors shall say, Behold the Messias is now comne,26 Wherefore, if they shall say unto you, Behold he is in the desert, goe not forth. Behold he is in the secret chambers, beleeve it not. and hee is in the desert, gathering of troupes for the restoring of his kingdome: or, he is in this or that secret roome plot∣ting his affaires, beleeve it not. For the returne of the Sonne of man shall be without observation, so as no man can fore-appoint,27 For as the lightning commeth out of the East, and shineth even unto the West; so shall also the comming of the Sonne of man be. or fore-ex∣pect the day; but shall bee suddaine and unlookt for; even as the lightning gives no warning when it comes, but suddenly flashes from the East to the West; so shall also the second comming of the Sonne of man be. Wheresoever the Sonne of man shall please to pre∣sent himselfe,28 For wheresoever the Carkeise is, there will the Eagles bee gathered toge∣ther. thither will he call unto him all men to be judged by him; so as all mankind shall flocke unto his judgement seate, even as the Eagles resort to the place, and subject of their repast. When as my Church shall have endured that full pro∣portion of affliction, which I have set forth for it,29 Immediately af∣ter the tribulation of those daies, shall the Sunne bee darkened. im∣mediately thereupon shall my last comming be in glory and majestie, and dreadfulnesse; for then the Sunne shall be darkened, &c. Then shall appeare those glorious and bright beames of sight, and heavenly splendour,30 And then shall ap∣peare the signe of the Son of man in heaven. which shall shine forth upon the very act of the appearance of the Sonne of man, as it were the opening of Heaven for his de∣scent, &c. And he by his almighty power shall send his holy An∣gells,31 And hee shall send his Angells with a great sound of a trumpet, & they shall gather together his elect from the foure winds from one end of heaven to the other. who with a mighty sound shall summon together his elect (whose bodies have beene vanished into all the elements) and they shall from all the coasts of the earth be assembled together before him. Take and learne this similitude of the fig-tree; looke as when yee see the branches of it, to put forth leaves,32 Now learne a para∣ble of the fig-tree: when his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh. ye know that summer is comming on, & that the winter which kept in that juice and sap, is now past: so likewise when ye see the signes accomplished, which I have now premonished you of, know yee that the kingdome of God is neare to the full accomplishment thereof. Doe not imagine that I have told you of things which are long hence to bee done; no, I assure you,34 Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not passe; till all these things be fulfilled. that all these things which I have foretold, concerning the de∣struction of the Temple, and Jerusalem, and all the ap∣pendances thereof, shall bee effected in your very time and sight; so as this present generation shall bee the witnesses of the fulfilling of every word that I have spo∣ken concerning these matters.
35 Heaven and earth shall passe away, but my words shall not passe a∣way.Know that my word can not faile & disappoint you; the heaven and the earth have their time set, when they shall passe away, but the truth of my word is everlast∣ing; and shall continue when this frame of the world shall be dissolved. 36 But of that day & houre knoweth no man, no not the Angells of heaven, but my Father onely.But, as for the day and houre of my second comming, I would not have you to be curiously inquisitive into it; that is a secret, which is not disclosed to the very An∣gels of heaven, but reserved onely in the hidden coun∣sell of my Father which is in heaven. 37 But as the dayes of Noah were, so shall also the comming of the Son of man be.But I give you this generall intimation of the condi∣tion of the time; wherein it shall bee, that as it was in the daies of Noah, before the universall deluge swept a∣way mankinde, so shall it bee in that time, wherein the Sonne of man shall come to judge the world in fire. So verse 38.39. 40 Then shall two bee in the field, the one shall bee taken, and the other left.This dreadfull comming of Christ shall not have the like issue unto all; to some it shall be terrible, to others happy; It shall make a perfect distinction betweene them whom the world made no difference betweene. Two shall be found in the field, about the same worke; one of them shall bee taken up to glory, the other shall bee (as a reprobate) left to everlasting confusion. So Verse 41. 43 But know this, that if the good man of the house had knowen in what watch the theefe would come, he would have wat∣ched, and would not have suffered his house to bee broken up.Yee are forewarned, and therefore faile not to watch: if the goodman of the house be informed before hand in what watch the theefe will come, (though hee bee not told of the houre wherein he is like to come) he will bee sure to stand upon his guard all that part of the night, and not suffer himselfe to bee surprised, and his house to be broken up. 44 Therefore bee also ready: for in such an houre as you thinke not, the Son of man commeth.So doe yee therefore, though the houre bee not de∣signed to you, yet you heare that the Sonne of man will both surely, and suddainely come to judgement; be yee therefore ever ready to receive him, whensoever hee comes. 45 Who then is a faith∣full & wise servant whom his Lord hath made ruler over his houshold to give them meate in due season.Whosoever therefore shall approve himselfe a faith∣full officer in the family of God; distributing to every one that measure of allowance which his master hath or∣dained; improving all his gifts and oportunities to the best service of God.
Blessed and happy is he, for being found so doing;46 Blessed is that ser∣vant, whom his Lord when hee commeth shall finde so doing. so he shall bee sure that his industry, and justice, and fideli∣ty shall be recompenced with eternall glory. Verily I say unto you;47 Verily I say unto you, that hee shall make him ruler over all his goods. as an earthly master remune∣rates such a servant with preferment and honour in his houshold, committing the rest unto his over-sight and government; so will the God of heaven toward him that is thus spiritually just, and faithfull, with an everlasting weight of glory. By the contrary expound verse 48, 49, 50, 51. CAP. XXV. WHiles men are here indifferently mingled toge∣ther,1 Then shall the king∣dome of heaven bee like∣ned unto tenne Virgins, which tooke their lampes, and went forth to meete the bridegroome. their state seemes all alike; all would bee thought to be as wise Virgins; but at the end of the world, it shall appeare what every one is. As the man∣ner is that virgins meet the Bridegroome, and attend upon him till hee bee brought into the Bride chamber; So all that take upon them to professe the Name of Christ, make shew of a ready and forward attendance upon his person and ordinances.2 And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. But indeed many of them are but false and hypocri∣ticall, which will appeare in the issue. For as those virgins are foolish,3, 5, 6, 8. They that were foolish, tooke their lampes, & tooke no oile with them: while the Bridegroome tarried, they all slumbred, and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the bridegroome commeth, goe yee out to meet him. And the foolish said unto the wise; give us of your oyle, for our lamps are gone out. who doe not furnish their lampes with store of oyle, which may continue their light, according to the occasion of their attendance: so those men are spiritually sottish, who doe not labour for true faith, and all other sound graces of the Spirit, which may enable them to persevere unto the end, and may make them capable of the glory of the heavenly Bridegroome. So verse 9, 10, 11, 12. Unto one, the great master of the family, the God of heaven, hath given greater gifts, faculties, opportunities;51 And unto one hee gave five talents, to ano∣ther two, and to another one, to every man accor∣ding to his severall abilitie. to another lesse; but to all some; with an intention that they should bee imployed to the honour and advan∣tage of his name, who is the owner, and bestower of them, &c.
18 But he that had re∣ceived one, went and dig∣ged in the earth, & hid his Lords money.But hee that had received the least measure and pro∣portion of stocke from the hand of God; was carelesse in the improving it, and made no use at all of it, for the profit of his master. 24, 25. Then he which had receiued the one talēt, came & said, Lord, I knew thee, that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou hast not sowen, & gather∣ing where thou hast not strawed; & I was afraid, & went & hid thy talent in the earth: loe there thou hast that is thine.As the idle and negligent servant, when his businesse succeeds not, is ready to cast the blame upon his master, pretending his hardnesse, and straitnesse, and morosity; so is the unfaithfull and indiligent man apt to lay the fault upon his maker, when hee hath omitted his good services, and runne himselfe into judgement. 26, 27. His Lord answe∣red & said unto him, Thou wicked & slothfull servāt, thou knewest that I reape where I sowed not, & ga∣ther where I have not stra∣wed: Thou oughtest there∣fore to have put my mony to the exchangers, & then at my comming I should have received mine owne with usury.I have given good proofes of my bounty to all my creatures; but if I were such as thou standerest mee, one that would bee willing to receive more than I give; Why didst thou not the rather take a course to increase that stocke which I committed unto thee; that so I might have received the advantage of mine owne gifts. Whosoever, through the effectual inoperation of Gods Spirit, shall improve those graces, and helpes which hee hath received, to the further honour of God; hee shall receive a further accession both of grace, and glory; and he that quencheth the Spirit, and suppresseth the good motions thereof,29 For unto every one that hath shall be given, & he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away, even that which he hath. and rejects those good meanes which are offered him, shall bee stripped of all those common favours which hee hath, and lose the hope of all that he might have attained. 30 And cast ye the un∣profitable servant into ut∣ter darkenesse, there shall bee weeping and gnashing of teeth.As that earthly Master would justly cast such an un∣profitable servant out of doores, into the darknesse and cold, there to miscarrie, whiles himselfe and his thriftie followers are entertained with good cheere, and light within; So shall the just God cast out such evill and un∣faithfull servants from his presence, and thrust them downe into the darke pit of hell, where there is nothing but wayling and horrour. 33 And he shall set the sheepe on his right hand, but the Goates on the left.And he shall set his elect and holy ones, as sheepe on the right hand: and the wicked and reprobate, as Goates on the left. 35 For I was an hun∣gred, & ye gave me meat.For ye have manifested the truth of your faith (which only can give you just claime to heaven) by the fruits of your good and charitable workes; when I, in my poore members upon earth, was hungred, ye gave me meat, &c.
CAP. XXVI. THe Sonne of man is already,3 And the Sonne of man is betrayed to be cru∣cified. by Judas in his intended conspiracy with the high Priests and Elders, betrayed to death, and that to the death of the crosse. Then assembled together both the high Priest of that yeare (for they were now growne annuall) and the chiefe fathers of all those priestly families, and the Scribes,3 Then assembled to∣gether the chiefe Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders of the people unto the Palace of the high Priest. and the Elders of the people; all which, conjoyned together, made up a perfect Councell of the Jewes. &c. In the house of Simon, who had beene a Leper,6 In the house of Si∣mon the leper. but being cured, retained still the name of his fore-past disease. Then came to him a woman,7 There came unto him a woman, having an alablaster box of very pre∣cious oyntment. noted for her zeale to Christ, even Mary Magdalene, having an alablaster box of very precious and sweet oyntment &c. When Judas saw it, he grudged at it,8, 9. But when his dis∣ciples saw it, they had in∣dignation, saying; To what purpose is this waste, for this oyntment might have beene sold for much, and given to the poore. and conceiving great indignation thereat, stirred up his fellow-disciples to murmure at this act of Mary, saying; What great pitty it is that an ointment of so great price should bee thus powred out in waste? There might have beene a great summe raysed upon it, which might have bin distri∣buted to the poore, and have yeelded a long, and dura∣ble releefe unto them; whereas now it is spent to lit∣tle purpose. Yee doe willingly allow sweet balmes,12 For in that she hath powred this ointment on my body, shee did it for my buriall. and rich per∣fumes for the dead; behold, this woman hath herein reached beyond your conceit; she hath done this as her last office, towards my buriall. I am now sitting with you at supper, my thoughts are upon my grave; and this woman hath hereby made a bountifull and loving pre∣paration for those my last exequies. I, who know the motions and the thoughts of all men,18 And hee said, goe into the Citie to such a man, and say unto him, the master saith, my time is at hand. doe foretell you; that going into the City yee shall meet a man bearing a pitcher of water, follow yee that man, and say to him; Thus saith our master; My time is now at hand, wherein I shall both keepe the Passover, and be made an everlasting Passover for my Church; I have made choice of thy house to honour it with this my last feast, &c. Even one of you my familiar and domestique atten∣dants, who sitteth now with me,23 And hee answered and said, hee that dippeth his hand with mee in the dish, the same shall betray me. and dippeth his hand in the same dish with me and you; shall be so perfidious as to betray mee, and sell mee into the hands of my ene∣mies.
25 Then Iudas which betraied him, answered & said; Master, Is it I: hee said unto him: thou hast said.Then Judas who was secretly guiltie of this wicked∣nesse, thinking that his silence might be an accusation of himselfe, durst boldly aske, as hoping to out-face the matter; Master, is it I? Jesus said unto him; since thy guiltines hath taken the boldnesse to aske this questi∣on, doe not thinke that either thy secrecy, or impudence can carrie it away without notice: Thou art the man. 26 Take, eate, this is my body.Take, eate, this bread is sacramentally my very body; so as, if yee doe worthily receive this element, yee doe therewith partake of mee; whiles your hand and your mouth take and eate this bread, your soules doe true∣ly and really receive me, who am represented and ex∣hibited, and conveyed into you, by and with this out∣ward signe. 28 For this is my bloud of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sinnes.This Wine is sacramentally my very bloud, whereby the new Testament is ratifyed, and sealed up to and with all my faithfull ones; which bloud of mine is now to bee shed for the redemption of mankinde, and for the re∣mission of the sinnes of all penitents, and true belee∣vers. 29 But I say unto you, I will not drinke hence forth of this fruit of the vine, untill that day when I drinke it new with you in my Fathers kingdome.It is a fare-well cup that I now drinke with you; for I will no more, in this mortall state, drinke, from hence∣forth, of this fruit of the vine; but shall reserve my selfe for a more comfortable draught, sweeter than all the new wine which earth can afford; of glory and happi∣nesse, which I shall enjoy in my Fathers kingdome; whereof ye shall be blessed partakers with me. 31 All ye shall be offen∣ded because of mee this night; for it is written: I will smite the shepheard, & the sheepe of the flocke shall be scattered abroad.All yee shall be scandalized, and drawne into offence with that, which shall bee done unto me this night; for your hearts will faile you, and yee shall weakely yeeld to forsake mee, when yee see mee laid hold of, and carried away violently by mine enemies; so as in you shall bee fulfilled that of the Prophet: I will smite the shepheard, and the sheepe shall be scattered abroad. 32 But after I am risen againe, I will goe before you into Galilee.But bee not dismayed with that, which shall befall mee; I must dye indeed, but I will rise againe; and when I am risen, will shew my selfe to you, my deare disciples: and that ye may know where to make account of my presence; remember that I now tell you, I will goe before you into Galilee. 39 And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup passe from mee, neverthelesse not as I wil, but as thou wilt.O my Father, when I looke to the grievousnesse of these instant sufferings, and the infirmity of this humane nature, which I have assumed: I could bee well content to wish that (if it could bee) this bitter death, which now awaits for me; might by me bee avoyded, and by thee removed. But when I cast mine eye to thine holy decree, and the necessitie of mans redemption, I doe
most willingly submit my selfe to thy will. Bee it not as humane nature could be content to wish, but as thy di∣vine will hath everlastingly decreed. If for my sake yee doe not finde cause enough to stirre up your selves, and to shake off your drowsinesse,41 Watch & pray that ye enter not into temptati∣on: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weake. yet at least for your owne, bee advised so to doe; neither let your eyes onely be open to watch, but your heart also to pray; for yee are now in great danger to bee overcome with tentations of feare, and distrust; I know your minde is good, ye are willing enough to performe these good duties: but the naturall infirmity of your flesh, is ready to strive against these good motions; so as yee had need of my seasonable and earnest excitations. Since my so serious admonition could not keepe open your eyes; Goe to, now sleepe on,45 Sleepe on now, and take your rest; behold the houre is at hand, and the Sonne of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. take your rest if you can; behold, yee are now entring into a busie and peri∣lous time: for now is the houre of my suffering at hand, and I the Sonne of man am betrayed by my wicked di∣sciple, into the hands of the malicious Jewes. Had an enemy done me this ill office,50 And Iesus said unto him; Friend, wherefore art thou come? it would have becomne him; but for thee, my friend and familiar, to sell thy service to my betraying, how hatefull a thing it is? I doe well know thy errand; thou art comne to be∣tray thy master with a kisse. And behold, one of them which were with Jesus,51 And behold, one of them which were with Iesus, stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and stroke a servant of the high Priest, and smote off his eare. even Simon Peter, out of his zeale to his master, drew forth his sword, & stretched out his hand, & smote a servant of the high Priest, called Malchus, & cut off his eare. Put up thy sword;52 Then Iesus said un∣to him; Put up againe thy sword into his place, for al they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. these are not the weapons that ye my disciples must fight withall: Peter thou doest not herein fight for mee, so much as against thy selfe; for whosoever in a private revenge, being not thereto cal∣led, and authorized, shall smite with the sword, that man pulls upon himselfe the just revenge of God, and his Law; and must expect the same measure which his cruel∣tie and presumption hath meated to another. It is a great weakenesse and ignorance in thee,53, 54. Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and hee shall presently give mee more than twelve legions of An∣gels: But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? if thou thinkest it is for want of helpe, that I am falne into these malicious hands; no, I would have thee know, that if I would pray unto my Father in heaven for rescue, I could easily obtaine a mighty host of glorious Angells to deliver me: But then what would become of man∣kinde? or how should that be fulfilled which the Scrip∣tures have foretold concerning me, and that great worke of redemption, which must be wrought by me.
61 And said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three dayes.Whereas Jesus had said, If you shall destroy this li∣ving Temple of my body, I will within three daies build it up againe; these false witnesses, perverting his words, and mis-alledging them, as spoken of the materiall Temple of Jerusalem, accuse him to have said; I am able to destroy this Temple of God, which you hold in so great honour and reverence, and can build it up again in three dayes. 64 Iesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: neverthe∣lesse I say unto you, here∣after shall ye see the Sonne of man sitting on the right hand of power, and com∣ing in the clouds of hea∣ven.Jesus saith unto him; I am indeed the Christ the Son of God; but it is not for you to judge of me by this now homely and contemptible appearance of mine; the time shall come when ye shall behold mee in another forme; ye who now looke upon me with scorne, and contempt, shall then see me sitting gloriously on the right hand of Majestie and power; and comming in the clouds of hea∣ven to judge both the quick and the dead. 68 Saying, prophecie un∣to us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee:They say thou art a great Prophet; now shew thy skill; out of thy deep knowledge now tell us (thus hood∣winkt) who it is that smites thee. CAP. XXVII. 2 And when they had bound him they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the Go∣vernour.BUt, having not in their owne hands, the power of life and death, they bound him, and led him away, and delivered him to the Roman Governour, Pontius Pilate. 3 Then Iudas, which had betrayed him, when hee saw that hee was con∣demned, repented him∣selfe, and brought againe the thirty pieces, &c.Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw the proceedings, and issue of this businesse, viz. that Jesus was condemned to die (whereas upon the sight, and knowledge of the continuall miracles of Christ hee perhaps) supposed, that (notwithstanding this wicked transacting of his) his master would easily free himselfe from their hands; hee was stricken with a late remorse; and brought againe the thirty pieces &c. 9 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Ieremie the prophet, say∣ing, And they tooke the thirtie pieces of silver, the price of him that was va∣lued, whom they of the Children of Israel did va∣lue.See Zachar. 11. verse 13. The testimony is plainly cited out of Zacharie, and yet is in an∣cient copies alledged under the name of Ieremie: which doubt∣lesse happened by the writers mistaking of the abbreviati∣ons;  for  as I have seene it in a very old manuscript.
Now at that feast of the Passover (for the honour of that solemnity) it was an ancient custome of the Jewes,15 Now at that feast, the governour was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would. in memory of their letting loose from their Aegyptian thraldome, to let loose some one prisoner, whom they would choose, for what offence soever he was commit∣ted; which favour the Roman governours (to ingratiate themselves with the Jewish people) thought good to continue unto them. Then Pilate, knowing that it was the Jewish manner,24 He tooke water & washed his hands before the multitude, saying; I am innocent of the bloud of this just person: see ye to it. by washing of hands to signifie and professe their inno∣cencie, tooke water, and in the presence of the multitude washed his hands, and made protestation of his cleare∣nesse and freedome from the guilt of the innocent blood of Jesus Christ. If there be any fault in shedding the bloud of this man,25 Then answered all the people, and said, his blood be on us, & our chil∣dren. wee doe willingly take it upon our selves: let it bee re∣quired of us, and of our children. And they scornefully put upon him all the robes and ornaments of royaltie, in mockage and derision: as first,28 And they stripped him, and put on him a scar∣let robe. they clad him with a scarlet robe. Then for his crowne,29 And when they had platted a crowne of thorns, they put it upon his head, & a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him. they floutingly put upon his head a wreath of thornes platted together; and instead of a Scepter, they gave him a reed in his hand; and in an open mockage, they bowed their knees to him, & jee∣ringly saluted him with the royall acclamation of, Haile King of the Jewes. They gave unto him (according as they were wont to doe unto condemned malefactors) a potion of sharpe wine mixed with myrrhe,34 They gave him vine∣ger to drinke, mingled with gall; and when hee had tasted thereof, hee would not drinke. and other bitter compositi∣ons; which he tasted of, but would not drinke. All sorts were ready to cast their taunting,44 The theeves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth. and op∣probious speeches upon him; not onely the Scribes and the Priests, and the multitude, but even the very theeves had their mouthes open against him; for, one of those theeves that was crucified with him, scornefully upbrai∣ded his passion to him. Now,45 Now from the sixt houre, there was darke∣nesse over all the land un∣to the ninth houre. from twelve of the clocke untill three in the after-noone, there was a darkenesse over all the land. God, by this, purposing to shew unto the world by this unusuall change of the course of nature, that there was a violence offered to the God of nature, which hee abhor∣red; and the delinquents had cause to be stricken with remorse for: And, about three of the clocke in the after-noone,46 And about the ninth houre, Iesus cried with a loud voice, saying; Eli, Eli, Lammasabachthani; that is to say, My God, my God, why why hast thou forsaken me? Jesus cried out with a loud voyce, in the words of the Prophet David, (his true and ancient type) My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? which he did in a deepe
sense of his Fathers wrath unto mankinde, in whose stead he now under-went that which was due for the sinnes of the whole world: whiles he said (Why hast thou forsa∣ken mee) implying that God had, for the time, with∣drawne from him the sense and vision of his comforta∣ble prefence; and whiles he said, My God, implying the strength of his faith, whereby he did firmely apprehend the sure and gracious aid of his eternall Father. 47 Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said; this man calleth for Elias.Some of them that stood there when they heard him say Eloi, whether mistaking the likenesse of the word, or whether wilfully scorning him in this passionate ex∣pression of his griefe, said; This man calleth for Elias, &c. 51 And the vaile of the Temple was rent in twaine from the top to the bot∣tome: and the earth did quake, & the rockes rent.And behold, that the Jewes might now understand, that by the death of this Sonne of God, all the Mosaicall ceremonies, and rites were at a full end; the vaile of the Temple, which was before the holy of holies, rent in peeces, from the top to the bottome; and that they might see the God of heaven and earth suffered under their hands, as the heavens testified their interest in him by subduing their light, so did the earth by the quaking, and agitation thereof, and by the rending of her rocks. 52 And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints, which slept a∣rose.Yea, the very graves were opened, and many bodies of the Saints which had long lien therein, now by the almightie power of their dying Saviour, arose. 53 And came out of the graves after his resur∣rection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many.And came out of their graves, to attend him, who was the first fruits of the dead; the Author of the happy resurrection of his chosen; and therefore upon the resur∣rection of this Sonne of God, the Lord of life, they a∣rose, and went into the City of Jerusalem, and shewed themselves to many, whom they had beene formerly knowne unto. 54 Now when the Centurion, and they that were with him watching Iesus, saw the earth-quake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying; truely, this was the Sonne of God.Now, when the Centurion, (though a meere hea∣then) and the Roman souldiers that were with him, saw the darkenesse and the earth-quake, and the manner of Christs death, his patience, his mercy, his voluntary and sweet expiration, they were stricken with great feare, saying, This Jesus was put to death as upon pretence of blasphemie, for that he gave out himselfe for the Sonne of God: but all these things plainly shew that hee said nothing but truth, of himselfe: doubtlesse hee was no o∣ther than that he said of himselfe, the Sonne of God. 56 Among which was Mary Magdalene, & Mary the mother of Iames, and Ioses, and the mother of Zebedees children.This while, there was no newes of his Disciples, they (except John onely) had withdrawne themselves; but many women, who had beene very ready to attend Christ, and to minister unto him, in his journey from Galilee to Jerusalem, stood within sight, though not very neare to his crosse; sadly beholding all that was done unto him.
Now there was Mary Magdalen,16 And there was Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. and that other Ma∣ry the mother of James, sitting over against the sepul∣cher, that they might take good view of the place where Jesus was laid, purposing to bring sweet odors (when the Sabbath was over) for the perfuming and embalming of his body. Now the next day that followed the preparation day, being both the Sabbath day,62 Now the next day that followed the day of the preparation, the chiefe Priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate. and the day of the Passover, the chiefe Priests (now not regarding the sa∣cred solemnity thereof, out of their malice to Christ) came together to the Roman governour, Pilate. Yee have a guard of souldiers which out of the towre of Antonia, are designed to this service, goe your way;65 Pilate said unto them, yee have a watch. set sure watch upon the sepulcher, &c. CAP. XXVIII. IN the night after the Sabbath, when it was dawning,1 In the end of the Sab∣bath, as it began to dawne, towards the first day of the weeke. towards the morning of the first day of the weeke &c. All power is given to me both in heaven and earth,18 All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. as Mediator betwixt God and man: neither is this power at this time conveyed unto mee, which before I had not: but now, by this my glorious and triumphant resurrection it is manifested to you and the world, that I am invested with this power. By vertue whereof,19 Goe yee therefore and teach all nations, bapti∣zing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. I give you my Apostles commis∣sion, and charge, to goe teach all nations of the world; adding to your doctrine the seale of holy Baptisme; whereby ye shall initiate all beleevers into my Church; Baptizing them, as by calling upon the name of God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost; one in essence, three in distinction of persons; so in the authority of the same one God; and into the profession of the faith, and religion of that one God distinguished by those three coeternall, and coequall persons, blessed for ever. And lo,20 And loe I am with you alwayes, even unto the end of the world, Amen. howsoever my bodily presence shall be sub∣duced from you, yet in my spirit and infinite deitie, I will be ever present with you, to protect and blesse you, and my whole Church to the end of the world.
THE GOSPELL OF St MARK. CAP. I. 2 Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.See Malach. 3.1. 3 The voice of one cry∣ing in the wildernesse &c.See Esay 40.3. 5 And were all baptized of him in the river of Ior∣dan confessing their sinnes.ANd as John preached unto them repentance, that they might be capable of the remission of their sinnes; so they accordingly practised it; for those that came to be baptised of him, presented themselves to him with an humble confession of their sinnes.6 And Iohn was cloath∣ed with camels haire, and with a girdle of a skinne about his loynes: and hee did eate locusts and wilde honey. See Matth. 3.4. 8 I indeed have bapti∣zed you with water: but he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost.See Matt. 3.11. 10 And streight way, comming up out of the water he saw the heavens opened, and the spirit like a dove descending upon him.See Matth. 3.16. 12 And immediately the spirit driveth him into the wildernesse.See Matth. 4.1. 17 And Iesus said unto them, come ye after mee, and I will make you fishers of men.See Matth. 4.19. 22 And they were asto∣nished at his doctrine: for he taught them, as one that had authoritie, and not as the Scribes.See Matth. 7.21. 34 And hee suffered not the devils to speake, be∣cause they knew him.And he suffered not the evill spirits to professe their knowledge of him: because he would not have him who
is the father of lies, to slander and disgrace the truth by his testimonie. See Matth. 8.4.44 Offer for thy clean∣sing those things which Moses commanded for a testimony unto them. In so much as Jesus, who purposely shunned the con∣fluences, and applauses of the people,45 Insomuch that Iesus could no more openly en∣ter into the citie, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter. found it not fit for him to enter openly into the city any more, &c. CAP. II. See Matth. 9.2.5 Sonne, thy sinnes be forgiven thee. See Matth. 9.6.10 But that yee may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, he saith to the sicke of the palsie. See Matth. 9.9.14 Sitting at the receit of custome. See Matth. 9.15.19 Can the children of the bride-chamber fast, while the bridegroome is with them. Hunger,25, 26. And he said un∣to them, Have yee never read what David did when hee had need, and was an hungred, hee and they that were with him; How hee went into the house of God in the dayes of Abiathar the high Priest, and did eate the shew-bread, which is not lawfull to eate, but for the Priests? or whatsoever bodily necessity dispenseth with the rituall observations of the law; as ye may well see in the example of David; who when he had need, and was thereupon driven to seeke reliefe of Abiathar the high priest, went into the Temple of God; and made no scruple to eate of that shew-bread which was consecra∣ted to sacred use, and therefore was not lawfull to be eaten of any but the Priests onely, &c. CAP. III. See Matth. 11.24.22 He hath Beelzebub, & by the Prince of the de∣vils casteth hee out devils. See Matth. 11.26.26 And if Satan rise up against himselfe, and be di∣vided, hee cannot stand, but hath an end.
28 All sinnes shall be forgiven unto the sonnes of men, and blasphemies, wherewith soever they shall blaspheme.See Matth. 11.31. 34, 35 Behold my mo∣ther and my brethren. For whosoever shall doe the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and my mother.See Matth. 12.49. CAP. IV. 11 Vnto you it is gi∣ven to know the mysterie of the kingdome of God, but unto them that are without, all things are done in parables.See Matth. 13.11. 12 That seeing they may not see, &c.See Matth. 13.13. 21 Is a candle brought to be put under a bushell, or under a bed, and not to be set on a candlesticke?See Matth. 5.15. 22 For there is nothing hid, which shall not be ma∣nifested?See Matth. 10.26. 25 For hee that hath, to him shall be given, and he that hath not, from him shall be taken, even that which he hath.See Matth. 13.12. 32 It is like a graine of mustard seed, which when it is sowne in the earth is lesse then all the seedes that be in the earth.See Matth. 13.31, 32. CAP. V. 39 The damsell is not dead but sleepeth.See Matth. 9.24. CAP. VI. 1 And came into his owne country.See Matth. 13.54, 55,2 Whence hath this man these things. 56.3 Is not this the car∣penter &c.
And hee could not abide to doe any great miracles there among them, because of their infidelitie.5 And hee could there doe no mighty worke, save that he laid his hands upon a few sicke folke, and healed them. See Matth. 10.9, 10.8, 9 And cōmanded them that they should take no∣thing for their journey, save a staffe onely, no scrip, no bread, no mony in their purse; but bee shod with sandals, and not put on two coats. See Matth. 10.11.10 In what place soever yee enter into an house there abide till yee depart from that place. See Matth. 10.14.11 Shake off the dust un∣der your feet for a testi∣mony against them: verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodome and Gomorrha in the day of judgement, then for that citie. And as a signe extraordinarily appointed by God for the miraculous cure of the diseased,13 And annointed with oyle many that were sick, and healed them. they annoynted the sick with oyle, in very great multitudes, and healed them. For Herod had an awfull and reverent conceit of John, knowing that he was a just and holy man.20 For Herod feared Iohn, &c. CAP. VII. See Matth. 15.2.5 Why walke not thy Disciples according to the tradition of the Elders, but eate bread with un∣washen hands. See Matth. 15.9.7 Howbeit in vaine doe they worship me, teaching for doctrines the com∣mandements of men. See Matth. 15.5.11 If a man shall say to his father or mother, it is Corban, that is to say, a gift by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me: &c. See Matth. 15.11.15 There is nothing from without a man, that entring into him, can de∣file him, &c.
26 The woman was a Greeke, a Syrophenician by nation.The woman was a Gentile; borne in those coasts of Tyre and Sidon which were in Syrophenicia. CAP. VIII. 15 The leaven of the Pharisees.See Matth. 16.6. 24 I see men as trees walking.And hee looked up and said, I see a weake confused glimmering, of men walking, which seeme to mee like unto trees. 33 Get thee behinde me Satan; for thou savou∣rest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men.See Matth. 16.23. CAP. IX. 1 Verily I say unto you, that there bee some of them that stand heere, which shall not taste of death, till they have seene the kingdome of God come.See Matth. 16.28. 13 Elias is indeed comne, & they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, &c.See Matth. 11.14. 19 O faithlesse gene∣ration, how long shall I be with you? how long shall &c.See Matth. 17.17. 20 This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.See Matth. 17.21. 37 Whosoever shall receive one of such chil∣dren in my name, receiveth me: & whosoever recei∣veth me, receiveth &c.See Matth. 18.5. 39 Forbid him not, for there is no man which shall doe a miracle in my name, that can lightly speake evill of me.Forbid them not; there is no reason to inhibit them that are well affected to us: If they make use of my name in ejecting devills, it appeares they have an honourable conceit of my power; at least they cannot open their
mouthes in disgrace of me, who doe improve my name to miraculous purposes. Neither is it for you to set your selves against them,40 For hee that is not against us, is on our part. that make no opposition to us: for, of those that are lookers on, such as make no head against us, doe in a sort make for us, in that they oppose us not. It is not to be expected that all should follow our traine; in this common hostility of the world, those that doe not at∣tend us, yet if they side not against us, are worthy to bee favourably entertained. See Matth 18.6.42 And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that beleeve in mee, it is better for him that a milstone &c. See Matth. 1.29.43 And if thy hand of∣fend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed than ha∣ving two hands to &c. That yee may avoyd that unquenchable and eternall fire,49 For every one shall bee salted with fire, and e∣very sacrifice shall bee sal∣ted with salt. see and provide carefully that yee may be seasoned with the fire and salt of Gods Spirit: for as no sacrifice of the Law is accepted of God, unlesse it bee first seaso∣ned with salt, and so passe the fire: so no soule can hope to bee graciously received of him, which is not wrought upon by the wholesome acrimony of due mortification. See Matth. 5.13.50 Salt is good, but if the salt have, lost his salt∣nesse, wherewith will you season it. Have in your selves the true seasoning of faith,50 Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another. of wisedome, and of all holy graces, which may make you savoury unto God; and have peace outwardly with o∣thers. CAP. X. See Matth. 19.8.56 For the hardnes of your heart, hee wrote you this precept, but from the beginning of the creation, God made them male and female.
14 Suffer the little chil∣dren to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdome of heaven.See Matth 19.14. 18 Why callest thou me good? there is no man good but one, that is God.See Matth. 19.17. 21 One thing thou lac∣kest; Goe thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poore, and thou shalt have treasure in &c.See Matth. 19.21. 25 It is easier for a ca∣mell to go thorow the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God.See Matth. 19.24. 29 There is no man that hath left house, or bre∣thren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or &c.See Matth. 19.29. 31 But many that are first, shall be last, and the last first.See Matth. 19.30. 37 Grant unto us that we may sit one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory.See Matth. 20.21. 38 Ye know not what ye aske: Can yee drinke of the Cup that I drinke of, and bee baptised with the baptisme that I am baptised with?See Matth. 20.22. 40 But to sit on my right hand, and on my left hand, is not mine to give, but it shall bee given to them, for whom it is pre∣pared.See Matth. 20.23. 42 Ye know that they which are accompted to rule over the Gentiles, ex∣ercise Lordship over them: and their great ones exercise authority upon them.See Matth. 20.25. CAP. XI. 9, 10. Hosanna, blessed is hee that commeth in the name of the Lord, blessed be &c.See Matth. 21.9.
See Matth. 21.19.13 And seeing a figge tree afarre off, having leaves, hee came, if haply hee might finde any thing thereon, &c. See Matth. 21.12.13.15, 17. And Iesus went in∣to the Temple, & began to cast out them that sold & bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the seales of them that &c. See Matth. 21.21.23 For verily I say un∣to you, that whosoever shall say unto this moun∣taine, be thou removed, & be thou cast &c. See Matth. 21.24, 25:29, 30. I will also aske of you one question, and an∣swer mee; and I will tell you by what authority I doe these things. The bap∣tisme of Iohn, was it from heaven, or of men? Ans∣wer me. CAP. XII. See Isay 5.1. & Matth. 21.33.1 A certaine man plan∣ted a vineyard, and set an hedge about it, and dig∣ged a place for the wine-fat, and built &c. See Matth. 21.42.10 And have yee not read this Scripture, The stone which the builders rejected, is become the head of the corner? See Matth. 22.15.17, 18, 19.13, 14, 15. And they sent unto him certaine of the Pharisees, and of the He∣rodians, to catch him in his words. And when they were come, they say, &c. Shall we give, or shall we not give? &c. See Matth. 22.29.24 Iesus answering, said unto them, Doe yee not therefore erre, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God? &c. See Matth. 22.30.25 For, when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marrie, nor are gi∣ven in marriage &c.
26, 27. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, & the God of Iacob. Hee is not the God of the dead, but the God &c.See Matth. 22, 32, 33. 33 And to love him with all the heart, & with all the understanding, and with all the soule, & with all the strength, & to love his neighbour as him∣selfe, is more than all whole burnt offerings, and sacrifices.And to love that God with all the heart, and to have all the powers, and faculties of the soule; even the un∣derstanding, and will, and affections, given up unto him, and to his sincere service; and for his sake to love a mans neighbour truly & unfainedly, as himselfe; this si more acceptable to God, than all the legall sacrifices, and and burnt offerings in the world. 35 How say the Scribes that Christ is the Sonne of David?See Matth. 22.42, 43. CAP. XIII. 4 Tell us when these things shall bee, and what shall be the signe when all these things shall be &c.See Matth. 24.3. 6 For many shall come in my name saying; I am Christ: and shall deceive many.See Matth. 24.5. 10 And the Gospell must first bee published a∣mong all nations.See Matth. 24.14. 14 But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel, &c.See Matt. 24.15, 15 And let him that is on the house top, not goe downe into the house, &c.See Matth. 24.16. 17 But woe to them that are with child, &c.See Matth. 24.19, 18 And pray yee that your flight bee not in the winter.See Matth. 42.20. 20 And except that the Lord had shortned those dayes, no flesh &c.See Matth. 24.22. 22 If it were possible, even the Elect.See Matth. 24.24. 24 The Sunne shall bee darkened, and the moone shall not give her light.See Matth. 24.29. 27 And then shall hee send his Angels, & shall ga∣ther together his elect &c.See Matth. 24.31.
But howsoever, I have given you many presages,32 But of that day and that houre knoweth no man, no not the Angells which are in heaven, nei∣ther the Sonne, but the Father. and certaine fore-tokens of that great day; yet, the particu∣lar time and houre thereof is so reserved in the secret counsell of God the Father, as that the blessed Angells of heaven know it not: no, the very Sonne of man, as he is man, hath it not disclosed unto him. CAP. XIIII. See Matth 26.8, 9.4 And there were some that had indignati∣on within themselves, and said, why was this waste of the ointment made? See Matth. 26.12.8 She hath done what she could, shee is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying. See Matth. 26.18.13 Goe ye into the Ci∣ty, and there shall meete you a man bearing a pitcher of water; follow him. See Matth. 26.23.18, 20. Verily I say un∣to you, one of you which eateth with mee, shall be∣tray me. And hee answe∣red and said unto them, it is one of the twelve that dippeth, &c. See Matth. 26.26.22 Take eate; this is my body. See Matth. 26.28.24 This is my bloud of the new Testament; which is shed for many. See Matth. 26.29.25 Verily I say unto you, I will drinke no more of the fruit of the vine, untill that day that I drink it &c. See Matth. 26.31.27 All ye shall bee of∣fended because of me this night; for it is written, &c. See Matth. 26.32.28 But after that I am risen, I will goe before you into Galilee.
36 And hee said, Abba Father, all things are pos∣sible unto thee, take away this Cup from me; never∣thelesse not that I will, but what thou wilt.O Father, I know all things are possible to thine abso∣lute and Almightie power; when I consult with hu∣mane infirmitie, I could incline to wish the removall of this bitter passion; but those weake volitions are not now for mee; I doe, and shall willingly submit mine hu∣mane will, to thy divine will and pleasure. 38 The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weake.See Matth. 26.41. 41 Sleepe on now, and take your rest, it is enough, the houre is come, &c.See Matth. 26.45. 47 And one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a ser∣vant of the high Priest, and out off his eare.See Matth. 26.51. 58 Wee heard him say, I will destroy this Temple that is made with hands, &c.See Matth. 26.61. 62 And ye shall see the Sonne of man sitting on the right hand of power, and comming in the clouds of heaven.See Matth. 26.64. CAP. XV. 6 Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner whomsoever they desired.See Matth. 27.15. 17, 8. And they cloath∣ed him with purple and platted a crown of thorns, and put, &c.See Matth. 27.25, 26. 23 And they gave him to drinke wine mingled with myrrhe, but hee re∣ceived it not.See Matth. 27.34. 25 And it was the third houre, and they crucified him.Dividing the day into foure quarters (three houres to each quarter) it was in the third of them, wherein they crucified him. 33 And when the sixt houre was come, there was darkenesse over, &c.See Matth. 27.46. 39 And when the Cen∣turion which stood over against him, saw that he so cryed out, and gave up the ghost, he said, truly this, &c.See Matth. 27.54.
CAP. XVI. See Matth. 28.1.2 And very early in the morning, the first day of the weeke they came &c. And during this infancie of my Church,27, 28. And these signes shall follow them that be∣leeve; in my name shall &c. They shall take up ser∣pents, and if they drike any deadly thing, it, &c. and this first plantation of my Gospell, these miraculous signes shall be done by them that beleeve in mee: In my name, &c. THE GOSPELL OF St LVKE. CAP. I. I Was moved by the instinct and direction of the holy spirit,3 It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of things, from the very first to write unto thee in order. having had full and infallible notice of all things, which were done from the very first intimation of the conception of Christ, till now, to digest and set them downe in due order, &c. Whereas King David had long since (for the avoyding of confusion in the holy services of the Temple) sorted all the Priestly tribe into foure and twentie rankes;5 A certain Priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia, and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Eliza∣beth. and had by lot designed to them the severall courses of their ministration; Zachariah the Priest, was one of the succes∣sors of Abia in his division, up on whom the eighth course fell; and as his time came, ministred accordingly; and his wife was also of the same holy tribe.6 And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the com∣mandements and ordinan∣ces of the Lord blamelesse. And they were both holy and conscionable persons, sincere and upright in their carriage before God and men; walking inoffensively in the wayes of Gods law. As there were diverse severall imployments in the of∣fices of the Priests, in their courses;9 According to the custome of the Priests of∣fice, his lot was to burne incense when hee went in∣to the Temple of the Lord. the lot of Zachariah was now to burne incense in the Temple, upon the Altar, which was set for that purpose in the outer roome or Tabernacle thereof.
10 And the whole mul∣titude of the people were praying without at the time of incense.And the multitude, as not being allowed to come under the roofe of the Temple, stood in the outer court (whence they might see the holy actions performed within by the Priests) praying all the time that the in∣cense was offered, that so the incense of their devotions might answer to the sweet savour of that materiall in∣cense, which ascended up (in their sight) towards heaven. 15 For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drinke neither wine nor strong drinke, and he shall be filled with he holy Ghost, even from his mothers wombe.For hee shall not onely be great in the reputation of his holinesse with men, but in the acceptation and favour of God; and hee shall in a Nazaritish austerity, be conse∣crated to God; not drinking wine, nor strong drinke; but be sadly devoted to the holy service of God; and shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from his birth. 18 And Zacharias said unto the Angel, whereby shall I know this; for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in yeares.It is a strange and unlikely message that thou deliver∣est unto mee: What signe dost thou give mee whereby I may be assured of it? for sure, in course of nature this cannot be; I am an old man, and my wife is stricken in yeares; wee are therefore both unapt to beget, or to beare a sonne. 20 And behold thou shalt be dumbe, and not able to speak, untill the day that these things shall be performed, because thou beleevest not my words.Since thou desirest a signe; behold, thou shalt feele, and finde this manifest signe in thy selfe; that very tongue that desireth it, shall be tyed up; thou shalt be dumbe, and not able to speake from this houre, till the birth of that sonne of thine; because thou beleevest not my words, &c. 22 For he beckoned un∣to them, and remained speechlesse.He made signes unto them of his owne speechlesnesse, and of that heavenly vision, which hee had seene, so as all the people, with much wonder apprehended this extra∣ordinary worke of God in Zacharias. 24 And hid her selfe five moneths, saying.Out of an holy bashfulnesse at this strange worke of God, and at the wonderment of her neighbours; shee kept close for five moneths. 25 Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the daies wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproch among men.Thus marvelously hath the Lord dealt with mee be∣yond all hopes, in this conception of mine, whereby hee hath taken away from mee the reproch of barrennesse. Then said Mary to the Angell, as partly wondring at the speech,34 Then said Mary to the Angel, how shall this be, seeing I know not a man. and partly inquiring into the manner of the performance of so strange a worke; Thou hast told mee a great and marvellous thing, that I shall now in∣stantly conceive the Messiah, the sonne of the living God; but tell mee how this shall be effected: How shall I that am a weake vessell of flesh, conceive him that is the sonne of God? or how shall I who am a virgin, being onely espoused to an husband, not yet therefore capable of the knowledge of a man; how shall I in this condicion be∣come the mother of such a sonne? 35 And the Angel an∣swered and said unto her, the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall over∣shadow thee, therefore al∣so that holy thing, which, shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God.Be not thou curious to inquire into the manner, how
this worke shall bee effected; For the spirit of God, the infinite and essentiall power of the highest, shall no lesse secretly then wonderfully worke this blessed conception in thee; of thy substance (by him sanctified) framing that sacred body, which the sonne of God shall assume to himselfe. And this is the sixt moneth of the conception of her,36 And this is the sixt moneth with her who was called barren. that was ever formerly reputed barren. For with God (howsoever things may seeme to weake and ignorant mortals) nothing is impossible;37 For with God no∣thing shall be unpossible. the conception of aged Elizabeth, the conception of a pure virgin, without the touch of man, are easily faisible to his omnipotence. Behold Lord, I have beene taught from thy Prophets,38 Behold the hand∣maid of the Lord: be it un∣me according to thy word: and the Angel de∣parted from her. that a virgin shall conceive, and be the mother of him that is Immanuel, God with us. If I (howsoever unwor∣thy) be designed by thee to this wonderfull honour, I do blesse thy name for this great mercy, and do gladly yeeld my selfe over to thy holy will, and pleasure. Let this gratious worke of thine be accordingly wrought in mee. And Mary arose, in those dayes,39 And Mary arose in those dayes, and went into the hill countrie with haste into a citie of Iuda. and partly for the fur∣ther confirmation of her faith, by the sight of that, which was affirmed by the Angel concerning her cosen Eliza∣beth, and partly for mutuall congratulation of these great workes of God; went up from Nazareth to the hill-countrie of Juda, to visit Elizabeth. The babe by the extraordinary,41, 42. The babe leaped in her wombe, and Eliza∣beth was filled with the holy Ghost, and she spake out with aloud voice, and said, Blessed art thou a∣mong women, and blessed is the fruit of thy wombe. and powerfull motion of the Spirit of God, leaped in the wombe of his mother; as in a miraculous presention of the Deiti of that Sa∣viour, whose fore-runner hee should be into the world; And Elizabeth was suddenly inspired with a Propheti∣call power; end by the instinct, and vertue thereof, said, All the powers of my will and affections agree together in magnifying the goodnesse of the Lord towards mee;46, 47, And Mary said, My soule doth magnifie the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour. And the facultie of my understanding, (in the apprehen∣sion of this great mercy of God) stirres up all the rest to praise and glorifie him. Hee hath approved his almighty power in this super∣naturall worke, which he hath wrought in mee: he hath,51 Hee hath shewed strength with his arme, he scattered the proud in the imaginatiō of their hearts. according to his gratious wont, chosen so poore and humble a creature (as my selfe) to exalt to this marvai∣lous honour; whereas those that are high in their owne conceits, hee hath confounded, and disregarded. So also verse 52.
61 And they said unto her, there is none of thy kinred that is called by this name.Thou knowest it is the usuall manner to call the chil∣dren by the names of some of the ancestors, or neare kin∣red of the familie; Why wilt thou alter the custome? what reason hast thou, since none of thy kinsfolke is so called, to appoint this name to be given to thy sonne? 63 And hee asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, his name is Iohn: and they marveiled all.And he made signes to them againe, that they should bring him a writing table; and therein he wrote, His name is John. 69 And hath raised up an home of salvation for us, in the house of his ser∣vant David.See Psal. 132.17. 78 Through the tender mercy of our God, where∣by the day-spring from on high hath visited us.Through the bowels of the tender compassion of our God towards mankinde, out of which hee hath sent his son, (as the morning sunne rising from the East) to visit his people, by his gratious presence with them. 79 To give light to them that sit in darkenesse and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet in the way of peace.To give true light of knowledge, and comfort, to those, who are naturally overwhelmed with the darke∣nesse of ignorance, and aversenesse from God; and there∣by in danger of everlasting death, and to set us in the true way of rest and eternall happinesse. 80 And was in the de∣serts till the day of his shewing unto Israel.And lived obscurely in the desert, untill it pleased God to call him forth for the discharge of that his pub∣lique function, in teaching and baptizing his people. CAP. II. 1 And it came to passe in those dayes, that there went out a decree from Cesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed.ANd it came to passe when John was borne, that there went out a publick edict from Augustus Cesar the Roman Emperour, that all the nations which were under the Roman dition, and jurisdiction, should assemble in those cities, whereto their tribes and families appertain∣ed, and there be inrolled, as well, for the number of their persons, as for the rate of their tribute, and taxation, which they were to pay unto the Roman State. So verse 3. 2 And this taxing was first made, when Cyrenius was governour of Syria.And this universall taxing was first made, when Cy∣renius was gouernour of Syria, to which Judea pertain∣ed as a province; which being of a levie of money to be paid to Rome, was more proper for him to meddle with, then for Herod the Tributary king of Judea. 7 And she brought forth her first borne sonne, and wrapped him in swadling cloathes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no roome in the Inne.And she brought forth her onely sonne, and wrapped him in swadling cloathes, and laid him in a manger, be∣cause
the meanenesse of her husband Joseph, and the concurse of people was so great, that no place could be obtained for their lodging in the Inne. And as the place of Christs birth was poore and homely, so were the persons to whom it was first mani∣fested,9 And lo, the Angell of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them. being but poore sheepheards: yet there was not more meanenesse in them to whom this wonder was first revealed, then there was glory in the revealer; for loe, the Angell of the Lord came upon them, and with a glorious brightnesse shone round about them, &c. Neither did God content himselfe with the testi∣mony of one Angell alone,13 And suddenly there was with the Angell a multitude of the heaven∣ly hoste praising God, and saying, but together with that one heavenly messenger, there was a whole host of blessed spirits, praising God, and saying, Now upon the birth of the Saviour of the world, let all praise and glory be given to God in the highest hea∣ven;14 Glory to God in the highest, & on earth peace good will towards men. let there be an happy peace & reconciliation of man to God; let there a mercifull acceptation, and respect of God to man: Yea Lord, glorious is the praise of thy mer∣cy; firme and comfortable is the peace of thy redeemed, unspeakeably gracious is thy good will towards men. And when the fortieth day was come,22 And when the dayes of her purification accor∣ding to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Ierusalem to present him to the Lord. which in the law was appointed for the purification of the woman, after her child-birth; Joseph and Mary (besides the errand of that due ceremony) brought him to Jerusalem, to pre∣sent him to the Lord in his Temple. Which they did out of a carefull respect to the law of the Lord;23 As it is written in the law of the Lord, Eve∣ry male that openeth the wombe shall be called ho∣ly to the Lord. requiring that every first borne male should be consecrated to God in memory of his preservation of the first borne of Israel in Egypt, when the eldest of eve∣ry Egyptian familie was stricken by the hand of God. Waiting long for the comming of the Messiah which should be for the comfort and salvation of Israel,25 Waiting for the con∣solation of Israel: and the holy Ghost was upon him. and he was by the holy Ghost indued with the gift of Prophesie. And it was revealed to him by the same spirit of God,26 And it was revealed unto him by the holy Ghost, that he should not see death before hee had seene the Lords Christ. that though he were very aged, and looked long for his dissolution, yet that hee should not die till he had with those his bodily eyes seene the Messiah, the Lord of life and glory. And by the direction and conduct of the same holy Spirit, hee came into the Temple at the very time,27 And he came by the Spirit into the Temple, and when the parents brought in the child Iesus. when the parents of Jesus brought him thither &c. O Lord, how long have I longed for this day;29 Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word. my life had beene tedious unto mee, if it had not beene for the hope of this sight; and now, that mine eyes are blessed with the sight of my Saviour; now thou givest mee a sweet and joyfull passage, out of this transitory life; thou
hast made good thy promise to me, and now make good thy salvation. 34 Behold this child is set for the fall, and rising againe of many in Israel: and for a signe which shall bee spoken against.Thinke not that nothing shall follow upon the birth of this divine child, but wellfare and glory, and advance∣ment to all men; and especially to Israel; but know, that as hee shall worke the happinesse of many, so hee shall be the occasion of the fall of many also; yea as his mercy shall save those that are the true sonnes of Israel, so his justice shall reject and condemne the wicked, and un∣beleevers; Neither looke that hee shall be applauded of all;34, 35. Yea a sword shall peirce thorow thy owne soule (also) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. yea, rather, he shall be as a common marke, whereat the arrowes of contumelie, and reproch shall be general∣ly shot, through the world; and his name and religion shall be sure to receive opposition, and contradiction, every where; and thereby men shall be tried, and occa∣sion shall bee given them, to shew either the truth, or falsehood of their hearts, towards his name and profes∣sion. And thou, O blessed virgin, howsoever thou shalt finde just cause of unspeakeable joy in such a Sonne, yet thou shalt not bee without many sorrowes, and heart-breakings for those things which shall befall him; and those great indignities, and hard measures which shall bee offered unto him. 36, 37. And had lived with an husband seven yeares from her virginity, And shee was a widdow of about fourescore and foure yeares, which depar∣ted not from the Temple, but served God, with fa∣stings and prayers, night, and day.After the time of her virginity, shee had lived seven yeares in wedlocke with her husband, and had from the decease of her husband, continued a widdow for the space of about fourescore and foure yeares; and shee spent her time, most-what, in her devotions, and atten∣dance upon Gods publique services in the Temple; gi∣ving herselfe to religious and pious exercises, of fasting, and prayer, continually, upon all occasions. 38 And spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Ierusa∣lem.And spake of him, to all them which looked for the comming of the Messiah, for the redemption of Israel. And Jesus, the Sonne of God, who had taken upon him the condition of our humanity, did accordingly subject himselfe to the infirmities,40 And the child grew & waxed strong in Spirit, filled with wisedome, and the grace of God was up∣on him. and growthes there∣of; as therefore hee would grow in stature of body, so also in respect of his humane soule, he grew, and increa∣sed in the qualities, and graces thereof, in wisedome, and knowledge; so as, according to the proportion of his age, the free gifts of the Spirit were augmented in, & upon him. 49 Wist yee not that I must bee about my Fathers businesse?Did ye not know, and consider, that howsoever I am ready to give all due respects to thee, as my mother, ac∣cording to the flesh, and to Joseph, as my reputed fa∣ther, yet that I have another Father (even the great and
glorious God of heaven) whose businesse I must goe a∣bout; and if in comparison of his services, I doe seeme to neglect you, it is not for you to thinke much of it. See vers. 40.52 And Iesus increased in wisedome, & stature, & fa∣vour with God and man. CAP. III. Vnder the high-priesthood both of Annas the father in law to Caiphas, and of Caiphas,2 Annas and Caiphas being the high Priest, the word of God came un∣to Iohn the Sonne of Za∣charias in the wildernesse. sonne in law to Annas, ruling successively; so as John preached in the severall yeares wherein they succeeded in government to each other. See Isay. 40.3,4 The voice of one crying in the wildernesse, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his pathes straight. 4.5 Every valley shall be filled, and every, &c. See Matth. 3.7▪7 Oh generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? See Matth. 3.8,8 Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repen∣tance, and begin not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our father; for I say unto you, that God is able of, &c. 9. See Matt. 3.10.9 And now also the axe is laid unto the roote of the trees: every tree therefore, &c. Bee yee so charitably affected,11 Hee that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none: and he that hath meate, let him do likewise. as that yee can be well contented to part with whatsoever is superfluous to you, for the reliefe of the necessity of those that want. Doe not grate on the subject, in exacting more tri∣bute,13 Exact no more than that which is appointed you. and larger fees than the law hath appointed for you.
16 I indeed baptise you with water, but one mightier than I commeth, the latchet of whose &c.See Matth. 3.11. 17 Whose fanne is in his hand, and he will tho∣rowly purge his floore, and will gather the wheate, &c.See Matth. 3.12. 22 And the holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, &c.See Matth. 3.16. 23. And Iesus himselfe began to bee about thirtie yeares of age, being (as was supposed) the sonne of Ioseph.And Jesus himselfe was now entring into the thirti∣eth yeare of his age; being (as was supposed) the sonne of Joseph, but indeed the Sonne of the onely true God, who gave flesh unto him by the miraculous power of his Spirit, of the substance of the virgin Mary; which Mary was the espoused wife of Joseph; and her naturall father was Heli, the father in law to Joseph; which Heli was the naturall sonne of Matthat, &c. CAP. IIII. 1 And was led by the spirit into the wildernesse.See Matth. 4.1. 4 It is written that man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.See Matth. 4.4. And Jesus who in all his motions, and actions was di∣rected,14 And Iesus returned in the power of the Sp∣rit into Galilee, and there went out a fame of him, &c. and led by the holy Spirit; returned by the power of the same Spirit into Galilee, after his bap∣tisme. 18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, &c.See Esay. 61.1. 23 And hee said unto them; yee will surely say unto mee this proverbe: Physician heale thy selfe: whatsoever wee have heard done in Caperna∣um: doe also here in thy country.Yee are ready to take up this proverbe against mee; Physician heale thy selfe: Sir, begin with your owne, ere you looke to the winning of others with your miracles; you have done wonders in Capernaum, why doe yee not gratifie your owne country rather with your mira∣culous workes? 20 But hee passing tho∣row the middest of them, went his way.But he by his divine power restraining their violence, and delivering himselfe from their hands, went away from them.
CAP. V. OH Lord,8 When Simon Peter saw it, he fell downe at Ie∣sus knees, saying; depart from me, for I am a sinfull man, (O Lord) I am not worthy to have the honour of thy presence in this ship of mine; for I am a sinfull man, and therefore depart thou away from me. See Matth. 4.19.10 From henceforth thou shalt catch men. See Matth. 9.6.24 But that yee may know the Son of man hath power, &c. See Matth. 9.9.27 Sitting at the receit of custome. See Matth. 9.13.32 I came not to call the righteous, &c. See Matth. 9.15.34 Can yee make the children of the bridecham∣ber fast whiles the Bride∣groome is with them? See Matth. 9.16,36 No man putteth a peece of a new garment upon an old, &c. 17.37 And no man put∣teth new wine into old bottels, &c. CAP. VI. Surely, the very not doing of good, when we may,9 Is it lawfull on the Sabbath daies to do good, or to do evill, to save life? &c. is evill; to forbeare the giving cure to this distressed man, would come justly under this taxation. Tell mee there∣fore, whether is it lawfull to doe good on the Sabbath day by healing this man, or evill by refusing to heale him, &c. See Matth. 5.3.20 Blessed are ye poore, for yours is the kingdome of heaven. Woe bee to you that pamper your selves;25 Woe bee unto you that are full, for yee shall hunger: wo unto you that laugh now, for yee shall mourne and weepe. with plen∣ty of all earthly delicates; feasting your selves without feare; for the time shall come wherein ye shall bee held short of all worldly comforts; and bee pinched with ex∣tremity of want. See Matth. 5.39.29 And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheeke, offer also the o∣ther, and him, &c.
37 Iudge not, and yee shall not be judged: con∣demne not, and yee shall not be condemned, &c.See Matth. 7.1. CAP. VII. 8 For I also am a man set under authority, ha∣ving under mee souldiers, &c.See Matth. 8.9, 10.9 I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel. 20 Art thou he, or shall we looke for another?See Matth. 11.2.3. 24 What went yee into the wildernesse for to see, a reed shaken with the winde?See Matth. 11.7, 8.25 But what went yee out for to see, &c.? 28 Among those that are borne of women, there is not a greater Prophet than, &c.See Matth. 11.11. 31 Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation, and to what are they like?See Matth. 11.16, 17,32 They are like unto children sitting in, &c. 18,33 For Iohn the Bap∣tist came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine, and yee say he hath, &c. 19.34 The Sonne of man is come eating and drink∣ing, and yee say, beh ld a gluttonous man, and a wine, &c. 35 But wisedome is justified of all her chil∣dren. 37 And behold, a wo∣man in the City, which was a sinner.And behold, a woman in the City, who was noted for an infamous offender, hearing, &c. 47 Wherefore I say un∣to thee, her sinnes which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little.She findes that her sinnes are many, and that those her many sinnes are (upon her repentance) forgiven to her; and in the sense of that mercy from me her Saviour, shee loveth much. 50 Thy faith hath sa∣ved thee, goe in peace.That faith of thine, which hath moved thee to
have recourse unto me for mercy and forgivenesse, hath delivered thee from the danger of all thy sinnes, and put thee into the state of salvation. Goe now away in the peace of a good conscience, and bee comforted in God, who hath remitted thee. CAP. VIII. MAry, called Magdalene,2 Mary, called Mag∣dalen, out of whom went seven devills. who had beene possessed with many devills, which were ejected by his power. And other faithfull Matrons,3 And many others which ministred unto him of their substance. who in a thankefull ac∣knowlegement of Christs mercy to them, (according to the usuall manner of those countries) attended him in his journy; and being wealthy ministred to him of their substance. See Matth. 5.15.16 No man when hee hath ligted a candle, co∣vereth it with a vessell, or putteth it under a bed, but &c. See Matth. 10.26.17 Nothing is secret, that shall not be made ma∣nifest; neither any thing hid &c See Matth. 12.49, 50.21 My mother and my brethren are these which heare the word of God. What speakest thou of a meere bodily touch?46 And Iesus said, some body hath touched me, for I perceive that vertue is gone out of me. I know many doe thus touch me without any sensible effect; but now I feele a touch of faith, which hath so wrought up∣on me, as to fetch vertue from me. See Matth. 9.24.52 He said, weepe not, shee is not dead, but slee∣peth. CAP. IX. See Matth. 10.14.5 Shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them. See Matth. 16.28.27 But I tell you of a truth, there be some stan∣ding here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdome of God.
33 Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us make three Tabernacles, &c.See Matth. 17.4. 41 O faithlesse and per∣verse generation! how long shall I be with you, and suffer you, &c?See Matth. 17.17. 50 For, hee that is not against us, is with us.See Marke 9.39. 51 When the time was come that hee should be received up, he stedfast∣ly set his face to goe to Ierusalem.When the time of his suffering drew neare, hee put on firme resolutions (notwithstanding all the malice and practices of his enemies) to goe up to Jerusalem. And they of that Samaritan village (professing to beare a great hatred to the Jewes) refused to lodge him and his;53 And they did not receive him, because his face was as though hee would goe to Ierusalem. because they saw great reason to thinke they were Jewes, and that their errand was to goe up to Je∣rusalem. 55 But hee turned, and rebuked them, and said; yee know not what man∣ner spirit ye are of.Yee doe not well consider whence this so uncharitable motion comes; from what temper, from what spirit; surely not from the spirit of meekenesse, which would best become you; but from a fiery and furious spirit of rash and mis-governed zeale, which transporteth you. 58 Foxes have holes, and birds of the aire have nests, but the sonne of man. &c.See Matth. 8.20. 60 Let the dead bury their dead: but goe thou and preach the kingdome of God.See Matth. 8.22. If thou doe once put thy hand to this husbandry of God,62 No man having put his hand to the plow, and looking backe, is fit for the kingdome of God. it is not for thee to cast backe thy thoughts upon the world; for whosoever shall so doe, makes & shewes himself unfit for this spirituall imploymēt in my Church. CAP. X. 1 After these things the Lord appointed other se∣venty also, and sent them two an two before his face, into every city and place whither he himselfe would come.AFter these things were done, and that Jesus was re∣turned from Galilee to Judea, hee appointed (besides the twelve which had together with himselfe preached the Gospell in Galilee) seaventie Disciples also; and sent them two and two, before him, into every citie of Judea, whither he would come after them. 2 The harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few, &c.See Matth. 9.37. 4 Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor, &c.See Matth. 10.10.
See Matth. 10.11.7 And in the same house remaine eating and drink∣ing such things, as, &c. See Matth. 10.14.11 Even the very dust of your citie which clea∣veth on us, wee doe wipe, &c. See Matth. 11.21.13 For if the mightie workes had beene done in Tyre and Sydon, which have, &c. See Matth. 11.23.15 And thou Caperna∣um, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust downe to hell. He said unto them,18 And hee said unto them, I beheld satan, as lightning, fall from heaven. I saw the power of satan sensibly abated, and suddenly dejected by this your preaching of the Gospell; even as when hee first fell downe from hea∣ven, and was suddenly cast downe to hell. Behold,19 Behold I give unto you power to tread on ser∣pents, and scorpions, and over all the powers of the enemi and nothing shall by any meanes hurt you. I give you power over all whatsoever crea∣tures are in their nature hurtfull unto men, whether by their poyson, or by their teeth, or sting; and over whatso∣ever the malice of devils might use to your harme and offence, so as nothing that men, or noysome creatures, or devils can do unto you shall be able to hurt you. Yet,20 Notwithstanding in this rejoyce not, that the spirits are subject unto you: but rather rejoice, be∣cause your names are writ∣ten in heaven. be not you puffed up with this wonderfull pri∣viledge; neither thinke that you have so much cause to rejoice in this powerfull command over the uncleane spirits, as in this great mercy of God towards you, that  hath from eternitie ordained you to everlasting life. See Matth. 11.25.21 I thanke thee, O Fa∣ther, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou, &c. But he willing to have taken occasion hereby to brag of his owne answerablenesse to the law of God,29 But hee willing to justifie himselfe, said unto Iesus, And who is my neighbour? in that hee had beene kinde and loving to his neighbours that dwelt by him; said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbour? The one was a Priest, and therefore by his very place,36 Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him, that fell among the theeves? professing examples of holinesse and charity; the other was a Levite, of the same holy Tribe, consecrated to the seruice of God; and both of these were Jewes; and there∣fore native country-men to this wounded traveller; yet they passed by him without regard; The Samaritan was a stranger in blood, and in religion faulty and opposite; an enemie in profession; yet in his compassion, did chari∣table offices to the releefe of this distressed man; tell me now, thou which art wont to measure neighbour∣hood by vicinity of place, which of these three was neighbour to the man which fell among the theeves?
38 Now it came to passe as they went, that hee entred into a certaine vil∣lage: and a certaine woman named Martha received him into her house.He entered into the village of Bethanie, to the house of Lazarus, and Martha, and Mary his sisters; and Martha, as the elder sister, and the busier huswife, intertained him and his followers in her house. But Martha, as being very busily intentive upon the provision for him,40 But Martha was cumbred about much ser∣ving, and came to him, and said, Lord dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that shee helpe me. and his familie, and finding the worke too laboursome to lie upon her hands alone, came to Jesus, and said; Lord, it is for thy sake, that I gladly take this paines; and should not grudge it, and more unto thee, were I but able to compasse it; but thou seest I want helpe whiles my sister sits here, still hearing that good counsell from thee, which some other time might be more seasonable, let it please thee therefore to com∣mand her to give me her aide for this necessary service. 41 And Iesus answe∣red and said unto her, Mar∣tha, Martha, thou art care∣full and troubled about ma∣ny things.And Jesus answered, and said; Martha, Martha, I do well see thou art lovingly carefull to give us all kinde, and liberall intertainment, and therefore bestirrest thy selfe about many businesses, which thou findest requisite to the making of that good cheer, which thou providest. 41 But one thing is need∣full, and Mary hath chosen that good part.But when thou hast all done, these bodily provisions, and intertainments, are but matters of the bye; outward complements and ceremonies of kindnesse; it is the good of the soule, which is the maine matter that is to be re∣garded; I must tell thee therefore, though I must thank∣fully acknowledge thy friendly respects to me, in this labour of thine, yet I cannot but more commend thy sisters diligent, and holy attention to this heavenly doctrine which hath beene delivered to her; she hath done that which is both more pleasing to mee, and more profitable and happy for her selfe, in laying up those in∣structions, and comforts, which shall sticke by her soule for ever. CAP. XI. 3 Give us day by day our dayly bread.GIve us that provision of maintenance for this present life which may be fit and requisite for it; and be plea∣sed to proportion thy gifts to our necessities; we doe not distrustfully cast forward, and crave the supply of a large store for the time to come; but wee begge of thee a suffi∣ciencie for the present day, desiring to depend ever upon thy gratious providence, for the daily renuing of our competent provisions. 4 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evill.Do thou not give us over into the hands of Satan, our spirituall enemie, to tempt us, for wee know our owne
weakenesse and disabilitie to resist him, and whensoe∣ver it shall please thee, for our triall, and thy glory, to give way to that tempter to assault us, give us the issue, together with the temptation: shew thy selfe strong in our weaknesse, and let not that evill one prevaile against us. See Matth. 12.24.15 He casteth out devils through Belzebub the chiefe of the devils. See Matth. 12.26.18 If Satan also be divi∣ded against himselfe, how shall, &c? See Matth. 12.27.20 But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, &c. See Matth. 12.43. &c.24 When the uncleane spirit is gone out of a man, &c. 25 And when hee com∣meth hee findes it swept, and garnished, &c. It is indeed a great honour and happinesse to her,28 But hee said, yea ra∣ther blessed are they that heare the word of God and keepe it. that is my mother, according to the flesh, that she should be chosen out of all women-kinde, to beare and nourish the Lord of life: yet her chiefe happinesse consisteth not in this, but rather in that her right and interest, which shee hath in me by her faith; this is that happinesse wherein all ye my faithfull disciples may also communicate with her; Blessed are they that heare the word of God, and do carefully and conscionably retaine, observe, and pra∣ctise it. See Matth. 12.39.29 This is an evill gene∣ration, they sek a signe, and there shall no signe be given, &c. See Matth. 12.40.30 For as Ionas was a signe &c. See Matth. 12.42.31 The Queene of the South shall rise up in the judgemet with, &c. See Matth. 5.15.33 No man when hee hath lighted a candle, put∣teth it in a &c. See Matth. 6.22.34 The light of the bo∣dy is the eye; therefore when thine, &c. See Matth. 23.25.39 Now doe ye Phari∣sees make cleane the out∣side of the, &c. See Matth. 23.23.42 For ye tithe Mint, and Rue, and all manner of herbes, and passe over Iudgements, and the love of God, &c.
46 For yee lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, and yee your selves touch t the bur∣dens with one of your fin∣gers.See Matth. 23.4. 47 For ye build the Se∣pulchers of the Prophets, and your fathers killed them.See Matth. 23.29. 48 Truly, ye beare wit∣nesse, that yee allow the deeds of your fathers, for they indeed, &c.See Matth. 23.30. 50 That the blood of all the Prophets, which was shed from the foun∣dation of the world, &c.See Matth. 23.35. 52 For yee have taken away the key of know∣ledge: yee entred not in your selves.See Matth. 23.13. CAP. XII. 1 The leaven of the Pharisees which is hypo∣crisie.See Matth. 16.6. 2 For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid, that &c.See Matth. 10.26. 6 Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten, &c?See Matth. 10.29. 10 And whosoever shall speake a word against the Sonne of man, it shall be forgiven him, &c?See Matth. 11.31. 21 So is he that layeth up treasure for himselfe, and is not rich towards God.Loe even such a foole, and so fraile and uncertaine, yea, so sure of the revenging hand of God, is that man, whose heart is set upon these earthly riches, without all care of procuring true grace, which onely is able to enrich his soule. 49 I am come to send fire on the earth, and wht will I, if it be already kindled?The issue of my Gospell shall be such, as if I had come purposely, to set divisions in the bosomes of men, against themselves, and with one another for the corruption of men will be stirred, and disquieted with the powerfull preaching thereof, and will be ready to raise broiles in the world; and then onely doth my word prevaile, and
worke effectually, when it is followed with such suc∣cesse; I cannot therefore but earnestly wish this holy fire of grace kindled in the hearts of men for the opposing, and wasting of their inward corruptions. So also verse 51. I have beene already baptized with water,50 But I have a bap∣tisme to be baptized with, and how am I straitned till it be accomplished. but there is another baptisme that I must undergoe, even a baptisme of blood, and how am I pained with the expectation thereof, longing to be past that extremitie of suffering which is ordained for mee, for mans redemption. See Matth. 16.3.56 Ye hypocrites, yee can discerne the face of the skie, and of the earth: but how &c. See Matth. 5.25.58 When thou goest with thine adversary to the Magistrate, as thou art in the, &c. CAP. XIII. ANd behold, there was a woman upon whom Satan,11 And behold there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmitie eigh∣teene yeares, was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her selfe. by the permission of God, had inflicted a grievous bodily infirmitie for the space of eighteene yeares toge∣ther; whereby she was so bowed together, that she could not lift herselfe up. So verse 16. See Matth. 13.31.32.19 It is like a graine of mustard-seede which a man tooke▪ and cast into his garden, &c. See Matth. 13.33.21 It is like leven, which a woman tooke and hid in three measures of meale, &c. Inforce your selves to use all diligent and vehement in∣deavours to enter into the kingdome of heaven;24 Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you will seeke to enter, in and shall not be able. ye shall finde much difficultie and opposition in your attaining thereto; resolve therefore to buckle with all the troubles and daungers, that shall lie in your way; else ye shall ne∣ver be able to compasse it; for there are many, I say unto you, which will heartlesly wish for it; and faintly move towards it, and yet shall faile of entring thereunto. When once the oportunities of this present life,25, 26 When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the doore, & ye begin to stand without, and to knocke at the doore, saying; Lord, Lord, open unto us, & he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are; then shall ye begin to say, wee have eaten & drunke in thy pre∣sence, and thou &c. (which is the time of grace,) are past, in vaine shall ye
then hope to challenge favour or respect from God for these outward privileges which yee have had above o∣ther nations. 29 And they shall come from the East, & from the West, & from the North, &c.See Matth. 8.11. I know that subtile Tyrant, who hath shed the bloud of my fore-runner,32, 33. Goe ye and tell that foxe, behold I cast out devills, and I do cures to day & to morrow, and the third day I shall bee perfected. Neverthelesse I must walke to day and to morrow, and the day fol∣lowing: for it cannot bee that a Prophet perish out of Ierusalem. is hunting after my death also; but tell him from me, that my times are set in the eternall counsell of God, wherein I shall doe these miraculous workes of ejecting devills, and healing diseases; and when my prefixed time is accomplished, for my labours, and sufferings, I shall in spight of the opposition of earth and hell, be perfected, and injoy my full glory. But in the meane time I must do my appointed services; and make account to yeeld my selfe over (when my day is come) into the hands of mine enemies in Jerusalem: for it can∣not be (so is that City inured to the bloud of Gods mes∣sengers) that a Prophet should bee suffered to die else∣where. 34 How often would I have gathered thy chil∣dren together, as a hen. &c?See Matth. 23.37. CAP. XIV. 15 Blessed is hee that shall eate bread in the kingdome of God.WEE are here at an earthly feast, where we partake of transitory, and perishing delicates; but how happy are they which shall bee admitted to taste of the heavenly provisions, in the glorious kingdome of God. 21 Goe out quickly in∣to the streets, and lanes of the City, and bring in &c.See Matth. 22.9. 23 And the Lord said unto the servant, goe out into the high wayes, and hedges, &c.See Matth. 22.10. 26 If any man come to mee, and hate not his fa∣ther, and mother▪ & wife, and children, & brethren, and sisters; yea and his owne life also, hee cannot be my disciple.If any man come to mee, and cannot bee content for my sake to neglect, and disregard his father, and mo∣ther, &c. and his very life also, if they stand in opposition to me, or offer to hinder him from enjoying me, he cannot bee worthy to beare the name of my disciple.
Whosoever will enter into the profession of Chri∣stianity,28, 29, 31. For which of you intending to build a tower, sitteth not downe first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it, lest happly af∣ter hee hath laid the foun∣dation, & is not able to fi∣nish it, all that behold it, be¦gin to mocke him; or, what king going to make warre against another king, sit∣teth not down first, & con∣sulteth whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that commeth against him with twenty thou∣sand. must make account of the worst, and utmost that it can cost him: and set it downe with his owne heart to undergoe resolutely all the difficulties that shall or can encounter him; even as a man that goes about to build a tower, or to meete some potent enemy in the field, will bee sure to fore-cast the cost, and perill of that enterprise, lest at last being overtaken in his recko∣ning, he give over, or be foyled with shame. See Matth. 5.13.34 Salt is good; but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be sea∣soned? CAP. XV. See Matth. 18..13.6 And when he com∣meth home, he calleth to∣gether his friends & neigh∣bours, saying unto thē, &c. The sinner that goes on in a course of wickednesse,7 I say unto you, that likewise joy shall bee in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninty & nine just per∣sons, which need no re∣pentance. may well be given for lost, by Angels and men: when such a one therefore repenteth, and converteth unto God, it must needs be much more cause of joy to all that tender the glory of God, than the inoffensive procee∣ding of those, which gave no cause of feare of their mis∣carriage. So verse 8, 9, 10. It is with God,11, 12, 13, &c. And hee said; A certaine man had two sonnes, And the yon∣ger of them said to his fa∣ther; father, give mee the portion of goods that fal∣leth to me; and he divided unto them his living. And not many daies after, the yonger sonne gathered all together, & tooke his jour∣ney into a farre country, and there wasted his sub∣stance with riotous living. and the two sorts of men in the world (the sinfull, and professedly righteous) as it is with the father that had two sonnes. The yonger, which was wild, and debauched, would needs spend his patrimony riotously; and at last, being pinched with want, returnes home to his father, miserable, but penitent; and is gra∣ciously (though unworthy) received to favour, with much joy for his recovery. The elder keepes on an harmelesse, and inoffensive course; (and though well accepted alwaies) yet is not so much rejoyced in, at any
one time, as his unthristie brother, which was accoun∣ted but as dead, and lost, by his wise and loving father. Right so it is with God in his carriage towards civill, and well ordered persons, on the one side, and those that are reclaimed from a leud and scandalous life, on the other &c. CAP. XVI. 8 And the Lord com∣mended the unjust stew∣ard, because hee had done wisely: for the children of this world are in their ge∣neration wiser than the children of light.ANd the Lord commended the witty device, and cun∣ning shift, which the unjust steward had made for himselfe; as it is commonly seene, that worldly-minded men are more suttle in the contriving of their affaires to their owne advantage, than Gods children are in the projecting and managing of better businesses. 9 And I say unto you, make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousnes, that when ye faile, they may receive you into everlasting habi∣tations.And I say unto you; Learne this wit of the unjust steward, so to order and dispose of these worldly riches (which are seldome other than unduly gotten by their owners) as that ye may make to your selves many friends by them; that upon this charitable, and advantagious improvement of them, yee may reape the comfort, and benefit of them, at your departure hence, and may bee received into everlasting habitations. 13 No servant can serve two masters, for ei∣ther, &c.See Matth. 6.24. 16 The law and the Prophets were untill Iohn, since that time, &c.See Matth. 11.12, 13. 17 And it is easier for heaven and earth to passe, than one &c.See Matth. 5.18. 19 There was a cer∣taine rich man, which was cloathed in purple, & fine linnen, and fared sumptu∣ously every day, &c.Heare yee this historicall parable. There was a cer∣taine great rich man, who was sumptuously arrayed, and delicately fed every day, being altogether given to his pleasure, and jollity. 21 And desiring to bee fed with the crums, which fell from the rich mans ta∣ble; moreover the dogges came, and licked his sores.His misery was great, yet hee begged no other supply of it, than that which was granted to the dogs, unasked, even the very crummes that fell from the table; yet these being denyed him, he lay comfortlesse at the rich mans gate; ready, as it were, to give up the Ghost, insomuch as the very dogs came forth to him, as to an helplesse, and dying man, and fell to licking his ulcerous sores.
And was carried, by the Angels of God,22 And was carried by the Angels into Abrahams bosome; the rich man also dyed, and was buried. into that place of rest and hapinesse, where Abraham the father of the faithfull, injoyeth the blessed participation of the glory of God and his Saints; and was there placed in the bosome of that glorious Patriarch at the full table of heaven. So verse 23. Besides that, God by his unchangeable decree,26 And besides all this, betweene us and you, there is a great gulfe fixed, so that they which would passe from hence to you, &c. hath set such a distance betwixt this place of rest, and that of torment, as that, there is no possibility of passage from the one to the other Thou callest mee father, and therefore professest thy selfe, and thy brethren to bee of my nation, Jewes.31 And hee said unto him, if they heare not Mo∣ses and the Prophets, nei∣ther will they bee perswa∣ded though one rose from the dead. Be∣ing Jewes therefore, they have the guidance and infor∣mation of the law, and the Prophets; and if their infide∣lity be such, as that they will not beleeve so cleare evi∣dences, as there are offered unto them: surely, neither will they bee convinced by the Testimony of one risen from the dead. CAP. XVII. See Matth. 18.7.1 It is impossible but that offences will come, but woe unto him, &c. See Matth. 18.6.2 It were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his, &c. So likewise ye,10 So likewise, ye when ye shall have done all those things which are comman∣ded you; say, we are unpro∣fitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to doe. if yee could performe all that is com∣manded you, yet yee must be forced to say; Alas Lord, we can challenge nothing from thee; it was our duty to do all that which we have done, we cannot hope to raise any advantage to our selves by our utmost endeavours. See Matth. 24.27.24 For as the lightning that lightneth out of the one part under heaven, &c. See Matth. 24.40.31 In that night he which shall bee on the house top, and his stuffe in &c. See Matth. 24.28.37 Wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles bee gathered toge∣ther.
CAP. XVIII. 7 And shall not God avenge his owne Elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he beare long with them?IF the very unrighteous Judge yeelded so farre to the importunity of the poore widdow, as to satisfie her desire; how much more shall the holy & mercifull God bee moved by the importunate prayers of his Elect; to revenge them upon their enemies; though hee doe yet forbeare them with long patience. 8 I tell you that hee will avenge them speedi∣ly: neverthelesse when the Sonne of man com∣meth, shall hee finde faith on the earth?I tell you that he will surely take speedy vengeance on them: hee will not slacke the time as men count slack∣nesse, but will come in his determined season to execute justice on their cruell persecutors; whose rage shall bee so great, and so prevalent, that there shall scarce be any faith found upon the earth, when the Sonne of man com∣meth. 14 I tell you, this man went downe to his house, justified, rather than the other; for every one that exalteth himselfe, shall be abased; and hee that humbleth himselfe, shall be exalted.I tell you, this Publican, how sinfull, how despised soever, returned home with better acceptation from God, than that other proud Pharisee, that stood upon points of his owne justification and holinesse. 19 Why callest thou me good: none is good save one, that is God.See Matth. 19.17. 22 Yet lackest thou one thing: Sell all, &c.See Matth. 19.21. 25 It is easier for a ca∣mell to goe thorow a needles eye, than for a rich &c.See Matth. 19.24. 29 Verily I say unto you, there is no man that hath left house or parents, &c.See Matth. 19.29. CAP. XIX. 8 Behold Lord, the halfe of my goods, I give to the poore, and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourefold.BEhold Lord, thy presence and power hath so wrought upon me, that now I doe professe for thy sake, to re∣nounce the world; and doe therefore make my will of that estate which I have; some good part of my substance I know to be lawfully gotten, as being left to bee for my patrimony; or honestly raised; howsoever, some o∣ther part of it hath beene increased by extortion, and in∣justice.
I would gladly give all to the poore, were it not that I must reserve some for just restitution. One halfe therefore I give to the poore, and out of the other halfe, I am ready to restore fourefold to any man, whom I have wronged by unjust exaction, and false accu∣sation. Behold, Zacheus; thou losest not by the bargaine:9 And Iesus said un∣to him, this day is salvati∣on come to this house, for so much as he also is the sonne of Abraham. for, instead of this transitory riches, which thou thus dis∣posest of, thou doest this day receive the tender of sal∣vation, which shall bee both to thy selfe, and thy family: see yee, my disciples, what an happy change this man hath made: for, whereas before hee was an alien from the common wealth of Israel, now hee is become a sonne of faithfull Abraham. See Matth. 25.14, 15:13 And hee called his ten servants, and delive∣red them ten pounds, and said, unto them, occupie till I come. See Matth. 25.18.20 And another came saying, Lord; behold here is thy pound which, &c. See Matth. 25, 24, & 25, &c.21 For I feared thee be∣cause thou art an austere man: thou takest, &c. See Matth. 25.29.26 That unto every one which hath shall be given, and from him that hath not, even, &c. See Matth. 21.12, 13.45, 46 And he went into the Temple, and began to cast out them that solde therein, and them that bought, saying unto them; It is written, my house is the house of prayer; but ye have made &c. CAP. XX. See Matth. 21.44.18 Whosoever shall fall upon that stone, shall be broken; but on, &c.
22 Is it lawfull for us to give tribute unto Ce∣sar or no.See Matth. 22.17. 25 Give unto Cesar the things which be Cesars, and unto God the things which be Gods.See Matth. 22.20, 21. 34, 35, 36. The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage: But they which shall be ac∣counted worthy to ob∣taine that world, and the resurrection from the dead neither marry, nor are given in marriage: neither can they die any more, for they, &c.See Matth. 22.29, 30, 31. 41 How say they that Christ is Davids sonne.See Matth. 22.43.45. CAP. XXI. 21 Then let them which are in Iudea flee to the mountaines, and let them which are in the midst of it, depart out, &c.See Matth. 24.16. 23 But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give, &c.See Matth. 24.19. 25 And there shall be signes in the Sun, and in the Moone, and in the starres, and upon the earth, &c.See Matth. 24.29. 29 Behold the fig-tree, and all the trees.See Matth. 24.32. 32 This generation shall not passe away till all be fulfilled.See Matth. 24.34. 34 And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be over∣charged, with surfetting and drunkennesse, and cares of this life, &c.See Matth. 24.35.
CAP. XXII. THen Satan by a strong temptation possessed himselfe of the heart of Judas,3 Then entred Satan in∣to Iudas, surnamed Isca∣riot, being of the number of the twelve. being one of the domestique attendants of Christ. See Matth. 26.29.18 For I say unto you, I will not drinke of the fruit of the vine, untill the kingdome of God shall come. See Matth. 26.28.20 Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, this cup is the new Testament, &c. See Matth. 20.25.25 The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lord∣ship over them, and they that exercise authority up∣on them are called bene∣factors. Simon, Simon, Satan, that malicious adversary of mankinde, hath earnestly sued for permission to put you to an exquisite and full tryall,31, 32. Simon, Simon, be∣hold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy faith faile not, and when thou art converted streng∣then thy brethren. as wheat is tried in the sanne, not for the purging and cleansing of you, but for your utter despersion and destruction; ye shall be in dan∣ger of his strong assaults: but for thee Simon, whose temptation shall be strongest, and perill most, I have prayd for thee, that, however thou shalt be hardly laid at, and thy faith may waver and stagger, by the power of those onsets, yet that it may not utterly faile, and be either wholly, or finally lost. But now, ye will have neede of all the provisions,36 But now, he that hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip, and hee that hath no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one. that yee can make, whether of mony or weapons; for there will be too much occasion of the use of both, both in respect of your destitution, and that violence, which will be offered to mee. See Matth. 26.39.42 Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me, &c. CAP. XXIII. YE women of Jerusalem, ye se nothing now in me that doth not aggravate misery;28 Daughters of Ierusa∣lem, weepe not for me, but weepe for your selves, and for your children. and therefore ye (not considering my inward grounds of assurance and com∣fort) spend your selves in teares for me; but forbeare this weeping of yours; and reserve your teares rather for
those grievous miseries and calamities, which are ready to seize upon you, and your children. 29 For behold the dayes are comming, in which they shall say, blessed are the barren, and the wombe that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck.For ere long, the dayes shall come, wherein it shall be griefe enough to the mother to thinke, that she hath children, which must be exposed to so cruell slaughters; and shall envie, and blesse those that are barren, and childlesse. I am as a greene, and sappy plant, this people is a seare and drie tree;31 For if they doe these things in a greene tree, what shall be done in the drie. It is the seare wood, and not the greene and juicie, that is for the fire: If then the hardest measure of death be inflicted upon mee, how much lesse shall the vengeance of God forbeare those whom their horrible sinnes have made fit matter for his wrath, and displeasure. 42 And he said unto Ie∣sus, Lord remember mee when thou commest in thy kingdome.Lord, howsoever I am now justly dying for my of∣fence; and howsoever thou art now in a despicable, and forlorne condition, ready to yield up thy life also, yet I know and see by the eyes of my faith, that there is a glorious kingdome prepared for thee, whereof after thy dissolution thou shalt receive the happy and everlasting possession: O then remember thou mee in that glory of thine, who am now a just partner in that shame and paine which thou unjustly sufferest, even after my death, I may be capable of happinesse with thee; Remember me when thou comest into thy kingdome. 43 And Iesus said unto them, verily I say unto thee, To day, thou shalt be with me in paradise.Since thy faith hath looked thus through my suffer∣ings, to my ensuing glory, be thou assured, that I who have wrought this confidence in thee, will crowne it; Comfort thy selfe therefore in thy death, with the cer∣taintie of thine immediate happinesse: This very day shall thy soule be received up into glory with mee; This day shalt thou injoy my presence in that happie para∣dise of heaven. CAP. XXIV. 5 Why seeke ye the li∣ving among the dead?WHy doe ye seeke for a living man in the graves of the dead? 16 But their eyes were holden that they should not know him.But God did so worke upon the senses of these two men, that their eyes were held from being able to discerne him; so as they tooke him for a stranger. 32 And they said one to another, did not our heart burne within vs, whiles he talked with us, by the way, and while hee opened to us the Scriptures?Did wee not feele an extraordinary working of his Spirit within us, whiles he talked with us by the way?
Why are ye affrighted,39 Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my selfe: handle me, and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. as if it were some spirit that appeared unto you, let all your senses search and trie me; handle mee, and convince your selves of the truth of my humane body; a spirit is an immateriall substance, and hath not flesh and bones, as ye see and feele me to have. Not out of any necessity, or use of nature,43 And he tooke it, and did eate before them. but to give unto them a more full proofe of his true humane body, now raised up from the dead, hee tooke that fish, and hony-combe, and did eate before them. THE GOSPELL OF St IOHN. CAP. I. IN and before the beginning of the world,1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the word was God. the Sonne of God who is the eternall, and essenti∣all Word of the Father, had a true and perfect being; and that word was coeternall with God the Father, and the holy Ghost; and that Word was in essence one and the same with God the Father, and the holy Spirit. The same Word (though hee appeared not to the world,2 The same was in the beginning with God. untill the fulnesse of time) yet was from ever∣lasting with God the Father, and of one essence with him. He was the Almighty Creator of all things;3 All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. for the Father made all things by him; neither is, nor was there any thing that had a being in the world, but from and by him, and his omnipotent power. He did not onely give a being to the creature,4 In him was life, and the life was the light of men. at the first, but he also gave, and doth still continue the life, and preservation of those things which he hath made, and as he hath both given and preserved a life to the rest of his creatures, so to man especially, hee hath pleased to give such a life, as is joyned with the light of understanding and knowledge, whereby hee may come to the sight and acknowledgement of him who is the author and giver of all good to him:
5 And the light shineth in darkenesse, and the darknesse comprehendeth it not.It is true indeed, that the faculties of mans know∣ledge, and understanding, are now so overspred with darkenesse of ignorance and misconceit, that hee cannot rightly apprehend and conceive the things of God; yet the meanes of this divine knowledge are offered, and held forth unto him; howsoever the indisposition of mans depraved nature is such, that he doth not intertaine them, and make use of them accordingly. 6 There was a man sent from God, whose name was Iohn.There was a man fore-ordained and sent from God, to be the harbinger of that sonne of his into the world, whose name was (as it was fore-appointed by the Angel) John. 7 The same came for a witnesse, to beare witnesse of the light, that all men through him might be∣leeve.The same came purposely to beare witnesse of the truth of that Saviour, who is the light of the world; that through his testimony all men might be won to a be∣leefe in Christ their redeemer. 8 Hee was not that light, but was sent to beare witnesse of that light.This John was indeed a great and holy Prophet, but he was not that light, which God had fore-promised should shine forth into the world, for their redemption, and salvation; but was onely sent to give testimonie to that Messiah, whose fore-runner he was. 9 That was the true light, which lighteth eve∣ry man that commeth into the world.That blessed Messiah is hee, which was the true light that shined from heaven; and from whose beames every man in the world that hath any glimpse at all of right un∣derstanding, receiveth his illumination. 10 He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.He was for a time visibly here in the world, and though by his divine power the world was made, yet (so as he was shrouded in the state of a servant) the world did not know, nor acknowledge him. 11 Hee came unto his owne, and his owne re∣ceived him not.He came to his owne creature man, and that in mans owne shape; hee came to his owne peculiar people, the Jewes, (having taken flesh from one of that nation) yet, his owne creature man, his owne countrymen, the Jewes received him not. 12 But as many as re∣ceived him, to them gave hee power to become the sonnes of God, even to them that beleeve on his name.But to so many of mankinde, as did by a true faith re∣ceive him, to them he gave this blessed priviledge, that whereas formerly they were aliens from God, and ene∣mies to him, now, they should become the sonnes of God, heires of salvation. 13 Which were borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.To them, I say, which are truly regenerate: who be∣sides their naturall birth from their earthly parents, of whom they received flesh, and blood, have beene borne againe, and from the Spirit of God have received a new life of grace; which no meanes of nature could possibly convey into them. 41 And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten Son of the Father.And as this substantiall Word of the Father was from all eternitie, one Spirit with him and the holy Ghost, so
in the time appointed by the determinate counsell of God, he came into the world, and tooke flesh upon him, and dwelt among us men, in a plaine, familiar, and soci∣able manner; yet so, as wee that were his inward and do∣mesticall followers, and faithfull disciples, beheld (in that meane condition of his) many evident demonstra∣tions of his glory and majesty, even such glory and ma∣jesty as was meete for the onely begotten Sonne of the Eternall Father. For we that are of our selves emptie of all good,16 And of his fulnesse have all we received, and grace for grace. have from his infinite bountie, received all the good gifts that we injoy, and those spirituall graces which were without measure in himselfe, hath he pleased in a due proportion to communicate unto us, in those severall measures and degrees which he knowes fit for us. And if your thoughts flye backe to the ancient courses of Gods favour to his people by the hand of Moses, as if,17 For the law was gi∣ven by Moses, but grace and truth came by Iesus Christ. under and by him, grace were conveied to men; yet know, that howsoever the Law was indeed given by the hand of Moses, yet as the truth of those promises which were shadowed out in the Law is accomplished, and fulfilled in Jesus Christ, so the grace and power of performing all those good duties which the Law re∣quireth, is onely given by Christ, and wrought by his Spirit. God is in his nature and essence altogether invisible,18 No man hath seene God at any time: the one∣ly begotten Sonne which is in the bosome of the Fa∣ther he hath declared him. as being an infinite Spirit; no man hath ever, or can with mortall and bodily eyes, see him; wee could never of our selves hope to attaine unto the knowledge of him; the onely begotten Sonne therefore who is one with the Father, hath graciously revealed and declared the knowledge of him to the world; hee being the perfect image of his Father, by being himselfe mani∣fested in the flesh, hath manifested God the Father unto mee. I had no knowledge of him by any outward denota∣tions;33 And I knew him not: but he that sent me to bap∣tize with water, the same said unto me, upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remain∣ing on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. but the same God that sent me to baptize with water, gave me this charge, and revelation concerning him; That man upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit of God descending from heaven, in the forme of a dove, and remaining for some time, upon him, the same is that Messiah, whose forerunner thou art; hee it is onely, that together with the outward element of water, can give the holy Ghost, both in the sanctifying and miraculous graces thereof. I know thee already, Simon, who thou art,42 And he brought him to Iesus, and when Iesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon, the sonne of Iona; thou shalt bee called Cephas. even the sonne of Jona, an obscure father; but out of my fore∣knowledge
also of what thou shalt be; both of that faith which I will give thee, and of that service wherein I shall imploy thee; I will give thee from henceforth a new name: thou shalt be called Cephas, or Peter &c. 46 Can there any good thing come out of Naza∣reth? Philip saith unto him, come and see.Is it possible, that either Galilee; or, therein the ob∣scure village of Nazareth, should yeeld any such emi∣nent good thing as that Messias of whom thou speakest? wee have learned to expect him out of Bethleem; and how is it then that thou namest him of Nazareth? 51 Hereafter, yee shall see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending, and descending upon the Sonne of man.Hereafter yee shall see more cleare demonstrations of my divine power; for ye shall know, and finde, that the command of heaven is mine; so as, both I onely o∣pen it to all beleevers, and doe thence familiarly com∣mand the ministration of Angells for the attendance of mee and mine; and at the last, yee shall see heaven open, and me the Sonne of man, comming in a glorious and dreadfull manner, to Judgement, with all the atten∣dance of thousand thousands of Angels. CAP. II. THou, who art my parent according to the flesh, may∣est justly looke for all due respects from me,4 Iesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine houre is not yet come. in all earthly occasions; but when it comes to divine matters, the businesses of my heavenly Father; it is not for thee to interpose thy selfe; the will of God is knowne to me, and the times are in his most wise and eternall counsell set, when my miraculous workes shall be done; it is not, as yet, proper, and seasonable for me, to doe that which thou requirest; but when I see my meet season for this act, I will accordingly effect it. 6 And there were set there sixe water pots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Iewes, containing two or three firkins apeece.And there were sixe large vessells of stone, for the re∣ceit of water, for those frequent washings, which the Jewish traditions had brought into use; each of them containing two or three firkins; so as the measure of them was great, and farre more than the proportion of that quantitie of liquor which the present necessitie might seeme to require. 11 This beginning of miracles did Iesus in Ca∣na of Galilee, and manife∣sted forth his glory, and his disciples beleeved on him.This was the first of those miracles which he wrought, with intention of the publike notice of the world, for the manifestation of his glory, in the execution of this publike office of the Messias; and his disciples, upon the sight hereof, beleeved in him.
See Matth. 26.61.19 Iesus answered and said unto them, destroy this Temple, &c. Many beleeved in him,24 But Iesus did not commit himselfe unto them, because he knew all men. but Jesus did not relie upon their fidelity, because hee knew all the hearts of men: and therefore well understood, who were truly affected to him, and who were false and hollow; notwithstand∣ing their pretences of reverence, and kinde respects to him. CAP. III. THe same man, being on the one side,2 The same came to Iesus by night, & said un∣to him, Rabbi; wee know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can doe these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him. desirous to hold his reputation with the Jewes, and especially them of his own sect; & on the other side, one who secretly ho∣noured Jesus, and willing to be his disciple, came to Je∣sus by night, and said; Master, howsoever the envie of thine enemies is ready both to denie thee thy due, and to cast false imputations upon thee, yet wee doe well know thou art a teacher sent from God; for it is not possible for any man to doe those miracles which thou doest, but by a divine power. Thou hast indeed given a true confession of mee;3 Iesus answered, and said unto him; verily, ve∣rily, I say unto thee, ex∣cept a man be borne againe, hee cannot see the king∣dome of God. but this is not enough, without a reall change wrought in thy soule; let me therefore most certainely assure thee, that except a man bee regenerate and borne anew, he is not fit for that spirituall life, and holy profession, which is required of the children of God. Except a man bee borne againe by the effectuall wor∣king of Gods Spirit, as by the Author of this new birth;5 Iesus answered, ve∣rily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man bee borne of water, and of the Spirit, hee cannot enter in∣to the kingdome of God. and, (in the ordinary course of Gods proceedings, in his Church) by the water of Baptisme, as the signe appoin∣ted by God in the Sacrament of our regeneration, hee cannot enter into the kingdome of heaven. Wee receive nothing of our fleshly parents,6 That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit. but a corrupt nature; neither can they convey any thing into us, but what they have; if wee will have any goodnesse, or grace, it must be wrought in us by the Spirit of God; which onely can bring forth effects like it selfe, spirituall and holy. Let it not seeme so strange a thing unto thee,7 Marvell not that I said unto thee; Yee must be borne againe. as if it were past thy beleefe, that I said, Yee must be borne a∣gaine. It is not for us to measure the workes of God by our owne conceit, & comprehension; How possible is it,8 The winde blow∣eth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it commeth, and whither it goeth: so is eve∣ry one that is borne of the Spirit. that
wee may bee borne againe by the Spirit of God, and yet can give no account of the manner how it is done. Even in naturall things we see it to be thus: the winde blow∣eth at uncertainties from al coasts; thou hearest the sound &c. How much more is it so in the supernaturall workes of God; his Spirit moves where and how it pleaseth, and no man can understand the secret operation thereof. 11 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speake that we doe know, and testifie that we have seene, and ye receive not our witnesse.Both my selfe, and the Prophets that have beene be∣fore mee, speake that which wee know to bee the truth of God; and testifie that which both hee hath revealed to us, and which wee have experimentally felt in our selves, but yee that are carnally minded, and worldly wise, finde no savour in our words, and beleeve not our witnesse. 12 If I have told you earthly things, and ye be∣leeve not: how shall yee beleeve, if I tell you of heavenly things?And if, while I have onely discoursed to thee of these principles of Christianity, which both our inlightned reason, and experience can easily make good, thou be∣leevest not; but findest such difficulties, both in appre∣hension, and assent, what liklihood, yea possibility, is there that thou shouldst beleeve me, when I shal tell thee of the greatest mysteries of salvation, and of those high and incomprehensible matters of another world? 13 And no man hath as∣cended up to heaven, but he that came downe from heaven: even the Sonne of man which is in heaven.These are things whereof no man can tell thee, but he that hath beene in heaven; and no man hath beene there to see them, but hee that is now comne downe from hea∣ven: even that Sonne of man (that talketh with thee) who in respect of his Deitie is still in heaven. 14, 15. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wildernesse; even so must the Sonne of man be lifted up: that whosoever be∣leeveth in him, should not perish, but have eternall life.And as the brazen Serpent was erected by Moses in the wildernesse, for the cure of those Israelites, that were stung with the fiery serpents, there; So must the Sonne of man be lifted up, on the crosse, that all they, who are envenomed by that old serpent the Devill, and stung with the conscience of their sinnes, looking up un∣to him, by a true faith, may bee healed, and live for e∣ver. 17 For God sent not his Sonne into the world, to condemne the world, but that the world through him might be sa∣ved.It was not the end, and intention that God had in sending his Sonne into the world, that the world should be condemned for not beleeving in him; but his holy and gracious drift, and purpose therein was, that the world of mankind should by him bee saved, in that by a lively faith, they apprehend that all-sufficient Redee∣mer. 18 Hee that beleeveth on him, is not condemned, but he that beleeveth not, is condemned already.Whosoever beleeveth in him, how great soever his unworthinesse, and iniquity bee, yet shall not come into condemnation: but hee that beleeveth not, is in a cer∣taine way of inevitable condemnation; and is left with∣out all remedy, in a state of eternall death, &c.
And this is that which brings just condemnation up∣on the world of unbeleevers; that,19, 20. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkenesse ra∣ther than light, because their deeds were evill: for every one that doth e∣vill, hateth the light. whereas the Sonne of God is comne into the world, and hath sent his Gos∣pell, the meanes of mans salvation abroad, into the world; yet, that men are so wedded to their owne cor∣ruptions, that they had rather to continue in their igno∣rance, and their knowne sinnes, than embrace the truth of God, and suffer the word of God to have his full ef∣fect in them; in which condition, whiles they doe still persist, it cannot be otherwise, but they must needs hate that good word of God, whereby their wickednesse is controled; for every one that doth evill hateth the light, &c. And there hee tarried with them,22 And there he tarried with them, and baptized. and by the hands of his disciples, baptized many. It is strange that ye should still move these questions,27, 28. Iohn answered and said: a man can receive nothing, except it be gi∣ven him from heaven. Ye your selves beare me wit∣nesse, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. after yee have had so full information from mee; but I well see it is not in the meanes; except God teach the heart from heaven, by his Spirit, all our instruction pre∣vailes not: ye your selves can beare me witnesse, that I did alwaies disclaime this honour, and said still; I am not the Christ whom ye expect, I am onely his servant, & messenger, which am sent before to make way for him. It is he who is the true, and onely Bride-groome,29 Hee that hath the bride, is the bridegroome: but the friend of the bridegroome, which stan∣deth and heareth him, re∣joyceth greatly because of the bridegroomes voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled. and husband of his spouse, the Church: this honour is proper to him therefore to injoy her, whom hee hath chosen, and betrothed to himselfe in truth, and righte∣ousnesse; as for me, and all other his faithfull servants, wee are the friends and attendants of this blessed Bride∣groome; and therefore (as our duty is) wee wait upon him, and hold it to bee our greatest joy, and glory, that we heare his voice, and that wee see the happy successe of this his spirituall marriage. I came but to notifie him unto the world,30 Hee must increase, but I must decrease. which when I have done, I doe most gladly give way and place to him, my God, and Saviour. His glory shall increase eve∣ry day, more, and more, in that hee shall bee knowne for the Sonne of God, by his irrefragable miracles; my name and honour shall decrease every day, (by the growth of his) in that the world shall finde themselves mistaken in reputing mee the Messias, whom they shall now know to be onely a servant to this Christ, whom I fore-runne and proclaime. It is he that commeth from above,31 Hee that commeth from above, is above all, hee that is of the earth, is earthly, & speaketh of the earth; hee that commeth from heaven is above all. and therefore just∣ly hath this preeminence, that hee is above all; as for me, and such as I am, we (howsoever our mission is from above) are but from the earth, weake, earthly creatures;
and being full of infirmities, speake as we are; when we speake, as of our selves, wee speake nothing but earthly things; but he being of the eternall substance of the Fa∣ther, is farre above all finite creatures, and therefore justly challengeth all answerable respects from us. 33 He that received his testimony, hath set to his seale, that God is true.He that hath beleeved, & received this infallible testi∣mony, which Christ giveth to himselfe from his Father; hath seconded the truth of God, and is so graciously ac∣cepted of him, that hee is pleased to hold himselfe ho∣noured by his subscription to, and obsignation of his di∣vine truth. 34 For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God: for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him.For this Sonne of God, whom the Father hath sent in∣to the world, speaketh onely the words of God; for God hath not in any finite measure communicated the graces of his Spirit unto him, as he hath done to us, men; but hath indued him with an infinite proportion there∣of, as in whom the Godhead dwelleth bodily. CAP. IIII. 4 And he must needs goe thorow Samaria.SAmaria lay right in his way from Judea to Galilee. 10 If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that faith to thee; Give me to drinke, thou woul∣dest have asked of him, & he would have given thee living water.If thou knewest what a gift it is, that God hath be∣stowed upon the world, in giving his Sonne to and for it; &, if thou couldst conceive that it is the same Son of God that saith unto thee, Give mee to drinke; thou wouldest rather have begged of mee, and I would have given thee those spirituall waters of heavenly Doctrine, and divine grace, which arise from that living fountaine, and spring forth to eternall life. 11 The woman saith unto him; Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, & the well is deepe: from whence then hast thou that living water.The woman scoffingly replied unto him: Sir, you talke of living waters; where are they? These that are here before you, for ought I see, are out of your reach: the well is deepe, and you have nothing to take them up with; What doe you therefore tell me of other living waters better than these? whence should you have them? 12 Art thou greater than our father Iacob?Are you a greater, and better man than our father the holy Patriarch Jacob, &c.? 14 But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the wa∣ter that I shall give him, shall bee in him a well of water, springing up into e∣verlasting life.But whosoever drinketh of this spirituall water, recei∣ving into his soule my heavenly Doctrine, and those ho∣ly graces of sanctification, which I give to all mine, shall never have cause to complaine of thirst any more: for that Spirit of mine which I shall give him, shall not on∣ly refresh him for the present, but shall continue his un∣speakeable
comforts, till he shall be possessed of eternall life. The woman still scorning him, said; Sir,15 The woman saith unto him; Sir, give mee this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw. It were a good matter to light upon this soveraine water; that thou talkest of; where is it? or how should I come by it? I pray thee bestow some of it upon me, that I may save this labour of drawing, and trouble of thirsting any more. Thou hast had five husbands in succession,18 For thou hast had five husbands, and hee whom thou now hast, is not thy husband, in that saidest thou truely. one after other; and now, thou livest in an adulterous manner, with one to whom thou wert never married; so as this can is but thy husband in pretence, not truly & lawfully, &c. Sir, I perceive by this speech of thine,19, 20. The woman saith unto him; Sir, I per∣ceive that thou art a Pro∣phet; our fathers worship∣ed in this mountaine, and ye say, that in Ierusalem is the place where men ought to worship. that thou art a Prophet, and canst tell strange, and absent, and future things: Tell me then, what saiest thou to the maine que∣stion, that is betweene us Samaritanes, and ye Jewes, concerning the worship of God; wee worship God in the Temple built upon this mount Garizim, and we have by our fathers beene taught so to doe; yee contend that Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. Jesus saith unto her; Woman,21 Iesus saith unto her, Woman, beleeve me, the houre commeth when yee shall neither in this moun∣taine, nor yet at Ierusalem, worship the Father. this circumstance of place shall not bee long stood upon; Beleeve mee, ere long there shall bee no strict limitations of place at all; so as that Gods worship should bee confined to mount Garizim, or to Jerusalem. Yee Samaritans,22 Yee worship yee know not what: we know what we worship; for sal∣vation is of the Iewes. having mingled your religion with manifold superstitions, and foule errours, have no true ground for the worship of God, neither indeed doe yee know what yee worship. Wee Jewes worship God ac∣cording to the prescript of his owne Law, (in regard of the maine substance of religion.) Herein therefore we goe beyond you Samaritans, that with the Jewes as his peculiar people hath God made that his covenant of grace and salvation; and that of their flesh and bloud is that Messias, which bringeth salvation to the world. But the time is now at hand,23 But the houre com∣meth, and now is, when the true worshipers shall worship the Father in Spi∣rit, and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him. when men shall not bee so straitly confined to places, and to outward rites, and ceremonies; but, the true worshipers of God shall lift up pure hands, every where, and without regard of these legall observations, shall worship God the Father, in Spirit, and truth; inwardly, and sincerely. For God takes pleasure in such suppliants, not regarding those that are altogether for outward formalities. We men, that are but flesh;24 God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spi∣rit and truth. it is no marvell if we bee pleased with outward and carnall rites; but as for God, he is a Spirit; and therefore must needs like that service,
which is most agreeable to his nature, spirituall; those then that would worship him to purpose, must wor∣ship him not formally, but in truth; not outwardly, but in spirit. 25 The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias commeth, which is called Christ: when hee is come hee will tell us all things.I, that am a woman, and a Samaritan, yet have beene so farre instructed in that part of religion which is com∣mon to us, with the Jewes, as that I know the Messias is now upon comming, even hee that is called the Christ; and that hee when he comes, will tell us all things. 35 Say not ye, there are yet foure moneths, and then commeth harvest? Be∣hold I say unto you, lift up your eyes and looke on, &c.It is meet and requisite that I should take all oportu∣nities of doing my Fathers will; even as when the corne is ripe, and the eares are white to the harvest, men neglect no time to reape it, and gather it in. 56 And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and ga∣thereth fruit unto life eter∣nall, that both hee that soweth, and hee that reapeth, may rejoyce toge∣ther.Whrein also yee my Disciples ought to imitate my seasonable care, and diligence, for your owne comfort and happinesse; for as in the harvest, he that reapeth, and gathereth in the corne, receiveth wages accordingly; so yee that labour in this spirituall harvest, shall be sure of the reward of eternall life; that so both those that have begun this good worke, and ye that finish it, may rejoice together in your happie successe. 37 And herein is that saying true: one soweth, and another reapeth.Many hands are imployed in this great service, accor∣ding to that usuall saying; One soweth, and another reap∣eth. 38 I sent you to reape that, whereon ye bestowed no labour: other men la∣boured, and ye are entred into their labours.I sent others before you, both the ancient Prophets, and John Baptist, and my seventie Disciples, to sow the seeds of Evangelicall doctrine in the hearts of men; and now ye are sent to perfect those good beginnings which they have made; So as yee shall reape the fruit and com∣fort of that good counsell, and holy labours, which have beene bestowed by others. CAP. V. 1 After this there was a feast of the Iewes, and Ie∣sus went up to Ierusalem.NOt long after this, was the Jewish feast of Pentecost, at which time, and upon which occasion, Jesus (ac∣cording to the law) went up to Jerusalem. 4 For an Angell went downe at a certaine season into the poole, & troubled the water, &c:For an Angell went downe, at some seasons appoint∣ed by God (though not fixed, and foreknowne by men) and in testimony of his descent, and presence, moved, and troubled the water of the poole; whosoever then first, &c. 17 But Iesus answered them, my father worketh hitherto, and I worke.But Jesus answered, and said, It would be very inju∣rious in you, to thinke, that the divine workes of God my heavenly Father, or those of mine, whereby I ap∣prove
my Deitie to the world, are any violation at all of the Sabbath day: rather, that day serves to set forth and celebrate these wonderfull workes, both of him and mee. Yee fixe your eyes upon mee, as a meere man,19 Then answered Iesus and said unto them, verily, verily I say unto you, the Sonne can do nothing of himselfe, but what he seeth the Father doe: for what things soever hee doth, these also doth the Sonne likewise. and looke no further then the flesh that you see; but herein ye are fouly deceived; it is the power of my invisible God∣head, whereby I doe these wonderfull workes; for I and the Father are one indivisible essence, and our acts are no lesse inseparable; The Sonne can doe nothing without the will, and act of the Father; and even as hee is man, can doe nothing, but what he seeth agreeable to the will and purpose of his heavenly Father. For God the Father loveth the Sonne (even as man) and enableth him to all his wonderfull workes which he doth;20 For the Father lo∣veth the Sonne, and shew∣eth him all things: and hee will shew him greater workes than these, &c. and will by his power and authority cause him to produce greater workes than yee have yet seene, that ye may yet more be astonished with wonder. For the Father (as by himselfe immediately) judgeth no man,22 For the Father judg∣eth no man: but hath com∣mitted all judgement un∣to the Sonne. but hath committed the power and managing of this worke unto the Sonne; so as the Father by the Sonne judgeth the world. Ye looke upon mee as a mere man,30 I can of mine owne selfe do nothing: as I heare I judge: and my judge∣ment is just, because I seek not my owne will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me. not knowing or considering that relation which I have to the Father, and that Deitie which is veiled under this flesh: know yee therefore that (in that humane state which I have assu∣med) I can of my selfe do nothing; but according to that I am directed, by that powerfull and all-wise Godhead; from the information whereof I judge, and my judge∣ment is just, because I seeke not to please my owne will (as man) but the will of my eternall Father, which hath sent mee. If I should yeeld you this,31, 32. If I beare wit∣nesse of my selfe, my wit∣nesse is not true; for there is another that beareth witnesse of mee. that my testimony concerning my self is not to be admitted; (as indeed amongst meere men that rule is but just and equall) ye know that ye have no reason to presse this upon mee; for there is another that beareth witnesse of mee, &c. Yee sent unto John to know his judgement of mee;33 Ye sent unto Iohn, and he bare witnesse unto the truth. ye had not sent to him, if ye had not ascribed too much to the authority of his testimony; and behold, ye know that he bare witnesse to the truth; and pointed unto mee as that Lambe of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world. But it is not any humane testimony that I stand upon,34 But I receive not te∣stimony from man, but these things I say, that ye might be saved. neither is it the approbation of any mortall man, that can adde any thing to mee, but I speake this for your conviction, that ye may be induced to acknowledge the truth, and be saved.
35, 36. Hee was a bur∣ning and a shining light: and ye were willing for a season to rejoyce in his light: but I have greater witnesse than that of Iohn: for the workes which the Father hath given mee to finish, &c.John was indeed a zealous and holy man; one that gave great light to Gods Church in his time, burning with fervent affections, and shining with heavenly do∣ctrine, and exemplary sanctimonie, and ye were willing for a season, to professe your hearty respects to him, and your thankfull and glad acceptance of his doctrine. But I rest not in his testimony; I have greater wit∣nesse, &c. 37 And the Father him selfe which hath sent mee, hath born witnesse of me, ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seene his shape.And the Father himselfe, which hath sent mee, hath borne witnesse of mee, both in that voice which was heard from heaven in my Baptisme; and in the attestation of his Prophets, and in all the types and figures of his law. But as for you, ye have nothing to doe with that eternall Father of mine, ye have no notice of him at all, either by his voice, or any whatsoever representation hee hath made of himselfe. 38 And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye beleeve not.Ye have not given that respect and beleefe to his word, which yee ought; for that Messiah whom the Law and the Prophets do so clearely set forth, and commend un∣to you, as sent from God, yee do wilfully reject. 39 Search the Scriptures, for in them yee thinke ye have eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me.Search the Scriptures, for yee professe to make high account of them; and do justly thinke in them to finde eternall life; and they are my witnesses; I desire no other testimony but theirs. 40 And yee will not come to me, that ye might have life.And yet, though by them ye be directed unto mee, as the onely fountaine of life, yet ye will not come to mee by a true faith, that ye might have life from me. 41 I receive not honour from men.Do not thinke that I set forth my selfe unto you, as if I affected to be honoured by you; no, it is not reputation, and honour from men that I regard. 42 But I know you, that yee have not the love of God in you.Much lesse from you, whom I know to be altogether void of the love of God. 43 I am come in my Fa∣thers name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his owne name, him ye will receive.For if ye did love God, ye would gladly receive mee, who am come to you in the name and authority of that my heavenly Father: but now ye receive me not; where∣as, if a false Prophet shall come in his owne name, and of his owne head, ye will be apt enough to intertaine and follow him. 44 How can ye beleeve which receive honour one of another, and seeke not the honour that commeth from God onely.But ye are ready to say; were the matter so plain as you pretend, why should not wee believe, as well as others? we are sure that wee know more then the common sort, why should wee not equally imbrace that truth which appeareth unto us? Let me tell you, it is your pride and ambition that lyes in your way: This grace of faith is given to the meeke and humble; as for you Scribes and Pharisees, ye are all for your owne vaine glory; all yee care for, is to be honoured of each other, and to surpasse
each other in titles and reputation with men; not re∣garding that true honour which commeth from God onely. Ye shall one day give an account,45 Do not thinke that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one that accuseth you, even Moses in whom ye trust. before the Tribu∣nall seat of God, of this stiffe incredulitie of yours, but do not thinke that I shall neede to be your accuser there; no, there is one that shall rise up to accuse you; even hee whom yee unjustly pretend and challenge for your Pa∣tron, Moses. There will need no other conviction of you,46 For had ye beleeved Moses, ye would have be∣leeved me: for hee wrote of mee. then the writings of Moses, who hath given therein abundant te∣stimonie of mee; so as had yee but beleeved Moses, yee would have beleeved mee. But if yee beleeve not his writings which ye confesse to be so authenticall, and beyond all exception;47 But if ye beleeve not his writings, how shall ye beleeve my words. how is it like yee will beleeve my words which yee are ready to sleight, and prejudge. CAP. VI. WHen Jesus perceived the inclination of the people,15 When Iesus there∣fore perceived that they would come and take him by force, to make him a King, hee departed againe into a mountaine himselfe alone. that they (being perswaded he was the Messias, and supposing that he must therefore be a tem∣porall king over Israel) would goe about to force him to receive this honour from them; he withdrew himselfe; and departed againe into a mountaine himselfe alone. Hee caused the ship by an extraordinary speed,21 And immediately the ship was at the land whither, &c. to come to land. Which bread of life the Sonne of man shall give un∣to you:27 Which the Sonne of man shall give unto you: for him hath God the Fa∣ther sealed. for him hath God the Father designed to this of∣fice of his Mediatorship; and hath given abundant proofe of his concurrence with him in this great worke. Then said they unto him,28 Then said they unto him. What shall wee doe, that we might worke the workes of God? Dost thou thinke that wee have not a due care of attaining eternall life? yes doubt∣lesse, wee slacke no indeavour that might further us thereunto; what worke is there that may be acceptable to God, or is required by him, which we are not willing, and forward to performe? Verily I say unto you;32 Then Iesus said unto them, verily, verily I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from hea∣ven, but my Father giveth you the true bread, from heaven. it was not the true heavenly bread that Moses gave you; that was but a bodily food, for the nourishing of the present life; but the bread, which my Father giveth you, is truly heauenly, and nou∣risheth the soule to an eternall life. For that bread,33 For the bread of God, is hee which commeth downe from heaven, and giveth life unto the world. which my Father gives for the feeding of his Church, is his onely Sonne which
commeth downe from heaven into the world; and giveth a spirituall life to all beleevers. 35 And Iesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: hee that commeth to me shall never hunger.I am that true bread of life, which nourisheth the soule everlastingly; hee that commeth to me by a lively faith, and partaketh of mee, shall never have cause to com∣plaine of spirituall hunger, &c. 36 But I said unto you, that yee also have seene me, and beleeve not.But I have told you (to your just shame and rebuke) that your incredulity is so much the more hatefull; for that having had so cleare manifestations of my divine power, yet ye beleeve not. 37 All that the Father giveth mee, shall come to me, and him that commeth to mee I will in no wise cast out.But it is not in the power of your perversenesse, to make my word and miracles ineffectuall; for (however incredulous ye prove your selves) yet all that the Father giveth to mee, shall and will beleeve in mee; and him that doth by a true faith lay hold on mee, I will in no wise abandon and cast off. 38 For I came downe from heaven, not to doe mine owne will, but the will of him that sent me.Which gratious preservation of mine elect children comes within the compasse of the very intention of my comming downe from heaven; for I came downe thence to do (not my owne will, but) the will of my Father that sent mee. 39, 40. And this is the Fathers will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, and this is the will of him that sent me, &c.And this is the will of my heavenly Father that sent me, that all mine should be infallibly raised to life, and that every one which knoweth the Sonne, and feeleth the power of his Spirit, and beleeveth in him, may cer∣tainly come to everlasting life, &c. Doe not murmur thus against my person, as if this imagined impossibilitie of descending from heaven lay on my part;44 No man can come to me, except the Father, which hath sent me, draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day. and not rather on your owne; the truth is, that all the default is in your unbeleefe; and this unbe∣liefe is naturall to you, and deeply fixed in your cor∣rupt disposition; insomuch as no man can come to mee, by the foot of a true faith, except my Father which sent me, inlighten his understanding, and powerfully incline his will, and affections thereunto; and that man, whom he shall so worke upon, shall be sure that I will perfect his salvation, and raise him up to glory, at the last day. 45 It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be taught of God: every man therefore that, &c.Every one that hath duly received the doctrine of my Gospell, and hath effectually learned the same, is there∣by wrought to beleeve in mee. 46 Not that any man hath seene the Father, save he which is of God, hee hath seene the Father.As no man can come to mee, but by the grace, and lively inoperation of my Father, so none can attaine to the perfect knowledge of the Father (and reveale the same to mankinde) but onely that Sonne of his, who is of the same essence with him; hee hath, in a manner in∣communicable to any creature, seene that eternall Father.
Yee speake of the bread which your fathers did eate;48, 49, 50. I am the bread of life; your fathers did eate Manna in the wil∣dernesse, and are dead; this is the bread which com∣meth downe from heaven, that a man may eate there∣of, and not die. I tell you, I am that true bread of life, which was figured by their Manna. That Manna which your Fathers did eate of in the wildernesse was such, as could not preserve them from dying; but such vertue shall ye finde in mee, who was pre∣figured by that Manna, as that whosoever feedes on mee shall never dye. Your Manna as it had no life in it selfe,51 I am the living bread which came downe from heaven, if any man eate of this bread he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. so it could give none; I am that true life-giving bread, which came down from heaven; if any man feed on this living bread, hee shall live for ever; Neither shall yee need to goe seeke farre for this bread: for the bread that I will give, is this very flesh of mine, which I will offer, upon the crosse, for mans redemption, this is it which your soules shall feede on, whiles by the meanes of this humanitie of mine, is conveyed unto you all my righteousnesse, and the full efficacie of my Deitie, for the quickening of them to life everlasting. The Jewes therefore, mistaking the words of Christ,52 The Iewes therefore strove among themselves, saying, how can this man give us his flesh to eate. as literally spoken, of a carnall and bodily manducation, argued with themselves; How can this be made good, which hee speaketh? how is it possible that this man should give us his flesh to eate? or how should that flesh be bread? Then Jesus knowing their secret murmurings,53 Then Iesus said unto them; verily verily I say unto you, except ye eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood, ye have no life in you. said unto them; Never thinke it so strange, that I have told you concerning the eating of my flesh; for I tell you yet againe, except yee do so, by a true and lively faith communicate of my flesh and my blood, as that you are incorporated thereinto, yee can have no spirituall life in you. Whosoever thus partaketh of my flesh, and my blood,54 Who so eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, hath eternall life, &c. as that he hath this spirituall communion with me, that man hath already a true right to eternall life, &c. For my flesh is indeed a true spirituall meat,55 For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drinke ineed. and my blood is a true spirituall drinke, whereby the soule of the true beleever is really nourished to eternall life. He that thus partaketh of my flesh and blood,56 Hee that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in mee, and I in him. becom∣meth one with mee, and I with him: neither is there any other way, or meanes of his happy communion with mee. Do not fixe your eyes too much upon this visible hu∣manitie of mine,57 As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth mee, even he shall live by me. but know that this power of giving life, is derived to mee from that my living Father in heaven, which hath sent mee, and hath given mee this life of the Sonne of God manifested in the flesh: by vertue
whereof, it is, that as he gives life unto mee, so I doe al∣so give a spirituall life to whosoever shall thus partake of me.58 This is that bread which came downe from heaven, &c. See verse 48, 49, 50. 60 Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said; this is an hard saying, who can heare it?Many therefore of his Disciples, when they had heard these words, taking them in a carnall, and literall sense, said; This is an hard and harsh doctrine; who can tell what to make of it, or how to take it? 61, 62. When Iesus knew in himselfe that his disciples murmured at it, hee said unto them, doth this offend you? what and if ye shall see the Sonne of man, ascend up where hee was before.The disciples made no open complaint of this their exception, and scandall; but when Iesus, the searcher of hearts, knew in himselfe, that his disciples murmured at his doctrine, he said unto them; Doe ye stumble at this saying of mine, I doe well know that the ground of your offence is the meane estimation of this humanity of mine; by the power whereof yee measure by your out∣ward senses, making no difference betwixt me, and other men; what will yee say then, if ere long your eyes shall be witnesses of another manner of condition of mine, than you thinke of; if you shall behold me (the Sonne of man) ascending up by the power of my Deity into hea∣ven, to take a repossession of that glory which I eternal∣ly enjoyed there. 63 It is the Spirit that quickeneth, the flesh pro∣fiteth nothing: the words that I speake unto you, they are Spirit, and they are life.Ye are ready to mistake my words, of a fleshly kinde of eating my body; wherein ye doe grossely erre: for it is not my flesh, considered simply of it selfe (without respect to the Spirit) that can availe you to this happy nourishment; but it is the Spirit of the Almightie, and eternall Godhead, (whereto this body is inseparably united) which gives this soveraigne vertue unto it. And even so is it also in my Doctrine; it is not the outward sound of my words, wherein ye are to rest, and to seeke comfort; but it is the inward and spirituall sense of them; thus taken, they shall bee found to have sweet∣nesse, and life in them. 66 From that time ma∣ny of his disciples went backe, & walked no more with him.From that time forth, many of those his fashionable disciples, taking this unjust offence at his holy Doctrine, went away from him, and followed his traine no more. 70 Iesus answered them, have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devill.Whiles the rest are gone, ye twelve sticke close unto me; and indeed I have singled you out to the honour of a more neare attendance upon mee; yet even this small number of yours must be abated; for, howsoever yee all make faire professions, yet one of you is a very devill in his heart, and will ere long manifest his wickednesse in act.
CAP. VII. HIs kinsemen therefore said unto him;3 His brethren there∣fore said unto him, depart hence, and goe into Iudea, that the disciples also may see the workes that thou doest. what doest thou here in this obscure corner of Galilee; Go thy waies up to the famous and frequent City of Jerusalem, where all the confluence is of the Tribes of Israel, and Proselytes from all parts, that thou maiest winne, and confirme thy disciples with thy miracles. It is not yet a seasonable time for me to goe up to Je∣rusalem; ye may goe when you please;6, 7. My time is not yet come; but your time is al∣way ready: the world can∣not hate you, but me it ha∣teth, because I testifie of it, &c. all times are alike to you. The world is your friend, and favours you in your designes; but mee it hateth, because I reprove the wickednesse of it. No man spake openly in his approbation, and defence;13 Howbeit no man spake openly of him, for feare of the Iewes. for feare of the censure of the Jewish Rulers; which had decreed to excommunicate any man that should professe respect unto him. I doe not deliver the doctrine which I teach,16 Iesus answered them, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. as my owne, but as my heavenly Fathers, which hath sent me. If any man shall, with a simple and honest heart,17 If any man will do his will hee shall know of the Doctrine, whether it bee of God, or whether I speake of my selfe. yeeld himselfe over to doe the will of my Father, according to the measure of that he knowes, God shall incourage and blesse that man with further light; so as hee shall fully know whether my Doctrine be of God, or of my selfe. I have done one charitable and miraculous worke on the Sabbath day, namely the cure of a palsie man,21 I have done one worke, and ye all marveile. and ye are all wondering, and yet mutinying at it. Under the Law of Moses,22 Moses therefore gave unto you circumci∣sion, (not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers) and ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man. ye were injoyned circum∣cision, (not that Moses was the first instituter thereof, but God to our father Abraham,) and yee doe without scruple practise it accordingly, even upon the Sabbath day. Looke seriously into the true state,24 Iudge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judge∣ment. and ground of things: and doe not judge according to fancy, or out∣ward appearances; but esteeme of things as they really are. Is it out of guiltinesse that our Rulers are thus silent?26, 27. But loe, he spea∣keth boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the Rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ? Howbeit wee kow this man whence he is: but when Christ com∣meth, no man knoweth whence hee is. Doe they know indeed that this is the very Christ? If they doe so, sure we thinke they mis-know him; for we have learnt that when the Messias comes, no man shall know, or declare his generation; but for this man, wee know his kindred and pedigree.
28 Then cried Iesus in the Temple as hee taught, saying; ye both know me, and yee know whence I am, and I am not come of my selfe, but hee that sent mee is true, whom yee know not.Yee mutter secretly that ye know me, and the place of my birth, and my parentage; but yee are utterly mista∣ken; for I have a Father in heaven, whom yee know not; I came not of my selfe, but my Father is he that sent me, who is the God of truth, of whom ye, after all your pretences of knowledge, are utterly ignorant. 29 But I know him, for I am from him, and he hath sent me.But I doe perfectly know him, as I have good reason; for both I am from him by eternall generation, and by him sent into the world to doe this great worke of re∣demption. 33 Then said Iesus un∣to them, yet a little while am I with you, and then I goe unto him that sent me.Ye seeke to lay hands on me; but know that my time is set; it shall not bee long ere I put an end to this your contempt and persecution; and departing from you, shall returne to my Father that sent me. 34 Ye shall seeke me, and shall not finde me; and where I am, thither yee cannot come.Then yee my persecutors shall seeke mee in vaine, for ye shall not finde me; I shall be quite out of your reach, and where I am, thither can ye not come. 37 In the last day, that great day of the feast, Ie∣sus stood and cried, saying; If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drinke.In the last day of the feast, which day they called the Great Hosanna: Jesus stood and tooke occasion by their solemne fetching up of water from the Well of Siloa (at the foot of mount Sion) for their sacrifices, and liba∣tions, to speake of better waters; and cried, saying; If any man thirst spiritually, let him come to mee, and drinke. 38 He that beleeveth on mee, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.Hee that beleveth in mee, shall (according to the fre∣quent promises, every where in the Scriptures) be abun∣dantly blessed; and shall not onely have much comfort in himselfe, but shall have such store of grace, and hea∣venly consolation in his heart, that hee shall bee able to yeeld forth abundance of it, unto others. 39 The holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Iesus was not yet glo∣rified.The miraculous and sanctifying gifts of the holy Ghost were not as yet so fully given, as they were after∣wards, when Jesus was received up into glory. 48. 49. Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees beleeved on him? but this people who knoweth not the Law, are cursed.Were this man such as you pretend, doe yee thinke that the Rulers, and the Pharisees, men of better judge∣ment than your selves, would not have discerned and ac∣knowledged him? They know the Law, & according to that, judge infallibly; but this ignorant multitude that hath no insight into the Law of God, lies open to mise∣rable seduction, and error, and is therein accursed.
CAP. VIII. SInce you plead the Law against this offender,7 Hee that is without sinne among you, let him first cast a stone at her. I gaine∣say not; but am ready to second Moses herein; in the meane time, doe not yee prosecute that in her, whereof your selves are guilty; she hath well deserved to be sto∣ned; but who shall be her executioners? If any of you be innocent, let his hand be first upon her. Howsoever thou hast deserved,11 And Iesus said un∣to her, neither doe I con∣demne thee; Goe and sin no more. it is not mine office to passe sentence of condemnation upon thee; since therefore thine accusers are sent away by their owne guiltinesse; it is not for me to prosecute thee; Goe thy waies, repent thee of this great wickednesse, and take heed thou be not mis-carried into this sin any more. Howsoever,14 Iesus answered, and said unto them, though I beare record of my selfe, yet my record is true, for I know whence I came, and whither I goe, but ye cannot tel whence I come, and whither I goe. in the ordinary course of humane pro∣ceedings, it is true that no mans testimony is to be taken concerning himselfe, yet in this case of mine, who am a divine person, exempted from all possibilitie of errour, God in the flesh, it is farre otherwise. Being such a one, though I doe beare record of my selfe, yet the record cannot but be true; for I, and I onely know whence I came, even from the; bosome of mine eternall Father; and whither I am returning; even to the repossession of that glory; but ye (judging onely according to the out∣ward appearance) know neither of these. Ye presume to judge according to your carnall affecti∣ons;15 Yee judge after the flesh, I judge no man. and follow your outward senses in the judgements yee passe on me; and, in the meane time, will not endure me, who doe not challenge, or execute that power which I might, in judging you. Not that I doe disclaime, or forsake that right;16 And yet if I judge, my judgement is true, for I am not alone, but I and the Father, that sent me. but make use of it when I see it meete; and whensoever I do judge any man, my judgement is true, and altogether in∣fallible; and such, as whereby ye may be convinced, ac∣cording to your owne rules; for I am not alone; the Fa∣ther that sent me, is with me, and testifieth with me, and for me. I am now shortly going away,21 Then said Iesus a∣gaine unto them, I goe my way, & yee shall seeke me, and shall die in your sins: whither I goe, ye cannot come. and removing from the earth; and then, in vaine shall ye seeke for help from mee, whom yee have despised; imploring the aid of the divine power of that Messias whom yee have rejected; justly therefore doe I cast you off, and suffer you to die in your sinnes; barring you out from my presence; for, whither I goe, yee shall never bee allowed to come. Then said the Jewes;22 Then said the Iewes, will he kill himselfe? be∣cause hee saith, whither I goe, ye cannot come. what meanes this threat of his departure, whither we shall not come to him: Will hee
kill himselfe? if hee doe, he shall indeed goe alone, wee list not to follow him on that condition. 23 And hee said unto them, ye are from beneath, I am from above.It is to no purpose to speake to you of heavenly things; ye cannot bee capable of my Doctrine; yee are altogether earthly and sensuall; and savour nothing but earthly things; I am from heaven, and my Doctrine is accordingly, &c. 24 For if ye beleeve not that I am hee, ye shall die in your sinnes.For if yee beleeve not that I am the Sonne of God, the true Messias, that should come to save the world, ye shall die in your sinnes. 25 And Iesus saith unto them, even the same that I said unto you, from the be∣ginning.I am not one that is sudenly, and inexpectedly started forth into the world; but, that very Messias, who from the beginning of the world, was foretold, and fore-pro∣mised to mankinde. 26 I have many things to say, and to judge of you, but he that sent me is true, and I speake to the world those things which I have heard of him.If I minded to take advantage of your wickednesse, and infidelity, I have matter enough to accuse and con∣demne you for; but that is not my errand for which I came; onely I must tell you, these contempts, and this unbeleefe of yours will not bee let goe unpunished; for my Father, that sent me, as he is truth it selfe, so hee will certainely make good that which I have delivered to the world, from him, and, that which hee hath spoken to the world by mee. 27 They understood not that hee spake to them of the Father.All this while, their understandings were so blinded, that they did not perceive that hee spake unto them, con∣cerning God the Father, and that dreadfull judgement of his, before which they must appeare, and receive the due sentence of their obstinate unbeleefe. 28 Then said Iesus un∣to them, when ye have lift up the Sonne of man, then shall ye know, that I am he, and that I doe nothing of my selfe.When ye have lift up me, the Sonne of man, to the crosse, and have fastned me to that tree of shame, and curse, whereon I shall suffer an ignominous, and paine∣full death, ye shall then know, both by the miraculous signes which then shall appeare to the world, and by the wonderfull consequences of my glorious resurrection, and ascension, that I am that Messias, whom ye have ex∣pected; and that I am not a meere man, as yee now sup∣pose, and that I doe nothing of my selfe &c. 29 And he that sent me is with mee; the Father hath not left me alone, for I doe alwaies those things that please him.The eternall Father that sent me, hee is inseparably with me; hee hath not left me alone; His Godhead is mine; I am one with him, and therefore I can doe no∣thing but that which is perfectly pleasing unto him. 31 Then said Iesus to those Iewes which belee∣ved on him, if ye continue in my word, then are yee my disciples indeed.I, who know your hearts, doe well see, that upon these words of mine, yee doe now beleeve in mee; but, take heed that this faith of yours bee not unsteddy and temporary; see that yee continue constant in the profes∣sion of my name, and then ye shall indeed bee my Disci∣ciples.
And then yee shall have the truth of God further re∣vealed unto you;32 And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. and this divine Evangelicall truth shall so worke with you, that it shall blesse you with the liberty of the Sonnes of God; making you free from the bondage of sinne, and Satan, under which yee are now held. What tellest thou us of freedome?33 They answered him, Wee bee Abrahams seed, and were never in bon∣dage to any man, how say∣est thou, ye shall be made free? tell this to the forlorne heathens, who are borne to servitude; as for us, we are the seed of faithfull Abraham, and that not of the bond-woman, but of the free: wee scorne the impu∣tation of bondage; and abhorre the very name of it? why doest thou then tell us of being made free? Indeed yee challenge a naturall freedome,34 Iesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoeuer commit∣teth sinne, is the servant of sinne. but yee are morally slaves and vassalls; howsoever yee please your selves, ye are servants to a base Master, even Sinne; for whosoever yeelds himselfe over to the commission of sinne, as ye doe, is no other than a slave and vassall unto sinne. Yee brag of your privileges, and liberty;35 And the servant a∣bideth not in the house for ever: but the Sonne a∣bideth ever. but how long will this last? yee are in Gods family but as Ismael was in Abrahams; ye may challenge, and usurpe a kinde of liberty, and immunity; but it shall soone bee at an end, as his was; the truth is, ye are servants of sinne, and not Sonnes of God: and, it is not for a servant to make account of a perpetuall claime to the house, or stay in it; if ye be once the adopted Sonnes of God, yee may challenge a roome in his house, but as yee are, yee have none. Neither shall yee attaine to this happy condition of spirituall freedome,36 If the Sonne there∣fore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. unlesse the Sonne of God doe invest you with it; your owne indeavours will but inthrale you more, his grace and mercy must onely worke your deliverance. I know ye are Abrahams seed, according to the flesh,37 I know that ye are Abrahams seed, but yee seeke to kill mee, because my word hath no place in you. but what will this availe you, whiles yee are strangers from the faith of Abraham, this is too plaine, in that ye seeke to kill mee, in whom Abraham beleeved, a wic∣kednesse, which ye could never yeeld unto, if yee had gi∣ven place to that saving word of mine, which hath beene delivered unto you: that very contempt of yours hath drawne upon you this hatefull sinne of your murderous intentions against me. My Doctrine is such as I have received from my hea∣venly Father, and therefore holy, and divine:38 I speake that which I have seene with my Fa¦ther: & ye do that which yee have seene with your father. your pra∣ctises are such, as ye have received from that true father of yours, whom ye will bee very unwilling to acknow∣ledge.
41 Wee be not borne of fornication, we have one Father, even God.We could not be true-borne, if wee had any other fa∣ther then that one, whom we challenge; being the sonnes of Abraham, it must needes follow that wee are the Sonnes of God; Onely God therefore, who is the Father of faithfull Abraham, is the Father of us who are his true children. 43 Why do yee not un∣derstand my speech? even because yee cannot heare my words.I have spoken plaine enough to you; why doe ye not understand my speech? the fault is in none but in your selves; ye are so carried with prejudice, and dis-affection, that yee will not apply your mindes to listen unto that, which I deliver unto you. 44 Ye are of your father the devill.Pretend, and professe what ye will, I must point you to your true father; Ye are of your father the devill, &c. 44 When he speaketh a lye, hee speaketh of his owne: for hee is a lyar and the father of it.Hee is both a practiser of lies himselfe, and the au∣thor and cause of them in others; when he utters lyes, he doth but his kinde; if at any time he let fall a truth, that is but stolne, and usurped; his proper worke is both to lie, and to move lies in others. 51 If a man keepe my saying hee shall never see death.If a man keepe my saying; hee shall be surely freed from everlasting death. 56 Your father Abra∣ham rejoyced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad.Your father Abraham by a lively faith foresaw this comming of mee, the Messias, and lived in that faith of his; and in that spirituall life rejoyced with joy unspeak∣able and glorious. 57 Then said the Iewes unto him, thou art not yet fiftie yeares old: and hast thou seene Abraham?Thou canst not so boast of age, as to make thy selfe neare fiftie yeares old; thou appearest to be much short of that; and hast thou lived so long as to have seene Abraham?58 Iesus said unto them, verily verily I say unto you, before Abraham was I am. I tell ye, O ye fond Jewes, my being is not to be mea∣sured by my comming in the flesh; I am that God, which was and is from everlasting; Abraham had his being in time, mine is from eternitie, your fathers knew mee by the name of I AM, I am still so to you, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. 59 Then tooke they up stones to cast at him: but Iesus hid himselfe, and went out of the Temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.But Jesus withdrew himselfe from them, and by his secret power so avoided their hands, as that they were not able (in his passage through the midst of them) to stay, or touch him. CAP. IX. 2 And his Disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sinne, this man, or his parents, that hee was borne blinde?THere be these two things which we take for granted, The one that all punishment that is inflicted upon man, is for sinne; the other, that every mans soule hath
formerly had a being in some other body; and hath pas∣sed from one to another; Now therefore, (these things presupposed) tell us, whose sinne it is that is punished with blindenesse in this man; was it his owne, whiles hee was in some other body, or was it his parents: for which hee is now thus from his very birth, blinde and mise∣rable. Howsoever ordinarily these outward afflictions are the just punishments for sinne;3 Iesus answered, nei∣ther hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the workes of God should be made manifest in him. yet in this case it was not the respect to the sinne of any man whomsoever, that is the cause of this mans blindenesse, but the respect that God hath to his owne glory, that hereby occasion might be taken, to shew forth his great power and and mercy in his cure. Whiles it pleaseth my heavenly Father (that sent me) to give mee opportunitie of life,4 I must worke the workes of him that sent me, whiles it is day: the night commeth when no man can worke. I must doe these great workes that hee hath designed mee unto; the night of death comes now shortly and fast on: then it will be no season to worke in this kinde any more. The Sunne hath his daily course,5 As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. which when he hath finished, hee then withdraweth his light, and then the night succedeth; whiles my bodily presence is in the world, I am that true Sunne that inlightneth the world; but this Sunne of mine shall set; and then ye shall not ex∣pect from mee any more this visible and sensible illumi∣nation; that I should shew forth my Fathers glory by my personall miracles. Goe, and wash in the poole of Siloam,7 Go wash in the poole of Siloam (which is by in∣terpretation Sent) he went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing. which is by interpretation, Sent: no other poole but that shall cure thee: neither could that doe it, but by my institution: it is my sending that gives that vertue, that successe, to these waters. Do not so wrong God, as to rob him of his glory,24 Give God the praise, we know that this man is a sinner. in ascribing that to a sinfull man, which is due onely to his glorious name: Never say that this man cured thee thus; hee is a sinner, we know: for he is a Sabbath breaker: God hath done it sure by some other meanes. It is a strange thing,30 The man answered and said unto them, why herein is a marvelous thing, that yee know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine eyes. that yee who professe so much knowledge should be ignorant in so great and impor∣tant a matter. I am but a simple man, yet I can easily see, and boldly affirme, that such a miracle as this is, cannot be wrought any other way than by a divine hand: and can a man be sent from God with such supernaturall power, and yet ye not know whence he is? Never tell me (as ye doe) that this man is a sinner:31 Now we know that God heareth not sinners, but if any man be a wor∣shiper of God, and doth his will. we know and have bin so instructed by you, that God gives not to sinners such wonderfull graces, as this, to be able
to give eyes to a man that never had them: yea, this is a thing that transcends all finite powers; and therefore do not cast so wrongfull an imputation upon him that hath done so great things for mee, &c. 33 If this man were not of God hee could doe no∣thing.If this man were not of God, in an extraordinary manner, as sent from him, assisted by him, it were not possible he should do such wonders. 34 They answered and said unto him, thou wast altogether borne in sinnes, and dost thou teach us? and they cast him out.Thou ignorant and presumptuous fellow; God had set a marke upon thee in thy very birth; therein proclai∣ming to the world, that thou hadst beene a sinner in thy former estate, ere thy soule entered into this body of thine; and doest thou take upon thee to teach us who are Masters in Israel? And they excommunicated him from their Synogogues. 39 And Iesus said, for judgement I am come in∣to this world, that they which see not, might see; and that they which see, might be made blinde.I am come to set right those things which are confu∣sed and disorderly in the world: and therefore, in much mercy, to illuminate those that are spiritually blinde; and in no lesse justice, to give those up to blinde igno∣rance, and spirituall darkenesse, which are fondly, and proudly misconceited of their knowledge and wisdome. 40 And some of the Pharisees which were with him, heard these words, and said unto him, are we blinde also?What dost thou strike at us in this speech of thine? canst thou not hold up thine owne reputation without disgracing of us: others, wee know, are blinde and igno∣rant enough, but dost thou cast this aspersion upon us? 41 Iesus said unto them, if yee were blinde, yee should have no sinne: but now ye say, wee see, there∣fore your sinne remaineth.If ye were blinde in your owne conceit: or were so indeed, for want of those helpes which are afforded unto others, your sin should be the lesse, and your fault should be both the more excusable, and more easily remedied: but now ye stand upon the opinion, and ostentation of your quicke sightednesse, ye make your selves uncapable of redresse; and can looke for no other, but that your proud contempt of Gods ordinances shall be required of you. CAP. X. 1 Verily, verily, I say unto you, hee that entreth not by the doore into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a theefe and a robber.VErily, verily, I say unto you: There are many that challenge to themselves the titles of your spirituall pastors; which indeed are no better then wolves to waste, and destroy the flocke. The Church is as a sheepefold, I am the doore of that sheepfold, by which every lawful∣ly-called pastor must enter; if any man will be climbing up, over the walls, and endeavouring to enter by undue and unwarrantable meanes, upon the charge of the Church, that man is no other than a thiefe and a robber.
But he that is duly and lawfully called by mee,2 But he that entreth in by the doore is the sheep∣heard of the sheepe. hee is the true sheepheard of his Church. To him,3 To him the porter openeth, and the sheepe heare his voice, and hee calleth his owne sheepe by name, and leadeth them out. God the Father (who is the porter of this spi∣rituall doore) gives willing entrance and admission; and the people of God who are his sheepe, do willingly heare his voice; and hee is familiarly, and intirely ac∣quainted with them, and leades them forth to the greene pastures of heavenly doctrine, and to the waters of com∣fort. Hee leades them the way to heaven by wholsome do∣ctrine, and holy example; and they follow him in both:4 And when he putteth forth his owne sheepe, he goeth before them, and the sheepe follow him: for they know his voice. for they are so instructed as that they can discerne his doctrine from errour, and heresie. So verse 5. I am that doore of my Church,7 Then said Iesus unto them againe, verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the doore of the sheepe. through which every one that hopes for true comfort in this holy function must enter; and by whom every one that would attaine salvation must necessarily passe. So verse 9. All that have heretofore taught any doctrines con∣trary to mine,8 All that ever came be∣fore mee are theeves and robbers: but the sheepe did not heare them. or that have indeavoured to draw away the hearts of men, to the beleefe of those doctrines, which have not had a reference to mine, (as if men could bee saved against, or without mee) shortly, all that ever have taught in their owne name, they are de∣ceivers and robbers, but those that are my true and faith∣full people, did not give any regard to them. He that is not the true shepheard,18 But hee that is an hireling, and not the sheep∣heard whose owne the sheepe are not. seeth the wolfe comming, and lea∣veth the sheepe, and fle∣eth. but takes upon him that calling, for the advantage of an outward commodi¦ty; who doth but tend another mans flocke for an hyre, will not adventture his life for their safetie; but when hee seees a danger comming, will run away, and shift for himselfe, leaving his sheepe to the mercy of the wolfe, &c. Ye my chosen people of the Jewes are now my known,16 And other sheepe I have which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall heare my voice, and there shall be one fold and one sheep∣heard. and noted flocke: but I have other sheepe also besides you, even the Gentiles, which are not of your fold; but shall have a fold of their owne, a more famous Church then yours: these must I ere long bring home out of the waste deserts of the world: and they shall heare the voice of my Gospell: and by the power thereof shall be united into one body of the Church, with you; so as Jewes
and Gentiles shall make up one holy Catholick Church, under me their one onely head. 17 Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay downe my life that I might take it againe.Howsoever, the love of my Father to me, as his eter∣nall Sonne, is infinite every way, and not capable of the limits of time, or measure; yet as man, and as Media∣tor betweene him and man, he loveth me for that deare propension of love, which hee sees in me to mankinde; that I am (for the redemption thereof) so cheerefully ready to lay downe this life of mine; which yet I shall not utterly forgoe, and lose: but onely lay it downe for the time, and soone after take it up againe, in my glori∣ous resurrection. 18 This commandement have I received of my Fa∣ther.All the whole carriage of this great businesse both in the voluntary resigning, and the reassuming of my life, is that, which is determined by the eternall, and most wise, and holy decree of my Father. 26 But ye beleeve not, because yee are not of my sheepe, as I said unto you.Ye beleeve me not, because, howsoever yee make an outward profession to be within the fold of the Church: yet in truth, ye are not that which yee pretend, though ye carry the fleeces of sheepe, yet yee are wolves within, and whiles yee continue such, how can yee beleeve my words, how can ye do other then persecute mee? 34 Iesus answered them: Is it not written in your law; I said yee are gods?Why are yee offended at this? It is onely your igno∣rance that is guiltie of a scandall herein; were yee rightly informed, yee would understand how justly I doe chal∣lenge this honor; but in the meane time there was no cause ye should stumble at this title which is in the holy Scriptures imparted to men in authority; for is it not written in the Psalmes, I have said ye are Gods? If God himselfe in his Scriptures, call them gods, upon whom it pleaseth him to put rule and command over others,35 If hee called them gods, unto whom the word of God came. honouring them with so high a stile: and withall, ye will grant that the authority of the Scripture is sacred, and inviolable. 36 Say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Sonne of God?Say ye of mee, whom the Father hath set apart, to be the mediator betwixt himself, and mankinde, and whom he hath sent into the world to be the Saviour thereof: Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Sonne of God? I tell you, this word of yours is no other then an high, and hainous blasphemie against God; and that claime of mine is most just, and irrefragable. 37 If I do not the works of my Father, beleeve me not.That ye may be throughly convinced hereof, do but looke upon the workes that I doe; if the miracles that you see come from mee, be any other than divine, and such as can have none but God himselfe for the author of them, beleeve me not.
CAP. XI. WE shall not neede to feare that wee shall upon this sicknesse forgoe Lazarus;4 This sicknesse is not unto death, but for the glo∣ry of God, that the Sonne of God might be glorified thereby. for this disease shall not end in a continuing death; but shall give an ac∣casion to win much glory to God, by his miraculous re∣storing. In all that time of the cleare day,9 Are there not twelve houres in the day? if any man walke in the day, hee stumbleth not, because hee seeth the light of this world. wherein wee have the benefit and direction of the Sunne, wee walke se∣curely, and stumble not; neither feare falling; The call and fore-appointment of God is the light of that Sunne, which I am, and must be directed by; whiles I walke ac∣cording to the guidance thereof, I cannot do amisse. But if a man walke either without, or against this sure, and holy direction, he cannot but stumble,10 But if a man walke in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him. and fall, and miscarry. Then said Thomas, &c. to his fellow disciples,16 Then said Thomas which is called Didymus, unto his fellow Disciples, Let us also goe, that wee may die with him. Our Ma∣ster is (I see) resolved to goe up to Jerusalem, where hee was so lately in danger of stoning; or at least, to the skirts of it, which is Bethanie, wherein what will hee do other then put himselfe in the very jawes of death; since hee hath taken up this resolution, let us not leave him; but let us also go, that we may dye with him. Whereas man hath by his sinne exposed himselfe to a double death, both spirituall and bodily,25 Iesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: hee that beleeveth in mee, though hee were dead, yet shall he live. I am he who am both the author or beginner of life unto him, and the preserver and finisher thereof; those sonnes of Adam, which are dead in their sinnes and trespasses, I do by the power of my Spirit revive, by working in them a lively faith in mee, and cause them to leade the life of grace. And those who do thus live the life of faith,26 And whosoever li∣veth and beleeveth in mee, shall never die. I doe by my power and mercy preserve from dying eternally, &c. And this howsoever Caiphas spake out of his owne malicious sense,51 And this spake hee not of himselfe, but being high Priest that yeare, hee prophecied that Iesus should die for that nation. yet God over-ruled his tongue herein (as being the high Priest that yeare) to utter unawares an oracle-like prophesie concerning Christ, that hee should dye for that nation of the Jewes. And not for that nation onely, but for all mankinde;52 And not for that na∣tion onely, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered a∣broad. that by the vertue of his death hee might gather together all his elect ones among the Gentiles; and might happily bring them to the participation of the same grace, and glory.
CAP. XII. 19 Behold, the world is gone after him.WEe see so many beleeve in him, as if all the world would turne disciples to him. 23 And Iesus answe∣red them, saying, the houre is come that the Sonne of man should bee glorified.The time is now at hand, wherein the Sonne of man shall be glorified, both by his triumph over death, and by the generall publication of the Gospell all the world over. 24 Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corne of wheate fall into the ground, and die, it abi∣deth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.In the meane time, let it not trouble you to see me die: for I tell you, this is the way to my greater glory. Even as ye see the corne falls into the ground, and there doth, as it were, die, in a naturall corruption, that it may live againe in a plentifull increase. 25 Hee that loveth his life, shall lose it, &c.See Matth. 10.39. 27 Father, save me from this houre, but for this, &c.See Matth. 26.39. I doe not so regard my owne safetie and peace, that I would have either of these stand in the way of thy glory. O Father,28 Father, glorifie thy name: then came there a voice from heaven saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorifie it againe. therefore, whatsoever I suffer, doe thou glo∣rifie thy owne name, &c. I have hitherto glorified it by all those proofes I have given of thy Deity, by all the miracles which thou hast wrought; and I will perfit that which I have begun; & will after a glorious death consummate thine everla∣sting glory in heaven. 32 And, I if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, upon my Crosse (which my enemies intend to my shamefull death) shall then shew forth my glorious triumphes, and will then by the power of my death, draw up all my cho∣sen ones into heaven with me. 35 Yet a little while is the light with you, walke while yee have the light, lest darkenesse come upon you.Yet a little while is the light of my bodily presence with you, and the light of my personall Doctrine shines forth unto you; make use of this happy opportunity whiles it lasteth, &c. 39, 40 Thererefore they could not beleeve, because that Esaias said againe; He hath blinded their eies, & hardned their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, &c.Therefore they could not beleeve, because that, as Isaias speaketh, in a just punishment of their malicious∣nesse and contempt, God had strucken them with a re∣probate sense, so as their eies were blinded, and their hearts hardened against the meanes of their conversion, and salvation. 47 For I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.See Iohn 3.17.
That Doctrine which by his commandement I preach unto you,50 And I know that his commandement is e∣verlasting. is that which will surely bring you to everla∣sting life, &c. CAP. XIII. IEsus, though he well knew what evill was towards him,3, 4, 5. Iesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that hee was come from God, and went to God; He riseth from sup∣per, and laid aside his gar∣ments, and tooke a towell and girded himselfe: after that he powreth water in∣to a bason, and began to wash the disciples feet, and to wipe them with the towell wherewith hee was girded. by the treacherous conspiracy of Judas, yet well know∣ing also, the happy issue of all these his imminent suffe∣rings, and foreseeing his triumph over all his enemies; and the glory prepared for him, in that free & full sove∣raignty, which the Father had given him, over all things, both in heaven and earth; and knowing, that as hee was sent from heaven, by his eternall Father; so also, that he was (in spight of all the opposition of the powers of hell) to returne now to the glory of his Father; He cheere∣fully addressed himselfe to this great worke; and rising from Supper, in a desire to leave behinde him, an exam∣ple of humility, and charity, he laid aside his garments, and tooke a towell, and girded himselfe; and powring water into a bason, began to wash his disciples feet. Thou doest not as yet understand the reason of this act of mine; thou shalt in due time know,7 Iesus answered and said unto him, what I doe thou knowest not now: but thou shalt know here∣after. upon what ground I doe it; but in the meane time, it behoves thee to submit thy selfe with all humble obedience, to this worke which I have in hand. If I doe not wash thee both by my bloud,8 If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me. shed for the expiation of mans sinne; and by the sanctifying power of my Spirit, (which I would represent unto thee by this washing) thou canst have no part with me, no interest in me, no benefit by me. Nay then, Lord,9 Simon Peter saith unto him; Lord, not my feet onely, but also my hands and my head. let it not be enough that thou wash∣est some part of mee alone; for alas, I am all uncleane with my sinnefull corruptions; wash mee therefore all over, cleanse thou both my hands that are guilty of ma∣ny offensive actions, and my head that hath conceived many sinnefull thoughts. As it is in the custome of bathes,10 Iesus saith to him, hee that is washed, need∣eth not, save to wash his feet, but is cleane every whit: and yee are cleane, but not all. that those who come forth thence, shall not need to bee washt over a∣gaine, save onely to have their feet washt, which have soyled themselves by treading upon the ground; so is it in this spirituall washing, ye my disciples are already, in respect of the maine businesse of regeneration, washed from your sinnes, yet there are some remainders of earthly and worldly affections, which must bee still pur∣ged
away, and rectified in the best men; so shall they be altogether cleane; and such is your condition at this time; ye my disciples are cleane; and yet not all of you; there is one of this your small number, who is extreame∣ly foule and filthie. 18 I speake not of you all, I know whom I have chosen: but that the Scrip∣ture may be fulfilled. Hee that eateth bread with me, hath lift up his heele a∣gainst me.But when I say yee are happy, I speake not of you all, I doe well know the condition of those, whom I have chosen to follow me; and amongst them I do well know who bee my true and faithfull followers, and vessels of honour; and I know yee are not all such; for in my fami∣ly must that be fulfilled which David my true type spake of his familiars, He that eateth bread with me hath con∣spired against me. 23 Now there was lea∣ning on Iesus bosome, one of his disciples, whom Ie∣sus loved.Now, according to the usuall forme of their posture at the Table, one of the disciples, (even John whom Je∣sus loved above the rest) leaned on the bosome of Je∣sus. 26 Iesus answered, hee it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it.Then Jesus, as whispering secretly unto John, said; He it is to whom I shall give a sop, &c. 27 And after the sop, Satan entred into him: then said Iesus unto him, that thou doest, do quick∣ly.Upon that sop so kindly given by Jesus to him; Satan tooke more full possession of Judas; and more strong∣ly prevailed with him, to resolve, and indeavour his in∣tended mischiefe. Then said Jesus unto him, I know well what thou goest about; thy secrecy cannot elude my knowledge of thy plots against mee; since therefore thou wilt needs doe thus treacherously, dispatch spee∣dily that which thou hast in hand. 31 Now is the Sonne of man glorified: and God is glorified in him.Now is the time at hand, wherein the Sonne of man shall be exempted from all the miseries, and calamities of this life, and shall be invested with the incomprehen∣sible glory of God; as in his patient death and power∣full resurrection, God shall be glorified by him. So also verse 32. 36 Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou shalt follow mee afterwards.Thou art not yet fit to follow mee up to my Crosse, or to ascend up with me to my glory: but ere long, thou shalt be enabled to both, and shalt bee admitted to the fellowship both of my death, and blessednesse. CAP. XIIII. 1 Let not your heart be troubled: ye beleeve in God, beleeve also in me.YE have great conflicts to undergoe: see therefore that your soules be furnished with a strong, and live∣ly faith: and, let it not suffice you, that yee doe beleeve
in one infinite, and invisible God, that eternall, and in∣comprehensible Spirit, who hath made you, and all the world; but repose the whole affiance of your hearts up∣on me, the true and onely Son of God, whom ye see clo∣thed with flesh: and the rather now fasten your soules upon me, by a stedfast beleefe, for that yee shall see this humanity of mine subjected to many, and great mise∣ries, much contempt, paine, insultation, yea to an igno∣minious death; but let not your hearts be troubled with those heavie things, which ye shall see to befall mee: the issue whereof yee shall finde to bee glorious. In heaven, which is the house of my Father,2 In my Fathers house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you: I goe to prepare a place for you. above there is infinite provision, and store of gloious mansi∣ons, for all my faithfull ones; were there onely roome for mee alone, I would not have borne you in hope of that which were not to bee enjoyed; but now, I know, there are such great store, that I goe, before hand, to pre∣pare places for you. And, though I doe now goe from you,3 And if I goe & pre∣pare a place for you, I will come againe, and receive you unto my selfe, that where I am, there ye may be also. and ascend in∣to heaven, to make provision for you, and my whole Church, yet I will, at the day of my last Judgement, and restoring of all things, come againe into the world; and gather all mine Elect to my selfe; that in a full consum∣mation of blisse, where I am, there may ye bee also. Master,5 Thomas saith unto him, Lord, wee know not whither thou goest: and how can wee know the way? thou hast in some generall termes told us of thy going to thy Father, and taking possession of thy kingdome: but thou hast not clearely explicated unto us the meanes, and manner, how thou wilt doe it; since therefore thou hast not fully expressed thy selfe in those particularities of thy kingdome and glory, how much lesse should wee bee able to know, which way thou wilt take for thy compassing, and attaining of it? If thou wouldst know the way to heavenly glory;6 Iesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man com∣meth unto the Father, but by me. know, that there is no way thither, but in and by mee; there is nothing tending to happinesse that thou canst de∣sire, but it is found in me. In me is to be found the begin∣ning, the proceeding, the end of all perfection; whoso∣ever would come to the glory of my Father, in me hee must enter, for I am the way; in mee hee must goe for∣ward, for I am the saving light of divine truth; in me hee must shut up, for I am eternall life, &c. If yee had so thorowly observed,7 If yee had knowen mee, yee should have knowen my Father also: and from henceforth, yee know him, and have seene him. and informed your selves of mee, and noted my words and actions, as yee might have done, ye might have seene in mee the lively image of my Father, and have acknowledged the full∣nesse of his Godhead dwelling bodily in me: but here∣in you have hitherto beene defective: now from hence∣forth,
see your owne errour, and amend it; and know, that in knowing, and beleeving in me, yee doe know my Father, and doe so beleeve in him, as if your eyes beheld him. So also verse 9. 8 Philip saith unto him; Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.Lord, wee have seene thee, and wee have seene great proofes of thy divine power, so as thy Father hath shew∣ed forth himselfe in thee, but wee wish that thou woul∣dest shew us thy Father in himselfe; if we could see him with our bodily eyes, we should be fully satisfied, and should not trouble thee with any more questions of this kinde. 10 Beleevest thou not, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me?Beleevest thou not that I am, in my eternall essence, one God with the Father, and that the God-head of the Father dwelleth, and exhibiteth it selfe in me, &c? So verse 11. 12 Verily, verily, I say unto you, hee that belee∣veth on me, the workes that I doe, shall he doe al∣so, and greater workes than these shall he doe, be∣cause I go unto my Father.I would have you know that the manifestation of the power of my God-head is not so tyed to my personall presence, as that when I am gone, there shal be no further proofe, nor use of it; but contrarily, even after my de∣parture out of the world, I will give such power to those that beleeve in me, that they shall doe the very same mi∣racles that I have done: yea, I will doe more and grea∣ter workes by their hands, after I have ascended, than those which I have here done in person upon earth. Be∣cause I going to my Father, shall and may in that glo∣rious condition of mine, so much more manifest my di∣vine power, by this meanes, unto the world. 16 And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that hee may abide with you for ever.I have hitherto beene a true comforter unto you, but it is not for mee to make my personall aboad amongst you; in respect of my visible presence, I must leave you; but bee not therewith dismaied, for I that am the Me∣diator for my Church, will pray to my Father, and hee will send you another Comforter, even his holy Spirit, which shall abide with you for ever. 17 Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but yee know him, for he dwel∣leth with you, and shall be in you.That holy Spirit of mine who is the author, and tea∣cher of all truth; whom the world hath no understan∣ding of; as being led by sense, and not acknowledging ought that it sees not, or conceives not by the dim ap∣prehensions of corrupt reason: but yee know him by the light of your faith, and the experience of his working in you; for hee dwelleth in you, and shall in a more full measure take up your hearts in his sanctifying, and mira∣culous graces.
It canot bee but yee must be afflicted with my depar∣ture, but I will not leave you comfortlesse,18 I will not leave you comfortlesse, I will come to you. though I must leave you for the time: there is another presence of mine, which I must, and will make good unto you, even the presence of my Spirit. Ere long, indeed,19 Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more: but ye see mee, be∣cause I live, yee shall live also. I shall bee taken away from the sight of the world; but yet I shall be still and ever present with you, and yee by the eye of your faith shall see and ac∣knowledge me: for, both I shall live, and ye by the ver∣tue of my life, shall live also this life of faith before mee, and in that state of your spirituall life, shall see and injoy me. And, at that time of my effectuall illumination,20 At that day, yee shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me. yee shall know and understand that holy and mysticall uni∣on, which is betwixt my Father and me, and my Church; and how that divine vertue is communicated from the Father to me, and by me to you beleevers. He that is rightly instructed in my commandements,21 Hee that hath my commandements, & kee∣peth them, hee it is that loveth me. and apprehendeth them aright, and conscionably endea∣vours to keepe and observe them, hee it is that loves me really and truely, &c. I must bid you farewell,27 Peace I leave with you, my peace I giue unto you; not as the world gi∣veth, give I unto you: let not your heart bee trou∣bled, neither let it bee afraid. and wish you all peace and happinesse, not according to the fashionable comple∣ment of the world, but seriously, and with effect; as be∣stowing upon you that good which I wish; let not your hearts be dismayed at my valediction; neither bee dis∣couraged with the feare of those evills which shall fol∣low after my departure. If ye did so spiritually love me, as ye ought,28 If ye loved me, ye would rejoyce, because I said I goe to my Father, for my Father is greater than I. ye would rejoyce, because I said, I goe unto the Father; for the glory wherewith my Father is eternally invested, is grea∣ter than that which this humane nature and life of mine is capable of; it is infinitely therefore for my advantage, that I goe to the Father, and therein, also for yours. I have not many words more to speake unto you;30 Hereafter I will not talke much with you: for the Prince of this world commeth, and hath no∣thing in me. I am now drawing neere unto my end. Satan, the great ruler of this wicked world, is now working his utmost against me; and is stirring up my enemies and conspira∣tors to my ruine; but he neither doth, nor can finde any the least advantage against mee; except that, which I shall voluntary yeeld for the working out of mans re∣demption; hee shall not finde in me either sinne, or im∣potence; so as what ever I shall suffer, it shall bee out of my will, not out of his power, or constraint. That herein the world may know that I love the Fa∣ther, in that, out of my obediēce to his wil,31 But that the world may know that I love the Father: and as the Father give me commandement, even so I doe: arise, let us goe hence. (who hath de∣creed me to be the propitiation for the sins of the world)
I do yeeld my selfe over to death; and in this passion of mine shall cheerefully fulfill all that, which the eternall counsell of my Father hath fore-determined to be done, and undergone by mee. CAP. XV. 1, 2. I am the true vine, and my Father is the hus∣bandman, every branch in me that beares not fruit, he taketh away.AS the naturall vine is to the brances, so am I spiritu∣ally to my Church; I give juice and sappe unto them that are mine; and all the moisture that they have, and the fruit that they beare, is received onely from mee, as the originall thereof; so as I am the true spirituall vine stock, to my faithfull branches, and my Father is as the carefull owner, and dresser of this vine, in that he is ready to tend it, at all assayes; and to lop off all those superfluous twigs, that yeeld no fruit answerable to the nourishment re∣ceived. Every branch therefore that is professedly in mee, and yet beares not fruit, but is utterly barren, hee taketh away by his just censures and judgements, &c. 3 Now yee are cleane through the word which I have spoken unto you.Ye my Disciples have had experience of this spiritu∣all husbandry, and the efficacie thereof; for now yee are pruned, and purged from your evill and corrupt affe∣ctions, through the power of that word, which I have spoken unto you; and of my spirit working therewith. 4 Abide in me, and I in you: as the branch cannot beare fruit of it selfe, ex∣cept it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except it abide in mee.Hold fast the grace that ye have received; be carefull that no inconstancie, or weake feares slacken your hold on mee; abide ye in mee, and be firme to mee, for I am stedfast unto you, and will abide in you for ever. 6 If a man abide not in mee, hee is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.If any man that professeth my name shall revolt from mee, and abandon that grace which he hath received; not persevering therein unto the end; hee is justly cast forth in a deserved punishment of his levity, and unthankful∣nesse, as a superfluous and feare branch that is lopped from the stock, is cast aside for the fire. 10 If ye keepe my com∣mandements, yee shall in my love, even as I have kept my Father comman∣dements, and abide in his love.I would not have you propound any other patterne to follow, then mine; yee se how studiously and exactly I have kept the commandements of my heavenly Father; and with how infinite love hee imbraceth mee; do ye so therefore: there is no way to continue in my love, but by keeping of my commandements; thus yee do it, and shall be sure never to faile thereof. 11 These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remaine in you, and that your joy might be full.These things have I spoken unto you, that the joy of my holy Ghost might remaine in your hearts, constant∣ly; and that your joy in me might be exquisite, and per∣fect.
For all that part of my Fathers counsell which it con∣cernes you to know,15 For all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made knowne unto you. and all that is any way requisite to your salvation, I, as the onely doctor of my Church, and the Word of my Father, have imparted unto you. It is their obstinate infidelitie and wilfull contempt that shall procure their just, and deepe damnation;22 If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sinne: but now they have no cloake for their sinne. if they had not had meanes sufficient offered unto them; yea if I had not come to them in person, and spoken un∣to them, and tendered to them the meanes of salvation, their sinne had beene the lesse; but now they have no excuse for their sinne, no colour of extenuation. So also verse 24. But now have they seene in mee the cleare proofes of the Godhead of my eternall Father,24 But now have they both seene, and hated both me and my Father. with whom I am one; and have maliciously opposed themselves against mee, and that divine power whereof they have beene convinced. CAP. XVI. BUt now I am going to heaven from whence I came,5 But now I goe my way to him that sent mee, and none of you asketh me, whither goest thou. to the repossession of my Fathers glory; and none of you so askes after the issue, and successe of my departure, as to establish his heart with abundance of comfort in the assurance of that happy provision which I shall there make for him and my Church. It is for your benefit and advantage that I remove my bodily presence from you;7 Neverthelesse I tell you the truth, it is expedi∣ent for you, that I go away: for if I goe not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. for except I goe away from you, ye shall not have the holy Ghost, (who is the true comforter of my Church) sent downe upon you in that abundant measure, which you shall shortly finde: for it is the decree of mine eternall Father (which in all things must be obeyed and fulfilled) that untill mine ascension into heaven, the holy Spirit shall not in the plentifull store of his graces be sent downe upon the earth. And this Spirit which I will send,8 And when he is come he will reprove the world of sinne, and of righteous∣nesse, and of judgement. shall in the power∣full preaching of that Gospell which shall be commit∣ted unto you, and by his secret cooperation therewith, shall convince this wicked and sinfull world, both of their owne sinne, and of my righteousnesse and judge∣ment. Of their sinne, wherewith they abound every where,9 Of sinne because they beleeved not on mee.
and which shall be most justly imputed to them, because of their unbeleefe; for could they beleeve in mee, that faith would worke repentance, and that faith and re∣pentance would have purged them from all their sinne. 10 Of righteousnesse, be∣cause I goe to my Father, and ye see me no more.Of my righteousnesse, wherein both I have approved my selfe perfectly answerable to the will of my heaven∣ly Father; and whereby onely I doe and can justifie all that beleeve in mee, notwithstanding all their unwor∣thinesse; because, as having overcome sinne and death, I ascend triumphantly to the glory of my Father. 11 Of judgement, be∣cause the Prince of this world is judged.Of my righteous judgement, in the moderation of the world, and ordering all the affaires of my Church, re∣dressing the enormities thereof, suppressing and punish∣ing the enemies of it, maintaining and vindicating the truth professed in it, and reducing all things therein to a right order; because Satan the Prince of the world is by me despoyled of his power, and restrained, and con∣founded in his devices and attempts. 12 I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot heare them now.I have yet many things to speake unto you concer∣ning the future estate of my Church, which through your weakenesse ye are not as yet meet to receive. 13 For hee shall not speake of himselfe; but whatsoever he shall heare that shall he speake, and he will shew you things to come.The lying spirits of false teachers speake, as of them∣selves, their owne vaine imaginations, and erroneous doctrines; but the holy Spirit which I shall send, as hee proceeds from the Father, and me his eternall Sonne; so he speakes also as from God the Father, and the Sonne; and whatsoever he hath from us received, that will hee inspire you with; and informe you in; and shall reveale unto you those things which concerne the future condi∣tion of my Church. 14 He shall glorifie me, for hee shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you.He shall not set up any new kingdome different from mine, but shall establish that glory and government, which is put upon me by the Father; he shall conferre the blessings & benefits that arise from my incarnatiō, suffer∣ing redemption, justification, sanctification upon you my faithfull ones, and shall reveale unto you the knowledge of those things which I have willed ye should be infor∣med in; and shall inrich you with those heavenly treasures of wisedome and knowledge, which are laid up in mee. 15 All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that hee shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you.All things that the Father hath are mine, by the right of that Godhead, which is one and the same, in both; and to mee also, as mediator, hath hee communicated all that power, which may serve for the administration and happinesse of my Church; therefore said I, that hee should impart the treasures of my wisedome, and know∣ledge unto you. 16 A little while, and ye shall not see mee, and againe a little while yee shall see me, because I goe to the Father.Now it shall not be long, ere I be removed from you,
in respect of my bodily presence; and againe it shall not be long after that, ere I comfort you with the gracious presence of my Spirit; because I goe to the Father. Ye shall after my departure be put to great extremi∣ties, for many grievous persecutions shall befall you:20 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that yee shall weepe and lament, but the world shall rejoice, and ye shall be sorrowfull, but your sorrow shall be turn∣ed into joy. in the meane time the worldshall insult upon you, and shall cry you downe as miserable men, and magnifie their owne ease, and happinesse; but be not herewith discomforted, for this sorrow of yours shall end in un∣speakable joy, and blessednesse. Yea, ye shall finde cause of exceeding joy,21 A woman when she is in travaile, hath sorrow, because her houre is come; but assoone as she is deli∣vered of the child. in that which was the occasion of your sorrow, even your sufferings, for my names sake; even as a woman in travell is ex∣tremely afflicted with her painfull throwes, but as soone as, &c. In that day when I shall have sent my holy Spirit upon you,23 And in that day yee shall aske me nothing. yee shall not need to aske any questions for the gaining of further knowledge: for all things, meet for you to know, shall be clearely revealed unto you, &c. Yee have not hitherto taken so expresse notice of my mediatorship,24 Hitherto have yee asked nothing in my name, aske and ye shall re∣ceive, that your joy may be full. as to propound your suits to my hea∣venly Father in my name; though the types and figures of the law, and the plaine intimations of the Prophets have directed you to this practise; but now, ever here∣after make this use of my name, in your prayers, and ye shall be sure to obtaine that which yee sue for, to the unspeakable joy and comfort of your soules. I have hitherto delivered divers doctrines to you in darke and mysticall manner, as ye have thought,25 These things have I spoken unto you in pro∣verbes, &c. through the weakenes of your apprehension, but henceforth, &c. I shall not need to incourage you with the assurance of my praying for you;26 And I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you. for such is the gracious propen∣sion of my heavenly Father toward you, that hee will in his wonderfull mercie, prevent you with his goodnesse, and give you all blessings unasked. CAP. XVII. O Father,1 Father, the houre is come, glorifie thy Sonne, that thy Sonne also may glorifie thee. as thou hast hitherto mightily declared mee for thy Sonne, by those wonderfull miracles that have beene wrought by mee; so now, that the houre of my suffering and death approacheth, do thou more glo∣rifie thy selfe by mee, in that, by this bitter passion of mine, mankinde shall be redeemed, satan, and all the powers of hel defeated; even whiles I must undergoe this paine, and ignominie, doe thou shew forth thy almightie
power in acknowledging, and magnifying the infinite vertue of this my al-sufficient redemption; that herein I, thine eternall Sonne, the mediator betwixt thee and mankinde, may also glorifie thee in this worke of attone∣ment, which I shall make betwixt thee, and men, and the full glorification of all mine with thee. 3 And this is life eter∣nall, that they might know thee the onely true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent.And this is the sure and certaine way to attaine eter∣nall life, even this, to know thee, who art the onely true God, and Jesus Christ thy Sonne whom thou hast sent into the world to be the redeemer thereof. 4 I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finish∣ed the worke which thou gavest mee to do.I have by my doctrine and miracles made thee known to men on earth; and now I am upon the point of finish∣ing that worke of mans redemption, by my death, and passion, which thou hast injoyned mee to doe. 7 Now they have knowne that all things, whatsoever thou hast gi∣ven me, are of thee.And now they have known, both by my information, and by their owne experience, that all the power that I have, & all the great acts that I have done, are from thee, and from that perfect and indivisible union which I have with thee. 9 I pray for them I pray not for the world; but for them which thou hast gi∣ven me, for they are thine.O Father, I require nothing of thee, but what I know may and doth well stand with thine eternall counsell; I pray not therefore for the world of unbeleevers, and rebellious wicked men; I pray for that speciall charge, that peculiar flock which thou hast committed unto me; they are thine, and thou hast professed to have a deare interest in them, and an infinite care of them. There is that perfect union betweene thee and mee, that those which pertaine to the one,10 And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. are no lesse pecu∣liarly proper unto the other: our right in all the elect is inseparable; all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am, together with thee, glorified in them. 11 Keepe, through thine owne name, those whom thou hast given mee, that they may be one as wee are.Keepe thou, through thy mightie power, and gracious protection, those whom thou hast given mee, that they may be joyned together in the unity of the Spirit, and may be so of one heart, as thou, O Father, and I, are of one nature, and essence. 12 Whiles I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name, those that thou gavest me, I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the Sonne of per∣dition: that the Scripture might be fulfilled.Whiles I was visibly with them in the world, I was ready upon all occasions to sustaine and com∣fort, and instruct them, and as by the personall exe∣cution of that power of a mediator, which thou hast committed unto mee to preserve and keepe them, even all those whom thou gavest to my peculiar charge, and attendance, have I yet more specially watched over, and kept from the perill of tentations; so as not one of them is lost: Onely Judas, who was of old ordained to this condemnation, mis-carrieth, not through any neglect of mine, but through his owne
wilfull wickednesse; So as in him is that Scripture ful∣filled, which the Psalmist said of him long agoe, let his dayes be few, and let another take his office. Psal. 109.10. Sanctifie thou them, O Lord,17 Sanctifie them through thy truth: thy word is truth. and purge them from all evill, and corrupt affections, by the power of thy Gos∣pell; which is the word of truth, and the power of God to salvation to every beleever. For their sakes I have sanctified,19 And for their sakes I sanctifie my selfe, that they also might be sancti∣fied through the truth: and consecrated my selfe to this worke of mediation, to become an holy, and al-sufficient sacrifice unto thee; that the holinesse of my perfect obedience might be derived unto them, that they through this my word of truth might be sanctified unto thee. That they may be perfectly joyned in the unitie of faith, and love, and may make up one entire body,21 That they all may be one, as thou Father art in mee, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may be∣leeve that thou hast sent mee. whereof I am the head; even as thou, O Father, art one with mee, as I am mediator betwixt thee and men; and by the vertue of this union, all that I have received from thee, is communicated unto them, and they become one with us: that by this full accord and unitie, that is be∣tweene them, the world may be convinced of the effica∣cie of my comming into the world, and of my divine power and authoritie, putting me upon this great worke, and effecting it by mee. The glory which thou hast put upon mee,22 And the glory which thou gavest mee, I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one. as media∣tor, I have not so received for my selfe, or so reserved to my selfe, as not to communicate it unto them which are the members of my body; I have stamped them with the same glorious impression, that they may be one in themselves and in mee, as wee are one, not one∣ly by an eternall communication of essence, but by an inseparable conjunction of the manhood with God. Thou, O Father, art in mee, as mediator,23 I in them, and thou in mee, that they may be made perfect in one. and I (as such also) am in them by my Spirit, working effectual∣ly in them, to unite them perfectly in one, both with themselves, and with us, &c. O Father,24 Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given mee, be with mee where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given mee. it is the utmost of all my indeavours and desires, that all those faithfull ones whom thou hast gi∣ven mee, may injoy the full participation of my glory; and that, for this end, they may be received up, at last, into that heavenly kingdome, whither I am going be∣fore them, and be there present with mee for ever, &c.
CAP. XVIII. 11 Then said Iesus un∣to Peter, put up thy sword into thy sheath; the Cup which my Father hath gi∣ven me, shall I not drink it?IT is not for thee to make opposition to this violence, which they are now going about to offer unto me; my Fathers will must be fulfilled; & doest thou goe about to prevent my sufferings? Since this passion of mine is set forth, and determined unto me, by the decree of my heavenly Father, shall not I cheerefully, and resolutely undergoe it? or, is it for thee to struggle against it? 28 Then led they Iesus from Caiphas unto the hall of judgement, and it was early, and they themselves went not into the judge∣ment hall, lest they should bee defiled: but that they might eate the Passo∣ver.Then led they Jesus from Caiphas, unto the house of Pilate; and it was early, even before day, and they them∣selves went not into the house of that heathen-gover∣nour, lest they should be defiled by going in thither; as being carefull to keepe themselves from all legall pollu∣tion, that they might bee capable of eating the Passo∣ver. 29 Pilate then went out unto them, and said; What accusation bring you against this man?Since therefore, out of this scruple, they would not come under the roofe of Pilate; Pilate came forth unto them, and said, &c. 32 That the saying of of Iesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death hee should die.That hereupon, the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled which hee spake concerning his lifting up to the crosse; foretelling what manner of death hee should die: since this was an execution proper to the Romans, under whose soveraignty they were, of whom also hee had clearely fore-prophesied, That the Sonne of man should be delivered into the hands of the Gentiles. 36 My kingdome is not of this world: if my king∣dome were of this world, then would my servants fight, &c.I am falsely accused to thee, as if I had challenged an earthly kingdome to my selfe, or, made any opposition against the politicke government of secular Princes; I have indeed preached of a kingdome, which I have right unto; but it is a spirituall kingdome, to bee set up in the soules of men; which doth not at all clash with these earthly dominions. Had I affected any such mat∣ter, as a temporall kingdome (in all likelihood) thou wilt imagine that I would have set up my servants, and followers, to gather forces, and make an head against the usurpers, but now, &c. 37 Iesus answered, thou saiest that I am a King, to this end was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should beare witnes unto the truth, every one that is of the truth, heareth my voice.Jesus answered, I am, that which thy question impli∣eth, a King indeed; but such a one, as I have formerly declared unto thee; I must deliver this truth unto thee, and to the world; for to this very end came I into the world, that I should informe the world of this saving truth; and howsoever this seemes harsh unto thee, yet every one who is rightly inlightened with the know∣ledge
of the truth, will receive it with all assent, and re∣verence. What is that truth thou talkest of? Is there no body,38 What is truth? thinkest thou, that can discerne of truth, but thou and thy followers? CAP. XIX. BEhold, since ye will not come into heare his accusa∣tion, and defence,4 Behold, I bring him forth to you, that yee may know, that I finde no fault in him. I doe therefore bring him forth to you, to let you know, that I cannot finde any fault at all in him, for which I may justly proceed against him; on∣ly since you have complained on him, as a man that af∣fects a kingdome, I have here brought him forth to you, in a royaltie fit for him. If thou, being a stranger in matters of religion,7 The Iewes answe∣red him, wee have a law, and by our law hee ought to die, because hee made himselfe the Son of God. canst finde no fault in him, yet wee, that are Jewes know his offence to bee capitall; neither doe wee offer him to punishment, as out of our owne spleene, and ma∣lice, but in a conscionable obedience to our Law. For, we have a Law, which inflicteth death upon a blasphe∣mer; and we know, and urge that whatsoever mere man shall call himselfe the Sonne of God, blasphemeth. This man (whom wee take to bee no other than he seemeth) hath called himselfe the Sonne of God; and therefore, by our Law ought to die. When Pilate heard this plea, and pretence of theirs he was more troubled in himselfe, out of a feare, lest,8 When Pilate there∣fore heard that saying, he was the more afraid. if hee should not satisfie this vehement rage of the multi∣tude, some tumult might follow upon it to his danger and prejudice. I am indeed now by my owne voluntary dispensation,11 Iesus answered, thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from a∣bove; therefore hee that delivered mee unto thee, hath the greater sinne. in thy power, and stand before thee, as my Judge; but, know thou, that this power of thine is not absolute, and independent; but is committed unto thee from an high∣er hand, to which thou must bee accountable; this au∣thority is put into thy hand, by that God, whose tribu∣nall is above thine; and therefore since all judiciary pow∣er is of his ordination, their sinne is so much the greater, and more hainous, who to cloake their owne malice, have had this recourse to abused authority; as seeking colourably to kill me under a false pretence of justice. Hitherto in my personall presence with thee,26 Woman, behold thy sonne. I have provided for thee, and comforted thee as a mother just∣ly deare unto mee; but now, that I shall no longer con∣tinue
upon earth, I doe commend thee to the love, and care of this my beloved disciple; &c. 28 After this Iesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.After this, Jesus knowing that he had exactly perfor∣med all that was required of him, before the full con∣summation of his passion; that the Scripture might be fullfilled, which saith of him (in his Type) They gave me vineger to drinke, he said, I thirst, &c. 30 It is finished.Now, I have done that I came for; I have both done, and suffered all that was requisite for mans redemption; my life and the Law are now fulfilled. For that Sabbath was an high day;31 For that Sabbath was an high day. by reason that there was a concurrence of the Passover and the Sabbath both at once in that one day. CAP. XX. 17 Iesus saith unto her, touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Fa∣ther, but goe to my bre∣thren, and say to them; I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God.IEsus saith unto her; Make not so eager haste to lay hold on mee, as if I were going away from thee, for I am not yet ascending to my Father: but, goe to my disci∣ples, (whom I lately conversed familiarly with, as with brethren) goe to them, and say unto them; I arose from the dead, not with any purpose to continue with you up∣on earth, but that I might ascend up to my Father in heaven; yea to your Father also, in that he is mine; ye are his children by adoption, as I am by nature, and as fellow heires with mee shall bee received up in due time to the participation of the same glory; which I now goe to take possession of. 19 Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the weeke, when the doores were shut, where the disciples were assembled, for feare of the Iewes, came Iesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them; Peace be unto you.On the Sunday night, when the doores were close shut up in the roome, where the disciples were secretly gathered together for feare of the Jewes, who malici∣ously made inquirie for them, (with an intent of their further persecution) came Jesus in, miraculously amongst them; and suddenly standing in the midst of them, said unto them: Peace be unto you. 21 As my Father hath sent mee, even so send I you.I was sent by my Father, to preach the Gospell, in my owne person, to the world; and afterwards to sub∣stitute, and surrogate those, which should in my name carry the same message; now therefore, the same com∣mission that I received from my Father, I doe here put over unto you. Ye have beene heretofore the messengers of this glad tidings to Judea; now I designe and ap∣point you to the same errand, unto all the parts of the world.
And he breathed upon them; as by that sensible signe,22 And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Re∣ceive ye the holy Ghost, giving them assurance of that spirituall power, which hee indued them withall, and said: Receive yee the holy Ghost; be ye by me ordained for worthy, and effectuall instruments of my service, in my Church; and be furni∣shed, by this act of mine, with such a measure of grace, and supernaturall abilities, as may assure you, that ye are set apart for this great imployment of my Apostleship; and shall, ere long, receive the full measure of those mi∣raculous gifts, which I have intended to you. Whose soever sinnes ye doe remit,23 Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remit∣ted unto them; and whose soever sinnes yee retaine, they are retained. whether by way of publique Doctrine, or particular application of your Apostilike sentence, they are remitted to them, in hea∣ven; and whose sinnes soever ye retaine, whether by generall doctrine, or by speciall censure, they are retai∣ned by God, and shall bee fearefully imputed to the of∣fenders. These acts of yours both wayes (as also of your true and lawfull successours) shall bee accordingly ratified in heaven. CAP. XXI. NOw when Simon Peter heard, by the voice of the disciple whom Jesus loved, that it was the Lord;7 Therefore that dis∣ciple whom Iesus loved, saith unto Peter, It is the Lord; Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, hee girt his fishers coat unto him (for he was naked) and did cast him∣selfe into the sea. he put upon him an upper coate (for he was clad after the manner of fishers, with some close inner garment onely, and having girt it unto him, did cast himselfe (in the vehemence of his desire to come unto Christ) into the sea. And the disciples, seeing such assured proofes,12 And none of the dis∣ciples durst aske him, who art thou, knowing that it was the Lord. and cleare evidences, that it was the Lord: durst not, for shame, move any question thereof, as if they could con∣ceive any doubt of so manifest and undeniable a truth. Simon, the sonne of Jona,17 Hee said unto him the third time, Simon son of Ionas, lovest thou mee? Peter was grieved, be∣cause he said unto him the third time, lovest thou me? and he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things▪ thou knowest that I love thee; Iesus saith un∣to him, feed my sheepe. thou hast shewed much servent affection to me, above thy fellowes, in that thou hast cast thy selfe into the sea, to come unto me; and in∣deed, thou hast reason to love mee more than the rest, for that more is remitted to thee, than to them. Tell me therefore, Dost thou love mee more than these thy fellow disciples? Hee saith unto him, yea Lord, thou knowest that I love thee, fervently, and zealously. Jesus saith unto him, Then doe thou shew, and improve this love of thine unto me, in this one point above all others; see that thou doe carefully teach, and guide the soules of
my people: thy affection cannot reach unto me, let it be bestowed upon those tender converts which shall come under thy charge. 18 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, when thou wast young, thou girddest thy selfe, & walkedst whither thou wouldest, but when thou shalt bee old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, &c.Verily, I say unto thee; In thy younger times, thou hadst the free command of thy selfe, and full scope, and liberty to dispose of thy selfe to thine owne best liking; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt be restrai∣ned in durance, and be forced to undergoe martyrdome, thou shalt be both bound, and crucified It neither concernes thee, nor befits thee to aske what shall become of thy fellowes?22 Iesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Leave that to my care; I have determined what to do with all mine; and particularly with this disciple, whom I have alwaies held so deare unto me. And, if it were my dermination to continue him here upon earth, till my comming a∣gaine, what were this to thee? looke thou to thy selfe; and addresse thy selfe to follow mee in that bloody way which I have led thee, to glory: 25 And there are also many other things, which Iesus did, the which if they should bee written every one, I suppose that even the world it selfe could not containe the bookes that should bee written: Amen.Let no man thinke that I intended in this writing, to comprehend all the miraculous workes which Jesus did; but onely to choose out some few from a world of those wonders, that he wrought; and, if all his great and mar∣velous acts should bee recorded, they would doubtlesse fill infinite volumes. THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. CAP. I. 4 But wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith hee, Yee have heard of me.BUt wait for the performance of that promise, which God the Father hath made concern∣ing the sending downe of the holy Ghost; which promise (said he) yee have heard rela∣ted to you, by me. 5 For Iohn truely bap∣tised with water, but yee shall bee baptised with the holy Ghost, &c.See Matth. 3.11. 6 When they there∣fore were come together, they asked of him, saying; Lord, wilt thou at this time restore againe the kingdome to Israel?Lord, we have heard, and have all this while beleeved that there is a temporall kingdome to be restored to the
now-enthralled, and tributary people of Israel, by the Messias. Wee know thee to bee that Messias, which should come: thou hast mightily declared thy selfe to be the Sonne of God by thy rising from death, so as no hu∣man power can bee able to resist thee: wilt thou now therefore, at this time, satisfie the expectation of thy people, and breake off this servile yoke of the Romans, and restore the kindome to Israel? This question of yours is curious, and mis-grounded.7 And hee said unto them, it is not for you to know the times, or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his owne pow∣er. It is true that I shall restore the kingdome to Israel, spiritually; not in a carnall and temporall manner, as ye weakely suppose; but by ruling in the hearts of men by the power of my Gospell, and at last, by perfiting the full glory of my Church: but when this shall be effected, it is not for you to inquire: there is enough revealed truth for you to content your selves with. Doe not yee offer to pry into those matters, and seasons, the know∣ledge whereof God the Father hath thought fit to re∣serve unto himselfe. That which concernes you, is,8 But ye shall receive power after that the holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall bee witnesses unto mee, both in Ierusa∣lem, and in all Iudea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth. to looke unto the worke whereto yee are designed: ere long yee shall re∣ceive power from above, & be furnished with abilities to cary my Gospell into the world; for which purpose the holy Ghost shall come upon you, in miraculous gifts and graces; and yee shall bee witnesses to mee, to declare and justifie unto the world, the truth of my resurrection, and the power of my Godhead, beginning at Hierusa∣lem, and so proceeding to the rest of Judea, and Galilee, and then, even to Samaria it selfe, and to all the nations of the earth without all exception, or limitation. Two Angels stood by them in the forme of men,10 And while they loo∣ked stedfastly towards heaven, as he went up, be∣hold two men stood by them in white apparell. clo∣thed in bright apparell. Yee men of Galilee, the late disciples of Jesus;11 Ye men of Galilee, why stand yee gazing up into heaven? this same Ie∣sus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seene him goe into heaven. why stand ye thus, with your eyes fixed upon that point of heaven, where your master ascended, as if you could still see him, as if your eyes would follow him up into that glory? know, that now yee must exercise rather the eyes of your faith; and that the heavens must containe that glo∣rious master and Saviour of yours, till his second com∣ming to judgement; at which time yee shall see him re∣turning from heaven, in the same glorious manner, wherein ye saw him ascending up thither. Now this man received that reward or hire of his treachery, wherewith a field was afterward purchased:18 Now this man pur∣chased a field with the re∣ward of iniquitie, and fal∣ling headlong, hee burst asunder in the midst: and and all his bowels, &c.
and when hee had done, in a late remorse, offered a de∣sperate violence to himselfe. From which Judas, by that wicked treason against his master, fell, that he might goe to that place which was fit for so foule a traytor,25 From which Iudas by transgression fel, that he might goe to his owne place. and such an hypocrite; who had all this while taken up a roome, that he was utterly un∣worthy of. CAP. II. 4 And they were all fil∣led with the holy Ghost, and began to speake with other tongues, as the Spi∣rit gave them utterance.WHereas the eleven Apostles had before, upon the breathing of their Master, and Saviour, received the holy Ghost, in that measure that was fit for the pre∣sent occasion; now all the assembled Disciples (together with the twelve) were fully inspired with the same holy Ghost; and miraculously furnished with the gifts and graces thereof; and (for a proofe of it) began to speake with strange tongues, as they were guided by the same Spirit. 17 I will powre out of my Spirit upon all flesh, &c.See Ioel. 2.28.29,18 And on my servants, and on my handmaids, &c. 30, 31:20 The Sunne shall be turned into darknesse, &c. 31 That his soule was not left in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption.Hee was not left to continue in the state of death; neither was his flesh so long suffered to lye under the power of death, as to passe through the degrees of cor∣ruption. 36 That God hath made that same Iesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.That God hath in his eternall counsell ordained this Jesus, whom yee have crucified, to be the Lord of his Church, the true and onely Messias, and the sole re∣deemer of mankinde; and hath mightily declared, and approved him for such; so as yee all ought to acknow∣ledge him, and looke for salvation from him alone. And even yee also shall receive these miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost,38 And ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. in testimony and assurance of the free remission of your sins, and that inward worke of renova∣tion which hee shall effect in you. 40 Save your selves from this untoward ge∣neration.Do not any longer joyne your selves with the per∣verse and malicious enemies of Christ; but as you do now see their hainous impiety, in crucifying the Lord of life, so do yee estrange your selves from them; and beleeve, and professe that truth of the Gospell which they labour to oppose.
And they continued stedfastly in the communion,42 And they continued stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. and fellowship of the Apostles and the rest of the Disciples of Christ; and constantly professed that doctrine, which the Apostles taught them; and joyned together in the celebration, and receit of the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and in prayers. And they had in that first plantation of the Gospell, so, all things common,44 And had all things common. as that every one was ready to contribute of that, which hee had, to the publique uses of the Church, and to the particular necessities of their brethren. So also verse 45. And consorting in their frugall, and temperate meales,46 And breaking bread from house to house, did eate their meate with gladnesse and singlenesse of heart. they did injoy the holy society of each other, with much comfort, and great sincerity of heart. CAP. III. AT the houre of evening prayer,1 At the houre of prayer, being the ninth houre. being about three of the clocke in the afternoone. It was onely the name of Jesus,16 And his name through faith, in his name hath made this man strong, whom yee see and know: yea, the faith which is by him, hath given him this perfect soundnesse in the presence of you all. which I made use of in this cure; neither was it the bare outward sound thereof, but the faith in the Almightie power of him, whose name it is, that hath made this man strong, whom ye see, and know; yea, howsoever the secret and omni∣potent power of God hath done it, yet the meanes which hath obtained it, is the faith in this Jesus, (both wrought in us by him, and firmely pitched upon him alone) that is it, which hath procured to this man perfect soundnesse, in the presence of you all. And now brethren,17 And how brethren, I wote that through igno∣rance yee did it, as did also your rulers. I have not said this to drive you into a despaire of mercy; had yee done this knowingly, wilfully, maliciously, the case had beene fearfull, and hardly capable of remedie; but now ye did it rather out of ignorance, and errour of opinion, as likewise, diverse of your rulers did; so that there is great hope, and (if ye repent) assurance of mercie, and forgivenesse.19 Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sinnes may be blotted out, when the times of re∣freshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. That, in the time when this Sonne of God shall come againe to judge the world, which shall be a day of ter∣rour indeed to the wicked and impenitent; but a day of unspeakable comfort and happinesse to all penitent be∣leevers; yee may then receive, not a discharge onely, but joy, and blessednesse for him. Whom the heavens must containe,21 Whom the heavens must receive untill the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets. in respect of the
presence of his glorified body, untill the time of his se∣cond comming, when hee shall appeare againe, for the full consummation of the glory of his elect; and perfect accomplishment of his kingdome, concerning which (in all the passages thereof) God hath spoken by all his holy Prophets, &c. CAP. IV. 11 This is the stone which was set at nought, of you, &c.See Psal. 118.22. NEither can there be any other meanes named, or conceived,12 For there is none other name under heaven, given among men, where∣by we must be saved. in all the world, whereby salvation can be had, but onely by, and through him. All these enemies of thy Christ, notwithstanding all their complotting,28 For to doe whatsoe∣ver thy hand and thy coun∣sell determined before to be done. and maliciousnesse; could do nothing against him, but that which thou in thine eternall coun∣sell hadst both foreseene, and decreed to permit, and or∣der to the behoofe, and salvation of thy Church. CAP. V. 3 Why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the holy Ghost, and to keepe backe part of the price of the land?WHy hast thou given way to Satan to take full pos∣session of thy heart, in this grosse hypocrisie of thine; wherein thou hast under a colour of holinesse, committed a grievous sacriledge, and thereby hast drawne in the holy Ghost as a suborner, and abetter of thy wickednesse and falshood; pretending to have beene moved by that good Spirit, to give all the price of thy land, freely, to God, and his Church, when in the meane time thou hast kept back part for thine owne use? How is it, that ye have agreed together thus to mock God,9 How is it that yee have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold the feet of them which have buried thy husband. and to put this affront upon the Spirit of the Lord? as if, by this secret, and fraudulent conveyance, ye would try whether hee did know, or would revenge this your close deceit, and impietie, &c. And they all met together every day, at set houres, in that spacious roome of the Temple,12 And they were all with one accord in Solo∣mons porch. which was called the porch of Solomon. 37 After this man rose up Iudas of Galilee, in the day of the taxing, and drew away much people after him.After this man, arose up Judas of Galilee, and up∣on the quarrell of the taxes, laid by Cesar upon the people of the Jewes, made an insurrection; pretending that they ought not to be charged with those impositi∣ons, &c.
CAP. VI. THere arose a murmur of those proselytes,1 There arose a mur∣muring of the Grecians a∣gainst the Hebrewes, be∣cause their widdows were neglected in the daily mi∣nistration. and Jewes (now converted to the Christian faith) that were bred in Greece, and had lived there, against those that were borne, and bred in Judea; because in the distribu∣tion of the Churches money and almes, their widdowes were not, as well provided for, as the other. It is no reason that wee,2 It is not reason that wee should leave the word of God, and serve tables. who are appointed by Christ our Master to preach the Gospell, and to attend the winning of soules to God, and the planting and order∣ing of his Church, should be taken up with the cares of the distributions of money, and other almes, for the re∣liefe and provision of the body. And when they had prayed,6 And when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. they laid their hands up∣on them, as hereby to signifie, and import the setting apart, and consecration of them to this usefull office. And there arose certaine of that famous Schoole or Synagogue,9 Then there arose cer∣taine of the Synagogue, which is called the Syna∣gogue of the Libertines, and Cerenians, and Alexan∣drians, and of them of Ci∣licia, and of Asia, disputing with Steven. which the free men of Rome had built for those Jewes, which came out of the Provinces, being strangers, of many severall nations, and they disputed with Steven. They saw a certaine majesty, and Angelicall bright∣nesse in the countenance of Steven.15 Saw his face as it had beene the face of an An∣gel. CAP. VII. BEing in all,14 Then sent Ioseph, and called his father Ia∣cob to him, and all his kin∣red, threescore and fifteene soules. to the number of threescore and fifteene soules; for the making up whereof, there are reckon∣ed, above those which Moses mentioneth, two sons, and a nephew of Ephraim, and two sonnes of Manasseth, which were borne after the comming down into Egypt. And were carried some of them to Hebron,16 And were carried over unto Sichem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abra∣ham bought for a summe of money of the sonnes of Emor the father of Si∣chem. some to Sichem, whether to that plot of ground which was bought of Emor the father of Sichem; or to that sepul∣chre which Abraham bought for money (for the buriall of his dead) of Ephron the Hittite. Yea, rather neglecting my Tabernacle, ye erected a Tabernacle to Moloch, the Idol of the Ammonites,43 Yea, ye tooke up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the starre of your god Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them. and to those other false deities, which ye chose out to your selves, out of the hoast of heaven; whose images & repre∣sentations ye framed to your selves, to worship thē, &c. Which also our fathers carried about with them,45 Which also our fa∣thers that came after, brought in with Iesus into the possession of the Gen∣tiles. as
the visible testimony of Gods presence; and brought it in with Joshua, and, under his conduct, into the promised land, which was then the possession of the Gentiles, &c. 51 Yee stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart, and eares, yee do alwayes resist the holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye.Ye stubburne and perverse people, men whose hearts are corrupt and gracelesse, and whose eares are wilful∣ly shut up against all good counsell; yee do alwayes re∣belliously set your selves against those wholsome do∣ctrines, and holy admonitions, which the Spirit of God gives you by his messengers; as your fathers did before you, even so doe ye, obstinately resist all the meanes of grace, and goodnesse. Who have received the Law, by the ministration of Angels, on mount Sinai, and have not kept it.53 Who have received the Law by the disposition of Angels, and have not kept it. But he, being full of faith, and all other graces of the holy Ghost,55 But hee being full of the holy Ghost, looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Iesus standing on the right hand of God. looked up stedfastly into heaven, and there saw a glorious representation of the Majesty of God, and Jesus appearing in his glorified humane nature, in∣vested with that infinite resplendence, which was fit for him, to whom the Father hath committed all power and glory. So also verse 56. 58 And cast him out of the citie, and stoned him: and the witnesses laid downe their cloathes at a young mans feet whose name was Saul.Yet this tumultuous violence was not without some pretence of a legall proceeding, for there came in cer∣taine men, which gave evidence against Stephen; and these witnesses (according to the law, being to cast the first stones at the condemned) laid downe their gar∣ments at the feet of one that was a favourer, and abet∣tour of their proceedings, even a yong man, named Saul. CAP. VIII. 18 And when Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy Ghost was given, he offered them money.ANd when Simon the sorcerer saw, that upon the outward ceremony of laying on of hands (though ac∣companied with the faithfull prayers of the Apostles) the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost were sensibly conferred on the persons formerly baptized; hee offered them money. 23 For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bit∣ternesse, and in the bond of iniquitie.For I perceive, thou art all over tainted, and empoy∣soned with the most deadly venome of wickednesse, and fast bound with the fetters and manicles of thine iniqui∣tie. 33 In his humiliation, &c.See Esay 53.8.
And the Spirit of the Lord suddenly and miraculous∣ly withdrew Philip, from the presence,39 And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the Eunuch saw him no more: and hee went on his way rejoycing. and sight of the Eunuch; who went on his way, thereupon more rejoyce∣ing, for that hee saw God had by so wonderfull meanes, wrought his conversion. CAP. IX. IT is no boot for thee to struggle,5 And he said, Who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Iesus whom thou persecutest, it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. and spurne against my almighty power; herein thou shalt so much the more punish, and wrong thy selfe; cease therefore from this thy violent and unjust persecution. And he disputed with those Jewes which came out of Greece to Jerusalem.29 And disputed against the Grecians: but they went about to slay him. CAP. X. A Man that in his kinde,2 A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house. and according to his know∣ledge, was very devout; and that (according to those generall principles which he had received) feared God; and had wrought his family to an orderly, and re∣ligious course, &c. Thy prayers which thou hast made unto God,4 Thy prayers and thine almes are come up for a memoriall before God. pro∣ceeding from such weake and imperfect (though true) faith, as his Spirit hath wrought in thee, and those chari∣table almes of thine, which upon the same grounds thou hast given, are gratiously taken notice of, and accepted by Almightie God. That which God hath sanctified,15 What God hath cleansed, that call thou not common. and delivered from all that legall pollution, which formerly debarred it from ordinary, and allowed use; do not thou hold pro∣fane, and uncleane. CAP. XI. See Matth. 3.11.16 Iohn baptized with water, but ye shall be bap∣tized with the, &c. ANd sent it to the Presbyters and Deacons of the Church, by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.30 Which also they did, and sent it to the El∣ders by the hands of Bar∣nabas and Saul.
CAP. XII. 4 And when hee had apprehended him, he put him in prison, & delivered him to foure quaternions of souldiers to keepe him, &c.DElivered him to foure quaternions of souldiers; that so there might bee for every change of the watch, both day and night, foure souldiers to gard him; that he might not faile to be forth-comming, &c. 11 Now I know of a suretie, that the Lord hath sent his Angel, and hath delivered mee out of the hand of Herod, &c.Now, when that astonishment was overpast, and Peter began sensibly to perceive that it was not a vision, but a reall act of deliverance; he said, &c. 15 And they said unto her, Thou art mad, but she constantly affirmed, &c.It is his Angel, who hath taken upon him the shape of Peter; himselfe it cannot be. 20 And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre, and Sidon: but they came with one accord to him, and having made Blastus the kings Chamberlaine their friend, desired peace, &c.They desired peace, because their country, being of it selfe but barren, was nourished with that corne, which was transported to them out of Herods dominions; the importation whereof being upon this late hostility for∣bidden; they were forced to submit, and sue to He∣rod. 23 And immediatly, the Angel of the Lord smote him▪ because hee gave not God the glory, and he was eaten with wormes, and gave up the ghost.And God smote him by the immediate hand of his Angell, with a loathsome and painefull disease; because he tooke to himselfe that vaine and wicked applause; and was willing enough that the people should rob God of glory, to bestow it upon him; and his entrailes were noysomely corrupted, and eaten thorow with wormes, and he gave up the ghost. CAP. XIII. 1 And Manaen, which had bin brought up with Herod the Tetrarch.ANd Manaen who had beene a courtier of great note, bred familiarly with Herod the Tetrarch, &c. 2 Separate me Barna∣bas & Saul, for the worke whereunto I have called them.Set ye apart Barnabas and Saul, by solemne prayer, and fasting, and imposition of hands, to be the Apostles of the Gentiles; and send them on that errand according∣ly. And they had John (which was called Marke) to bee their Minister,5 And they had also Iohn to their minister. to assist them in those holy labours, though in an inferiour degree. 9 Set his eyes on him.Fixed his eies upon him, with much indignation, and zealous anger.
And as concerning his raising up &c.34 And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to re∣turne to corruption, hee said on this wife; I will give you the sure mercies of God. he said on this wise; I will make good that firme and faithfull, and no lesse gratious promise, which I made to David; that from his loines should proceed a King, whose dominion should be everlasting. By him, and through faith in his bloud,39 And by him all that beleeve, are justified from all things, from which yee could not bee justified by the Law of Moses. all that be∣leeve, receive a full discharge from all those sinnes, whereof they could never bee acquitted by the Law of Moses; it is our faith in him, which shall give us that iustification, which we should in vaine seeke in the Law of workes. See Matth. 10.14.51 They shooke off the dust of their feet against them, and came into Iconi∣um. CAP. XIV. PAul knowing, by the instinct,9 Who stedfastly be∣holding him, and percei∣ving that hee had faith to be healed. & intimation of the Spi∣rit of God, that the lame man, who had heard his prea∣ching, had now faith enough to make him capable of this miraculous cure. Neverthelesse,17 Neverthelesse hee left not himselfe without witnesse, in that hee did good, and gave us raine from heaven, and fruitfull seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladnesse. God hath not left the blindest hea∣thens, in their darkest times of ignorance, without a sufficient conviction of his infinite goodnesse, and pow∣er; in that hee hath heaped upon them many blessings, for the present life, and hath given cleare demonstrati∣ons of his providence, and omnipotence, in ordering the seasons according to a regular course, and making plen∣tifull pourveiance for his creatures, of all, both necessa∣ry, and expedient helpes and comforts. CAP. XV. THey were gladly received by the whole congregati∣on, and especially by the Apostles,4 They were received of the Church, and of the Apostles, and Elders. and those Presby∣ters, which the Apostles had there ordained, &c. Why doe yee goe about to crosse God,10 Now therefore why tempt yee God, to put a yoke upon the necke of the disciples, which nei∣ther our fathers, neither we are able to beare? in thwarting his ordinance, and altering the course, which hee hath set for the justification, and salvation of men, by impo∣sing upon the disciples a necessity of subjecting them∣selves to this yoke of the law of Ceremonies, and, by con∣sequence, to the law of workes; a condition, which not
they onely, but even the holiest of our fathers, were ut∣terly unable to undergoe, and fulfill. 20 But that wee write unto them, that they ab∣staine from pollutions of Idols, and from forni∣cation, and from things strangled, and from bloud.Onely, that wee write unto them, that they abstaine from those things, which are the most common and or∣dinary offences of the times, in those that are become converts to Christianity; namely, from having any thing to doe with the pollutions of Idolatrie, in partaking of their Idol-services, or ought that pertaines thereunto. Secondly, that they abstaine from fornication, and all bodily uncleannesse; which, however the Gentiles (es∣pecially in those parts) are wont to make slight account of (as if it were a matter of little, or no offence,) yet they must be better taught, that it is a very hainous sinne a∣gainst God, and their owne bodies. And thirdly, that they doe abstaine (for the time) from the eating of ought strangled, and of blood, whether within the body of the thing killed, or severed from it; because this charge was not peculiarly given to the Jewes alone in the Law, but, before the Law, to whole mankinde, and therefore not too suddenly to bee abrogated. 21 For Moses of old time hath in every City them that preach him, be∣ing read in the Synagogues, every Sabbath day.For we may not, all at once, inhibite the observations of these rites, and Mosaicall ceremonies, for as much as the people have beene of old trained up in them, and are taught in every City, to regard, and observe them; in that every Sabbath day, the Law of Moses is (by severall sections) read to them in their Synagogues: they must therefore bee weaned from them by degrees, and meet leasure. 28 For it seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you.It seemed good to us, being herein led, and guided by the holy Ghost, to lay upon you, &c. CAP. XVI. 14 Whose heart the Lord opened, that she at∣tended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.WHose understanding the Lord inlightned with the knowledge and apprehension of that which was taught, and whose heart was moved to affect that truth which she heard, &c. 16 A certaine damosell possessed with a spirit of divination met us.A certaine Damosell, possessed with an ill Spirit, which had the power (through the permission of God) to foretell things to come, met us, &c. 37 Being Romans, and have cast us into prison, & now doe they thrust us out privily?Being free Denizens of Rome, and therefore, privi∣leged by the Law, from these base usages.
CAP. XVII. THese Jewes of Berea, were more ingenuous,11 These were more noble than those in Thessa∣lonica, in that they recei∣ved the word with all readinesse of minde, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. and bet∣ter affected, than those of Thessalonica; for they chearefully received the word of our Gospell, and tooke paines to search the Scriptures, and to compare our do∣ctrine with the text of the Prophets, to see if wee had al∣leged them aright. And they brought him into that spacious roome,19 And they tooke him, and brought him un∣to Areopagus, saying. wherein was wont to be held the chiefe Court of Justice in Athens, called Areopagus, or Mars his hill, saying, &c. For as much then as we are of a divine originall,29 Forasmuch then as wee are the offspring of God, wee ought not to thinke that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art, and mans device. having our soules inspired into us by almighty God, wee might by our very selves easily reach to so much knowledge of God, as to understand, that he is of a spirituall nature, and not to be resembled by gold, or silver, or stone, gra∣ven by the art, and device of man, or any other bodily creature. As for those former times of ignorance;30 And the times of this ignorance God win∣ked at, but now comman∣deth all men, every where, to repent. God hath seemed, as it were, to over-looke, and disregard them, in not giving them the meanes of knowledge and con∣version; and therefore hath expected the lesse from them; but now that he hath offered so effectuall meanes of salvation, hee lookes for other manner of obedience, commanding all men, every where, now to repent them of their sinnes. CAP. XVIII. ANd,3 And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought (for by their occupation, they were tent-makers.) because he was of the same craft of tent-making which he had learned, and (though formerly a Pha∣rise, and now an Apostle, by profession, and by privilege a Citizen of Rome) practised, for his owne necessary maintenance, as one that would not, in those tender be∣ginnings, charge the Church; nor, in this holy care and frugality, bee gone beyond by the false apostles: hee abode with them, and wrought in their trade. Having purposely so farre conformed himselfe to the Law of Moses;18 Having shorne his head in Cenchrea: for he had a vow. as to shave his head upon a vow made to God, and to be performed by him at Hierusalem; that, by this meanes, hee might winne the weake Jewes; in that they should see, he was not (as was suggested) an
enemy and despiser of the Law; but one, that was wil∣ling to observe it for the time, till those ceremonies, which were dead with Christ, might also be safely, and decently buried. CAP. XIX. 2 Have yee received the holy Ghost, since yee beleeved? and they said unto him, We have not so much as heard, whether there bee any holy Ghost.HAve yee received the extraordinary and miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, since ye beleeved? and they said unto him; we have not so much as heard that there are those miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost bestowed on men that beleeve. 3 And hee said unto thē, Unto what then were ye baptized? and they said, unto Iohns baptisme.And hee said unto them; These graces and gifts are wont to be given by imposition of hands, after Baptisme; which since yee have not taken notice of, tell mee, unto what were ye baptized? And they said, we were bapti∣zed by Johns baptisme, to the remission of sinnes by Je∣sus Christ, that Lambe of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world. 4 Then said Paul; Iohn verily baptized with the baptisme of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should beleeve on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Iesus.Then said Paul; John verily, as the outward Mini∣ster of baptisme, baptized you with water, to the remission of sinnes; together with his baptisme, teach∣ing the people that they should beleeve in that Jesus Christ, which should come after him; so as, his baptisme was true, and perfect; yet such, as was not accompani∣ed, and attended with these miraculous gifts, which now since the full glorification of Christ, are bestowed upon men. 5 When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Iesus.Whiles therefore John taught them thus, and made this holy Commentary upon his said baptisme, they that heard it (in receiving his baptisme) were baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus. 6 And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them, and they &c.And when Paul had laid his hands upon them (as ha∣ving before beene fully, and duely baptized) the holy Ghost came downe upon them, in miraculous gifts; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied. 19 Many also of them which used curious arts, brought their bookes to∣gether.Many of them, which used magicall, & devilish Arts, in a professed remorse, brought their bookes together, &c. CAP. XX. 7 When the disciples came together to breake bread.WHen the disciples came together to celebrate the Lords Supper, &c. 22 And now behold, I goe bound in the Spirit un∣to Ierusalem.And now, behold, I am by the strong motions of
Gods Spirit, over-ruled, and, as it were, forcibly ur∣ged, to goe up to Jerusalem. Amongst whom I have gone preaching the Gospell of Christ, and by the power thereof laboured to erect,25 And now behold, I know that yee all, among whom I have gone prea∣ching the kingdome of God. and advance the spirituall kingdome of the Lord Jesus, &c. Be carefull, and vigilant, O yee Ephesian Pastors,29 For I know this, that after my departing, shall grievous wolves en∣ter in among you. over the flocke committed unto you; for I doe well know, by reuelation from God, that, when I am gone, there will arise dangerous false-teachers, who will intrude themselves into your assemblies, and make havock of the soules of your people. CAP. XXI. WHo said to Paul,4 Who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not goe up to Ieru∣salem. through those revelations (which they had from the Spirit of God) of the dangers, which Paul should passe at Jerusalem; that they thought good to advise him not to goe up thither. We have foure men,23 Doe therefore this that we say to thee, Wee have foure men which have a vow on them, which having vowed themselves Nazarites for a season, are now come up to accomplish those oblations, which are in the Law required. Them doe thou take with thee, and joyne with them,24 Them take and pu∣rifie thy selfe with them, and bee at charges with them, that they may shave their heads, and all may know that those things &c. in the ceremonies of their purification, in the Temple; and, in the charge of their offerings; that they by sha∣ving their heads, giving open testimony of their vow, may, as by thy countenance and allowance, put them∣selves forward to the full performance thereof, &c. And the next day purifying himselfe with them,26 And the next day purifying himselfe with them, entred into the Temple, to signifie the accomplishment of the daies of purification, untill that an offering should bee offered for every one of them. en∣tred into the Temple, according to the Law, to signifie the accomplishment of the daies of their separation; and there staied with them, untill those three sacrifices of the three Lambes (one for a burnt offering, another for a sinne offering, a third for a peace offering) should be offered for every one of them; and till the rest of the oblations, and rites should be accomplished. And immediately they shut to the outer gates of the Temple,30 And forthwith the doores were shut. lest that holy place should be defiled with that bloud, which they meant to shed.38 Art not thou that Aegyptian, which before these daies, madest an up∣roare, and leddest our in∣to the wildernesse foure thousand men that were murtherers? Art not thou that Aegyptian impostor, which under the name of a Prophet, didst lately draw together foure thousand debauched men, into the mount of Olives, and make an insurrection against the Roman government?
CAP. XXII. 28 But I was free borne.BUt I was free borne, in that I was borne a citizen of Tarsus, a colonie of Rome, indued with the privi∣ledges of that mother citie. CAP. XXIII. 3 God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: for, sit∣test thou to judge mee af∣ter the Law, and comman∣dest me to be smitten con∣trary to the Law?GOd shall be revenged of thee, O thou counterfeit of an High-Priest, and mere painted visor of justice; For dost thou pretend to come hither to judge mee ac∣cording to the law, and now (preventing and abusing justice) doest thou command mee to be smitten contra∣ry to law? the law forbids to punish any man causelesly, and unheard, thou commandest this unjust measure to be offered unto mee. 5 Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that hee was the high Priest, for it is written, Thou shalt not speake evill of the ruler of thy people.Then said Paul, Brethren, I acknowledge not this man (being a knowne and palpable usurper) to be the High-priest; for I well know what is written in the law, Thou shalt not speake ill of the Ruler of thy people; were he so, I would have forborne to speake unreverent∣ly, and unrespectively to him; but being as he is, a noted intruder, I have made bold to speake home unto him. 6 But when Paul per∣ceived that the one part were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees, hee cryed out in the Councell, Men &c.But when Paul perceived that the one part of the as∣sembly were Sadduces, which denyed the resurrection, the other Pharisees; in an holy policie to divert the ma∣lice of the multitude, and so to divide them, that his just cause might finde a partie among them, hee cryed out in the councell, and said, &c. 9 But if a spirit, or an Angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight against God.If the Spirit of God, or some Angel of God hath spoken to him, what reason have wee to quarrell with him, in this? or if wee doe, what do wee else but fight against God himselfe? CAP. XXIV. 1 And after five dayes, Ananias the high Priest descended with the Elders and with a certain Oratour named Tertullus.ANd after five dayes, Ananias the high Priest, out of his malicious stomach against Paul, tooke his jour∣ney with the Elders of the Jewes, to Cesarea, and carri∣ed with him a certaine famous pleader, named Ter∣tullus, &c. 6 Who also hath gone about to profane the Tem∣ple; whom wee tooke, and would have judged according to our law.Who hath gone about to profane the Temple in carry∣ing in thither with him a forrayner, both in nation, and religion.
CAP. XXVI. ANd now I stand here before thee,6 And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our Fathers. and am judged for maintaining the accomplishing of that blessed hope, which our fathers conceived, from those cleare promises, made by God unto them, of that Messias, which hee would send, and now hath sent into the world, as also for averring that assured hope of our resurrection from the dead. To the happy fruition whereof our twelve tribes,7 Vnto which promise our twelve tribes instant∣ly serving God day and night, hope to come, for which hopes sake, King Agrippa, I am accused of the Iewes. and all that are faithfull amongst them, serving God, day and night, hope to attaine: for the maintenance of which hope (O King Agrippa) I am accused of the Jewes. And compelled them to disclaime and renounce their profession, and to speake against the name of Jesus.11 And compelled them to blaspheme. CAP. XXVII. BEcause it began now to be dangerous sayling,9 Now when much time was spent, and when say∣ling was now dangerous, because the Fast was now already past, Paul admo∣nished them. for that the season was well neare out; it being well forward in Autumne, at which time the seas use to be shut up, and the weather is wont to be stormie, and unsetled. There arose a stormie, and tempestuous wind,14 But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous winde called Euroclydon. that blew strongly from the North-East, which therefore the mariners are wont to call Euroclydon. God hath indeed assured me, that none of all our lives shall miscarry in this danger,31 Paul said to the Cen∣turion and to the Souldi∣ers, Except these abide in the ship, yee cannot be sa∣ved. but that God who hath ordained our preservation, hath also ordained the means thereof, and therefore hath appointed that these mari∣ners shall continue in the ship, if we will hope of safety. And when wee fell upon a shelfe of ground,41 And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship aground, and the forepart stuck fast and remained unmove∣able. that rising up somewhat high, and being shallow under water, had a deepe sea, and strong eddye on both sides of it, they ran the ship aground there, (though not close to any shore) and the fore part sticking fast upon that shelfe remained unmoveable, &c. CAP. XXVIII. THey knew that the Iland was called Malta.1 They knew that the Iland was called Melita. Hee shooke off that venemous serpent into the fire,5 And hee shooke off the beast into the fire, and felt no harme.
and felt no hurt; according to that word of our Saviour, They shall take up serpents, and if they drinke any dead∣ly thing, it shall not hurt them. 15 They came to meet us as farre as Appii forum.They came to meet us a dayes journey, as farre as the towne called Appii forum, &c. 19 Not that I had ought to accuse my nation of.Not that I have any complaint to make unto Cesar, of my nation; howsoever some of them secretly plotted, and vowed my death without cause; but onely that I may stand upon my owne just defence before him. 20 Because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chaine.For maintaig the truth of that Messias, who is the onely hope, and the sole redeemer of Israel, I am now bound with this chaine. 26 Go unto this people and say: Hearing yee shall heare, and shall not under∣stand, &c.See Isay 6.9. THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE ROMANS. CAP. I. 1 Paul a servant of Iesus Christ, called to be an A∣postle, separated unto the Gospell of God.PAul, once a persecutor, now a faithfull servant of Jesus Christ, called by his immediate voice from heaven, to be an Apostle, set apart, both in the eternall counsell of God, and by his speciall command, and appointment, to preach unto the Gentiles the Gospel of God, which is the glad tidings of salvation. 2 (Which he had promi∣sed afore by his prophets in the holy Scriptures.)(Which Gospell is not of any new device, or creation, but is the same which hath beene anciently promised afore times by the Prophets, which have beene since the world began, and consigned by them, in the sacred mo∣numents of holy Scripture.) 3 Concerning his Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the feed of David according to the flesh.Concerning his only and eternall Sonne Jesus Christ our Lord, who taking upon him our nature, was miracu∣lously
conceived by the holy Ghost, and tooke flesh of the blessed virgin Mary, who was of the seed of David, and derived from him according to the flesh. And mightily declared,4 And declared to be the Son of God, with power, according to the Spirit of holinesse by the resurre∣ction from the dead. and proved to be the Sonne of God by that omnipotent power, which hee shewed in raising himselfe from the dead; which power of his, is confirmed and sealed unto the hearts of all his faithfull, by the holy Spirit of God. By whose mere grace and mercy wee have received this honour, and immediate calling to our Apostleship,5 By whom wee have received grace and A∣postleship for obedience to the faith among all nations for his name. that we should carry this blessed message of the Gospell for him to all nations, to the end, that they might yeeld the obedience of their faith unto it, and be holily confor∣med thereunto. Among which nations, ye Romans especially,6 Among whom ye are also the called of Iesus Christ. are par∣takers of Jesus Christ, by your effectuall calling, which hee hath wrought in you. For God is my witnesse,9 For God is my wit∣nesse, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospell of his Sonne, that without ceasing I make mention of you alwaies in my prayers. whom I do sincerely serve in this holy labour of preaching the Gospell of his Sonne Christ, that I do not faile upon all occasions, to make mention of you in my prayers. For I long to see you; that I may personally impart unto you some holy, and divine counsell,11 For I long to see you that I may impart unto you some spirituall gift, to the end you may bee esta∣blished. to the end ye may be established, and confirmed in the faith, which ye have received. Although, not onely to give comfort unto you, but to receive comfort from you also,12 That is, that I may be comforted together with you, by the mutuall faith both of you and me. by the present inter∣view of our mutuall faith; which shall administer much cause of joy, both to you and mee. That I might reape some spirituall fruit amongst you, as I have done amongst other Gentiles;13 That I might have some fruit among you al∣so, even as among other Gentiles. in seeing the hap∣py successe of my preaching the Gospell to you; and glo∣rifying God the more in your full conversion, and sal∣vation. Neither are yee beholden to mee for this desire,14 I am debter both to the Greeks and to the Bar∣barians, both to the wise and to the unwise. as if it were an arbitrary favour; It is a dutie that I owe to all nations, both learned and unlearned, both wise and simple, to preach unto them the Gospell of peace. For howsoever yee Romans carry the reputation of great, and learned, and wise; and contrarily,16 For I am not ashamed of the Gospell of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that beleeveth, to the Jew first, and also to the Greeke. the Gospell hath no shew but of simplicitie; yet I am not ashamed to professe my selfe the publisher of this plaine, and homely doctrine of the Gospell, neither indeed, need I, for how meane soever it seemes to carnall eyes, yet it is the mighty and powerfull meanes, whereby God workes the salvation of every beleever, whether Jew (for unto Jewes it was first to be preached) or Gentile.
17 For therein is the righteousnesse of God re∣vealed, from faith to faith; as it is written, The just shall live by faith.For that gracious acceptation of God, whereby he accounteth us as righteous in his sight, through the me∣rits of his Sonne, is revealed to us, in and by this Gospell of his; and the sense and assurance thereof, groweth in us according to the increase of our faith; which faith of ours gives us a spirituall life in him; according to that of the Prophet Habacuc, The just shall and doth ever live by his faith. 18 For the wrath of God is revealed from hea∣ven against all ungodlinesse and unrighteousnesse of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousnesse.Neither is there any other way of justification, or life, but by this faith; for, as for the workes of men they are altogether sinfull; and such, as lye open to the judge∣ments of God; since both by his word, and by sensible experience, the wrath of God is declared, and denoun∣ced against that universall ungodlinesse, and unrighte∣ousnesse, which is in men; who suppresse the light of that law of God, which is written in nature it selfe; and though they cannot but know what they ought to doe, and leave undone, yet they smother this truth in them∣selves; and give way to their owne wickednesse. 19 Because that which may be knowne of God, is manifest in them.In which case it is not for man to plead ignorance; for God hath in the very principles of nature, ingraffed in mans heart, a certaine knowledge, both that hee is, and that hee is just, and holy, and powerfull; and hath thereby plainly convinced man of these generall truthes concerning himselfe. 20 For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world, are clearly seene, being un∣derstood by the things that are made, even his eternall power and God∣head, so, &c.For those blessed attributes of God, which are not to be discerned by the sense of man, namely his eternall power, his infinite goodnesse, wisdome, justice, mercy, and the truth of his deitie, are ever since the world was created so clearely seene, and made knowne by the vi∣sible and mighty worke of his creation, and government of all things; as that those which will not hereupon ac∣knowledge them, are left without all excuse. 21 Because that when they knew God, they glo∣rified him not as God, neither were thankfull: but became vaine in their ima∣ginations, and their foolish heart was darkned.Because, that when by these meanes, they knew so much of God, as these naturall principles would reach unto, they did not accordingly glorifie God after the proportion of that light, which they received; neither were thankful to him, who was the author and giver of all those good things they injoyed; but gave way to their owne vaine imaginations, and misconceits, concerning him; and suffered their foolish hearts to be over∣whelmed with the darknesse of ignorance, and errour. 22 Professing them∣selves to be wise, they be∣came fooles:Professing themselves to be learned and wise in these worldly and naturall things, they became very fooles in respect of spirituall and heavenly matters. 23 And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and foure footed beasts, and creeping things.And instead of those spirituall apprehensions, which they should have had of the invisible God, and that
glory, which they should have ascribed to him, as an immortall, and infinite Spirit, they framed to them∣selves images of him, like to a corruptible and mortall man, or like to birds and foure footed beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore,24 Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleane∣nesse, through the lusts of their own hearts, to disho∣nour their owne bodies betweene themselves. God (on the other side) in a just punish∣ment of their grosse idolatrie, (as plaguing one sin with another,) gave them over to their owne uncleane lusts; wherewith they were transported into such unnaturall beastlinesse, as that they dishonoured and abused their owne bodies betweene themselves. Those, who instead of acknowledging that truth,25 Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshiped and ser∣ved the creature more then the Creator. which God revealed to them, in his mightie, and glori∣ous workes, worshiped him, and conceived of him, ac∣cording to the lying fancies of their owne braine, and served, and bowed down to those base creatures, giving more adoration to them, then to the Creator, &c. See verse 24. For even their very women (whose sexe might seeme to import modestie,) became so shamelesse,26 For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did change the na∣turall use into that which is against nature. as that leaving the naturall use of fulfilling their lusts, they gave themselves over to that beastlinesse, which is a∣gainst nature. And likewise also,27 And likewise also the men, leaving the natu∣rall use of the woman, bur∣ned in their lust one to∣wards another, men with men working that which is unseemely, and recei∣ving in themselves, &c. the men &c. men with men wor∣king those acts of filthinesse, which nature it selfe ab∣horreth; and through the just judgement of God, (in this punishment of one sinne with another,) received such re∣compence of their idolatries, and spirituall fornications, as they had well deserved. And as they regarded not to acknowledge,28 And even as they did not like to retaine God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate minde, to do those things which are not convenient. and set before their eyes, that God whom they did, or might know; so God found it most just, to suffer them (being willingly blinded by their owne leud desires) to runne so farre into the mis-judgement of their mindes, as to make no difference of actions, and to call good evill, and evill good, and thereupon to fall into these foule and abominable enormities. Not onely do commit these sinnes themselves,32 Not onely do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. but give countenance, and incouragement to those that do them; and so become more then actors, patrons, and abettors of evill.
CAP. II. 1 Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man who∣soever thou art that judg∣est: for wherein thou judg∣est another, thou condem∣nest thy selfe; for thou that judgest, doest the same things.THere are, I know, divers of you so farre from being patrons of sinne, that yee are ready to passe severe censures, and judgements upon other men for those very sinnes, whereof themselves are secretly guilty; but O man, whosoever thou art, that judgest another for any offence, know, that thou makest thy selfe utterly inex∣cusable, and passest therein sentence against thy selfe; thine owne mouth hath condemned thee, in the person of another. 2 But we are sure that the judgement of God is according to truth against them which commit such things.It is not a verball profession of thine innocence, or any secret evasion of witty excuse, that can serve the turne; wee know assuredly (whatsoever men may pre∣tend) that the judgement of God, is, according to the truth of mens actions, and estates; and therefore, that he will surely punish the dooers of wickednesse, what co∣lour soever is set upon them, and their condition. 4 Or despisest thou the riches of his goodnes, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that the goodnesse of God leadeth thee to repentance?Or doest thou make an ill use of the rich mercy and patient long-suffering of God, as if he noted not, or re∣garded not, or would not punish thy mis-doings, not considering that his forbearance, all this while was for thy good, that hereupon thou mightest bee moved to repentance? 5 But after thy hard∣nesse & impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy selfe wrath, against the day of wrath, and revela∣tion of the righteous judgement of God.But thou contrarily, takest occasion by this meanes, to harden thy selfe so much more, in thy sinnes, and be∣comest obstinately impenitent; and hereby doest aggra∣vate thine owne judgement; and addest every day, some thing to that heape of Gods wrath, and vengeance, which is laid up for thee, and shall bee fearefully execu∣ted upon thee in that day, which hee hath set for the just revelation, and infliction thereof. 11 For there is no re∣spect of persons with God.For God regardeth not the person of any man for these outward things; not accepting of any man the more, for his parentage, or countrey, or wealth, or ho∣nour; nor disrespecting any, on the contrary, for mea∣nesse of birth, or poverty, or personall infirmity. 12 For as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judg∣ed by the law.For, as many as have sinned without the knowledge of a written law, shall receive notwithstanding a just judgement for their sinne, as being therein convinced by a law of nature; and as many as have sinned against the written law of God, shall according to that law, receive judgement for their sinnes. 13 For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified.For, it is the full and perfect obedience to that law, which shall present a man just before God; it is not a for∣mall profession, or an outward hearing of the law, that
can doe it. Doe this and live, is the voice of the law; not, heare this and live. For, when the Gentiles,14 For when the Gen∣tiles which have not the law, doe by nature the things contained in the law: these having not the law, are a law unto them∣selves. which have not the written law of God given unto them, doe by the light of nature, those morall actions, which are contained in the law written, these having not that written law, yet have in their owne brest those rules of equity, which are a law to themselves. Which give good testimony that they have an inward rule, in very nature of their judgement, both of good,15 Which shew the worke of the law written in their hearts, their con∣science also bearing wit∣nesse, & their thoughts the meane while accusing, or else excusing one another. and evill, agreeing with the written law; their conscien∣ces also telling them secretly, in their owne bosomes, whether they have done well, or ill; and their thoughts, either excusing, and acquitting them, in doing good; or accusing and condemning them in doing evill. I say,16 In the day when God shall judge the se∣crets of men by Iesus Christ, according to my Gospell. so many as have sinned against the light of the law written, shall bee judged by that law, in that great day of Assise, when God shall judge the secrets of all hearts by his Sonne Jesus Christ; according as I have declared unto you, in that holy and infallible message, which I have received from God; and delivered unto you. Behold, thou hast the honour,17 Behold, thou art cal∣led a Iew, and restest in the law, and makest thy boast of God. and privilege to bee called a Jew, (one of Gods antiently chosen people) and testest in this prerogative, which thou hast above other nations, that thou hast the law given to thee; and there∣upon makest thy boasts of a more peculiar interest in God. Thou takest upon thee to bee a teacher of the simple,20 An instructer of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the forme of knowledge, and of the truth in the law. as conceiting, that thou hast all the points of the law laid up in thy brest, and hast full knowledge of all the secrets thereof. Thou that abhorrest idols, and erecting of false gods,22 Thou that abhorrest Idols, doest thou commit sacrilege? doest thou profane the name of the true God, by rob∣bing him of his due? For the name of God is ill spoken of among the Gen∣tiles, by occasion of your leud life,24 For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you; as it is written. and wicked behavi∣our, as it is written by the Prophets, Esay, and Ezekiel, concerning your fore-fathers. But ye say, Wee are circumcised,25 For, circumcision ve∣rily profiteth, if thou keepe the law; but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncir∣cumcision. and have the seale of Gods covenant in our flesh. Deceive not your selves; this is but an idle vaunt; in vaine shall ye stand upon the outward ceremony of circumcision, whiles yee doe not regard the truth, and substance of that which is signified by it; Did ye live answerably to the Law of God, yee might seeme to have some reason to boast of your cir∣cumcision;
but if yee be willing transgressors, and vio∣laters of the law, your circumcision gives you no privi∣lege above the uncircumcised. 26 Therefore if the un∣circumcision keepe the righteousnesse of the law, shall not his uncircumcisi∣on be counted for circum∣cision?If he that is uncircumcised do carefully endeavour to doe those things which are required in the law, and shall accordingly doe the morall duties there specified, shall not that man bee all one in account with God, as if hee were circumcised. 27 And shall not uncir∣cumcision which is by na∣ture, if it fulfill the law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision do∣est transgresse the law.And shall not that man which is uncircumcised, if, be∣ing onely guided by the light of nature, hee performe those outward acts of morality, which the law requireth, rise up in judgement against thee, who being circumci∣sed, and having the letter of the written law to direct thee, yet livest contrary to the law? 28 For he is not a Iew, which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcisi∣on, which is outward in the flesh.If there be a privilege in Judaisme, certainely it is in the truth, and sincerity of that profession: and a man that is truely and spiritually a Jew, or Israelite, must not be esteemed so by the outward marke of circumcision in the flesh; neither is that circumcision worth accounting of, which is onely a cutting off an outward skin. 29 But hee is a Iew, which is one inwardly, & circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.But he that would be a true Israelite, or Jew indeed, must be such inwardly; being cleansed from all corrupt affections, and freed from all superfluity of maliciousnes. And that circumcision must bee inwardly in the heart, & soule, & spirit, (in cutting off the uncleane fore-skin thereof,) & not a literall & outward circumcision of the flesh, which shall ever carry acceptance from God; it may be, this bodily circumcision may amongst men bee deemed a marke of honour; but with God, no circum∣cision can looke to receive allowance, but the spiritu∣all. CAP. III. 1 What advantage then hath the Iew; or what profit is there of circumci∣sion?WHat privilege then hath the Jew above the Gen∣tile? or what profit is there of circumcision, more than of uncircumcision; if all the praise and advantage thereof be inward, which may bee as well incident into a Gentile, as into a Jew? 2 Much every way: chiefely because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God.Yes doubtlesse, there are great privileges in many re∣spects, but chiefely in this; that unto that nation, and people, were the Oracles of God committed; with them was the covenant made, to them was the law delivered; and unto their trust and custodie were the holy Scrip∣tures deposited.
But alas, you will say;3 For what if some did not beleeve? shall their unbeleefe make the faith of God without effect? What are they the better for these Oracles of God, if they have rejected them care∣lessely, through their unbeleefe, and have made them∣selves unworthy of these favours? But I say againe; Grant that many of them did not beleeve; shall their in∣fidelity bee any hinderance to the performance of the faithfull promises of God? shall not hee make his word good to his chosen ones, because some of the nation have failed of their duty to him? God forbid: yea, whatsoever become of men,4 God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a lyar, as it is written, That thou mayest be justi∣fied in thy sayings, and mightest overcome when thou art judged. who are all falshood, and vanity, let the truth of God, and all his words, and promises stand firme and inviolable for ever; according to that of the Psalmist. That thou may∣est be declared to be most true, and just in all thy sayings; and whensoever any of thine actions are scanned, maiest goe away with the glory of a perfect, and irreprehensi∣ble justice. But if this bee all, that,5 But if our unrighte∣ousnes commend the righ∣teousnes of God, what shall we say: Is God un∣righteous, who taketh vengeance? (I speake as a man.) God lookes to bee glorified by men, and (as he pleases to order matters,) hee turnes the wickednesse of men, to the praise of his justice; since his justice doth most appeare in punishing the wicked∣nesse of men; what shall we say? Is God unrighteous in punishing men, for that by which his justice is glori∣fied? (I speake after the carnall manner of mens reason∣ing.) God forbid;6 God forbid: for then how shall God judge the world. that the Judge of all the world should bee unrighteous. No; farre bee that from the least of our thoughts; for how should he order and compose all the affaires of the earth and heaven, if hee himselfe were not absolutely righteous? For,7 For if the truth of God hath more abounded, through my lye, unto his glory; why yet am I also judged as a sinner? (saith the wicked man) if the truth of God bee more magnified, and made more conspicuous, and so more glory accrews to his name by my lye, in that my falshood and injustice is the matter for his justice to worke revenge upon, what reason is there, that I should be punished, who have occasioned this further glory to God; and should be proceeded against as an offender? And why should wee not rather take up that resoluti∣on, which some have slanderously cast upon us,8 And not rather, as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirme that wee say; Let us doe e∣vill, that good may come; whose damnation is just. by lewd and false reports; affirming, that we say, Let us doe evill, that good may come of it: So that the event bee good, it matters not what our actions be; such wicked calum∣nies are cast upon us, by the depraving tongues of false accusers, who shall receive just damnation for this slander of the Gospell. What then,9 What then? are we better than they? No, in no wise: for we have be∣fore proved both Iewes and Gentiles, that they are all under sinne. if there bee prerogatives that we Jewes have, above the Gentiles, are we better than they? or
have we cause to pride our selves, as being in an happier condition? No, in no wise; for we have before proved, that all, both Jewes and Gentiles are in the state of sin; and, thereby lyable to the wrath of God, and everlasting damnation. 13 Their throat is an open sepulchre.See Psal. 5.9. The poyson of Aspes is under their lips.See Psal. 140.3. 19 Now wee know that what things soever the law saith, it saith to them who are under the law: that every mouth may bee stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.But ye are now ready to say, that these accusations and reproofes are not meant to you Jewes, but to other pro∣fane and wicked nations. Be not deceived, whatsoever the Spirit of God saith in the Scriptures, it speaketh to them unto whom that word of God was given; and therefore more especially to the people of the Jewes; intending that by these generall taxations of mans wic∣kednesse, every mouth should be stopped; & that all the world should be convinced, as giulty before God. 20 Therefore by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh bee justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sinne.Therefore, certainly, since all mankinde is thus cor∣rupted, it must needs follow, that no man can bee justifi∣ed, and acquited before God, by those workes, which he can pretend to doe, answerable to the law of God; for the law rather bindes us over to death, in that the onely effect thereof is to shew us our sins, & to convince us of it; and thereby to lay us open to the wrath of God. 21 But now the righ∣teousnesse of God without the law is manifested, be∣ing witnessed by the law, and the Prophets.But now, if any man would know how hee may come to stand righteous before God; the case is fully cleared; there is an Evangelicall righteousnesse, which consists not in the workes of the law; which is confirmed by the testimony of Gods Spirit, both in the Law, and the Prophets. 22 Even the righteous∣nesse of God, which is by faith of Iesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that beleeve; for there i no difference.Even the righteousnesse both given, and accep∣ted of God, which is by faith in Jesus Christ; which faith, is that effectuall instrument, whereby wee receive, apprehend, apply Christ, who is true, and perfect righ∣teousnesse unto all them that beleeve, whether Jewes or Gentiles; for, herein God maketh no difference at all. 23 For all have sinned, and come short of the glo∣ry of God.For, both all men have sinned, and come short of that perfect obedience, whereby they should glorifie God, and of that justce, which God accounts onely, and true∣ly glorious; and therefore have need of a Saviour. 24 Being justified free∣ly by his grace, through the redemption that is in Iesus Christ.And, being in this case, have no way to bee justified, but by his gracious, and free acceptation, and acquitall wrought and obtained by the redemption that is in Je∣sus Christ.
Whom God the Father hath ordained,25 Whom God hath set forth to bee a propiti∣ation through faith in his bloud, to declare his righ∣teousnesse for the remissi∣on of sinnes that are past, through the forbearance of God. and set forth to bee that Mediator, who should make a full atone∣ment for mankinde, through faith in his bloud; and who should make knowne, and apply that his alsufficient satisfaction, for the remission, even of those sinnes, which were committed before his comming in the flesh; the expiation whereof could not bee made by any legall sa∣crifices, but onely by his oblation and death, which was prefigured thereby; this was the meanes to doe away those sinnes, which God in his mercy, would not take speedy revenge of, but graciously reserved them to bee purged by the bloud of his Sonne. And not onely to make knowne this mercy to those that are gone, and past, but also, to declare unto us,26 To declare, I say, at this time his righteousnes that he might be just, and the justifier of him which beleeveth in Iesus. at this time, and to all that shall come after us, unto the end of the world, what is the onely meanes of our stand∣ing righteous before God, even faith in Christ, that thus, he might be approved to be both most just in himselfe, in accepting of none but those that are righteous; and also a justifier of every one (and him alone) that beleeveth in his Sonne Jesus. What cause of boasting then can any of us have in our selves, whether Jewes or Gentiles? if Gentiles,27 Where is boasting then? it is excluded: by what law? of workes? nay, but by the law of faith. in our civill justice; and if Jewes, in our just workes? surely none at all. All boasting is utterly excluded: but how, or upon what ground is our boasting excluded? surely, not upon the ground of our workes: for, if by our workes we could fulfill the law, wee should have cause of boast∣ing in our selves; but upon the ground of faith; for now that we are justified thereby, upon the free acceptation of God, we have no cause at all to boast in our selves, but in him alone. Let this conclusion therefore bee firmely set downe,28 Therefore we con∣clude, that a man is justifi∣ed by faith, without the deeds of the law. that a man is justified, not by the workes of the law, but by faith onely. Neither is this justification proper, and peculiar to one nation onely,29 Is hee the God of the Iewes onely? is he not also of the Gentiles? yes, of the Gentiles also. but is common to the beleevers of all nations, thorow the world; never thinke therefore that this mercy is confined to the Jewes onely; no, the grace of God is not limited to them onely; God is not the God of the Jewes, but of the Gentiles also. Seeing it is one, and the same God, whose goodnesse extendeth, and inlargeth it selfe to all;30 Seeing it is one God, which shall justifie the circumcision by faith, & uncircumcision through faith. and makes no more difference betwixt Jewes and Gentiles, but that he justi∣fies the Jewes by faith, and through faith the Gentiles, which as they are all one in effect, so his mercifull act of justification is one, and the same in both.
31 Doe wee then make void the Law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law.Do we then, because wee teach that men are justified by faith, and not by the workes of the Law, make void the Law, through faith, as if therefore it were of no use, because wee can obtaine no perfect righteousnesse by it? God forbid; yea rather, our faith establisheth the Law, in that it obtaineth that grace, whereby the law is ful∣filled; for so much as the Spirit of God, which dwels in our hearts by faith, inableth us to walke according to the Law. CAP. IV. 1 What shall wee say then? that Abraham our father, as pertaining to the flesh, hath found.THere is but one way of justification; as it was with Abraham, who was our father according to the flesh, so it is with us; and how will you then say, that the case stood with Abraham? had he no benefit by his workes? 2 For if Abraham were justified by workes, hee hath whereof to glory, but not before God.Surely I must needs yeeld the case alike in all; and as for Abraham, therefore if hee were justified by the me∣rit of his workes, he had cause to glory in himselfe; and not in God; but hee never sought to glory in himselfe, but in God onely; and therefore he was justified not by workes, but by faith. 3 For what saith the Scripture? Abraham belee∣ved God, and it was coun∣ted unto him for righ∣teousnesse.For what saith the Scripture? Abraham beleeved God in his promises, and that faith of his apprehending Christ, which was promised, was accounted unto him by God for righteousnesse; so as Abraham upon his be∣leefe, was reputed no lesse righteous, then if hee had ful∣filled the law. 4 Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.Now, this reputing just must needs be an act of favour, and grace; whereas to him that earneth ought by wor∣king, the recompence is given, not out of grace and fa∣vour, but as of due debt. 6 Even as David also describeth the blessednesse of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteous∣nesse without works;And David also, whose authority is justly sacred amongst you, so describes our righteousnesse, as one that meant to exclude workes from the power of justifying; for when hee would set forth the blessednesse of a man justified before God, hee describes him by the imputing of righteousnesse without workes; 7 Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.Saying, blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sinnes are covered; and not, blessed are they whose good workes are many and great. 9 Commeth this blessed∣nesse then upon the cir∣cumcision onely, or upon the uncircumcisiō also? for we say, that faith was rec∣koned to Abraham for righteousnesse.That ye may well see this righteousnesse, and blessed∣nesse is not by works, but by faith, consider, that circum∣cision is the first worke that is required under the law, and that this blessednesse belonged to Abraham, not upon his circumcision, but before, even in his uncircum∣cision;
For wee say, that Abrahams faith was accounted to him for righteousnesse. But when and in what estate was it so accounted to him? when hee was circumcised;10 How was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision; or in uncir∣cumcision? not in circum∣cision, but in uncircumci∣sion. or whiles he was uncir∣cumcised? ye are easily able to satisfie your selves in this; and know, that it was not when he was circumcised; but long before, even when he was uncircumcised. And hee received this outward marke,11 And he received the signe of circumcision, a seale of the righteousnesse of the faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised: that hee might be the fa∣ther of all them that be∣leeve, though they be not circumcised, that righte∣ousnesse might bee impu∣ted unto them also. and signe of the Sacrament of circumcision, as a seale and full con∣firmation of that faith which he had before, whiles he was uncircumcised; God would therefore have him justified by faith before hee was circumcised, that hee might be the father of all that are faithfull, though uncir∣cumcised; that his example might shew, that righteous∣nesse is and may be so imputed unto them also, without any outward circumcision. And that hee might be the father of the circumcised,12 And the father of circumcision, to them, who are not of the circumcision onely, but also walke in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had being yet uncircum∣cised. of those (I meane) which are not onely outwardly, and formally circumcised, but truly and inwardly, and who live the life of that faith which Abraham had being yet uncircumcised. For the promise that was made to Abraham of the inheritance of the land of Canaan (by which a better in∣heritance was figured) was not made to Abraham,13 For the promise that hee should be the heire of the world, was not to Abra∣ham, or to his seed through the Law; but through the righteousnesse of faith. be∣cause he had merited it, by keeping the law, but because hee had beleeved God, and had obtained the righteous∣nesse of faith. For if they which trust to the fulfilling of the law,14 For if they which are of the law be heires, faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect. be heires of the spirituall blessings of God, and so the inhe∣ritance come by workes, then faith is to no purpose, nei∣ther is there any use of it; and so those promises, which are made to the beleever are vaine and uselesse; neither could any heart finde comfort or assurance in it selfe; for as much, as it should be convinced in it selfe of an im∣possibility of keeping the law, and thereby of attaining eternall life. Because howsoever to those which are upright,15 Because the Law worketh wrath, for where no law is there is no trans∣gression. and perfect, the law might, and would shew the true way of life, yet to those that are sinfull and corrupt (as now all mankinde is) it doth nothing, but aggravate their evill condition; for whiles it shewes them what they ought to doe, and gives them not strength to do it, it impleads them guiltie before the judgement seate of God; since that having the knowledge of our dutie, and not perfor∣ming it we runne into greater condemnation; for, if that
man sinne, which is not acquainted with the written Law of God, his sinne must needs be much lesse, then his, who doth knowingly, and wilfully offend. 16, 17 Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the pro∣mise might be sure to all the seed, not to that onely which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all: (as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations,) before him whom hee be∣leeved, even hee who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which bee not, as though they were.Therefore, since if the inheritance were by workes, faith were of no use, and the promises to no purpose, I do justly conclude, that it is of faith, that it might be of Gods grace, and not of our earning, and that the pro∣mise might stand in full force to all the seed of faithfull Abraham, not onely to the Jewes, which stand upon the priviledge of the law, but to all those of Jewes and Gen∣tiles, which follow the faith of Abraham, who is the fa∣ther of all us beleevers, in what nation soever; as it is written, I have made thee a Father of many nations. The father, I say, of us all, not naturall but spirituall, not in respect of flesh, but in respect of that interest in that God, in whom hee beleeved; confidently rely∣ing upon the promise of that God, who (hee well knew) was able to quicken the dead, and by his mighty word, is able to make those things to be which are not. 18 Who against hope, beleeved in hope, that hee might become the father of many nations, according to that which was spoken, Such shall thy seed be.Who, when there was no cause or reason at all (in nature) why he should hope, yea, when all things seemed to crosse the possibility of any hope, yet even then belee∣ved that hee should have the honour of being the father of many nations, according to that word which God had said unto him: That his seed should be as the starres of heaven. 19 And being not weake in faith, hee considered not his owne body now dead, when hee was about an hundred yeares old, nei∣ther yet the deadnesse of Sarahs wombe.And being strong, and vigorous in faith, he regarded not the impotencie of his owne body, which was, as it were, dead in respect of any desires or powers of genera∣tion; being now about an hundred yeares old; neither yet the deadnesse of Sarahs wombe, which was long before past the ordinary possibility of conception. 22 And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousnesse.And therefore this faith of his in the truth of Gods promises was accepted of God in lieu of perfect righte∣ousnesse. 23 Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him.Now this case was not intended to be Abrahams alone, neither was it recorded of him onely, that his faith was so imputed to him. 24 But for us also, to whom it shall be impu∣ted, if wee beleeve on him, that raised up Iesus our Lord from the dead.But it is meant to be extended unto all us the sonnes of faithfull Abraham, to whom there shall be the like imputation of faith to righteousnesse, if wee do truly beleeve in that God, who raised up Jesus our Lord, from the dead. 25 Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised againe for our justi∣fication.Who was delivered to death, for the full satisfaction for all our sinnes; in that he paid for us that debt, which wee were never able to have discharged; and was raised up from the dead for our justification; in that hereby he
hath fully declared hinselfe to have conquered death and hell, and to have atchieved that great worke of re∣conciling God the Father unto us. CAP. V. THerefore being justified by faith,1 Therefore being justi∣fied by faith, wee have peace with God, through our Lord Iesus Christ. as laying hold on that Christ, in and by whom God is satisfied and appeased towards us; we have peace with God (who be∣fore were, through our sinnes, utter enemies to him) by the meanes of the same Jesus Christ our Lord. By whom also, besides our peace,2 By whom also wee have accesse, by faith, into this grace, wherein wee stand, and rejoyce in hope of the glory of God. wee have accesse by the same faith, into the grace and favour of God, where∣in we stand, being beloved of him, as deare children, and do rejoyce in the comfortable expectation of the posses∣sion of the glory of God, which is laid up for us. And not onely do wee rejoyce,3 And not onely so, but wee glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribu∣lation worketh patience. and glory in the com∣fortable assurances of his favour, and salvation; but we rejoyce also in our very tribulations; which are the one∣ly miseries, and heart-breakings unto carnall mindes: yet in these we can finde pleasure, and cause of joy; not in themselves so much, as in their issue, and fruitfull ef∣fects; as knowing that tribulation in Gods children worketh patience: And patience experience of Gods mercifull sustenta∣tion and aid; and experience, hope4 And patience, expe∣rience: and experience, hope: of his further mercy, and seasonable deliverance. And hope disappointeth us not; because the sense and comfortable assurance of that love wherewith God em∣braceth us, is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us.5 And hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed a∣broad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is gi∣ven unto us. For, when wee were yet in our sinnes,6 For when wee were yet without strength, in due time, Christ dyed for the ungodly. and therefore utterly unworthy, and (as it were) uncapable of his fa∣vour; even then, Christ our mercifull Saviour, dyed for us, wretched and ungodly men. Wherein that gracious redeemer shewed his wonder∣full goodnesse, and mercy to mankinde,7 For scarcely for a righ∣teous man will one die: yet peradventure, for a good man some would even dare to die. beyond all example; for scarcely will any one be content to dye for the best deserving, and most righteous man; and yet, it is possible that for a good man and deare friend, some one would dare to dye. But God commendeth his love to us (above all the conceit, or practise of men) in that,8 But God commen∣deth his love towards us, in that, whiles wee were yet sinners, Christ died for us. whiles wee were yet sinners, and therefore enemies unto him, yet even then Christ dyed for us.
9 Much more then being now justified by his blood, wee shall be saved from wrath through him.How much more, then, being now accepted of him, as friends and sonnes, and justified by his blood from all our sinnes, shall wee be saved from the wrath of God, and all the effects, and consequents thereof, by and through him. 11 And not onely so, but wee also joy in God through our Lord Iesus Christ, by whom we have now received the attone∣ment.And not onely have wee this fruit of his mercy, to be saved, and secured from wrath, but wee do also further joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom our happy reconciliation with God, is made and per∣fected. 12 Wherefore, as by one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, &c.Wherefore, as by one man, even our first parent Adam, sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, as the due reward thereof, &c. For, let no man thinke that sin began to have his being together with the Law;13 For untill the Law sinne was in the world, but sinne is not imputed when there is no law. no, sinne was before there was any written Law to forbid it; and the same acts which are forbidden in the Law, were both formerly done, and formerly sinfull; But sinne was not so knowne, and ac∣knowledged by the committers of it; nor so strictly and severely imputed to them, by God, as it was, and is, since the Law was given. 14 Neverthelesse, death raigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the si∣militude of Adams trans∣gression, who is the figure of him that was to come.Neverthelesse, that sinne was in the world before, ap∣peares sufficiently, in that death, which is the effect of sinne, raigned and raged over all mankinde, even from Adam, the first man, till Moses, under whom the Law was given; raigned, I say, even over very infants, that had not actually sinned, as Adam did, and over those ignorant Gentiles, that had not received a direct prohi∣bition, as Adam had; which Adam is the type, and fi∣gure of that second Adam, who was to come; in that the first Adam was the originall of our naturall, and earth∣ly being; the second Adam of our spirituall, and heaven∣ly; and as by the first sinne came into the world, so, by the second, came righteousnesse. 15 But not as the offence, so also is the free gift; for if through the offence of one, many be dead, &c.But yet, the resemblance betwixt the first, and second Adam, is not so exquisite, as that it admitteth not ma∣ny differences and exceptions: I grant there is much dif∣ference betwixt the bringing in of sinne by the one, and of grace and righteousnesse, by the other; but this diffe∣rence is to the advancement of Christs part; for the grace of Christ is much more powerfull to justification, and salvation, then the sinne of Adam was to condemnation: insomuch as the author of that grace is more potent, then the meanes of that depravation; If therefore through the offence of one, many be dead, much more, &c. 16 And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgement was by one to condemna∣tion: but the free gift is of many offences unto justifi∣cation.There is besides a difference of the extent of the sinne in the one, and the gift of the other; that gift doth more
inlarge it selfe, then that sinne; one sinne did in the just judgement of God binde us over to condemnation; but the free gift and grace of God acquites us from many sinnes, unto justification. For, if by one mans offence (who was the first Adam) death, through the meanes of that man had power over all mankinde; much more shall the grace and gift of righteousnesse of Jesus Christ,17 For if by one mans offence, death reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousnesse, shall reigne in life by one Iesus Christ. (God and man,) obtaine eternall life, unto all them which have received abundant mercy from him. So by the righteousnesse of one (which is Christ Je∣sus) the free gift of grace,18 Even so by the righ∣teousnesse of one, the free gift came upon all men un∣to justification of life. and righteousnesse came upon all men (if onely they beleeve) unto that full justification which shall be to their everlasting life. For, as by the disobedience of one man,19 For as by one mans disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. all the many sonnes of Adam are made sinners, by the imputation of his sinne, to all his posterity, and by that infection which he transmitted unto them; so by the obedience of one (which is Christ) shall all his many faithfull ones be made righteous; both by the imputation of his justice, and by the worke of his Spirit, graciously renuing, and sanctifying them. Moreover, the law was in his due time given by God,20 Moreover, the Law entred, that the offence might abound: but where sinne abounded, grace did much more abound. unto man, that sinne might be knowne to be, as it is, un∣measurably sinfull; and might be acknowledged hai∣nous; and withall, not without the gracious, and wise counsell of God, who meant, from the greater hainous∣nesse of sinnes to winne so much more glory, and praise to his mercy; in that, where sinne abounded, his grace did much more abound in the remission thereof, and delive∣rance therefrom. That as sin had prevailed over all mankind,21 That as sinne hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reigne through righteousnesse un∣to eternall life, by Iesus Christ our Lord. to bring upon him a double death, both spirituall, and bodily; so might his grace, through the righteousnesse of his Sonne Jesus Christ, be effectuall to restore man to eternall life. CAP. VI. WHat then?1 What shall wee say then? shall wee continue in sinne, that grace may a∣bound? shall wee make so ill use of the mercy of God, as that, because where sinne abounds, grace abounds much more, therefore we should resolve to continue in sin, that we may have so much more use, and improvement of grace? God forbid; no, this purpose of sinning, and grace,2 God forbid: how shall we that are dead to sinne, live any longer therein? cannot stand together; for, where grace hath wrought upon the heart, there we are dead to sinne, by the pow∣er thereof; and, if we bee dead to it, how should we live longer in it?
3 Know yee not, that so many of us as were bap∣tized into Iesus Christ, were baptized into his death?Know yee not, that so many of us, as were baptized into Jesus Christ, have the full efficacie of Christs death sealed up unto us, and by vertue thereof die unto our sinnes? 4 Therefore wee are buried with him by bap∣tisme into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glo∣ry of the Father: even so wee also should walke in newnesse of life.Yea, our baptisme doth not onely represent unto us our death to sinne, by the power of his death, but our buriall also; and the continuance of that state of the death of sinne, in us, and our rising againe to newnesse of life; that, like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the omnipotent power of God; even so, wee should by the power of his Spirit, bee raised from the grave of our sinnes, to walke before him in the new life of holy obedience. 5 For if we have bin planted together in the likenesse of his death: we shall also bee in the like∣nesse of his resurrection.For, if wee be so grafted in him, as that the power of his death, workes the like effect in us, that it did in him; so also shall the same engrafting conveigh unto us the same vertue of his resurrection, that wee should also rise by, and with him, from the grave of our sinnes. 6 Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sinne might be destroy∣ed, that henceforth wee should not serve sinne.Knowing this, that this corrupt nature of ours, our unregenerate part, is crucified and dead together with him, and by the power of his death, that the whole bulke of our maliciousnesse, and depravation might bee so farre destroyed, as that, howsoever we may be drawne to sinne, yet wee should not serve sinne any more. 7 For he that is dead, is freed from sinne.For he that is dead to sinne, is freed from any further dominion of sinne. 8 Now if we be dead with Christ, wee beleeve that wee shall also live with him.Now, if we being in Christ, died also with, and in him, wee have reason to beleeve that wee have no lesse part in his resurrection, and life also; so as we both doe, and shall live with him. 9 Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more: death hath no more do∣minion over him.Knowing therefore, that Christ being raised from the dead, and triumphing over death, in that his resurrecti∣on yeeldeth not to death any more, nor suffereth death (thus by him vanquished) to have any more power over him. 10 For in that he died, hee died unto sinne once: but in that hee liveth, hee liveth unto God.For, in that he died, he died but once for the destroy∣ing of sinne; but in that hee liveth, hee liveth with God for ever, a life immortall and glorious. 11 Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sinne, but alive unto God, through Iesus Christ our Lord.Likewise, yee that are regenerate, must make account that yee are, by the vertue of his death, dead unto sinne, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who hath raised us up to the life of new obedience, by the power of his resurrection. 12 Let not sinne reigne therefore in your mortall bodie, that yee should o∣bey it in the lusts thereof.Let not sinne therefore, which is thus dead in you (or at least, hath received his deaths wound) rule, & reigne,
as a Tyrant, in these mortall bodies of yours, so as that ye should obey it in the lusts, and sinfull motions there∣of. Neither doe yee yeeld over the members of your bo∣dies, and the faculties of your soules,13 Neither yeeld yee your members as instru∣ments of unrighteousnesse unto sinne: but yeeld your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righte∣ousnesse unto God. as instruments and weapons of unrighteousnesse, to serve under the com∣mand of sin; but yeeld up your selves wholly to the service of God, as those that are for this purpose raised up from the dead; and let all the parts & faculties of your bodies, and soules, bee imployed as weapons, to fight under the command of God, for righteousnesse. For,14 For ye are not un∣der the law, but under grace. yee are not under the condemning power of the law; but, under the grace, and mercy of God accepting you in Christ. What then? shall wee therefore take liberty to sinne,15 What then? shall we sinne, because wee are not under the law, but un∣der grace? God forbid. because the law hath no power to condemne us for sin, and wee are assured of grace and mercy from God? God forbid. Know ye not that there is such a contrariety betwixt God and sinne, that ye cannot possibly serve both.16 Know yee not that to whom yee yeeld your selves servants to obey; his servants yee are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of o∣bedience unto righteous∣nesse? Cer∣tainely, every man must obey that master whom hee serves, whether it bee sinne, which will pay him with death; or, whether righteousnesse, which will pay his obedience with life and glory. But for you, God bee thanked, that,17 But God be thanked that yee were the servants of sinne: but yee have o∣beyed from the heart, that forme of doctrine which was delivered you. howsoever yee were once the servants of sinne; yet now; yee are freed from that bondage, and have willingly obeyed from the heart, that doctrine of the Gospell, which was deli∣vered unto you. Being then set free from the servitude of sinne,18 Being then made free from sinne, ye became the servants of righteous∣nesse. yee be∣came the voluntary, and chearefull servants of righteous∣nesse. I use this familiar similitude of service and freedome,19 I speake after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh: for as yee have yeelded your members servants to uncleannesse, and to ini∣quity, unto iniquitie, even so now yeeld your mem∣bers servants to righteous∣nesse, unto holinesse. beeause I would descend to your weake capacity, that by these secular, and civill things, yee might understand the spirituall. Let me therefore exhort you, that, as ye have yeelded over your bodies, and soules to be servants to uncleannesse, and all kinde of iniquity, from one de∣gree thereof to another; even so now, that yee would contrarily yeeld over those your soules, and bodies, to be the servants of righteousnesse, that ye may bee whol∣ly purged from your corruptions, and consecrated to the service of God. For, when ye were the servants of sinne,20 For when ye were the servants of sinne, yee were free from righteous∣nesse. yee had no∣thing to doe with righteousnesse; neither had that any
tye over you to hold you in, within any compasse of obe∣dience. 21 What fruit had yee then in those things, whereof ye are now asha∣med? for the end of those things is death.Then yee ran wild, and loose, according to your owne vaine and sinfull lusts; but now, when yee looke backe upon that lawlesse condition, bethinke your selves what fruit or benefit yee found in those wayes of wickednesse, whereof ye are now ashamed. Alas! what good was to be hoped for from them, whose end is nothing but death and damnation? 22 But now being made free from sinne, and become servants to God, yee have your fruit unto holinesse, and the end ever∣lasting life.But now, contrarily, being set free from the service of sinne, & being admitted to be the servants of God, ye have abundance of contentment hereby; and this estate yeelds you the most comfortable, and sweet fruit of ho∣linesse here, and of eternall life, hereafter. 23 For the wages of sinne is death, but the gift of God is eternall life.Now therefore, compare the issue of both these servi∣ces together; and yee shall easily see which master to serve, and obey. The wages that sinne shall pay you in the end, is death, both of body and soule: but the gift that God bestowes upon his followers, is eternall life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. CAP. VII. THat ye may therefore fully understand in what termes ye stand with the law;1 Know ye not bre∣thren (for I speake to them that know the law,) how that the law hath domini∣on over a man, as long as he liveth. I shall make use of that simili∣tude of the husband and wife, which is most plaine and familiar. Know yee not therefore brethren (for I speake to those Jewish Christians that doe well know the law) that the Mosaicall law hath dominion over any man, that is subject unto it, so long as the said law is in force? 2 For the woman which hath an husband, is bound by the law to her husband, so long as hee li∣veth; but if the husband bee dead, shee is loosed from the law of the hus∣band.Take the instance of an husband and wife; let the husband be the law, let us converts to Christianity, be the wife; so then, the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to live with her husband, and to be subject unto him, so long as hee liveth; but if her husband bee once dead, shee is loosed from any further bond to her husband, or observance of him. 3 So then, if while her husband liveth, shee bee maried to another man, &c.If then whiles her husband is alive, shee takes her owne libertie, to forsake her husbands bed, and to mar∣ry with another man, &c. 4 Wherefore my bre∣thren, ye are also become dead to the law, by the body of Christ, that yee should bee maried to ano∣ther, even to him who is raised from the dead, that wee should bring forth fruit unto God.Even so it is with you, my brethren, whiles the law lived, and stood in his full force, and vigour, yee were bound to hold you close unto it, and to observe it with all care, and due respects; but now, that the Mosaicall
law is dead to you (and you to it) by that alsufficient sa∣crifice, which Christ offered up in his flesh, for us; yee are now discharged from the law, and are free to be ma∣ried to another, even to Christ, the Sonne of God, who is raised from the dead; that wee should upon our happy marriage with him, bring forth fruit unto God. For which better fruit, wee have both more occasion,5 For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sinnes, which were by the law, did worke in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death. and better helpes than we formerly had; for whiles wee were carnall, and under the power of the law, the moti∣ons of our sinfull, and corrupt nature tooke occasion by the law, to stirre us unto evill; and accordingly drew from us those effects which did justly procure our eter∣nall death. But now,6 But now wee are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein wee were held, that wee should serve in newnesse of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter. wee are delivered from that miserable ser∣vitude, and hard exaction, and wofull curse of the law; that rigorous and cruell bondage under which wee were held, being expired, that we should lead a new life, with our husband Christ Jesus, and should serve him in that sanctity, and reall obedience, which is wrought by the Spirit of renovation in us, and not in the outward and fashionable knowledge of the law, without any true change of the heart. What shall we say then?7 What shall we say then? is the law sinne? God forbid: nay I had not knowne sinne, but by the law: for I had not know∣en lust, except the law had said: Thou shalt not co∣vet. If there be a kinde of neces∣sity to bee delivered from the law; and the motions of sinne working in us, by the law bring forth fruit unto death: it should seeme that the law is sinne, and that it is not onely unprofitable, but exceeding mischeivous, and pernicious to the soule. Nay, God forbid we should so thinke: the law doth not cause sinne, but it discries it, and shewes the hainousnesse of it; for I had not knowne, or observed lust to bee a sinne, if the law had not said; Thou shalt not covet: some grosse outward actions might be easily discernable to be foule, and sinfull: But for this secret concupiscence of the heart, I could not have discovered it to bee that, which it is, sinne; had it not beene for the light of Gods law. Indeed the law was given,8 But sinne taking oc∣casion by the commande∣ment, wrought in mee all manner of concupiscence; for without the law, sinne was dead. for the forbiddance and re∣straint of sinne, and ought to have that use in us; but through our corruption it falls out contrarily, that the law, shewing and inhibiting sinne, and not giving power to avoid and restraine it, gives occasion to our impetu∣ous desires, and lusts, so much more eagerly to pursue forbidden pleasures: for had not the law strictly restrai∣ned us from the yeildance unto sinne, sinne had not had such force to put it selfe upon us. Take me, if you please, for an example: for I,9 For I was alive with∣out the law once, but when the commandement came, sinne revived, and I died. before I inquired carefully into the law, lived in a free, and care∣lesse
security, making no difference of my actions; but, when once I came to take notice of the commandement, which restrained and forbad my sinfull lusts, and affecti∣ons; now, my corruptions began to gather head, and, as it were, seemed to receive a new life, and vigour. So as I, by the force of them, fell into a spirituall death, and lay under that miserable estate. 10 And the comman∣dement which was ordai∣ned to life, I found to bee unto death.And so that commandement, which was ordained to be a rule of life, and (if I could have kept it) a meanes of life also, I found to be unto me, (through my owne cor∣ruption) an occasion of death. So also verse 11. 13 Was that then which is good, made death unto me? God forbid: but sinne that it might appeare sin, working death in mee by that which is good, that sinne by the commande∣ment might become ex∣ceeding sinfull.Was then the law, which is good, turned evill, and, in its owne nature deadly unto mee? God forbid; the fault is not in the law, but in my owne depravednesse; for sinne, that it might appeare every way like it selfe, harmefull and deadly, wrought death in me, by oc∣casion of that law, which is in it selfe good, and holy: so as hereupon, that sinne, which in the time of my securi∣ty seemed not worthy of any note, appeared to bee ex∣ceedingly foule, and sinfull. 14 For wee know that the law is spirituall: but I am carnall, sold under sin.For the law (we know) is an heavenly, spirituall, and divine thing, and therefore is not of an hurtfull, and kil∣ling nature; but I am an earthly, carnall, and sinfull creature (as of my selfe) altogether given up to the power of sinne, and as it were sold under it, to an hard, and cruell servitude. 15 For that which I doe, I allow not: for what I would, that doe I not, but what I hate, that doe I.And even now, in the state of my regeneration, I am divided in my selfe; for that which I doe, (as being over∣come with the force of my corruptions) I allow not, as renued; for, that good which I would doe, upon the good motions of Gods Spirit in mee, that I doe not; but that which in my spirituall, and regenerated part I hate, that through the sway of my carnall affections, I doe. 16 If then I doe that which I would not, I con∣sent unto the law, that it is good.If then my inordinate affections carrie me to doe the thing, which I would not doe, and I finde a reluctance in my selfe against it; this very strife that is in me, shewes, that I am sufficiently convinced, that the law (which for∣bids this that I doe) is good. 17 Now then it is no more I that doe it, but sinne that dwelleth in me.Now then, it is no more I (who am a spirituall, and renued person) that doe this evill, but it is that corrupt nature, which dwelleth in mee; for I doe it not with the whole sway of my will, but my prevalent corruption is guiltie of it.
For, I know, that in me, that is, in my nature,18 For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing; for to will is present with me, but how to performe that which is good, I finde not. as it is in it selfe, & of it selfe, there dwelleth no goodnesse at all; for I can (so long, and so farre as I follow the motion of Gods Spirit) indeed will that which is good; but, as I am carried away with the frailty of my flesh, how to performe that good, which I will, I finde no power at all. Now,20 Now if I doe that I would not, it is no more I that doe it, but sinne that dwelleth in me. if I bee drawne so with the force of my remain∣ing corruption, that I doe unwillingly commit that sinne which I would not, it is no more I (the regenerate man) that doe it; but that wicked nature of mine, which dwel∣leth in me. I finde then a kinde of forceable power of secret cor∣ruption, lurking within me, which so drawes me awrye,21 I finde then a law, that when I would doe good, evill is present with me. that when I would doe good, I am in the meane while declined to evill. For I delight in the law of God,22 For I delight in the law of God, after the in∣ward man, &c. as I am a regenerate man, &c. But I see and feele another secret power of corrupti∣on, striving,23 But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my minde, and bringing me into captivitie to the law of sinne, which is in my members. and fighting against the powerfull inclina∣tion of my regenerate part; and so prevayling often∣times with me, as that I am over-carried by that sway of sinne, which is in my corrupted nature. Oh that I, wretched man that I am,24 Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deli∣ver mee from the body of this death? might once bee delivered from this masse of inward corruption, which dwells in this mortall, and sinfull flesh of mine. But, in the meane time,25 I thanke God, through Iesus Christ our Lord. So then, with the minde, I my selfe serve the law of God: but with the flesh, the law of sinne. howsoever I am much cum∣bred, and vexed with these inbred, and stubborne cor∣ruptions of mine; yet, have I no cause to bee too much dejected herewith; but rather to rest patiently, and con∣tentedly upon the mercy of God, and to bee heartily thankefull unto him, through Jesus Christ our Lord: for this grace that hee hath wrought in mee, to struggle against these my wicked corruptions, and in some good measure, to master, and overcome them. So then, in that I am renued, I give my obedience to the powerfull motions of Gods Spirit; but in that I am unregenerate, and carnall, I am carried to the obedience of those sin∣full motions, which my vitious nature is ready to sug∣gest unto me.
CAP. VIII. 1 There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Iesus, who walke not af∣ter the flesh, but after the spirit.SUch is the case, not of my selfe onely, but of all those that are (as I am) regenerate persons; there is there∣fore now no condemnation (howsoever there may bee much trouble and vexation,) to them which are in Christ Jesus, being ingraffed into him, and made one with him; who, howsoever they may be transported into some sin∣full actions, by the strength of a temptation, or by their owne frailtie; yet in respect of the trade, and course of their life, walke not after the guidance and motion of their corrupt nature, but of the holy Spirit. 2 For the law of the spi∣rit of life in Christ Iesus, hath made mee free from the law of sinne and death.For the efficacie and power of that good Spirit which giveth life to all faithfull ones, applying unto my soule the blood and all-sufficient merits of Christ my Sa∣viour, hath set mee free from the tyranny of sinne and of death, so as neither of them shall be able to prevaile a∣gainst mee. 3 For what the Law could not do, in that it was weake through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likenesse of sinfull flesh, and for sinne con∣demned sinne in the flesh.For that perfect righteousnesse, and justification which I was not able by reason of the weakenesse of my flesh to attaine unto, by fulfilling the Law; God hath graciously wrought out for mee; who sent his owne Sonne to take upon him that nature of ours, which our sinne had miserably corrupted; and to make a full satis∣faction for sinne; and withall to take away that guilt, and power of sinne, whereby it bound mee over to con∣demnation. 4 That the righteousnes of the Law might be ful∣filled in us, who walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit.That the perfect righteousnesse of the Law might be imputed to us, as fulfilled by us, in that it was by Christ fulfilled for us, which live not according to the motions of our sinfull nature, but according to the motions, and directions of his Spirit. 5 For they that are after the flesh, do minde the things of the flesh, but they that are after the spi∣rit, the things of the spirit.For they that are merely naturall and carnall men, do minde and affect earthly and carnall matters; but they that are regenerate, and spirituall, minde and affect holy, spirituall, heavenly things. And the end of them both, is according to their di∣sposition,6 For to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. and affection; for the carnall minde of man can have no other end then death; thither it leads, and there it leaves him; but for a man to be spiritually minded is the certaine way to life, and eternall peace. 7 Because the carnall minde is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.Neither can the carnall man looke for any better issue; for his affections, and desires are no better then mere enmity against God; utterly rebelling against the Law of God, as those which neither are subject unto it, neither indeed (whiles they so continue) can be.
So then those that are mere unregenerate men cannot possibly please God.8 So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God. But ye are not unregenerate and carnall men, but re∣newed, and spirituall;9 But yee are not in the flesh; but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit f God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. if so be that yee have the Spirit of God dwelling in you, howsoever yee have withall the remainders of your corrupt nature still abiding in you. But if any man have not the Spirit of God, whereby he is renued inwardly, what profession soever he makes, yet he is none of his. And if Christ be in you by his Spirit, certainly,10 And if Christ be in you, the body is dead be∣cause of sinne, but the spirit is life because of righteous∣nesse. this corrupt nature of yours is as good as dead in you, in re∣spect of any hurt that sinne can do unto you, by it; but, the Spirit of God is powerfull in you, to worke in you the life of grace here, and to bring you to the life of glo∣ry hereafter, because of that perfect righteousnesse which is in it; whereby sinne is mortified,11 But if the spirit of him that raised up Iesus from the dead, dwell in you, hee that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortall bodies, by his spirit that dwelleth in you. and grace wrought. But, if the Spirit of that Almighty God, which raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, yee may well be assured, that the same omnipotent power of his, which raised Christ from the dead, shall also easily be able to raise your mortall bodies from the death of sinne, and put a new life into them, by the efficacie of the same Spirit. Therefore, brethren,12 Therefore brethren, we are debters, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. since we are raised up from this death of sinne, and quickened to grace, wee should have no more to doe with our corruptions, as to live and walke in them; but ought rather to frame our selves after the guidance, and motions of that holy Spirit. For if ye live after the flesh,13 For if yee live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if yee through the spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. doing those things which your corrupt nature moves you unto, yee shall dye eter∣nally, but if ye mortifie your evill and corrupt affections, by the power of the spirit, ye shall live for ever. For as many as are guided by the spirit of God to lead their lives in all holy obedience to the will of God,14 For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sonnes of God. they have good reason to be assured they are the sonnes of God. As for you,15 For ye have not re∣ceived the spirit of bon∣dage againe to feare, but ye have received the spi∣rit of adoption whereby we cry Abba, father. yee have received good evidence of your spirituall and happy condition; for yee have felt in your selves, not that effect of the spirit of God, which by the Law workes feare, and terrour in the soule; but that gra∣cious effect of it, which comfortably assures you of your adoption; whereby wee are imboldened to speake to God, under the title of a loving Father. So as this Spirit of God joynes together in testimo∣ny with our soule, or Spirit, to assure us,16 The spirit it selfe beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the chil∣dren of God. that we are the children of God; our owne spirit finding in our hearts
such peace of conscience, faith, hope, and other graces, that may testifie this truth unto us; and the spirit of God confirming the said testimony unto our soules, by the powerfull operation thereof, in us. 17 And if children, then heires, heires of God, and joynt-heires with Christ: if so be that wee suffer with him, that wee may also be glorified toge∣ther.And if wee be children, then heires; for all Gods chil∣dren are heires of a glorious kingdome, heires of God, and joynt heires with Christ; if wee do patiently indure to suffer with him here; that wee may be also glorified with him hereafter. And well may wee resolve to indure whatsoever af∣flictions we can meet with here;18 For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. for we do undoubtedly know that all the sufferings of this present life are no∣thing, in comparison of that exceeding glory, which is layd up for us, and shall be revealed unto us. 19 For the earnest ex∣pectation of the creature, waiteth for the manifesta∣tion of the sonnes of God.Neither are wee alone in these sufferings, or this pa∣tient hope; for all creatures suffer with us, and do with an earnest expectation, as it were, wait, and long for that day, wherein there shall be a full accomplishment of the glory of the sonnes of God, that then they may be deli∣vered from the bondage of corruption. 20 For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by rea∣son of him who hath sub∣jected the same in hope.For the creation was made subject to a fraile and impaired condition, not of it owne naturall inclination, (since all things do naturally affect continuance and per∣fection) but by the power and just will of God, who for mans sinne ordained this subjection; yet not without expectation of being once freed therefrom. 21 Because the creature it selfe also shall be deli∣vered from the bondage of corruption, into the glori∣ous liberty of the children of God.Because the creature it selfe also shall once be fully delivered from this liablenesse to corruption, and shall partake of that freedome from it which the children of of God shall once enjoy, together with their full blessed∣nesse. 22 For wee know that the whole creation groa∣neth, and travaileth in paine together untill now.For wee know that the whole frame of the creation doth (as it were) suffer under our sinne, and groane, and labour, as if it were in a sensible paine, together with us, untill this happy restoring of all things. 23 And not onely they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even wee our selves groane within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.And not onely these senselesse and brute creatures, but even we also, which have more excellent gifts, even the graces of Gods Spirit (as the handsell, or first fruits of a full measure hereafter) even wee our selves groane within our selves, waiting for the consummation of those blessed priviledges of our adoption; which is the per∣fect restauration of our bodies, and glory of our soules. 24 For wee are saved by hope, but hope that is seene is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth hee yet hope for?For howsoever we are, for the present, afflicted, and in our sense distressed; yet in assured hope wee are saved; and have already this salvation laid hold of by the power of our hope; But therefore wee must not looke for a
present discharge and fruition; for hope is not of things already possessed; no man hopeth for that which he pre∣sently injoyeth. But our hope is of absent and future things;25 But if wee hope for that wee see not, then do we with patience wait for it. and if wee do hope for such blessednesse to come, then do wee with much patience digest the present evils, and wait for the deliverance, and glory promised and provided for us. And howsoever wee of our selves,26 Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmi∣ties; for wee know not what wee should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self maketh intercession for us with groanings, which cannot be uttered. are full of weak∣nesses, yet we have a strong helper; for the Spirit of God succoureth, and relieveth our infirmities; and whereas, wee (as of our selves) know not what to pray for, or how to pray, as wee ought, the Spirit of God aids us by his gratious worke in us; stirring up our drouzie, and dull hearts to make powerfull supplications to God, with sighes and groanes that cannot be expressed. And that God,27 And hee that sear∣cheth the hearts, knoweth what is the minde of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. which is the onely searcher of the heart, finding his own Spirit to send up these prayers, & supplications in us; cannot but accept of those holy mo∣tions and requests which are made by the same Spirit, in the hearts of his Saints; as knowing that they proceed not from our naturall desires, nor tend to the fulfilling of our owne lusts, but are according to his most holy, and blessed will. And wee well know that all the miseries and evils which wee are subject unto here below,28 And we know that all things worke together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. through the gra∣cious sanctification and improvement of God, worke together for the good and benefit of those which love God; which happy issue of their calamities, doth not befall them, as out of the efficacie of their owne wise∣dome, and providence, but by the good hand of God, who hath effectually called them, and decreed them to glory. For those whom God did in his eternall counsell,29 For whom hee did foreknow, hee also did predestinate to be confor∣med to the image of his Sonne, that hee might be the first borne amongst many brethren. owne for his, out of that corrupt masse of mankinde, those did he pre-appoint and predestinate to be confor∣mable to the image of his Sonne; both in their holinesse, and in their patient sufferings; that so he being the Son of God by nature, might be the first borne, and ring∣leader of many brethren, by adoption and grace. Moreover,30 Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them hee also called: and whom hee called, them he also justifi∣ed: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. there is a strong and indissoluble chaine of mercy and grace in God towards his elect, the linkes whereof can never be either broken, or severed; for those whom hee did predestinate, them also in his due time hee effectually calleth; and those whom hee thus calleth, hee also justifieth; and those whom he justifieth from their sinnes, he doth also, fully (at last) glorifie.
31 What shall we then say to these things? if God be for us, who can be a∣gainst us?What shall we then say to these things? What shall we need to be disheartned with any sufferings? if God be with us (as he surely is, if we be his) who can be against us? 32 He that spared not his owne Sonne, but deli∣vered him us for up all; how shall hee not with him also freely give us all things?He that was so gracious to us, as not to spare his own naturall Sonne; but willingly delivered him up to death for us all; how can hee scant us of any other good thing? how forward must hee needs be, to give us freely (toge∣ther with him, who is more then all the rest) all other blessings whatsoever? 33 Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifieth.Neither can wee have reason to doubt of Gods ever∣lasting favour to us; for, who should put us out of it? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, as to alienate Gods love, and mercy from them; when it is God himselfe that freely justifieth and acquitteth them? Who can accuse where God cleareth and absolveth them?34 Who is he that con∣demneth? it is Christ that dyed: yea rather that is ri∣sen againe, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh interces∣sion for us. Much lesse can there be any danger of their utter con∣demnation; for who is it, that can condemne them? Hee that should be their Judge, Christ Jesus, is hee that dyed for them; yea rather which hath triumphed over death for them, being risen againe from the dead, for their full justification; yea who now sitteth gloriously at the right hand of God, there making perpetuall intercession, for us. 35 Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation or di∣stresse, or persecution, or famine, or nakednesse, or perill, or sword?Now then, let us make a bold challenge both to earth, and to hell; who shall separate us from that firme and everlasting love wherewith Christ hath imbraced us? shall tribulation, or distresse, or persecution, or famine, or nakednesse, or perill, or death? 36 (As it is written, For thy sake wee are killed all the day long, wee are ac∣counted as sheep for the slaughter.)(As it is long since written by the Psalmist, and must be still verified, even of our times, For thy sake wee are, all our lives long, exposed to the continuall daunger of varieties of death, and are pointed out to the shambles, even as sheep are to the slaughter.) 37 Nay in all these things wee are more then conquerers, through him that loved us:Nay, howsoever wee may be assaulted with all these evils, yet wee are more then conquerers over them all, through the mighty power and unspeakable mercy of that God and Saviour, which hath loved us: For I am fully, and unremoveably perswaded, that neither death, nor life, nor the very Angels themselves, whether good or evill, nor the principalities, and powers of heaven or hell, nor things present, nor things to come,38 For I am perswaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principali∣ties, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 39 Nor height, nor depth, nor any other crea∣ture shall be able to sepa∣rate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Ie∣sus our Lord.Nor the things above, nor things beneath; nor any other created power, whatsoever, shall be able to sepa∣rate vs from that eternall and deare love of God, which he beareth to us in Christ Jesus our Lord.
CAP. IX. IF I shall say something that may seeme to sound unto the prejudice of my nation,1 I say the truth in Christ, I lye not, my con∣science also bearing mee witnesse in the holy Ghost. it may perhaps be constru∣ed by some, as if I were ill-affected to my countrimen the Jewes; But I say the truth in Christ, I lye not; my conscience also bearing mee sincere witnesse, in that whereof I have the attestation of the holy Ghost. That I am much grieved,2 That I have great hea∣vinesse, and continuall sor∣row in my heart. and continually afflicted with sorrow of heart, for the obstinacie and infidelity of my people. For in the fervour of my zeale to the glory of God,3 For I could wish that my selfe were accursed from Christ, for my bre∣thren my kinsmen accor∣ding to the flesh. in the salvation of my brethren, I could heartily wish to be utterly separated from Christ, on condition, that the Jewes my kinsmen according to the flesh might be saved. Who are the naturall sons of the holy Patriark Israel;4 Who are Israelites: to whom pertaineth the ado∣ption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the gi∣ving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises: and who have received many, and singular priviledges from God, above all other nations of the earth; to whom pertaineth that peculiar choice, which God made of them, for his owne people; and the dignity, and preemi∣nence in many tokens of his favour; and the mutuall co∣venants which he made with them, and the honour of the giving of the Law, and the prerogative of his service, and the grace of his promises. Who are lineally descended of the holy Patriarches,5 Whose are the fathers, and of whom, as concer∣ning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. and which are of the same blood, of which, according to the flesh, Christ vouchsafed to come, even the eternall Sonne of God, who is the true and everliving God, blessed for ever. Not as if I meant that all the nations stand now ex∣cluded from salvation;6 Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect, for they are not all Israel which are of Is∣rael. and that their condition were hopelesse, as if the word of promise which God made to the Fathers, and their seed, had utterly failed and taken no effect; for certainly if it have not held in some of them, yet in others which are true Israelites indeed it hath ta∣ken happy and sensible effect; for there is a just distin∣ction to be made, betwixt those of the seed of Israel; all those which are according to nature, the posterity of Israel, are not the true and priviledged sonnes of Israel. As (to go higher) neither are all the sonnes of Abra∣ham, children of the promise; for it was said;7 Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but in Isaac shall thy seed be called. In Isaac shall thy seed be called; The blessing shall be de∣vived to his seed; and of his issue shall the Messiah come; not of Ismaels, though proceeding from the same loynes of Abraham.
8 That is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.To speake more plainely, all those that are the chil∣dren of these holy Patriarchs, according to the flesh, are not therefore the chosen sonnes of God: it is not their bloud, but their faith that must make them so. There are some of these selected from the rest, to whom the pro∣mise was made, and by whom it was received by faith; those are they that God makes reckoning of. 9 For this is the word of promise: At this time will I come, and Sa∣rah shall have a sonne.And this is the word of promise, which was spoken to Abraham. At this time will I returne, and Sarah thy wife shall have a sonne, even Isaac, so as he onely is the promised seed. 10 And not onely this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, e∣ven by our father Isaac.Neither was this promise made to Sarah onely, but even to Rebecca also, the wife of Isaac, having concei∣ved by that one selected person, even our father Isaac. 11 For the children be∣ing not yet borne, neither having done any good or evill: that the purpose of God according to electi∣on might stand, not of workes, but of him that calleth.For she, having then twinnes in her wombe (even Ja∣cob, and Esau) the children being yet unborne, and therefore not having done good, or evill; that it might clearely appeare there was no respect therein to any workes that were done by either of them; but, that the decree, and purpose of God (who had made this choice) might stand in force, and bee effected, not out of the merit of either, but out of the will of God, who calleth or refuseth whom he pleaseth. 12 It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger.It was said unto her, in regard of their earthly con∣dition (whereby a spirituall was closely figured.) The elder which is Esau, shall bee a servant to the younger, which is Jacob; and the right and privilege of the pri∣mogeniture shall bee devolved upon the younger sonne Jacob. 13 As it is written: Iacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.As it is written; Jacob and his posterity have I so lo∣ved, that I have purposed many blessings unto them, and accordingly will bestow the same blessings upon them; but Esau have I so farre disregarded, as to passe over both him, and his posterity. 14 What shall wee say then? Is there unrighte∣ousnesse with God? God forbid.What shall wee say then to this? or what use or con∣struction shall wee make to this purpose, and procee∣ding of God? Is there unrighteousnesse with God, in this (seemingly unequall) distribution of his blessings: God forbid. 15 For he saith to Mo∣ses: I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy; and I will have compassi∣on, on whom I will have compassion.For he saith to Moses; I stand not upon workes, or merits, that should draw my mercy and pitty either way; but my owne most holy will is the ground of all the gracious, and saving courses that I take with men. I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy (not on those that deserve it) & I will have compassion on whom
I will have compassion; my onely will shall bee the rule of all my favourable, and mercifull dealings with men. So then, the happy successe,16 So then, it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy. and glorious issue of the elect, must not be ascribed, either to the will, or to the actions and deservings of themselves, but to the meere goodnesse, and will of God, that sheweth mercy to them, rather than to others. For the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh;17 For the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh; Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name might bee declared tho∣rowout all the earth. Since thou wouldest needs obstinately, & presumptuously resist the messages, that I sent unto thee, in the behalfe of my people; I have, in my wise and just decree, purposed to make this use of thy advancement to the throne of Aegypt, and of thy rebellious resistance of that charge which I sent unto thee; thereby to take just occasion, to shew my mighty power, in, and upon thee; and that my powerfull, and miraculous revvenges of thee, might bee declared abroad, to the glory of my might, and justice, thorow all the earth. Therefore he hath mercy on whom he will have mer∣cy; there being no other motive to incite him hereunto,18 Therefore hath hee mercy on whom hee will have mercy; and whom he will, he hardeneth. but his owne mere, & gracious will; & whom he will, hee passeth over, leaving them to themselves; who are there∣upon hardened by their owne corruptions, and the temp∣tations of Satan; justly punishing their former contempt, with further obdurednesse of heart. Thou wilt then, perhaps, say; If God,19 Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet finde fault? for who hath resisted his will? in these courses which he takes with men, follow his owne will onely; and all things are done thereafter; why doth God com∣plaine, and finde fault with sinners, as if they had offen∣ded in doing that which they doe? Why doth he blame them or being hardened? If he will have it thus, who can resist it? Nay, but, O vaine, and wretched man,20 Nay but (O man) who art thou, that repliest against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why hast thou made me thus? who art thou that art ready thus to cavill, and quarrell with thy ma∣ker? as if hee had done thee wrong in giving thee this condition, and thus disposing of thee. How easie is it for God to silence and confound thee, ten thousand waies? In the meane time, let this answer stop thy pre∣sumptuous mouth: that if it shall please the Almighty to stand upon his absolute right, and power over his crea∣ture, it is not for any creature to expostulate with him, and to challenge him for his actions; wee are to him as the clay is to the Potter; shall the clay insolently argue with the Potter, and say; Why hast thou made mee so homely a vessell, and why to so meane uses? Hath not the Potter full power over the clay,21 Hath not the Potter power over the clay of the same lumpe, to make one vessell unto honour, and another unto dishonour. to make it up into what forme, or to what use he pleases? and of
the same lumpe to make one, an hansome vessell for the table, another plaine and carelesly-shaped, for the use of the kitchin, or whatsoever other base service; and shall not God have power over the clay of mankinde, out of the same masse of perdition, to make up one man a vessell of honour, and to passe over another, as a vessell of dishonour? 22 What if God wil∣ling to shew his wrath, & to make his power know∣en, endured with much long suffering, the vessells of wrath fitted to destru∣ction?Who hath cause to take exception at God, if hee take these two contrary courses with his creatures? There are some, with whom God is justly offended for their sinnes, (called therefore vessels of wrath) whom their owne iniquitie hath made fit subjects of damnati∣on. What if God after much patience, and long suffe∣ring, whereby he hath endured the provocations of these men, yet willing to shew, and approve his justice, and to let the world see, that he is infinitely displeased with sinne; and that he is a powerfull God, able to take ven∣geance of sinners; doe execute his fierce wrath upon them, on the one side? 23 And that hee might make knowne the riches of his glory, on the vessells of mercie, which hee had afore prepared unto glory.And on the other side, what if hee please to make knowne the infinite praise and glory of his grace and mercy, upon those chosen subjects of mercy, which he of his owne meere goodnesse, and without any respect of ought in them, had before prepared unto their glory? 24 Even us whom he hath called, not of the Iewes onely, but also of the Gentiles.Even to us, whom hee hath graciously and effectually called, not of the nation of the Jewes onely, but also of the Gentiles, without any exception of bloud, or coun∣try. As he saith also in the Prophet Hosea. 25 I will call them my people, which were not my people, and her belo∣ved, which was not belo∣ved.See Hosea 2.23, & 20. 27 Isaias also crieth con∣cerning Israel, Though the number of the children of Israell, bee as the sand of the sea, &c.See Isa. 10.22, 23. 29 And as Esaias said before, except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a seed, &c.See Isa. 1.9. 30 What shall wee say then? that the Gentiles which followed not after righteousnesse, have attai∣ned to righteousnesse, even the righteousnesse which is of faith?What shall wee then say to all this? or, what is the issue of that, which wee have spoken? Even this; that herein is to be seene, and magnified the wonderfull dis∣pensation
of the Almighty; that the Gentiles, which followed not after righteousnesse, have attained to that righteousnesse, which they sought not after, even the righteousnesse which is of faith; in that they, by their saith, have laid hold of that grace, and mercy, which is offered in the Gospell, by Jesus Christ, being of them∣selves otherwise, both strangers, and enemies to God. But Israel,31 But Israell which followed after the law of righteousnesse, hath not at∣tained to the law of righ∣teousnesse. which sought to attaine to righteousnesse by the workes of the law, and affected to earne both perfect justice, and Gods favour by the fulfilling there∣of, have not at all attained to the state of righteousnesse. Wherefore? because they sought it not the right way,32 Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were, by the workes of the law: for they stumbled at that stumbling stone. nor upon right grounds; thinking to attaine to it, not by faith, in Christ, which is the onely way to compasse it, but by the workes of the law, which they were never able to keepe and performe; for they made Christ a stone of offence unto them; and obscuring the vertue of his merits, and satisfaction, by confidence in themselves, and their owne workes, they have taken occasion to fall foule upon that Saviour, which should have raised them. As it is written. See Isa. 8.14, 15.33 As it is written: Be∣hold, I lay in Sion a stum∣bling stone, and a rocke of offence: and whosoever beleeveth on him, shall not be ashamed. CAP. X. FOr I beare them record,2 For I beare them re∣cord, that they have a zeale of God, but not ac∣cording to knowledge. they have a fervent zeale to God, but it is ignorant, and erroneous; they doe ear∣nestly affect the law, but they know not that Christ, by and in whom the law is fulfilled. For they, not knowing,3 For they being ig∣norant of Gods righteous∣nesse, and going about to establish their owne righ∣teousnesse, have not sub∣mitted themselves unto the righteousnesse of God. and apprehending that righ∣teousnesse, which is of faith in Christ; which God wor∣keth in us, and accepteth from us; going about to make good their owne righteousnes, which is by the workes of the law, have not submitted themselves to seeke that righteousnesse, which God requireth, and crowneth in his children. For Christ is so the end of the law for righteousnesse to every one that beleeveth; as that we by faith in him,4 For Christ is the end of the law for righte∣ousnesse, to every one that beleeveth. who hath fulfilled the law for us, are, and shall bee so justified, as if wee had perfectly fulfilled the law in our selves.
5 For Moses descri∣beth the righteousnesse which is of the law, that the man which doeth those things, shall live by them.For Moses describes the righteousnesse of the law by doing, whiles he saith; The man that doth those things, shall obtaine life by doing them. 9, 7 But the righteous∣nesse which is of faith, speaketh on this wise: Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven; that is to bring Christ downe from above: or who shall descend into the deepe, that is to bring up Christ againe from the dead.But the righteousnesse, which is of faith, stands not up∣on those difficulties, and impossibilities of action; but upon the apprehension of Christ our Saviour; and there∣fore speaketh on this wise; Say not thou in thine heart, who shall be able to ascend up into heaven, to carry mee up thither? (for Christ hath already done this for thee, and this were to fetch Christ thence, and to denie his ascention) nor say; Who shall descend into hell for me, to rescue me from thence, for Christ hath already deli∣vered thee from thence, and this were to frustrate the death of Christ. 8 But what saith it? The word is nigh thee, e-in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of faith, which we preach?But what faith it? even this: The word of the Gospell, and the effect of the promises therein contained, are easily to bee attained, and lye open before thee; thou shalt not need to goe seeke farre for them, they are within thee; both in thy mouth to confesse them, and in thy heart to beleeve them; and this is the word of faith which we preach; offering salvation to all that shall by a true faith lay hold thereon: Even this, That if thou shalt confesse &c. 10 For with the heart man beleeveth unto righ∣teousnes, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.For with the heart, man beleeveth, and by that his faith, is graciously accepted as righteous; and with the mouth, he makes profession of that Christ, on whom he beleeveth, and shewes forth the truth of his faith, by the fruits of it, to salvation. 13 For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved.Whosoever shall call upon God, by Christ, in faith∣full prayer, shall be saved. 14 How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not be leeved? and how shall they beleeve in him, of whom they have not heard?Now, this invocation of God, presupposeth a faith: for how shall they call on him, on whom they have not beleeved, that he can, or will helpe them: and this faith presupposeth an hearing; for how shall they beleeve on him, of whom they have not heard; and this hearing doth not necessarily imply an instructor; for how shall they heare without a Preacher. 15 And how shall they preach, except they bee sent? as it is written: how beautifull are the feet of them, that preach the Go∣spell of peace?And this preaching presupposeth a mission, or sending on Gods part; for how shall they preach, except they be sent by God, on this errand of his, and receive both gifts, and command from him; according to that of the Prophet; How beautifull, and worthy of cheere∣full aceptance are the very feet of those that preach the Gospell of peace, &c.?
But I say;18 But I say, Have they not heard? yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the end of the world. what doe yee stand upon these contemptu∣ous conceits of the Gentiles, as if they had never heard ought of God before? doe ye not remember the words of the Psalmist; Their sound went into all the world, &c. even the wonderfull workemanship of the heavens, and earth, was a great instruction to them, and taught them to know somewhat of their maker. By that mercy which I will shew to the Gentiles▪19 I will provoke you to jealousie by them that are no people, and by a foolish nation I will anger you. which are not my people, you will be stirred up to envie against them; I will bee so gracious to those rude, and ignorant nations, that you shall fret at, and bee moved to anger, and emulation of them, whom yee formerly contemned. CAP. XI. GOd hath not cast away those of his people,2 God hath not cast a∣way his people, which he foreknew: wote yee not what the Scripture saith of Elias? whom hee elected, and acknowleged for his; howsoever those fashionable counterfeits, which make an empty profes∣sion of the name of his people, be justly rejected, &c. As it was in the time of Elias, so it is still,5 Even so then at this present time, also, there is a remnant according to the election of grace. there are (amongst a number of false Hypocrites) some few left, whom God hath graciously selected to himselfe. And if they be elected, out of his free grace,6 And if by grace, then is it no more of workes; otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of workes, then it is no more grace, otherwise worke is no more worke. then not out of any merit of their owne workes; otherwise grace should not bee free, but earned, and so no grace at all. But if it be of the merit of workes, then it is not of his free grace; for else worke should not bee worke, and not meritorious at all; neither can there bee any mix∣ture of the merit of workes, and the free grace of God, but one of these excludes the other. What shall we conclude then? even this:7 What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for, but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blin∣ded. All the na∣turall sonnes of Israel, his posterity according to the flesh, have not obtained that which they seeke for; name∣ly, righteousnesse before God, and salvation; but those whom God hath mercifully selected out of the rest, have obtained it; and the rest, through their owne wilfull infi∣delitie, are hardened in their hearts, and blinded in their understandings. See Isa 29.10.8 According as it is written: God hath given them the spirit of slumber, &c.
9 And David saith, Let their table be made a snare, &c.See Psal. 69.22, 23. 11 I say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid: But ra∣ther through their fall, sal∣vation is come unto the Gentiles for to provoke them to jealousie.I say then; Have the whole nation of the Jewes so stumbled, as that they are utterly falne, and that there is no recovery and salvation for any of them? God forbid; No, there are many of them whom God will call, and save. Rather, as upon their fall, the Gentiles are succee∣ded into their roome, and partake of that grace and sal∣vation which they refused; so, God meanes to make use of the emulation, which the Jewes doe hereupon con∣ceive against the Gentiles, to stirre them up to an ear∣nest indeavour to recover and attaine the same grace, and happinesse. 12 Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the dimini∣shing of them, the riches of the Gentiles: how much more their fulnesse.Which happy issue shall be a notable advantage to the Church of God; for, if upon their fall, the world of Gentiles were inriched, and upon their decay, and losse, the Gentiles were the gainers of those honours and privi∣leges, which were taken from them; how much more shall their full recovery, and receit into favour, bee both gainfull, and glorious; when there shall be an happy uni∣on betwixt all beleevers, and one Church shall be made up of both Jewes and Gentiles. For I speake to you Gentiles, as one, that howsoever I am by birth and bloud a Jew,13 For I speake to you Gentiles, in as much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles I magnifie mine office. yet challenge a speciall interest in you, and professe an especiall care of you: in as much as I am appointed to be the Apostle of the Gen∣tiles; and therefore in thus setting forth your privileges, and blessings, I magnifie my owne office; 14 If by any meanes I may provoke to emulati∣on them which are my flesh, and might save some of them?Which I purposely do, that by thus extolling Gods favour, and mercy to you, I might provoke those of my owne flesh and bloud, to an holy emulation of you, and might save some of them. 15 For if the casting a∣way of them, be the recon∣ciling of the world; what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead.For, if upon the casting away of them, the rest of the world were received into favour; how much more must all the world needs bee received, by their receiving a∣gaine into favour? whiles they are excluded, the Church hath not that full and compleate life which then it shall enjoy, upon their restoring. 16 For if the first fruit be holy, the lumpe is also holy; and if the root be holy; so are the branches.For certainely, it must needs bee granted, that there is a speciall privilege of spirituall noblenesse, and (by rea∣son of the covenant) an hereditary kinde of dedication to God in the nation of the Jewes, more than (naturally) of the Gentiles; for if the Patriarchs, which were the first fruits of the Jewes, were holy, then the whole bulke or lumpe of the nation, is holy also; and if those faith∣full men, which were the roots of that nation, were holy,
so must they also, which, as branches, are issued out from them, be holy. And if some of these Jewish olive branches be broken off, and thou being but a branch,17 And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wilde olive tree wert graffed in amongst them, and with them partakest of the root and fatnesse of the olive tree; or siene of a wild olive be graffed in, instead of them, and together with the true naturall boughes partakest of the juice, and fatnesse that arises from the root of the olive tree; Boast not against those branches that are broken,18 Boast not against the branches: but if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee. as if thou wert better then they, or against those other bran∣ches that yet grow, and stand, as if thou wert more assu∣red, and better regarded then they; plainly, do not yee Gentiles insult over the Jewes, into whose spirituall stock ye are ingraffed; but if any will needs be so insolent, let him know, that as the root is not beholding to the branches, but the branches to the root, so that those good things which we have, we have received from the Jewes, and not the Jewes from us. But, thou wilt perhaps say;19 Thou wilt say then, the branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in. why should I not boast my selfe as better respected of God? Those naturall branches were broken off, to give way unto me. Well, it is true; Those naturall branches (viz. the nati∣on of the Jewes) were broken off, for their unbeleefe,20 Well, because of un∣beleefe they were broken off, and thou standest by faith: be not high minded, but feare. which once thought themselves as strong and sure as thou; and thou standest now in their roome by professing faith in that Christ whom they rejected; be not puffed up, O ye Gentiles, as if ye in your severall nations, could not be stripped of these priviledges; but rather if yee presume too much, feare the very same issue. For if God spared not the Jewes,21 For if God spared not the naturall branches, take heed lest hee also spare not thee. which were the na∣turall branches, but brake them off from being a Church, or people, take heed lest hee spare not you. Behold therefore a notable proofe,22 Behold therefore the goodnesse and severity of God, on them which fel severity; but towards thee, goodnesse, if thou continue in his goodnesse, other∣wise thou also shalt be cut off. and example of both the goodnesse, and severity of God; on the Jewes that are falne, just severity in forsaking them, and casting them out from his protection; but towards you, O Gen∣tiles, singular goodnesse and mercy, if yee continue in that state which may be fit to receive, and hold that his mercy and goodnesse; otherwise even ye Churches of the Gentiles also shall be cut off. And they also, if they cast off their unbeleefe,23 And they also if they bide not still in unbeleefe, shall be graffed: for God is able to graffe them in againe. and shall humbly submit themselves to their true and onely Mes∣siah, shall be received into this holy communion againe; for the same God, who rejected them, is as able also to shew mercy upon them. For, if ye, of rude, barbarous, and savage Idolaters,24 For if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature, and wert graffed contrary to nature in a good olive tree, how much more shall these which be the naturall bran∣ches, be graffed into their owne olive tree.
were taken and admitted into the holy Church of God; how much more easie and proper may it be for them, which were before, the noted and peculiar people of God, to be readmitted into the same holy fellowship. 25, 26. For I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, (lest yee should be wise in your owne conceits) that blindnesse in part is happened to Israel, untill the fulnesse of the Gentiles be come in: And so all Isra∣el shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer; and shall turne away un∣godlinesse from Iacob?For I would not have you ignorant, brethren, of this mystery, lest you be puffed up with the proud conceit of your presently happy condition, and grow scornfull of the forlorne Jewes; that a great part of the Jewes is now obstinate and hardened against the Gospell, through their owne unbeleefe; and God hath hereby taken occa∣sion to feoffe the Gentiles in the priviledges which they once had; but that withall, this obduration of theirs shall not be perpetuall; the time shall come, when this blindnesse and obstinacie shall be removed; when the number of the converted Gentiles shall be fully made up; Then shall the Jewes generally be converted, and be received to grace and salvation; as it is written, There shall come, &c. See Isay 59.20. 28 As concerning the Gospell they are enemies for your sake: but as tou∣ching the election they are beloved for the Fa∣thers sake.Will yee therefore know, what (in short) to thinke of the Jewes? If ye looke to the Gospell of Christ, which they reject, they are indeed enemies; but this is for your advantage, for their refusall thereof brought it sooner unto you. But if yee looke to the covenant of God made with their fathers, so there are of them, chosen ves∣sels, and such as are deare unto God. 29 For the gifts and cal∣ling of God are without repentance.For the gifts and calling of God, whereby it hath plea∣sed him to adopt these of Abrahams posterity for his sonnes, and to ingage himselfe by covenant to his seed, are inviolable, and such as shall never be reversed or re∣pented of. 30 For as yee in times past have not beleeved God, yet have now obtai∣ned mercy through their unbeleefe:For as ye, in times past, have not beleeved God, and yet now upon their unbeleefe, and rejection, have ob∣tained mercy; God graciously profering to you those meanes of salvation which they refused: 31 Even so have these also now not beleeved, that through your mercy they also may obtain mer∣cy.So it is now, for the present, with them; they have not beleeved that Gospell, which ye have received; and God will make this use of it, to extend unto them, in his good time, the same mercy which he hath shewed unto you. 32 For God hath con∣cluded them all in unbe∣leefe, that hee might have mercy upon all.For God hath in his just judgement, given them up both to their unbeleefe, as the deserved punishment of their former sinnes, so as that he now thereupon, hath fit occasion, and matter for his mercy to worke upon; that as all, both Jewes and Gentiles had layd themselves
open to the displeasure, and wrath of God; so both Jewes and Gentiles are now partakers of his mercy. Oh the wonderfull depth of Gods counsell;33 (O the depth of the riches, both of the wise∣dome and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgements, and his wayes past finding out! Oh the infinitely rich treasures of his wisdome and knowledge; how unsearchable are the reasons of his decrees, and the passages of his executions past our tracing & finding out: For of him, without any other motive, and through him, without any helpe and assistance, and to him,36 For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever. Amen. and for his owne sake alone, without all other respects, are all things. To whom be glory for ever. Amen. CAP. XII. I do therefore earnestly beseech you brethren,1 I beseech you there∣fore brethren, by the mer∣cies of God, that yee pre∣sent your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. by those wonderfull mercies of God, which have been now laid forth unto you, that you labour for true sanctification; and that ye do present your whole selves, soules and bo∣dies unto God, as wholly devoted, and consecrated to his service; wherein ye shall offer a farre more acceptable sacrifice unto him, then all the oblations under the Law; theirs were of beasts, yours of your selves; theirs of beasts slaine, yours is a living sacrifice; theirs was it were a brute service, yours a reasonable. And be not yee conformed to the sinfull fashions,2 And be not confor∣med to this world: but be ye transformed by the re∣newing of your minde, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God. and dispositions of this present wicked world; but be changed and altered from the state of your corrupt nature by the renuing of your minde, and affections; so as that ye may attaine to an experimentall knowledge of that which is good and acceptable, and to a cleare understanding of the holy and perfect will of God. But let each man thinke soberly and modestly of him∣selfe, and of his gifts,3 But to thinke soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith. according to that true measure and proportion of faith, and other graces, which God hath thought meet to bestow upon him. So wee, being many,5 So wee being many are made one body in Christ, and every one members one of another. are but one mysticall body uni∣ted to Christ our head; and are all members (not of our selves, but) of one another; as the hand or foot is not his owne member, but the bodies. Let us prophesie according to the rule and analogie of that faith,6 Let us prophesie ac∣cording to the proportion of faith. which is contained in the articles of our Christian beleefe, and the holy Scriptures. Or any service or attendance about those things,7 Or ministery, let us wait on our ministring. which concerne the provisions of the poore Saints, let him wait on that service, &c. Apply your selves one to another in your affections;16 Be of the same minde one towards another, minde not high things, but condescend to men of low estate.
so as the same good opinion or respect that thou hast from another, thou maist beare unto him againe; Be not high minded, and proudly conceited; neither do affect ambitious aspirings; but, &c. 17 Provide things ho∣nest in the sight of all men.Looke carefully, as to your conscience, before God, so to your honest reputation with men; and so order your wayes, that ye may maintaine a good fame in the world. 18 If it be possible, as much as lyeth in you, live peaceably with all men.It may so fall out, that it may not be possible, (such as some mens dispositions are) to live peaceably with them; or such conditions of peace may be tendered, as may be utterly unlawfull to be accepted: But if it possibly may be, let there be no default in you, why you should not live peaceably with all men. 20 Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give, &c.See Prov. 25.21, 22. 21 Be not overcome of evill, but overcome evill with good.Let not thine enemies despight so overcome thee, as to move thee to impatience, or malice; but let thy pati∣ence, and charity be such, as that thereby thou maist ex∣ceed his maliciousnesse; and, if it may be, winne him to relent, and acknowledge his owne errour. CAP. XIII. 1 Let every soule be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordai∣ned by God.LEt every man (of what condition soever) be subject unto Magistrates, and Princes; for God hath set up, and ordained the order of Government, and authority of one man over another; neither is there any institution of rule and soveraintie, nor any power of governing, which is not from God. Wouldest thou not then be in feare, or danger of the power of soveraigne authority?3 Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? doe that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same. do that which is good, and lawfull, and thou shalt not onely be free from feare, but shalt be sure of praise, and incouragement from it. Wherefore ye must yeeld ready obedience to them, not onely out of a servile feare of punishment,5 Wherefore yee must needs be subject, not one∣ly for wrath, but also for conscience sake. and care to avoid the danger of displeasure, but even for very conscience sake; because God hath so required you, and laid this charge upon your soules. Pay to every man that which is due to him; and be not a debter to any man,8 Owe no man any thing, but to love one another, for hee that loveth ano∣ther, hath fulfilled the Law. of ought, but love, and chari∣table affection, which yee ought so to pay, as that yee should have more to pay: For hee that loveth his bro∣ther, hath fulfilled all that which the second Table of the Law requireth of him.
For what doth that table of the Law require,10 Love worketh no ill to his neighbour, there∣fore love is the fulfilling of the Law. but that wee should do no ill to our neighbour (implying also therein those positive duties which wee owe to his good) loue therefore, in that it withholds us from wor∣king any ill to our neighbour, doth herein fulfill the Law. Which duty and holy affection, as it is ever seasonable,11 And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleepe: for now is our sal∣vation neerer, then when wee beleeved. so now especially; since wee know upon what times we are falne; times of danger and tryall; wherein it is very needfull that wee shake off our dulnesse and securitie, and be so much the more forward in grace and obedi∣ence, by how much we draw nearer to that goale of glo∣ry and salvation, then when wee first began to beleeve the Gospell. The night of our ignorance,12 The night is farre spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the workes of darknesse: and let us put on the armour of light. and unregeneration is now farre spent, and the day of our full renovation, and grace is now at hand; let us therefore cast off our sinnes, which are the workes of darknesse, and let us diligent∣ly, and carefully indeavour to have our soules clad with all holy vertues of sanctification. Let us behave our selves soberly, righteously,13 Let us walke honest∣ly, as in the day, not in rio∣ting and drunkennesse. godli∣ly, (as men that walke in the publique, and open view of others in the day time, are commonly carefull to go seemly clad) in this cleare light of the Gospell; and not debauch our selves in rioting, and in drunkennesse, &c. But see that your soules be cloathed (as with a gar∣ment) with true sanctification,14 But put yee on the Lord Iesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. and with the perfect righ∣teousnesse of Christ Jesus apprehended by your faith, and as for the flesh, respect and tend it as a servant, and fit in∣strument for the soule, but be not carefull to pamper it, and to fulfill the lusts thereof, as if this were your maine intention; sustaine it, but do not make it a wanton. CAP. XIV. THere are amongst you many new converts,1 Him that is weake in the faith, receive you, but not to doubtfull disputati∣ons: which though they have imbraced the Christian faith, yet are but weake and unsetled; make much of such; and take them to your further instruction, but trouble them not with controversies, and doubtfull disputations about things indifferent; but give much scope and latitude to them in these regards. For one beleeveth,2 For one beleeveth that he may eate all things: another who is weake, eateth herbs: that through the generall al∣lowance of God, hee may lawfully eate any meat what∣soever; another, who is weake, makes scruple of eating
flesh, and contents himselfe with feeding on hearbs, and rootes, and such other livelesse nourishment. 3 For God hath recei∣ved him.For God doth indifferently accept both of him that eateth, and of him that eateth not. 4 Yea, hee shall be hol∣den up: for God is able to make him stand.Yea, hee whom thou art so ready to condemne, God will mercifully acquit, and uphold; for, that God, whom I formerly declared to be willing, is certainly most able to beare him up against all uncharitable judgements. 5 Let every man be fully perswaded in his owne minde.Let every man be so fully perswaded in his own heart of the lawfulnesse of that which he doth, as that he finde no doubting, and scrupulous hesitation in doing of it; but let him grow to firme resolutions therein. 6 Hee that regardeth a day, regardeth it unto the Lord, and hee that regar∣deth not the day, to the Lord, hee doth not regard it: He that eateth, eateth to the Lord.He that regardeth, and observeth one day above ano∣ther, regardeth it out of respect to the Lord, whose law (as he supposeth) requires, and injoynes this difference; and hee that regardeth not one day more then another, doth this out of respect to the same Lord; who by the liberty of the Gospell, hath freed us from those Jewish observations, &c. 7 For none of us liveth to himselfe, and no man dyeth to himselfe.For we are the Lords servants, and therefore wee are not in any thing to respect our selves, but our master; none of us liveth, or may live, to and for him selfe; none of us dyeth to himselfe, but to the Lord; so as by his death, as also by his life, God is, and must be glorified. 11 For it is written, As I live saith the Lord, every knee shall, &c.See Isa. 45.23. 13 Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stum∣bling blocke.Let us not passe judgements of censure one upon ano∣ther, but let us passe this judgement of charitable reso∣lution in our selves, that no man put a stumbling block, &c. 14 I know and am per∣swaded by the Lord Iesus, that there is nothing un∣cleane of it selfe: but to him that esteemeth any thing to be uncleane, &c.Nothing is, in it owne nature, uncleane; for God made all things good; but in a mans conceit, and opinion, some creatures seeme uncleane; and whiles a man is in that minde, surely that creature is uncleane to him; because his conscience riseth up against the use thereof. 15 But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not charitably: destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed.But if thy brother be so grieved, and hurt, as hereby to be drawne into a scandall, with thy eating of that meat which hee makes conscience of, now walkest thou not charitably: Do not, what in thee lies, destroy him with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed. 16 Let not then your good be evill spoken of.Let not that good liberty which the Gospell hath gi∣ven you in these indifferent things, be evill spoken of, through your carelesse use of it. 17 For the kingdome of God is not meat and drinke, but righteousnesse, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.For the kingdome of God, which hee erects by grace
in the hearts of men, doth not consist in meates, and drinkes, and these outward observations, but in the in∣ward vertues, and good dispositions of the soule, in righ∣teousnesse, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. But thou sayest, I have faith,22 Hast thou faith? have it to thy selfe before God: happy is he that con∣demneth not himselfe in that thing which he allow∣eth. and knowledge of the lawfulnesse of these things; why may I not freely make use of them? Hast thou faith? bee thankfull for it; this will secure thy conscience in that which thou dost, be∣twixt God, and thee; and doe thou make this use of it; but know, that thou must walke in respect of others, by the rule of charity; thy charity therefore is for others, thy faith for thy selfe; For happy is that man, which is so setled by his faithfull resolutions, as that he condem∣neth not himselfe in that, which he yeeldeth to doe. He that doubteth whether he sinne in eating, or not,23 And hee that dou∣bteth is damned if he eate, because he eateth not of faith: For whatsoever is not of faith is sinne. is condemned if he eate; because his conscience is unset∣led, and he eateth sinfully, because he eateth doubtfully; For whatsoever is not done in faith, & particularly (even in these indifferent things) whatsoever is done with a doubtfull conscience, is sinne. CAP. XV. WEE then that are well grounded in knowledge,1 We then that are strong ought to beare the infirmities of the weake, and not to please our selves. and strong in resolution, ought to beare with the infirmities of our weake brethren, departing in some kinde, even from our owne right, and not standing up∣on the termes of our liberty, and contentment. For Christ himselfe, who is our perfect patterne,3 For even Christ plea∣sed not himselfe, but as it is written, the reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me. was so farre from seeking to please himselfe, as that he wil∣lingly exposed himselfe, to all the contumelies of men; according to that of the Psalme; The reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell upon me. That we might thereby be armed with patience,4 That we through pa∣tience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. and furnished with strong consolations, against the evill day, and that our hearts may bee established in a lively hope of the glory to come. Now, the God of patience, and comfort,5 Now the God of pa∣tience and consolation grant you to be like mind∣ed one towards another, according to Christ Iesus. work in you this charitable, and loving respect, one towards another; according to that gracious example, which we have laid before us, in our Lord Jesus Christ. So also verse 7. Now,8 Now I say that Iesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision, for the truth of God, to confirme the promises made unto the fathers. I say that Jesus Christ was willing to stoope so low, as to refuse no service for the salvation of mankind;
and particularly he graciously condescended, to be as a servant to those of the circumcision, his chosen people of the Jewes, that he might make good the truth of God unto them; in the confirmation of those promises, which were made to the fathers. 9 And that the Gentiles might glorifie God, for his mercy, as it is written.As also of the Gentiles, whom he hath mercifully cal∣led, that they may glorifie God in his grace, and good∣nesse to them, as it is written, &c. 12 And againe, Esaias saith, There shall be, &c.See Isai. 11.10. 13 With all joy and peace in beleeving.With joy in the holy Ghost, and with that happy peace of conscience, which ariseth in the heart, through a lively faith in Christ. 15 Because of the grace that is given to me, &c.Because God hath trusted me with this great grace, and honourable (however laboursome) priviledge. 16 That I should bee the minister of Iesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministring the Gospell of God, that the offering up of the Gen∣tiles might bee acceptable, being sanctified by the ho∣ly Ghost.That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, preaching the Gospell unto them; that I may thereby offer up the Gentiles unto God in this office of my Evangelicall priesthood, as an acceptable oblation to him; being sanctified (not by any legall observations, but) by the inoperation of the holy Ghost. 18 For I will not dare to speake of any of those things which Christ hath not wrought by mee, to make the Gentiles obedi∣ent, by word, and deed,For I will not dare to set forth my selfe, by any faculty or worth of my owne; or to mention any thing, but that which Christ hath wrought by me, both in my doctrine & actions for the winning of the Gentiles to obedience. 19 Through mightie signes and wonders, by the power of the spirit of God so that from Ierusalem, &c.Wherein, indeed, he hath wrought wonderfully, and shewed his almighty power, in those miraculous workes which we have done through the holy Ghost; so that from Jerusalem, &c. 20 Yea, so have I stri∣ved to preach the Gospell, not where Christ was na∣med, lest I should build upon another mans founda∣tion.Yea, with the evidence of these signes and wonders, confirming the truth of my doctrine, I have laboured to preach the Gospell to those places, where the name of Christ was never before heard of, not so much striving to bestow my paines, where other men had planted a Church before me; lest I should seeme to ease my selfe by building upon another mans foundation: But as it is written, &c. 23 But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire these many yeares to come unto you.But now having no further occasion to stay in these parts, for the planting of any new Churches, and having a great desire these many yeares to come unto you.
But now I must before-hand goe to Jerusalem,25 But now I goe unto Ierusalem to minister unto the Saints. to car∣ry thither those contributions and collections which the Grecian Churches have made for the relief of the poore Christians, there. After I have carefully and faithfully discharged my selfe of this trust, which was committed unto me,28 When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this fruit. and delivered this contribution to their hands, &c. And, I am sure that, when I doe come unto you, I shall bring with me unto you abundance of spirituall graces;29 And I am sure that when I come unto you, I shall come in the fulnesse of, &c. and shall fill you with the blessings of the Gospell of Christ. That I may be delivered from the rage,31 That I may be de∣livered from them that doe not beleeve in Iudea, and that my service which I have for Ierusalem, may be accepted for the saints. and violence of those unbeleeving Jewes, which are cruelly incensed against me; and that this service of mine, in bringing this collection to Jerusalem, may receive a good constructi∣on of those Jewes which doe beleeve, and be accepted of them without prejudice of my person, or act. CAP. XVI. I Commend unto your loving respects,1 I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the Church which is at Cenchrea. and entertain∣ment, Phebe our sister, which hath beene very helpfull to the Church that is at Cenchrea; and hath done many good offices to it. That ye receive her in an holy and Christian fashion,2 That ye receive her in the Lord, as becommeth saints. as becommeth your profession, &c. Epenetus who is one of the first converts unto Christ in the region of Achaia.5. Epenetus who is the first fruits of Achaia unto Christ. Who are of speciall note,7 Who are of note amōg the Apostles, who also were in Christ before me. and in high account with all the Apostles; and who were famous disciples, before my conversion. Since I cannot be personally present,16 Salute one another with an holy kisse. to salute you with a faithfull kisse of peace and love, doe ye so as from me, salute one another. Now I beseech you brethren,17 Now I beseech you brethrē, mark them which have divisions and offen∣ces. to have a carefull and vi∣gilant eye upon them that cause divisions, and (by that meanes) offences, to the Church, &c. For they that are such, howsoever they may pretend Christianity,18 For they that are such, serve not our Lord Iesus Christ, but their own belly. yet indeed they serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their owne gaine and profit, teaching false doctrines for filthy lucres sake, &c. But as for you; the same of your obedience,19 For your obedience is come abroad unto all men, I am glad therefore on your behalfe, but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evill. and holy carriage, is flowne abroad all the world over, and I am therefore glad on your behalfe; and rejoyce in your con∣stant repulse of these erroneous teachers, But I would
have you still goe on in that holy and Christian course; and, be wise to maintaine that which is good, and inex∣pert of, and averse from that doctrine, which is evill. 20 And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly: the grace of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ be with you, A∣men.And the God of peace, howsoever hee doe for your triall suffer both false teachers, and persecutors to afflict his Church, yet will shortly crush the power of Satan, & tread him under your feet. 22 I Tertius who wrote this Epistle, salute you in the Lord.I Tertius, who was Pauls notary, or scribe, to write this his Epistle to you, salute you in the Lord. 25 Now to him that is of power to establish you according to my Gospell, and the preaching of Iesus Christ, according to the re∣velation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began:Now to him that is able to confirme, and establish your hearts, in the truth of that Gospell (which I have preached unto you) of Jesus Christ; (according to the revelation of that great mystery of godliness, which was kept secret, ever since the beginning of the world, and was onely shadowed out in certaine dim types, and fi∣gures: 26 But now is made ma∣nifest, and by the scriptures of the Prophets according to the commandement of the everlasting God, made knowne to all nations for the obedience of faith.But now is clearly made manifest to the world, and by the full understanding of the scriptures, of the ancient Prophets, upon the commandement of the everlasting God, made knowne and published to all nations, to win them to the obedience, and chearfull imbracing of this holy faith, and to frame their lives and practices answer∣able thereunto. 27 To God only wise bee glory through Iesus Christ, for ever, Amen.To God onely wise, the author and fountaine of all wisedome, who is only able to make us wise to salvation, bee glory and praise through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. CAP. I. See Rom. 1.1.1 Paul called to be an Apostle of Iesus Christ, &c. THat ye are in every thing richly furnished by him, with all graces,5 That in every thing ye are enriched by him in all utterance, and in all knowledge. that may serve both for your owne knowledge, and for the expressi∣on thereof to the good of others. Even as that promise which Christ made in testimo∣ny to the truth of the Gospell, was made good,6, 7. Even as the testi∣mony of Christ, was con∣firmed in you, so that yee come behinde in no gift, waiting for the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. and con∣firmed in you, who were accordingly indowed with many excellent fruits, and gifts of his Spirit; so as ye were not wanting in any grace whatsoever that is requisite for you; untill ye shall attaine to the full measure there∣of, in the reuelation of Jesus Christ, in his second com∣ming. God is most firme, and constant to his owne decrees,9 God is faithfull, by whom ye were called un∣to the fellowship of his Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord. and promises; by whom ye are called, and graciously ad∣mitted into the communion with his Sonne Jesus Christ; and being therefore made one with him, your condition must needs be certaine, and happy. Now I beseech you brethren,10 Now I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that yee all speake the same thing, and that there, be no divisions among you. and do (as it were) ear∣nestly adjure you, by the sacred name of our Lord Jesus Christ, as ye love and honour that deare Saviour of ours, that yee all agree together in the truth of one, and the same doctrine, &c. Now this I say,12 Now this I soy, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. that yee are partially affected to your teachers, and make sides, in emulation of your respects to them; so as one sayes, I am for Paul; another, I am for Apollo; another, I am for Peter; and another, I am for Christ. What? are ye not all then for Christ;13 Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? or is Christ one in Paul, another in Apollo, another in Peter? Is Christ divided? is he not one in all his messengers? or why make yee mention of Paul, or Peter? was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized into the name of Paul?
14 I thanke God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius.If ye be in that minde, I thanke God that I have not medled with you, this way; for I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius. 17 For Christ sent mee not to baptize, but to preach the Gospell: not with wisdome of words, lest the crosse of Christ should bee made of none effect.For the maine errand, whereupon Christ sent mee, was, not to baptize, but to preach the Gospell; not in the pompe, and vaine ostentation of eloquent speech (as the false teachers affect) lest I should rather seeme to gaine this way, then by the plaine simplicity of the laying forth of the sufferings of Christ; and should by this meanes fru∣strate that plaine and effectuall doctrine of the crosse of Christ. 18 For the preaching of the crosse is to them that perish, foolishnesse: but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God.For this homely preaching of the Crosse of Christ, is to vaine minds of carnall men (which go on securely to their perdition) no better then foolishnesse; but unto those that are wrought upon by Gods Spirit, and are in the sure way of salvation, it is no other then the strong power of God. 19 I will destroy the wisdome of the wise, and will bring, &c.See Isa 29.14. 20 Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Hath not God made foolish the wise∣dome of this world?Where then is the wise, and learned Pharisee? where is the Scribe? where is the Philosopher? these all seeme great knowers, and deep schollers in their kind; But hath not God made the wisdome of this world mere foo∣lishnesse in respect of divine mysteries? For, since that the world by their naturall wisdome, did not,21 For after that in the wisedome of God, the world by wisdome knew not God; it pleased God by the foolishnesse of preaching, to save, &c. nor could, nor would know God, in that way of divine wisdome, wherein hee vouchsafed to declare himself; it pleased God, by this preaching of the Gospell, (which the world calls foolishnesse) to save them that beleeve. 22 For the Iewes re∣quire a signe, and the Greeks seeke after wise∣dome.For the Jewes looke to be convinced by signes from heaven, that they may beleeve; and the Grecians look to be convinced, and won with humane reason, and philo∣sophicall demonstrations, that they may beleeve. 23 But we preach Christ crucified; unto the Iewes a stumbling block, and un∣to the Greeks foolishnesse.But wee care not to satisfie either of them in their owne wayes; but rather we preach Christ crucified unto them; which is a stumbling block to the Jewes, who ex∣pect a magnificent, and temporall Redeemer of Israel; and unto the learned Grecians, no other then foolish∣nesse, who cannot conceive how hee that is God could dye, or how he that did dye, could redeeme us. 24 But unto them which are called, both Iewes and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdome of God.But unto them which are truly and effectually called, by the inward voice of the Spirit, whether they be Jewes, or Greekes; the power of God to save us, and the wisdome of God to informe us. 25 Because the foolish∣nesse of God is wiser then men: and the weaknesse of God is stronger then men.Because that Gospell of God, which the world mis∣names
foolishnesse, is wiser then all the deepest Philo∣sophy of men; and that plaine word of his, which the world thinkes to be weake, and forcelesse, is stronger then the powerfullest arguments of men; and thus it is in a generality, whatsoever, in and from God, seemes to savour of the least wisedome, and reason, or of the most weaknesse, farre surpasseth all the wisdome and strength of men. Ye see (my brethren) the condition of christianity,26 For ye see your cal∣ling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, nor many, &c. how that now, in this entrance of the Gospell, not many that are worldly wise, and deep learned, not many mighty, &c. are called. But God hath chosen plaine, simple,27 But God hath cho∣sen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise: and God hath chosen the weake things of the world, &c. unlettered fishermen, to confound the great wise Philosophers of the world, and God hath chosen meane, weake and sil∣ly agents, to confound the powerfull, and mighty po∣tentates of the earth. So verse 28. And hath chosen us, that had no being at all, in grace,28 Yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are. and seemed to be but as nothing in worldly respects, even us hath hee chosen, to humble, and bring downe those that make the most glorious appearance in the world. That no man whosoever (being no better then base,29 That no flesh should glory in his presence. and contemptible flesh) should arrogate ought to him∣selfe, or boast of his parts, or priviledges in the presence of God. But yee are not mere flesh, and blood;30 But of him are ye in Christ Iesus, who of God is made unto us wisdome, and righteousnesse, and sanctification, and redem∣ption. neither have reason to stand upon these carnall priviledges; since yee are admitted into an happy communion with God through Christ Jesus; who of God his Father is made unto us wisedome, in that by him wee receive true knowledge, and illumination; is made unto us righte∣ousnesse, in that, both his righteousnesse is made ours, and wee are for his righteousnesse graciously acquited, and accepted; is made unto us sanctification, in that by his Spirit we are renued, and purged from our sinnes; is made unto us redemption, in that by his precious blood wee are ransomed from the hands of our spirituall ene∣mies. Thus is Christ made All to us;31 That according as it is written, Hee that glorieth let him glory in the Lord. that according as it is written; Hee that glorieth might not glory at all in him∣selfe, but might glory in the Lord.
CAP. II. 1 And I, brethren, when I came to you I came not with excellency of speech, or of wisdome, declaring unto you the testimony of God.ANd as for mee, brethren, I, when I came unto you to preach the Gospell of God, did not come to you with flourishes of vaine eloquence, nor with the per∣swasions of humane wisdome and learning, as I see the false teachers do, to insinuate themselves the better into your mindes. 2 For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Iesus Christ, and him crucified.For (howsoever I were able to know and discourse with the best of them, as having beene trained up at the feet of a learned master) yet I resolved to let go all that secular skill, and so to beare my selfe amongst you, as if I knew nothing else in the world but Christ and him cru∣cified. 3 And I was with you in weaknesse and in feare, and in much trembling.And I was amongst you in much meeknesse, and hu∣mility, in manifold infirmities; in much awe of that great and weighty charge which I sustained, in much feare of those many, and spightfull machinations of mine enemies, against mee. 4 And my speech, and my preaching was not with inticing words of mans wisdome, but in de∣monstration of the Spirit and of power.And my speech, both in my private exhortations, and in my publique preachings, was not curiously plausible, as if I would winne with words of humane eloquence, and wit; but in plaine and powerfull expressions of Gods Spirit, speaking in mee, and working in you, by mee. 5 That your faith should not stand in the wisdome of men, but in the power of God.That so your faith might not rest, and depend upon, or appeare to be wrought by the force of mans perswa∣sion, or wisedome, but by the mighty power of Gods Spirit. 6 Howbeit wee speake wisedome among them that are perfect, yet not the wisedome of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to nought.Yet let no man thinke it is out of our disability, that we speake not in these high straines of wisedome, which others so much wonder at; for both we can, and do speak deepe points of wisedome, and divine knowledge, a∣mongst them that are attained to a meet perfection of skill to conceive it; Yet not points of carnall, and secular wisedome, such as the world admires, and the great men of this world (who vanish and come to nothing) are wont to affect. 7 But wee speake the wisdome of God in a my∣stery, even the hidden wisdome which God or∣dained before the world, unto our glory.But we speake divine wisedome, even the deepe my∣steries of the Gospell of God, which hee hath hid from the eyes of the world; even that which concernes the sal∣vation of man, by his Sonne Jesus Christ manifested in the flesh; which Gospell of his, was ordained by him be∣fore the world was, as the meanes to bring us to his glory.8 Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it, &c. Which none of the great rulers of this world, Herod, Pilate, the High Priests, and the other Governours of Judea knew; for had they knowne it, &c.
But herein also hath God made good that of the Pro∣phet Esay; The eye hath not seene, &c.9 But as it is written, Eye hath not seene, nor eare heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, the things that God hath pre∣pared for them that love him. the things that God hath prepared for them that love him; and there∣fore these spirituall blessings of remission of sinnes, and salvation by Christ, are things farre beyond the reach and apprehension of the eyes, and eares, and hearts of the men of this world. But God hath vouchsafed to reveale them unto us,10 But God hath revea∣led them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit sear∣cheth all things, yea the deepe things of God. by his Spirit; having by the power thereof, illuminated our mindes, to see these great things of God; For the Spirit of God alone, is hee that doth fully know, and is able to reveale them unto us; Hee onely knoweth all things; and particularly the deepest mysteries of Gods eternall counsell, and proceedings with men. For as it is with men, so it is with God also;11 For what man know∣eth the things of a man, save the spirit of a man, which is in him; even so the things of God know∣eth no man, &c. what man knoweth a mans secret thoughts, but onely himselfe, and his owne soule or spirit; even so, the secret counsels and mysteries of God can none know, but the Spirit of God onely. Now this Spirit of God is that, which wee have recei∣ved; We that are his regenerate children are partakers,12 Now wee have re∣ceived not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that wee might know the things that are freely given to us of God. not of that spirit, wherewith worldly men are led, and carried, but of that good Spirit which is of God; that we might by his illumination and Grace, know and ap∣prehend the great, spirituall, a heavenly blessings of forgivenesse, and salvation, that are freely given to us of God. Fitting spirituall things with plaine and simple spi∣rituall expressions; and not uttering spirituall things,13 Comparing spiritu∣all things with spirituall. in a carnall and affected fashion. But the man that is merely naturall, and unregenerate,14 But the naturall man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spi∣ritually discerned. receiveth not these divine mysteries of the Spirit of God; for they seeme to be mere foolishnesse unto him, who is nothing but flesh and blood; neither indeed can hee, whiles he continues in that condition, know, or con∣ceive them; because they are to be discerned by spirituall eyes, which he hath not. But he that is renewed by the Spirit of God,15 But hee that is spiri∣tuall judgeth all things, yet hee himselfe is judged of no man. knoweth and apprehendeth, and rightly judgeth of all these spiri∣tuall things; yet he himselfe is judged of no carnall man, so as that his knowledge in these divine matters can be controlled, or censured by him. For the counsell,16 For who hath knowne the minde of the Lord, that he may instruct him, but wee have the minde of Christ. and will of God is hid from carnall mindes; so as the Prophet might well aske, Who hath knowne the minde of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But as for us, we that be his renewed, and faithfull ones, we have the will of Christ clearely revealed unto us.
CAP. III. 1 And I brethren, could not speake unto you as un∣to spirituall, but as unto carnall, even as unto babes in Christ.ANd I brethren, howsoever I may be taxed and de∣spised by some, as if I onely spake unto you plaine and vulgar things, must tell you that I purposely did so, that I might frame my speech to your apprehension; for I could not speake unto you, as to men already re∣generate, but as to carnall men, novices in Christianity, babes in Christ. 2 I have fed you with milke, and not with meat.I did therefore (as was meet) feed you accordingly with the milke of the first principles of religion, not with the strong meat of harder & higher doctrines, &c. 3 For ye are yet carnall; for whereas there is a∣mong you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not yet carnall, and walke as men?For howsoever yee may be well conceited of your selves, the truth is, ye are yet carnall; whereof you shall be clearely convinced by your effects; For whiles there are among you, envyings, and strifes, and factious divisi∣ons; are ye not carnall; and carry your selves, not as Christians, but as men? 4 For whiles one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollo.See Chap. 1. verse 12. 6 I have planted, Apollo watered: but God gave the increase.I have beene the first that laid the grounds of religi∣on amongst you, and planted the Church at Corinth: Apollo came after mee, and seconded my holy endea∣vours with you; but it was God that gave successe to both our labours, and wrought upon your hearts an in∣crease of grace thereby. 8 Now he that planteth and hee that watereth are one: and every man shall receive his owne reward, according to his owne la∣bour.Now hee that first planteth, and hee that afterwards watereth, are but as one instrument, or agent of the same God; their paines tend all to one end; so as ye ought not thus to divide your respects to them; but know that if there be a difference in their labours, every man shall re∣ceive of God his owne reward, according to the propor∣tion of his faithfull painfulnesse in his place. 9 For we are labourers together with God, ye are Gods husbandrie; yee are Gods building.For wee are labourers under God, and together with him; in this great worke of winning soules to him; and therefore cannot faile of our due reward; Ye are Gods husbandrie, we helpe to till and sow you: Ye are Gods building, we helpe to reare you up. 10 According to the grace of God, which is given unto me, as a wise master builder, I have laid the foundation, and ano∣ther buildeth thereon, but let every man take heed how hee buildeth there∣upon.And in this spirituall architecture or building, there are degrees of workmen; I for my part; according to that measure of grace which God hath given mee, as a wise master builder, have (as a faithfull Apostle of Christ) layd the foundation of a Church amongst you; grounding you in the first principles of Christianity; and
then come other teachers after mee, and build there∣upon such further doctrines, as they thinke meet. But let every man take heed what hee teacheth, and how hee buildeth. For certainly, as for the foundation, I know,11 For other foundati∣on can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Iesus Christ. I have made sure worke; I well know, no man can lay any other then that which I have laid; which is Jesus Christ; on whom alone the Church of God is originally founded and built. Now all the care is for the building that is erected upon this foundation; what matter or stuffe it is of;12 Now if any man build upon this foundati∣on, gold, silver, pretious stones, wood, hay, stubble; and how it is laid; for what matter soever it is, whether gold, silver, pretious stone, wood, hay, or stubble; Certainly it will and must come to the tryall;13 Every mans worke shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it be∣cause it shall be revealed by fire, and the fir shall trye every mans worke of what sort it is. every mans worke or doctrine shall appeare what it is; There is a day comming which shall clearely declare it, because it shall be made manifest by the fire of Gods judgement: that tryall and examination of God shall discover every mans worke of what sort it is. If any mans doctrine which hee hath built thereupon,14 If any mans worke abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. be of a firme and solide nature (such as gold, and silver, &c.) and do therefore endure the tryall, which it shall be put unto, he shall receive a reward. If any mans doctrine be frivolous (like straw or stubble, or wood) apt to be burnt up:15 If any mans worke shall be burnt, he shall suf∣fer losse: but he himselfe shall be saved; yet so as by fire. and so be wasted in that fiery examination, hee shall lose his labour in teaching it; but as for himselfe, because hee holds and maintains the foundation, hee shall be saved; but yet so, as that his sleight errors shall cost him deare; and under∣goe the sharpe affliction of the just hand of God. Know yee not that yee are the spirituall Temple of God, built by him, and consecrated to his owne service;16 Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. and that as God testified his presence, and inhabitation in the materiall Temple, so the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? For that which the world accounts to be the onely wisdome, is esteemed of God no other,19 For the wisdome of this world is foolishnesse with God; for it is writ∣ten, He taketh the wise in their owne craftinesse. then mere foo∣lishnesse; according to that which is written; Hee be∣fooleth the wise and crafty in their owne wilinesse and policie. Therefore let no man glory in one man above ano∣ther; for all things are yours;21 Therefore let no man glory in men, for all things are yours. (so as yee shall wrong your selves in so fastidious a choice) whether Paul or Apollo, &c.
CAP. IIII. 1 Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.ANd, as for us, let men account us as we are, (without all flattering, and partiall respects) even as the mini∣sters of Christ, and the stewards, or dispensers of the great mysteries of God; not as the masters, or owners thereof. 2 Moreover, it is requi∣red in stewards, that a man be found faithfull.And ye know it is a principall quality required in a steward, that he be faithfull to his Lord; laying forth that which is committed to him, with all due care and fidelity. 3 But with mee it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of mans judgement: yea, I judge not mine owne selfe.So have I done, howsoever I am censured by some e∣mulous accusers: But I regard it not; with me it is a ve∣ry smal thing, that I have undergone the censures of you, or of any mortall man; neither need you to take this un∣kindly; for I tell you, I my selfe dare not passe a rash ver∣dict or sentence against my selfe; or if I should, I weigh it not. 4 For I know nothing by my selfe, yet am I not hereby justified: but hee that judgeth mee is the Lord.For I have, indeed, carried my selfe, as neare as I could, inoffensively in my ministery; neither doe I know any flaw, or blemish in my demeanure, this way; but yet, I may not stand stiffely upon mine owne justification; but must leave my selfe to the favourable sentence of my Lord and Master. 5 Therefore judge no∣thing before the time until the Lord come, &c.Much lesse therefore doe ye presume to judge of o∣thers, before the time of the cleare revelation of all things, which shall be at the comming of the Lord, who &c. 6 And these things, bre∣thren, I have in a figure transferred to my selfe, and to Apollo, for your sakes: that ye might learne in us not to think of men, above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up for one against another.And as for these particulars, brethren, I have instanced in the names of my selfe, and Apollo, purposely (though we have made no such challenges, nor have had such sides taken) for your sakes; that ye might learne, by this example and instance of ours, not to over-value men, a∣bove that rate which is commended unto us by the written charge of Christ; and that no man be puffed up with a proud conceit of being under one teacher, rather then another, or of more worthinesse in himself, then an∣other. 7 For who maketh thee to differ from another and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, &c.For, O vaine man, whosoever thou art, that vauntest of thine owne excellencies, or better parts; tell me, who makes thee to differ from another? how comest thou to be better then others? And what hast thou, that thou hast not received, as of free gift, from God? 8 Now ye are full, now ye are rich, yee have rai∣gned as Kings without us, and I would to God yee did reigne that wee also might reigne with you.And as for you, Corinthians, I take no pleasure to see you thus affected; ye are, in your owne conceits, full fed, and have no need of our wholesome nourishment;
ye are rich in grace, and vertue; Yea, ye are, in your own opinion, already glorious Kings, without any helpe of ours; Alas, I would to God it were thus with you; so far am I from envying your happinesse, that I could earnest∣ly wish ye did indeed reigne over your corruptions, and were possessed of the assurance of glory and blessednesse with Christ, that we might take our part and share with you in that your happy estate. For, as for our condition,9 For I think that God hath set forth us the Apo∣stles last, as it were appro∣ved to death: for wee are made a spectacle unto the world, and to Angells, and to men. it is here no other then very miserable; for I thinke that God hath set and singled out us, who are his last Apostles or messengers, as men de∣stined and appointed to death in the publique theater of the world; wherein we are made a spectacle to all eyes; even to the whole world of beholders, both Angells and men. What a difference there is betweene you and us?10 Wee are fooles for Christs sake, but yee are wise in Christ. we are accounted (and willing so to be accounted) fooles for Christs sake, but yee thinke your selves wise in Christ, &c. We are made so contemptible as the very dirt under the feet of men; and as the scrapings,13 Wee are made as the filth of the world, and are the off scouring of all things unto this day. and parings and base off all of all creatures, unto this day, cast out as loath∣some and unprofitable. I write not these things to shame you by upbraiding you with your owne error, but,14 I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sonnes, I warne you. by this touch which I have given you, to admonish and warne you of so offen∣ding. For I doe justly challenge more right in you,15 For though you have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not ma∣ny fathers. then a∣ny other teacher whatsoever; for if you have ten thou∣sand schoolemasters, and instructers to read divine le∣ctures unto you, yet have ye no more spirituall fathers, besides my selfe, &c. Who shall put you in mind of both my strict conver∣sation, and holy doctrine,17 Who shall bring you into remembrance of my waies, which be in Christ, as I teach every where, in every, &c. which I propound to all the Churches of Christ. Now some take upon them, at pleasure,18 Now some are pas∣sed up as though I would not come to you. as if it were sure that I would not come to controll them. And will make tryall of these boasters,19 But I will come to you, shortly, if the Lord will, and will know not the speech of them which are puffed up, but the pow∣er. not of their e∣loquence, and good words, wherein I know they excell, but of their power, and evidence of the spirit, wherein I know I shall finde them defective. For the praise and glory and efficacy of the Gospell,20 For the kingdome of God is not in word, but in power. which is the kingdome of God, doth not stand in words, but in power.
21 What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod? or in love, and in the spirit of meeknesse?Let it be your owne choice, then, after what manner I shall come unto you; My carriage must be directed by your deserts, & dispositions; Wil you that I shal come to you with a rod of censure, to correct your exorbitances? or, in love, and in the spirit of meeknesse, to commend and cherish your holy proceedings, and Christian carri∣age? I shall doe either of them, as I shall receive occasion from you. CAP. V. 1 It is reported com∣monly, that there is forni∣cation among you, and such fornication, as is not so much as named amongst the Gentiles, that one should have his fathers wife.IT is brought unto me both by common, and credible report, that there is a very shamefull practice of un∣cleannesse tolerated, or winked at, amongst you; and in∣deed, such a one, as for the odiousnesse of it, is not to be heard of among the very Gentiles themselves; that one should converse, and commit filthinesse with his fathers wife. 2 And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mour∣ned, that he that hath done this deed, might be taken away from among you.And ye, in the meane time, are taken up with your owne proud contentions, and minde not the correction, and reformation of so foule a crime: and are not hum∣bled rather, for such an hainous offence; nor have taken a course, that he which hath done this wickednesse, might be taken away from among you. 4, 5 In the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, with the power of our Lord Iesus Christ, to deliver such a one unto Satan; for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Iesus.I have already decreed concerning this incestuous per∣son, that when ye are gathered together in the name, and with the invocation of our Lord Jesus Christ (in which assembly I will in my desire and consent, and approbati∣on be present with you) That in the power and authori∣ty of our Lord Jesus Christ, this offender be cast out of the Church, and by this heavy censure, delivered over in∣to the power of Satan; not for his finall damnation, but only for his temporary smart, and for punishment of the flesh, that his soule may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 6 Your glorying is not good, know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe?Ye Corinthians have no reason to pride your selves, and to boast, and glory of your estate, whiles ye have so foule sinnes amongst you; know ye not that a little lea∣ven of sinne, sowreth the whole lumpe of your Church. 7 Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lumpe, as ye are unleavened: for even Christ our Passeover is sacrificed for us.Purge out therefore this old, and sowre leaven of of∣fence, that ye may be a holy congregation indeed, as yee are so in profession; Ye know, no leaven may bee endu∣red in the Paschall feast; Behold Christ our Paschall Lambe is slaine, and sacrificed for us:
Away therefore with all the sinfull leaven of our un∣cleannesses; and let us keepe this spirituall passeover,8 Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old lea∣ven, neither with &c. not with old leaven, neither with &c. I admonished you before in another Epistle, that yee should not keepe company with fornicators;9, 10 I wrote unto you in an epistle, not to compa∣ny with fornicators: yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with Ido∣laters; for then must yee needs go out of the world. and I doe now againe second that my needfull charge; yet then I did not intend to require you to avoid the company of heathenish fornicators, or of covetous, or oppressive, or Idolatrous heathens; for then must ye goe out of the world; these do so abound every where, that ye can meet with no other. But now I have written unto you, particularly,11 But now I have written unto you, not to keep company: if any man that is called a brother bee a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extor∣tioner, &c. not to consort your selves in the company of inordinate Chri∣stians; If any that is called a brother or professed Chri∣stian, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an adulterer, &c. with such a one have not so much familiarity as to fre∣quent his ordinary conversation. As for the rest; what have I to doe, to censure,12 For what have I to doe to judge them also that are without? doe yee not judge them that are within. or meddle with them that are without the pale of the Church? Is not this the power that God hath commit∣ted unto you, to judge and censure those that are with∣in? But, as for those that are without;13 But them that are without, God judgeth: therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person. we must leave them to the censure of God. Therefore let the issue of this my exhortation, and charge, be this; put away from your selves that wicked person. CAP. VI. DAre any of you,1 Dare any of you, ha∣ving a matter against ano∣ther, goe to law before the unjust, and not before the saints. having a suit or quarrell against his fellow Christian, goe to law before heathen judges, and not before those of his owne holy profession? Know ye not, that Gods faithfull,2 Doe ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you &c. and holy ones (which are his saints here on earth) shall have the honor one day, to be admitted to sit on thrones in assistance of Christ, to judge the? world and if the world shall bee judged by you, &c. Know ye not that we shall sit on judgement upon the very Angells themselves,3 Know ye not that we shall judge Angells, how much more things that pertaine to this life. even upon those evill and a∣postate
spirits, which doe now sway so much in the world; how much more should we be thought worthy to passe our judgement upon the triviall, and base things that pertaine to this life? 11 But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Iesus, and by the Spirit of our God.But ye are now cleansed and purged from these your sinnes, in that ye are both justified, and sanctified; Justi∣fied by the power and merits of Christ; sanctified by the Spirit of our God; applying to you the efficacy of his passion, and obedience. 12 All things are law∣full unto me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawfull for mee, but I will not bee brought under the power of any.Doe not thinke that yee may safely take your free scope; and liberty in things indifferent; it is true, all things of that nature are lawfull to be done, but yet they are not all meet, and expedient to be done; we Christi∣ans must follow another rule, even of charity also, in the use hereof. 13 Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shal destroy both it and them: now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.It is not for you to strive about matter of meates; Meate is ordained for the filling of the belly, and the belly is ordained to be the receptacle of those meates, for the nourishing of the body; but they are, both, of a perishing, and transitory condition; not worthy to take up our thoughts, and to be the grounds of contention in Gods Church. But, as for fornication, that is of another ranke; let no man thinke that as the belly is for meat, so also the body is for fornication; howsoever that sinne hath, in the time of your inconversion, beene but of sleight account, yet know now that it is a hainous offence against God; for the body is not to be prostituted to lust, but to be consecrated to the Lord; and the Lord challenges the members of the body to be the propriety of himselfe who is their head. 14 And God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his owne power.And God hath both raised up from the dead the Lord Christ, whose our bodies are, and will also by his owne mighty power raise up these bodies of ours from corrup∣tion, and mortality. 15 Know yee not that your bodies are the mem∣bers of Christ? shall I then take &c.Know ye not that, by reason of that perfect union which is betwixt Christ and his Church, your bodies are the members of the mysticall body of Christ? shall I then take &c. 16 What, know ye not that he which is joyned to an harlot, is one body? for two (saith he) shall be one flesh.Know ye not that he, which is joyned with an harlot, in an uncleane and unlawfull society, becomes, as it were one body? for that which was spoken of the lawfull copu∣lation of man and wife, that they two shall be one flesh; holds also of the corruption and violation of this holy institution of God; here is an impure and sinfull unity, contracted in this unlawfull and wicked conjunction. 17 But he that is joy∣ned unto the Lord, is one spirit.But he, that cleaves to the Lord with all his heart,
and is wholly devoted to his service, is as it were one spirit with God; not in essence, but in consent of will, in love, in all those graces that may make him heavenly, and divine. Flee fornication; Every sinne of a man,18 Flee fornication: e∣very sinne that a man doth is without the body; but he that committeth forni∣cation sinneth against his owne body. though it de∣file the committer, yet leaves not a direct blemish, or taint upon the body; but rather staineth the soule prima∣rily, and the body only by relation; but he that commits this sinne of fornication doth directly and immediately sinne against his owne body, in making it one with an harlot. CAP. VII. AS concerning those questions,1 Now concerning the things whereof yee wrote unto me, it is good for a man not to touch a wo∣man. which you propoun∣ded to mee in your letters, concerning single life, and marriage; I answere thus: It were better for a man, if he could containe, not to touch a woman; the single life is very expedient, profitable, commendable to those that are fit for it. Neverthelesse, because every man is not able to con∣taine; to avoid fornication, let every such man as cannot attaine hereto, have his owne wife; and let every such woman have her owne husband.2 Neverthelesse, to a∣void fornication, let every man have his owne wife, and let every woman have her owne husband. And let every such husband, in a sober and modest manner, render unto his wife those due respects,3 Let the husband ren∣der unto the wife due be∣nevolence, and likewise al∣so the wife unto the hus∣band. which pertaine to the marriage bed, and likewise, the wife un∣to the husband. The wife hath not power of her owne body, to with∣hold and denie the lawfull use thereof to her husband,4 The wife hath not power of her owne body, but the husband, &c. or to impart it unto any other: but the husband only, as he is her head, hath power thereof, &c. Refuse not to give unto each other those dues of con∣jugall benevolence, which ye owe one to other,5 Defraud you not one the other, except it bee with consent for a time, that yee may give your selves to fasting and prayer and come together againe that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. being thereto required; neither doe yee estrange your selves from matrimoniall conversation, except it be with con∣sent, for a time; that ye may give your selves to the so∣lemne exercise of fasting and prayer; and then converse together againe; lest Satan take occasion and advantage by over long refraining, to tempt you to incontinency. But this that I have spoken,6 But I speake this by permission, and not of commandement. concerning the speedy re∣turne to the use of the marriage-bed; I have not said by way of command; for if any finde themselves able, with∣out danger of incontinency, longer to abstaine, I impose
no necessity upon them of hasting to this remedy; but on∣ly, I speake this by way of permission, out of respect to the weaknesse of those, which are not able to containe. 7 For I would that all men were even as I my selfe, but every man hath his proper gift of God.For I could wish that all men were even as I my selfe, am; free from these desires, and from these troubles of a married estate; But every man must doe as hee may; each one hath his proper gift of God, &c. 8 I say therefore to the unmarried and widdowes, it is good for them if they abide even as I.I say then to those that are virgins, or widdowes; it is good for them to continue in the state of single life, as I doe; and this is to be laboured for, and carefully endea∣voured. 9 But if they cannot containe, let them marrie: for it is better to marry then to burne.But if after earnest indeavour, they finde themselves not able to containe, let them use that remedy of mar∣riage, which God hath ordained. It is better for them to betake themselves to lawfull and honest matrimonie; then to burne & boyle with inordinate lusts, and desires. 10 And unto the mar∣ried I command, yet not I but the Lord, let not the wife depart from her hus∣band.And as for those that are married persons, I command them, (and yet it is not so much my charge (as an Apo∣stle of Christ) as it is Gods owne command in the law; and Christs in the Gospell) let not the wife upon any pretence, voluntarily depart from her husband. 12 But to the rest speak I, not the Lord, if any bro∣ther hath a wife.But to the rest that are unequally matched with infi∣dells, I speake, as an Apostle of Christ, having other∣wise no expresse charge for it, either in the law, or in the words of Christ; If any brother have, &c. 14 For the unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelee∣ving wife is sanctified by the husband▪ else were your children uncleane; but now are they holy.For however it might seeme that the infidelitie, or paganisme of the husband makes the marriage utterly uncleane; yet so doth God respect the piety of the be∣leeving wife; as that, by vertue thereof, the mrriage is to all purposes accounted as holy; and such, as whereto the benefit of the promises, and priviledges of beleeving matches, doth appertaine; and so also is it in the case of an unbeleeving wife; else, if the marriage were unholy, the children therein begotten should be uncleane also; but now, they are so farre holy as to be accounted, by vertue of such parentage, within the Church, and those to whom the benefit of the covenant of God belongeth. 15 But if the unbelee∣ving depart, let him depart A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such ca∣ses, but God hath called us to peace.But if the unbeleeving husband, or wife will needes depart, and forsake, and renounce communion, and ma∣trimoniall society with the party beleeving; let them depart; doe not ye finde your selves perplexed herein; A brother, or sister is not hereupon so to be held in bon∣dage to an infidell wife, or husband, as that hee or shee must be forced to abstaine from marriage with another; For Gods calling doth not enforce upon us any necessary perplexednesse, but rather opens us a way to peace of conscience.
But if the unbeleeving party will abide,16 For what knowest thou O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou O man whether thou shalt save thy wife? it is fit by all meanes for the Christian husband, or wife, to continue their matrimoniall conversation, for what knowest thou O man, whether thou maist not be a meanes to save thy wife; or thou, O wife, thine husband? And, now, having only these generall rules;17 But as God hath distributed to every man, as the Lord hath called e∣very one, so let him walk; and so ordaine I in all Churches. let every one apply them to his particular use, and so walke, and behave himselfe, as God hath distributed his gifts unto him, and according as the Lord hath called him, either to single life, or marriage; to sejunction or cohabitati∣on: And this order I give to all Churches. And as it is in the cases of marriage,18 Is any man called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised so also in all o∣ther regards, Is any man called in the state of circumci∣sion of body? let him not strive to draw on the foreskin of his flesh so, as that he should seeme to bee uncircum∣cised, &c. Circumcision is not a thing that God now regards,19 Circumcision is no∣thing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of the commandements of God. neither doth he regard uncircumcision, neither of these can either hinder, or further us to heaven, but it is the conscionable walking after the commandements of God that God careth for. Let every man abide contentedly, and quietly in that condition wherein he was called20 Let every man abide in the same calling where∣in he was called. by God; not striving for a change thereof; as, in hope and desire to bee better esteemed of God. Art thou called a servant?21 Art thou called be∣ing a servant? care not for it: but if thou maist bee made free, use it rather. Thinke not that this is a∣ny prejudice to thee, in respect of Gods acceptance; but, if thou maist be made free, make use of this favour of thy liberty, rather. Ye are bought to an holy freedome,23 Ye are bought with a price, be not yee the ser∣vants of men. by the precious ransome of the blood of Christ; and therefore if ye may be outwardly free, doe not sell your selves to the servi∣tude of men; or if ye be bondmen or servants, yet be not so the slaves of men, as for their sakes, to do that which is unworthy of your Christian profession. Now, as concerning virgins;25 Now concerning virgins, I have no com∣mandement of the Lord: yet I give my judgement as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord, to bee faithfull. whether Christian pa∣rents ought to keepe them at home, in an unmarried e∣state, or place them forth in wedlocke, I have no direct command in the Law of God, which hath not seemed to take notice of any such matter, as affectation of virgini∣ty; But, as I am an Apostle of Christ, and one that hath obtained this mercy of the Lord, to be faithfull, in the place wherein he hath set me, I give you this advise: I suppose then that it is best for a man,26. I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distresse, I say that it is good, &c. considering the present necessity, and troublesomnesse of the times, to continue in a single estate.
28 Neverthelesse, such shall have trouble in the flesh: but I spare you.Neverthelesse, such as yeeld to marriage shall have trouble in the flesh, through the cares of their husbands, or wives or children, and the many burdens and en∣combrances of affaires of their family; but I desire so to favour, and ease your infirmitie, as that yee may be free from these molestations; neither do I urge the contrary in case of your disposition to marriage. 29 But this I say bre∣thren, the time is short, it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they had none.But this I say brethren, the time which wee have to live here, is but short and momentany; and therefore it is not for us to suffer our selves to be intangled, or be∣sotted with the cares, nor pleasures of this life; let those then, that have wives, not dote upon them, and be car∣ried away with pleasure in them, but be so affected as if they had none. 32 Hee that is unmar∣ried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how hee may please the Lord.He that is unmarried (and can containe) hath no secu∣lar occasions to distract his thoughts, but hath the more freedome to care for spirituall, and heavenly things; how he may be approved to the Lord. 35 Not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that you may attend upon the Lord without distra∣ction.Not that I would force upon you a necessity of con∣taining, and thereby cast a snare upon your consciences; but I onely advise you, what (if yee can be capable of it) is fit and comely, and that estate wherein yee may more freely, and without distraction attend upon the Lord. 36 But if any man thinke that he behaveth himselfe uncomely towards his vir∣gine, if she passe the floure of her age, and need so re∣quire, let him do what hee will, &c.But if any man finde it not fit to continue his daugh∣ter in the state of virginity, for that, either her age, or disposition perswades the contrary; I presse him not, but leave him at liberty: let him do what he will, hee of∣fendeth not in giving her in marriage. Neverthelesse, hee that is resolved thus to keep his daughter unmarried, finding no necessity either in her disposition,37 Neverthelesse hee that standeth stedfast in his heart having no neces∣sitie, but hath power over his owne will, &c. or in his owne estate, but perceives after carefull deliberation, and inquirie, that hee hath good ground, and power so to do, he doth well in it. She hath liberty to marry whom she will; but yet not in the flesh,39 She is at liberty to be married to whom she will, only in the Lord. but in the Lord; having due respect to re∣ligion; and addressing her selfe to this lawfull remedy with modesty, and the feare of God. 40 But she is happier if shee so abide, after my judgement, and I thinke also that I have the Spirit of God.But shee is happyer if shee continue in the state of widdowhood, according to my judgement: And I thinke that I also shall be yeelded to have the Spirit of God, as well as your glorious and boasting teachers. CAP. VIII. 1 Now as touching things offered unto Idols we know that we all have knowledge; knowledge puffeth up, but charity edi∣fieth.NOw concerning things offered to Idols; I do well know the grounds of your practice; upon the invita∣tion
of your infidell friends, ye eate of their meat which hath beene sacrificed to Idols, and pretend your know∣ledge of the vanity, and nullity of their false gods: so as you need not therefore forbeare the meat, which hath beene idlely, and foolishly offered unto them; Let this be yeelded to you; wee know that wee all have know∣ledge; but what are wee the better for that knowledge, which is hurtfull to our brethren; yea, we are the worse, for we are puffed up with it; and out of a proud conceit, neglect our weaker brethren; it were well if our know∣ledge were lesse, so that our charity were more; know∣ledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth. But if any man love God, and his brethren, in,3 But if any man love God, the same is knowne of him. and for God, the same man is approved, and dearely respected of God: it is not therefore our knowledge, but our love, for which we are accepted of him. We know that an Idoll is no such thing as (it is made for) a God;4 As concerning there∣fore the eating of those things that were offered in sacrifice unto dols, wee know that an Idol is no∣thing in the world, &c. it is nothing but a false image of that which is not; if it be materially, wood, or stone, it is formally nothing in the world; and that there is no other God, but one; the rest are leud fictions. Bur to us there is but one God; even that eternall Fa∣ther, of whom and from whom, all things (and wee a∣mongst the rest) receive their beeing; and one Lord Jesus Christ, in, and by whom,6 But to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and wee in him, and one ord Iesus Christ, by whom, &c. all both beeing, and blessings are derived from God the Father unto us, and all crea∣tures. But howsoever yee have knowledge to understand this, yet every man hath not;7 Howbeit, there is not in every man that know∣ledge: for some with con∣science of the idol, unto this houre eate it as a thing offered unto an Idol, &c. for some ignorant Christi∣ans, out of a mis-led conscience, thinking hereupon, that there is some vertue conceived to be in the Idol, eat the meat sacrificed thereunto, with some kinde of good re∣spect to the Idol; and so their conscience being weake, is by your example defiled, and drawne into sinne. And so out of the confidence of thy knowledge, this practise of thine shall be an occasion of the perishing of thy weake brother; whose soule should be deare unto thee, as that for which Christ thy Saviour dyed.11 And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish for whom Christ dyed. Wherefore, rather then I would,13 Wherefore if meate make my brother to of∣fend, I will eate no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend. by occasion of my meat, draw my brother into an offence, I would abstain, not onely from meat thus sacrificed, but from eating any flesh whatsoever, so long as I should live.
CAP. IX. 1 Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? have I not seene Iesus Christ our Lord? are not you my worke in the Lord?ANd if I could be content thus altogether to abridge my selfe of my liberty; how much more should yee be content, to part with a little? For have not I as good reason to call for my owne, and to stand upon the re∣spects due to me, as another man? Am I not an Apostle? am I not a free man as well as they? have I not (though later in time, yet no lesse truly) seene Jesus Christ, our Lord, in his glorified estate, (which is more then they have done) since his ascension? are not ye my converts to God? 3 Mine answer to them that do examine mee, is this:Mine answer that I give to those that make question of my calling and Apostleship, is this which I have now set downe; even the successe of my labours amongst you, and your effectuall conversion by mee. Have not wee power to eate and drinke4 Have wee not power to eate, and to drinke? upon you charge, as well as other teachers? 5 Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other A∣postles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas.Have not we power to lead about with us, our wives at the charge of the Church, as well as other Apostles, and as well as those of them which were of the kinred of Christ, and as well as Peter? or to take the benefit of the ministration of grave Christian matrons, for our tendance and provision in our journey, as well as they? 6 Or I only and Barna∣bas, have we not power to forbeare working?Or am I onely, and Barnabas excluded from the com∣mon priviledge of others; and must be forced to worke for our living? not expecting maintenance from you, and the rest of our auditors? 7 Who goeth a warfare any time at his owne charge?Is there not reason that we should live upon your cost? is there any reason that we should labour upon our own? who goeth a warfare, &c. 9, 10 Doth God take care for oxen? or saith he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes, no doubt; this is written, that hee that ploweth should plow in hope: and he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope.Do ye thinke that in that law Gods principall ayme and drift, was to make provision for oxen? and did not rather therein intend to give order for those which are, typically, the oxen of his spiritull husbandrie, even those which labour in his harvest; and doubtlesse it was meant chiefly to us; and given for our sakes; that we which take paines in the field and floore of God, might both hope for, and receive such recompence as is meet for us. 11 If wee have sowne unto you spirituall things, is it a great thing if we shall reape your carnall things?If we have conferred upon you spirituall blessings, and have brought you the knowledge of Christ, and salvati∣on by him; do ye thinke it a great matter to returne un∣to us some poore temporall provisions of food, rayment, and meet maintenance? 12 Neverthelesse wee have not used this power but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospell of Christ.Neverthelesse, wee have not made use of this power, and liberty of taking maintenance from you; but rather
take paines, and endure want, lest occasion should be hereupon taken to hinder the passage of the Gospell. For it were better for mee to die,15 For it were better for mee to die, then that any man should make my glorying void. then to lose this glory of my free and unrecompenced preaching of the Gospell, amongst you; wherein I have both prevented scandall, and out-bidden and shamed the false Apostles. For preach I must; howsoever, I cannot,16 For though I preach the Gospell, I have no∣thing to glory of, for neces∣sity is laid upon mee: yea, woe is unto me if I preach not the, &c. nor may not glory in this, that I preach the Gospell: for I may not do otherwise; the necessity of my calling layes this du∣ty upon me; and wo be to me if I preach not the Gospell; so as this is no thanke to me. If I do it willingly, I have my reward with God; but if unwillingly and grudgingly, I lose my reward; be∣cause, I am (as it were) forced to my service by com∣mand; for this dispensation is committed unto mee,17 For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me. howsoever; and I must discharge it upon my perill. The onely thing therefore, that I can holily glory in, is this, that I have preached the Gospell, cost-free; and have not so abuse my power,18 What is my reward then verily, that when I preach the Gospell, I may make the Gospell of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospell. and liberty, as to be a scan∣dall unto any whatsoever. Ye talke of your liberty in these indifferent things; I am as free as you, free from all men; yet have I willingly yeelded to make my selfe a servant to all men,19 For though I be free from all men, yet have I made my selfe servant un∣to all. &c. To the Gentiles that are without the Mosaicall law, I became (in ceremoniall matters) as without the Law: (yet let no man taxe mee for a lawlesse man; I am not without the Law of God in respect of morall duties, and do willingly subject my selfe to the Evangelicall Law of Christ) that I might gaine them that are without law.21 To them that are without law, as without law (being not without law to God; but under the law to Christ) that I might gaine them that are with∣out law. I framed my selfe, and my carriage in all things, to the dispositions and manners of all men (so farre as I lawfully might) that by thus applying my selfe unto them, I might by all meanes save some.22 I am made all things to all men, that I might by all meanes save some. And this I do out of a desire to propagate and enlarge the good successe of the Gospell; that I might be par∣taker with you23 And this I doe for the Gospels sake, that I might be partaker thereof with you. of the comfort that ariseth therefrom, and the crowne laid up for the furtherers thereof. Let this also be your care, and indeavour;24 Know yee not that they which run in a race, runne all, but one receiveth the price: so run that yee may obtaine. and do ye persevere constantly therein; it is with Christians in their holy course, as with runners in a race; for as in a race, many runne, but one receiveth the prize; so in Christiani∣tie, many make a profession, and put forward to an holy conversation; but onely he that persists to the end shall be saved: so runne ye therefore that ye may attaine.
25 And every man that striveth for the mastery, is temperate in al things: now they doe it to obtaine a corruptible crowne, but we an incorruptible.And in this your holy profession, be carefull to abstain from all those offences, which may be an hinderance un∣to you; Ye see how wrestlers, and fencers that strive for the mastery, and praise of their art, and strength, tem∣per their diet, so, as they refraine from every thing that may be harmfull to them, either for the shortening of their breath, or the stiffening of their sinewes. Now if they doe this for a garland of withering leaves, how much more should we doe it for an immortall and incor∣ruptible crowne? 26 I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that beateth the aire.I therefore so runne, as one that resolves to hold out to the end; I so fight, as one that would not spend one blow in vaine; but as one that would be sure to strike to purpose. 27 But I keepe under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by a∣ny meanes, when I have preached to others, I my selfe should be a cast-awayAnd, as those wrestlers do, I diet my selfe according∣ly; I keepe under my body therefore, and bring it in subjection, by abstinence, and such other hard exercises; lest that by any meanes, when I have preached to others, I my selfe, letting loose the raines to my owne lusts, should be a cast-away. CAP. X. 1, 2 Moreover brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, & all passed through the sea, and all were bap∣tized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea.MOreover, Brethren, I would not that yee should bee ignorant, how that our Jewish fore-fathers in the Church of Israel, were in the very same condition with us; they were under the same Sacraments with us; For, being all under the cloud, and all passing through the sea, they were all baptized (under the ministery and conduct of Moses) in the cloud, and in the sea; that waterish cloud, and those sea-waters were as no other, but those baptismall waters, wherewith we are now washed in our initiation into Christ. 3 And all did eate the same spirituall meat.And as this Sacrament was the same to them, and to us; so was that other also; for they did all eate the same spirituall meat with us. 4 And did all drinke the same spirituall drinke, for they dranke of that spi∣rituall rocke that follow∣ed them; and that rock was Christ.And did all drinke of the same spirituall drinke; for they dranke of that water which issued from that rocke; and that rocke was a figure of Christ; out of whose side issued that blood, which our sacramentall wine now re∣presenteth. But yet for all this, there were many of them, with whom God was displeased;5 But with many of them God was not well pleased, for they were o∣verthrowne in the wilder∣nesse. notwithstanding this out∣ward profession, and participation of his Sacraments, as ye may perceive by the effects; for they were over∣throwne in the wildernesse.
The people did feast in their sacrifices to the honour of their Idoll,7 The people sat downe to eate and drinke and rose up to play. and in celebration of their solemnities did rise up to play. As they committed fornication with the Moabitish women, and were accordingly punished;8 As some of them committed, and fell in one day three & twenty thou∣sand. there being slaine of them, in one day, three and twenty thousand, besides, one thousand before. Neither let us tempt our Lord Christ,9 Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them al∣so tempted; with our impa∣tience, and infidelity, as some of them tempted him, by making undue trialls of his power and mercy, &c. And were destroyed of the destroying Angell,10 And were destroy∣ed of the destroyer. execu∣ting the just wrath of God. Which are falne upon the very last age of the world;11 Now all these things hapned unto them for en∣samples: and they are writ∣ten for our admonition, up∣on whom the ends of the world are come. so as those things which were done so long since, in the very first ages of the Church, are still warnings for us in these latest times. Let no man therefore glory in his owne strength,12 Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall. or securely presume upon his owne abilities; but let him that thinkes he standeth, and applaudes himselfe in his owne abilities, take heed lest he fall. Now upon these examples of Gods judgements,13 There hath no tem∣ptation taken you, but such as is common to man: but God is faithfull, who will not suffer you to bee tem∣pted above that you are a∣ble: but will with the tem∣ptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be a∣ble to beare it. and the reproofe of your sinnes; I would not have you too much dejected, and discouraged; for, if you have beene miscarried with temptations, nothing is befalne you herein more then is incident into other men; rather, have carefull recourse to God, who is faithfull in the performance of all his promises, and undertakings; and, if ye looke up to him, will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength to resist, and overcome; but will moderate the tentation, and give you an happy issue out of it, and enable you, in the meane time, to goe through with it. I speake, as to wise men,15 I speake as to wise men: judge ye what I say. who doe well understand the true nature, and use of the Sacraments; and therefore judge yee, whether that which I speake bee not just and right. Is it for you that are members of Christ and parta∣kers of the body and blood of Christ in his holy Supper,16 The cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we breake, is it not the communion of the bo∣dy of Christ? to have any thing to doe with the table of Idols? Look to the holy elements of both kindes; that sacred cup in the Eucharist, which we consecrate and blesse, is it not that, wherein we have a joynt communion with Christ in partaking of his blood? The bread, which wee breake in that holy Supper, is it not that; wherein we doe both professe, and have communion with Christ in a joynt re∣ceiving of his body?
17 For we being many are one bread, and one bo∣die, for wee are all parta∣kers of that one bread.For we that receive this body of Christ, are now not many bodies, but one body; even as the bread is of ma∣ny graines made up into one loafe. 18 Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eate of the sacrifi∣ces, partakers of the Altar?Cast your eyes upon those Jewes, which hold them∣selves still to the Mosaicall law; are not they, whiles they eate of the oblations made to God, justly thereby held to be partakers of that sacrifice which is offered upon the altar, unto the true God? So therefore must it needs be, that ye which eate of the meat offered to Idols, doe by this meanes interesse your selves in their Idolatry. 19 What say I then, that he Idol is any thing; or at which is offered in sa∣crificed to Idols, is any thing?What shall I say then? that the Idoll hath any pow∣er in it selfe, to defile, and pollute the creature? or that the things offered to Idolls, doe, either in their nature contract any pollution hereby, or cast (as of themselves) any uncleannesse upon the partaker of them; No surely, all the pollution is in the purpose, and intention of the receivers; the end and scope of these superstitious Ido∣laters, is wicked; and thereupon those that joyne with them in their abominable worke, become justly defiled. 20 But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to divells, and not to God: and I would not that yee should have fellowship with divels.For the Deities of the Gentiles are no other then Di∣vells (what forme soever they put on,) and therefore those things, which they sacrifice unto those their ima∣gined gods, are by them sacrificed indeed unto Divells, not unto God; and I would not that ye should have any communion with, and in the service of Divells. Ye therefore, who at Gods table partake of the cup of the Lord, cannot at the table of Idols partake of the cup of Divells,21 Yee cannot drinke the cup of the Lord, and the cup of divels. &c. 22 Doe wee provoke the Lord to jealousie? are we stronger then he?Doe we dare to provoke the Lord to wrath; and to a jealous indignation at our participation with Idoll-gods? Can we beare it out against him? will he not be sure to be revenged on us, to our utter confusion? 23 All things are law∣full for me, but all things are not expedient: all, &c.See Chap. 9. ver. 12. 24 Let no man seeke his owne, but every man anothers wealth.Let no man stand upon the termes of his owne right, and liberty, and regard his owne pleasure, or profit, but carefully tender the good, and welfare of others. 25 Making no questi∣on for conscience sake.Making no question of the lawfulnesse thereof, nor raising any scruple in thy conscience concerning it. 26 For the earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse thereof.For the earth is the Lords, and all the creatures wher∣with it is furnished; and in his right, they are therefore thine to make thy lawfull use of. 28 But if any man say unto you, this is offered in sacrifice unto Idols, eate not for his sake that shew∣ed it, and for conscience sake; the earth is the Lords &c.But if any man, &c. eate not, out of thy due respects to the offence of him that told thee so; and for consci∣ence
sake; upon the very same ground of that full right, which thou hast in God, to all his creatures, and there∣fore needest not to be tyed to eate of any of them, with offence. For the conscience sake, I say,29 Conscience, I say, not thine owne, but of the o∣thers: for why is my liber∣ty judged of another mans conscience? not of thy selfe (for thine owne conscience, perhaps, is fully enough perswa∣ded of the lawfulnesse hereof) but of that other that told thee so, who doubtlesse would not have spoken of it to thee, if he had not made scruple of it, himselfe; for why should I use my liberty with scandall, so as I should be condemned by another mans conscience, whiles I doe that which he thinkes damnable, though I thinke it law∣full. For,30 For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evill spoken of, for that for which I give thankes? though I may lawfully eate of things sacrificed to Idolls, by the grace and priviledge of my Evangeli∣call liberty, receiving the good creatures of God (though abused) with thanksgiving to God, the author, and gi∣ver of them; yet, why should I expose my selfe to the censures of men, and open their mouthes against mee, as if I were an Idolater, in doing it? Give none offence to any man whomsoever,32 Give none offence, neither to the Iewes, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. whether within the bosome of the Church, or without; neither to Jew, nor Gentile, nor Christian. Even as I please all men in all lawfull and indifferent things, not seeking, &c.33 Even as I please all men in all things. CAP. XI. NOw I praise you, brethren,2 Now I praise you brethren, that you remem∣ber me in all things, and keepe the ordinances as I delivered them to you. that you remember all those good instructions that I gave you, and that ye observe those rituall traditions, and ordinances, which were in that forme, that I delivered them unto you. But, I would have you know,3 But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ: and the head of the woman is the man: and the head of Christ is God. that there are severall degrees of subjection, and subordination. The woman is subject to the man, the man is subject to Christ, and Christ, as man, is subject to God the Father; and each of these acknowledges a superiority, and head-ship in those to whom they are subject. This being premised,4 Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishono∣reth his head. I held it requisite to admonish you of some indecent fashions that are used in the con∣gregation, by those of both sexes; For whereas cove∣ring of the head is commonly taken for a signe of subje∣ction; and the uncovering of it, a signe of power, and superiority; it is contrarily used amongst you; The man who is the superiour, covers his head; and the woman
who is the inferiour, uncovers it. Let me therefore tell you; Every man that praies, or prophesies with his head covered, disparages, and dishonours himselfe; and casts off that signe, and semblance of superiority, which hee should maintaine. 5 But every woman that prayeth or prophesi∣eth, with her head unco∣vered, dishonoureth her head, for that is even all one as if she were shaven.But, every woman that taketh upon her, publiquely to pray or prophesie with her head uncovered, dishonours her selfe; in doing that which is against naturall modesty and decency; For this bare-headednesse in women, is no lesse unfit, and uncomely, then if their heads were shaven. 6 For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorne: but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorne or shaven, let her be cove∣red.It is an immodest fashion in the wanton dames of Corinth, that they goe abroad in publique places, with∣out any vaile, or covering on their heads; if they will needs take up this mannish fashion, of going uncovered, let them be shaven also; but if it be a shame for a wo∣man to be shaven, (as yee cannot but grant) then let her be covered. 7 For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as hee is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the man.For a man ought not (indeed) to cover his head, for as much as he is the superiour; and, in this superiority, beares the glorious image of God; having none above him to controll, and over-rule him; but the woman is but the glorious image of the man; and must acknow∣ledge her inferiority, and subjection to him. 10 For this cause ought the woman to have pow∣er on her head, because of the Angels.For this cause ought the woman to cover her head, to shew that she is under the power of her husband; and not to display her immodesty before the face of the very Angells of God, who are (in this indecent carriage) wit∣nesses thereof. 11 Neverthelesse, nei∣ther is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man in the Lord.Not that the man ought to insult upon the weaknes of the woman, and pride himselfe in his owne superiori∣ty, but must consider that God hath matched them to∣gether, so as neither of them can have their being with∣out other. 12 For as the woman is of the man: even so is the man also by the woman but all things of God.For as the woman was first made of the man, so is the man, ever since, conceived, and borne of the woman; and God is the author, and maker of both. 15 But if a woman have long haire, it is a glory to her, for the haire is given to her for a covering.But, if a woman have long haire, it is a glory to her; for her haire was given to her for a covering; nature it selfe therein pointing you to that guise and fashion, which is meetest for that sexe. 16 But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custome, neither in the Churches of God.But if any man list to be contentious, and will rather stand upon the justification of these unseemely fashions, let it be sufficient answere for him that we have no such customes of immodesty, and indecency; nor any other of the Churches of Christ, so as he shall be singular in this his opinion.
But however I praise you (in a generality of your care and obedience,) yet in this particular,17 Now in this that I declare unto you; I praise you not, that you come to∣gether, not for the better but for the worse. which I am now to write of, I praise you not; that when yee meet toge∣ther to celebrate the Lords Supper, yee come together, so, as ye are rather the worse, then the better for it. For there must needes (through the wise and holy or∣dination of God) be schismes, and sects,19 For there must bee also heresies among you, that they which are ap∣proved may be made ma∣nifest among you. and factions a∣mong you, that thereupon there may bee an occasion to trye the dispositions and resolutions of men; in that those which are true-hearted and conscionable, may approve their fidelity in sticking to the truth. When ye meet, therefore, in this manner together,20 When ye come to∣gether therefore into one place, this is not to eate the Lords supper. yee doe not celebrate or eate the Lords Supper, as yee pretend and professe, but your owne, or the feasts of Bacchus rather. For whereas (if ye will needs celebrate the love-feasts) ye ought to meet al together, both rich and poore,21 For in eating, every one taketh before other his supper, and one is hun∣gry, and another is drun∣ken. and stay one for another, in that love-supper, which you are wont to make immediately before the Eucharist; yee contrarily, meet together the wealthiest of you, and eate your owne good cheere, not expecting your poorer brethren, and so one is hungry, and another is drunken. If ye have a minde to feast your selves,22 What, have ye not houses to eat, and to drink in? or despise yee the Church of God, & shame them that have not? & make choise of your guests, have ye not your owne private houses to eate, and drinke in? Why doe ye defile the Church of God with these partiall and immoderate banquets? why doe ye despise and shame the poore, that have not wher∣with to feast with you, &c. See Matt. 26. verse 26.24 Take eate, this is my body, which is broken for you, this do in remem∣brance of me. See Matt. 26. verse 28.25 This cup is the new testament in my blood, &c. Shall be guilty of an horrible profanation of that sa∣cred body, and blood of Christ,27 Shall bee guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. which is in this sacra∣ment exhibited, and tendered unto him. Eateth and drinketh just judgement,29 Eateth and drink∣eth damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. and condemna∣tion to himselfe, in not considering the greatnesse of this mystery, and making no difference betwixt this sacred bread, which is sacramentally the body of Christ, and the other common, and ordinary bread. For these abuses of this holy Sacrament,30 For this cause many are weake and sickely a∣mong you, and many sleep. the hand of God hath beene upon many of you; so as many of you are afflicted with divers kinds of diseases, and many of you are stricken with death it selfe.
31 For if wee would judge our selves, wee should not be judged:Be ye therefore warned hereby, and looke carefully into your owne hearts, and accuse and censure your selves for these enormities, that so yee may escape the judgements of diseases, and death, which else God will inflict upon you. 32 But when wee are judged, wee are chastened of the Lord, that wee should not be condemned with the world.But when we are thus stricken with sicknesses, & death, wee are chastened mercifully, by the Lord, on purpose that wee may escape that eternall condemnation which befals the wicked of the world. CAP. XII. 1 Now concerning spi∣rituall gifts, brethren, I would not have you igno∣rant.NOw concerning spirituall gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant of the nature, and differences thereof, that yee may know how to value them, in your selves and in others. 3 Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spi∣rit of God, calleth Iesus accursed: and that no man can say, that Iesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.Ye finde this a manifest difference betwixt you & those infidels, from whom ye are severed; yee Christians have the Spirit of God, they want it; and for a tryall of both, know, that whosoever speakes evill of the name of Christ, that man certainly hath not the Spirit of God, but is still an infidel; and contrarily no man can acknow∣ledge, and professe Christ to be the Lord, and stand out for the maintenance of this truth, but by the holy Ghost, if not regenerating, yet at least illuminating, and infor∣ming him therein. 4 Now there are diver∣sities of gifts, but the same Spirit.Now there are diversities of gifts, distributed to men in the Church, but there is onely one, and the same Spi∣rit, that bestowes them upon men. 5 And there are diffe∣rences of administrations, but the same Lord.And there are differences of services, and functions in the Church, but one and the same Lord, to whom they are directed. 6 And there are diver∣sities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all.And there are diversities of operations in the exe∣cution of those services, and in miraculous workes there∣in wrought; but it is the same God, which worketh all in all. 7 But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit with∣all.But these severall gifts by which the power of Gods Spirit is manifested to men, are given to every man, not for his owne behoofe, but for the profit of others. 8 For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisedome; to another, the word of knowledge by the same Spirit.For to one is given the power of understanding, and unfolding the great mysteries of speculative divinitie; to another the right skill of practicall cases, and all by one and the same Spirit. So also is it with Christ, and his Church; hee is the head,12 So also is Christ. they are the severall members, and all make up but one mysticall and compleat body.
This one-nesse of ours may well be seene in those Sa∣craments, which are common to Gods Church;13 For by one Spirit are wee all baptized into one body, whether wee be Iewes or Gentiles, whe∣ther wee bee bond or free: and have beene all made to drinke into one Spirit. for by one and the same Spirit of God, working with, and by the outward elements, are wee baptized into the com∣munion of one and the same Church; whether wee be Jewes or Gentiles, bond or free; and are all made par∣takers of the same Sacramentall cup, and therein of the same blood of Christ, by the working of the same Spirit. For the body doth not consist of one member alone,22 For the body is not one member, but many. but of many severall limmes, and parts.23 And those mem∣bers of the body which wee thinke to be lesse ho∣nourable, upon these wee bestowe more abundant honour, and our uncome∣ly parts, &c. Wee do not despise the least or worst part of the bo∣dy, yea rather, by how much more meanenesse or shame, there is in any part, so much more carefull are wee to deck it, and dresse it with more costly, and comely or∣naments. But God hath given us that naturall instinct and in∣clination,24 For our comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered the body together, having gi∣ven more abundant ho∣nour to that part which he lacked. so to regard the frame and temper of these bo∣dies of ours, as to giue more honour to, and to take more care of those parts, which are the most despicable. Now ye are that spirituall body, whereof Christ is the head; and are the severall,27 Now ye are the bo∣dy of Christ, and mem∣bers in particular. and particular limmes and members of that body. And God hath set and appointed men in severall rankes and degrees in his Church; first Apostles,28 And God hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Pro∣phets, thirdly teachers, af∣ter that miracles, then gifts of healings, helpes in go∣vernements, diversities of tongues. then secondly Prophets, both such, as by revelation foretell future things, and such as can wisely and skilfully inter∣pret the Scriptures; thirdly pastors and teachers, &c. those that are helpers to the sicke and poore; those that are skilfull in government, those that are indued with diversities of tongues. Amongst all these,31 But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more excel∣lent way. affect yee most those gifts which may make most for the edification of the Church, and regard not so much ostentation as use, and yet behold, I am now, in the sequell, propounding to you a more ex∣cellent way then all these, even the way of charity; which is most worthy of your pursuit. CAP. XIII. THough I speake in never so great variety of lan∣guages, though I speake never so excellently,1 Though I speake with the tongues of men, and of Angels, and have not cha∣rity, I am become as sounding brasse or tinck∣ling cymball. and di∣vinely, and have not charity; the noise that I make is no
better, then that of a sounding brasse or a tinckling cym∣ball, which fils the eare to little purpose. 2 And though I have all faith, so that I could re∣move mountaines.And though I have never so strong a faith, so as that I could remove mountaines. 8 Charity never faileth, but whether there be pro∣phesies, they shall faile; whether there be, &c.Charity is a during and perpetuall grace; and where it is truly rooted in the heart, never faileth; whereas other gifts, and tongues, and prophesie, and knowledge, at last vanish away, &c. 9 For we know in part, and wee prophesie in part.For this knowledge which we now have, is but weake and imperfect, and our prophesying is accordingly full of infirmitie. 10 But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.But when we once attaine to that heavenly perfecti∣on of knowledge, which wee shall once enjoy in heaven, then all these our weake, and imperfect apprehensions shall cease, and give way. 11 When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things.Even as it is with us, in our severall ages; when I was a child, I spake as a child, and understood as a child, and thought as a child; but now, when that I am become a man, I meddle no more with those childish words, gestures, actions, and they are now to mee as if they had never beene; so shall it be with us, in that our future state of glory, compared with the present; now we are mere children in our desires, and apprehensions; then we shall be of full and perfect stature; all the thoughts and con∣ceits of this our present childishnesse shall then be pas∣sed and gone; and perfection of all grace and heavenly knowledge shall come in the roome of them. 12 For now wee see through a glasse, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am knowne.Now all the knowledge that we have of God is dim, and darke; as a man that lookes in a glasse sees there but the image or resemblance & representation of the thing seene, and not the thing it selfe; but then we shall see him clearly, and immediately; even as we now see each other in the face; and not in the glasse; so shall we see him then; now I know but in part, but then I shall know God in the same manner that I am knowne, fully, according to the capacitie of a finite creature, and clearely. And now whereas there are three maine graces which wee must chiefly labour for in all our lives, faith, hope, and charity, the greatest of them all is charity.13 And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three: but the greatest of these is charity. CAP. XIV. 1 Follow after charity, and desire spirituall gifts, but rather that yee may prophecie.FOllow then principally after charity; but yet also de∣sire other spirituall gifts; but of all the rest let it be your chiefe desire that yee may be inabled by the Spirit
of God to teach and declare those things which may be to the edification of the Church. The gift of tongues, though it be excellent,2 For hee that speaketh in an unknowne tongue, speaketh not unto men, but unto God: for no man understandeth him: how∣beit in the Spirit hee spea∣keth mysteries. yet is not comparable with this; for hee that speaketh in an un∣knowne tongue; onely God, and himselfe understands what he saith; and therefore he speakes not to men at all, (at least it is all one as if he spake not) but unto God who understands him; although perhaps in his owne sense, and understanding, hee speakes of deep and high matters, and such as might be well worthy to be under∣stood of others. But hee that teacheth and explaneth Gods will to his people, speaketh unto men; and that to singular purpose,3 But hee that pnophe∣sieth, speaketh unto men to edification and exhor∣tation, and comfort. to edifie them in knowledge, and to stirre them up with exhortation, and to raise them up with comfort. Now brethren, if I come to you speaking with tongues,6 Now brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you: except I shall speake to you either by re∣velatiō, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine? what shall I profit you? surely nothing at all; neither shall yee receive any good at all by my labours, except I speake unto your understanding by a cleare revelation of Gods holy mysteries, on my part, and by knowledge on yours; except I speake by way of prophesying, and expo∣sition on my part, and by learning on yours. There is a number of severall sounds of voices in the world;10 There are, it may be, so many kindes of voices in the world, and none of them are without signifi∣cation. which are significant to those which are acquain∣ted with them, but to others seeme strange and uselesse notes; and there is no voice that can be uttered, but it is, somewhere, of some signification. Therefore if I heare a man speake such words as whose meaning I do no way understand;11 Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh, a Barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a Barbarian unto mee. I am as a mere Bar∣barian to him that, speaketh them; and he that speakes them, is a Barbarian to mee; because we understand not each other. So then for as much as ye Corinthians are zealously desirous of spirituall gifts,12 Even so yee, for as much as yee are zealous of spirituall gifts, seeke that yee may excell to the edi∣fying of the Church. labour not so much for those indowments, which may make you admired of men, as for those which may inable you to edifie the Church of God. Wherefore,13 Wherefore let him that speaketh in an un∣knowne tongue, pray that he may interpret. let him that hath the supernaturall gift of strange tongues, pray to God that he would give him ability to interpret the Scriptures; so as he may improve his tongues to the good of many. And as it is in preaching, so in praying also;14 For if I pray in an un∣knowne tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understan∣ding is unfruitfull. if I pray in an unknowne tongue, my will in the generall drift there∣of, is devout, and the extraordinary gift of the Spirit puts words into my tongue, but my understanding is not at all benefited.
15 What is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray with under∣standing also: I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with understanding.What should I doe then? I will pray with the generall good intention of my will, and the language which the Spirit gives mee; and I will pray with the understanding of the words wherein I pray; I will sing with a generall devotion of my will, and I will sing with the understan∣ding also. 16 Else, when thou shalt blesse with the Spirit, how shall hee that occu∣pieth the roome of the un∣learned, say Amen, at thy giving of thankes, &c?Else, when thou shalt blesse in that unknowne lan∣guage which the Spirit speakes by thee, how shall those that are ignorant, and unlearned, in that tongue, say Amen to thy prayers or thanksgivings, seeing he un∣derstands not what thou sayest? 20 Brethren, be not chil∣dren in understanding: howbeit in malice bee yee children, but in understan∣ding be men.Brethren, be not children in your judgement, and un∣derstanding, that you should childishly make ostentati∣on of the gift of those tongues, which others under∣stand not: but in respect of an harmlesse simplicity, and freedome from malice, be ye as children. 21 In the law it is writ∣ten, With men of other tongues, and other lips will I speake unto this people: and yet for all that will they not heare me.In the old Testament God tels his people by his pro∣phet Esay, that hee would speake unto them by men of other languages (meaning the Chaldeans whose diffe∣rent tongue is threatned for a punishment unto the Jewes;) notwithstanding which judgement, he complains that they would not heare, and obey him. 22 Wherefore tongues are for a signe, not to them that beleeve, but to them that beleeve not; but pro∣phesying serveth not for them that beleeve not, but for them which beleeve.Wherefore this strange tongue was threatned as a plague to his people; there is no reason, then, that wee should glory in that, which was minaced for a judge∣ment unto our forefathers; and these strange tongues, we know (which are now given,) were intended for ano∣ther use, even to be for a signe of the marvelous power of Gods Spirit, for the conviction of those that beleeve not the Gospell, and not so much for the benefit of those that do beleeve already; but prophesying, or interpre∣ting of the Scriptures, serves not for infidels, which be∣leeve not, but for Christians that are already converted to the faith. 24 But if all prophesie, and there come in one that beleeveth not, or one un∣learned; hee is convinced of all, hee is judged of all.But if yee all prophesie, and interpret the Scriptures by course, and there come in one that beleeveth not, or is ignorant, hee is met with, and convinced by every one of you, and findes himselfe censured by each of you. 25 And thus are the se∣crets of his heart made manifest, and so falling downe on his face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.And by this meanes are the secret wickednesses of his heart discovered; and hee, in an humble and earnest re∣morse, on the one side; and admiration of Gods gifts, on the other, falling downe on his face, will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth, and speaks by you. 26 How is it then, bre∣thren? when yee come together, every one of you hath a Psalme, hath a do∣ctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an inter∣pretation: let all things be done unto edifying.What then, my brethren, is to be done? when yee come together, let every one of you, who is indued
with any speciall gift, make use of it to the benefit of the Church, whether he have some divine hymne or Psalme, which hee hath composed to stirre up the hearts of the people, or whether hee have some wholsome doctrine prepared to deliver unto them, or whether a revelation from God of some future occurrence necessary to be foreknowne, or some interpretation of any obscure place of Scripture, let all things be so done, as may most edifie. If in your meetings there be occasion of speaking un∣knowne tongues, let onely two, or three,27 If any man speake in an unknowne tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course, and let one inter∣pret. be appointed to speake by course, one after another, and let one be ap∣pointed to interpret, and render in a knowne tongue, what they deliver. Let those that preach, and expound the Scriptures speake two or three, by course one after another,29 Let the Prophets speake two or three, and let the other judge. in your publique meetings, and let the other preachers judge. And the spirits of the teachers are subject to the try∣all, and judgement of other teachers; which onely can,32 And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. and may examine those points which they deliver, whe∣ther they be consonant to the truth of God. All may not take upon them, either to teach, or judge;33 For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints. this were to make a confusion in the Church: and God is the author, not of confusion, but of peace, and gives by us these holy, and meet orders to be observed, not a∣mongst you onely, but in all the Churches every where. And if they have any doubts, or questions to propose,35 And if they will learne any thing, let them aske their husbands at home: for it is a shame for a woman to speake in the Church. let them not do it publiquely, in the congregation, but let them aske their husbands privately at home; for it doth not agree with the modesty of women, to speake in the publique assembly. It is not for you, Corinthians,36 What? came the word of God out from you, or came it unto you onely? to stand stiffely upon your owne customes, and factions; or to thinke it fit that others should frame themselves after your exam∣ple: What? were ye the first Christians? were there none before you? are there none other beside you? If there be any man which beleeves that hee hath re∣ceived the Spirit of God,37 If any man thinke himselfe to be a Prophet, or spirituall, let him ac∣knowledge, that the things which I write unto you, &c. and that hee is a true minister of God, hee cannot but acknowledge that the things which I write unto you, are the Commandements of the Lord, and needfull and requisite to be observed. But if any man be willingly, and perversely ignorant,38 But if any be igno∣rant, let him be ignorant. I will not stand out in contention with him, let him be ignorant still.
CAP. XV. 6 And that he was seen of above five hundred bre∣thren at once, of whom the greater part remaine unto this present, but some are fallen asleepe.AFter that he was seen of above five hundred bre∣thren at once, in that mountain of Galilee, where he had appointed to meet his Disciples; of whom the greater part remaine unto this day, and being yet a∣live, can give ample witnesse to this truth, but some of them rest in the sleepe of death. 8 And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one borne out of due time.And, last of all, he was seene of me, as one out of sea∣son, (after all the rest) called to my Apostleship. 9 For I am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apo∣stle, because I persecuted the Church of God.For, I am the meanest of all the Apostles; and not worthy of that honourable title; because I persecuted the Church of God; although not maliciously, but in an ignorant zeale of the Law. 10 But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which was be∣stowed upon me, was not in vaine, but I laboured more abundantly then they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.But, by the mere grace, and mercy of God, contrary to my deservings, I am called to this station of my Apo∣stleship, and furnished with gifts, and abilities, to dis∣charge it; neither was I carelesse in improving this mer∣cy and goodnesse of God to mee; for I laboured more abundantly then they all; and yet, why doe I say, it was I that laboured? rather it was the grace of God, which both inabled me, and wrought by me. 11 Therefore whether it were I, or they, so wee preach, and so ye beleevedBut, whether it were my labour, or theirs; all comes to one; Christ hath beene by us preached so to have died, and so to have risen; and accordingly by you be∣leeved. 17 And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vaine, ye are yet in your sins.And if Christ be not risen, your faith should be in vaine pitched upon a dead, and perished redeemer; and so ye are yet under that wofull condemnation which is due to your sins; from which only the resurrection of Christ can acquite, and discharge you. 19 If in this life onely wee have hope in Christ, we are of all men most mi∣serable.If the comforts and hopes that we have in Christ were onely confined to this present life, and extended not be∣yond death, we were of all men the most miserable; who doe willingly curbe and restraine our selves of those pleasures which others take full scope unto; and indure those hardnesses, and miseries, which others shift off; only, in the expectation of that glory, which wee shall once injoy, with Christ. 20 But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept.But now, all our stay and comfort, is, that Christ is risen from the dead; and is so becomne the first fruits of them that sleep in death, as that, the vertue of his resur∣rection extends unto all his that lie in their graves, and
that they by the power thereof shall necessarily follow him, in rising to life. For, as in the first Adam, who was the first fruits of all his dying generation, we all die; so in the second Adam,22 For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. which was the first fruits of those that rise from the dead we all shall be made alive; Adam brought death upon mankinde; Christ, life and resurrection. So as, all shall rise, but every man in his owne order;23 But every man in his order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christs, at his com∣ming. First, Christ (who is as the first sheafe of this harvest of the resurrection, by and from which all the whole crop of the dead saints receive vertue) shall shew himselfe, as being already risen; afterwards, they that are Christs, who are found alive at his comming; and they that are dead in him, and in his faith, and favour, shall be, upon their happy change, carried up to meet him. Then commeth the end of all this miserable and trou∣blesome world;24 Then commeth the end, when hee shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father, when hee shall have put downe all rule, and all au∣thority and power. when he shall have delivered the king∣dome of his mediator-ship unto God the Father; and shall have vanquished, and put downe all the adversary principalities, and powers, both of earth, and of hell. For he must, by the interest of his mediatory power,25 For hee must reigne till hee hath put all ene∣mies under his feet. reigne, untill he hath fully subdued all the enemies of his Church, and children. The last enemie that shall be subdued, and destroyed,26 The last enemie that shal be destroyed is death. shall be death it selfe, who hath hitherto subdued, and destroyed all things. It is manifest, that herein God the Father excepteth himselfe,27 It is manifest that he is excepted which did put all things under him. who did put all things under the subjection of his Sonne. And when all things shall be thus subdued unto the sonne, as the King of his Church, God and man;28 And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the sonne also himselfe bee subject unto him that put all things un∣der him, that God may be all in all. then shall the sonne also (to whom as Mediator the power and rule of all things is committed, and as it were dele∣gated by the Fther) resigne up this mediatory rule, and government, to his Father, who hath committed it unto him; so as, he shall no more raigne, now, as Mediator, but as God; and we shall injoy God immediately, who shall be all in all to us. Else,29 Else, what shall they doe which are baptised for the dead; if the dead rise not at al, why are they thē baptized for the dead? to what purpose is the usuall (but mis-grounded) practise of those men, which are baptized for their dead friends, in a conceit of giving aide, and refreshment to them, in that common state of death, if they were not fully assured that the dead shall arise againe?30 And why stand we in jeopardy every houre? And why doe we stand in continuall jeopardy every
houre, for the profession of the Gospell, and particular∣ly of the truth of the resurrection, if wee were not per∣swaded of a retribution after our departure hence? For me, I protest, I sweare by that joy which I take in you,31 I protest by your re∣joycing which I have in Christ Iesus our Lord, I dy daily. as the deare children and fruit of my Apostleship which is the greatest comfort that my Lord Jesus Christ hath given unto me; that I am every day dying, ready to be offered up for the name of my Lord and Saviour. 32 If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what ad∣vantageth it mee, if the dead rise not? Let us eate and drinke for to morrow we die.If, as it is the manner of men to be put to fight with beasts, in their Amphitheaters; so I have beene put to fight with bestiall men, at Ephesus, and have with them beene exposed to so manifest, and great perill of my selfe, what am I the better, or to what purpose have I done it, if there were no resurrection? Well might ye profane men then, take up these atheous words of your leud predecessors, which the Prophet Esay hath set downe, Let us eate, and drinke, for to morrow we shall die, and there is no further account to be made. 33 Be not deceived: e∣vill communications cor∣rupt good manners.But for you, O Corinthians, bee not yee miscarried with such godlesse, and wicked speeches, remembring that old (but true) verse of the heathen Poet; Evill com∣munications corrupt good manners. 34 Awake to righte∣ousnesse, and sinne not: for some have not the know∣ledge of God, I speake this to your shame.Awake ye from the secure and dangerous estate of your former corruptions, to a life of grace and righte∣ousnesse, and doe not dare to yeeld your selves over to your sins; and give not eare to those leud suggestions of wicked and profane men, for there are some such, even amongst you who professe Christianity; that have not the true knowledge, and feare of God; I speake this to your shame; who have had so powerfull meanes to the contrary. 35 But some man will say, How are the dead rai∣sed up, and with what bo∣dy doe they come?But some man will object, and say; you speake of a re∣surrection; but what an impossible thing is this that you tell us; how can it be that that body which is vanished to dust, and corruption, should rise againe? Tell us then what body is it that shall be restored to us, for this can∣not possibly be repaired? 36 Thou foole, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die.Thou foole, doe but looke to the graine that thou sowest; that which thou sowest doth not sprout up a∣gaine, except it first corrupt, and die. 37 And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare graine.And when thou sowest, thou sowest not that eare and that corne which shall be, but bare graine, &c. 38 But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his owne body.But God gives it (in the growing up) that body, or substance which it hath, according to his pleasure, and to every seed his owne body; not the body of another kinde of graine, nor the body of another graine of the
same kinde, but to every graine his owne body. And, as it is in plants,39 All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one kinde of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, a∣nother of fishes, and ano∣ther of Birds. that they have their severall bodies and substances, which God gives them at his plea∣sure, so is it in those creatures, which have sense, and mo∣tion; there are severall kindes of flesh in them: there is one flesh of men, another of beasts, &c. And even so in the resurrection, God, who hath here given a fleshly bo∣dy unto men, shall then give them such a body as shall be for glorified persons. There are also celestiall bodies or substances,40 There are also ce∣lestiall bodies, and bodies terrestriall, but the glory of the celestiall is one, and the glory of the terrestriall is another. as the heaven it selfe, the planets, and other starres; and there are terrestriall substances, as these elements of earth, and water, and the mineralls and metalls therein contained, each of these have bodies of their owne, differing in de∣grees of worth and excellency one from another. And even so in the heavenly bodies themselves,41 There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moone, and another glory of the Starres: for one star differeth from another Star in glory. there are severall degrees of glory; for there is one glory of the Sun, which is the great originall of light, and ano∣ther of the moone which is next to it, in glory and light∣somnesse; and another of the starres, which make lesse shew, then it; and amongst those starres also, one differs from another in brightnesse, and glory. So is it in the state of the resurrection,42 So also is the resur∣rection of the dead, it is sowen in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. compared with the present; the body, as it is now, is a goodly crea∣ture; but then, it shall have another manner of lustre up∣on it; it is laid downe in corruption, it is raised againe, in a state of immortality, and incorruption. So also verse 43. We lay downe in the grave a naturall body,43 It is sowen in dis∣honor, it is raised in glory: it is sowen in weaknesse, it is raised in power: such as we tooke from our parents, earthly, dull, heavie, and such, as when it was at the best, needed the aide of our senses, but it is raised a body quite altered in all the qualities thereof; having put off all the grossnesse,44 It is sowen a natu∣rall body, it is raised a spi∣rituall body, &c. and cloggy substance of it; and become pure, light, and apt to motion, and, as neare (as a body may be) to the nature, and qualities of a spirit; so, there is a grosse and naturall bodie, and there is a body that is pure, agile, and spirit-like. And, so it is written;45 And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soule, the last Adam was made a quickning spirit. that the body of the first man (which was Adam) was informed, and enlived by a li∣ving, and reasonable soule; but herein the second or last Adam Christ, excelled the first, in that he gives us a spi∣rituall life, by the power of his quickning spirit; In our naturall being, therefore, we have a living soule, but in our spirituall, we have a life-giving spirit.
46 Howbeit, that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is naturall, and afterward that which is spirituall.Howbeit, our naturall being was first, and then, after, our spirituall; we must first receive our elementary, and naturall body from Adam, ere we can receive our spiri∣tuall, and incorruptible. 47 The first man is of the earth, earthy, The se∣cond man is of the Lord from heaven.The first Adam was formed of the earth, and there∣fore was of a base, and earthly composition; The second Adam, which is the Lord Christ, as he came from hea∣ven, so he hath an heavenly and glorious body. And according to the differences of the first, and se∣cond Adam,48 As is the earthy, such are they that are ear∣thy; and as is the heavenly such are they also that are heavenly. so are they that partake of the natures of them both; as the first Adam was earthly, so those which are derived from him, and have nothing, but what they receive from him, are earthly, and corrupti∣ble; And as the second Adam is heavenly, so they that partake of him, are heavenly and glorious. 49 And as wee have born the image of the ear∣thy, we shall also beare the image of, &c.And, as we have been like the first Adam sinfull, mor∣tall, and corruptible; so shall we bee, like the second A∣dam, pure, immortall, incorruptible. 50 Now this I say, bre∣thren, that flesh and blood cannot inherite the king∣dome of God.Now, this I say, brethren, that these naturall bodies of ours, consisting of flesh and blood, as they are in this base, dreggish, and drossy condition, cannot inherit the Kingdome of God, &c. 51 Behold, I shew you a mystery: we shall not all sleepe, but we shall all bee changed.We shall not all sleepe in death; but we shall be sud∣dainly changed to an incorruptible estate; those that shall be found alive, at the comming of Christ, shall be instantly so wrought upon, by the power of God, that their bodies shall passe by a present alteration into an immortall, and glorious condition. 52 In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpe, for the trum∣pet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incor∣ruptible, and we shall bee changed.We shall be changed in a moment, even in the twink∣ling of an eye, when the last summons to judgement shall be given; for the Archangell, with a trumpet-like voice, shall call all that are dead in their graves unto judgement; and the dead shall thereupon rise incorrup∣tible, and those that are alive shall then undergoe that change. For this corruptible body must lay downe this im∣purenesse,53 For this corrupti∣ble must put on incorrup∣tion. and corruption, and must, in stead thereof, put on incorruption, and perfect glory, &c. 54 So when this cor∣ruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mor∣tall shall have put on im∣mortrlity, &c.Then shall be brought to passe that saying, that is written in the Prophet Esay; He shall swallow up death in victory; for that death shall be fully both vanquished and destroyed, and happily triumpht over, by life, and immortality. Esaiah 2. 55 O death, where is thy sting: O grave, where is thy victory.And that other of the Prophet Osee; O death, I will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction; Now then may we justly insult over subdued death, and say, O
death, where is thy sting, wherewith thou hadst wont to wound all creatures? O grave, where is thy victory, &c? It is only sinne by which death hath power over us,56 The sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the law. and it is the just rigor of the law, that inflicts death up∣on us, for sinne. But thankes be to God,57 But thankes bee to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Iesus Christ. who hath given us the victo∣ry over sinne, which is the cause of death; and over death which is inflicted for sinne, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, my brethren,58 Therefore, my be∣loved brethren, be ye sted∣fast, unmovable, alwaies a∣bounding in the worke of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labour is not in vaine in the Lord. since ye know that there is certainly a resurrection, and a day of retribution, wher∣in in ye shall receive the reward of your good workes, and holy obedience; and ye cannot lose any of your hopes and labours, which ye have undergone for Christs sake, be ye therefore stedfast, and unmovable, &c. CAP. XVI. VPon the first day of the weeke,2 Vpon the first day of the weeke, let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come. which is the Lords day, let every one lay by him, in store, some such proportion of almes, as he can spare, out of his gettings in the weeke before; that this stocke of your contribu∣tion may be ready to send to the poore Saints at Hieru∣salem, and that there be no need of gatherings, when I come. For I have very ample,9 For a great doore, and effectuall is opened unto me, and there are ma∣ny adversaries. and full oportunity offered me of preaching at Ephesus; many vehement invitations; and great likelihoods of the good successe of the Gos∣pell in the conversion of many; and besides, there are many adversaries, which must be opposed, silenced and convinced. Doe ye incourage him against the malice and mis∣chievous plots of false teachers;10 See that he may be with you without feare, for he worketh the work of the Lord. for it is the Lords work that he doth conscionably undertake and performe, &c. Ye know the house of Stephanas,15 I beseech you brethrē that ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves, &c. that it was the first family in all Achaia, that received the Gospell; and that they have continued constant in that good profession, e∣ver since; and have beene exceedingly forward in pro∣viding for, and attending up the Saints. That you give all loving and reverent respects unto such, and to &c.16 That ye may submit your selves unto such. That comfort which I could not but desire,17 For that which was lacking on your part they have supplied. and yet could not hope for, of injoying you all, is, as in your name, supplyed to me, by their presence.
22 If any man love not the Lorld Iesus Christ, let him be Anathema Marana∣tha.If any man give manifest proofes of his hatred, and opposition to the Lord Jesus Christ; let him be branded with the heaviest curse, and sentenced with the feare∣fullest degree of excommunication. THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. PAVL TO THE CORINTHIANS. CAP. I. 5 For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboun∣deth by Christ.FOr, as in these troubles, and persecutions, which we indure for the Gospell; it is not so much wee that suffer, as it is Christ that suffers in us; and in these wee abound: so the consolations which we have also, are in, and by Christ; and these comforts abound according to the proportion of our sufferings. 6 And whether wee be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectuall in the enduring of the same suf∣ferings which we also suf∣fer: or whether wee be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation.And both our sufferings, and consolations are for your good, and not onely for our owne; for whiles we suffer patiently, and constantly, wee do herein give you an example of couragious suffering for Christ; whereby you may receive not onely present consolation, but also eternall salvation, which is effectually wrought through the mercy of Christ, in the enduring of those your suffe∣rings; & whiles we are comforted, we give you a cheerfull example of the joyfull issue of those sufferings, and there∣by helpe forward also your consolation, and salvation. 8 That we were pressed out of measure, above strength, in so much that we despaired even of life.Wee were pressed exceedingly with those troubles and persecutions, even above the power of our naturall strength, to undergoe them, insomuch as wee made no account that we could escape them with life. 9 But wee had the sen∣tence of death in our selves, that wee should not trust in our selves, but in God which raiseth the dead.But wee made full reckoning of our present death, as utterly inevitable; giving our selves for dead men, that wee should not trust in our selves for any possibility of life, but in God, who raiseth the very dead. 10 Who delivered us from so great a death.Who delivered us from so instant and so cruell a death, &c.
That for the gift bestowed upon us, for the benefit,11 That for the gift be∣stowed upon us by the meanes of many persons, thankes may be given by many on our behalfe. and behoofe of many, and upon the earnest prayers of many, thanks may be also given to God by many, on our behalfe. Our demeanour in the world was not guided by a worldly wisedome, and policie,12 For our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simpli∣city, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wise∣dome, but by the grace of God, wee have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you wards. as if wee sought our selves, by the disadvantage of others; neither was our preaching taken up in the ostentation of secular philoso∣phy, and humane eloquence, but set forth with the effi∣cacie of Gods grace, and simplicitie of truth, and holy zeale, as to all Gods people, so to you especially, more abundantly. That as yee received one maine benefit by my first comming, which was your conversion;15 That you might have a second benefit. so ye might re∣ceive a second benefit by my comming to you againe, even your confirmation in the Gospell. When I thefore was thus minded,17 When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightnesse? or the things that I purpose, doe I pur∣pose according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay? and yet did not ac∣cordingly performe it, was it out of any levity, or incon∣stancie, and unsteddinesse to my owne resolutions? or do I contrive my purposes, and determinations out of car∣nall respects, that according to the occasion of more pro∣fit, or more ease, I should alter them? and that I should say, and unsay at pleasure; promising and retracting as advantage served? But I call the onely true God to witnesse,18 But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay. that nei∣ther this purpose and ingagement of mine, nor any word of my preaching amongst you hath beene false, double, variable, deceitfull. For the Sonne of God, Jesus Christ,19 For the Sonne of God, Iesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me and Silva∣nus and Timotheus, was not yea, and nay, but in him was yea. &c. was so preached to you by us, as with one ever firme and con∣stant asseveration of the truth by us delivered concer∣ning him, wee did not vary our note; one while affir∣ming that of him, which another while we denyed; but wee ever continued unmoveable, and unchangeable in the same doctrines. Otherwise wee should not have faithfully delivered this holy errand that is committed to us;20 For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. for certainly all the promises of God in the Gospell, (which are the mat∣ter of our message) are in him fully, and immutably per∣formed; and so are proclaimed, and justified to the world by us, unto the praise and glory of God. Now hee that doth confirme,21 Now hee which sta∣blisheth us with you in Christ, and hath annointed us, is God. and establish both you and us in the faith and profession of his undoubted truth of Christ our Lord, and in an unchangeable, and unre∣moveable adherence to him; and who hath anointed us with the precious oyle of his spirituall grace, is God onely.
22 Who hath also sea∣led us, and given the ear∣nest of the Spirit in our hearts.Who hath also sealed us up for his; and as it is wont to be done in bargaines, that the earnest given in hand bindes the contract; so hath he made our salvation sure, by giving to us before-hand the earnest of his Spirit, in our hearts. 23 Moreover, I call God for a record upon my soule, that to spare you, I came not as yet unto Co∣rinth.Moreover I call God to beare witnesse with my soule, of the truth which I affirme, and to take punishment upon my soule, if I affirme ought but the truth; that onely out of respects to you, I forbore to come, as yet, to Corinth; lest finding matters amisse, and yet un∣reformed, I should have beene forced to use my Apo∣stolicall authority amongst you, in such severity as would have seemed very harsh unto you. 24 Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by faith ye stand.But when I speake of sparing you, let no man thinke that we meant ever so to take upon us, as if wee would be imperious, and over-rule you in matter of faith and religion, at our pleasure; but onely that we would indea∣vour your reformation; and therein be helpers forward of your joy: As for your faith, it is not either in our will, or in our power to shake, or stirre it; for that is it, whereby ye do, and must stand; so as it neither is, nor can be subject to the command, or alteration of men. CAP. II. 5 But if any have caused griefe, he hath not grieved me, but in part: that I may not overcharge you all.BUt if any man have caused griefe (as indeed that in∣cestuous man hath done) he hath not grieved mee alone, but many of you also, with mee; that I may not have reason to charge you all, with the blame, or suspi∣tion of bearing with that foule crime. 6 Sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was justified of ma∣ny.Since he hath beene censured, according to my order, and hath professed his serious repentance, let this pu∣nishment, or censure be sufficient, which was inflicted upon him publiquely in the congregation. 10 To whom yee for∣give any thing I forgive also: For if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it in the person of Christ.And as I before wrote to you, that my spirit consen∣ted together with you, in the excommunicating of this offender, so now, I do professe my concurrence with you, in his absolution, and remission; as ye do therefore forgive him, so do I also; and in this forgivenesse of mine, I have respect to you, and do it for your sakes, sincerely, as in the presence of Christ, so in the name, and person of Christ, who hath committed this authority unto me. 11 Lest satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices.Both you and I must thus release him lest satan should get an advantage of us, by overwhelming the sinner with despaire; and by prevailing against us in our too much austerity and uncharitablenesse; for we are well acquain∣ted
with the subtle devices of that great, and cunning adversary. An oportunity was offered to mee, by the Lord,12 And a doore was opened unto mee of the Lord. in the great readinesse and forward desires of the hearers. I was much grieved, and troubled in my soule,13 I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother. for that I met not with Titus, my brother, by whom I made account to heare of your estate, &c. And casteth abroad the sweet perfume or savour of the knowledge of God, by our preaching in every place,14 And maketh manifest the savour of his know∣ledge by us in every place. so as the world is, as it were, filled therewith. For we by our preaching are as a sweet and acceptable perfume in the nostrils of God, casting abroad,15 For wee are unto God a sweet savour of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that pe∣rish. and sprea∣ding the fragrant savour of Christ, all the world over: graciously accepted of God, howsoever wee speed with men; since hee doth not judge of us, by the event, but re∣gards, and crownes our conscionable labours, whether they light upon them that are saved, or on them that perish. To the one, we are as a deadly savour,16 To the one we are the savour of death unto death and to the other the savour of life unto life: and who is sufficient for these things? by reason that their corruption turnes this wholsome, and saving Gospell into poyson, and thereby makes our preaching an occasion of their destruction; to the other, wee are a sweet and comfortable savour, giving both the life of grace here, to those that receive our Gospell; and of eternall glory, hereafter: so as this imployment is noble, and great, and of exceeding importance, and how few are there, that are fit and able to discharge it? As for us, blessed be God, he hath fitted us for it;17 For wee are not as many which corrupt the word of God; but as of sin∣cerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speake wee in Christ. for we are not as many, who do corrupt, and adulterate the word of God, mixing it with their owne fancies, and preaching it plausibly, and covetously, so as they may humor others, and advantage themselves; but wee have preached the pure and sincere word of God unto you, and that with truth and uprightnesse of heart; as in the sight of God, by the direction and authority of Christ. CAP. III. YE, O yee converted Corinthians,2 Ye are our epistle writ∣ten in our hearts, knowne and read of all men. and your whole Church, are as a large epistle of commendations (written in the testimony of our conscience, which knowes all our effectuall labours among you) sent forth to all the world, in our behalfe, well knowne and read of all men. For as much as yee are manifestly declared to be3 For as much as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ mini∣stred by us, &c. written not with inke, but with the Spirit of the living God, &c.
Christs epistle, written by our ministery in that both Christ is written in you, by us, and that also Christ by our preaching, hath written the blessed characters of his grace in you; not with inke, but with, &c. 5 Not that we are suffi∣cient of our selves to thinke any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiencie is of God:And such trust and confidence have wee, through Christ, in our God, that wee are bold thus to boast of this worke of God in you, and the efficacie of our mini∣stery amongst you. 6 Who also hath made us able ministers of the new Testament; not of the letter, but of the Spirit: for the letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.Who hath made us able ministers of the new Testa∣ment: but, not of the outward and bare sound there∣of, or of that dead letter, wherein it is expressed, and written, but of that inward vertue of the Spirit of God, which (through the blessing of God) worketh with the vocall sound of the Gospell; for the outward expressi∣on, being separated from the inward power of the Gospell, occasions the death of the soule; it is the inward grace of the Spirit, working with the letter, and sound of the Gospell, that gives a true spirituall life unto the soule. 7 But if the ministration of death written, and in∣graven in stones, was glo∣rious, so that the children of Israel could not sted∣fastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away:But if the old law which threatneth, and bringeth death with it, which was written and ingraven in tables of stone, were delivered with such glory, as that the chil∣dren of Israel could not looke stedfastly upon the face of Moses, for the shining glory of his countenance, which glory was but temporary, and vanished away with the face it selfe. 8 How shall not the mi∣nistration of the Spirit be rather glorious?How shall not the ministration of the Gospell, which is accompanied by the Spirit of God, and gives life to the receivers, be much more glorious? So also verse 9. 10 For even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect by reason of the glory that excelleth.For even that glorious delivery of the Law, and that shining face of Moses, had no glory at all in it, if it be compared with that excellent glory of the Gospell, and of the Apostolicall function. 11 For if that which is done away, was glo∣rious, much more that which remaineth is glori∣ous.For if that Law and that shining brightnesse which was transitory, and is done away, were glorious, how much more glorious must that needs be, which is to re∣maine for ever, viz. the Gospell, & the ministery thereof. 12 Seeing then that we have such hope, wee use great plainnesse of speech.Seeing then that we have this confident assurance of the dignity of our function, and the soveraigne power of the Gospell, wee do with much freedome and resolution preach this Gospell to you.
And we do not make our selves like Moses,13 And not as Moses, which put a vaile over his face, that the children of Israel could not stedfastly looke to the end of that which is abolished. who put a vaile over his face, that the eyes of the Israelites could not have their full scope, to looke at that bright lustre of his face, which is (and was soone after to be) abolished. But this was done in a figure; for as their eyes were thus hindred from seeing the glory of Moses face,14 But their mindes were blinded: for untill this day remaineth the same vaile untaken away, in the reading of the old Testament; which vaile is done away in Christ. so the eyes of their mindes were dimme, yea blinded, that they could not see the end of the Law; and still, untill this day, the same vaile of ignorance continues unremoved; for in reading of the old Testament, they have not the power of seeing him, who was prefigured, and shadow∣ed out thereby; which vaile is onely done away by Christ; as in whom all things were fulfilled, and by whom the cleare light of knowledge is given unto the soule. But even to this day, when Moses is read,15 But even unto this day, when Moses is read the vaile is upon their heart. this vaile of ignorance, and unbeleefe is betwixt their hearts, and his face. Neverthelesse,16 Neverthelesse, when it shal turne unto the Lord the vaile shall be ta∣ken away. when that heart of theirs shall be tur∣ned to the Lord, then shall the vaile be taken away by the gracious illumination of Gods Spirit; and they shall then see Christ clearely laid forth in Moses. Yee heard of a Spirit, as ye heard of a letter;17 Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. now the Lord is that Spirit, which gives life unto the letter of the Gospell; and where this Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty and freedome from the bondage of sinne, and satan; and a bold and confident accesse to the throne of grace. But wee all, as being in a better case then Moses,18 But we all with o∣pen face, beholding as in a glasse the glory of the Lord are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. do with an open face behold the glory of the Lord; and as a glasse which is set against the Sunne, receives the beames thereof; so do we take in glory from God, in one degree after another, till wee be fully changed into his glorious image, and made like unto him, which is wrought in, and upon us, by the Spirit of the Lord. CAP. IV. THerefore,1 Therefore, seeing we have this ministery, as we have received mercie, we faint not. seeing wee have so excellent and noble a ministery, or function; as God hath highly ho∣noured us, and shewed mercy to us in vouchsafing to call us thereunto, so wee go courageously forward in the carefull discharge thereof, and faint not. But have renounced all the slye,2 But have renounced the hidden things of dis∣honesty, not walking in craftinesse, nor hand∣ling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every mans conscience, in the sight of God. and secret disho∣nesties of hypocrisie, not craftily seeking our owne ad∣vantages, by indirect meanes, in our preaching the
word of God, but in plaine and open truth, and sincerity, labouring to be approved of every mans conscience, in the presence of God. 3 But if our Gospell be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.And so clearly and faithfully have we laid Christ o∣pen before you, in our preaching, that if there bee any man, to whom our Gospell is yet hid, it is a fearefull signe of that mans reprobation, and perdition. 4 In whom the god of this world hath blinded the mindes of them which beleeve not, lest the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ, who is the image of God should shine unto them.And that he is one of those unbeleevers, whose mindes Satan, who is the god of this world, hath blinded; so as that, through their owne obstinacy, and his suggestion, the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ, who is the perfect and living image of God the Father, appeares not unto them, but by the just judgement of God, is kept from their eyes. That God which in the first creation brought the light out of darknesse, now, that the world was all cove∣red with darknesse of ignorance, brought the light of his Gospell into it, and hath shined in our hearts, to give us thereby a true and cleare knowledge of the glory of God, in, and by the meanes of Jesus Christ.6 For God who com∣manded the light to shine out of darknesse, hath shi∣ned in our hearts, to give the light of the know∣ledge of the glory of God, in the face of Iesus Christ. But this goodly and rich treasure of the Gospell is by him put into us, that are but base, brittle, earthen vessels; that there may no part of the praise of the excellent power, and vertue thereof be cast upon us,7 But wee have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellencie of the power may be of God, and not of us. but all may be (as it is due) ascribed to God alone. 8 We are troubled on every side, yet not distres∣sed: we are perplexed, but not in despaire.We are afflicted on every side, yet not over-pressed, and distracted therewith. Alwaies imitating, in our very bodies, the example of the sufferings, and dying of our Lord Jesus, that once our now mortall bodies may be conformable to his,10 Alwaies bearing a∣bout in the body the dy∣ing of the Lord Iesus, that the life also of Iesus might be made manifest in our body. in everlasting glory, and the life of blessednesse, and im∣mortality. So also verse 11: 12 So then death wor∣keth in us, but life in you.So then, we are continually exposed to death, whiles ye live quietly, out of the danger thereof, and provide for your life and safety. 13 Wee having the same Spirit of faith ac∣cording as it is written, I beleeved, and therefore have I spoken; we also be∣leeved and therefore speake.We, having the same faith, that David had, wrought in us by the Spirit of God, can say, as he did, I beleeved,
and therefore have I spoken; upon the same grounds then that he had, we also beleeve the performance of all Gods promises to us, and therefore we doe boldly pro∣fesse, and preach the truth of the Gospell. For all, both our sufferings and deliverances are for your sakes,15 For all things are for your sakes, that the a∣bundant grace, might, through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God. that the abundant grace of God which shews it selfe in both these, might win so much more glory to God; for that so many are interessed therein, and shall returne their praises and thanksgivings to him for his mercy to us. Upon which assurances, we goe on cheerfully in our ministery, and faint not; for, though our body decay,16 For which cause wee faint not, but, though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renew∣ed, day by day. and languish by reason of our many pressures, and afflicti∣ons, yet our spirit gathers strength, and resolution eve∣ry day, more then other. Forasmuch as we know, that this light affliction which we suffer here, for the short moment of this present life,17 For our light affli∣ction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a farre more exceeding and eternall waight of glory. shall be recompenced (through Gods mercy) with an incomparably, and inconceivably more excellent, and e∣ternall measure of glory; and helpes us forward towards the attainment thereof. Whiles we cast, not our bodily eyes, upon these out∣ward things, that are seene, but the eyes of our soules, upon those spirituall, and invisible excellencies; for all these things which our bodily eyes can see, are tempo∣rall and transitory; but those invisible things, which our soules see, are eternall.18 While we look not at the things which are seene, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seene, are temporall, but the things which are not seene are e∣ternall. CAP. V. FOr we know, that if this earthly body of ours, where∣in the soule sojournes, some while, as in a Tabernacle of clay, be once dissolved; we have a glorious mansion, prepared for us, and built by God; even an house made only by the infinite power and goodnesse of our creator, which is eternall in the heavens.1 For we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved we have a building of God an house not made with hand, eternall in the hea∣vens. For in this fraile tabernacle of our body,2 For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to bee clothed upon with our house. wee live in continuall sighing, and groaning; earnestly desiring, if it might be, that in this state of our bodies, we might, with∣out the paine of a dissolution, be clothed upon with the life of glory, and immortality. If, at least,3 If so bee that being clothed we shall not bee found naked. we be found (at the comming of Christ) clothed with these bodies of ours, and not despoiled of them before by death.
For we, that are in this tabernacle of our bodies, doe sigh and groane, being burdned with this lumpish, and earthen load of our flesh; not for that we would be un∣clothed, and stripped of them; but in a desire, that being clothed with them, we might have glory put also upon us; that, as we are clothed with them, so they may bee clothed with glory; that so mortality might (without any sensible paine) be swallowed up of life.4 For we that are in this Tabernacle, doe groan, being burdened, not for that we would be unclo∣thed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swal∣lowed up of life. Now, he that ordained and wrought us to this bles∣sed condition, is only God; who hath also given us, be∣fore hand, the earnest of his Spirit,5 Now hee that hath wrought us for the selfe∣same thing, is God; who al∣so hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. to assure us of the full accomplishment of his good promises to us. Therefore, howsoever nature is ready to shrinke at the thought of dissolution, yet we are confident alwaies to undergoe it, cheerfully, and resolutely: Knowing that our life is, in this case, a true pilgrimage; in that, whiles we are present in this body of ours, wee are ab∣sent from the Lord;6 Therefore we are al∣waies confident, knowing that whilest wee are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. We doe, indeed, account our body to be our home; but it is a short, uncertaine, imperfect, and miserable home; it is heaven that is our true coun∣trey, and home, as being our Fathers house; whiles then we are in this home of our bodies, wee are away from our glorious home, and from the Lord, who is the ow∣ner, and maker of it. 7 For wee walke by faith, not by sight.(For we doe only now, by our faith, injoy God, but are as strangers, yet, in regard of our present sight, and fruition of him.) We are, I say, confident to undergoe our dissolution, and willing rather to be freed and delivered from our body, and to be present with the Lord,8 We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. then to be still in the body, and absent from God. Wherefore we labour that, whether wee live, or die, whether our soules be present in our bodies, or separa∣ted from them, by death, we may be graciously accep∣ted of him.9 Wherefore wee la∣bour, that, whether present or absent, we may be ac∣cepted of him. Knowing therefore the terrour of this dreadfull judge∣ment, and the awfulnesse of that Lord, who shall appeare in it, we perswade men to a conscionable feare, and o∣bedience; and for us, we are carefull to bee approved of God in our sincerity, and faithfulnesse to him, in our mi∣nistery; and I trust also, ye your selves, in your owne con∣sciences,11 Knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord, we perswade men, but we are made manifest unto God, and I trust also are made manifest unto your consciences. can not but allow, and give testimony thereof. 12 For wee commend not our selves againe unto you, but give you occasion to glory on our behalfe, that you may have some∣what to answere them, &c.But we speake this, to give you occasion, rather to rejoyce, and boast, on our behalfe; that you may have somewhat to answere those false Apostles, which make a
shew of joy and confidence, but indeed have no truth thereof in their hearts. Neither let any man censure us for this our gloriation, as if we were over-carried beyond the bounds of discre∣tion; or as if this zeale and boasting savoured of some kinde of madnesse; for, if we be thought to bee besides our selves, it is for our fervent love to God, and his Gos∣pell, that we are so reproached; and if we be sober, it is for your cause,13 For whether we be besides our selves, it is to God; or whether we be so∣ber, it is for your cause. that we might give an example of meek∣nesse unto you. For the wonderfull and infinite love of Christ where∣with he imbraced mankinde, offers an holy force, and violence unto us; because we doe thus rightly, and justly judge; that we were all dead, and lost by reason of our sinne; otherwise that only and deare Saviour of ours would not have died for all.14 For the love of Christ constraineth us, be∣cause we thus judge: that if one died for all, then were all dead. And withall, that his purpose of dying for all was this, that they which live by the power and efficacy of his death, should not live unto themselves, any more, but unto him, and for his glory and advantage, who dy∣ed for them, and rose againe.15 And that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves but unto him which died for them, and rose againe. Wherefore, henceforth,16 Wherefore hence∣forth know we no man af∣ter the flesh; yea, though we have knowne Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. wee doe not respect and e∣steeme any man for these outward, and fleshly regards of honor, or wealth, or parentage, or the like; yea, if heretofore we have boasted of Christ for any fleshly re∣spects, or interest; as that he was of the same city, coun∣try, kindred with us; yet henceforth we stand no more upon these points, but rather boast our selves of him in spirituall regards, as our redeemer, as our gracious and al-sufficient mediator, interceding for us in heaven. Therefore if any man doe challenge to have any right in Christ, or any station in his spirituall kingdome,17 Therefore if any man be in Christ, hee is a new creature; old things are past away, behold, all things are become new. let him be a new creature renewed by the grace of his spirit. All the old, out-worne conditions of our sinfull nature, and the appendances thereof, are now gone and past; all things that are in us, are now become new by the pow∣er of regeneration. And all things are thus renued by the power, and grace of God; who hath reconciled,18 And all things are of God, who hath recon∣ciled us to himselfe. &c. God was in Christ, as the Father in the Sonne, recon∣ciling the world to himselfe,19 To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himselfe, not imputing their trespasses unto them. by Christ the Sonne; by his full satisfaction so doing away their sinnes, as that hee imputes them not to the penitent, to the beleever, &c.
21 For he hath made him to be sinne for us, who knew no sinne, that wee might be made the righte∣ousnesse of God in him.For he hath made him, who knew no sinne, to under∣goe and satisfie, in our steed, that wrath which was due to our sinne; that we might bee made partakers of his righteousnesse, before God, by the mercifull imputati∣on thereof unto us. CAP. VI. 2 I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation, &c.See Isay 49.8. 6 By the holy Ghost, by love unfained.IN the good improvement of all those spirituall graces which ye have received. Let us beare our selves as the ministers of God, in rightly delivering to his people the word of truth,7 By the word of truth by the power of God, by the armour of righteous∣nesse, on the right hand, and on the left. with∣out mixtures of our owne fancies, in the zealous mainte∣nance of that truth by our utmost indevours, and by that power of working miracles, which God hath given to us, in all righteousnesse; which, like a compleat ar∣mour may compasse us about, and defend us both from the dangers of the temptations of prosperity on the right hand, and of adversitie, on the left. 11 O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you; our heart is enlarged.O ye Corinthians, we doe by all meanes desire to ex∣presse the good affections that wee beare towards you; our hearts are inlarged towards you in all affectionate love, and holy desires of your good. 12 Ye are not straitned in us, but yee are straitned in your owne bowels.It is no strait, or narrow roome that ye take up in our hearts; ye have full scope there; and if yee thinke otherwise, surely the straitnesse is in your owne breasts, that ye will not conceive sufficiently of our kinde, and hearty disposition towards you. 13 Now for a recom∣pence in the same, I speake as unto my children, be ye also inlarged.In requitall of this Christian, and fatherly affection of ours to you, be ye also as spirituall children, alike lo∣vingly affected towards us. 14 Be ye not unequally yoaked together with un∣beleevers.Out of this tender love, and care of mine, I doe ad∣vise and charge you, that ye doe not make so unequall matches for your selves, as to joyne your selves in mar∣riage with infidels, &c.
CAP. VII. HAving therefore received such gracious promises of Gods presence, and fatherly respect to us,1 Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holinesse in the feare of God. upon our separating from infidels, and refraining from all com∣munion with them, let us accordingly cleanse our selves from all filthinesse, both of soule and body; not onely keeping our consciences free from those heathenish pol∣lutions, but our bodies also from consorting with them, making up our perfect holinesse every way, in the feare and obedience of God. Let not your hearts be any way estranged from us;2 Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man. we have done no wrong to any man; if we have beene sharpe, and severe in taxing that crime which was tole∣rated amongst you, it was but just that we said, and did in it, &c. I doe not say this,3 I speake not this to condemne you, for I have said before, that you are in our hearts to die and live with you. as if I meant to lay any accusation upon you, that you have conceived such an injurious sus∣pition of me; for I have before professed how sincerely I love you, and how fervently, and constantly; even so as I could be content not only to live with you, but to die for you also. We were extreamly pressed, both with inward,5 Our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side, without were fightings, within were feares. and with outward afflictions; without, we had bickerings with the enemies of the Church, Jewes, Gentiles, false teachers; within, we were disquieted with feares of the mis-carriages of our weake brethren, and the danger of the successe of our adversaries. And not by his comming only,7 And not by his com∣ming only, but by the con∣solation wherewith hee was comforted in you, when he told us your ear∣nest desire, your mourning your fervent minde to∣wards me. but by the report and sight of those many, and great consolations, which hee received, in and from you; when he informed us of your earnest desire to be approved of us, your mourning for this just cause of scandall, your fervent affection towards mee, &c. For, though I did grieve you,8 For though I made you sorry with a letter, I doe not repent though I did repent. with that sharpe letter that I wrote unto you; yet now, I am not sorry for it; although I was sorry to thinke how much you would be troubled therewith, &c. Now I rejoyce, not for your sorrow,9 Now I rejoyce, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance; for ye were made sorry after a godly manner. but for the good issue and successe of that sorrow of yours; that it was the occasion of the reforming of that fault, whereof I com∣plained, &c. For godly sorrow worketh a repentance,10 For godly sorrow worketh repētance to sal∣vation, not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the world worketh death. never to be repented of, yea to be joyed in; such a repentance as
leads to eternall salvation; but worldly sorrow doth but dry the bones, to no purpose; and if it be suffered to prevaile over the heart, ends in despaire and death. 11 For behold, this self same thing, that yee sor∣rowed after a godly sort, what carefullnesse it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what indignation.For, behold, this godly sorrow, that my letter occa∣sioned in you, what good effects it hath wrought in you, what carefulnesse to redresse this crime, what apolo∣gies for your selves, of your hearty detestation of the fact, yea what indignation at so soule an abuse, &c. 12 I did it not for his cause that had done the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered wrong, but that our care for you in the fight of God might ap∣peare unto you.I did it not so much for any particular mans cause, ei∣ther the offenders, or any other party wronged; but that I might hereby give a proofe to you of that exceeding great care, that I have of your good in the sight of God; and that you might be sufficiently by this meanes assu∣red of it. 14 But as wee spake all things to you in truth, even so our boasting which I made before Titus is found a truth.For, as all that wee spake to you concerning Titus, is well approved by you, to be true; even so all those ho∣ly boasts that I made of you to Titus, are by him found to be truth. 15 How with feare, and trembling you received him.With what reverence, and awe of his ministery ye re∣ceived him. 16 I rejoyce therefore, that I have confidence in you in all things.I rejoyce, therefore, that I finde so good reason to be confident of your well-doing, in all things. CAP. VIII. 2 How that in a great triall of affliction, the abun∣dance of their joy, and their deep povertie aboun∣ded unto the riches of their liberality.HOw God hath blessed, and honoured the Churches of Macedonia, with a double grace; both with much chearfulnesse and joy in their great tryals of afflictions; and with a rich liberality, and contribution to the ne∣cessity of other saints,5 And this they did not as wee hoped, but first gave their owne selves to the Lord, and unto us, by the will of God. notwithstanding their owne deepe poverty. And this they did farre beyond our hope; first giving themselves over to the Lord; and then yeelding them∣selves to be swayed,6 Insomuch that we de∣sired Titus that as hee had begun, so hee would also finish in you the same grace also. and disposed of by our ministery, ac∣cording to the will of God. Insomuch as wee desired Titus, that as he had begun to move you for your liberall contribution to the same purpose, so that he would follow it home, and finish so good a worke amongst you.7 Therefore (as ye a∣bound in every thing in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and in all dili∣gence, and in your love to us) see that yee abound in this grace also. Therefore as yee abound in every other grace, and vertue, in faith, and a zealous expression of it, &c. So also that yee abound in this liberall almes for the reliefe of other Churches, that are now pinched with want.
I do not lay any imperious command upon you,8 I speake not by com∣mandement, but by occasi∣on of the forwardnesse of others, to do thus; but I move, and solicit you to it, upon occasion of others forwardnesse, &c. Who have begun a yeare agoe, not onely to do some∣thing, but to professe your forwardnesse to do more,10 Who have begun be∣fore; not onely to do, but also to be forward a yeare agoe. and to undertake a large collection for this use. For God measures our almes, according to the minde of the giuer; if there be first a willing minde,12 For if there be first a willing minde, it is accep∣ted according to that a man hath, and not accor∣ding to that he hath no is is ac∣cepted of him, though it be never so small a gift; for hee requires us not to give that, which wee have not, but what wee have, and in that proportion that we have; and accordingly accepts of what we thus give. That their abundance,14 That their abundance also may be a supply for your want that there may be equality. when occasion shall be here∣after given, may (in way of requitall) supply your wants; that so there may be a just equality of the gift, and the retribution. According to equality of proportion,15 As it is written, He that had gathered much, had nothing over; and hee that had gathered little, had no lack. which was in the gathering of the Manna in the Law; hee that had ga∣thered much, had nothing more then his fellowes, in the sharing of it, and he that gathered little, had no lesse then they. And we have sent with him that brother of ours,18 And wee have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the Gospell, throughout all the Churches. even Barnabas, which hath taken much paines for the plan∣ting, and promoting of the Gospell, and hath justly won great estimation amongst all the Churches. To travell with us,19 To travell with us with this grace which is administred by us to the glory, &c. and to carry this contribution which is raised by us to the glory, &c. I have sent Titus and Barnabas, for this purpose,20 Avoiding this, that no man should blame us in this abundance which is administred by us. that I might hereby take away all suspition of retaining to my selfe ought of that abundance of mony which wee have procured for this needfull releefe. Wherein we were carefull to take that course which might cleare our reputation both before God and men.21 Providing for ho∣nest things, not onely in the sight of the Lord. And wee have sent with them Titus our brother,22 And wee have sent with them our brother, whom wee have often∣times proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent upon the great confidence which I have in you. whom wee have oftentimes, &c. but now much more officious in this service, upon that confidence which hee sees I have in you; as knowing that you will not fru∣strate my hope and assurance. They are the messengers sent for this purpose by the Churches,23 They are the messen∣gers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ. and such as by whom Christ hath beene much glorified.
CAP. IX. 4 Lest happily if they of Macedonia come with me, and finde you unpre∣pared, we (that we say not you) should be ashamed.I Have often boasted of your liberality, in my speech with them of Macedonia; be ready therefore with your contribution, lest haply, if they of Macedonia should come with mee, to you, and finde you unprepared, both we that have boasted, and yee of whom we have boasted, should be ashamed, &c. 8 And God is able to ke all grace abound to∣rds you, that ye alwaies aving all sufficiencie in all things, may abound to eve∣ry good worke.Neither do ye in this your liberall contribution make doubt of your owne want, which may follow hereafter; for be ye assured that God, for whose sake yee give it, is able to furnish you with abundance of these, and all other blessings; that ye alwayes being all-sufficiently sup∣plyed by him, may upon every occasion give liberally to every good worke. 9 As it is written: Hee hath dispersed abroad: he hath given to the poore, &c.See Psal. 112.9. 10 Now hee that mini∣streth seed to the sower, both minister bread for your food: and multiply your seed sowne, and in∣crease the fruits of your righteousnesse.Now, I beseech that God (who is wont to requite abundantly all the good workes of our beneficence, and to furnish the sower, both with seed and increase) that he will provide liberally for you; and give you a plenti∣full harvest of the seed, which is thus sowne by you; and multiply to you the fruits of this your just liberality. 15 Thankes be unto God for his unspeakable gift.Thankes be to God for that grace of Christian boun∣tie towards others, which hee hath bestowed upon you, which is a gift of unspeakable value; and worthy of all thankfull acknowledgment. CAP. X. 1 Now I Paul, my selfe beseech you, by the meek∣nesse, and gentlenesse of Christ, who in presence am base among you; but being absent, am bold to∣wards you.I Have spoken to you for the poore; and now I solicit you for my selfe; I beseech you therefore (who might seeme to have power to command) not by ought in mee, but by the meeknesse and gentlenesse of Christ our Saviour; even I Paul beseech you; whose presence, as my adversaries say, is meane, and contemptible amongst you; howsoever in my absence I take upon me to deale roundly with you. 2 But I beseech you that I may not be bold, when I am present, with that con∣fidence wherewith I think to be bold against some, which thinke of us, as if wee walked according to the flesh.But I beseech you, that yee will so order the matter, that I may not have cause, when I am present, to make use of that bold and free severity against you, which I purpose to use against some envious detractors, which thinke and speake of us, as if there were nothing in us,
but what they see; as if we used worldly craft, and poli∣cy to get an hand over you. For though wee do indeed live in the flesh,3 For though we walke in the flesh, wee do not warre after the flesh. and are cloathed about with this earthly body, yet wee do not live carnally, nor make use of carnall, and indirect meanes to advantage our selves. We have indeed a warfare in hand,4 For the weapons of our warfare are not carnall, but mighty through God, to the pulling downe of strong holds. and we have wea∣pons, which wee do and must imploy in it; but as the warfare, so also the weapons which wee use, are spiritu∣all, not carnall; wee do not thinke to prevaile by secular power, and dignity, but by the mighty power of the Gospell, which is able (through the cooperation of God) to pull downe the strongest holds of flesh and blood. Casting downe all the vaine and wicked imaginati∣ons of the heart,5 Casting downe ima∣ginations, and every high thing that exalteth it selfe against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. and that proud ostentation of secular wisedome, and knowledge, that exalts it selfe against the true and saving knowledge of God; and bringing every thought of mans heart into an holy captivity, to be sub∣missely obedient, and conformable to the will of Christ. And having in a readines to take just revenge upon the disobedience of those persons,6 And having in a readi∣nesse to revenge all diso∣bedience, when your obe∣dience is fulfilled. who after their submission to the Gospell, have runne out into outrageous offences; whom we shall accordingly censure after that yee have so fulfilled your obedience to our admonitions, that there may no exception be taken at our forbearance of you. Do yee judge of things according to their outward appearance?7 Do yee looke on the things after the outward appearance? if any man trust to himselfe that he is Christs, let him of himself thinke this againe, that as he is Christs, even so are we Christs. The false teachers make a faire flourish; I go simply to worke; do ye judge of them and mee, as we seeme? your false apostles brag of their interest in Christ; that they have seene him, and pertaine to him; but if any man make these boasts of himselfe, let him learne to know, that he hath not, neither can have more right in Christ, nor more relation to him, then we have. But I will not speake much of this our authority, lest I should seeme (as they accuse mee) to speake bigge in letters,9 That I may not seeme, as if I would terrifie you by letters. and to terrifie you with the threatnings of my power. For his letters (say they) are full of great authority, and imperiousnesse; but his person is weake and meane, neither promising, nor performing ought; and his speech is plaine, homely, contemptible.10 For his letters (say they) are weighty, and powerfull, but his bodily presence is weake, and his speech contemptible. But let such a one know,11 Let such a one think this, that such as wee are in word by letters, when wee are absent, such will wee be also in deed, when we are present. that hee shall finde he hath mistaken us; for hee shall well understand, and feele, that such as wee are in the expression of our selves by let∣ters, in our absence; such wee will be found in our deeds, and carriage, when we are present.
12 For wee dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with some that commend themselves: but they measuring themselves by themselves, &c.As for us, we content our selves with our owne medi∣ocrity; wee dare not enter into comparison with these your glorious masters, that commend themselves, and bragge of their owne abilities: but lt mee tell you, they onely looking upon, and admiring their own good parts, and not comparing their small gifts with the greater, and more excellent indowments of others, be∣wray themselves to be unwise. 13 But we will not boast of things without our measure, but according to the measure of the rule, which God hath distribu∣ted to us, a measure to reach even unto you.But, however they exeeed, wee will not boast of our selves immoderately, and go beyond those bounds of just gloriation which God hath set us; but will keepe our selves within those limits of our abilities, and deserts, which God hath distributed unto us; in which compasse, our just boastings shall extend themselves unto you, of whom wee know wee have well merited, even above others; and will confine our vaunts of successe within the line of those regions, to which we have preached, where∣in yours of Corinth is plainly comprehended. 14 For wee stretch not our selves beyond our measure, as though wee reached not unto you, for we are come as farre as to you also in preaching the Gospell of Christ.For wee stretch not our selves, and the praise of our labours, and preachings beyond our due bounds, in say∣ing that wee reached so farre as Corinth, in these our Apostolicke paines, and teachings: for ye well know that wee are comne as farre at least, as to you, in this holy errand of preaching the Gospell of Christ. 15 Not boasting of things without our mea∣sure, that is, of other mens labours, but having hope, when your faith is increa∣sed, that wee shall be en∣larged by you according to our rule abundantly.Not boasting our selves of things done beyond our line, and measure; and arrogating to our selves the praise of other mens labours; but well hoping, then when your faith is increased, the notice and propagation thereof will be a meanes to enlarge our happy successe abun∣dantly, to others of the Gentiles, whom the rule and charge of God hath limitted us unto. So verse 16. CAP. XI. 1 Would to God you could beare with mee a little in my folly, and in∣deed beare with mee.I Do well know that the successe of the doctrine de∣pends much upon the authority and good reputation of the teacher; give me leave therefore, since the false apostles are so apt to set forth themselves, and to dispa∣rage mee, to boast a little of my selfe; and indeed yee do give me leave. 2 For I am jealous over you with godly jealousie: for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste vir∣gin to Christ.I must crave pardon to do thus; for I am jealous over you with godly jealousie; for I by my ministery, have espoused you unto one husband, even to Christ; and I
would be loath yee should be carried away with any strange love; but would faine present you as a chaste vir∣gin to Christ. For if these emulous preachers,4 For if hee that com∣meth preacheth another Iesus, whom we have not preached; or if yee receive another Spirit, which yee have not received, or ano∣ther Gospell which yee have not accepted, yee might well beare with him. whom ye so much ma∣gnifie, did preach to you a truer Messias, then we do; or if by them ye did receive a better, & more powerfull spirit then ye have received by us, &c. ye might well applaud them, and stand out for them; but now, seeing they preach the same Christ with us, and pretend to give the same spirit, and deliver the same Gospell, what reason can there be, that wee who first brought you to this Christ, by this Gospell, and by whom the miraculous gifts of the Spirit were first dealt amongst you, should be neglected in comparison of them? For if I be not so eloquent in my speech as some of them, yet my knowledge is not short of theirs;6 But though I be rude in speech, yet not in know∣ledge, but we have beene throughly made manifest among you in all things. but what need I say thus to you, who upon good experience know well and throughly what we are? Is this a reason of my contempt amongst you,7 Have I committed an offence in abasing my selfe, that you might be exalted, because I have preached to you the Gospell of God freely? that I lived in an homely fashion with you, and abased my selfe for your spirituall advantage, so to preach the Gos∣pell freely amongst you, that in the meane while, I earned my owne living? I made my selfe beholden, for maintenance,8 I robbed other Chur∣ches, taking wages of them to do you service. to other Churches, taking wages of them, to do you service. And lest ye should thinke I aime at some further pro∣vision from you hereafter,10 As the truth of Christ is in mee, no man shall stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia. I do solemnely sweare, as the truth of Christ is in mee, and preached by mee; I will not take maintenance from any of you, nor be bereft of this ground of my boasting, whiles I shall be in any part of the regions of Achaia. But as I do preach freely amongst you, so I will do;12 But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them which desire occasiō, that where∣in they glory, they may be found even as wee. that I may cut off all occasion of advantage, and excepti∣on from those false Apostles, that seeke occasion; for they boast of this, as a meritorious act of theirs, that they take nothing of you for their preaching; I will not therefore herein give them cause to say they go beyond me; but will be equall unto them, in this, wherein they so much glory. For even satan himselfe,14 And no marvell; for Sathan himselfe is trans∣formed into an Angel of light. though hee be indeed an un∣cleane spirit of darknesse; yet to deceive men the better, doth oft times put himselfe into the forme of a glorious, heavenly, lightsome Angell. I know it is an argument of weaknesse, and folly,16 I say againe, Let no man thinke me a foole: if otherwise, yet as a foole receive mee, that I may boast my selfe a little. for a man to boast of himselfe, and to set forth his owne praises; yet, now yee force me to it, let no man impute
this to mee, as folly: or if ye will needs take it so, let mee for the time take the priviledge, and liberty of folly, to bragge of my selfe a while. 17 That which I speake, I speake it not after the Lord, but, as it were, foo∣lishly, in this confidence of boasting.That which I shall now speake, I am content that it appeare as spoken in a certaine humane, and (as ye may construe it) a vaine and fond manner, and not as from the Lord; I meane, that I do thus confidently glory of my selfe unto you; but if the occasion (which is my owne defence, and the vindication of my Apostleship from contempt) be well considered, it will be found that this boasting is both necessary, and holy. 18 Seing that many glo∣ry after the flesh, I will gory also.Seing your false Apostles do vaunt, and bragge of their priviledges, in these outward, and worldly mat∣ters, why may I not be allowed to do so also? If yee construe this as foolish, yet yee may very well beare with it; for ye suffer fooles gladly, because ye your selves are wise.19 For yee suffer fooles gladly, seeing yee your selves are wise. 20 For yee suffer, if a man bring you into bon∣dage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himselfe, if a man smite you on the face.I well see that your wisdome (such as it is) hath made you very patient, in other occasions; my emulous adver∣saries have wrought strangely upon you, and have sped well; you can be content that they should make slaves of you, and pillage you, and prey upon you at pleasure; that they should bragge of themselves causelesly, and unjust∣ly; that they should smite and censure you as they list. I meane, that they should smite you in your reputati∣on, by reproches, and contumelies; as they do us much more; taxing us, as if wee were weake and worthlesse men; wherein yet they are mistaken, and have foully wronged us; for wherein soever any of them thinkes that he hath cause to be bold, and confident, let mee speake (as they may take it) foolishly, I am bold also,21 I speake as concer∣ning reproach, as though wee had beene weake: howbeit soever any is bold, I speake foolishly, I am bold also. and dare enter into comparison with him. Do they boast to be the ministers of Christ? I speake (you may thinke) foolishly,23 Are they ministers of Christ? I speake as a foole, I am more. but truly; I am more then they boast to be, an Apostle, &c. Five severall times was I scourged by the Jewes, ac∣cording to the utmost rigour of their punishment in this kinde; receiving each time fortie lashes, save one.24 Of the Iewes five times received I forty stripes save one. 25 A night and a day I have beene in the deepe.I have beene a night and a day, after my shipwrack, in the sea, beaten with the waves. Besides these outward miseries and dangers, I have beene dayly macerated inwardly, and deeply afflicted with the common cares,28 Besides these things that are without, that which commeth upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. and feares of all the Churches of Christ. 29 Who is offended and I burne not?Who is offended, and I am not tormented with sor∣row, and consumed with zeale of the redresse?
If I must needs glory,30 If I must needs glo∣ry, I will glory of the things which concerne mine infirmities. I will glory of those things which are accounted my miseries, and disgraces, as of my scourgings, hunger, nakednesse, persecutions. Yea, I will glory of my very flight. I was hard driven for my life,33 And through a win∣dow in a basket was I let downe, by the wall, and e∣scaped his hands. and out of a desire to reserve my selfe for the further use, and benefit of the Church, and service of my God, I was content to be let downe out of a window in a basket, and escaped. CAP. XII. BUt I restraine my selfe; it is not expedient,1 It is not expedient for me, doubtlesse, to glo∣ry, I will come to visions, & revelations of the Lord. doubtlesse for mee to glory of those things, which I have done, and suffered for Christ, and his Church; I will onely glance a little at those visions, and revelations, wherein they thinke to over-top me. I know, and was acquainted with a man,2 I knew a man in Christ above fourteene yeares a∣goe, whether in the body, I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I cannot tell, God knoweth: such a one caught up to the third heaven. not in the flesh, so much, as in Christ; (which I speake not out of a∣ny vaine ostentation, but in a sincere respect to the glory of Christ) who above fourteene yeares agoe (so long have I smothered this revelation of mine) was caught up (whether in body, or in an extasie of soule, I know not, God knoweth) into the highest, (which is the empyreall) heaven, the blessed seat of God and his Saints. I knew, I say,3 And I knew such a man (whether in the body or out of the body, I can∣not tell, &c. such a man (whether in body or in exta∣sie of spirit, I cannot tell, God knoweth;) That he was taken up into that heavenly paradise of God, and there heard, and saw unspeakable things; such as he neither may, nor can utter.4 How that hee was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawfull for any man to ut∣ter. I will not, out of my modesty,5 Of such a one will I glory, yet of my selfe I wil not glory, but in mine in∣firmities. tell you that I was the man; but of such a man you will give me leave to glory; as for my selfe, when my name comes into mention, yee shall not heare me to glory in any thing, but in mine in∣firmities. Neither had I this one vision only, but very many re∣velations from God; with the number whereof, lest I should be too much puffed up, (as our fraile nature is ea∣sily transported) there was, through the holy permission and wise ordination of God, way given to a strong ten∣tation of concupiscence, cast into me by Satan, to hum∣ble and afflict me, lest I should be exalted above mea∣sure.7 And lest I should bee exalted above measure, through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to mee a thorne in the flesh, the messenger of Sathan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.
8 For this thing I be∣sought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.Whereupon, I oft, and earnestly besought God, that he would be pleased to take off the tempter; and to rid mee from that impetuous, and troublesome suggestion. 9 And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weaknes. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infir∣mities, that the power of Christ may rest upon mee.And he said unto me; content thy selfe to struggle a while with this temptation; and know that it is suffici∣ent, that I doe by my grace uphold, and defend thee from the prevailing thereof; well maist thou endure to be exercised with it, whiles I shall savegard thee by my grace from the dāger of it; for were there not such weak∣nesses as these, to which fraile humane flesh is subject, there should not be occasion for mee to magnifie my power, and mercy to men, in giving them strength to overcome, and, in the end, victory; Since therefore it is thus, good cause have I, to resolve to glory in mine infirmities; by which the power, and goodnes of Christ are so much more advanced, and glorified. 10 For when I am weake, then am I strong.For, when I am weakest in my selfe, then is God most strong in mee, and makes me most strong in him, by that power of faith & patience, and holy courage, which he puts into me. 11 For in nothing am I behinde the very chie∣fest Apostles, though I bee nothing.For, though I be nothing as of my selfe, yet, through the grace of God inabling me, I am not inferiour to the very chiefest Apostles, either in my abilities, or labours. 12 Truly, the signes of an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signes and wonders, and mighty deeds.Truly, there was good proofe of my Apostleship a∣mongst you; God gave great, and undoubted testimony therunto, in that marvellous patience which he wrought in me, and in those admirable signes, and wonders, and miraculous deeds which he wrought by me. 13 For what is it wherein ye were inferiour to other Churches, except it be that I my selfe was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong.What one point, then, is there, wherein ye Corinthi∣ans are inferiour to other Churches; seeing your Apo∣stle that converted you is not below theirs: except per∣haps this be the matter; that I your Apostle was not chargeable to you, as theirs have beene; this is a wrong that ye may well forgive. 14 For the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.For, though it be the difference betwixt spirituall, and carnall parents; that the spirituall are provided for, by their children, whereas the carnall parents provide for their children; yet I will herein affect to that which your bodily parents are wont to doe, rather to lay up for you, my spirituall children, then to receive any maintenance from you. 15 And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, &c.And I will very galdly, not only lay out my substance, but lay downe my life for you; although, I am not re∣quited accordingly; for the more abundantly I love you, the lesse am I loved againe. 16, 17 But be it so: I did not burden you: neverthe∣lesse being crafty, I caught you with guile: did I make a gaine of you by any of them, whom I sent unto you?But, though I did not charge you my selfe; yet my emulous detractors are ready to say, that I dealt crafti∣ly
with you, for though I did not burden you in person, yet that I made a prey of you, and raised booties from you by those which I sent unto you. Againe,19 Againe, thinke you that we excuse our selves unto you? we speak before God in Christ, but we doe all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying. doe ye thinke that we stand so much upon our excuses, for our owne sakes, that we may come cleare off from you? no, we speak before God, in Christ, as calling him to witnesse our sincerity; wee doe, and speake all this for your good, and edification. For, I feare, lest when I come,20 For I feare lest when I come, I shall not finde you such as I would; and that I shall be found unto you, such as ye would not, &c. I shall not finde you so free, and innocent from these offences, wherewith I have charged you, as I would; and that you shall finde me so sharpe, and severe towards you, as will not be pleasing to you, &c. And lest, when I come againe to you,21 And lest when I come againe, my God wil humble me, among you, and that I shall bewaile many which have sinned already, and have not re∣pented of the uncleannesse and fornication. my God give me cause of sorrow and humiliation for your unprofici∣ency, and manifold disorders; and that I shall be occasi∣oned to grieve, and mourne for many enormious sinners which have given publique offence, and have not pro∣fessed their repentance for their uncleannesses, and forni∣cations, &c. CAP. XIII. TWise have I beene with you already;1 This is the third time I am comming to you: in the mouth of two, &c. and now I am this third time comming to you; every one of my commings to you are as so many severall witnesses a∣gainst you; now you know it is the word of the Law, that in the mouth of two, &c. I told you before in my other epistle,2 I told you before, and foretell you as if I were present the second time, and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all other, that if I come againe I will not spare. and now I fore∣tell you againe, in this second letter, as if I were present in person with you; (my epistle supplying my bodily presence) that I would have it notified to them, which heretofore have scandalously sinned; and to all other guilty persons, that, if I come againe, they must expect all due severity from me. Since ye are ready to contemne my meeknesse,3 Since ye seek a proof of Christ, speaking in me, which to you wards is not weake, but is mighty in you. and patience, and hereupon make question of the power of Christ, speaking in mee; which of all others ye have least cause to doe, having felt in your selves the happy effica∣cy of the Spirit of Christ, which hath shewed it selfe mighty in operation, within you. For that Saviour of ours,4 For though he was crucified through weak∣nesse, yet he liveth by the power of God; for we al∣so are weake in him, but we shall live with him by the power of God to∣ward you. though he was by his owne voluntary dispensation, in the weaknesse of our humane flesh, crucified; yet, in and on the power of his Godhead,
he liveth for ever; even so also we, that are his members, and even we his Apostles, are by unbeleeving worldlings judged weake in and with him; but, we shall live with him gloriously, by that mighty power of God, which he doth, and shall make good unto us; the proofe whereof, he hath effectually shewed in, and to you. 5 Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith, prove your owne selves; know ye not your owne selves, how that Iesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?Ye need not, O Corinthians, goe further then to your owne hearts, for a proofe of our Apostleship, and pow∣er; Examine ye your selves only, whether ye have faith in Christ; prove your owne hearts; can ye be such stran∣gers in your owne breasts, as not to know that Christ Jesus is in you? certainly ye cannot but know that he is in you, except ye be reprobates. 6 But I trust that yee shall know that wee are not reprobates.So as ye must needs either acknowledge and reve∣rence our Apostleship, or yeeld your selves to be repro∣bates: But I trust ye shall know, and be more and more convinced, that we are the chosen ministers of Christ, & not reprobates. 7 Now I pray to God that ye doe no evill, not that wee should appeare approved, but that yee should doe that which is honest, though wee be as reprobates.Now I pray God so to keep you upright in his feare, that ye may doe no evill; which I doe not wish for our owne sakes, that we might be hereby approved and gra∣ced in the successe of our ministerie, but chiefely, if not only, for yours; that ye may be preserved in a course of well doing, whatsoever become of us in the opinion of men. 8 For we can doe no∣thing against the truth, but for the truth.For we cannot exercise the power of our Apostleship in punishing, or censuring those that live justly, truly, conscionably; but in the countenancing, and incoura∣ging of them rather, and opposing the contrary. 9 For we are glad whē we are weake, and ye are strong: and this also wee wish, even your perfecti∣on.Let my detractors cast upon me the imputation of weaknesse, because I am not too stirring amongst you; I am glad to be held thus weake, when as my quietnesse is rather caused through your innocence, then my de∣fect: That which we wish, and are ambitious of, is your perfection, though it be with our owne disgrace. 11 Be perfect, bee of good comfort, be of one minde, live in peace.Labour towards perfection of holinesse and obedi∣ence, &c.
THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE GALATIANS. CAP. I. WHo gave himselfe to death,4 Who gave himselfe for our sinnes, that hee might deliver us from this present evill world, accor∣ding to the will of God, &c. for the saving of us from our sinnes, that he might deliver us from the corruption of this present wicked world, and from the condemnation due thereunto; according to the eternall counsell, and good pleasure of God, our heavenly Father. I marvell that ye are so soone removed from Christ your Saviour,6, 7 I marvell that you are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto a∣nother Gospel, which is not another; but there bee some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. which hath so graciously vouchsafed to call you to the profession of his name, unto another do∣ctrine (cōcerning the conjoyning of the law with Christ) which is by the teachers thereof called a Gospell; But in truth, it is no Gospell at all; neither can there be any other Gospell besides that truth of God, which ye have received from us; howsoever there be some false teachers that trouble, and distract your hearts, and labour to pervert, and adulterate the only true Gospell of Christ. But though we, or, if it could be possible, an Angell from heaven, should preach any other doctrine to you, under pretence of a Gospell, then that which ye have re∣ceived already from us, let him be defied, and accursed.8 But though wee, or, an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospell unto you, then that which wee have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Thus confident am I of the truth of the Gospell,10 For doe I now per∣swade men, or God? or doe I seek to please men? For if I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ. upon sure grounds; for doe I now herein goe about to be ap∣proved of men, or of God rather? Surely it is not the allowance or applause of men, that I seek; for if I made this the scope and drift of my labours, to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ, but of men, rather. It is no humane, but a divine Gospell.11 Is not after man. Who had designed, and destined me,15 Who separated me from my mothers wombe & called me by his grace. even from my mothers wombe, to this worke of my Apostleship, and of his mere grace and mercy called me. To reveale his sonne Christ unto me,16 To reveale his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen, immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood. not for my own
private good only, but, that I might declare him a∣mongst the heathen, immediately I consulted not with any mortall man, for his information in this mystery of the Gospell. 19 Save Iames the Lords brother.Save James the kinsman or cosen german of Christ. CAP. II. 2 And I went up by revelation, and communi∣cated unto them that Gos∣pell, which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of reputation, lest by any meanes I should runne, or had run in vaine.I Went up, not of mine owne head, but by the appoint∣ment, and revelation of God; and because there was a seeming difference betwixt the course that I tooke in my preaching, and planting the Gospell, and theirs (they permitting circumcision where they preached, I not per∣mitting it) I was willing to communicate unto them the course which I held among the Gentiles; but not in open hearing, but privately, to those which were in chiefe account; viz. Peter, James, and John; lest by any meanes I should have beene thought to have gone a wrong way to worke, in my ministerie. 3 But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greeke, was compelled to be circumcised.But so ordered I the matter, that not so much as Ti∣tus, who was with me in that journey, (being a Gentile and a Grecian) was compelled (notwithstanding the im∣portunity of some) to be circumcised. 4 And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spie out our li∣berty, which we have in Christ Iesus.And that chiefely, because of some false brethren of my nation, the Jewes, who were secretly, and under∣hand brought in, and set, as spies, to prye into that li∣berty which we have in Christ Jesus; whereby wee doe justly hold our selves freed from these legall ceremonies and observances; and laboured by their inforcement, to draw us unto that bondage of the Mosaicall law, from which we were delivered by Christ. 5 To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an houre, that the truth of the Gospell might con∣tinue with you.To whom we yeelded not an inch, nor gave subjecti∣on for so much as an houre, but opposed them effectu∣ally; that ye might well finde that it was no other, then the truth of the Gospel, which we had delivered to you, and that ye might resolve to persist therein. 6 But of these who seemed to bee somewhat (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter, God ac∣cepteth no mans person.)But of these great Apostles, who carried much sway in the Church, and seemed persons of eminence, what∣soever they were, all is one to mee; (God doth not ac∣cept of any mans person, as more regarding him, be∣cause he is great, learned, well-spoken) even the best of them in conference, added nothing to mee, nor taught mee any thing that I knew not. 7 But contrariwise when they saw that the Gospell of the uncircum∣cision was committed un∣to me, &c.But contrariwise, when they saw that I was made the
Apostle of the Gentiles, as Peter was of the Jewes. So verse 8. And when Peter, James, and John,9 And when Iames, Cephas, and Iohn, who seemed to be pillars, per∣ceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to mee, and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, &c. who were justly accounted to be the pillars of the Church, perceived that great measure of grace, and mercy, which God had vouchsafed unto mee, in so miraculous a call to my Apostleship, they did willingly admit me, and Barna∣bas into the society, and partnership of this great worke; consenting that wee should go to convert the heathen, and they the Jewes. Thus wee went about our great and holy taske;11 But when Peter was come to Antioch, I with∣stood him to the face, be∣cause he was to be blamed. but when Peter was come to Antioch, where I was, I with∣stood him openly, and professedly; because indeed hee was worthy of blame, and opposition. For, before that,12 For before that cer∣taine came from Iames, he did eate with the Gen∣tiles: but when they were come, hee withdrew and separated himselfe, fearing them which were of the Circumcision. certaine Jewes came thither from James; he did familiarly converse at meales, and upon all other occasions, with the Gentiles, as making no diffe∣rence betwixt them and Jewes; but when those Jewes were come to him, from James, he withdrew and separa∣ted himselfe from the Gentiles, as if they had beene un∣cleane, and unfit to be conversed with; belike fearing the offence of those Jewes which were newly come unto him. And the other Jewes which were with him before,13 And the other Iewes dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barna∣bas also, &c. following his example, dissembled also with him, and withdrew themselves from the Gentiles, insomuch as Barnabas also (my companion) began to be drawn away with them. But when I saw that they halted thus;14 But when I saw that they walked not upright∣ly according to the truth of the Gospell, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou being a Iew livest af∣ter the manner of Gen∣tiles, and not as doe the Iewes, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do, &c? and went not sincerely on, according to the truth of the Gospell (wherein wee have learned that the partition wall is bro∣ken downe, and that in Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentile) I said boldly unto Peter before them all; If thou being naturally borne a Jew, livest in a free fashion, after the manner of the Gentiles, without any regard of the strict observation of the Jewish rites, why doest thou compell those, which are borne Gentiles, to live accor∣ding to the rules of the Jewish strictnesse? Wee who are Jewes by nature,15, 16 Wee who are Iewes by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the workes of the Law, but by the faith of Iesus Christ, even we have beleeved in Iesus Christ. and therefore (as it might seeme) peculiarly chosen, and priviledged by God, and not Gentiles, who have beene heretofore cen∣sured, and rejected for impure and uncleane persons: Even wee, well knowing that a man is not justified by the workes of the Law, but by faith in Jesus Christ, have beleeved in Jesus, &c.
17 But if while wee seeke to bee justified by Christ, wee our selves al∣so are found sinners, is therefore Christ the mi∣nister of sinne? God forbid.Thus I said to Peter, and that justly and truly; How is it then? if wee leaving our confidence to be justified by the workes of the Law, and seeking to be justified by Christ, be yet found to bee sinners; shall wee therefore say that Christ came to strip us of that righteousnesse, which we might have hoped for in the Law, and to leave us as sinfull and polluted men, under the state of sinne, and death? God forbid, that wee should teach such do∣ctrine. 18 For if I build againe the things which I de∣stroyed, I make my selfe a transgressour.For, as for me, I have alwaies hitherto preached the death and abolition of sinne, by the power of Christs death, and if I should now preach the power and pre∣valence of sinne, over the soule (notwithstanding that death of Christ) I should build up that, which I have formerly destroyed; and make my selfe justly censurable. 19 For I through the law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God.It is not the justice of Christ, that voids the Law, or disables it from justifying us; no, it is the Law it selfe that kils her followers alone; I my selfe by the power and rigour of the Law, am a dead man to the Law; inso∣much as it condemnes mee for not keeping it; and puts me out of all hope and confidence in my selfe, or it; that I might seeke unto God, for that life of faith, which is onely to be found in, and by Christ. 20 I am crucified with Christ, neverthelesse I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in mee, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God.As my Saviour was crucified, so am I crucified with him; and by the power of his death am dead to my sins, and corruptions: But though I be dead, one way, yet I live another: yet I know not whether I may properly say, that I live, or rather that Christ lives in mee; for as my soule animates my body, so Christ animates (as it were) my soule; and moves and workes in me; and the life which I now live, is not a carnall, but a spirituall life; not the life of nature, but of grace, wrought in mee by the power of faith in the Sonne of God, &c. 21 I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if righ∣teousnesse come by the Law, then Christ is dead by the Law.Howsoever other men may be joyning Christ and the Law together; I for my part will not be so injurious to the grace of Christ, as to frustrate it by adding a partner to it; for surely if righteousnesse be to be had by the workes of the Law, then Christ is dead in vaine. CAP. III. 1 O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Iesus Christ hath beene evidently set forth, crucified among you?O Yee foolish Galatians, how comes it to passe, that ye are so bewitched, by your glozing, and false tea∣chers, as to be carried away from your obedience to the truth of the Gospell; yee, which have had Christ Jesus
so clearly, and openly preached unto you, as if yee had seene him hanging upon the crosse before you. Let me aske you but this question;2 This onely would I learne of you, Received ye the Spirit by the workes of the Law, or by the hea∣ring of faith? Yee beleeve that ye have received the Spirit of God; tell mee then, whence had you it? did you receive it by doing the workes of the Law; by the gift of these circumcisers? or did yee re∣ceive it upon your hearing, and beleeving of the Gospell, and that word of faith which ye heard of us? Are ye so foolish, as having begunne in the profession of the doctrine of justification by faith,3 Are ye so foolish? ha∣ving begun in the Spirit, are yee now made perfect by the flesh? ye will now seeke to be perfected by circumcision in the flesh, and other carnall observances? Have ye in vaine suffered so much for the defence and profession of the Gospell? if, at least, it be in vaine;4 Have yee suffered so many things in vaine? if it be yet in vaine. as cer∣tainly it is in vaine, if ye now flye off from the sincerity, and truth thereof. The Apostles of Christ, who by laying on of hands gave you the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, and wrought strange wonders among you, did they do it upon your doing of the workes of the Law, or upon your receit of the doctrine of faith?5 He therefore that mi∣nistreth to you the Spi∣rit, and worketh miracles among you▪ doth hee it by the workes of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? Preached before unto Abraham,8 Preached before the Gospell unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all na∣tions be blessed. even ere he was cir∣cumcised, this glad tidings of the Gospell; saying, Thy name shall be used in all benedictions; and thou shalt be a patterne and rule of blessings to all nations. So then they which do truly beleeve, are so blessed, as faithfull Abraham was.9 So then, they which be of faith, are blessed with faithfull Abraham. For, as many as depend upon the workes of the Law for their justification, are under the curse, in not perfor∣ming the Law; as it is written: Cursed, &c.10 For as many as are of the workes of the Law, are under the curse. &c. The Law doth not stand upon the requiring of our faith as a condition of our justification, and salvation; but stands upon these termes; The man that doth them, shall in, and by them obtaine life.12 And the Law is not of faith: but the man that doth them shall live in them. Christ hath redeemed us from that curse,13 Christ hath redee∣med us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us: for it is writ∣ten: Cursed is every one that hangeth on tree, &c. which must needes follow upon the breach of the Law; in that hee, who was in his owne person most holy, and blessed; in the person of us sinners, and for us (for whose sinnes he came to satisfie his Father) hee is made a curse: as it is writ∣ten, &c. See Deut. 21.23. That the blessing which was promised to Abraham,14 That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles, through Ie∣sus Christ. might, &c. that wee through faith, might receive that good Spirit of sanctification, which hee hath promised. Brethren,15 Brethren, I speake after the manner of men: though it be but a mans co∣venāt, yet if it be cōfirmed, no man disanulleth or ad∣deth thereto. let mee fetch an argument even from your humane affaires; If it be but a mans covenant, yet if it be ratified, and confirmed, no man takes upon him, to disa∣null,
or to alter it: How much more shall the covenant, that God himselfe made with Abraham, be firme and in∣violable. 16 Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, and to his seedes, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed which is Christ.Now to Abraham, and to his seed were the promises made; I will be the God of thee, and thy seed; And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; And though the word Seed, do in the signification thereof imply a collection, or multitude, yet in this sense it is, in the use, and intention of God, restrained to one, even Christ; who is, by a specialty, that seed of Abraham, by, and through whom the blessing is derived to all nations. And this I inferre hereupon; this being an Evangeli∣call covenant, which was made before hand, with Abra∣ham, of blessing and salvation, to be had by, and in his seede, Christ; it cannot be that the law which was given foure hundred and thirty yeares after, should disanull it; and make this so ancient, and firme a promise of none effect.17 And this I say, that the covenant that was con∣firmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was foure hundred and thirty yeares after, cannot disa∣null, that it should make the promise of none effect. For the law and the promise cannot both stand toge∣ther; if righteousnesse and salvation be by the workes of the Law, then it is not to be had, by vertue of the pro∣mise; But God gave it to Abraham, by promise;18 For if the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of promise; but God gave it to Abraham by promise. there∣fore not upon workes. 19 Wherefore then serveth the Law? it was added because of trans∣gressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made, and it was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.If the promise then were sufficient; wherefore serves the Law? why came that so long after, if the promise, made so long before, were enough to save men? surely there are other uses of the law, and other occasions of the delivering of it. As (for one) the law was given to bridle and restraine the transgressions of men; to shew them their sinnes and imperfections, that in a sense of their vilenesse, they might seeke unto Christ, who is that seed in whom the promise of the blessing was both made and accomplished; and this law was ordained and given of God, by the ministery of Angels, in the hand of a third person, that should go betweene God, and his people, as a messenger or mediator; even Moses, who was to take the Law from the hand of Angels, and de∣liver it to the people. 20 Now a Mediator is not a Mediator of one, but God is one.Now a Mediator implies a difference; there cannot be a Mediator, where there is but one side; God being one therefore, the people must be the other party; and thereupon it will follow, that the law is so farre from an intendment of giving life, as that in the delivery of it, it argues a difference, betwixt God and his people. 21 Is the Law then a∣gainst the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had beene a law given, which could have given life, verily righte∣ousnesse should have been by the law.What then? is God in these proceedings, contrary to himselfe, in giving a law and promises contrary to each other? as if hee would have saved men by the Law first;
and then altering his purpose resolved to save them by his promise? God forbid; No, God is constant to his owne determinations herein. For if men could have at∣tained to life by the keeping of the Law; there had been no use of the righteousnesse of faith. But now the Scripture hath made knowne to us our universall sinfulnesse, wherewith every soule is tainted, and bound over to death; so as no man can looke for any advantage from the law; so as now there is just roome made for the necessary supply of the promises of salva∣tion by faith in Christ, to be obtained of all them, that beleeve in him.22 But the Scripture hath concluded all under sinne, that the promise by faith of Iesus Christ might be given to them that be∣leeve. But, before this happy supply of faith came, we were all obnoxious unto the law, and to the condemnation threatned to the breakers of it; and were (as it were) shut up close prisoners under the law, and reserved for this comfortable release of faith, in that Saviour which should afterward be revealed.23 But before faith came, wee were kept un∣der the law, shut up unto the faith, which should afterwards be revealed. Wherefore the law was not intended to perfect us, as of it selfe, but onely to bee our Schoole-master to train us up unto the higher forme of Christ; that by it we being convinced of our owne imperfections, and dan∣gers, might seeke for our justification by faith in Christ.24 Wherefore the law was our Schoole-master to bring us unto Christ, that wee might be justified by faith. But after that faith is once wrought in the heart, wee are no longer under the tyrannie, rigour, malediction of the Law; which is as the ferule of that hard Schoole-master.25 But after that faith is come, we are no longer un∣der a Schoole-master. For ye are all now the children of God, by faith in Je∣sus Christ,26 For yee are all the children of God by faith in Christ Iesus. even the children of God, not the slaves or pupils of the law; and therefore do now obey the law, as out of the duty of sonnes, not out of constraint; as a rule of life, not as a meanes of your justification. For as many of you as have beene baptized into Christ, have made Christ your owne;27 For as many of you, as have beene baptized in∣to Christ, have put on Christ. and are cloathed with his graces, with his merits. God makes no difference now betwixt nations, and persons: all are alike, yea all are one to him, in Christ;28 There is neither Iew, nor Greeke; there is nei∣ther bond, nor free; there is neither male, nor female; for yee, &c. are all one in Christ Iesus. his acceptation doth not single out a Jew from a Greeke, but his mercy is indifferently extended to them all, with∣out all respect of persons. And if ye be Christs, then are ye that speciall seed of Abraham, to which the promise is made; and by conse∣quence, ye are the inheriters of the blessing promised.29 And if ye be Christs, then are yee Abrahams seed, and heires according to the promise.
CAP. IIII. 1 Now I say, that the heire, as long as hee is a child, differeth nothing from a servant, though hee be lord of all.IT is with man under the law, as with a child under wardship or pupillage: let the child be never so great an heire, yet so long as he is under age, he is held downe; and differeth nothing, in his usage, from a servant, but is kept straitly in, under tutors, and governours, untill the full time limited by his fathers wil, or set by the laws, be expired. 3 Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the ele∣ments of the world:Even so it is with us, in this spirituall minority of ours we were under the bondage, and wardship of the law of ceremonies: 4 But when the fulnesse of the time was come, God sent forth his Sonne made of a woman, made under the law,But, when the time, which our heavenly Father had prefixed, for our freedome, was fully comne, God sent forth his Sonne, made of a woman, and made voluntari∣ly subject unto the law, To redeeme us that were in bondage to the law, that we might now attaine those full and ample priviledges,5 To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the ad∣option of sonnes. and liberties, which belong to us as sonnes, by the vertue of his gracious adoption. 6 And because yee are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.And, because ye are his truly-adopted sonnes; God hath given you the comfortable sense, and assurance of his mercy; in that he hath given unto your hearts, the holy Spirit, even the Spirit of his Sonne; which with an holy vehemency inables you to lay claime to God as your owne, and to speake to him by the name of Abba, Father. 9 But now after that ye have knowen God, or ra∣ther are knowen of God, how turne ye againe to the weake and beggerly ele∣ments, whereunto ye de∣sire againe to be in bōdage?But now after that ye have knowne God, and his will; yea rather, after that God hath so knowne you, as to ac∣cept you to mercy, and to reveale his will unto you; how is it that ye being thus indeared to God, yet turne backe to the base, and impotent ceremonies of the law, from which ye were freed, as if ye were fond of that bon∣dage whereof ye are acquited? 10 Ye observe daies, and moneths, and times, and yeares.Yee stand upon the Judaicall observations of those new Moones, and Sabbaths, of the seaventh moneth, of the solemne festivities, and of Jubilees, which the Mo∣saicall law hath prescribed. 12 Brethren, I beseech you be as I am: for I am as ye are, ye have not iju∣red me at all.Brethren, I beseech you be ye so affected to me, as I am to you; and be ready to follow my example in lea∣ving these rituall observations, as I am ready in all indif∣ferent things to conforme my selfe unto you. And if I have spoke sharply to you in this point, thinke not that it is out of any discontentment, or private displeasure a∣gainst you; for yee have not wronged me at all. 13 Yee know how through infirmitie of the flesh, I preached the Gos∣pell unto you at the first.Ye know that when I first came amongst you and
preached the Gospell to you, though I was then much opposed, and outwardly afflicted, and demeaned my self in an homely, and meane manner. Yet ye then did not despise or reject me,14 And my temptation which was in the flesh, ye despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an An∣gell of God, even as Christ Iesus. because I was thus afflicted, and meane in my outward port and cariage; but received me with all alacrity, and reverence; so as if an Angell of God had comne amongst you, yea, if my Lord Jesus should in person have comne to you, yee could not have shewed more outward respect to him. Where is then that blessednesse, which ye spoke of?15 Where is then the blessednesse you spake of? for I beare you record, &c. professing how happy ye were in such a teacher, for I beare you record, &c. These false teachers make shew of much zealous affe∣ction that they beare you; as if they wooed your love;17 They zealously af∣fect you, but not well: yea, they would exclude, that you might affect them. but it is but colourable, and ill-grounded; they would draw away your respect to us, that ye might be wholly devoted to them. But it is good to be zealously affected towards good men, and upon good grounds alwaies;18 But it is good to be zealously affected alwaies in a good thing, and not onely when I am present with you. and when ye have once placed your good liking and opinion, as ye did once upon me, not to be easily removed from it; but to continue it still, as well in absence, as in presence. My little children,19 My little children, of whom I travaile in birth againe, untill Christ be for∣med in you. whom I have once begotten unto Christ, by the Gospell; and of whom (as being now re∣lapsed to Judaisme) I am now in travell againe, till I have recovered you to that sincere faith, and perfect li∣berty in Christ, which ye once had. I desire to be personally present with you, now,20 I desire to be pre∣sent with you now and to change my voice: for I stand in doubt of you. that I might frame, and alter my speech with you, according as I should see occasion, one while reproving, another while incouraging you; one while applauding you, and another while bemoaning and bewailing your danger; for, indeed I am in much doubt of you. Tell me, ye that have so much desire to fall backe,21 Tell me, ye that de∣sire to be under the law, do ye not heare the law? and to be under the bondage of the law, if ye have such a minde to Moses, doe but heare what Moses hath told you. For, it is written, you know, in him;22 For it is written, that Abraham had two sonnes, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a free-wo∣man. that Abraham had two sonnes, the one, Ismael, by his bond-woman Hagar, the other, Isaac, by his true wife, Sara. Abraham was indeed the naturall Father to them both, but, as for Ismael, who was the bond-womans sonne, he had nothing but nature in him;23 But he who was of the bond-woman, was borne after the flesh, but he of the free-woman was by promise. as he was con∣ceived in an ordinary manner, so, he had nothing but mere flesh, derived from Abraham; but Isaac, that was the sonne of Sara, the free-woman, and lawfull wife of
Abraham, was both extraordinarily conceived upon the promise made by the Angell, and was the sonne of Abrahams faith; to, and in whom the promise of bles∣sing made to Abraham was accomplished. 24 Which things are an allegory; for these are the two covenants, the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bon∣dage, which is Hagar.Which, as it is a true history, so it is an allegory also of spirituall things; for these two mothers resemble, and expresse the two covenants; Sara, the covenant of grace; and Hagar, the covenant of workes; This Hagar then bringeth forth children to bondage. 25 For this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Ierusalem, which now is, and is in bōdage with her children.Which same thing is also typed forth unto us by Si∣nai, and Jerusalem; For this Hagar is a figure of mount Sinai in Arabia (out of the bounds of the promised land) where the law was given, and representeth the pre∣sent Jerusalem, as it now stands, under the bondage of the law, to which she, and her children have subjected themselves. 26 But Ierusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.But the spirituall Jerusalem, which is the Church of the new Testament, gathered by the heavenly grace of God, is free from all these slaveries of the ceremoniall law; which Church is the mother of us all, and commu∣cateth therefore her freedome unto us. 27 For it is written, Re∣joyce thou barren that bea∣rest not, breake forth and cry, &c.See Esay 54.1. Now brethren, we Christians are (as Isaac was) the sonnes of the freewoman,28 Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the chil∣dren of promise. and those to whom the pro∣mise of blessing is both made, and performed. 29 But as then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit, even so it is now.But, as then, Ismael, which was the merely naturall sonne of Abraham, persecuted Isaac, that was borne, above the power of nature, by the wonderfull worke of God, and also renued by the Spirit of God; Even so it is now; the sonnes of the bond-woman, those that will needs be slaves to the law, persecute, and oppose those free Christians, which know themselves exempted there-from. 30 Neverthelesse, what saith the scripture? cast out the bond-woman, and her son, for the son of the bond-woman shall not be heire with the son of the free-woman.Neverthelesse, even as Sara said to Abraham, Cast out the bond-woman and her sonne; for, &c. Even so hath God determined concerning the Jewish Syna∣gogue, and their abettors, which stand for the law, that he will cast them off, and bereave them of all the privi∣ledges of his Church, and the inheritance of children. 31 So then, brethren, we are not children of the bond-woman, but of the free.So then brethren, we see how to account our selves; we are not children of Hagar the bond-woman, that we should be under the law, but, of Sara the free-woman, that wee should be under grace.
CAP. V. STand fast, therefore, in that spirituall liberty,1 Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not intangled again with the yoak of bondage. from the law of ceremonies, wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not againe drawne into a willing bon∣dage, and servitude unto them. There is more in this your yeeldance to these rites,2 Behold, I Paul say un∣to you, that if ye be cir∣cumcised, Christ shall pro∣fit you nothing. then ye are aware of; Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if now, after yee have beene informed so fully in the truth of the Gospell, ye be circumcised, as in obedience to the law, Christ shall profit you nothing; ye doe, what in you lieth, frustrate the death of your Saviour. For, I testifie againe to every man,3 For I testifie againe to every man that is cir∣cumcised, that he is a deb∣tor to doe the whole law. that whosoever is circumcised, doth by this signe professe himselfe, and so becomes, bound to keepe the whole law, and every rite thereof; for circumcision is a badge of Judaisme; and whosoever yeeldeth thereunto, makes himselfe liable to all those manifold, and burdensome observations of the law. It is a fearefull, but most sure word;4 Christ is become of no effect unto you: whoso∣ever of you are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace. whosoever of you seeke to be justified by the law, hath renounced the benefit of grace, and Christ is becomne of no effect unto him; forasmuch as the purpose of Christs comming, and all his active, and passive obedience was to free us from the law, and to justifie and acquite us from our sinnes. For we who are renued by the Spirit of God,5 For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousnesse by faith. are by the same Spirit taught to expect full justification from faith in Christ, and not from the workes of the law. For in Jesus Christ, and his Kingdome, the Church,6 For in Iesus Christ, neither circumcision avai∣leth any thing, nor uncir∣cumcision, but faith which worketh by love. neither is any man the more respected for his circumci∣sion, nor lesse regarded for his uncircumcision; but eve∣ry man is accepted of God, according to that measure of true faith, which he hath in him; I meane not an idle and dead beleefe, but a lively and operative faith, such a one as worketh by love. Ye went on very forwardly, and commendably,7 Ye did run wel, who did hinder you, that yee should not obey the truth? in the course of Christianity; who did stand in your way, and stop those good proceedings of your obedience to the truth of the Gospell? Surely, this perswasion of retracting you,8 This perswasion com∣meth not out of him that calleth you. commeth not from God, who called you forward into this good way; but it comes from Satan and his wicked instru∣ments, your false teachers. But take heed, brethren,9 A little leaven leaven∣eth the whole lumpe. a little false doctrine may in∣fect and poison your whole profession.
10 I have confidence in you through the Lord; that you will be none other∣wise minded, but he that troubleth you, shall beare his judgement, whosoever he be.And I am confident in you, through the goodnesse of God working in you, that ye will not be transported thus lightly, with erroneous doctrine, but that ye will con∣tinue constant unto that truth, wherein you have beene informed; But whosoever he be that hath thus trou∣bled the peace of the Church, and laboured to seduce you, shall be sure to feele the just judgement of God up∣on him, for so great a sinne. And, whereas the false teachers have suggested to you, that I my selfe am a favourer of circumcision,11 And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why doe I yet suffer perse∣cution? then is the offence of the crosse ceased. and preach the lawfulnesse, and expediencie of it; they wrong both you, and me, in this mis-information; for, if I doe preach circumcision, why doe I yet suffer persecution? then that scandall and slander of the crosse, which the ad∣versaries cast upon us (in teaching that by Christ cruci∣fied, and not by the workes of the law, men are justifi∣ed) is utterly at an end; and all is peace betweene the Jewes, and us. 12 I would they were even cut off which trouble you.I would to God these injurious and vehement urgers of circumcision, and other Jewish rites, were utterly cut off; that the Church of Christ might be at peace. 13 For brethren, ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.For, brethren, ye have beene by vertue of your Chri∣stian profession, called into a liberty, and freedome from legall observations; Onely, make ye a good use of this freedome; and doe not so demeane your selves, as if yee thought that ye were hereby let loose to all inordinate∣nesse, and licentious courses; But so serve one another by love, as that ye have care of the edification of each other in godlinesse. 15 But if yee bite and devoure one another, take heed that ye be not consu∣med one of another.But, if ye fall foule upon each other, by secret hostili∣ties, and labour to undoe the fame, and good report of each other; and werry, and teare each other with facti∣ous oppositions, take heed lest ye be the authors of each others endlesse confusion. 16 This I say then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh.Walke ye, and live according to the information, and guidance of the holy Spirit of God; and ye shall not be carried away with the vaine and sinfull lusts of the flesh. 17 For the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, &c.For there is a continuall enmity betwixt the flesh, which is our corrupted nature, and the spirit, whereby we are regenerated; so as the flesh lusteth, &c. 18 But if ye be led of the spirit, ye are not under the law.But if ye be led by the Spirit of God, ye are not un∣der the bondage of the law; but doe, out of your free love unto God, yeeld cheerfull obedience to him. 19 Now the workes of the flesh are manifest, &c.Now the workes of our corrupted, and depraved na∣ture are manifest, &c.
And they that are Christs,24 And they that are Christs, have crucified the flesh with the affecti∣ons and lusts. have so farre crucified this corrupt nature, with the affections and lusts there∣of, as that, howsoever they have some remainders of life, in them; yet, they have not so much vigor, as to raigne, and rule in them. If then,25 If we live in the Spi∣rit, let us also walke in the Spirit. we be perswaded that the Spirit of God is in us, and that we have a true spirituall life in him, let us al∣so walke, so, as may become the guidance, and direction of the same Spirit. CAP. VI. BRethren, if a man, through weaknesse,1 Brethren, if a man bee overtaken in a fault; yee which are spiritual, restore such a one. be overtaken with some sinne, ye that are regenerate persons, and know what our nature is, restore such a one, &c. Beare ye mutually the burdens of each others infir∣mities;2 Beare ye one anothers burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. we all have our load, it must be our care, and de∣sire to ease each other in the bearing of them: and so in loving each other we shall fulfill the law of Christ. Let no man stand upon the points of his owne skill,3 For if a man thinke himselfe to be something, when he is nothing, he de∣ceiveth himselfe. righteousnesse, perfection; For, if a man thinke him∣selfe to be something, when indeed he is nothing, his o∣verweening befooles him. Let every man trie, and examine his owne actions,4 But let every man prove his owne worke, and then shall he have re∣joycing in himselfe alone, and not in another. by the rule of Gods word, and then shall he (finding them sincere and upright) finde cause of rejoycing in the testimonie of his owne conscience; and not stand upon the opinions of others. For every man shall be answerable to God for his owne actions, and not for other mens.5 For every man shall beare his owne burthen. Let him that is taught in the word, by way of just thankfulnesse, and retribution, communicate to him that teacheth him, in all outward good things;6 Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teacheth, in all good things. returning to him temporall blessings in lieu of those spirituall, which he receiveth from him. Let no man, when he unjustly drawes backe his hand from the maintenance of Gods ministers,7 Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for what∣soever a man soweth, that shall he also reape. pretend excu∣ses; Be not deceived; God is not mocked, and eluded by our shifts; but what, or howsoever a man soweth in the distribution of these earthly things this way; in the same manner, and measure shall he reape from the hands of God. He that bestoweth these outward good things only8 For he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reape corruption; but hee that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reape life everlasting.
upon the pampering of himselfe, and regards none, but his owne private pleasure, or profit, in disposing of them, that man shall be rewarded accordingly; for these carnall respects of his shall end in losse, and corruption; but hee that bestowes them to holy, and Spirituall purposes, being therein led and directed by the Spirit of God, shall by the goodnesse of that same Spirit, (graci∣ously remunerating him) receive eternall life. 10 As wee have there∣fore opportunity, let us do good to all men, especially unto them, who are of the houshold of faith.Let us be ready to do good, and liberally to distribute these earthly things to all, that have need, but especially to all our fellow Christians; and amongst them, yet more particularly, to those that have the oversight of this family of God. 12 As many as desire to make a faire shew in the flesh, they constraine you to be circumcised: onely lest they should suffer per∣secution for the crosse of Christ.As many as affect glory, and popularity, and their own ease, & safety, urge unto you a necessity of being circum∣cised; providing herein for their owne quiet, and indem∣nitie: lest they should from the Jewes suffer persecution, for preaching the full effect of the death, or crosse of Christ, without the workes of the Law. 13 For neither they themselves who are cir∣cumcised keepe the Law, but desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.For neither doe these Judaizing teachers themselves, though they be outwardly circumcised, keepe the Law in other things; so as it is plaine that they doe not urge these matters out of any true zeale to the Law, but one∣ly they would draw you in, that they might glory of the circumcision of your flesh, as if they had converted you to their Judaisme. 14 But God forbid that I should glory, save in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.Let them glory of what they will, boasting of the va∣lidity and use of their fleshly circumcision; but for mee, God forbid that I should glory in any thing, save in the benefit of the crosse, and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom the world is crucified to mee, so as it prevailes not against mee, to carry mee away from my holy courses: and I am crucified to the world, so as I af∣fect not the glory and vanity thereof. 15 For in Christ Iesus, neither circumcision avai∣leth any thing, nor uncir∣cumcision, but a new crea∣ture.For in Christ Jesus, and his acceptation, and in true Christianity, there is neither respect to circumcision, and the rest of those legall observations, or to any privi∣ledges thereby challenged; nor yet to uncircumcision, or any of that secular learning, and wisdome, which is bragged of among the Gentiles; nothing carries it there, but a new creature; he that is regenerate is a true servant of Christ, and is accordingly regarded of him. 16 And as many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them and mer∣cy, and upon the Israel of God.And as many as walke according to the rule, that I have in this my epistle commended unto you, seeking justification onely by Christ, without the workes of the law, peace be unto them, and mercy; and not to them onely, but to the whole Church of God, every where.
I have given you a true Apostolicall decision of the controversie moved amongst you:17 From henceforth let no man trouble me, for I beare in my body the markes of the Lord Iesus. let no man be further troublesome to me; but rest in this sentence of mine: well may I challenge this at your hands; for I beare in my body the markes of the sufferings which I have endured for the name of our Lord Jesus. THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. CAP. I. WHo hath blessed us, not with these outward favours of riches, and honour, and such like blessings, which are uncertaine, and transito∣ry; but with all spirituall blessings,3 Who hath blessed us with all spirituall blessings in heavenly places in Christ. which may fit us for those heavenly places, provi∣ded for us, in, and by Christ. Which blessings of his have beene bestowed upon us out of that infinite love, whereby he hath chosen us,4 According as hee hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. be∣fore the beginnings of the world, to this end and pur∣pose, and with this effect, that wee should be holy, and blamelesse, both in our disposition and conversation be∣fore him, approving our unfained love unto him in all things. Having by his eternall decree predestinated,5 Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Iesus Christ to himselfe, according to the good pleasure of his will. and fore-ordained us to be his adopted sonnes, in, and by Jesus Christ; not out of ought that was or should be in us, but according to his owne mere mercy, and the good plea∣sure of his owne will. All which God hath done for us,6 To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved. for the onely praise and glory of his infinite grace, and mercy; wherein hee hath made us (which were of our selves justly hatefull) to be accepted in his beloved Sonne Jesus Christ. In,7 In whom wee have redemption through his blood, the forgivenesse of sinnes, according to the riches of his grace. and by whom wee have redemption through his precious blood (which was paid as our ransome,) and full forgivenesse of all our sinnes, according to the abun∣dance of his mercy to us.
8 Wherein hee hath a∣bounded towards us in all wisedome and prudence.Wherein hee hath beene exceeding bountifull unto us, in imparting to us the rich treasures of spirituall wisdome, and prudence. 10 That in the dispensa∣tion of the fulnesse of times, he might gather to∣gether in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him.That in the fulnesse of time, which God in his wise dispensation, and providence had appointed, hee might call and gather together, under one head, Christ Jesus, all, both Angels in heaven, and men on earth, which per∣taine unto him. 11 In whom also wee have obtained an inheri∣tance.By whom also, and in whom, upon his gracious uni∣ting of us to him, wee have obtained an happy and glori∣ous inheritance, &c. 12 That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ.That our glory might be, to the praise and glory of him, who hath thus crowned and glorified us, who first here below beleeved in Christ. In whom also after that ye beleeved, yee were made sure, and sealed up for his, by that holy Spirit of his, which hee promised13 In whom also after that ye beleeved, yee were sealed with that holy Spi∣rit of promise: to send to all his elect, infallibly witnessing to your spirits, that yee are the sonnes of God. 14 Which is the earnest of our inheritance, untill the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.Which is to us beforehand, the certaine earnest, and pledge of our full inheritance to come, even untill that purchased possession of eternall life may be fully accom∣plished and stated upon us, to the praise of his glory. 18 That yee may know what is the hope of his calling, & what the riches of the glory of his inheri∣tance in the Saints.That ye may know what great, and wonderfull good things yee may, and ought to hope for, by vertue of his effectuall calling of you: and what the unspeakable and unvaluable riches are of that glorious inheritance, which he hath laid up for his Saints. 20 And set him at his owne right hand in the heavenly places.And exalted him in his humane nature, to the parti∣cipation of his infinite glory and majesty, in the highest heavens. 21 Farre above all prin∣cipalitie, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that, &c.Farre above all the most mighty, and most glorious Angels of heaven, and whatsoever thing else is, or can be named, either in earth or in heaven. 22 And hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the Church:And hath put all things in subjection to him, as medi∣ator, and hath appointed him to have the disposing of all things, as the head of the Church: 23 Which is his body, the fulnesse of him that filleth all in all.Which Church is so to Christ, as the body is to the head, making up the fulnesse of Christ (who hath of himselfe full perfection and infinite power and majesty) so as his goodnesse holds not himselfe complete with∣out his Church.
CAP. II. ANd you hath hee by his Spirit quickned,1 And you hath hee quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sinnes; who were in the state of your corrupt nature, dead in your sinnes, and trespasses; having therefore no more power to raise up your selves, then the dead man hath to raise himselfe from his grave, now hee hath wrought power∣fully in you, and hath freed you from those your sinnes; Wherein ye lived in times past,2 Wherein in time past, ye walked according to the course of this world, ac∣cording to the prince of the power of the aire, the spirit that now wor∣keth in the children of disobedience; framing your selves according to the wicked course, and trade of the world; and according to the will of him, who is the prince of those wicked spirits, which exercise their power in the aire; even that evill spirit, which now worketh, and ru∣leth in them who are wilfully disobedient; Fulfilling the sinfull desires of their corrupt nature, both in carnall, and in mentall, or spirituall sins;3 Fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. both in bodily uncleannesses, and in the errours, and exorbitan∣ces of the minde; and were naturally such, as could ex∣pect nothing from the hands of God, but wrath, and damnation; even as other heathens justly may, and are. Having raised Christ, the head, hath together with,5 Hath quickened us to∣gether with Christ, (by grace ye are saved.) and in him, quickned us his members, by vertue of his re∣surrection; and that merely out of his owne good will towards us; for by grace, and not by any merits of ours, are wee saved. So also verse 6. That not onely the present age,7 That in the ages to come, hee might shew the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindnesse to∣wards us, through Christ Iesus. but those that are to come also, might see and feele the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindnesse towards the Gentiles also, in calling them home to him, through Jesus Christ. For out of the mere favour, and mercy of God, are ye saved, through faith in Christ,8 For by grace are ye sa∣ved thorow faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God. yee cannot merit any thing, as of your selves; it is the free gift of God. This salvation is not of workes, lest any man should finde cause of boasting in himselfe,9 Not of workes, lest any man should boast: that he hath earned it at Gods hand, and therefore is not beholden to his mercy. For all that we are, and have, is his;10 For we are his work∣manship, created in Christ Iesus unto good workes, which God hath before ordeined, that wee should walke in them. wee are his work∣manship, created not onely in Adam to a naturall life, but in Christ to a spirituall life of new obedience, that wee should do all manner of good workes, which God hath in his eternall counsell prepared, and fore-ordained for us to walke in.
11 Who are called un∣circumcisiō, by that which is called the circumcision in the flesh made by hands.Who are scornefully called, The uncircumcision, by those Jewes which boast themselves to bee called by the title of a fleshly circumcision; as if in this right they were accepted of God; and ye in the defect thereof were forlorne, and rejected. 12 That at that time ye were without Christ, be∣ing aliens from the com∣monwealth of Israel, and strangers from the cove∣nants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.That at that time ye had neither knowledge of Christ, nor any interest in him; being mere forainers from the holy Church of God, and strangers from the gracious co∣venant which hee hath made with all his faithfull ones; having neither any hope of salvation, nor any just ground of hope; and living, as without the acknowledge∣ment of a God in the world. 14 For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken downe the middle wall of partiti∣on between us.For he is our perfect peace-maker; yea our very peace and reconciliation it selfe; who hath conjoyned in one body of the Church, both Jewes and Gentiles; and, whereas there was a wall of partition set up betwixt these two, so as they could not come together, hee hath broken downe that pile of division, so as now, wee are one family, as it were, in one roome of the same Church. 15 Having abolished in his flesh, the enmity, even the law of commande∣ments, conteined in ordi∣nances, for to make in him∣selfe of twaine, one new man, so making peace.Having in his suffering of death in his body utterly a∣bolished the cause of this division and enmity, which was the Law ceremoniall, consisting of divers rites, and or∣dinances; for to make those two kindes of people, Jewes and Gentiles, one new creature, in and to himselfe, so by this gracious union, making peace betwixt them. 16 And that hee might reconcile both unto God, in one body, by the crosse, having slaine the enmity thereby.And that having made them up into one body, hee might reconcile them, not to themselves onely, but to God also, by that propitiatory sacrifice, which he made of himselfe, upon his crosse; having utterly extinguished thereby the enmity betwixt God and us. And are the living stones of that holy Church of his, which is built upon the foundation of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: Jesus Christ himselfe being that chiefe corner stone,20 And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Christ Ie∣sus himselfe being the chiefe corner stone. in whom both the wals of Jewes and Gentiles, are conjoyned. 21 In whom all the buil∣ding fitly framed toge∣ther, groweth unto an ho∣ly Temple.In whom alone, all the whole building, being com∣pacted, and cemented together by love, is made up in∣to one Euangelicall Church, whereof the Temple was a type. CAP. III. 2 If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which is given to me-ward.IF ye have heard of my Apostleship, and charge to preach unto you the tidings of grace, and salvation; which is committed unto me for your behoofe.
And to make manifest unto all men,9 And to make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath beene hid in God, &c. the communica∣tion of this wonderfull mystery of the saving of man∣kinde, which God (the creator of all things by Christ) reserved from all eternity in his owne secret counsell. To the end that now,10 To the intent that now unto the principali∣ties, and powers in hea∣venly places, might be known by the Church, the manifold wisedome of God. the glorious Angels of heaven (after that God had once vented, and declared that his good purpose to mankinde) might see in this wonder∣full redemption, and blessed union of the Church, a cleare proofe and demonstration of the manifold, and infinie wisedome of God. In whom we have boldnesse,12 In whom wee have boldnesse, & accesse, with confidence, by the faith of him. and free and confident accesse to the throne of Gods grace, by that faith which gives us a right in him, and assures us of a gracious accep∣tation. Wherefore,13 Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tri∣bulations for you, which is your glory. I desire you that yee be not discouraged at the sight of those tribulations, which I suffer, for prea∣ching the Gospell to you; yea rather, yee ought to ac∣count them your glory, and rejoycing; in that ye have an Apostle, who is thought worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. Of whom that whole united family of Saints,15 Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named both in heaven and earth, and here below of Jewes and Gentiles, is named to be the one universall Church of Christ. That yee may be able with all his Saints,19 And to know the love of Christ, which pas∣seth knowledge, that yee might be filled with all the fulnesse of God. to conceive the absolutenesse, and infinite perfectnesse, and exactnes of the worke of that reconciliation, which hee hath wrought for mankinde, in all the dimensions of it; and may be affected with it accordingly. And,20 Now unto him that is able to do exceeding a∣bundantly, above all that we aske or thinke, accor∣ding to the power that worketh in us. that ye may apprehend that unspeakable love of Christ towards us, the full knowledge whereof pas∣eth all finite capacity; and that ye may be filled with all perfection of the graces of God. CAP. IV. ENdeavouring to preserve that holy,3 Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. and Christian unity, which the Spirit of God hath wrought in you, by a peaceable disposition, and carriage one to another. See Psal. 68.18.8 When he ascended up on high, hee led captivity captive, and gave gifts, &c. Now in that David sayes that Christ ascended;9 (Now that he ascen∣ded, what is it but that hee also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? what doth it imply, but that hee had before descended, both
from heaven to the earth, which is the lowest part of the world, and from the surface of the earth, into the bowels thereof, the grave. 10 He that descended is the same also that ascen∣ded up, farre above all hea∣vens, that hee might fill all, &c.He that thus descended, &c. that hee might fulfill all that was fore-said of him, and all that is or should be re∣quisite for the full glorification of his Church. And some hee gave to be pastors, and teachers of his Church,11 And some pastors, and teachers, &c. to lead forth his people, and to feed them with wholsome doctrine, and holy government. 12 For the perfecting of the Saints, for the worke of the ministerie, for the edifying of the body of Christ:All which he hath given, and ordained for the perfe∣cting of the grace of his Saints; and for the full and exact discharg of the great work of the ministery, which could not be sufficiently managed by any one ranke of gifts, or men; and in generall, for the full edification of the Church, which is the mysticall body of Christ: 13 Till wee all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Sonne of God, unto a per∣fect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnes of Christ:Till all those, yet unbeleevers, which belong to Gods election, be brought to one, and the same saving faith, and to the true knowledge, and acknowledgement of the Sonne of God, together with us; and so the whole Church (as if it were one body) grow up to be a perfect and divine grown man; even to that full stature of grace, and full knowledge, which it is ordained unto, in and by Christ; yea untill that Christ, who accounts the Church to be no other then his body, and holds himselfe not perfect, without it, have in us attained to that full growth, as that no degree of perfection shall be wanting to this mysticall body of his. 14 That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carryed a∣bout with every winde of doctrine, by the sleight of men.That henceforth, wee be no more children, unstayed, and unconstant in our good courses, and purposes; tossed to and fro with every winde of false doctrine, in the tottering cock-boat of our weake irresolution; and chea∣ted, through the sleight and cunning craftinesse of insinu∣ating false teachers, &c. 16 From whom the whole body fitly joyned together, and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectuall working in the measure of every part, ma∣keth increase of the body, unto the edifying of it selfe in love.That, as in the naturall body, wee see that it is knit to∣gether by joynts and sinewes, to make up one complete living frame, which receiveth vertue and power of moti∣on from the head, which is diffused into all the severall parts according to the use and occasion of the diverse members thereof; so as the whole body, by this meanes growes up together in strength and stature; so it is spi∣ritually in the mysticall body of Christ, the Church: it receiving vertue, and grace from Christ, the head, which is distributed to every faithfull soule, as a limbe and member of this body, growes up to the full state of per∣fection in Christ: and is in the whole bulke, and frame thereof, edified by the mutuall love of each beleever un∣to other.
Being estranged from that course of life,18 Being alienated from the life of God. which God hath prescribed unto us, &c. But ye have not so learned Christianity,20 But yee have not so learned Christ. as to give your selves over, under that pretence, to riot and dis∣order. If, at least,21 If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Iesus, yee have given eare to the doctrine of Christ, and have beene taught in his schoole, so, as yee ought, according to the truth of this heavenly discipline: which is this, That ye put off your old, sinfull, depraved nature,22 That ye put off, con∣cerning the former con∣versation, the old man, which is corrupt accor∣ding to the deceitfull lusts. which is corrupt according to those deceitfull lusts, and desires that are inbred in your bosomes, & now change your former affections, and conversation, And be renewed, not onely in the baser,23 And be renewed in the spirit of your minde, and lower fa∣culties of the soule, which are your affections, and appe∣tite, but even in the more noble and higher powers thereof, which are your understanding and will. If,26 Be ye angry and sinne not; let not the Sunne goe downe upon your wrath: according to the weaknesse of humane nature yee be carried into the passion of anger, yet take heed of be∣ing transported by the vehemence thereof, into sinne; neither let that unquiet passion (howsoever it may seize upon you) lodge, and sleep with you: Neither doe,27 Neither give place to the Devill. by this harbouring of an uncharitable passion, let in Satan into your soules. Doe not cause the Spirit of God to withdraw his graces from you, as in a detestation of your leud courses;30 And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, where∣by ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. neither doe, by your sinnes, give just distast to that good Spirit, whereto ye have beene so infinitely behol∣den for your confirmation, and sealing up to the full possession of your future glory. CAP. V. YEE were once, not only darksome,8 For yee were some∣times darknesse, but now are ye light in the Lord. with ignorance and unbeleefe, but even darknesse it selfe; but now, ye are clearely inlightened by the Spirit of God, &c. Awake,14 Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. thou sinner that sleepest securely in the state of sinne; and rise up from that spirituall death, wherein thou liest, by confessing, and forsaking thy sin; and then Christ, which is the true light, shall shine forth unto thee, by giving thee remission, and salvation. Strive to recover and fetch up that time,16 Redeeming the time, because the daies are evill. which your negligence hath lost; and make carefull use of all opor∣tunities of doing good; because the world is full of cor∣ruption, and yee shall meete with many occasions of
distraction, and discouragement. 18 And be not drunke with wine wherein is ex∣cesse: but be filled with the Spirit.Doe not give your selves to intemperance, in the use of meates, and drinkes; which is the cause of much luxu∣rie, and outrage; but, if yee desire to cheare up your hearts, be ye filled with that holy Spirit of God, which only can give perfect joy to the soule. 19 Speaking to your selves in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord.Which joy, shall expresse it selfe at your holy mee∣tings, in Psalmes, and hymnes, and sprituall songs; in stead of those wanton, and offensive songs, which the mirth of sensuall men is usually wont to breake forth into, &c. 23 And he is the Savi∣our of the body.Even as Christ is so the head of his Church (which is his body) as that he is the Saviour of it; governing it for the benefit, and salvation thereof; so should the husband who is the head of his wife, rule over her (not tyranni∣cally, and harshly, but) lovingly, and so as may be to the behoofe, preservation, and comfort of her. 26 That he might sancti∣fie and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word.That he might sanctifie and cleanse it by his holy Spi∣rit, working in us by his word, and by his Sacrament of Baptisme, as the meanes thereof. 27 That he might pre∣sent it to himselfe a glori∣ous Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and with∣out blemish.That at the last hee may present this his spouse the Church, perfectly beautifull, before the Tribunall of his Father, cleared from the spots of her sins, and wrinckles of her infirmities. For, as Evah was part of the very body of Adam, flesh of his flesh,28 So ought men to love their wives, as their owne bodies: he that loveth his wife, loveth himselfe and bone of his bone; so are wee spiritually the very parts and members of the mysticall body of this second Adam: out of his pretious side was the Church taken. 31 For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joy∣ned, &c.See Genes. 2.24. 32 This is a great my∣stery, but I speake concer∣ning Christ & the Church.This union, and conjugall conjunction is then a great mystery, not in respect of it selfe, but, in respect of that which is thereby represented, even the blessed union which is betwixt the husband Christ, and the Church his spouse. CAP. VI. 2 Honour thy father & mother (which is the first commandement with pro∣mise.)WHich is the first Commandement; yea, the onely one, that hath a peculiar promise of blessing an∣nexed unto the charge given. 7 With good will do∣ing service, as to the Lord, and not to men.In the services that yee doe, having an eye not so
much to your masters, as to the Lord, who calls for this your obedience unto them. Brethren, yee are souldiers in Gods warfare;11 Put on the whole armour of God, that yee may be able to stād against the wiles of the Devill. as souldiers, therefore, are wont to put on a compleat har∣nesse from head to foot; so doe yee furnish your soules with all holy graces, which may defend and preserve you from all the crafty assaults of the devill. For, our fight doth not lye against flesh and blood,12 For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, a∣gainst powers, against the rulers of the darknesse of this world, against spiri∣tuall wickednesse, in high places. (weake and impotent like our selves) but against the strong, and mighty powers, and principalities of hell; against those evill spirits, which sway this wicked world, that is, all darksome with ignorance and infidelitie; against those spirituall tempters, who being themselves wicked, labour to infect all others, and have so much more advantage, as they are more eminent in the place of their abode, and onset, being the region of the ayre, wherein they doe ordinarily worke. Put your selves therefore into a fit and sure posture,14 Stand therefore, ha∣ving your loines girt about with truth, and having on the breast-plate of righte∣ousnesse; having your loynes girt about with the belt of sincere, and rectified affections; and having your hearts defen∣ded with the brest-plate of innocence, and holy and up∣right intentions; And your feet shod with a ready alacritie to professe and maintaine that Gospell of Christ,15 And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace. which can onely bring true peace to the soule. But,16 Above all taking the shield of faith, where∣with ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. in vaine should yee pretend to be girt with all this complete harnesse, if yee did not hold out also be∣fore you, the shield of a true, and lively faith, whereby yee may be able both to beat back, and to extinguish all the strong, sudden, violent, fiery tentations of that wic∣ked one. And let your head be defenced with the assured hope of salvation, as with an helmet;17 And take the hel∣met of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. and let your hand be ar∣med with the word of God, which is as the sword of the Spirit, whereby satan may not onely be resisted, but van∣quished also, and utterly foyled. And that all this preparation,18 Praying alwaies with all prayer and suppli∣cation in the spirit, and watching thereunto. and holy munition may prevaile, and take happy effect, ye must ever be praying unto God, with all fervency of soule, in all frequence, and instance of prayer, and supplication; watching ther∣in, &c.
THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS. CAP. I. 5 For your fellowship in the Gospell from the first day untill now.THat by our ministery, ye have beene brought to the communion and fellowship of the professi∣on of the Gospell; and have so continued from the first day that you heard of it, untill now. 7 Ye are all partakers of my grace.Ye are all partakers with me, of the same grace and mercy of God, in your effectuall calling, and election to life. 10 That yee may ap∣prove things that are ex∣cellent, that yee may bee sincere, and without offēce till the day of Christ.That ye may see, and acknowledge, the difference between the truth of God, and the vaine fancies of men, and may approve of these excellent mysteries of salvati∣on, &c. 12, 13 But I would yee should understand bre∣thrē, that the things which happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherāce of the Gospel: so that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the pa∣lace, and in all other pla∣ces.So that my bonds, and sufferings, which I endure for Christ, howsoever they were by Satan and his compli∣ces intended to the disgrace and hinderance of the Gos∣pell, yet quite contrarily by the providence and good∣nesse of my God are turned to my great honor, and the advancement of religion; as being famous to this pur∣pose, both in Neroes Court, and in all other places. 15 Some indeed preach Christ, even of envie and strife, and some also of good will.Some indeed, hearing how famous I was over all A∣sia, for preaching the Gospell, envying this glory of mine, and in an emulatory desire to reach, and out-strip me in it, preach Christ out of envie, and contention, o∣thers sincerely. 16 Supposing to adde affliction to my bonds.Supposing, and purposing by this meanes to stirre up Nero, so much the more against mee, as the man that first broached this newes of the Gospell amongst his subjects. For I know that this advantage, which the Gospell shall receive,19 For I know that this shall turne to my sal∣vation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Iesus Christ, by the emulous labours of my adversaries, and this persecution which they doe thereupon raise a∣gainst
mee shall turne to the furtherance of my salvati∣on through the help of your prayers, and the powerfull assistance, and working of the Spirit of Christ. According to my firme confidence, and earnest expe∣ctation, that in nothing they can doe, or that can befall mee, I shall be ashamed,20 According to my earnest expectation, and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed. and have cause of dejection, and discouragement. For Christ is to mee, as the author of my life,21 For to mee to live is Christ, and to die is gaine. so the onely end and scope of my life; it is that I onely live for, that I may preach Christ, and glorifie him there∣by: and to dye is so farre from being terrible to mee, as that it is my gaine and advantage. But howsoever, while I live here,22 But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour: yet what I shall chuse I wote not. this is the fruit of my labour, that Christ is glorified by mee; yet whether of the two I should choose, life or death, I cannot resolve. For I am much straitned, and distracted in the choice;23 For I am in a strait, betwixt two, having a de∣sire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is farre better. having, in respect of my owne glory, and happinesse, a great desire to depart hence and to live with Christ my Saviour, in rest and blisse, which is much the better for mee. But yet on the other side, I see that for mee to abide here still in this mortall life, it is more needfull for you,24 Neverthelesse, to a∣bide in the flesh is more needfull for you. and more behovefull to the Church of God. And out of this perswasion,25 And having this con∣fidence, I know that I shall abide, and continue with you all, for your furthe∣rance, and joy of faith. that my life shall be of so much necessity, and use for you, I am fully assured, that I shall abide, and continue with you all, and that God will protract my life for a time here upon earth, for the fur∣therance of your faith, and the increase of your joy and comfort. That ye do unanimously hold together,27 That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one minde, striving together for the faith of the Gospell. in the profes∣sion, and defence of one, and the same truth; joyning your forces to fight together for the defence of the do∣ctrine of the Gospell. And in all your sufferings put on an undaunted cou∣rage, and resolution; being in nothing terrified by your adversaries; which confidence and fortitude of yours, bodes nothing but foyle, and perdition to your opposers, but unto you nothing but victory, and salvation, and that from God.28 And in nothing ter∣rified by your adversaries, which is to them an evi∣dent token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. CAP. II. LEt me not intreat you only, but adjure you brethren,1 If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spi∣rit, if any bowels, and mer∣cies; as ever yee would receive any comfort in Christ, as ever ye would reape benefit by his love, and your owne;
if yee have any sense of that spirituall communion which is betweene the Saints of God, if ye have any compassion, and mercy on me, and Gods Church; 2 Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one ac∣cord.Do yee herein make up the full measure of my joy, in that ye be peacably, and lovingly affected one towards another, &c. 4 Looke not every man on his own things, but eve∣ry man also on the things of others.Do not yee so much bend your eyes upon your owne good parts, admiring them, and priding your selves in them; as upon the more excellent graces of other men; neither be so much intent upon your owne private com∣modities, as upon the good of others. 5 Let this minde be in you, which was also in Christ Iesus.Be ye so humbly and charitably minded, and so re∣spect the good of others, with neglect of your owne, as yee see Christ Jesus your Saviour did. 6 Who beeing in the forme of God, thought it not robbery to be equall with God;Who being very God, and knowing it to be no pre∣sumption in him to equalize himselfe to God the Father; 7 But made himselfe of no reputation, and tooke upon him the forme of a servant, and was made in the likenesse of men:Yet voluntarily humbled, and abased himselfe, and tooke upon him a meane, and contemptible condition, here on earth; and as hee stooped so lowe, as to become man, so hee framed himselfe to the state, and yeelded to the infirmities of man: 8 And being found in fashion as a man, hee hum∣bled himselfe, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the crosse.And being found in the nature, and forme of man, he did in that his humanity, humble himselfe so farre, as to become obedient, even unto death, and that the most painfull, and ignominious death of the Crosse. 9 Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, & given him a name, which is above every name;Upon which wonderfull humiliation of his, it hath pleased God the Father, to advance him, in his humane nature to an answerable height of glory; having given unto him both that title, and that state, and power which is farre above any title, or state, or power of whatsoever finite creature; having publiquely to the world decla∣red, and approved him to be God Almighty; 10 That at the name of Iesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth;That in the acknowledgement of this just title and divine power of his, every creature should bow and stoope unto him, both the Angels of heaven, and men on earth, and the very infernall spirits, which are most averse from his kingdome; And that every tongue should be forced to confesse, that even that Jesus, who was thus abased, is the God,11 And that every tongue should confesse, that Iesus Christ is Lord. and Lord of all, &c. 12 But now much more in my absence, worke out your owne salvation with feare and trembling.But now much more, in my absence (since yee shall want the helpe of my counsels, and incitements) stirre up your selves earnestly, to doe all that is requisite on your part, for the attaining of salvation; not in a bold and se∣cure presumption of your owne abilities, but in an humble feare, and awfull trembling at the considerati∣on
of the greatnesse of the worke, and your owne in∣sufficiencie. For it is not any power, or ability in your selves,13 For it is God that worketh in you both to will, and to doe, of his good pleasure. that can availe ought this way; but it is God onely, who gives you both to will that which is good, and to do the good which ye will, of his mere good will and pleasure. Frame your selves to all peaceable carriage,14 Doe all things with∣out murmurings, and di∣sputings. one to∣wards another, and do all things without heart-burnings, and quarrels. Yea, if I do not onely labour amongst you,17 Yea, and if I be offe∣red upon the sacrifice, and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoyce with you all. but even dye for you, it shall be my joy; you have by your holy, and lively faith, offered your selves unto God, as a living and reasonable sacrifice; if I may die for the confirmati∣on of this faith of yours, it shall bee that whereof I shall rejoyce together with you. For I have no man so heartily affected, both to you,20 For I have no man like minded, who will na∣turally care for your state. and mee; who will so carefully minde, and tender your estate as if it were his owne. It much troubled him,26 And was full of hea∣vinesse, because that yee had heard that he had been sicke. to thinke how much you would be afflicted with the rumour of his sicknesse. Because, for the worke of Christ,26 Because for the work of Christ, he was nigh un∣to death, not regarding his life, to supply your lacke of service toward mee. through his labour in preaching, and the toyle of his journey hither for my comfort, and tendance; and his watchings, and paines taking in ministring to my necessities, hee was nigh unto death; not regarding his owne life in a zeale to supply your lacke of service towards mee. CAP. III. BEware of those profane and impure men which open their unhallowed mouthes against the truth of God;2 Beware of dogs, be∣ware of evill workers: be∣ware of the concision. beware of those false teachers, which under pretence of edifying Gods Church, pull it downe, by their life, and erroneous doctrine; beware of the Judaizing opposers of the Gospell; who whiles they talke of circumcision, do indeed make a concision, and rent in the Church. For, whatsoever they may pretend, wee are indeed of the true, and spirituall circumcision; and not they; we,3 For wee are the cir∣cumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and re∣joyce in Christ Iesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. who worship God inwardly in the soule, and stand not upon an outward cutting of the flesh; we, who place the confidence and joy of our hearts, upon Christ Jesus, and not upon these externall acts and priviledges, which con∣cerne the outward man. Although I dare boldly say, if these outward privi∣ledges were to be stood upon, there is none of them all,4 Though I might also have confidence in the flesh, if any other man thinketh that hee hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more.
who could finde more cause of confidence, and boasting herein, then I might. 6 Concerning the righ∣teousnesse of the Law, I was blamelesse.I was so strict and punctuall in the observation of the prescriptions of the Law, as that no man could taxe me for the breach or violation thereof. 7 But what things were gaine to me, those I coun∣ted losse for Christ.But those things which whiles I was a Jew I accounted as rare and excellent prerogatives, those now, since that I was converted to Christ, I have made no reckoning of, but have sleighted them, as not only worthlesse, but even rather prejudiciall to my better calling. 9 And be found in him, not having mine owne righteousnesse.That I, who was but a lost man in my selfe, might be found in him, not having, &c. 10 That I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and the fel∣lowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death.That I may know him both in speculation and in pra∣ctise; and may both know, and feele the power of his re∣surrection, raysing mee from the death, and that I may experimentally finde, what a comfort, and happinesse it is, to suffer for him, and with him; that thereby I may be made conformable to him, in his death. 11 If by any meanes I might attaine unto the re∣surrection of the dead.That so by this meanes, I may attaine to that eternall life, which followes upon the happy resurrection of the just; and in the meane time that full measure of mortifi∣cation and newnesse of life, which he hath ordained me unto. 12 Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Iesus.Not that I have as yet already attained it; let no man misconstrue mee, as boasting of my perfection; no, I come as yet short; but I strive and labour towards it; and follow hard, that I may reach it at the last; yet can I not do it, as of my selfe, it is Christs laying hold on mee, that will and must inable mee thus to lay hold on Christ. 13 Brethren, I count not my selfe to have apprehen∣ded: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behinde, and reaching forth unto those things which are before.As those that runne in a race, forget how much ground they have already passed, and minde onely that part of the way, which yet remaineth, to the goale; so do I, in this course of my Christian profession; never looke backe to what I have done, but still looke forward to that which I yet must and ought to doe. 14 I presse toward the marke, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus,And thus conscionably labouring, I presse forward towards that prize of heavenly glory, which is the blessed issue and fruit of our high calling in Christ Jesus. 15 Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing yee be otherwise minded, God shall reveale even this unto you.Let us therefore, so many of us as are sincere, and true hearted to God, and such, as doe truely strive for this Christian perfection, be thus minded, renouncing all confidence in our selves, or ought that pertaines to us, and seeking for justification onely in Christ; and, if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, as depending upon
the workes of the Law, or any other outward helpes, God shall in his good time open your eyes to see, and acknowledge this truth of his, which hee hath revealed unto mee. Neverthelesse, in the meane time,16 Neverthelesse, where∣to wee have already attai∣ned, let us walke by the same rule, let us minde the same thing. for so much of the truth of God as wee have already obtained the know∣ledge of, let us therein walke on peaceably, and loving∣ly; following one, and the same rule of the word of God, and conspiring in all Christian unanimity, and concord, to do all good offices to God, and each other. For many,18 (For many walke, of whom I have told you of∣ten, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the crosse of Christ. even of those that professe themselves to be Christians, of whom I have oft complained, and warned you, and now renue my complaint with teares, live inordinately; & so as that they proclaime themselves to be the secret, and reall enemies to the Gospell of Christ, and opposers of the power, and vertue of his passion. Whose end is destruction of body and soule,19 Whose end is de∣struction, whose god is their belly, and whose glo∣ry is in their shame, who minde earthly things.) who make a god of their ease and pleasure, and profit, avoi∣ding all the danger of persecution for maintenance of the truth, and making an advantage of their plausible teaching; who now glory in that which will at last prove their shame, and confusion; who minde only these tran∣sitory and earthly things. As for us, we over-looke the earth,20 For our conversation is in heaven, from whence, &c. and have both our affections and conversation in heaven before hand, from whence, &c. CAP. IV. I Beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntiche,2 I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntiche that they bee of the same minde in the Lord. that being noted for wise and religious matrones, they do not by their discord distract, and trouble the Church at Philip∣pi; but that they agree peaceably, in their Christian profession. And I intreat thee also, who art the faithfull husband,3 And I intreat thee also true yoke-fellow, helpe those women which la∣boured with mee in the Gospell, with Clement al∣so, and with other my fel∣low labourers, whose names are in the booke of life. and yoke-fellow to the one of them; that thou do also yeeld, to give thy best furtherance to those women, which have taken paines to minister unto mee, and have suffered some afflictions also, for the promoting of the Gospell; with Clement, and other my fellow la∣bourers, whose names are written in the roule of the just, and holy men, which are ordained to eternall life. That now at the last,10 But I rejoyced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last, your care of mee hath flourished againe, wherein ye were also care∣full, but yee lacked oportu∣nity. you have given good proofe of your carefull respects to me (which seemed for the time
to be intermitted) in that provision which you sent to me, by the hands of Epaphroditus; not that I make que∣stion of your care of me, formerly; I know ye wanted not will, and desire, to have expressed your love to mee, but yee wanted oportunity till now. 11 Not that I speake in respect of want, for I have learned in whatsoever, &c.Not that I rejoyce so much in regard of the supply of my want; which I well know how to beare, for I have learned, &c. 13 I can doe all things through Christ, which strengtheneth mee.Let no man thinke that I arrogate this power to my selfe; no, of my selfe I can doe nothing, but in, and through Christ, which strengtheneth mee, I can doe all things. 17 Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit that may abound to your ac∣count.Not that I desire a gift; it is all one to mee, whether I want or abound; but in this, I desire that a benefit may accrue unto you, whose beneficence to mee is an advan∣tage unto your selves. THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS. CAP. I. 5 For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof yee heard before in the word of the truth of the Gospell.FOr those goodly, and glorious things, which your hope assures you to be laid up for you in heaven, whereof yee have heard before, in that most true word of the Gospell: 6 Which is come unto you, as it is in all the world.Which Gospell is comne unto you, being preached amongst you, as it is all the world over, &c. 10 That ye might walke worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing.That yee may behave your selves so, as may become those, which are honoured by God, with so high a cal∣ling, and ordained by him, to so great glory; and so as may be in all things well pleasing unto him, &c. 12 Giving thankes unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be parta∣kers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.Giving thankes unto God the Father, who hath fur∣nisht us with such graces, as whereby wee may be fitted to become partakers of that glorious, and everlight-some, and blessed inheritance of his Saints in heaven.
In, and by whom,14 In whom we have re∣demption through his blood, even the forgive∣nesse of sinnes. wee are freed and bought out from the bondage of sin, and satan, even by the ransome of his most pretious blood, in that by the vertue thereof, and the full satisfaction made thereby unto God, wee have forgivenesse of sinnes. Who is unto us that onely and perfect meanes, in,15 Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first borne of every creature. and by whom, God which is by nature invisible, is manife∣sted, and revealed to mankinde, in the Sonne, as in a cleare and perfect glasse, we see the Father: That eternall Sonne had his being of, and with the Father, before ever any creature was made. And as hee had an eternall being before them,16 For by him were all things created, &c. so they had their being in time from him, for by him were all things created, &c. Who is the first cause of all things,18 Who is the beginning, the first borne from the dead, that in all things hee might have the prehemi∣nence. giving a beginning unto them all; and restoring them all again, by the power of his resurrection, as being the omnipotent raiser of himselfe from the dead; and he, by whose power all o∣thers either have risen, or shall rise. For it pleased the Father,19 For it pleased the Fa∣ther that in him should all fulnesse dwell. that in him should essentially dwell all perfection of grace, of wisedome, of power, of goodnesse, and mercy. And (having made peace,20 And having made peace through the blood of his crosse, by him to re∣concile all things unto him∣selfe; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. through the satisfaction made by his precious blood, shed upon the crosse) by the perfect worke of his onely mediatorship, to reconcile unto himselfe, all things, that were formerly set at vari∣ance with him by sinne; and to set unity betwixt God and men, betwixt Angels and men. And amongst the rest, even you Colossians,21, 22 And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minde, by wicked workes, yet now hath hee reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy, and unblameable, and unre∣proveable in his sight. that were sometimes in your naturall, and heathenish condition, not onely strangers from God, but even enemies to him, both in respect of the sinfull disposition of your mindes, and of your wicked workes also, and trade of sinne, wherein ye lived, yet now hath he reconciled, in that true humane body of his, by suffering death for you, that hee might present you holy, &c. Which mercy of reconciliation,23 If yee continue in the faith grounded and setled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospell, which yee have heard, and which was prea∣ched to every creature which is under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a minister. and peace ye shall be sure to receive, if yee continue constantly firme in that true faith, and Christian hope which hath been wrought in you, by the Gospell: which Gospell ye have had prea∣ched unto you, and not to you only hath it beene taught, but to all the nations under heaven; whereof I Paul am made a minister. Who now rejoyce in those persecutions,24 Who now rejoyce in my sufferings for you, & fill up that which is behind, of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church, which I suffer for your sake, yea for Christs; every Saint of God is a member of Christs body; and Christ therefore suffers in
him; thus it is then with me; my afflictions are Christs; and I doe, in suffering, fill up that which is behinde of the afflictions of Christ, in my flesh, for his Churches sake. 25 Whereof I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is given to mee for you, to fulfill the word of God.Of which Church I am made a minister, according to the dispensation, which is committed to me of God, for your behoofe; that I may fully deliver that errand which I have received, of preaching the Gospell to you, and to the rest of the Gentiles every where. 26 Even the mysterie which hath been hid from ages, and from generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints.Even this mystery of salvation by Christ revealed to the Gentiles; which hath been hid from former ages, and from the fore-passed generations of our forefathers; but now is made clearely manifest to his Saints. To whom God would make knowne, what is the glo∣rious riches,27 To whom God would make knowne what is the riches of the glory of this mystery a∣mongst the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. and treasure of this great mystery of the Gospell, for the salvatiō of the Gentiles, as well as of the chosen people of the Jewes; the summe and substance of which mystery, and Gospell, is Jesus Christ; in whom onely ye have the hope of eternall glory. CAP. II. 1 For I would that yee knew, what great conflict I have for you, & for them at Loadicea, & for as many as have not seene, &c.FOr I would that ye knew what great care, and anxiety, and selfe-conflicts I have within me, for you and for your neighbours of Laodicea; and for all other converts to Christ, which have not seen my face, nor injoyed my bodily presence. 2 That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ:That their hearts may be furnished with the rich, and full understanding of the Gospell of Christ, and may bee setled in the perfect acknowledgment of the great myste∣ry of religion, wherein God is revealed to men, even God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Sonne. In whom alone are laid up all the treasures of wise∣dome,3 In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdome, and knowledge. and knowledge; so as that without him they can∣not be had; and by him they are imparted unto his faith∣full ones, for their salvation. 6 As ye have therefore received Christ Iesus the Lord, so walke ye in him:As ye have therefore received the true doctrine, con∣cerning Christ Jesus the Lord; so do ye persist, and perse∣vere therein. 7 Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have beene taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.Ye are living plants, ye must be fast rooted in the soile of Christ; ye are living stones, ye must bee laid fast, and firmly mortered upon the foundatiō of Christ; ye must be strongly stablished in the true faith of Christ, as ye have beene taught by your faithfull teachers, Archippus, and
Epaphras; abounding, more and more, in the knowledge, and profession thereof, with thankfulnesse to God, for that light which he hath imparted unto you. Beware, lest any man make a prey of you,8 Beware lest any man spoile you through Philo∣sophy and vaine deceite, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments, of the world, and not after Christ. through the false pretence of secular wisedome, as mixing divine things with humane, and measuring heavenly mysteries by their naturall reason; or, through the vaine inforce∣ment of Jewish rites, and ceremonies; both which kinds of false teachers forme their doctrines after the uncer∣taine and mis-devised traditions of men, or after the beg∣gerly rudiments of the world, viz. the ceremonies of the law, which are now out of date, and not after the truth of Christ. For in him, the whole God-head dwelleth essentially,9 For in him dwelleth all the fulnesse of the God∣head bodily. and the divine nature is not onely united to the soule of Christ, but to the body also; and in him hath God fully revealed himselfe to the world. And ye are in, and by him filled with all saving grace,10 And ye are compleat in him, which is the head of all principalitie and power. and divine knowledge; even in him, who is your head; and not yours onely, but the head of all the heavenly Angells, even those mighty, and powerfull spirits above.11 In whom also yee are circumcised, with the circumcision made with∣out hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ. In whom also yee are spiritually circumcised in your hearts, by that inward circumcision which is made by his holy Spirit, and not by the hands of men, in that yee have, by his gracious worke in you, put off your sinfull corruptions, through the vertue of that circumcision, not which Moses, but which Christ hath wrought in you. The effect of which circumcision ye have received,12 Buried with him in Baptisme, wherein also you are risen with him, through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead. in that ye have received that baptisme, which succeeds that other legall Sacrament; yee are therefore circumci∣sed, in that ye are baptized, and ye are in baptisme buri∣ed together with Christ, in respect of the mortification of your sinnes, represented by lying under the water; and in the same baptisme, yee rise up with him, in new∣nesse of life, represented by your rising up out of the wa∣ter againe; through that faith of yours, which is ground∣ed upon the mighty power of God, who hath raised him from the dead. And you, being once altogether dead in your sinnes,13 And you being dead in your sinnes, and the un∣circumcision of your flesh, hath he quickned toge∣ther with him, having for∣given you all trespasses: and in the spirituall uncircumcision of your hearts, hath he quickened, and raised up to a life of grace, and new obebience, together with himselfe, by the power of his resurrection; having forgiven you all those trespasses, wherein ye formerly lay. Blotting out, by his precious blood,14 Blotting out the hand-writing of ordinan∣ces that was against us, which was contrary to us, and tooke it out of the way, nailing it to his crosse. that obligatory bond of Mosaicall ordinances, and ceremonies, which carried in them a secret accusation of our guiltinesse; and
cancelled it utterly; nayling it to his crosse, as void, and of none effect. 15 And having spoiled principalities and powers, hee made shew of them openly, triumphing over them in it.And having spoyled the principalities, and powers of hell, he made a shew openly, leading them, as manicled captives, after him; being exalted upon the triumphant chariot of his crosse. Since therfore the Mosaicall ceremonies are thus abro∣gated,16 Let no man therefore judge you in meate, or in drinke, or in respect of an Holy day, or of the New-moone, or of the Sabbath dayes: let no man judge you, in matter of eating, or drink∣ing; or in respect of your solemne annuall festivities, of Pasch, Pentecost, Tabernacles, or of your monethly feast of new-moones, or of your weekly feasts, the Jewish Sab∣baths. 17 Which are a sha∣dowe of things to come, but the body is of Christ.Which observations are onely types, and shadowes of things, which were then to come; but the body and substance, shadowed and figured out by them, is Christ. 18 Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angells, intruding into those things which hee hath not seene, vainely puft up by his fleshly minde.Let no man beguile you of your prize (which is laid ready at the goale for you) by drawing you aside, under pretences of voluntarie humility, to those opinions, and practices which are not warrantable; as to worship the Angells, under colour of an awfull modesty, in not going first to God, without a mediation; out of a bold curiosi∣ty intruding himselfe into the profession of knowing that, which he hath not seene; and vainely puft up with a proud conceit of his owne skill. 19 And not holding the head, from which all the body by joynts and bands having nourishment mini∣stred, and knit together, increaseth with the in∣crease of God.And not holding himselfe to the true knowledge of Christ; who is the only head of the Church; from whom, all the body of his universall Church, being knit together by the joynts, and bands of one common Spirit, recei∣veth due spirituall nourishment, and groweth up, and in∣creaseth in the graces of God, till it come to a full stature. 20, 21. Wherefore if ye bee dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world: why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances? (Touch not, tast not, han∣dle not:Wherefore, if ye have part in Christs death, by which these Mosaicall ordinances are abrogated, and abolished; Why, as though ye were still of the world, and had no interest in Christ; are ye subject to the rites, and ordi∣nances of the ceremoniall Law? (as to stand upon the termes of, touch not this, tast not that, handle not that other: 22 Which are all to pe∣rish with the using) after the commandements, and doctrines of men.All which meates, and drinks (whereof they are so scrupulous) perish with the using, and have no further being, after they are received) interpreted and urged after the commandements, and traditions of men. 23 Which things have indeed a shew of wise∣dome in will-worship and humilitie, and neglecting of the body, not in any ho∣nour to the satisfying of the flesh.Which opinions and practices of theirs, are such, as wherein, they make indeed a great shew of wisedome and piety, professing a voluntary humiliation, and afflict∣ing of themselves with hard usages of the body, in fast∣ing, and abstinence; and not yeelding that due respect
and care to the body which were meet for the moderate and fit sustentation thereof. CAP. III. IT is not for you to affect the things of the world,3 For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. for ye are dead to the world, and to all the vaine, and sin∣ful motions, and desires thereof, but ye have already, and shall injoy hereafter, another manner of life, which the world cannot see, or discerne; for it is hid, and laid up with Christ, in God; as out of the knowledge,5 Mortifie therefore your members which are upon the earth, forni∣cation, uncleannesse. so out of the danger of the world. Mortifie therefore all the lims of your earthly and sinfull corruptions, fornication, uncleannesse, &c. Seeing that ye have put off your old depraved nature,9 Seeing that yee have put off the old man with his deeds; with the sinfull works thereof; And are professed that yee are become new en,10 And have put on the new man, which is renew∣ed in knowledg, after the Image of him, that cre∣ated him: re∣newed in knowledge, and all holy disposition; ater the image of God, who hath created this new heart in you. In which businesse of renovation, there is no respect of persons at all, whether a man be a Jew or a Greeke,11 Where there is nei∣ther Greeke, nor Iew, cir∣cumcision, nor uncircum∣cision, Barbarian, &c. &c. but every man is accepted according to that measure wherein Christ his Saviour, and his holy Spirit dwells and workes in him. Contrary therefore to those lims of your corruptions,12 Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindnesse, hum∣blenesse of minde, meek∣nesse, long suffering, &c. take to yourselves, as it becomes the elect children of God, holy and beloved; all those graces of regeneration which are meet for your Christian profession, tender mercies, and compassion, kindnesse, &c. And above all these,14, 15. And above all these things put on charity which is the bond of per∣fectnesse, and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also yee are called in one body; and be ye thankfull. see that your hearts bee filled with charity, which doth perfectly unite together all the members of this mysticall body; and by, and in which, all other graces are perfected, for the use of Gods Church. And let that Christian peace, which God worketh in you, and which your holy profession calleth you to, by vertue of your union with the whole Church, rule and raigne in your hearts. Let the doctrine of Christ be familiarly setled in your hearts, and make you rich in all wisedome;16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisedome, teaching and admonishing one an∣other in Psalmes, &c. so as that yee may be able to teach, and admonish one another; that ye may expresse the joy of your hearts in Psalmes, &c.
CAP. IIII. 3 That God would o∣pen unto us a doore of utterance, to speak the my∣stery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds.THat God would vouchsafe unto us faire, and happy oportunities of preaching the Gospell, and give us powerfull assistance, and abilities to deliver the great my∣steries of the Gospell of Christ, for which I am now in bonds.5 Walke in wisedome towards them that are without, redeeming the time. Walke carefully and wisely, and carry your selves in∣offensively towards those that are not of the Church of God; and take all advantages, and oportunities of doing good.6 Let your speech bee alwayes with grace, seaso∣ned with salt that you may know how yee ought to answer every man. Let your speech be alwaies gracious and savory, such as may argue the holy disposition of the heart, from whence it comes; so framing your words to the occasi∣on, as that ye may returne a meet answer to every man. 11 These onely are my fellow workers unto the Kingdome of God, which have beene a comfort to me.These two onely of the Jewish nation, have helped me, in the preaching, and furtherance of the Gospell, and have beene comfortable unto me, in their incourage∣ments, and loving ministrations. 16 And when this E∣pistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read also in the Church of the Laodi∣ceans: and that ye like∣wise read the Epistle from Laodicea.And after that this my Epistle hath beene read among you, cause that it be read also in the neighbour Church of Laodicea; and let this inclosed Epistle, which was written to me from Laodicea, importing much the good of you all, be likewise read amongst you. THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS. CAP. I. 3 Remembring with∣out ceasing your worke of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Iesus Christ, in in the sight of God and our Father.WE do, upon all occasons, give thanks to God, for your faith, hope, and charity; and for the gracious effects, and proofe of them all; that your faith hath approved it selfe in good workes, your love in a laboursome in∣deavour for the help of your brethren, your hope in a
patient enduring of sufferings; whereby ye have fastned yourselves upon our Lord Jesus Christ, in sincerity, as in the sight of God, our heavenly Father. Knowing brethren,4 Knowing brethren beloved, your election of God. and being upon good reason ful∣ly perswaded, that ye are elected of God, to salvation. And the ground of this our perswasion, is the happy and fruitfull successe of our preaching amongst you;5 For our Gospell came not unto you in word one∣ly, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know what manner of men wee were among you for your sake. For our Gospell was not onely verbally preached amongst you, and so formally intertained, but it was both delive∣red, and received amongst you, in much powerfull working upon your hearts, with much evidence of the holy Ghost, and in much assurance of the infallible truth thereof; as we doe also appeale to your consciences, af∣ter what manner we demeaned our selves amongst you, with what meeknesse, patience, diligence for the win∣ning of your soules. For when we goe about to report your forwardnesse,9 For they themselves shew of us, what manner of entring in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God. they are ready to prevent us; and upon famous relation can tell us how loving intertainment, and kinde accep∣tance we had from you, in our first entring to you; and how cheerfully yee obeyed our Gospell, in turning pre∣sently from your Idols, to serve the true, and ever-living God. CAP. II. FOr your selves brethren,1 For your selves bre∣thren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was not in vaine. and your owne consciences can abundantly testifie, that our preaching amongst you was not in vaine, but exceedingly effectuall. To speake unto you the Gospell of God,2 To speake unto you the Gospell of God with much contention. with much fervency of zeale, and with powerfull opposition of the gainesayers. For our teaching amongst you was not in a colloguing,3 For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleannesse, nor in guile. and colluding fashion, to make a gaine secretly of you, neither was it in a plausible way of humouring unclean∣nesse and impurity of living. Neither did I make my preaching as a colour,5 Nor a cloake of cove∣tousnesse, God is witnesse. or cloake of my covetous seeking for wealth; as if I aimed at my profit onely, in my teaching. When we might have taken upon us,6 When we might have beene burthensome as the Apostles of Christ. and have requi∣ted a chargeble maintenance, and have borne a port, fit for the Apostles of Christ. Not the Gospell onely, but our very lives also,8 But also our owne soules, because yee were deare unto us. which are worthy to be most deare, and precious to us.
12 That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his king∣dome and glory.That yee would walke in so holy a manner, as might become those, whom God hath honoured with the high calling of Christianity; and to whom hee hath intended to give so glorious a kingdome. 14 For yee brethren be∣came followers of the Churches of God which in Iudea are in Christ Ie∣sus, for ye also have suffe∣red like things of your owne countrimen, &c.For yee, brethren, became followers of those Christi∣an Churches, which are planted in Judea, for ye also have suffered from your countrimen of Thessalonica, the very same kinde of persecutions, which they suffered of their countrimen, the Jewes. 15 Who both killed the Lord Iesus, and their own prophets, and have perse∣cuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men.Which Jewes (that ye may see and know ye have part∣ners, in all your sufferings, and hard measures offered unto you) have proceeded very maliciously in their cru∣ell persecutions; for they both killed the Lord Jesus, and their owne holy Prophets; and have spightfully cha∣sed us, who are of their blood and nation; and have runne very deep upon the displeasure of God, and oppose themselves against all men in resisting the course, and successe of the Gospell among the Gentiles. 16 Forbidding us, to speake to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sinnes alway, &c. for the wrath is come u∣pon them to the utmost.That they may make up that full measure of their owne, and their forefathers sinnes, upon the fulfilling whereof, God hath intended to sweep them away with his judgements, by the hands of the Romans; and to exe∣cute his wrathfull displeasure, and vengeance upon them to the utmost. 18 But Satan hindred us.But Satan stirred up these envious Jewes, to raise op∣positions against me, and by these meanes hindered my journey to you. CAP. III. 1 We thought it good to be left at Athens alone.WEe were well content rather to be left alone at Athens, then ye should want the help, and com∣fort of so worthy a teacher, as Timotheus our brother. CAP. IV. 4 That every one of you should know how to pos∣sesse his vessell in sancti∣fication, &c.THat every one of you should know how to use, and governe his body, holily, and chastly. 5 Not in the lust of con∣cupiscence, even as the Gentiles, which know not God.Not yeelding your selves over to be slaves unto your owne beastly lusts and inordinate desires, as the Gentiles which know not God. 8 Hee therefore that de∣spiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who also hath gi∣ven unto us his holy Spi∣rit.Hee therefore that despiseth these wholsome, and Apostolicall counsels and commands, despiseth not
man, but God himselfe; who hath given us his holy Spi∣rit▪ and hath indited these things unto us. I need not give this literall charge to you,9 But as touching bro∣therly love, yee need not that I write unto you, for yee your selves are taught of God to love one ano∣ther. of loving one another, as if it were a thing as yet unperformed of you, for God hath already written these reall characters of love in your hearts, and hath enabled you to give good proofe of this Christian charity, to each other. And that ye doe earnestly affect, and studiously endea∣vour for peace, and quietnesse,11 And that ye study to be quiet, and to doe your own businesse, and to worke with your owne hands. and laying aside all curi∣ous intermedling with other mens businesse, be carefull of your owne, &c. Carry your selves in an honest and seemly fashion a∣mong the Gentiles, not giving them occasion of scorne,12 That yee may walke honestly towards them that are without, and that yee may have lacke of no∣thing. by your basenesse, and idle want; but labour in your vocations, so as that ye may have lacke of nothing, nor be too much beholden to others courtesie. Concerning your dead friends,13 Concerning them which are asleepe, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. that ye sorrow not for their losse, in an over passionate, and immoderate fashi∣on, and measure, like to Gentiles, that apprehend not the hope of a resurrection. For this wee deliver unto you,15 For this wee say unto you, by the word of the Lord, that wee which are alive, and remaine unto the comming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. as from the expresse charge of God, that those which shall be found alive, at the second comming of the Lord to judgement, shall not prevent them, which are before dead in their graves, so as to be glorified before them. For the Lord himselfe shall personally descend from heaven, with a mighty noyse,16 For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpe of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first. even with the loud and powerfull voyce of an Archangell, which shall be as the trumpet of God, to summon the world before the tribu∣nall of Christ; and then they that are dead in the faith of Christ, shall rise, ere the full consummation of the living. CAP. V. BUt as for any speciall designation of the times and seasons of Christs comming, brethren,1 But of the times and the seasons, brethren, yee have no need that I write unto you. it is curiosity for you to inquire into it, and unnecessary for mee to write thereof to you. This your selves know perfectly already,2 For your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so commeth as a thiefe in the night. and it is e∣nough for you to know it, that whensoever that day commeth, it shall come suddenly, and inexpectedly, even as a theefe in the night. Therefore let us not give up our selves to a carnall security, as doe others;6 Therefore let us not sleepe as doe others, but let us watch and be sober. but let us be watchfull and sober.
7 For they that sleepe, sleepe in the night, and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night.For the time of darknesse is fit for the workes of dark∣nesse: sleepers and drunkards make choice of the night, as meetest for them. 8 But let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the brestplate of faith, and love, and for an hel∣met, the hope of salvation.But let us, who are children of the light, and with whom there is no night of riot, and disorder, be ever sober; our profession cals us unto it; for wee know wee are in a continuall warfare; we must therefore be ever watchfull, and be furnished with the brestplate of a live∣ly faith in Christ, with love to our brethren, and with hope of salvation by Christ, as with an helmet. 12 And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you.And wee beseech you brethren, that you take speciall notice of, and give due regard to those your spirituall overseers, which labour amongst you in word, and do∣ctrine, and have the charge of your soules committed unto them by the Lord, and do admonish you. 16 Rejoyce evermore.Rejoyce in the Lord alwayes, and let none of the out∣ward crosses of this life, rob you of your joy in the ho∣ly Ghost. 17 Pray without ceasing.Pray upon all occasions, and at all meet oportunities, and be evermore lifting up your hearts in heavenly eja∣culations to God. 19 Quench not the Spirit.Doe not ye coole, and discourage, and (as much as in you lieth) quench and put out the good graces of Gods Spirit, either in your selves or in others; but che∣rish and foster them. 20 Despise not Prophe∣sying.Despise not the preaching of the Gospell, upon any pretence soever, whether of the meanenesse of gifts, or of prejudice against the teacher; but reverence and ho∣nour it. 23 And I pray God your whole spirit, and soule, and body be preserved blame∣lesse unto the, &c.And I pray God that all your inward faculties of un∣derstanding, will, affections, and all outward members of your bodies may be preserved, &c.
THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS. CAP. I. WHich very afflictions, and persecutions suf∣fered by you,5 Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgement of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdome of God, for which ye also suffer. are a manifest and cleare proofe of a judgement to come, wherein the righteous God of all the world, shall declare you to be accounted of him, in his great mercy, worthy of that kingdome of God, for which ye also suffer. Seeing it is a most just, and righteous thing with God,6 Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recom∣pence tribulation to them that trouble you: not to let wicked persecutors goe away, at last, unpuni∣shed; but to returne paine and torment to them that trouble you. And to you that are troubled, by them, eternall rest,7 And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Iesus shall be revealed from heaven, and glory, together with us, and all his Saints; in lieu of those miseries they have cast upon you, &c. Whose presence shall be exceeding dreadfull to the wicked;8 In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ. for hee shall come in flaming fire to take venge∣ance on them that would not know God, and that yeeld not their obedience, but make opposition to the Gospell of our Lord Jesus Christ. When hee shall come in wonderfull,10 When hee shall come to bee glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that beleeve, because our testimony a∣mong you, was beleeved, in that day. and unconcei∣vable glory; which hee shall not reserve to himselfe, but impart to his Saints; in whose brightnesse, and confor∣mity to the glorious body of Christ, his infinite good∣nesse, and mercy shall be then admired: even, in the glo∣rification of all that beleeve; amongst whom ye also have your part, forasmuch as yee have beleeved that Gospell, which we delivered unto you.
CAP. II. 1 Now we beseech you, brethren, by the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by our gathering to∣gether unto him,NOw we beseech, and adjure you brethren, by that sure, and deare account that yee make of the com∣ming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of that glory, which wee shall injoy with him, when wee shall be taken up to meet him in the clouds, 2 That yee be not soone shaken in minde, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.That yee be not soone driven away from that truth of doctrine, which hath beene delivered to you, concerning the comming of Christ; nor be disquieted in your thoughts, either by pretences of revelations, or by pre∣tence of report, or letter sent, as from us; as if the day of his comming were instantly at hand. 3 Let no man deceive you by any meanes, for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sinne be revealed, the sonne of perdition.Let no man deceive you by any false suggestions of the haste of that day; for it shall not come, till after there haue beene a sensible and generall defection from the faith of Christ, and the purity of the Gospell; and till that Antichrist, the noted, and eminently sinfull enemie of Christ, that sonne of perdition, be revealed. 4 Who opposeth and exalteth himselfe above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he as God, sitteth in the Tem∣ple of God, shewing him∣selfe that he is God.Who in the pride of his heart opposeth himselfe a∣gainst, and exalteth himselfe above all those soveraine powers that are called gods here on earth, and above, and against him, that is the onely true God; crossing and contradicting his word, and ordinances; so as that he ty∣rannizeth in, and over the Church of God, bearing him∣selfe as if hee were the absolute Lord, and God thereof. 6 And now yee know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time.And now yee know, both by that which I spake to you in presence, and that which I have now written, what let lyes in the way of his revelation; and what it is that must de done, and expected ere that enemie of Christ doe fully discover himselfe; namely, that the Gospell must both be universally preached, and revol∣ted from: and that the Roman empire must be removed ere he can fully shew himselfe. 7 For the mystery of ini∣quity doth already worke: only he who now letteth, will let, untill he be taken out of the way.For there are already foundations secretly laid for this Antichristianisme; and this deep mystery of iniqui∣ty doth (though closely and insensibly) euen already worke: onely the powerfull, and flourishing estate of the Empire (which now hindreth any such present usurpati∣on) will let, untill it be taken out of the way. 8 And then shall that wicked be revealed, whō the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth.And then, shall that wicked one shew himselfe in his colours; who shall continue to oppose the truth of God, and to infest his Church, untill the Lord shall by the power of his Gospell overthrow him; and shall utterly destroy and confound him, with the glory of his com∣ming to judgement.
Even that presumptuous enemy of Christ,9 Even him whose comming is after the wor∣king of satan, with all po∣wer, and signes, and lying wonders: whose comming shall be graced, and set forth by the working of satan, and all the powers of darknesse; with mighty workes, with strange miracles, and lying wonders. And with all the fraud & imposture that wickednesse can devise to use for the delusion of those miserable cli∣ents of his; which perish,10 And with all decei∣vablenesse of unrighteous∣nesse in them that perish: because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. because they imbraced not that truth of God which was offered unto them, that they might be saved. And for this wilfull refusall of Gods truth,11 And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions. it shall be just with him to give them over unto strong delusions, &c. Because,13 Because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, and beliefe of the truth. however others may be miscarried with these powerfull deceits, yet for you, wee are perswaded that God hath, from before the beginning of the world, chosen you to salvation, which yee shall happily attaine unto, through the sanctification of the holy Ghost, and your firme faith in the truth of God revealed unto you. And hold fast all that wholsome doctrine of the Gospell, which I have delivered unto you,15 Therefore brethren, stand fast and hold the tra∣ditions which yee have beene taught, whether by word or our epistle. either in my sermons, or in my Epistles. CAP. III. THat the word of the Lord may be universally prea∣ched and willingly received;1 That the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you. and be glorified in the effectuall power thereof, in other places, as it is with you. And that wee may be delivered from absurd and per∣verse men, both those false hypocrites,2 And that wee may be delivered from unreaso∣nable and wicked men: for all men have not faith. which closely un∣derworke the Gospell, and those publique opposers of the truth, which persecute us, for the professing of it; which that they doe, it is no marvell; for all men have not faith, to know and yeeld to the truth; that is a singu∣lar gift of God, which he hath bestowed onely on some; it is no marvell if others hate and persecute it. And not after that holy counsell,6 And not after the tra∣dition which yee received of us. and charge which he received of us. Not because wee had not just liberty, and power to require maintenance from you, in lieu of our labours;9 Not because wee have not power, but to make our selves an ensample un∣to you to follow us. but that wee might thus make our selves examples of painfulnesse, unto you, for your imitation.
14 Note that man, and have no companie with him, that he may bee asha∣med.Set a marke on such a one; and doe both give up his name to me, and censure him with a just ejection, out of your company, that he may with shame be won to refor∣mation. THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO TIMOTHIE. CAP. I. VNto Timothie, my owne deare sonne, whom I have spiritually begotten to the faith,2 Vnto Timothie my owne sonne in the faith. &c. Neither give heed to idle Jewish fables,4, 5 Neither give heed to fables, & endlesse gene∣alogies, which minister questions, rather then edifi∣ing which is in faith: so doe. Now the end of the commandement is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfained. nor to those infinite pedigrees, and genealogies which they stand up∣on, in drawing downe the line of their discent from A∣braham; or from David, in a pretence of claiming kin∣red of Christ, according to the flesh; which breed ma∣ny frivolous questions, and contentions; rather then tend to thee dification of the Church, in the faith of Christ, which should be the end and drift of all our labours; For that which the commandement of God both in the law, and in the Gospell drives at, is charity; even that Christi∣an charity, which floweth from a sincere hart, and a good conscience, and an unfained faith in that Christ, which hath loved us, and shed abroad his love in our hearts. From which graces some having roved, and taken a wrong aime,6 From which some having swarved, have tur∣ned aside unto vaine jang∣ling: have shot away their shafts, and have turned aside unto vaine jangling: Taking upon them to be teachers of the law, whiles in the meane time,7 Desiring to bee tea∣chers of the Law, under∣standing neither what they say, &c. they understand neither the principles, nor conclusions of their owne doctrine. Not, that I take exceptions against the law it selfe;8 But wee know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully. no, the law is good, and to excellent purpose, if a man make such use of it, as hee ought; not seek∣ing to bee justified by it, but to bee directed by
it, in his obedience, and to bee brought by it, to Christ, which is the end of the law. Knowing this,9 Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawlesse, and disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners. that the law is not made for the coerti∣on, restraint, punishment of the righteous, and upright in their conversation, but of lawlesse and disobedient men, of godlesse, and leud persons, &c. But I obtained mercy from God;13 Who was before a blasphemer, & a persecuter, and injurious. But I obtai∣ned mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in unbeliefe. who graciously held me capable thereof; because that which I did, I did not maliciously, or spightfully, but out of ignorance, and un∣beliefe. Howbeit, for this I obtained mercy,16 Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Iesus Christ might shew forth all long suffering for a patterne to them which should hereafter beleeve on him to life everlasting. that Christ Jesus might make me a patterne, & exāple, in whom he might shew forth his wonderfull patience, and long suffering; for the comfort and incouragement of all them, who notwithstanding the conscience of their many infirmi∣ties, should hereafter beleeve in him, to life ever∣lasting. This charge I commit unto thee, sonne Timothie,12 This charge I com∣mit unto thee sonne Timo∣thie, according to the pro∣phecies which went be∣fore on thee, that thou by them mightest warre a good warfare. that knowing thy selfe to be of more then ordinary note, and one whom many Prophesies have foretold of, as a worthy and eminent instrument of Gods glory, and the good of his Church, that thou stirre up thy selfe, accor∣ding to those predictions of thee, to approve thy selfe a good souldier in this spirituall warfare of Christ. Holding the pure and true doctrine of the Gospell,19 Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away, concerning faith, have made shipwracke. and a good conscience in all thy actions, which some having disregarded and put away, have beene miserably ship-wracked in their judgement, concerning matters of faith. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander,20 Of whom is Hyme∣neus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Sa∣tan, that they may learne not to blaspheme. whom I have by a dreadfull sentence of excommunication, given over to the power of Satan that they may be hereupon drawn to repent of their heresie, and blasphemy against God. CAP. II. I Exhort therefore, brethren, that first of all, when yee meet together in your publike assemblies,1 I Exhort therefore that first of all supplicati∣ons, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thankes bee made for all men. ye joyne to∣gether in all kinde of prayers and holy devotions; both those whereby we sue to prevent and avoid evills that may befall us, and those wherein we sue for all blessings that we want, and those wherein we intreat for the good of all others, and those wherein we give thankes, for our owne good, and the good of the whole Church.
2 For Kings, and for all that are in authoritie, that wee may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godli∣nesse and honestie.But especially let your prayers, and thanksgivings be for Kings, and for all that are in authority over you, that through Gods blessing upon their government, wee may lead a quiet, and peaceable life, &c. 4 Who will have all men to bee saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth.And thus generall would God have your prayers, and intercessions to be, because he hath excluded no sorts or conditions of men from the capacity of heaven, or from the meanes of salvation, so as it is not for us to reject, or condemne any, as irrecoverably cast away by him, and uncapable of our prayers; since he hath revealed his will to be thus large, and gracious. For as there is but one God, and mankinde is but as one corrupted masse;5 For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Iesus. so there is but one mediator be∣twixt God, and mankinde, even that man and God, Jesus Christ; who having taken the nature of man upon him, for the working of this reconciliation, hath therein made no difference of Jewes or Gentiles, of great, or meane, but calleth all indifferently. 6 Who gave himselfe a ransome for all, to be testi∣fied in due time.And gave himselfe accordingly, to be a ransome for all; so as the world should in due time, see, & know what an open way is made by him, for their salvatiō; a ransome sufficient for the redemption of all mankinde, and per∣fectly effectuall to all that beleeve. 7 Whereunto I am or∣dained a preacher, and an Apostle.Of which wonderfull and mercifull redemption I am, through the grace of God, ordained a preacher, and an Apostle, &c. 8 I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands with∣out wrath, and doubting.By vertue of this my Apostolicall charge, and functi∣on, I doe therefore ordaine, and will that men doe not confine their devotion to any one place, but that as occa∣sion offers it selfe, they pray every where; looking not so much to these outward circumstances, as to the inward devotion of the heart, that they pray in holinesse, in cha∣rity, in faith, 9 Not with broidered haire or gold, or pearles, or costly aray.Not in a fashion that may argue either wantonnesse, or curious nicenesse, or pride. For I suffer not a woman (though she be indued with gifts fit for the instruction of others) to teach publikely in the congregation;12 But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to u∣surpe authoritie over the man, but to be in silence. nor yet at home to take upon her, to governe and rule her husband; but in a modest silence to receive his instruction, and commands. 13 For Adam was first formed, then Eve:For Adam had the priority in his very creation; he was first formed; and then Eve was formed of the substance taken from him. 14 And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.And Adam as he was the first in creation, so hee was not the first in transgression, neither was Adam deceived immediately by the Serpent, but the woman. 15 Notwithstanding she shall bee saved in childe bearing, if they continue in faith and charitie, and holinesse with sobriety.But though the woman hath by her yeeldance to the
suggestion of the Serpent, brought upon man and her selfe, so great sinne and misery; and though I allow her not to take upon her publike offices, yet there is imploy∣ment for her at home, wherein she may so demeane her selfe, as may be pleasing unto God; and in that very pu∣nishment which God inflicted upon her, hee hath given her just cause and meanes of comfort; for God shall make those her painfull conceptions, and the care and anxiety, which she undergoes in the education and nurture of her charge, good meanes to bring her to salvation: but the maine condition, and help to that her future glory, is the continuance (of that sexe, as well as the other) in faith, charity, and holinesse with sobriety. CAP. III. IF a man desire the office of publike teaching,1 If a man desire the of∣fice of a Bishop, he desireth a good worke. and go∣verning the Church; he desireth a worke that is both holy, and excellent, and difficult. A Bishop then, must bee a man of an inoffensive life;2 A Bishop then must be blamelesse; the husband of one wife, &c. one that is not tainted with the common blemish of polygamie; that is, of having more wives at once then one, or, after an unjust repudiation of one wife, marying another, &c. Not a novice in the faith, or in age;6 Not a novice, lest be∣ing lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemna- of the Devill. lest being puffed up with the conceit of his early advancement, above others, he fall through pride, into that condemnation in∣to which the Divell is, for that same cause, plunged; or give advantage by this meanes to the tempter and accu∣ser of mankinde to worke his damnation. Lest he fall into the reproach of the heathen,7 Lest hee fall into re∣proach, and the snare of the devill. and go∣ing on in leud and debauched courses, bee intangled in the bands of wickednesse, the snares of the Devill. Holding and maintaining the true doctrine of Chri∣stian religion, in a sanctified heart,9 Holding the mysterie of the faith, in a pure con∣science. and a pure consci∣ence. See verse 2.12 Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children, and their, &c. Doe justly obtaine the favour, and honour to bee pre∣ferred to the higher offices in the Church;13 Purchase to them∣selves a good degree, and great boldnesse in the faith, which is in Christ Iesus. and do by this meanes receive an increase of courage, and holy boldnes, in the profession of the Gospell of Christ.
15 But if I tarry long, that thou maiest know how thou oughtest to be∣have thy selfe in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, &c.How thou oughtest to carry thy selfe in this great fa∣mily of God; the Church of the living God; which is, in repect of men, the pillar and ground of truth: So as that it sustaineth, and beareth up (by a faithfull profession, and maintenance thereof) the true religion of God. The summe whereof is, that undoubtedly-great and wonderfull mystery of godlines:16 And without con∣troversie, great is the my∣stery of godlinesse, God was manifest in the flesh. God manifested in the flesh, &c. CAP. IIII. 1 Now the spirit speak∣eth expresly, that in the later times, some shall de∣part from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devills.NOw the Spirit of God hath expresly revealed both to me, and others his Prophets, that in the later times, wherein Antichrist shall raigne, and sway in the world; some shall depart away from the purity of religi∣on, giving heed to seducing spirits, and to doctrines devi∣sed, and set on foot by the Devill. 2 Speaking lies in hypo∣crisie, having their consci∣ence seared with a hote yron;Broaching false, and erroneous points of doctrine, and labouring to make them good, by an hypocriticall osten∣tation of holinesse; having hard, and seared hearts, insen∣sible of their owne dangerous estate, and of the fearfull judgements of God. 3 Forbidding to marrie, and commanding to abstaine from meats which God hath created, to be re∣ceived with thanksgiving of them which beleeve, and know the truth, &c.Forbidding marriage, either absolutely in it selfe, or specially to some sorts, and estates of men, as a thing un∣cleane and unlawfull; and commanding (upon pretence of holinesse, and conscience) to abstaine from some kind of meates; which yet God hath created good, and allow∣ed to be received, &c. 5 For it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer.For it is sanctified to us, and may lawfully be received, if the word of God have not forbidden, but given free way unto it; and if we use it, both with prayer for a bles∣sing upon it, and with thanksgiving to God for it. 6 Nourished up in the words of faith, and of good doctrine, whereun∣to thou hast attained.Nourished and brought up in the true religion of God, and in good and wholesome doctrine; &c. But refuse thou both erroneous, and hereticall opini∣ons,7 But refuse prophane and old wives fables, and exercise thy selfe rather unto godlinesse. as also the fabulous dotages of vaine, and braine-sicke men; and exercise thy selfe rather in the holy and Spiri∣tuall workes of piety, and godlinesse. 8 For bodily exercise profiteth little, but godli∣nesse is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.For as for that bodily exercise of fasting, and strict penitence, wherewith many please themselves, if it bee considered in it selfe, surely it profiteth little; and many have used it to small purpose; but the exercises of true Piety, whereby we worke upon our hearts, to draw them to the feare of God, to sound repentance, to a lively faith, and all other heavenly dispositions, are profitable to all
ends and purposes; having the promises of Gods grati∣ous acceptation, and reward, both in respect of the bles∣sings of this life, and the life to come. For therefore we doe with much chearfulnesse,10 For therefore wee both labour, and suffer re∣proach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, spe∣cially of those that beleeve. both labour and toyle in our vocations, and also suffer the re∣proaches, that are cast upon us for Christ; because wee have our full trust, and confidence reposed upon the li∣ving God; who is the protector, preserver, and maintai∣ner of all men, but especially of those that beleeve, who are most peculiarly interessed in him. Demeane thy selfe so grauely, and stayedly,11 These things com∣mand and teach. that no man may take occasion to despise thee for thy young yeares; but be thou an example to all beleevers,12 Let no man despise thy youth, but bee thou an example of the beleevers in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. to frame their lives according to thine; Goe thou therefore before them, & lead them both by thy doctrine, and by thy con∣versation, in Christian love and charity, in an undaunted courage and fortitude, in a lively faith, in an holy purity both of heart and life. Till I come be thou diligent in reading,13 Till I come, give at∣tendance to reading, to ex∣hortation, to doctrine. and medita∣ting upon the holy Scriptures; and imploy thy selfe carefully in teaching, and exhorting others. Doe not neglect to stirre up,14 Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophesie, with the laying on of the hands of the presbyterie. and exercise those nota∣ble gifts & graces, which were given thee by the Spirit of God, when, upon the speciall revelation of God, and the divine oracle of his holy Ghost, thou wert appointed and designed to this holy ministery; whereto thou wert admitted and consecrated by the prayers, and impositi∣on of the hands of the presbytery.16 Take heed unto thy selfe, & unto the doctrine: continue in them. Looke carefully to thy selfe, both for thy life, and thy doctrine; and continue constant in the carefull observa∣tion of these rules, which I have given thee, &c. CAP. V. DOe not take up too sharply, and roundly,1 Rebuke not an elder, but intreat him as a father, and the younger men as brethren. those that are ancient in yeares, but intreat them plausibly, and gently, as thy fathers in age; neither be too harsh to the younger men, but treat with them as with brethren. Give due respect to those widowes which under thy charge,3 Honour widowes that are widowes indeed. are appointed to bee maintained by the pub∣like contribution of the Church: such I meane, as are widowes indeed, and therefore for their condition du∣ly capable of this maintenance. But if any widow have children,4 But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learne first to shew piety at home, and to requite their parents, for that is good and accep∣table before God. and nephewes of sufficient abilitie, to provide for her; let those children, or nephewes learne to shew their pitty and love to
such their Parents, or Aunts; and to requite those loving and chargeable offices, which in their yonger times they received from them, &c. Now she that is a widdow indeed, fit for your reliefe, is shee,5 Now she that is a wid∣dow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God, and conti∣nueth in supplications and prayers night and day. that is utterly destitute of other helpes, that is religiously given, trusting in God, and spending her time ever in holy devotion, both night and day. But shee that lives in pleasure and delicacie, pampe∣ring herselfe so much the more,6 But she that liveth in pleasure, is dead while she liveth. by occasion of her free∣dome, and giving her selfe over to wantonnesse, though she live in the body, yet in soule shee is dead, dead in her sinnes and trespasses. 8 But if any provide not for his owne, and special∣ly for those of his owne house, he hath denyed the faith, and is worse then an infidell.But if any shall willingly neglect to provide for those that concerne him; and especially for them of his owne family, and neare kinred; that man, together with huma∣nity, hath cast away religion also; and makes himselfe, in this foule and shamefull incivility, worse then an in∣fidell. 9 Let not a widdow be taken into the number, un∣der threescore yeares old, having beene the wife of one man.Let not one be taken into the number of those wid∣dowes, who depend upon the maintenance of the Church, and are imployed, by it, to charitable services, in attendance of the sicke, and ministration to the Saints in their travailes, under threescore yeares old; and such a one as hath given good proofe of her modesty; having so beene the wife of one husband, as that she hath not, upon his repudiation, married to another. 11 But the yonger wid∣dowes refuse: for when they have begun to waxe wanton against Christ, they will marry.But doe not admit of younger widdowes to this con∣dition, and service; for they, after that they have beta∣ken themselves to this ministration, and by this meanes have, as it were, married themselves to Christ, when they grow pampered and wanton, will be casting off these re∣solutions of their serviceable attendance upon the Church of Christ, and will marry, perhaps to infidels; for those who are the sonnes of the Church will not ea∣sily give way to match with persons so devoted. 12 Having damnation, because they have cast off their first faith.And so by this meanes run into the just danger of damnation, because to please their new husbands they cast off their profession of the faith of Christ; at least in marrying they doe violate that promise, and ingage∣ment, wherein they bound themselves to doe their con∣tinuall service to the Church. I will therefore, and ordaine that the yonger women be left to their full liberty to marry,14 I will therefore that the yonger women marry. &c. 15 For some are already turned aside after satan.For some are, already, through their wanton courses and knowne fornications, mis-carried by satan, to the great scandall of the Church. 17 Let the Elders that rule well, be counted wor∣thy of double honour, espe∣cially they who labour in the word and doctrine.Let those Bishops or Pastors that rule well, be coun∣ted
worthy of all due respects, both of honour and main∣tenance; but especially those among them, which be∣sides their care and paines in governing, labour diligent∣ly in teaching and instructing their people. Against a Presbyter, whose function is sacred,19 Against an Elder re∣ceive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses. and whose scandall may be more dangerous, receive not an accusation, unles it be proved by two or three witnesses. But those Presbyters which give manifest offence by their sin, doe thou rebuke, and censure publiquely,20 Them that sinne re∣buke before all, that others also may feare. that others also may feare. Doe not rashly lay thy hands upon any man, to or∣daine,22 Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be par∣taker of other mens sinnes. Keepe thy selfe pure. and authorize him to the holy function of the mi∣nistery; neither doe thou admit of any unworthy man; nor by this meanes through thy partiality, make thy selfe a partaker of other mens sinnes; but keepe thy selfe holy, and untainted. Some there are who offer themselves to ordination,24 Some mens sinnes are open before hand, going before to judgement: and some men they follow af∣ter. whose scandalls are knowne beforehand, and runne (be∣fore their tender of themselves to this holy function) in∣to just censure: others offences are not knowne till after they be ordained. Likewise also on the contrary,25 Likewise also the good workes of some are manifest beforehand, and they that are otherwise cannot be hid. the good workes & ho∣ly carriage of some, that put themselves forward to this holy calling, are well knowne and approved beforehand, so as thou needst not make scruple of laying thy hands upon them; and as for them that are otherwise, if thou doe diligently enquire after their demeanour, and con∣versation, they cannot be hid from thy notice; so as thou maist refraine to admit them. CAP. VI. LEt those Christians,1 Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their owne masters worthy of all honour. which are under the yoke of servitude, so carry themselves to their masters (though infidels) as accounting them worthy of all ho∣nour; not derogating ought from their obedience, be∣cause themselves are called to the knowledge, and pro∣fession of Christ, &c. And for those that have beleeving masters,2 And they that have beleeving masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren, but ra∣ther doe them service, be∣cause they are faithfull. let them not thinke they may abate ought of their due respects, and observance to them, because they are their fellow-Christians, &c. And consent not to the true,3 And consent not to wholsome words, even the words of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ. and saving doctrine of the Gospell, &c.
4 He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strife of words, &c.Hee is proud (knowing nothing, indeed, of what hee ought to know) but vainely distempering himselfe about idle, and frivolous questions and quarrels, about words, whereof, &c. 5 Perverse disputings of men of corrupt mindes, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gaine is godlinesse, &c.Perverse, and peevish brablings of disputations of men of corrupt and depraved mindes; void of all care and love of truth; ayming only at their own filthy lucre, as supposing gain to be the best, and only godlinesse, &c. 6 But godlinesse with contentment is great gain.But I say contrarily, that godlinesse is great gaine, and such as may give a man all-sufficiency in himselfe; if he have an heart content with his estate. 9 But they that will bee rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtfull lusts.But they that set down their rest, and resolution, that they will be rich, must needs fall into many temptations, & be miscarried with them; and cannot but be intangled in the snares of satan, and drawn into many covetous de∣sires, &c. 10 Which whiles some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced thēselves through with many sorrowes.Which whiles some have immoderately coveted, they have beene drawne to renounce their Christian profession, and have wounded their soules with many sorrowes, and have brought infinite mischiefes upon themselves. 12 Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eter∣nall life.Fight thou that good and happy fight of a true and faithfull champion of Christ, for the maintenance of his faith, and Gospell, which thy true faith in him shall in∣able thee unto, and crowne thee for; and lay hold upon that blessed reward of eternall life, &c. 13 Who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession.Who before Pontius Pilate made a just and undaun∣ted profession of his Messiahs-ship: telling him, that for this cause hee came into the world, that hee might beare witnesse of the truth. 16 Who onely hath im∣mortality, dwelling in the light, which no man can approach unto.Who onely hath perfect and absolute immortality, as in himselfe; dwelling in that increated and infinite glory of divine Majestie, which our weake and darke ap∣prehensions cannot conceive or reach unto, &c. 19 Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternall life.Laying up in store for themselves, through the grace, and acceptation of God, a good foundation of assured comfort, against the evill day, even the day of death; that they may, upon his mercifull remuneration obtaine eter∣nall life. 20 O Timothy, keepe that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding pro∣fane and vaine bablings, and oppositions of science, falsly so called.O Timothy, keepe thou sure and carefully, that preti∣ous treasure of sound and wholsome doctrine, where∣with thou art entrusted; avoiding those profane & vaine janglings about idle questions, and those bootlesse quar∣rels of sophistrie, which carry a shew of learning & know∣ledge,21 Which some profes∣sing, have erred concerning the faith. Grace be with thee, Amen. but indeed have nothing but frothy ostentation. Which some professing have beene drawn into grosse errours, and mis-opinions concerning religion.
THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO TIMOTHIE. CAP. I. I Doe not onely remember thee often,3 I thanke God, whom I serve from my forefa∣thers with pure consci∣ence, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day. but I thanke my God (whom I serve in that true re∣ligion which I received from my forefathers, being in substance the same, which I now pro∣fesse) that hee puts into my thoughts the remembrance of thee; for I take so much pleasure in recalling thy ver∣tues and graces, that I hold it a great favour of God, that he hath given thee a place in my devotions, both by day, and by night. When I call to remembrance the unfained faith wherewith thou art (amongst other graces) eminently indued; and that true piety,5 When I call to re∣membrance the unfained faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grand∣mother Lois, &c. which was at first notably apparent in thy grandmother Lois, and, &c. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance,6 Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stirre up the gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands: that thou quicken and stirre up those gifts and graces of God, which were given thee by the imposition of my hands; not suffering them to goe out, for want of use, and exci∣tation. But exercise them boldly, and cheerfully;7 For God hath not gi∣ven us the Spirit of feare, but of power, of love, and of a sound minde. for God hath given us his Spirit to inable us, and beare us out in these holy services, which Spirit of his, is not a Spirit of feare, and cowardise; but a Spirit of power, and resolu∣tion; a Spirit of fervent love to his Church; a Spirit of sincerity, both of judgement and affection. Be thou a cheerfull partner of those afflictions,8 But be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospell according to the power of God, which follow the profession of the Gospell; not out of any strength of thine owne, but out of the mighty power of God, upholding and incouraging thee therein. Who hath saved us from sinne, and death,9 Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his owne purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Iesus, before the world began. and hath vouchsafed to call us effectually into the state of saving grace, even to holinesse and newnesse of life; not for any
merit of our workes, but for his owne mercies sake, upon his owne good purpose, and grace, which was de∣creed to be given to us, in, and by Christ Jesus; before the world began. 10 But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Iesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life, and immortality to light, &c.Which hath taken away from death, all that power and tyranny, which hee exercised over mankinde; and hath made a cleare way to life and immortality, for all that beleeve, through the Gospell. For I well know what a powerfull, and mercifull God,12 For I know whom I have beleeved, and I am perswaded that hee is able to keepe that which I have committed unto him a∣gainst that day. and Saviour it is, whom I have relyed and cast my selfe upon; and I am fully perswaded, that he is infinitely able, against all the powers of hell, to keep, and safeguard that my pretious soule, which I have committed to his care, and custodie, and to bring it forth glorious, at that great day of his appearing; and to perfect that salvation of mine, which he so gratiously hath undertaken. 13 Hold fast the forme of sound words which thou hast heard of mee, in faith, and love, which is in Christ Iesus.Hold fast both the substance of sound Christian do∣ctrine, and the forme of expressing, and delivering of it; which thou hast heard of mee; the summe of which do∣ctrine is our faith in God through Christ, and our love to him, and our brethren. 14 That good thing which was committed un∣to thee, keepe by the holy Ghost.That good and pretious treasure of the Gospell of Christ, which was committed unto thy care & trust; and those singular graces which God hath bestowed upon thee, see that thou keepe and maintaine, with an happy increase; not out of any power and vertue of thine own, but by the holy Ghost which dwelleth in thee. 18 In that day, &c.In that day of the last and generall retribution, when he shall come to reward every man according to his workes. CAP. II. 1 Thou therefore my sonne, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Ie∣sus.THou therefore, my sonne, be couragious, and strong in the maintenance of that Gospell of Christ, which thou hast received through the grace that is given thee, by the same Lord Jesus Christ. 2 And the things that thou hast heard of mee, a∣mong many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithfull men, who shall be able to teach others also.And the same things which thou hast heard mee deli∣ver unto thee, not in a corner, but publiquely before many witnesses, as a truth worthy to be averred; even the same things doe thou preach, and deliver over to faithfull men, that may communicate them unto o∣thers; that so this blessed message of the Gospell, may be both diffused abroad, and transmitted to posterity. 3 Thou therefore en∣dure hardnesse, as a good souldier of Iesus Christ.Thou knowest thy calling, that thou art by thy pro∣fession,
a souldier of Jesus Christ, serving under his co∣lours; resolve thou therefore to do, and endure that which belongs to thy place; be content to suffer, and undergoe all hardnesse for his names sake. It is not therefore for thee, to be taken up with other cares, and imployments;4 No man that warreth intangleth himselfe with the affaires of this life, that hee may please him, who hath chosen him to be a souldier. no man that gives himselfe to the warres, whiles hee is in that service, intangles him∣selfe in the affaires of his husbandry, or bargainings, but devotes himselfe wholly to the military businesse, which he hath in hand, that hee may please his captaine, or ge∣nerall. And as it is in wrestling; every man that strives,5 And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except hee strive lawfully. is not presently graced with the garland; but hee that wrestles skilfully, and according to the lawes of that exercise; so it is in this holy station; not every Bishop is crowned, and rewarded of God, but hee that manageth this calling gravely, holily, faithfully. The husband man must first labour and take paines in plowing, and sowing,6 The husband man that laboureth, must first bee partaker of the fruits. ere hee can be partaker of the fruits of his field; and when hee hath bestowed this profitable toyle, he is well worthy to be the first, that shall eate of his owne labours. I am persecuted, as an offender,9 Wherein I suffer trouble as an evill doer, e∣ven unto bonds: but the word of God is not bound. for that I preach the Gospell of Christ; and am imprisoned, and put into bonds and fetters, for this onely cause; but howsoever they may binde mee fast, as they doe; yet they cannot binde up and fetter the Gospell of Christ; that word of his, both is, and shall ever be free; for even in these bonds of mine, I doe, and will preach it unto all commers. Therefore,10 Therefore I endure all things for the elects sake. I endure affliction for those good offices that I doe towards the furthering of the salvation of the elect, &c. And if wee beleeve not, hee loseth nothing by it;13 If we beleeve not, yet hee abideth faithfull, hee cannot denie himselfe. the misery and damage is ours; but for him, hee is the same he was (what ever become of us) just, and faithfull in all his promises, and undertakings; hee cannot be lesse then his word, but will certainly doe whatsoever hee hath spoken. And the doctrine of these profane heretickes spreads abroad, as a canker doth in the flesh; of which sort,17 And their word will eate as doth a canker: of whom is Hymeneus, and Philetus. are Hymeneus, and Philetus. Who have erred in a maine point of faith; saying,18 Who concerning the truth have erred, saying, that the resurrection is past already, and over∣throw the faith of some. that there is no other then a spirituall resurrection, to be received; and that this spirituall resurrection is passed, whiles wee live here on earth; and by this meanes have perverted, and overthrowne the faith of some.
19 Neverthelesse the foundation of God stand∣eth sure, having this seale, the Lord knoweth them that are his. And let every one that nameth the name of Christ, depart from ini∣quitie.But howsoever, some fashionable professors of Chri∣stianity doe thus fall off; yet neverthelesse, the foun∣dation of Gods gracious and eternall election remaines sure, and unmovable; and is shut up inviolably under this seale of his; The Lord hath eternally fore-knowne those that are his; yet not so, as that presuming upon an ab∣solute decree, wee should liue as wee list; but on our parts who are thus mercifully fore-knowne, there is re∣quired an holy, and conscionable obedience; so, as that every one that professes the name of Christ must depart from iniquity. 20 But in a great house, there are not onely vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood, and of earth, and some to honour, and some to dishonour.Neither need we to be troubled to see some fall away from Christ; for, as we see it is in a great house, there are vessells of all sorts and metalls; and of all formes, and for all uses; some pretious ones of gold, and of silver, which are for honourable uses; others againe of wood, or of earth, which are destin'd to baser uses: so it is in the great house of God, the world, all are not faithfull, all are not set apart to glory. 21 If a man therefore purge himselfe from these, he shall bee a vessel unto honour, sanctified and meete for the masters use, and prepared unto every good worke.And if any man therefore shall keepe himselfe pure, and cleane from these false doctrines, and hereticall tea∣chers, he shall approve himselfe to be a vessell of honor, sanctified and set apart by God, for the glory of his mer∣cy, and by him prepared, and inabled to every good worke. 22 Flie also youthfull lusts.Avoid thou those impetuous desires, and passions, to which youth is commonly subject, &c. 23 But foolish and un∣learned questions avoid.But foolish questions, and such as tend to no edifica∣tion, and can give no furtherance to our knowledge by assoyling them, doe thou avoid, &c. 24 And the servant of the Lord must not strive.And it is not for a servant of the Lord to quarrell, and brabble about slight, and worthlesse matters, &c. 25 In meeknes instruct∣ing those that oppose thē∣selves, if God peradven∣ture will give them re∣pentance to the acknow∣ledging of the truth:Endeavouring that by this meanes, God, if he have so decreed, may give them repentance, and grace to ac∣knowledge that truth, which they have gaine-said. 26 And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of devill, who are taken captive by him at his will.And that they may seasonably recover themselves from their heresies, and errors, which are the very snares of the devill, wherein they are intangled, and held cap∣tive at his pleasure.
CAP. III. MAking an outward and formall profession of godli∣nesse,5 Having a forme of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof: from such turne away. in words, but in their deeds denying the power thereof: so living, as if godlinesse were but a meere name, and a matter of fashion, without all force and efficacy; have nothing to doe with such kinde of men. Of this sort of dangerous hypocrites, are they,6 For of this sort are they which creepe into houses, & lead captive silly women laden with sinnes, led away with divers lusts, which under faire pretences insinuate themselves into mens houses; and seduce poore silly women; which are the more apt to be mis-led, for that they are formerly vicious, being light huswives, and those that are given up to leud, and wanton courses. Which indeed are fit disciples for such teachers,7 Ever learning and ne∣ver able to come to the knowledge of the truth. as those which are curiously inquiring still into every no∣velty of doctrine, and never care to attaine unto sound knowledge of Gods saving truth. Now as of old, Jannes and Jambres,8 Now as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so doe these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concern∣ing the faith. which were Pha∣raohs sorcerers, resisted Moses and contested with him, in the message that he brought frō God; so doe these false teachers at this day resist us, in delivering the truth of the Gospell; being men of corrupt mindes, desperately er∣ring in the maine points of religion, and framing their beleefe according to their owne fancies, and affections. But they shall not prevaile to the seducing of any more; for God shall lay them open,9 But they shall pro∣ceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was. and display the foolishnesse of their doctrine, and shame them, as he did those sorcerers, who were so restrained by the hand of God, that they could not so much as make lice, in emula∣tion of Moses. The godly are afflicted, and persecuted,13 But evill men and se∣ducers shall waxe worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. but wicked men and seducers are at full ease, and grow on, from one degree of sinne to another; deceiving others, and being themselves deceived, by Satan. All holy Scripture is given by inspiration from God; not being dictated,16 All Scripture is gi∣ven by inspiration of God, and is profitable for do∣ctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse; or penned by any humane de∣vice; and is fully availeable, as for matter of doctrine, and for confutation of errors; so also in respect of manners, both for correction of mis-demeanours, and for instructi∣on, and direction of our holy, and righteous carriage. That a Divine,17 That the man of God may bee perfect, tho∣rowly furnished unto all good workes. or teacher of Gods people may bee made complete; throughly furnished by it unto all the services of his profession.
CAP. IIII. 3 For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrins, but after their owne lusts shall they heape to themselves teachers, having itching eares.BE earnest, and diligent in preaching, for there will a∣rise false teachers; who shall so bewitch the mindes of men, with their plausible fancies, as that they will not en∣dure sound doctrine; but shall multiply to themselves great variety of pleasing teachers; having itching eares, that affect altogether nouelty and choice of doctrines, and curious speculations. 6 For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.For I am now ready to be offered up, as a sweet sacri∣fice to God, in my martyrdome, for his name, &c. 7 I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.My life is a warfare, and behold, I have fought a good fight, having striven for the Gospell zealously, and ef∣fectually: My life is a race, and I have runne my course, even to the very goale, constantly, and happily; I have maintained and defended the truth of Christs Gospell inviolably. 8 Henceforth there is laid up for me a crowne of righteousnesse.And now from henceforth, I comfort my selfe with the expectation, and assurance of that crowne, or garland of immortality and glory, which upon the gracious pro∣mise of the righteous God, is laid up for me, &c. 10 For Demas hath for∣sakē me, having loved this present world, and is de∣parted unto Thessalonica, &c.For Demas hath given over to attend me in my af∣fliction, any longer, rather choosing to take his own ease, and to provide for his owne safety and profit, then to mi∣nister to me in my bonds. For he may be of great use to assist me here in my mi∣nistery,11 For he is profitable to mee for the ministery. which I labour in (though a prisoner) continu∣ally. 16 At my first answere no man stood with me, but all men forsooke me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.At my first answer before Neroes tribunall, I was for∣saken of all, which formerly professed favour to me; out of a weake feare of danger, and persecution; whose infir∣mity I so farre pitty, that I doe earnestly pray to God, that this timorous shrinking of theirs may not be laid to their charge. 17 And I was delive∣red out of the mouth of the lion.And I was delivered from the tyranny of that cruell Nero. 18 And the Lord shall deliver mee from every evill worke, and will pre∣serve me unto his heaven∣ly Kingdome.And the Lord shall deliver me still, and ever, from every evill worke, that might blemish this my holy pro∣fession; from all cowardly feares, and sinfull revolts, and whatsoever else may bee offensive to God and his Church, &c.
THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO TITVS. CAP. I. PAul a servant of God,1 Paul a servant of God, and an Apostle of Iesus Christ, according to the faith of Gods elect, and the acknowledging of the truth, which is after godli∣nesse. and an Apostle of Je∣sus Christ, sent and imploied by him, to preach that Gospell of his, whereby true faith is wrought in his elect, and whereby they are led to the acknowledgment of the saving truth of Christian religion. For this cause when we were both together in Crete;5 For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting, and ordaine Elders in e∣very city, as I had appoin∣ted thee. I left thee there behinde me, that thou mightest rectifie, and make up that which I might not stay to take full or∣der for; and that, by thine Episcopall authority, thou mightst ordaine presbyters in every city of that popu∣lous Iland. See 1 Tim. 3.2.6 If any bee blamelesse, the husband of one wife, having, &c. Teaching to mixe Judaisme with Christianity for their owne private advantage.11 Teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake. One of their owne Poets, even Epimenides,12 One of themselves, even a prophet of their owne, saith; The Cretians are alwaies lyers, evill beasts, slow bellies. prophe∣sied truly of them, when he said of them, though upon an∣other occasion; The Cretians are great liers, cruell op∣pressors, dull, and epicurean gluttons. This testimony,13 This witnesse is true. though spoken of him to another pur∣pose, is very true of these Judaizing Cretians, &c. These Jewish bablers talke of differences of meates,15 Vnto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled, and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even their minde and conscience is defiled. as if some were still impure by vertue of the Leviticall Law, but these men are deceived. For now since the ab∣rogation of those ceremoniall observations, certainly there is no impurity to bee conceived to remaine in the creature it selfe; but what impurity there is, is in the re∣ceiver of them; if the man be pure, all meates are pure
to him; but, if the man bee sinfull and uncleane, in vaine doth he thinke to make choice of his meat, for all that he can touch or taste, is made uncleane to him, by his in∣ward and morall pollution; since thereby his very soule is made odiously uncleane to God. CAP. II. 8 Sound speech that cannot be condemned.LEt that which thou teachest, O Titus, bee sound do∣ctrine, such as, if it come to scanning, cannot be justly censured, &c. 11 For the grace of God, that bringeth salvati∣on, hath appeared to all men.For the great bounty and mercy of God, which offe∣reth and (if they were not wanting to him, and them∣selves, in not beleeving;) bringeth salvation to mankinde; hath beene manifestly shewed, and well approved unto all men in the incarnation of the Sonne of God. 12 Teaching us, that denying ungodlinesse, &c.By vertue whereof, that holy Gospell of his, whereby this salvation is published to the world, teacheth us to avoid ungodlinesse, &c. 13 Looking for that blessed hope, and the glo∣rious appearing of the great God, and our Savi∣our Iesus Christ.Having an eye to that blessed recompence of reward, which wee stedfastly hope for, even that unspeakable glory, which we shall bee possessed fully of, at the appea∣rance of our great God, and Saviour Jesus Christ. CAP. III. 5 According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost:ACcording to his great mercy, he hath saved us, by the meanes of those holy ordinances which hee hath ap∣pointed, and namely (as one of them) by the holy Sacra∣ment of Baptisme, which is the laver of our spirituall re∣generation, yet not by any vertue of the outward signe, but by the inward renovation, which is wrought in us by the holy Ghost. 6 Which hee shed on us abundantly, through Iesus Christ our Saviour.Which holy Ghost hee hath abundantly indued us withall, in the miraculous, and saving graces thereof, by and through Jesus Christ our Saviour, who sends that glorious Comforter of his Church. 9 But avoid foolish questions, &c.See 1 Tim. 1.4. and 1 Tim. 6.5. 10 A man that is an he∣retike, after the first and second admonition, reject.If any man teach, or hold erroneously, concerning the maine points of Christian religion, doe thou give him some serious admonitions, to reclaime him, if it may be; but if once or twice admonishing prevaile not, reject him.
Knowing that such a one is utterly incorrigible,11 Knowing that hee that is such, is subverted, and sinneth, being con∣demned of himselfe. and sinneth wilfully, in not yeelding to the truth; and is there∣fore condemned in his owne conscience, whiles after so palpable a conviction he will yet hold out to maintaine a knowne error. Zenas,13 Bring Zenas the lawyer, and Apollos on their journey diligently. who having beene a professor of the Mosaicall law, is now so much the fitter for the preaching of the Gospell, and Apollo who is mighty in the Scriptures, are comming towards me; Let them be ayded by you in the charge of their journey hitherward, &c. And stirre up those that professe themselves to be our disciples, and well-willers,14 And let ours also learne to maintaine good workes for necessary uses. that they bee ready and for∣ward to doe all workes of charity, and beneficence, &c. THE EPISTLE OF S. PAVL THE APOSTLE TO PHILEMON. CAP. I. OVr fellow-labourer in the Gospell,1 And fellow-labourer. Bishop or Pastor of the Church at Colosse. And to his faithfull consort,2 And to our beloved Apphia, &c. our beloved sister Apphia, &c. My prayers are alwaies for thee;6 That the communi∣cation of thy faith may be∣come effectuall by the ac∣knowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Iesus. that thy faith may ever shew it selfe to bee sound and lively, by those good workes which it shall produce; and that those charitable actions of thine, may give effectuall demon∣stration of the holy graces that are in thee by the gift, and inoperation of Jesus Christ. I beseech thee in the behalfe of Onesimus,10 I beseech thee for my sonne Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds, who is now my convert, as whom, in my imprisonment, I have won to the faith of Christ, Who in times past, whiles he was thy servant,12 Which in time past was to thee unprofitable: but now profitable to thee and to mee. and an unbeleever, was belike contrary to his name, utterly un∣profitable; but now upon his conversion, will make good that which his name imports, and prove profitable both to thee and me.
12 Receive him that is mine owne bowels.Receive him therefore lovingly, whom I esteeme as deare to mee, as my owne bowels. 13 Bonds of the Gospel.In this durance and imprisonment which I endure for the Gospell. 16 Both in the flesh, and in the spirit.How much more deare to thee, both in worldly or civill respects, and in spirituall. 17 If thou count mee therefore a partner, receive him as my selfe.If thou count mee worthy to be a partner of thy love, and dearest respects, and wouldst shew favour to mee, if I were present with thee, doe the same to him, whom I now hold as my other selfe. 20 Refresh my bowels in the Lord.Do thou comfort, and cheere mee up in my spirituall joy, in the Lord, refresh mee in the Lord, refresh mee in these afflictions, which I suffer for Christ, in doing this kindnesse for my sake. THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWES. CAP. I. 1 God who at sundry times, and in diverse man∣ners spake in times past unto the fathers by the prophets.THat God, who in the severall times, and ages of the world, did in many and diverse wayes, and manners, reveale himselfe to our forefa∣thers, by his prophets; in dreames, in visions, in secret inspirations, and instincts, in apparitions of angels; some∣times in the cloud, sometimes in the fire, sometimes in whirlewindes, sometimes in a still voice, Hath now in these, &c. 3 Who being the bright∣nesse of his glory, and the expresse image of his per∣son, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when hee had by himselfe purged our sins, sate downe on the right hand of the Majesty on high.Who being in respect of his divine nature, very God, of very God; light of his Fathers light, the brightnesse of those glorious beames of his eternall essence, and infinite majesty; and being so, the ex∣presse and cleare representation of his Fathers per∣son, as that the substance of the Father doth perfectly shine forth in him; and all that is to be knowne concer∣ning God, is manifested to us, in and by him; and giving supportation, maintenance, preservation to all things,
which hee hath made, by that almighty power of his; when hee had by his owne all-sufficient satisfaction, ex∣piated, and done away all our sinnes; even by himselfe, and his owne pretious blood, shed for us; he then tooke up his rest in the full possession of heavenly glory (even as man) at the right hand of his Father. Being in his very humane nature advanced so much higher then the greatest angels of heaven;4 Being made so much better then the Angels, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name they. by how much he hath obtained a more excellent, & glorious name then they, viz. to be called, and to be the Sonne of God, not by Grace, or adoption, as wee are, but by nature, and e∣ternall communication of essence. And of the Angels hee saith;7 And of the Angels he saith: who maketh his An∣gels spirits, and his mini∣sters a flame of fire. who makes these invi∣sible, and spirituall natures, so swift messengers, as the very windes that passe suddainly round about the earth, and returne not; and makes those his ministring spirits, as quick, piercing, forceable, operative, as flames of fire. Thus hee speakes ever of the Angels, as servants,8 But unto the Sonne he saith, Thy throne (O God) is for ever and ever: a sce∣pter of righteousnesse is the scepter of thy king∣dome. but of the Sonne, he speakes as of the God, and Lord of the Angels; Thy throne O God, &c. Thy kingdome, and government is most just and righteous. See Psal. 45.7.9 Thou hast loved righ∣teousnesse, and hated ini∣quity, therefore God, even thy God, &c. See Isa. 34.4.11 They shall perish, but thou remainest: and they all shall waxe old as doth a garment. CAP. II. SInce therefore it is so, that the Sonne of God,1 Therefore wee ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which wee have heard. which hath now last spoken to us by himselfe, is so much more excellent then the Angels, wee ought to give so much more diligent heed, and reverent respect to the things, which wee have heard spoken by him, &c. For if that law which was given by the ministration of Angels, were of so great awfulnesse;2 For if the word spo∣ken by Angels was sted∣fast, and every transgressi∣on, and disobedience re∣ceived a just recompence of reward; and every trans∣gression thereof, and disobedience thereunto, carryed away a terrible judgement from the just hand of God; How shall wee escape,3 How shall we escape, if wee neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord. if wee neglect the sweet and gratious word of the Gospell, the message and meanes
of our eternall salvation; which first began to be perso∣nally preached by the Lord himselfe, &c. 6 But one in a certaine place testified, saying, What is man, &c.But the holy Psalmist in his eighth Psalme testified, say∣ing; O God, what is man, &c. 7 Thou madest him a little lower then the An∣gels, thou crownedst him with glory and honour, and diddest set him over the workes of thy hands.Thou hast made that very Sonne of man for the little time of his humiliation, here on earth, somewhat lower then the Angels, but thou soone advancedst him againe, and crownedst him with infinite glory, and majesty; and didst make him (as Mediator) the Lord, and King over all the workes of thine hands. 8 But now, wee see not yet all things put under him.But now, as yet, wee doe not indeed see all things actually so subjected to his government, as that none of the rebellious enemies of Christ do rise up against him; it is enough that hee hath taken possession of his glory, and will in his owne due time, subdue all the adverse powers. But in the meane time wee see that Jesus, who was indeed,9 Who was made a little lower then the Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour, that he by the grace of God, should taste death for every man. made a little lower then the Angels, in respect of his suffering of death, (which those blessed spirits are not capable of) wee see him, I say, crowned with glory and honour, who was before humbled by his owne voluntary dispensation, and by the wonderfull grace, and favour of God, towards mankinde, that hee might under∣goe that death for man, which every one is liable unto; and by his tasting of death, sweeten it to all his faithfull ones. 10 For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sonnes unto glory, to make the Captaine of their sal∣vation perfect through sufferings.For it well stood with the justice, and mercy of that infinitely wise, powerful, & holy God, who is the maker, and preserver of all things; for the effecting of that his gratious decree, in saving many sonnes of his, and brin∣ging them to their full glory; to fit this great author, and ring-leader of their salvation, for that wonderfull, and unspeakable glory, wherewith his humanity was to be invested, through many and great sufferings. 11 For both hee that sanctifieth, and they who are sanctified, are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren.For both that Saviour of ours, by whom wee are san∣ctified, and wee that are sanctified, are all of one nature, namely, we have all one common humanity; For which cause hee being, as hee is, God, blessed for ever, is not ashamed to call us, miserable men by the name of his brethren. 14 That through death hee might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devill.That by the suffering of that death, which was due to us for our sinnes, he might strip satan of that power, and advantage, which hee had over mankinde, in the draw∣ing of man into eternall death, by miscarrying him into sinne, whose wages is death. 15 And deliver them who through the feare of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.And that hee might deliver those his chosen children,
from the feare and horrour of temporall death, who in the state of nature, were held continually in a slavish feare, and dreadfull expectation of it. Wherefore since hee would become man,17 Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his bre∣thren, that hee might be a mercifull, and faithfull High-priest, in things per∣taining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. and our el∣der brother, it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren in all things, both in his substance, and affecti∣ons, and infirmities, sinne onely excepted; that out of his experience hee might be approved unto us, a mercifull, and faithfull High-priest, in those things which are re∣quisite to make up a perfect rcconciliation with God, for the sinnes of the people. For in that he himselfe,18 For in that hee him∣selfe hath suffered being tempted, he is able to suc∣cour them that are tem∣pted. in his humane nature hath suf∣fered, being assailed by diverse difficulties, and tryals of affliction, hee is therefore, out of his owne feeling expe∣rience, able to succour those that are thus afflicted, and assaulted. CAP. III. WHerefore, O yee Christian Jewes,1 Wherefore holy bre∣thren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle, and High∣priest of our profession Christ Iesus. who are parta∣kers of this heavenly calling, and brethren by your holy profession; consider and set before your eyes, Jesus Christ, your blessed Saviour, who in respect of the Gospell, is our great and prime Apostle, that brings us the glad tidings of salvation; and in respect to the Law, is our High-priest, who hath offered up a perfect sacrifice for mankinde. Who was faithfull to God his Father,2 Who was faithfull to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithfull in all his house. in all things that were injoyned him to be done, even as (and much more, then ever) Moses was in the Israelitish Church; which was as the great family of God upon earth. Ye have an high opinion of Moses;3 For this man was counted worthy of more glory then Moses, in as much as he who hath buil¦ded the house, hath more honour then the house. but know yee that there is no comparison to be admitted betwixt him, and Christ; for Christ is accounted worthy of so much more honour then Moses, by how much the builder, and master of the house is worthy of more honour, then the house which hee hath built, or any parcell thereof: Now Christ is the maker and owner of this great house of his Church, and Moses is a part of this house of God, as being a member of his Church; and therefore is wor∣thy of much more honour then Moses. The materiall houses wherein wee dwell,4 For every house is builded by some man, but he that built all things is God. are built by the hand of some man; but Christ who is the builder of this great house of the Church, yea of the whole world, is God, and therefore infinitely more excellent, then any creature whatsoever.
5 And Moses verely was faithfull in all his house as a servant, for a te∣stimony of those things which were to be spoken after.And Moses was faithfull in the administration of this whole Church, or house of God, as a servant; in delive∣ring unto the people all that part of Gods will, which he would have then to be declared unto them; and which afterwards was to be more clearely set forth. 6 But Christ as a Sonne over his own house, whose house are wee, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoycing of the hope firme unto the end.But Christ is a faithfull governour, as the Sonne of God, and therefore as the true Lord, and owner of this house; which house or Church of his, wee are, if, as we have received the Christian faith and profession, so wee doe stedfastly hold on the resolute maintenance of the same faith, which onely is able to give us confidence, and cause of rejoycing in the assured hope and expecta∣tion of our glory to come. 8, 9, 11. Harden not your hearts as in the pro∣vocation in the day of temptation in the wilder∣nesse, when your fathers tempted mee, proved me, and saw my workes forty yeares: So I sware in my wrath, they shall not en∣ter into my rest.See Psal. 95. verse 8, 9, 10, 11. 12 Take heed bre∣thren, lest there be in any of you an evill heart of un∣beleefe in departing from the living God.Take heed, brethren, lest after this holy profession, made by you, there be found in any of you an evill, and unbeleeving heart, to fall away, and depart from the co∣lours of the living God, to take part with infidelity. 13 But exhort one ano∣ther daily, whiles it is cal∣led to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulnesse of sinne.But exhort, and stirre up one another, daily, whiles God holds forth this happy oportunity unto you; lest, as it fell out with our forefathers in the wildernesse, so it should betide unto you; that any of you should have his heart hardned, and turned backe towards the spirituall Egypt, through the deceitfull suggestions of sinne. 14 For we are made par∣takers of Christ, if wee hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end.For wee are already made partakers of Christ (in our holy profession) in his word and Sacraments, and shall be fully, and perfectly possessed of him, if wee goe on, ac∣cording to our good beginning, and stedfastly hold that faith, which is onely able to give us confidence and assu∣rance, unto the end. 15 Whiles it is said to day, if yee will heare his voice, harden not, &c.See Psal. 95.8. 16 For some when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses.For not all your forefathers that were brought by the hand of Moses, out of Egypt, did provoke God to
anger, by tempting of him, but some, and those indeed not a few, when they heard his words, yet went on to tempt and offend him. So then wee see they could not enter into the promi∣sed land, because of unbeleefe.19 So wee see that they could not enter in, be∣cause of unbeleefe. CAP. IV. LEt us therefore by their example, take heed, lest,1 Let us therefore feare, lest a promise being left us, of entring into his rest, any of you should seeme to come short of it. since wee have a promise left us by Christ, of entring into his glorious rest (whereof that other was but a dim type) any of you by turning backe to Judaisme, or infi∣delity, should come short of it. It was the very same word of the Gospell that was preached to them of old, and of late unto us;2 For unto us was the Gospell preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it. but how so∣veraine soever it was of it selfe, yet it was not at all avail∣able to the good of many of them; for that it was not mixed with faith, in them that heard it; for without faith in the receiver, the word profiteth nothing. For as they had a rest, which if they had beleeved,3 For wee which have beleeved doe enter into rest, as hee said, As I have sworne in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest, although the workes were finished from the foundation of the world. they had entred into, so have wee also, and that a farre more excellent, and sweet rest, which wee shall (upon our beleefe) enter into; that which God calleth his rest; now that which God calleth his rest, was not that which was his ceasing from his worke of creation, on the seventh day, which was his Sabbath; for those sixe dayes workes of his were finished in the first beginnings of the world; before this other rest was mentioned; so as it is another kinde of rest, whereof God here speaketh, even that sweet complacencie, and contentment which hee takes in his blessed saints, and their glory with him. For as of that other, which is the Sabbath dayes rest,4 For he spake in a cer∣taine place of the seaventh day on this wise. he speaketh on this wise, &c. And in this place againe,5 And in this place a∣gain: If they shall enter in∣to my rest. hee speakes of another kinde of rest; even the fruition of his perfect peace, and glory, whiles he saith, If they shall enter into my rest. Againe, in Davids mention of that rest,7 Againe, hee limiteth a certaine day saying in Da∣vid, To day, after so long a time, as it is said, To day if ye will heare his voice. there is a cer∣taine day limited, and specified, even long after that other rest was out of date; whiles he saith, To day if yee will heare his voice, &c. For if Joshua,8 For if Iesus had given them rest, then would hee not afterward have spo∣ken of another day. by bringing them into the promised land, had given them rest, he would never have spoken of another day of rest, which they should not have.
9 There remaineth therfore a rest to the peo∣ple of God.There is therefore another manner of rest, which is glorious, and heavenly, that remaines for Gods faithfull people. 10 For hee that is en∣tred into his rest, he also hath ceased from his owne workes, as God did from his.For hee that is entred into this blessed, and glorious rest, hee hath utterly ceased from all his unquiet, and troublesome labours, and miserable taskes, which he un∣derwent here on earth: even as God himselfe on his se∣venth day, rested from the workes of his creation. 11 Let us labour there∣fore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbe∣liefe.Let us therefore labour, and strive to enter into that perfect, and blessed rest of glory, and immortality; and let us take heed that none of us bee so miscarried, as our forefathers were, by their unbeliefe, from entring there∣into. 12 For the word of God is quicke and power∣full, and sharper then any two edged sword, pier∣cing even to the dividing asunder of soule and spirit, and of the joynts and mar∣row, and is a discerner of things and intents of the heart.For, it may not be slightly regarded whatsoever the word of God threatens unto us; for even as the judge∣ments, which of old seized on them, were piercing and active; so is the word of God still (which menaces these vengeances to us) quicke, and powerfull, &c. search∣ing into the very inmost powers, and faculties of the soule, and finding out our most close, and reserved thoughts and intentions. 16 Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtaine mercy.Let us therfore in the confident assurance of his readi∣nesse to help us, make our addresse boldly, and cheerfully to the throne of his grace; upon all occasions suing to our bountifull God for a supply of all our necessities, &c. CAP. V. 1 For every High-priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sinnes.FOr Christ is indeed a perfit High-priest, of whom the High-priest under the law was but a figure; we know that whosoever beares this office, is taken from among men of the same mould, and composition with them∣selves; and that hee is ordained for the behoofe, and be∣nefit of men, in divine and spirituall matters; and speci∣ally that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for the sinnes of the people. 2 Who can have com∣passion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for that hee himselfe also is compassed with infirmity.And therefore, in likelihood, such a one, as can pitty the ignorant, and erring; for that he himselfe hath expe∣rience of the manifold infirmities, which call for his com∣passion in others. 6 As he saith also in an∣other place, thou, &c.See Psalm. 110. verse 4.
Who in the time of this present, and mortall life,7 Who in the dayes of his flesh, when he had of∣fered up prayers and sup∣plications, with strong cry∣ing and teares, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared: when hee had offered up the incense of his prayers, and supplications, &c. and was heard, and graciously answe∣red in those extrem agonies, which he endured, not with∣out a true humane, but inoffensive feare. Though being the naturall, and eternall Sonne of God, he was replenished with all perfection of graces and vertues;8 Though hee were a sonne, yet learned hee o∣bedience, by the things which he suffered. yet that he might be a mercifull High-priest for us, he was willing by the experience of his sufferings, to be tutored to an exact obedience. And being thus by his exquisite sufferings,9 And being made per∣fect, he became the author of eternall salvation, unto all them that obey him. and obe∣dience, made a perfect High-priest; hee became the au∣thor of salvation to all those which obey him, in such humble and sincere manner as he obeyed his Father. Seeing ye do yet make your selves uncapable of them,11 Seeing ye are dull of hearing. by fore-stalling your minds with sinister affections, and over-much respect to the Mosaicall law. Whosoever in the schoole of Christ is such,13 For every one that useth milke, is unskilfull in the word of righteousnes. as that he needs to be (as it were) fed with the spoone, and in∣structed in the plainest, and easiest points of religion, that man surely, is uncapable of those higher, and more difficult doctrines of divinity, which require more skill, and more able apprehension to learne them. Those more difficult and profound mysteries of Chri∣stianity,14 But strong meat be∣longeth to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to dis∣cerne both good and evill. belong to them, which are of more growth and strength of knowledge, and spirituall understanding; who have made their mindes inured unto, and exercised in these heavenly speculations, so as they are able to dis∣cerne betweene the good of truth, and the evill of er∣rour. CAP. VI. THerefore not resting our selves contented with the knowledg of the first principles of Christiā religion,1 Therefore leaving the principles of the do∣ctrine of Christ, let us goe on unto perfection, not lay∣ing againe the foundation of repentance from dead workes. let us goe on towards the perfect understanding of the highest mysteries thereof; not needing now to be instru∣cted anew, in the first grounds of our Catechisme, in the doctrine of repentance for sinne, and of faith in God. Those ordinary points of religion,2 Of the doctrine of Baptisme, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrecti∣on of the dead, and of eter∣nall judgement. which are called for of all that are to be baptized, & to be made capable of the imposition of hands, for their confirmation in the faith received; and particularly, that there is an happy re∣surrection of the just to glory; & a judgement unto eter∣nall death and damnation, pertaining to the wicked and ungodly.
3 And this will we do, if God permit.And surely I doubt not but this is our holy and Chri∣stian resolution, God inabling us thereunto: not slack∣ning in our holy profession, not revolting from it; which condition is most fearfull. 4 For it is impossible for those who were once enlightned, and have tasted of the heavenly gifts, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost:For if there be any who have beene once inlightened with the common illuminations of the Spirit of God, and have in some slight measure beene sensibly endow∣ed with those divine gifts, which are wont to lead the way to saving graces, and have beene made partakers of the common graces of the holy Ghost: 5 And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,And have (though not fully fed, yet) pleasingly tasted of the good word of God; and of the effectuall operati∣on of those ordinances and meanes, which tend to the obtaining of a better life; 6 If they shall fall away, to renew them againe unto repentance, seeing they crucifie to themselves the Sonne of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.It will be impossible for such, (if they shall afterwards utterly Apostate frō, & wilfully abandon their Christian faith, renouncing it totally, and malitiously) to recover themselves againe by a sound and seasonable repentance, since they doe by this shamfull revolt, offer a new vio∣lence unto the Son of God; and scornfully fasten him up∣on the Crosse againe, and put him to open shame, and contumely, before the face of the world. 9 But beloved, we are perswaded better things of you, and things that ac∣company salvation, though we thus speake.But my beloved, though we have made this tart com∣parison, of a barren, or ill-bearing soile, whose end is the fire; yet, we have said this, not out of any such hard con∣ceit that wee have of you, as for your warning, and af∣frighting from your sinnes; for we are perswaded better things of you, making full account of you, that yee are those that are ordained unto eternall salvation. 10 For God is not un∣righteous to forget your work, and labour of love, which yee have shewed toward his name, in that ye have ministred to the Saints, and doe minister.For it hath pleased God to give very gracious evidēces of your glory to come; in that he hath so happily wrought in you, inabled you to doe good; neither is, or can God be unrighteous in not perfecting, & retributing that your painfull love and zeale, which you shewed to his Name, in that ye have carefully, and beneficently ministred to the necessity of his Saints, &c. 12 Who through faith and patience, inherit the promises;Who now upon the power of their faith and patience, holding to the end, inherit that great and endlesse glory which was promised unto them; 14 Saying, Surely, bles∣sing I will blesse thee, and multiplying I wil multiply thee.Saying, By my selfe I have sworne that I will excee∣dingly blesse and multiply thee, &c. 17 The heires of pro∣mise, the immutability of his counsell, confirmed it by an oath.To the heires of that promised inheritance of heaven∣ly blessednesse; the unchangablenesse and stability of his decree; confirmed his promise by on oath. That so by two immutable things, viz. Gods promise and his oath,18 That by two immu∣table things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold up∣on the hope set before us. in both or either of which, it was impossi∣ble
for God to lie, we might have a strong, and unmove∣able consolation; who have in all our doubts and distres∣ses fled to him as our sure stay, and refuge; laying hold upon that glory and happinesse which is set before us, by the hand of a lively and stedfast hope, and confident ex∣pectation thereof. Which hope is to the soule,19 Which hope wee have as an anchor of the soule, both sure and sted∣fast, and which entreth in∣to that within the vaile. as an anchor is to the ship, a sure and stedfast stay thereunto in all the stormes, and tempests of temptation; which is firmely pitched, not below on earth, but above in heaven, the true holy of Holies, within the vaile. Whither Jesus Christ our blessed ringleader,20 Whither the fore∣runner is for us entred: even Iesus made an high Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec. and fore∣runner, is before-hand entred for us, to take possession thereof, even for us also; and there to intercede for us, as being an High-Priest for ever, after the order of Mel∣chisedec. CAP. VII. BEing by his name, Melchisedec,2 To whom also Abra∣ham gave a tenth part of all: first being by inter∣pretation King of righte∣ousnesse, and after that also King of Salem which is King of peace. King of righteous∣nesse; and, by his title, King of Salem, that is, of peace, and therefore carrying in his very appellation those two honorable attributes of his royalty, peace and righteous∣nesse. Brought in Without any father,3 Without father, with∣out mother, without de∣scent, having neither be∣ginning of dayes, nor end of life: but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a Priest continually. or mother mentioned in the Scripture; without any mention of his pedigree or de∣scent; without any record either of his beginning, or ending; in all these regards resembling the Son of God; doth therefore abide an High-Priest for ever, in that there is no intimation given of any time wherein that office of his ceased. But this Melchisedec,6 But he whose descent is not counted from them, received tithes of Abra∣ham, and blessed him that had the promises. whose descent is not reckoned either from Levi or Abraham; as being before them both, and of an higher (though not recorded) pedigree, received tithes even of Abraham himselfe; and blessed that man, in whose seed all the nations of the earth were promised to be blessed. And here men that are mortall,8 And here men that die, receive tithes: but there he receiveth them, of whom it is witnessed that he liveth. and whose death and succession is apparently notified, receive tithes; but in that history of Abraham, he receiveth tithes, of whom there is no other mention but of his life, and continu∣ance. And, as I may so say, Levi himselfe,9 And as I may so say, Levi also who receiveth tithes, payed tithes in A∣braham. the father of that Priestly Tribe, who received tithes from all the rest of Israel, payed tithes (after a sort) to Melchisedec, in and
by the hands of his father Abraham.10 For hee was yet in the loines of his father, when Melchisedec met him. For hee was potentially in the loynes of his great grand-father Abraham, when Melchisedec met him. If therefore perfect justification, and full consumma∣tion,11 If therefore perfecti∣on were by the Leviticall Priest-hood, (for under it the people received the Law) what further need was there that another Priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the or∣der of Aaron? both of grace and glory, might have beene had by the ministery and sacrifices of the Leviticall Priest-hood, (for under it the people received the great variety of lawes and ordinances from God, by which they were go∣verned) what further need was there, that another High-priest should arise, of a more high and excellent order, which is the order of Melchisedec; and not rather hold on still in that Leviticall line, and order from Aaron? 12 For the Priest-hood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.As the Priest-hood is no small part of the law and or∣dination of God, and that which is exercised in, and a∣bout the care and over-sight of the observations thereof; so it must thereupon follow, that the Priest-hood being changed, the law must of necessity be changed also. 13 For hee of whom these things are spoken, pertaineth to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the Al∣tar.For that Messiah of whom these things are spoken, that he should be such an High-priest, pertaineth to a quite other tribe, then that of Levi; even to the royall Tribe of Juda, out of which none ever descended that served at the Altar of God. 16 Who is made, not after the law of a carnall commandement, but after the law of an endlesse life.Who is made an High-Priest, not by vertue of a com∣mand, or institution, which stands upon a fleshly succes∣sion, but upon that infinite power of God, which conti∣nueth an endlesse life unto him, without all need, or pos∣sibility of a successour. For that old Mosaicall law was disannulled by reason of the weaknesse thereof,18 For there is verily a disannulling of the com∣mandement going before, for the weaknesse and un∣profitablenesse thereof. and the utterly disability that it had to justifie, and save any client whomsoever; another therefore, which is an Evangelicall law, must of necessity come in the roome of it. 19 For the law made nothing perfect: but the bringing in of a better hope did: by the which we draw nigh unto God.For the Law verily could not, by the rituall observa∣tions thereof, give perfit justification to any follower of it; but this new Law and Priest-hood of Christ, which raises up our hearts to a comfortable hope and assurance of the favour of God, and salvation, brings us at last un∣to an happy perfection. 20 And in as much as not without an oath hee was made Priest,And in so much as God doth not mention his ordain∣ing of Christ to be an High-priest without the preface of a solemne oath, 21 (For those Priests were made without an oath: but this with an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord sware, and will not repent, &c.(For those other Leviticall High-Priests were not brought in with this solemne attestation of the oath of the Almighty; but this true and onely High-priest, was so; whiles it is said: The Lord sware, and will not re∣pent. Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Mel∣chisedec.
By so much was Jesus made the undertaker and Me∣diator of a more noble, and excellent covenant,22 By so much was Ie∣sus made a surety of a bet∣ter testament. which God hath made with mankinde, under the Gospell, then that old covenant whereof Moses was the interpreter. But that other ordination and profession,28 For the Law maketh men high Priests which have infirmitie, but the word of the oath which was since the law, maketh the Sonne, who is conse∣crated for evermore. which God made since the Law, wherein by his word & his oath, he published a more perfect Priest-hood, declareth his eter∣nall Sonne to be that High-priest, who is fully glorified for evermore. CAP. VIII. A Minister of that glorious Sanctuary,2 A minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man. whereof this below was but a figure; and of that everlasting Ta∣bernacle of heaven, which was pitcht by the hands of God alone; and not by men, as that other Mosa∣icall Tabernacle was; which is indeed the truth, and substance of that, whereof that other was but a type, and shadow. For if he were such an High-priest,4 For if hee were on earth, he should not bee a Priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the Law. as ye Jewes would have your Messias to bee, conversing still on earth, and exercising these Leviticall actions, in a materiall Tem∣ple, hee should bee indeed no Priest at all; seeing yee know those Priests which doe these like functions, are of another Tribe, then that whereof hee was; neither were there any use of him for these kinde of sacrifices; neither could they be worthy of an High-priest, of so glorious order & condition; others were by God assigned to that purpose. Whose service was altogether umbraticall,5 Who serve unto the example, and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished, &c. and Ty∣picall; shadowing, and representing heavenly things, by these outward, and earthly rites, fabricks, sacrifices: As Moses was admonished, &c. By how much Christ is the Mediator of a more ex∣cellent covenant, even that Evangelicall,6 But now hath he ob∣tained a more excellent mi∣nistery, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises. more excellent then the legall, which is grounded upon the promises of life, and salvation to every beleever. For if that other covenant of workes and rituall obser∣vations could have beene fully able to justifie mankinde,7 For if that first cove∣nant had beene faultlesse, then should no place have beene sought, &c. then should no place have beene left for this other cove∣nant of faith.8 For finding fault with them, he saith, Behold, the dayes comes (saith the Lord) when I will make, &c. But as finding an insufficiency in the trust which they
reposed in the old covenant; he promiseth a better; say∣ing, Behold, in the dayes of the Gospell, I will (saith the Lord) make, &c. 10 For this is the cove∣nant that I will make, &c.See Ier. 31.33.34. CAP. IX. 1 Then verely the first Covenant had also ordi∣nances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary.THen verely, that first covenant was altogether in types, and significations of spirituall things, consi∣sting of many ceremonies, and having an outward, and materiall sanctuary. 2 For there was a Ta∣bernacle made, the first wherein was a candle∣sticke, and the Table, and the shew-bread, which is called the Sanctuary.For there was a tabernacle made; in the first roome whereof (which was next to the open court where the people assembled) was the candlesticke and the Tables, whereon the shew-bread was dayly set; and this former roome was called the holy place, or Sanctuary. 3 And after the second vaile, the Tabernacle, which is called the holiest of all:And within the vaile, there was a second roome of the Tabernacle called the holy of holies; or the holiest of all. 4 Which had the gol∣den censor, and the arke of the covenant, over laid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aarons rod that budded, and the Tables of the Co∣venant.Into which the High-priest onely entred with his gol∣den censor; and in which was the Arke of the Covenant, over-laid round about with gold; within which Arke were reserved the two tables of the Law; and in the verge whereof were kept the pot of Manna, which God would have laid up for a monument of that miraculous provi∣sion for Israel, and the rod of Aaron that budded. 5 And over it the Che∣rubims of glory shado∣wing the mercy-seat, of which wee cannot now speake particularly.And over it were those glorious Cherubims, whose wings, being spread forth, shadowed the cover of the Arke, which was called the mercy-seat; of all which seve∣rall things, there is no need in this place to make a parti∣cular discourse. 6 The Priests went al∣waies into the first Ta∣bernacle, accomplishing the service of God.The priests went daily into the first roome of the Ta∣bernacle, accomplishing those ordinary services of God, which were required of them in their daily ministra∣tion. 7 But into the second went the High-Priest a∣lone once every yeare, not without blood, which hee offered for himselfe, and for the errours of his people.But into the second, or inner roome of the Taber∣nacle, went the High-priest alone, once every yeare, not without a solemne sacrifice, first offered, (and the blood thereof sprinkled about) for the expiation of his owne sinnes, and for the errours, and over-sights of the people. 8 The holy Ghost this signifieth, that the way in∣to the holiest of all, was not yet made manifest, while as the first Taber∣nacle was yet standing.The holy Ghost signifying this mystery unto us, that while the outer roome of the Tabernacle (whereby was
signified the state of the Church under the law) stood, separated by a vaile from the holiest of all; (which repre∣sented heaven) the way to heaven howsoever it were knowne to some few, yet was not openly manifested to the world, as it was by Christ afterward. Which outward roome of the Tabernacle,9 Which was a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service per∣fect, as pertaining to the conscience, and the court leading thereinto was a figure of the then present time and condition under the old law, wherein were of∣fered both gifts and sacrifices of all kindes; yet such, as in, and of themselves, had no power or vertue, to acquit and justifie him that did that service; and to appease and cleare the conscience in spirituall matters. Which said law consisted, for the most part,10 Which stood onely in meates and drikes, and divers washings, and car∣nall ordinances imposed on them untill the time of reformation. in the differences of meates, and drinkes, cleane and uncleane, in divers washings and rinsings, and manifold outward bodily ceremonies, and rituall observations, imposed upon the Jewish people, untill the time of the new Te∣stament; wherein the Messias should rectifie and re∣forme, and supply, whatsoever was amisse or wanting in their performances. But Christ being now comne,11 But Christ being come an High-priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building: a true and ever-glori∣ous High-priest, bringing and obtaining eternall happi∣nesse to his Church, hath in his humane nature, which is a more noble and excellent Tabernacle, then that mate∣riall one; and of a divine making, (whereas that other was made by the hands of men,) Not with the shedding,12 Neither by the blood of goats and calves: but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternall redemption for us. and sprinkling of the blood of, whether goats or calves, or any other beasts, but ha∣ving willingly shed his owne most pretious blood; hee entred once for all into the high and holy heavens, ha∣ving thereby redeemed us from sinne, and death, and ob∣tained an everlasting inheritance for us. For if the blood of buls, &c. sanctified so farre,13 For if the blood of buls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprink∣ling the uncleane, sancti∣fieth to the purifying of the flesh; as to wash off a legall impurity from the flesh, How much more shall the blood of Christ,14 How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternall Spirit, offered himselfe without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead workes, to serve the living God. who by the motion of his eternall Spirit (the infinite efficacie and power whereof made his death fully meritorious, and perfectly availeable) offered himselfe, as a most pure, and spotlesse sacrifice unto God; purge and cleanse your conscience from all those sinfull, and odious corruptions, which are noysome to God, and deadly to your owne soules; that yee might be wholly consecrated to the ser∣vice of the true and living God.15 And for this cause hee is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by meanes of death, for the redemption of the trans∣gressions that were made under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternall inheritance. And for this cause is he the mediator of the new Te∣stament;
not that hee might flourish, and raigne upon earth, in an outward pompe, as yee Jewes vainly ima∣gine, but that hee might suffer death even for those transgressions, under the old Testament, which the blood of beasts could no way expiate, and that all those which are effectually called by him, might receive the promise and performance of an eternall inheritance. 16 For where a Testa∣ment is, there must also of necessitie be the death of the Testator.Neither should it seeme strange to you to heare of the death of the Messias; for where a testament is, there must be also of necessity the death of the Testator. 19 Hee tooke the blood of calves, and of goats, with water and scarlet wooll, and hysope, and sprinkled both the booke and all the people.Hee tooke the blood of calves and goats, mixing it with water; that it might not clodder and congeale to∣gether, and dipping therein scarlet wooll which might drinke up and retaine it, and sprigs of hyssop, that might disperse it abroad, hee sprinkled therewith both the booke of the Law, and the people, to signifie that nei∣ther that law could bee fulfilled, nor the people freed from their sinnes, but onely by the blood of Christ. 22 And without shed∣ding of blood is no remis∣sion.Without shedding, and sprinkling of blood, there was no doing away of any legall impurities: and without Christs blood shed, no doing away of any spirituall, or morall impurity of the soule. 23 It was therefore ne∣cessary that the patternes of things in the heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices then these.It was therefore necessary that this earthly Taber∣nacle (which was a patterne of the heavenly, and spiritu∣all) should be thus consecrated with these earthly rites, and with the blood of beasts; but the true spirituall and heavenly Tabernacle, which is his holy Church it selfe, was to be purified with a better sacrifice, even with the blood of Christ. 24 For Christ is not en∣tred into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it selfe.For Christ is not entred into that externall and ma∣teriall holy of holies, which was a type of that true and blessed sanctuary of heaven, but into the very heaven it∣selfe, &c. 28 So Christ was once offered to beare the sinnes of many, and unto them that looke for him, shall he appeare the second time without sinne unto salva∣tion.So Christ was once offered, to make full satisfaction for the sins, not of some few, but of many, yea of all man∣kinde, if they could all beleeve in him; and unto those that are his, who love and looke for his glorious appea∣rance, shall he come againe and shew himselfe, not in in∣firmity, as before, but with power; not to be offered up againe for sinne, but to judge sinners, and to perfect the salvation of his elect.
CAP. X. THe Spirituall state of things is like unto a picture,1 For the Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of things, can ne∣ver with those sacrifices which they offered yeare by yeare continually, make the commers thereunto perfect. wherein there are first, some rude lines chalked out; afterward, the colours are laid, and the full resemblance expressed; even so it was here; the law was but as the first rude draught of good things, to come; and had not the full image, or lively expression of the things them∣selves; & therefore could never by those shadowie sacri∣fices, which they offered cōtinually, yeare by yeare, make perfect those that followed the rules, & practise thereof. For where there is no sinne,2 For then would they not have ceased to be of∣fered, because that the worshipers once purged, should have had no more conscience of sinnes. there needs not be any offering for sinne; if therefore sinne had beene done fully away, by those offerings; what use could there have beene of any more oblations? since that these legall worshipers, being once purged from their sinne, should have found no more trouble in their conscience for that sinne, from which they were once cleared. But now it is plaine,3 But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance a∣gaine made of sinnes eve∣ry yeare. that in these legall sacrifices there is a continuall refrication of the memory of those sinnes every yeare, which wee have committed, so as we are put in minde, both of our guilt thereby, and of satisfaction to be made unto God for it. Wherefore when hee intimates the incarnation of Christ, and his comming into the world in the flesh,5 Wherefore when hee commeth into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and offe∣ring thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou pre∣pared mee. hee saith, Sacrifice and oblation is not the thing that thou restest in, or wherein thou receivest full satisfaction: but thou hast personally designed mee to thy perfect, and en∣tire service; both in doing and suffering; and thereby art reconciled to the world. See Psal. 40.7.7 Then said I, Lo I come, (In the volume of the book it is written of me) to doe thy will, O God. Hee taketh away the use of sacrifices, and oblations,9 Hee taketh away the first, that hee may establish the second. that he may establish the perfect use, and improvement of Christs incarnation, and exquisite obedience. That will which Christ came to doe,10 By the which will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Iesus Christ, once for all. was Gods de∣cree of his perfect fulfilling the Law, and suffering death for our redemption; by the exact performance whereof, we are sanctified, through his voluntary offering of him∣selfe to death, once for all mankinde. Every priest after the Leviticall order,11 And every Priest standeth daily ministring, and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins. is imployed dayly, in his externall ministration, and offereth often∣times, the same kinde of outward, and bodily sacrifices, which yet have not the vertue to take away any sins at all. For by one offering hee hath perfectly satisfied for all those whom hee hath chosen to himselfe;14 For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. and hath
thereby wrought out the salvation of all those which are, or shall be in all times sanctified to his service, and glory. 19 Having therefore, brethren, boldnesse to en∣ter into the Holiest by the blood of Iesus;Now therefore, seeing we see so happy a change made, that whereas under the law, none but the High-priest might enter into the holy of Holies, with the blood of beasts, now wee all may have free entrance into heaven it selfe (which is the truth and substance of that shadow) through the pretious blood of Jesus Christ. 20 By a new and living way which he hath conse∣crated for us, through the vaile, that is to say, his flesh;As under the law, the High-priest passed through the vaile into the Holy of holies; so now under the Gospell, the vaile, through which we must enter into the holy heavens, is the flesh of Christ; that is the new, and everliving way, which is ordained, and consecrated for our onely passage into glory. 21 And having an high Priest over the house of God;And having now, insteed of that Leviticall Priest∣hood, so absolute and glorious an High-priest, set over the whole Church of God, 22 Let us draw neere with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evill conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.Let us doe all things really, and spiritually, which were signified by those externall rites; and therefore, let us draw neare unto God, not with outward aspersions, but with a true heart, in full confidence, and stedfast relyance upon the mercies of God; having (instead of those outward sprinklings of the body) our hearts sprink∣led, and cleansed from an evill conscience; even from all our sinfull corruptions; and our bodies washed, as with baptismall water, whereby wee are initiated into the Church, so also sanctified by the Spirit of God, and de∣livered from all filthinesse of sinne. 24 And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good workes.And let us have a charitable, and tender respect one to another; in stead of those strange and envious disposi∣tions, and carriages, that are wont to be betwixt Jewes and Gentiles; let us so frame our selves and our affecti∣ons, as that we may draw on each other to mutuall love, and good workes. 25 Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is: but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day ap∣proaching.Not withdrawing, & utterly separating our selves from the assemblies of Gods people, upon conceit of the pecu∣liar rights, & prerogatives, which God hath given to the Jewes, above the Gentiles; and standing upon the high termes of difference, as the manner of some is; but rather incouraging and exhorting one another, to these holy services, and so much the rather, now, because yee know, that the day of the Lords comming draweth on. 26 For if we sinne wil∣fully, after that wee have received the knowledge of the truth, there remai∣neth no more sacrifice for sinnes.For if we do wilfully abandon the Church of God, & fall totally away from that saving truth, & holy religion, which we have received the knowledge of, and professed to imbrace; purposely, and malitiously opposing our selves thereunto, thus sinning against the holy Ghost;
there remaineth no way, or meane to expiate our sinne, since that blood of Christ, which is the onely sacrifice for sinne, is thus by us contemned, and troden under foot. Neither doth, or can ought remaine for us,27 But a certaine fear∣full looking for of judge∣ment, and fiery indignati∣on, which shall devour the adversaries. in this fear∣full, and deplorable condition, but a certain dreadfull ex∣spectation of Gods terrible judgments, and that wrath and indignation of his, which shall be as a consuming fire to devoure the wilfull adversaries of his Truth. Hee that did willingly violate,28 Hee that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses. or transgresse (much more that did wilfully contemne, or blaspheme) the law of Moses, suffered death, without mercy, upon the accu∣sation, and evidence of two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye,29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose yee, shall hee be thought wor∣thy, who hath troden un∣der foot the Son of God, & hath counted the blood of the covenant, where∣with hee was sanctified an unholy thing, and hath done despight unto the spi∣rit of grace. shall that wilfull apostate be thought worthy of, who by his revolt, from the profession of Christ, and his contemptuous op∣position to his Gospel, hath, as it were, troden under foot, the Son of God; and powred contempt, and scorne, upon that precious blood of Christ, wherewith the covenant betwixt God, and his people is made, and ratified, and that, whereupon dependeth all the sanctification of men; making no difference betwixt that sacred blood of his, & the blood of brute creatures, and hath done a spightfull affront unto that good Spirit of God, whereby grace is wrought in the hearts of men, by contemning and op∣posing the gratious motions thereof. But do ye call to remembrance those good,32 But call to remem∣brance the former dayes, in which, after yee were illu∣minated, yee endured a great fight of afflictions. and holy beginnings of yours, when ye first received the Gospell; how that after yee were inlightned with the knowledge of Christ, ye did cheerfully resolve to suffer for his name, and underwent a great triall of afflictions, for your good profession. For in these manifold, and great difficulties,36 For yee have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, yee might receive the pro∣mise. and fiery trials, ye will have need of a strong and invincible pati∣ence, that after ye have undergone, and fulfilled the will of God, in your active and passive obedience, ye may be made partakers of the promised inheritance. Neither shall ye need to feare that ye shall linger over long, under your sufferings;37 For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tary. for God your sure and graci∣ous deliverer, hath set the time, wherein he will free you from all your troubles; and that time shall not be long, neither can be protracted beyond that period, which he hath limited unto it. Untill the accomplishment whereof (however it may seeme delayed) the true and sound Christian shall live,38 Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw backe, my soule shall have no pleasure in him. and uphold himselfe, by the strength of his faith; but if any man shall cowardly slinke from his holy profession, and renounce that calling of his Christianity, which hee
sees thus persecuted, my soule shall hate that man, as worthy of the displeasure both of God and man. 39 But wee are not of them who draw back un∣to perdition: but of them that beleeve to the saving of the soule.But we are not of them which apostate from Christ to their utter damnation; but of that number of belee∣vers, which persist in a lively faith, and constant professi∣on, to the saving of our soules. CAP. XI. 1 Now faith is the sub∣stance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seene.NOw this faith wherof we speake, and which we hold fast is that, which gives us a present cōfidence in, and a fruition of those things, which are onely yet in hope ours; and that which doth clearely and certainly reveale and disclose unto us those things, which are not discern∣able by the eye of sense, or reason. 2 For by it the Elders obtained a good report.Neither, did our fore-fathers any other way finde ac∣ceptation from the hands of God, then by their faith. 3 Through faith we un∣derstand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seene were not made of things which doe appeare.Whereas the wisest heathens have doubtfully dispu∣ted concerning the state of the world, whether it had any beginning, and how it came to have a being; we, through faith, doe clearely apprehend the truth of this matter; and doe certainely understand that the world was fra∣med by the all-powerfull word of God; and that it was made of nothing; so as of that which was not at all, nor had any pre-existence in nature, was made this visible frame of heaven, and earth. 4 By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain, by which he obtained witnes, that hee was righteous; God testifying of his gifts, and by it he being dead, yet speaketh.It was onely the faith of Abel, that made the diffe∣rence betwixt his sacrifice, and the sacrifice of Cain; whereupon God gave a sensible testimony of his accep∣ting, first the person, and then the offering of Abel; and, by the vertue of that faith it was, that God regarded so the blood of Abel, as that, after he was dead, he heard the cry thereof, and tooke order for the revenge of it. It was upon the faith of Enoch, that he was in an extra∣ordinary,5 By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not found, because God had translated him: for before his translation, &c. and supernaturall maner translated from earth to heaven; without passing through the gates of death, which is the common way of mankinde; and was no more to be found upon earth, because God had miracu∣lously translated him, &c. 7 By the which he con∣demned the world, and became heire of the righ∣teousnesse which is by faith.By which example of his obedience, and faith, he con∣demned the unbeleefe, and obstinacy of the world; and shewed, by his preservation, that the world did justly pe∣rish, for not being warned by him; whose word, if they had obeyed, they had escaped that destruction. 10 For hee looked for a citie which hath foun∣dations, whose builder and maker is God.Hee was content to dwell, a while, in those moving Tents, because his heart was set upon the expectati∣on
of a fixed, and during city, in heaven; the foundati∣ons whereof are eternall; whose builder, and maker is God. By faith,11 Through faith also Sarah her selfe received strength to conceive seed. Sarah her selfe (though at first she laughed distrustfully) recollecting her selfe, received strength to conceive, &c. Therefore sprang there of one (even Abraham) who was (in respect of any likelihood of propagation) as good as dead, an innumerable issue, &c.12 Therfore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the starres. These all died in faith, not having received the per∣formance of those gracious promises,13 These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seene them a farre off. concerning the comming of the Messiah in the flesh, & the accomplish∣ment of his spirituall Kingdome; but having seene them a farre off, &c. They that doe confesse themselves to be strangers,14 For they that say such things, declare plainly, that they seeke a country. and pilgrims on earth, doe therein plainly declare, that their thoughts, and endevours are bent upon their glorious home in heaven. It was not in respect of Mesopotamia,15 And truly, if they had beene mindfull of that countrey, from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to, &c. whence they came, that they accounted themselves strangers; for if they had had a mind thither, they might have had oppor∣tunity to have returned. But accounting themselves strangers, both in Chaldea,16 But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he hath pre∣pared for them a citie. and in Canaan, they raised up their hearts to the desire of a better country, that is, an heavenly; and God re∣spected them accordingly; disdaining to intitle himselfe particularly by their name; as styling himselfe their God; having prepared for them that blessed city, and country of heavenly glory, which they looked for. From whence, also, in a sort, hee received him;19 From whence also he received him in a fi∣gure. in that the suddaine, and inexpected ereption of Isaac from that his imminent, and intended death, was, as it were, a figure, and resemblance of his raising from the dead. By faith Isaac did so blesse Jacob, and Esau,20 By faith Isaac bles∣sed Iacob and Esau con∣cerning things to come. concern∣ing their future estate, as that he both knew, and signi∣fied, that the elder should serve the younger; and gave a greater benediction to Jacob, then to his elder brother.21 And worshipped leaning upon the top of his staffe. And being now so weake with age, that hee was not able to stand upright, hee, leaning upon the top of his staffe, worshipped God; and prayed for a blessing on E∣phraim, and Manasseh. And feared not the danger of not fulfilling the edict of Pharaoh, concerning the drowning of the males, &c.23 And they not afraid of the Kings commaude∣ment. Esteeming that reproach (which hee,26 Esteeming the re∣proch of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Aegypt. together with Gods people, suffered, in, and for the expectation of Christ, whom he fore-saw to come,) greater riches, then all the treasures of Aegypt, &c.
27 By faith he forsooke Aegypt not fearing the wrath of the King: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.By faith, he having forsaken Aegypt, upon the slaugh∣ter of the Aegyptian, returned to bring Gods message for the deliverance of his people, not fearing the wrath of King Pharaoh; but resolved to undergoe all dangers, as setting before his eyes that powerfull God, which is invisible; whom he knew to be both able, and willing to rescue him. 28 Through faith hee kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the first borne, should touch them.Through faith, he kept that Passover, which God or∣dained, and appointed; and caused the posts, and lintells of the Israelites doores to be sprinkled with blood, that the destroying Angell, which slew the first borne of the Aegyptians, might not touch them. 33 Who through faith subdued Kingdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obtained promises, stop∣ped the mouthes of lions,Who through faith, subdued kingdomes, as Josuah, and David: wrought righteousnesse, carrying them∣selves justly in their government, as Samuel, and David; obtained the promises made unto them, by God, as A∣braham, of a sonne; Caleb and Joshuah of the promised land; Gedeon & Jepthe of victories; stopped the mouths of Lions, as Samson, and as Daniel; 34 Quenched the vio∣lence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weaknesse were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens.Quenched the violence of the fire, not being so much as scorched therewith, as the three children; escaped the edge of the sword, and David the sword of Saul, Elias of Jezebel; out of weaknesse were made strong, as Job, and Ezekias; became valiant in battell, as Joshua, Sam∣son, Samgar, and David; turned to flight the armies of aliens, as Samson, Jonathan, Jehosaphat. 35 Women received their dead raised to life a∣gaine, and others were tortured, not accepting de∣liverance, that they might obtaine a better resurrecti∣on.Women received their dead restored to life, as the Shunamite, and the Sareptan; others were tortured, and tormented for their religion, and would not accept of deliverance, and ease, (as Eleazar and the Maccabean brothers,) that dying for Gods cause, they might be par∣takers of an happy resurrection to eternall life. They were stoned, as Zachariah; they were sawne a sunder,36 They were stoned, they were sawne asunder. as Esay, &c. 39 And these all having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise.All these, having received a good testimony, and a gratious acceptation through their faith, yet received not that large measure of grace, which was promised, and performed under the Gospell; neither did injoy the pre∣sence of that (now-exhibited) Saviour, in whom all the promises of God are Yea and Amen. 40 God having provi∣ded some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made per∣fect.God having provided for us, in these later times, bet∣ter things, even the manifestation of Christ in the flesh, and abundance of grace and illumination; that they might not over-runne us in spirituall priviledges, and perfection; and that their salvation and happinesse might wholly depend upon that, which is exhibited, and per∣formed in our dayes.
CAP. XII. VVHerefore since wee are compassed about with such innumerable examples of holy men,1 Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed a∣bout with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sinne which doth so easily beset us, and let us runne with patience unto the race that is set before us. who have so fully testified the vertue, and power of faith, let us, (as those that runne a race) cast away every thing that may clog and burden us in our passage; and particularly all our sinfull corruption, which is both the heaviest, and closest weight that lies upon the soule, & let us stirre up our selves to runne with patience, and couragious reso∣lution, the race that is set before us. Yee have indeed suffered many things for the name of Christ, ye have beene stripped of your goods,4 Ye have not yet resi∣sted unto blood striving a∣gainst sinne. and affli∣cted in your bodies, but yet ye have not (which yee must not refuse, if ye be called unto it) suffered death, for the defence of the truth, and opposition to wickednesse, and errour. If ye be utterly exempted from whatsoever chastise∣ments, (whereof,8 But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are yee bastards, and not sonnes. all the true Sonnes of God are parta∣kers) this shall argue unto you, that yee are not the true, and naturall, but the base and supposititious sons of God. As it is in these humane corrections,11 Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous but grievous: neverthelesse, afterward it yeeldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousnesses un∣to them which are exerci∣sed thereby. those chastise∣ments, which were grievous unto our childhood, are af∣terwards allowed of us, as profitable unto us; so it is in these afflictions from the hand of God; none of them are for the time, pleasing; but grievous and irksome; yet afterwards, we finde them to bee exceeding beneficiall; working an happy, and sweet peace in the heart, after all the unquiet broyles and tumults of temptation; and a blessed increase of all grace, and sanctification, in the soule of him, that is therewith exercised. Wherefore, comfort your selves with these things,12 Wherefore lift up the hands, which hang downe, and the feeble knees: and rouze up your fainting courage, to the chearefull indu∣ring of all afflictions. And go on evenly,13 And make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame bee turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed; and steddily in this course of Chri∣stianity, which yee have entred into; lest yee come once to halt betwixt truth, and errour, God and the world; ye be, at the last, utterly perverted; but be carefull rather, upon the first sense of your doubts, or complaints, to re∣ceive full satisfaction, and due incouragement. Looking diligently, not onely to your selves,15 Looking diligently, lest any man faile of the grace of God, lest any root of bitternesse spring∣ing up, trouble you and thereby many be defiled. but to each other also; carefully stirring up each other, lest any man languish in and come short, of that grace of God which hee either had, or might have had; lest any erroneous, or apostating spirit rise up among you,
and trouble your peace, and draw away (or at least) in∣fect many. 17 For hee found no place of repentāce, though he sought it carefully with teares.For though he did at last earnestly, and with teares re∣pent him of his bargaine; yet he found no such benefit of that his late repentance, as thereby to recover that which he yeelded to forgoe; neither could those teares of his move his father Isaac, to repent of that benediction, which he had justly given to Jacob. 18 For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that bur∣ned with fire, not unto blacknesse, and darknesse. and tempest.I would have you to know, and seriously consider, that under the Gospell, there is required a greater care of your holy cariage, then there was under the Law, by how much the meanes thereof are more gracious, and effectuall; This different condition may be well expres∣sed to you, by two Mounts, the one of Sinai, the other of Sion; ye are not then comne to that earthly, and mate∣riall mount of Sinai, which might be touched and felt; and that burned (in a delivery of the Law,) and was com∣passed about with blacknesse, and darknesse, and tem∣pest. 22 But ye are come un∣to mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Ierusa∣lem, and to an innumera∣ble company of Angels:But ye are comne to the spirituall mount Sion; even to the holy Church of the living God; the heavenly Jeru∣salem; where ye shall bee in the society of innumerable Angells. 23 To the generall as∣semblies, and Church of the first borne which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect.Where ye shall be joyned to the universall company of those Saints of God, that are, and have beene most emi∣nent in grace here on earth, and are most conspicuous for glory, above; where ye shall injoy the presence of God, the righteous, & glorious Judge, governor of all; and of the glorified Spirits of just, and holy men, which are now happy in the blessed vision of God. 24 And to Iesus the Me∣diatour of the new Cove∣nant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things then that of Abel.Where ye shall injoy the presence of our deare Savi∣our, Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator of the new Tes∣ment, whose blood being shed for the redemption of mankind, calls out unto God, not for revenge, as Abels, but for a full remission of sinne, and reconciliation of man unto God. 25 See that yee refuse not him that speaketh: for if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth; much more shall not wee escape if wee turne a∣way from him that speak∣eth rom heaven.See then that ye refuse not that Christ, which speak∣eth unto you, in his heavenly Gospell; For if they escaped not, who refused to harken to the Law, which God by Angell delivered to man, here upon earth; how much lesse shall we escape, if we despise the Gospell, which is delivered unto us from heaven? Whose voice then, in the delivery of the Law was so terrible,26 Whose voice then shooke the earth, but now he hath promised, saying, that it caused the earth to tremble, and quake; but now speaking of the promulgation, and successe of his Gospell, he promiseth a further change, and motion,
that he will make, even in the heaven also, and in the spirituall condition of his Church. And this word, Once more, signifieth,27 And this word yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot bee shaken may remaine. that one maine alteration, that shall be made by God, in the bringing in of his Gospell; that all those things which are subject to change, and corruption, shall be removed (as those that are made and ordained to mutation) that the everlasting Kingdome of Christ may be perpetually established. Wherefore, we having our part in the spirituall,28 Wherefore wee re∣ceiving a Kingdome, which cannot bee moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God accep∣tably, with reverence and godly feare. and everlasting Kingdome of Christ, which cānot be moved, let us labour for that true grace of his Spirit, which may enable us to serve God acceptably, in all holy awe, and reverence of his divine Majesty. For God, as he is most gracious and mercifull to those that feare and serve him,29 For our God is a consuming fire. so he is a most terrible avenger of all wickednesse, and disobedience, and will bee sure to punish it with unspeakable torments. CAP. XIII. FOr thereby some, as Abraham, and Lot,2 For thereby some have entertained Angels unawares. have inter∣tained Angells in the shape of men unawares. Having an eye to the patience, and constant martyr∣dome,7 Considering the end of their conversation. wherewith those your teachers have shut up their well-led lives, here on earth.8 Iesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. And as theirs, so let your faith be stedfastly fixed on Je∣sus Christ your Saviour, who altereth not, but is, and was and will be still the same for ever. And as Christ is one, & the same,9 Be not carried about with divers & strange do∣ctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart bee established with grace, not with meates, which have not profited them that have been occupied there∣in. so is the truth of his doctrine; which ye ought, therefore, constantly to em∣brace; Be not therefore carried away with diversity, and new-fanglenesse of doctrines; with vaine, and superstiti∣ous observations; For it is a good, and happy thing to have the heart truly setled in a state of regeneration, and not to be taken up with frivolous disquisitions, concer∣ning the choice, or cleannesse, and uncleannesse of meats, which have no way availed, or benefited those that have exercised themselves therein. Vnder the Law it was appointed,10 Wee have an altar whereof they have no right to eate, which serve the Tabernacle. that they which ser∣ved in the Tabernacle, should eate of those sacrifices, which were offered upon the Altar; but now, it is other∣wise; we have a Spirituall and living altar, and sacrifice, even Christ Jesus himselfe; of whom they cannot claime any right to partake, that are addicted to the ceremonies of the abrogated law.
13 Let us goe forth therefore unto him with∣out the campe, bearing his reproch.Let us therefore couragiously, and cheerfully imitate the example of his sufferings; bearing that reproch of impurity, and unworthinesse, which is cast upon us, for his names sake. 20 Now the God of peace, that brought againe from the dead our Lord Iesus Christ that great shepheard of the sheepe, through the blood of the everlasting covenant.Now the God of peace, who brought againe from the dead, our Lord Jesus Christ, having approved himselfe, as the great, so the true and good shepheard of his elect, by shedding that precious blood of his, whereby the e∣verlasting covenant of peace and reconciliation, is ra∣tified and confirmed betwixt God and man. 22 For I have written a letter unto you in few words.For I have written a letter unto you, howsoever large in it selfe, yet very short in comparison of the weight, and worth of the argument, and that entire affection of mine, from whence it hath proceeded. THE GENERALL EPISTLE OF S. IAMES. CAP. I. 1 To the twelve tribes which are scattered a∣broad, greeting.TO all the beleeving Jewes, that are dispersed a∣mong the nations in any part of the world. Be yee so farre, my brethren, from being de∣jected,2 My brethren, count it all joy, when yee fall into diverse temptations. and disheartened with the afflictions, which yee suffer for Christ, as that ye doe account this a great, and just cause (above all others) of your joy, and exultation, that ye are thought worthy, and made able to undergoe these sharpe tryals for his sake. 3 Knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience.Knowing that these sufferings, whereby your faith is tryed, do both exercise, and (through the goodnesse of God) worke patience in you. 4 But let patience have her perfect worke, that ye may be perfect, and entire, wanting nothing.Let not your patience shrinke and faile, but let it hold firme and constant to the end; and let it produce in you those good and gratious effects, which are proper there∣unto, that so ye may be entire and perfect in goodnesse, wanting no vertue or grace fit for Christians. 8 A double minded man is unstable in all his waies.An unbeleeving man, that hath one heart for God, another for the world; one while inclining to a confident
reliance upon God, another while distrusting him, is ut∣terly uncertaine, and unstable in all his actions, and pur∣poses. Let a Christian,9 Let the brother of low degree rejoyce in that hee is exalted. who is taken from a meane condi∣tion, and advanced to any height of honour, be thankfull to God for his exaltation, and acknowledge his promo∣tion to be a favour from God. And let the rich, contentedly rest in the hand of God,10 But the rich in that he is made low: because as the flower of the grasse he shall passe away. if he have thought fit to humble him with want; because if he be in never so prosperous an estate, here is no con∣tinuance for him; but even as the flower of the field hee shall wither away, and vanish. Blessed is the man that patiently endureth afflictions,12 Blessed is the man that endureth temptation. and persecutions for the name of Christ, &c. Let no man when he is tempted, and drawne to sinne,13 Let no man say when hee is tempted, I am tem∣pted of God, for God can∣not be tempted with evill, neither tempteth hee any man. cast the fault hereof upon God; for God, as hee is most pure and holy, so hee can neither be solicited, or moved to evill, neither can he move, or solicit any man to evill; which is contrary to his most pure, and perfect nature, and will. But every man, when hee is tempted,14 But every man is tempted, when hee is drawne away of his owne lust, and entised. must acknow∣ledge, next to the suggestion of Satan, the fault to be his owne; in that he is drawne aside by his owne sinfull con∣cupiscence, and entised to do evill thereby. It is with sinne as it is in our naturall birth;15 Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sinne: and sinne when is it finished, bringeth forth death. in every one of us, there is originally a corrupt disposition, and pronenesse to sinne; from hence are our evill lusts, and desires; those vitious lusts and desires bring forth sinfull actions; and sinne when it is growne to a consummation, and perfect course, bringeth forth eternall death. Every good gift proceeds from that God,17 Every good gift, & every perfect gift is from above, & commeth down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variable∣nesse, neither shadow of turning. who is the author, and originall of all light; whom wee may not measure by these created lights of the Moone or Sunne; in which there are interchanges of brightnesse, and ob∣scurity, by night and day, by clouds and clearenesse; some while shining, and some while shadowed; but must con∣ceive of him, to be ever constant in his most just decrees, in his rich mercies to us, without all variablenesse, with∣out all suspicion, or possibility of changing. And that infinite and unchangeable mercy of his hath approved it selfe to us in this, that of his owne free will,18 Of his owne will be∣gate hee us with the word of truth, that we should be a kinde of first fruits of his creatures. without any merit of ours, without any of our inclinati∣on towards him, he hath regenerated us to himselfe; not by the mortall, and corrupt seed, which wee derived from Adam, but by the immortall, and incorruptible seed of the word of truth; that we should be singled out as the noblest, and happiest of his creatures.
20 For the wrath of man worketh not the righte∣ousnesse of God.For the minde of that man who is taken up with wrath, cannot for the time, be capable of doing the will of God, or bringing forth any good worke. 21 Wherefore lay apart all filthines, and superfluity of noughtines, and receive with meeknesse the en∣graffed word, which is able to save your soules.Wherefore that yee may be fit, as good ground, to receive this divine seed; do ye rid your hearts of all that naturall uncleannesse, and those sinfull dispositions, and affections, which as so many superfluous, and hurtfull weeds, take up the soyle of your hearts, and make it un∣profitable, and noysome; and with meeknesse and purity of heart, receive yee that holy word of God, which by the hands of his Apostles, is cast into the furrows of your soules; or is ingraffed in your hearts by their gracious plantation; as that which is onely able to save your soules. 25 But who so looketh into the perfect law of li∣berty, & continueth there∣in, &c.But whosoever looketh throughly into the perfect glasse of Christian doctrine, and vieweth himselfe, and his actions therein, well, and suly; and continueth to fixe his eyes and thoughts thereupon; he being, &c. 27 Pure religion, and un∣defiled before God, and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherlesse, and wid∣dowes in their affliction, and to keepe himselfe un∣spotted from the world.That religion which shall passe for pure, and unde∣filed, in the account and censure of God our heavenly Father, is not that, which consists in good words, and glorious shewes, and holy professions; but that which approves it selfe in action; in visiting the fatherlesse, and widowes in their affliction, in relieving the distres∣sed; and in keeping our selves free from all the defile∣ments of the world, from the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. CAP. II. 1 My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ the Lord of glory, with respect of persons.MY brethren, ye that make profession of the faith, and true religion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, know that it is not for you to have respect of per∣sons; as I perceive some of you are wont to have. 4 Are ye not then partiall in your selves, and are be∣come judges of evill thoughts?Are ye not then sensibly partiall? and are ye not plain∣ly selfe-convicted in your owne hearts of the undue par∣tiality of your thoughts? Yea, are not those rich men growne to that insolence, and boldnesse,7 Do not they blaspheme that worthy name, by the which ye are called? as that they dare blaspheme that sacred name of God, by which yee rejoyce to be called, and which ye boast to professe? 10 For whosoever shall keepe the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.For whosoever shall professe to endeavour the kee∣ping of the whole law of God, if hee doe willingly offend in any one point thereof; he is in that one, a transgressor of the Law; and is guilty of the violation of the whole
law (as it is taken together for the absolute rule of our life, and carriage) though not of every particular branch, and parcell of that law. For we are not to looke so much at the severall points contained in the law,11 For he that said, Doe not commit adultery, said also, Doe not kill. as to the authority and justice of him that made the law; which is indeed violated, and of∣fended by any breach thereof; for the same God who said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill, &c. So doe ye speak, and so do,12 So speake ye, and so doe, as they that shall be judged by the law of liber∣ty. as those that desire to be ap∣proved unto God, for their loving obedience to him; as those that make account to be judged, not by the rigour of the Law, but by the gratious mitigation, and mercy of God, calling us to a free and cheerefull observation thereof. It is the great praise and glory of Gods mercy,13 And mercy rejoy∣ceth against judgement. that it freeth us from the judgement deserved by our sinne. What doth it profit a man, my brethren,14 What doth it profit my brethren, though a man say hee hath faith, and have no workes; can faith save him? to make a vaine and empty profession, and ostentation of faith; and to say that he hath a true faith, when as he hath no good workes, whereby to approve the truth of his faith? Can such a pretended, and verball faith save him? As that is a vaine and idle charity, which bids a man be warme, and be filled, yet gives him nothing to feed,17 Even so faith, if it hath not workes, is dead being alone. or warme him with; so is that a vaine and dead faith, which professing an adherence to God, yet is severed from all good workes, and is void of charity. Yea, a man may,18 Yea, a man may say, thou hast faith, and I have workes, Shew mee thy faith without thy workes, and I will shew thee my faith by my workes. in a just scorne of the separation of these mens faith, and workes; say to them; Thou hast faith, and I workes; shew mee that strange faith of thine, which thou talkest of, and pretendest to have without workes, and I will shew thee my faith which I shall approve to thee, by my workes. But wilt thou know, O thou vaine man, that that faith,20 But wilt thou know (O vaine man) that faith without workes is dead? which thou pretendest to have, without workes, is a mere counterfeit, and dead faith, and nothing else but an idle pretence.21 Was not Abraham our father justified by workes, when hee had of∣fered Isaack his son upon the altar? No otherwise are wee justified then our father Abra∣ham, (the father of the faithfull) and was hee any other way justified, then by a working faith? was it not upon his actuall offering of his sonne Isaac upon the altar? Seest thou therefore,22 Seest thou how faith wrought with his workes? and by workes was faith made perfect. how Abrahams faith was joyned with workes, and brought them forth as a necessary fruit thereof? so as by the workes which hee did, hee plainly shewed the truth, and livelinesse, and efficacy of his faith. See Rom. 4.3.23 Abraham beleeved God, and it was imputed unto him, &c.
24 Ye see then, how that by workes a man is justifi∣ed, and not by faith onely.Yee see then that a man is justified, not by that empty, and titular faith which yee vainly boast of, devoid of workes, but by that faith which worketh by love. 25 Likewise also, was not Rahab the harlot justi∣fied by workes, when she had received the messen∣gers, and had sent them out another way?Likewise also, if ye will cast your eyes upon a meaner example; looke to Rahab the harlot; was it not thus with her? was she justified by such a dead and lazie faith, as ye speake of, and not rather by a lively, and working faith; which caused her to hazard her life for the preservation of the Israelitish messengers, and to send them out ano∣ther way? 26 For as the body with∣out the spirit is dead, so faith without workes is dead also.I do therefore conclude, that this faith of yours (which yee vainly pretend) separated from good workes, is but a mere carcasse of faith; having no truth, no life in it; no more then this body of ours, is a true humane body, when it is destitute of the spirit wherewith it is animated. CAP. III. 1 My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that wee shall receive the greater condemnation.MY brethren, doe not ambitiously affect the title of the authors, and leaders of factions; drawing disci∣ples after you; neither be ye rigid and uncharitable cen∣surers of others: knowing that this pride, and rigour of yours, shall bring upon you the greater condemna∣tion. 2 For in many things we offend all: If any man of∣fend not in word, the, &c.For as wee are all apt to offend in our whole carriage: so especially in our tongue; if any man have so much go∣vernment of himselfe, therefore, as to rule his tongue, and not to lash out in offensive speeches; it is an argu∣ment that that man is every way well ordered, and able to command himselfe in all his other behaviour. 5 Even so the tongue is a little member, and boast∣eth great things: behold, how great a matter a little fire kindleth.Even so the tongue is a little member, but may justly boast that it is able to doe great matters; behold how great a pile of wood a little fire is able to set in a flame, and to consume unto ashes. 6 And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue amongst our members, that it defi∣leth the whole body.Such a fire is the tongue, yea it is (though small) a whole world of iniquity, and mischiefe; neither is there any kinde of wickednesse which doth not proceed from thence, &c. 10 Out of the same mouth proceedeth bles∣sing and cursing: my bre∣thren, these things ought not so to be.Men are wont to make use of the same tongue, both for the blessing of God in their devotions, and for the cursing of their brethren in their uncharitable speeches, and censures; But my brethren, this ought not to be; nei∣ther can these two things stand well together. 13 Let him shew out a good conversation, his works with meeknesse of wisdome.Let him in his conversation give cleare proofe of his
good workes, not in a rough and sullen austerity, and frowardnesse; but in a wise, and discreet meeke∣nesse. Never bragge vainely that ye are Christians:14 Glory not, and lie not against the truth. and doe not shame, and contradict that truth, which yee professe, by a reall deniall of the profession thereof. Yee may make a kinde of ostentation of wisedome,15 This wisdome de∣scendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensuall, and devillish. but I must tell you, this wisedome is not heavenly, but earthly; not spirituall, but sensuall; not holy and divine, but devillish. There is a great and neare relation,18 And the fruit of righteousnesse is sowne in peace, of them that make peace. betwixt righte∣ousnesse, and peace; so as they that are truely desirous to advance peace, are carefull of setting forward good workes, and maintenance of justice; and againe, those shall bee sure to reape the fruits of righteousnesse, and glory, which have sowne the seeds of peace and con∣cord. CAP. IV. BUt whiles I speake of righteousnesse and peace,1 From whence come warres and fightings a∣mong you? come they not hence, even of your lusts, that warre in your mem∣bers? I per∣ceive there is just cause to complaine of unquiet broyles and injustice; for from whence are those warres, and brawlings, and unchristian quarrels amongst you, but from your owne unruly, and inordinate lusts, and de∣sires? if they did not fight against grace in your bosomes, ye would not be so apt to fight with each other. Yee long after others commodities,2 Ye lust and have not: ye kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and warre, yet yee have not, because ye aske not. and goe without them, yee are rankorously, and murderously affected to each other, in an evious desire of what is theirs, and can∣not obtaine it; ye quarrell and strive one with another; and carry not away that which yee sue for; and whereas ye should crave of God what ye want, ye have it not, be∣cause ye aske it not. And if yee doe aske, yee receive not,3 Yee aske and receive not, because ye aske amisse, that yee may consume it upon your lusts. because yee aske amisse; either begging unmeet things, or slightly and heartlesly wishing things fit to be asked, or calling for them upon a wrong ground, and to a wrong purpose; namely, not desiring them for the glory of God, and the good of others, but onely to spend it upon your owne intemperate lusts, and pleasures. O ye vaine men,4 Yee adulterers and a∣dulteresses, know yee not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? that are thus palpably corrupted with the love of the world, (having formerly plighted your troths to God) doe ye not know and consider that there is such a discord betwixt God, and the world, that yee
cannot possibly affect both;whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemie of God. that so much love as ye beare unto the world, so much hatred ye incurre with God. Whosoever therefore will bee a devoted friend to the world, is (in so being) a very enemy to God. 5 Doe ye thinke that the Scripture saith in vaine, The Spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envie?This the Scripture beateth upon, every where; and doe ye thinke it speaketh thus in vaine? Certainly, eve∣ry word thereof is to excellent purpose, and shall bee truly verified upon us; Doth then that Spirit of God, which we professe to have dwelling in us, lust after envie; and envie the good things of others? 6 But hee giveth more grace, wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble.Surely no; so farre is he from that, as that hee giveth more grace where hee hath given some already; where∣fore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble. 8 Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purifie your hearts ye double minded.Ye are naturally aloofe from God in your corrupt af∣fections; now labour ye with your hearts to draw them neare unto God, in your holy desires, and he shall draw nigh to you in a gracious condescent, and approbation. The Law of God requires at our hands a reverent and loving respect to our brother;11 Speake not evill one of another (brethren) hee that speaketh evill of his brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh evill of the Law, and judgeth the Law; but if thou judge the Law, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a judge. and forbids us any evill speeches, or rash judgements concerning him: so as wee cannot revile, or unjustly censure our brother, but wee make head against the Law, and offer an open affront thereunto, in charging it with unjustice; and if we doe thus censure and charge the law, we are farre from being the doers of the Law, but presumptuously take upon us to be the judges and condemners of the Law. 12 There is one Law∣giver, who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou that judgest another?It is God alone, who, as he was the maker and author of the Law; so is he the just and powerfull Judge of the violation of his Law; having in his owne almighty hands, the power and liberty both to save, and to destroy; Who art thou therefore that darest to passe thy judgement up∣on another, since he is onely reserved to the Tribunal of God? 16 But now ye rejoyce in your boastings: all such rejoycing is evill.But now, your hearts are lifted up with the over-va∣luing conceits of this earthly prosperity; and are immo∣derately affected therewith; these are not the things that are fit for you to set your hearts upon; all such transpor∣tations with worldly delights, or confidences, are evill. 17 Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is sinne.And howsoever others, that are ignorant of better things, may bee carried away with the admiration of these vanities, yet it were a great shame and sin, for you who have beene well informed of heavenly and spirituall matters, to dote upon these transitory commodities or pleasures; in such case your very knowledge of better, would be an aggravation both of your sinne, and judge∣ment.
CAP. V. ANd the rust of them shall justly convince you of your uncharitable, and wicked covetousnesse;3 And the rust of them shall bee a witnesse against you, and shall eate your flesh as it were fire; yee have heaped treasure toge∣ther for the last dayes. who had rather suffer these your metalls to corrupt with hoard∣ing them up in your chests, then to lay them forth upon the necessities of your brethren: yea, this very rust of your silver shall fret, and eate into your very flesh and bones, and shall be a meanes of consuming you. And yee have seene the happy end which it pleased the Lord to put unto those his patient sufferings, &c.11 And have seene the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very pittiful, and of tender mercie. See Matth. 5. verse 34, 35. Be yee true and steddy in all that ye affirme or deny;12 But above all things, my brethren, sweare not, neither by heaven, neither by earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea bee yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into con∣demnation. not inconstantly varying in what ye speake; lest through falshood and unfaithfulnesse yee fall into just condemna∣tion. Is any man sicke among you, let him send for the Pastors, or Ministers of the Church;14 Is any sicke amongst you; let him call for the elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oyle in the name of the Lord. and let them pray for him, and with him; and whiles the miraculous gift of healing continueth in the Church, let them make use of that signe which Christ hath ordained for that purpose, viz. calling upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, let them anoint him with oyle. And their faithfull prayer shall bee a meanes (ordina∣rily) to save that sicke person from the danger of his dis∣ease,15 And the prayer of faith shall save the sicke, & the Lord shal raise him up: and if he have committed sinnes, they shall be forgi∣ven him. &c. and whereas his sinnes are the cause of his sick∣nesse, even those sinnes of his shall upon humble and faithfull prayers be done away, and forgiven. In case of offence done,16 Confesse your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that yee may be healed. or in case of any weight (which an unremoved sinne laies upon the conscience) or in de∣sire of advice concerning the avoydance of sinne, doe ye give ease to your soules by a mutuall confession of your faults, and pray one for another, that ye may be de∣livered from the guilt, and punishment of your sinne, &c.19 Brethren, if any of you doe erre from the truth, and one convert him, Brethren, if any of you be seduced either into error of beleefe, or uncleannesse of conversation, and one of you be a meanes to convert and reclaime him, Let him know,20 Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shal save a soule from death, and shal hide a mul∣titude of sinnes. that he is very happy in this deed of his; for in thus turning away the sinner from his evil way, whether of judgement, or practice; he shall save a soule from eternall death, and shall be a meanes that the many sinnes of that convert, shall through his true repentance be forgiven, and not imputed unto him.
THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERALL OF S. PETER. CAP. I. 1 Peter an Apostle of Iesus Christ, to the stran∣gers scattered throughout Pontus.PEter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to those Jewes, which are dispersed through the regions of Pontus, &c. 2 Elect according to the foreknowledg of God the Father, through sancti∣fication of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Iesus Christ: Grace unto you and peace be multiplied.Those who in their outward pro∣fession, and in the due judgement of charity, are justly reputed for the elect of God, according to the eternall de∣cree, and good purposes of God the Father; which e∣lection of theirs is made good unto them, by their true sanctification wrought in them by the Spirit of God conforming them to all holy obedience; & by the remis∣sion of sinnes by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ;3 Which hath begot∣ten us againe unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Iesus Christ from the dead. Grace, &c. Who when we were naturally the sonnes of wrath, hath wrought graciously upon us, and renewed us by grace, and raised us up, to the hope of everlasting glory, by the power of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 5 Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to bee revealed in the last time.Who are by the mighty power of God, through the meanes of their faith (wrought in them by the Spirit of God) kept to the full obtaining, and fruition of that sal∣vation which having beene purchased and revealed by Christ, is ready to be consummated in these last dayes of the world.6 Wherein yee greatly rejoyce, though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heavinesse through ma∣nifold temptations. In the hope and assurance of which salvation, ye doe (as ye ought) greatly rejoyce, although now for a season, God sees it fit for you to be in much heavinesse; through those many trialls of affliction which he hath sent upon you.9 Receiving the end of your faith, even the salva∣tion of your soules. Receiving, in present, the pledges and beginnings of salvation; & thereby, the assurance of the accōplishment thereof, as the full fruit, and scope of our faith in Christ. 10 Who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you.Who long agoe prophesied of that abundant grace, that should bee given unto his Church, in these times of the Gospell.
Bending their thoughts intentively upon the earnest inquiry into the revelation of that Spirit of Christ (whereby they were informed of future things) to know when, and at what time,11 Searching what, or what manner of time the spirit of Christ which was in them, did signifie, when it testified beforehand the sufferings, &c. Christ the Messiah should come into the world, and should suffer; and should reenter into his glory. Vnto whom it was revealed that those things which they reported concerning the Saviour to come,12 Vnto whom it was re∣vealed, that not unto thē∣selves, but unto us they did minister the things which are now reported unto you by them tha have preach∣ed the Gospell unto you, with the holy Ghost sent downe from heaven, which things the Angells desire to looke into. should not be exhibited, and accomplished really unto them∣selves, in their time, but unto us, to whom they are now reported, as done, by those his Apostles which have preached the Gospell unto you; even those glad tydings of salvation, which they being inspired by the holy Ghost delivered unto the world; the wonderfull mysteries of which Gospell, it is no marvell, if the Prophets desired to looke into, when as the very Angells of heaven have longed to attaine unto the knowledge, and sight thereof. As those that runne in a race,13 Wherefore gird up the loines of your minde, be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Iesus Christ. or goe a journey are wont to gird up their loines, that they may readily, and without incombrance passe on their way; so doe ye gird up the loines of your minds, take order to prevent all spirituall hinderances, and stirre up your selves, to all forwardnesse, and speed, in your way towards heaven; for this cause, be ye sober, and doe ye perfectly, and con∣stantly hope for the full accomplishment of that grace, and happinesse, which partly is, and perfectly shall bee brought unto you in the revelation of Jesus Christ. But as ye are by a most holy God called into an holy profession of his Gospell,15 But as he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy, in all manner of con∣versation. so (that ye may approve your selves worthy of this high vocation) labour ye to be holy in all your carriage and conversation. By whom ye were redeemed from your unprofitable,18 From your vaine conversation received by tradition from your fa∣thers. and dangerous estate, wherein ye were under the law; and freed from those vaine confidences, whereon yee were taught by the tradition of your fathers to relie. Seeing ye have by the powerfull working of the holy Ghost, sanctified, and purified your hearts,22 Seeing ye have pu∣rified your soules in obey∣ing the truth through the spirit, unto unfained love of the brethren. so as that yee doe yeeld intire obedience unto God, in all things, and particularly in bearing unfained love to the brethren, &c.
CAP. II. 1 Wherefore, laying a∣side all malice, & all guile, and hypocrisies, &c.VVHerefore, since ye are by the grace of the Gos∣pell now happily regenerated, and become children unto God; doe ye demeane your selves, and be affected accordingly; and therefore, laying aside all ma∣licious disposition,4 To whom comming, as unto a living stone, dis∣allowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious; and all guile, and hypocrisies, &c. To whom being joyned in this spiritull structure, as unto a sure corner stone (rejected indeed and disallowed of men, but chosen and fully accepted of God) 5 Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiri∣tull house, an holy Priest∣hood to offer up spirituall sacrifice, acceptable to God by Iesus Christ.Ye also, as so many living stones, are laid in this spiri∣tuall building, to make up a spirituall Temple unto God, and (that yee may be every way answerable to those le∣gall institutions) ye are also an holy (but Evangelicall) Priest-hood; to offer up, not materiall and bodily, but spirituall sacrifices of your selves, and of prayses and thanksgivings, acceptable unto God, by Jesus Christ. 8 Whereunto also they were appointed.Vnto which offence they were given up by the most just decree of God, who hath holily and justly ordained to punish one sinne with another, in the wilfully disobe∣dient. 11 Dearely beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstaine from fleshly lusts which warre against the soule.My brethren, ye are strangers, and pilgrims in respect of your earthly home (from which ye are driven) much more in respect of your heavenly, whither ye are travel∣ling; I beseech you, therefore, that yee carry your selves thereafter, abstayning from all those carnall and sensuall desires, which worldly hearts are wont to bee taken up with, and which are very pernicious to the soule, and utterly opposite to the peace, and welfare thereof. 13 Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whe∣ther it bee to the King as supreame.Subject your selves to every superior power, that is ap∣pointed over you, whether it be to that of Kings, or o∣ther their subordinate governors; and that not so much out of feare, as out of the conscience of your obedience to God, who hath ordained them. 15 For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.For so is the will of God; that yee so behave your selves, as that, by the integrity and innocence of your car∣riage, yee may stop the mouths of those ignorant, and malicious infidells, which seeke advantages against you: 16 As free, and not using your libertie for a cloke of maliciousnesse, but as the servants of God.As those that are indeed a free people; free, not from the due obedience to authority, but from the spirituall bondage of sinne; truly freed by the ransome of Christs blood, from your spirituall servitude; but not licentious, and making an ill use of this your liberty, as if under pre∣tence of that, ye were priviledged to cast off the yoke of all obedience and subjection to government, and whol∣some Lawes of your superiors; but so demeaning your
selves, as that ye remember, that notwithstanding your freedome, ye are still servants to that God, who hath prescribed unto you due obedience, and submission to your superiours. Who in his owne person,24 Who his owne selfe bare our sins in his owne body, on the tree, that we being dead to sinne should live unto righteousnesse. did take upon him the hea∣vie burden of our sinnes; and did in his very owne body both undergoe and pay, upon the crosse, those punish∣ments, which were due to us, for all our sinnes, &c. CAP. III. WHiles those infidell husbands shall see your holy, and chaste conversation,2 While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with feare. joyned with a reverent awe, and due respects to themselves, as your head. But let their chiefe ornamēts be in the inward dipositi∣on of an holy, and good heart,4 But let it be the hid∣den man of the heart, in that which is not corrupti∣ble. in those Christian vertues and graces, which are not subject to corruption, &c. Whose daughters ye are, if yee follow her example in well doing, boldly and constantly,6 Whose daughters ye are, as long as ye doe well, and are not afraid with any amazement. and not in those weake feares, whereto she yeelded, and was drawn into inconvenience and dissimulation thereby; I know your sexe is subject, by reason of the infirmity of it to manifold feares and suspicions, as if by the submissive yeeldance unto your husbands ye should expose you to their tyranny and contempt, but doe ye that which your place, and duty requireth, and be not affrighted, and dis∣quieted with these doubts, and distrusts; leaving the ordering of all events to the wisdome, and providence of God. Giving unto them all tender, and due respects,7 Giving honor to the wife, as to the weaker ves∣sell, &c. as those, towards whom, by reason of the weaknesse of their sexe, all gentle and favorable usage is required of you, &c. But give yee unto God, in your hearts,15 But sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts, and bee ready alwayes to give an answere to every man that asketh you a rea∣son of the hope that is in you with meeknesse and and feare. that honour which is due unto him, in trusting to his promises, and relying upon his providence, by a stedfast confidence, and reposition; and since ye live amongst heathens, and pro∣fessed enemies to the Gospell, be not yee daunted with their oppositions, and persecutions; but bee ready when ye are thereunto duely called, to make profession of that true saith, and religion, which yee have received; but let not this be done in a turbulent, and seditious manner, but with all meeknesse of spirit; and reverence to that autho∣thority whereby ye are called thereunto. Being put to death in his humane body,18 Being put to death in the flesh, but quickned by the Spirit. in regard of the separation of his soule therefrom, for a time; but being
quickned, and raised up to an immortall life, by the power of his divine spirit, or deity. 19 By which also hee went and preached unto the spirits in prison;By the power of which divine spirit of his, long before his manifestation in the flesh, he came to the old world; and by the mouth of Noah, that preacher of righteous∣nesse, spake to them, whose spirits are now fast prisoned in hell; 20 Which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the dayes of Noah, while the Arke was preparing.Which were in their life time, wicked and disobedi∣ent to his holy counsels; when the patient long suffering of God gave a large respite to them for their repen∣tance, and conversion; even all the while that the Arke was preparing by Noah, &c. Compare this with chap. 4. vers. 6. Answerable unto which preservation of the eight per∣sons in Noahs family,21 The like figure whereunto, even bap∣tisme, doth also now save us, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience towards God) by the resurrection of Ie∣sus Christ. by water, is the benefit which we receive by baptisme; which doth also now save vs, by, and in applying unto us the power of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and becomes effectuall unto us, not in re∣spect of the outward element, which onely washeth off the filth of the flesh, but in respect of the inward effica∣cie of the grace, thereby represented, and exhibited; whereby the conscience is both quieted, and assured of pardon and favour; and is thereupon enabled to treat for, and expect mercy from God, and reconciliation with him. CAP. IV. FOr as much as Christ hath suffered death in his hu∣mane nature,1 For as much then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arme your selves likewise with the same minde, for hee that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sinne. do yee labour to conforme your selves to Christ herein, and thinke this seriously with your selves, that hee who will be like unto Christ in his death and passion, which hee endured in the flesh, must bee mortified in, and to the corrupt desires of the flesh; and must cease from those sinnes, which are the actions of a carnall, and unregenerate life. 2 That hee no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.He must have nothing to doe with his wonted corru∣ptions; neither must lead the rest of his life (which he hath to spend here below) according to the sinfull lusts of car∣nall men, but according to the holy will of God. 6 For this cause was the Gospell preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged ac∣cording to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit.For, for this cause was the Gospell preached, of old, to those which are long since dead, being swept away by the deluge, that howsoever they were in the sight, and construction of men seized on by the fearefull judgment of God; yet that some of them being wrought upon by
that word of his, and brought to a sudden repentance, might have their soules saved. For true charity if it be in us,8 For charity shall cover the multitude of sinnes. will hide a multitude of those sinnes, and infirmities, which are in our brethren. If any man be called, by God, to speake publikely,11 If any man speake, let him speake as the oracles of God. as his messenger or minister to his people, let him so deli∣ver that word which hee brings, as may become the ho∣linesse and majesty of the Oracles of God, &c. Beloved, let it not seeme strange and uncouth to you,12 Beloved, thinke it not strange concerning the fiery tryall, which is to trie you. that there is a fire of persecution begunne to be kindled among you, for the profession of the Gospell, which is in∣tended by God, for the tryall of your faith, and constan∣cie, &c. For the Spirit of God, which alwayes brings glory,14 For the Spirit of glo∣ry, and of God resteth upon you. and happinesse with it, resteth upon you, and doth by this meanes give you good evidence of his abiding in you, &c. For the time is come, wherein,17 For the time is come, that judgement must be∣ginne at the house of God: and if it first beginne at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospell of God? according to the pre∣diction of the Prophet, judgement must begin at the sanctuary or house of God; which is his Church; the wisedome of God hath thought fit by the cruell hands of wicked men, to exercise the patience, and faith of his dearest children; and if he begin with these sharpe affli∣ctions upon us, which are tenderly beloved, and respe∣cted of him; what intolerable punishments hath he pro∣vided, and will be sure to inflict upon those that are wil∣fully, and rebelliously disobedient to the Gospell of God? And if the most righteous,18 And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly, and the sinner appeare? and dearest of all Gods children, shall not escape a very sore, and severe tryall of chastisement, such (as if they were left to their owne strength) were enough to overlay, and miscarry them, what shall then become of the wicked, and ungodly? how shall it be possible for them to escape utter confu∣sion? CAP. V. THose that are the pastors,1 The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a witnesse of the sufferings of Christ. or spirituall overseers of the Church, amongst you, I do exhort, who am also a partner with them of the same holy calling; and an eye-witnesse of all those bitter sufferings of Christ, both in his life, and in his death, &c. Not proudly and tyrannically taking upon them to domineere over the faith of Gods people;3 Neither as being lords over Gods heritage. or in an
overly, and imperious manner tyrannizing over the Church, which is the heritage of God, &c. 13 The Church that is at Babylon elected, toge∣ther with you, saluteth you, and so doth Marcus my sonne.The Church of God consisting of those coelect mem∣bers of Christ (whether in the properly-called Babylon, which is in Egypt, or the mysticall Babylon, which is Rome) salute you. THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. PETER. CAP. I. 1 That have obtained like prtious faith with us through the righteousnesse of God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ.WHo have received the gift of a true and lively faith (which is equally precious, wheresoe∣ver it is in any of the elect) through the me∣rits of Jesus Christ, who is our God, and Saviour. 4 Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption, that is in the world through lust.By which Christ, and by the knowledge of him, are conveyed unto us exceedingly great and pretious bles∣sings, and graces, such as hee had formerly promised to us beleevers; that by these wee might be made parta∣kers of those divine qualities of the soule; viz. of wis∣dome, goodnesse, holinesse; whereby wee resemble that God according to whose image we were created; having beene delivered and freed from that corruption, which aboundeth in worldly men, through their sinfull lusts. 9 But hee that lacketh these things, is blinde and cannot see farre off, and hath forgotten that hee was purged from all sins.But hee that lacketh these graces, is at the least pur-blinde; not seeing heavenly things which are a farre off, but earthly things onely which are neare at hand; having forgotten even the very first, and maine principles of Christianity; and namely this; that they were washed from their old sinnes by the laver of regeneration, per∣sisting wilfully in those evils, as if they had never beene done away. 10 Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling, and ele∣ction sure: for if yee doe these things ye shall never fall.Wherefore doe yee so much more studiously, and earnestly labour to attaine unto good assurance in your
soules (both of your effectuall calling in time, and of your eternall election to life before all times) by belee∣ving, and by well doing; For, if yee doe thus carefully, and conscionably indeavour your selves, it is a firme ar∣gument of the grace and mercy of God, so upholding you, that ye shall never utterly fall from him. Moreover I will take order while I live,15 Moreover, I will in∣deavour, that you may be able, after my decease, to have these things alwaies in remembrance. both by my utmost endeavours upon all occasions, and by these mo∣numents, which I shall leave behinde mee, so to settle the remembrance of these things in you, that after my decease ye may not forget them, but may thinke of them effectually. But, besides our owne testimony,19 We have also a more sure word of prophesie, whereunto yee doe well that yee take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a darke place, untill the day dawne, and the day starre arise in your hearts. wee have that evi∣dence which ye are wont to account more certaine then all the report of present witnesses, even the cleare word of the ancient prophets foretelling the truth of all events, concerning Christ, whereunto yee doe well that ye take heed, and give all due respect; regarding it, as a candle that shines in a darke roome, till a greater light arise unto you; that is, untill the bright and glorious Go∣spell, which is as the day-starre, and the morning light of divine truth be fully manifested unto you; as that wherin all those propheticall predictions appeare to be perfect∣ly accomplished. Presupposing first, and laying this sure ground,20 Knowing this first, that no prophesie of the Scripture is of any private interpretation. that the exposition of the propheticall predictions of the ho∣ly Scriptures, may not be framed, and ruled according to the private conceit of the reader, but by the gratious revelation of the holy Ghost, and those meet helpes, which God hath ordinarily left unto his Church. For,21 For the prophesie came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy Ghost. there must be the same authority for the inter∣preting of Scriptures, which was in the giving and deli∣vering of them; now those holy prophesies came not in old time, from the device of mans braines; neither did they deliver their owne inventions; but those sacred per∣sons, which were sent by God, on his messages to the Church, spake as they were inspired by the holy Ghost, and wrote onely those words which were put into them by God himselfe. CAP. II. EVen denying that gratious Lord and Saviour,1 Even denying the Lord that bought them. who hath not stucke to shed his most pretious blood for the redemption of mankinde, &c.
3 And through cove∣tousnesse shall they with fained words make mer∣chandise of you, whose judgement now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbreth not.And, as crafty merchants are wont with many faire, and glozing words, to deceive the buier, so doe they in a covetous desire, and aime at their owne advantage, go about with fained pretences, and plausible words to make merchandise of you: whose just judgement, and fearefull damnation, which hath beene of old ordained for them, and denounced against them, is not delayed, and slackened, for one moment, beyond the time limited to their due punishment. 4 And delivered them into chaines of darknesse, to be reserved unto judg∣ment.And delivered them up into that dungeon of hell, to be reserved there, in horrible darknesse, untill the day of the last judgement, wherein they shall receive the sen∣tence and execution of their full torment. 11 Whereas Angels which are greater in po∣wer and might, bring not railing accusation against them before the Lord.Whereas the good Angels of God, who are greater in power and might, then any mortall creature, and therefore might seeme priviledged to take more liberty unto themselves, yet when they have appeared before God, and have held (as it were) contestation with the evill angels in his presence, have not cast railing accu∣sations against them, but have left their judgement unto the Lord. 12 But these, as naturall bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed, speak evill of the things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption.But these men, as if they were no better, then very bruit beasts, which are made onely for the slaughter, beare themselves in a brutish and savage fashion; following their owne beastly sensuality, and opening their foule mouthes against those things, and persons, whose worth they understand not; and they shall speed accordingly; for they shall be taken in their owne wickednesse, and shall perish in that everlasting destruction, which they have drawne upon themselves. 17 To whom the mist of darknesse is reserved for ever.For whom the dreadfull darknesse of hell is reser∣ved for ever. 18 For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure, through the lusts of the flesh through much wantonnes, those that were cleane escaped from them, who live in errour.For whiles these hereticall teachers affect to speake bigge swelling words of vanity, and make great ostenta∣tion of the large promises of liberty to their clients, they pleasing the carnall appetite of lustfull men, allure, through much wantonnesse, those wretched disciples, that were once escaped from the snares of their false do∣ctrine; and draw them to live in their damnable errour. 20 For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord, and Saviour Iesus Christ, they are againe intangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning.For, if after they have escaped the wicked heresies, and abominable corruptions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord, and Saviour Jesus Christ, they suffer themselves to be againe intangled in, and over∣comne by those impious errours, and practices, it had beene better for them, never to have beene delivered therefrom; the later condition of their sinfull relapse shall be much worse then the first estate of their grosse and ignorant impiety.
CAP. III. IN that they say,5 For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water, and in the water. all things continue as they were from their first creation, they do willingly hoodwinke them∣selves, and purposely will not know that change, which was wrought by the deluge of waters; and the stability of that word or decree of God, whereby the heavens were made of old; and the earth also was made to ap∣peare (upon the removing of the waters to their proper receptacle, the sea) as standing up out of the water, and as compassed about by the water. Upon which situation of the earth it came to passe,6 Whereby the world that then was, being over∣flowed with water, pe∣rished. by the just and holy decree of God, that the world of men that then was, being overflowed with water, peri∣shed. But these lower regions of the heavens,7 But the heavens, and the earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judge∣ment, and perdition of un∣godly men. and the earth which wee doe now presently see, after that change wrought by the deluge, are, by the same all-wise and just decree of God, continued in the state wherein they still are, and reserved for a contrary meanes of dissolution; which shall be by fire, in that great day of the generall judgement, and of the finall destruction of the wicked, and ungodly.8 But (beloved) be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand yeares, and a thousand yeares as one day. But as for the conviction of that idle, and wicked conceit of atheous men, who, because of the seeming de∣lay of the comming of the Lord, goe about to perswade themselves, that he will not come at all; beloved, I would not have you to be ignorant of this one thing, that no time ought to seeme long in comparison of eternity; That in the account of the Ancient of dayes, the immutable, and eternall God, there is no difference of yeares and times; one day, and a thousand yeares are alike, and all one to him; these measures of time are nothing to him that is infinite. The Lord, who hath promised to come,9 The Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count slack∣nesse) but is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to re∣pentance. is not slacke in the performance of that promise of his (according as men take slacknesse) so as to put off, and disappoint the day which he had set, but in his mercifull long suffering to us ward (as he had eternally decreed) hee waites for our repentance; as taking no pleasure in the destruction of any of his creatures, but gratiously inviting all men to repent and be saved. Neverthelesse wee, according to his promise,13 Neverthelesse we, ac∣cording to his promise, looke for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousnesse. looke for, (after that this visible, and lower fabricke of the world shall be purged, with this last and universall fire, from those drossie and impure qualities which are in it)
a new heaven, and a new earth, pure and glorious; so as the whole purified world (that then shall remaine) shall be the palace, and habitation of Gods elect. But ye, beloved, seeing ye know these things, and are admonished,17 Ye therfore beloved, seeing yee know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the errour of the wicked, fall from your owne stedfastnesse. before-hand, of the danger of these pesti∣lent doctrines, beware lest ye bee led away with these atheous suggestions of wicked men, and doe thereupon fall from that stedfast profession which yee have hitherto made of the truth. THE FIRST EPISTLE OF S. IOHN. CAP. I. 1 That which was from the beginning, which wee have heard, which we have seene with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled.THat ever-living Sonne of God, the co-essentiall Word of the Father, which was from all eter∣nity, whom wee Apostles had the honour and happinesse to heare with our eares, to see with our eyes, and to touch with our hands. 2 For the life was ma∣nifested, and we have seen it, and beare witnesse.(For that life-giving Word of his Father was mani∣fested in the flesh, and wee have for many yeares toge∣ther, seene him, and conversed with him, and beare wit∣nesse of him, &c.) 3 That which we have seene and heard, declare we unto you, that yee also may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellow∣ship is with the Father, and with his Sonne Jesus Christ.Even that same coeternall Sonne of God, whom we have personally seene, and heard, doe wee declare, and preach unto you; that yee, by our Gospell, may have the happinesse of being partakers with us, of these glad tidings, and meanes of salvation; wherein yee shall un∣speakably benefit, and advance your selves; for ye shall therein, enter into a blessed communion with God the Father, and with his Sonne Jesus Christ. 5 This then is the mes∣sage which we have heard of him, and declare unto you that God is light, and in him is no darknesse at all.This then is the message, which wee have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is of a most pure, simple, holy, perfect, and glorious nature, resembled by no
creature so much, as by exquisite light; in which there is nothing but a cleare, and exact brightnesse without any the least mixture of darknesse. As he is light, so every aberration from him,6 If wee say that wee have fellowship with him, and walke in darknesse, we lie and doe not the truth. is dark∣nesse; if we then say that we have fellowship with this pure, and holy God, and yet walke in the darknesse of any sinne whatsoever, we belye our selves, and doe not ac∣cording to that truth which we professe. CAP. II. MY deare children,1 My little children, these things write I unto you that ye sinne not. whom I have spiritually begotten in the Gospell, I have written this former passage concerning your cleare deliverance from sinne, upon the penitent confession thereof; and concerning the fre∣quence, and inevitablenesse of sinnes; not with a purpose to incourage you in the practice of your sinnes, but, con∣trarily, to draw you therefrom; and to lay weight upon you, that you indevour carefully, according to the ut∣most power of humane frailty, to avoid all sinne, &c. And he is the expiatory sacrifice for our sinnes;2 And he is the propi∣tiation for our sinnes: and not for ours onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole world. and not for the sinnes of us Jewes onely, which were his peculi∣ar people of old, but also for the sinnes of all beleevers, through the whole world; sufficient for the satisfaction of the universall debt of all mankinde, but effectuall to those onely, who apply it by faith. The knowledge of God is not an idle,3 And hereby we doe know that we know him, if we keepe his comman∣dements. or fashionable matter, but is ever joyned with holy practice; hereby therefore we may be assured that wee know God a∣right, if we frame our selves diligently, and conscionably (according to the capacity of our weake nature) to keepe his commandements. He that saith, or professeth, that hee abides in God,6 He that saith he abi∣deth in him, ought him∣selfe also to walke, even as he walked. and hath a true spirituall interest in him, let him make his word good, by his carefull and holy imitation of Christ, in all those morall actions, and heavenly cariage, where∣in he hath gone before us. Brethren, this charge that I lay upon you,7 Brethren, I write no new commandement unto you, but an old comman∣dement which yee had from the beginning. of loving one another, though it be now newly, and freshly urged by me, yet in regard of the first originall of it, is very an∣cient, even as old as the eternall of Law God it selfe, &c. Againe it is, in some respects, a new commandement,8 Againe, a new com∣mandement I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you, because the darknesse is past, and the true light now shineth. that I write unto you, even in the same sense that our Saviour so called it; in that it is daily renewed unto you, and vehemently reinforced upon you upon by God, even
that ye should strive, and labour unto that which was re∣ally, & perfectly performed by Christ, and justly, & due∣ly required of you, because it is not now with you, as it was wont; the darknesse of your ignorance and unbe∣leefe is passed, and the light of truth now shineth cleare∣ly in your eyes. 12 I write unto you lit∣tle children, because your sinnes are forgiven you for his names sake.I write these things unto you, my dearly beloved, spirituall children; because God hath beene graciously pleased to forgive your sinnes, and to receive you to a full mercifull reconciliation with him, for the sake of his Sonne Christ. 13 I write unto you fathers, because yee have knowne him that is from the beginning: I write unto you young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one: I write unto you little children, because ye have knowne the Fa∣ther.I write to you more aged, & confirmed Christians, be∣cause ye have knowne that eternall Sonne of God, which was before all worlds; What is more commendable in fulnesse of age, then fulnesse of knowledge? and what is more fit to be knowne of ancient men, then he who is the Ancient of dayes? What is more affected of the young and vigorous, then strength, and valour? and be∣hold I write unto you, young men, because you have well approved your spirituall prowesse, and manhood, in overcomming that great enemy of your soules. 15 If any man love the world, the love of the Fa∣ther is not in him.If any mans heart bee set upon the world, it is set off from God; if hee love the world, he cannot love God. 16 For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.For all those things, wherewith the hearts of worldly men are taken up, which are reduced to these three heads, carnall lusts and concupiscences, covetous desires, proud and ambitious thoughts and affectations, are such, as are utterly abhorring from God, and are the mere baites of the world. 18 Little children, it is the last time, and as yee have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time.Little children, ye are fallen upon the last age of the world; neither shall there bee any new state of things, betwixt this, and the finall judgement; and, as yee have heard that in the last times of the Church, Antichrist shall come; so know now, that accordingly many Anti∣christs, who are direct opposers of the Saviour of the world, the Sonne of God, are already comne; whereby it is made evident, that this is that last time, which was foretold of. 19 They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had beene of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us.They went out from our communion, not so much in respect of place, as of doctrine; They were formerly a∣mongst us, in regard of outward profession, but they were not truly, and really of us; viz. of the number of the faithfull; who onely are the true and lively members of the Church of Christ; for, if they had so beene, doubt∣lesse they would have continued in that holy, and happy communion with the Church of God; but now, in that they have thus departed from it, they plainly shew that
their profession was but formall, and counterfeit. But as for you, my beloved;20 But ye have an uncti∣on from the holy One, and ye know all things. yee have received from Christ, a large measure of the grace and illumination of his Spirit; whereby ye are furnished with the knowledge of all things necessary to your salvation. And therefore I have not written unto you,21 I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth; but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth. as out of a conceit of your ignorance; because yee know not the truth: but rather, presupposing your knowledge of the truth, and your abilities to discerne, and disprove those errors, and lying doctrines which are opposite thereto, I write, to stirre up your care and diligence therein. And who is so pernicious, and impious a lyar, as hee,22 Who is a liar, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? hee is Antichrist that denieth the Father and the Sonne. who in these insuing perillous times, denies that Jesus is that true, and onely Messias and Saviour, that should come into the world. He is an eminent, and notorious Antichrist, that denieth the Father, and the Sonne; And well and necessarily are these two joyned toge∣ther;23 Whosoever denieth the Sonne, the same hath not the Father. as the relations betwixt them are utterly insepara∣ble; whosoever denieth the Sonne, (what pretences so ever he may make) yet that man, neither doth, nor can acknowledge God the Father, &c. But the holy Ghost, whom,27 But the anointing which ye have received of him, abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anoniting teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, & even as it hath taught you, yee shall abide in him. according to the gracious promise of Christ to his Church, ye have received from his gift, abideth in you; and so filleth you with all neces∣sary, and expedient knowledge, that ye need not any fur∣ther teaching from me, or any other; Even that holy Spi∣rit, by the illumination thereof, teacheth you all those truths, that are needfull to be knowne; for as much as it is truth it selfe, and not capable of any error; as that holy Ghost, therefore, hath inlightened your mindes with the knowledge of the truth, so doe ye, and I trust yee shall evermore continue constant in the same. If ye know that God is absolutely and infinitely just and righteous, yea, even justice it selfe;29 If yee know that he is righteous, ye know that every one which doth righteousnesse is borne of him. yee doe there∣withall know, that whosoever frames himselfe to follow the example of his holinesse, and righteousnesse, doth plainly shew that he is the sonne of God by spirituall re∣generation. CAP. III. THe world indeed takes no knowledge of this privi∣ledge of ours, neither doth regard, or affect us;1 Therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. how should it, when it doth neither know, nor love that God whose children we are?
2 Beloved, now are we the sons of God, & it doth not yet appeare, what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall appeare, we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is.Beloved, even now, we have this great honor put upon us, that we are the Sonnes of God; which is a very happy, and wonderfull prerogative; but how blessed, and glori∣ous we shal be hereafter, we are not capable to conceive. Onely this we know, which is enough for us, that when that blessed God, and Saviour of ours shall appeare, we shall be like him in glory; for we shall then injoy the per∣fect, and beatificall vision of him, and shall bee therein transformed into his likenesse. 3 And every man that hath this hope in him, puri∣fieth himselfe, even as he is pure.And every one that hopes assuredly for this so glori∣ous a condition, cannot but doe his utmost indevour to prepare himselfe for that happinesse, by purging himselfe from all his sinnes, and corruptions, that he may be in imitation of that his Saviour, holy and pure; 6 Whosoever abideth in him, sinneth not: who∣soever sinneth hath not seene him, neither knowne him.There is a perfect opposition betwixt Christ, and sin; and so farre as the Kingdome of Christ is erected in the heart of any man, so farre is hee exempted from sinne; whosoever therefore is a true member of the mysticall body of Christ, sinneth not with the whole sway of his will; neither, howsoever he may bee transported with in∣firmity, makes a trade of sinning; and whosoever thus sinneth, hath no interest at all in Christ, neither hath truly beleeved in him. 7 He that doth righte∣ousnesse, is righteous, even as he is righteous.He that giveth himselfe up to God, to worke righte∣ousnesse, and to be conscionably obedient to the will of God, in all things, that man is truly righteous in the ac∣count of God, even truly, though not in the same mea∣sure as Christ himselfe (whose righteousnesse is imputed unto him) is righteous. 8 Hee that committeth sinne, is of the devill, for the divell sinneth from the beginning.He that gives himselfe over to the commission of sin, and makes it his willing practice, that man is not of God, but of the Devill; for it is, and hath beene the trade of that wicked spirit, even from the beginning, ever since his fall, to sinne against God, and to draw others into sinne, and condemnation with him, &c. 9 Whosoever is borne of God, doth not commit sinne; for his seede re∣maineth in him, and hee cannot sinne, because he is borne of God.Whosoever is truly regenerate, doth not yeeld him∣selfe over to be a vassall of sinne; neither doth make a trade of a knowne evill; for the Spirit of God, whereby he was renewed, is still and ever in him, which cannot but restraine him from a willing abdication of himselfe to live in notoriously wicked courses. It is a very sure, and irrefragable proofe unto us, that we are truly the children of God,14 We know that wee have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. and have already as true a right to heaven, as if we were actually possessed of it, and had already passed from death to that spirituall, and eternall life, that we doe finde in our hearts a true and unfained love to our Christian brethren, &c.
For if our owne conscience doe accuse,20 For if our heart con∣demne us, God is greater then our heart, and know∣eth all things. and condemne us, much more shall God doe so; who is the Lord of the conscience; from whom none of our secret thoughts, or inclinations can be hid. CAP. IIII. HEreby, for the present occasion,2 Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. yee shall take a tryall of the spirits, whether they be of God, or no; every one who confesseth Jesus Christ to have beene God from all eternity, and in the fulnesse of time to have taken our nature upon him, and to be comne in the flesh, to ac∣complish the perfect worke of mans redemption, is of God, and speakes from God. So by the contraries verse 2. And this is the spirit of that great,3 And this is that spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard that it should come, and even now alrea∣dy is it in the world. and notoriously powerfull enemie of Christ, whereof yee have beene oft premonished, that he should come in the later dayes; and now is this spirit of contradicton to the Sonne of God already in the world. But as for you, my dearely beloved children in Christ,4 Ye are of God, little children, & have overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. ye have overcomne the assaults of these pestilent false teachers; because that Spirit of God, which is in you, and hath taken upon him your safegard; is greater and more powerfull, then that wicked spirit, which animates, and sets them on worke to doe this mischiefe to God, and his Church. For true Christian love,7 For love is of God, and every one that loveth, is borne of God, and knoweth God. and charity is the worke of God in the heart; and every one that doth truly love his brother, out of the true grounds of his interest in God, and obedience to him, is the child of God, truly regene∣rate, and hath knowne, and felt the power of Gods Spirit in him. The abridgment of all piety, and religion,15 Whosoever shall confesse that Jesus is the Sonne of God, God dwel∣leth in him, and he in God. is shortly comprised in this rule; Whosoever shall confesse Jesus Christ to bee the true and coeternall Sonne of God, sent by his Father into the world for the perfect redemption of him, and mankinde, God dwelleth in him, and he in God. Herein are we so assured of the perfect love of God to us, as that wee may have confidence,17 Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldnesse in the day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world. and boldnesse to stand before his judgement seat, in that great day of ac∣count; for that our hearts tell us that wee desire to bee
every way conformable to his will; labouring towards that holinesse and perfection which is in him. 18 There is no feare in love, but perfect love ca∣steth out feare: because feare hath torment.And when this love of God towards us is ascertained to our hearts, it doth perfectly quiet the conscience, which otherwise is full of tumults, and feare, and unqui∣etnesse; for where assurance of love is, there is no feare, or anxiety; since perfect love casts out feare; neither can these two stand together; for in love there is joy, and contentment, but in feare there is vexation, and tor∣ment, &c. CAP. V. 1 Whosoever beleeveth that Iesus is the Christ, is borne of God: and every one that loveth him that begate, loveth him also that is begotten of him.YE are now falne into a time, wherein there is much opposition to Christ, the Sonne of God; the greatest part of the world set themselves against him, and deny the truth of his comming, and the power of his deity; this therefore for the time may make a just distinction betwixt Christians, & the rest of the world; Whosoever beleeveth that Jesus is the true Messias and Saviour of the world, and receiveth his whole doctrine delivered unto men, it is a good evidence that hee is of the num∣ber of Gods children, sequestred from the world of unbeleevers, and may therefore challenge our love to∣wards him; for every one that loveth that God and Fa∣ther who hath called and regenerated his children, must needes also love those children whom hee hath thus re∣generated. 3 For this is the love of God, that wee keepe his commandements, and his commandements are not grievous.Herein doe wee approve our love to God, that wee set our selves to keepe his commandements; and to us that are regenerate, his commandements are not grie∣vous, and unpleasingly troublesome, for as much as we do cheerfully addresse our selves to the keeping of them, out of our love to that good God, who hath injoyned them. 4 For whatsoever is borne of God overcom∣meth the world; and this is the victory that over∣commeth the world, even our faith.What person soever he be, that is renued by the Spi∣rit of God, he overcommeth those temptations where∣with the world labours to withdraw him from his God; and this victory, whereby the world is overcome by us (who are Gods Children) is obtained by our faith, lay∣ing hold on Christ Jesus. So also verse 5. 6 This is hee that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by water onely, but by water and blood: and it is the Spirit that beareth witnesse, be∣cause the Spirit is truth.This, even this Jesus Christ, is hee that came into the world, and instituted, and underwent, not the baptisme
of water onely, which John gave, and performed; but the baptisme of blood also, which hee shed for mans redemption: Both which, even water and blood issued out of his side in his death; and the effusion of which pretious blood of his, he caused to be represented in his last supper, and commanded the memoriall thereof to be continued to his Church: unto which Jesus, and the the truth of his God-head, the Spirit of God hath given full testimony, both in the hearts of his elect, and in his miraculous descent at the feast of Pentecost, and those wonderfull gifts which he hath bestowed upon men; and the witnesse of the same Spirit is infallible: the author whereof is truth it selfe, and therefore can neither de∣ceive, nor be deceived. Unto this maine truth concerning Christ the redee∣mer of the world, there are sixe all-sufficient,7 For there are three that beare witnesse in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. and unde∣niable witnesses; whereof three are in heaven, and three upon earth; Those in heaven are the three sacred per∣sons in Trinity, the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, and these three are in essence, one and the same God. Those three that beare witnesse unto him on earth, and seale up the truth of his promises unto us,8 And there are three that beare record in earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the blood, and these three agree in one. are the water in baptisme, by which wee are cleansed from the filth of our sinnes; the blood of Christ (exhibited in the holy Eucharist) by the shedding whereof our sinnes are expiated; and the efficacy of his Spirit, which sealeth up to our hearts that testimony of water, and blood; in that it applies unto us the power of that ablution, and that expiation; and these three agree in, and make good, one and the same truth, concerning Christ the onely re∣deemer of mankinde. If wee are wont to give credit unto the witnesse of men, surely,9 If we receive the wit∣nesse of men, the witnesse of God is greater. wee must needs grant that the witnesse of God is much more certaine, and unfailable; &c. He that truly beleeveth on the Son of God, hath God dwelling in him, by faith;10 Hee that beleeveth on the Sonne of God hath the witnesse in himselfe. and therefore hath that divine witnesse within himselfe, &c. If any man see his brother fall into, and continue in such a sinne, as may be capable of forgivenesse,16 If any man see his bro∣ther sinne a sinne which is not unto death, hee shall aske, and he shall give him life, for them that sinne not unto death: there is a sinne unto death; I doe not say that he shall pray for it. let him earnestly sue unto God, for pardon of that offender; and God who is great, and infinite in mercy, shall graciously incline his eare to his prayers, and give remission and life to such a one. There is indeed a sinne unto death, for which there is no forgivenesse with God, because there is no capacity of repentance for it in the commit∣ter of it; I meane the sin against the holy Ghost; when a man having received the knowledge of the Gospell by
the illumination of the holy Spirit, and professed the be∣liefe thereof, shall in a devillish malice, wilfully blas∣pheme, and persecute that knowne truth; I doe not give you allowance to pray for the pardon of this sinne. 17 All unrighteousnesse is sinne, and there is a sinne not unto death.Any of our injurious carriages towards God, whether in our words, deeds, or thoughts, is sin; and therefore of it selfe guilty of death; but such is the mercy of God, that he takes not advantage of our infirmities, but by his gracious pardon, so remits them, as that all our sinnes are not, in their event, deadly. 18 We know that who∣soever is borne of God sinneth not, &c.See Chap. 3. verse 9. THE SECOND EPISTLE OF S. IOHN. CAP. I. 1 The Elder unto the elect Lady, and her chil∣dren, whom I love in the truth.IOhn the Apostle, knowne and acknowledged the overseer of the Churches of God, which are in Asia, to the faithfull and holy matron, elect of God to be a vessell of honour, and to her children; whom I love, in, and for the truth of the Gospell, which they doe zealously professe, &c. 10 If there come any unto you, and bring you not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed.If there come any unto you, and make stubborne op∣position to this doctrine, and broach the contrary errors, to seduce you, give no intertainment to such a one, nei∣ther hold any familiarity with him. For whosoever, after knowledge of his wilfull heresie, shall maintaine familiar conversation with him,11 For he that biddeth him God speed, is parta∣ker of his evill deeds. makes himselfe partaker of his wickednesse, both of judgement, and practise.
THE THIRD EPISTLE OF S. IOHN. AS thy soule is in a good,2 That thou mayest prosper, and be in health, even as thy soule prospe∣reth. and comfortable con∣dition; so I wish that thy body, and estate may be also. Because for the setting forth of the glory of Christ,7 Because that for his names sake, they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles. and the promulgation of his Gospell, they went forth to preach the word of God a∣mong the Gentiles, and tooke no recompence from them, for their labour and charge.9 I wrote unto the Church, but Diotrephes who loveth to have the preeminence among them, receiveth us not. I wrote unto the Church for this purpose, but Dio∣trephes, who affects to beare a sway amongst your people, and is prejudiced against us, is not willing to give way to this just and holy motion.
THE EPISTLE OF S. IVDE. CAP. I. 4 For there are certaine men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condem∣nation, ungodly men, tur∣ning the grace of our God into lasciviousnesse.FOr there are secretly, and underhand crept in certaine false teachers, who by the just and holy counsell of God, were from eternity set out, and given up to this fearefull damnation, which they have runne into, by their wickednesse; grace∣lesse and ungodly men, who have abused the grace and mercy of our God, as an inducement to their prostitu∣tion of themselves to all manner of licentiousnesse, &c. 6 And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their owne habita∣tion, hee hath reserved in everlasting chains under darknesse, unto the judge∣ment of the great day.And the Angels, which not contented with that estate, wherein they were first created, but rebelling against God, and proudly affecting an higher glory; were thereupon cast downe from their heavenly habitations; he hath reserved, under his everlasting, and unchangeable decree, in the dreadfull darknesse of hell, to the full con∣summation of their torment, at the great day of finall judgment, when they shall receive their utmost doome of their fore-appointed damnation. 7 And going after strange flesh.And, being carried with filthy, and unnaturall lust to∣wards those of their owne sexe. 8 Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, & speak evill of dignities.Likewise also these beastly and wicked miscreants, which are carryed away with their owne giddie fancies, & idle dreames, defile themselves, with abominable lusts, despise authority, and speake scornefully, and disgrace∣fully of all those that are in dignity and eminence above them. 9 Yet Michael the Arch∣angell, when contending with the devill, he dispu∣ted about the body of Mo∣ses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.Yet Michael the Archangel, when conflicting and striving with the devill, hee contested with that evill spirit, about the body of Moses (which being secretly hidden by God, was sought for, and attempted to be brought forth by satan) durst not, as of himselfe, pro∣nounce against that wicked spirit, the sentence and judg∣ment of that his blasphemie; nor cast upon him any rayling accusation, but onely said, The Lord rebuke thee.
But these men are brutish,10 But these speake e∣vill of those things, which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. & grossely ignorant in their understanding, not knowing how to value the worth of any thing that is good; and yet have their mouthes open to disgrace, and raile on that which they know not; and those things which they cannot but naturally know, as brute beasts, which are led and carried by their senses, those they abuse in a sinfull and sensuall immoderation, and make them occasions of their sinne and destruction.11 Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Kain, and ranne gredily after the errour of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core. Certainly the curse of God hangs over the heads of these men; for they have, in respect of envy and murther, followed the courses of Cain; and in respect of corru∣pting the truth for silthy lucres sake, they have greedily run on in the wicked steps of Balaam; and in respect of opposing themselves to authority, they have imitated the rebellion and mutiny of Corah, and shall perish in that damnable presumption. These are blemishes to your holy profession; and,12 These are spots in your feasts of charitie, when they feast with you, feeding themselves with∣out feare: clouds they are without water, carryed a∣bout of windes, trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twise dead, plucked up by the roots. when yee meet together at your love-feasts, bring shame and dishonour upon your assemblies; in a gluttonous fa∣shion, pampering and cramming themselves at your publique banquets; such as would willingly passe for Christians, and yet have no soundnesse and truth of re∣ligion in their hearts; they would seeme clouds therfore, but have no raine in them; they would seeme trees, but they are feare and withered; twice dead; once while they stand, dry and saplesse; and once yet more whiles they lye, as plucked up, and rotting.14 And Enoch also the seventh from Adam, pro∣phesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his Saints. Of these, amongst other wicked men, is that ancient prophesie of Enoch, who was the seventh in descent from Adam, fulfilled; wherein hee foretels that the Lord shall come to judgement, attended with many thousands of his holy and glorious Angels, &c.15 To execute judge∣ment upon all, and to con∣vince all that are ungodly among them. To execute his finall vengeance upon all the ungod∣ly, &c. In a flattering manner making shew of admiring the persons, and parts of some great men,16 Having mens persons in admiration, because of advantage. for their owne ad∣vantage. These be they who make sides,19 These be they who separate themselves, sensu∣all, having nor the spirit. and divisions in the Church of God, severing themselves from the commu∣nion of other Christians, both in opinion and conversa∣tion; men secretly given up to their owne sensuality; ha∣ving (howsoever they pretend) no share at all in the Spi∣rit of God. And of some, who are through simplicity seduced,22 And of some have compassion, making a dif∣ference. have compassion; making a difference betwixt those spi∣rits which are stubburne, and turbulent; and those which are meeke and gentle.
23 And others save with feare; pulling them out of the fire: hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.And others that are stiffe, and perverse, save (if yee may) with vehement urging unto thē, the terrors of judg∣ment; as it were violently pulling them out of the fire of Gods wrath, wherein they lie; hating & avoiding all oc∣casions of pollution from these wicked men, and abhor∣ring every thing that may carry a savour, or suspition of uncleannesse. THE REVELATION OF S. IOHN. CAP. I. 1 The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him to shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to passe, and he sent and sig∣nified it by his Angell un∣to his servant John.THis which followeth is the Revela∣tion, which Jesus Christ, the Sonne of God, made unto John; which revelation, God the Father gave to his Sonne Jesus, as the Mediator of his Church, that he might (accor∣ding to that holy office of his) shew unto his servants, those things which must in the ensuing times, come to passe; and the same Jesus sent his Angells, and by their ministery signi∣fied these future things to his servant John. 3 Blessed is he that read∣eth and they that heare, &c.See Revelation 22. verse 7. 3 For the time is at hand.For the time is neare at hand, wherein divers of these following predictions shall be accomplished, & wherein an entrance shall bee made to those which shall after∣wards succeed. 4 John to the seven Churches in Asia, grace be unto you, and peace from him which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven spirits which are before his throne:John, to those seven famous Churches, which are in the lesser Asia, and under their name, to all other over the whole world: Grace be unto you, and peace from that almighty, and glorious God, who onely hath an ab∣solute, and infinite being, in, and of himselfe, who was
from all eternity, & shall be the same, without all change everlastingly; who is the author of all blessings to his Church; and from those seven principall minstring spi∣rits, which stand ready before his throne, to receive his commands for the behoofe of his Church; and to con∣vay his blessings unto it; according to the number of those chiefe, and eminent Churches, whereto I write. And as from these merely-spirituall natures,5 And from Jesus Christ, who is the faith∣full witnesse, and the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his own blood. so also from him, that is God and man, Jesus Christ the righte∣ous; who is the onely faithfull, and true witnesse, that hath declared the will of his Father, to his Church; who both raised himselfe from the dead, and diffuseth the power, and vertue of his resurrection to all his; by whom all Kings raigne, as having received all power, and dominion from God his Father, over all the world: Unto that blessed, and gracious Saviour of ours, that hath loved us from all eternity, and hath clean∣sed, and purged us from the guilt of our sinnes, by his owne most precious blood. And hath made us, who were before,6 And hath made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: to him be glory. the sonnes of wrath, and his enemies, to become Kings and Priests unto God, even the Father; Kings, in ruling over our selves, and subduing of our corruptions; and Priests, in offering up our bodies and soules unto him, together with the sacrifices of our praises, and thanksgiving: to him be glo∣ry, &c. Behold, he shall come to judgement with glory,7 Behold, he commeth with cloudes, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kinreds of the earth shall waile because of him: even so, Amen. and majesty in the clouds of heaven; and all men shall be wit∣nesses of that divine state, and magnificence of his; even those his enemies, which used him contemptuously upon earth, and peirced his hands and feet, and side, in an insolent cruelty; and all the wicked throughout the world, shall tremble, and be confounded with feare, and anguish, because of his comming to take full vengeance of them: even so, Amen. I am the onely true and eternall God,8 I am Alpha and Ome∣ga, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. who so was be∣fore all things, as that I gave being unto all things; and (whatsoever should become of all things which have their being from me) am everlasting; and have my being of my selfe, infinite, and independent; and therefore am he, from whom all things receive their beginning, and in whom they end; saith the Lord, which is not capable of any variation of time, who is, and was, and shall ever be, even the Almighty. I was by the correption of the Spirit,10 I was in the spirit on the Lords day. in an holy exta∣sie, on the first day of the week, (which, upon the occasi∣on of Christs resurrection, was called the Lords day) &c.
12 And I turned to see the voice that spake with me, and being turned, I saw seven golden Candlesticks.And I turned to see him, whose voice spake unto me; and having turned, I saw seven golden Candlesticks re∣presenting those seven famous Churches, whereto I was commanded to write; as those, wherein were placed those seven worthy, and renowned Pastors, which gave light to their severall Churches. 13 And in the midst of the seven Candlesticks, one like unto the Sonne of man, clothed with a gar∣ment downe to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle.And in the midst of those representations of the seven Churches, I saw Christ, the Sonne of God, in the resem∣blance of a man, clothed, as for the gravity, and state of a King, or Priest, in a garment downe to the foot; and in signification of his ready addressednesse to the gracious workes of his Mediatorship, girt with a golden girdle a∣bout the middle. 14 His head and his haires were white like wooll, as white as snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire.To imply the eternity of him, who is the true An∣cient of dayes, his head and his haire were white, as the purest snow-like wooll; and to signifie his searching knowledge, and piercing insight into all things, his eyes were as a flame of fire. 15 And his feet like un∣to fine brasse, as if they burned in a furnace: and his voice as the sound of many waters.To import the purity of his proceedings, and the so∣lidnesse, and invinciblenesse of that power of his, where∣by he treads down all his spirituall enemies, his feet were like unto the purest, and finest brasse; and in signification of the loud diffusion, and great power of his word, his voice was as the sound of many waters. 16 And hee had in his right hand seven starres, and out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword: and his countenance was as the Sunne shineth in his strength.And he had in his right hand seven starres; in resem∣blance of that sure protection that hee takes, and that wise, and just, and beneficiall disposition, which he makes of his faithfull ministers in his Church; and out of his mouth proceeded the sharp two edged sword of his powerfull doctrine; and his countenance was majesticall, and glorious, as the Sunne shining in his full strength. 18 And have the keyes of hell and of death.I have the absolute power over hell, and death; so as I can either command them for the just torment and pu∣nishment of wicked men, or discharge the penitent from the feare and danger of them. CAP. II. 1 Unto the Angell of the Church of Ephesus, write.VNto the chiefe Pastor, or Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, write. See chapter 1. verse 16. &c. 4 Neverthelesse, I have somewhat against thee, be∣cause thou hast left thy first love.Yet notwithstanding all this worth, which I doe ac∣knowledge in thee, I have some just exceptions against
thee; and this especially, that thou art not so zealous, and fervent, as thou wert in thy first conversion; but hast coo∣led and abated of that thy first love. Repent thee therefore, of this decay of grace,5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and doe the first workes, or else I will come unto thee quick∣ly, and will remove thy Candlesticke out of his place, except thou repent. and be∣thinke thy selfe of recovering that measure of zeale, which thou once hadst; & bring forth such good workes, for the fruits thereof, as were formerly wrought by thee; or else, I will shortly come against thee, and enter into a course of judgement with thee, and remove away my Church from amongst you. But in the meane time,6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. this commendable point I confesse to be in thee, that thou abhorrest the beastly opinions and practices of the Nicolaitans, the wicked followers of that revolted Deacon, and proselyte of An∣tioch; Who gave way to the indifferent use of fornicati∣on, and Idolatry; which things I also hate. To him that holds out against all assaults,7 To him that over∣commeth will I give to eate of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. and pre∣vailes against all his spirituall enemies, will I give a blessed participation of Christ, in the Kingdome of hea∣ven, even of him who was at first figured by the tree of life in the earthly Paradise. And I know the opprobrious and reviling speeches,9 And I know the blasphemy of them which say, they are Jewes, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. which are cast out against the Christians of Smyrna, by those which call themselves Jewes, and so perhaps they are by blood, but in respect of their unbeleefe, and malicious persecution of the truth, are no better then the Synagogue of Satan. And ye shall have persecution in that Church of yours,10 And yee shall have tribulation ten dayes. for the space of ten yeares. He that over-commeth the spirituall enemies,11 He that hath an eare, let him heare, what the Spirit saith unto the Churches, He that overcommeth shal not be hurt of the second death. where∣with he must conflict, shall be sure to escape that second, and worst death of the soule, which is the utter, and finall separation of the soule from God. See Revel. 1. verse 16.12 The sharpe sword with two edges. I know that thou dwellest in a place, where heresie,13 I know thy workes, and where thou dwellest, even where Satans seate is, and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those dayes, wherein Antipas was my faithfull Martyr, who was slaine among you where Satan dwelleth. superstition, Idolatry, and all kinde of wickednesse is, without all controlment, practised, and maintained; and yet thou dost constantly professe my Truth; and hast not beene drawne to deny my Gospell, and true religi∣on; even in those dayes, when in the heate of persecution, Antipas my faithfull martyr, thy zealous assistant, was slaine in that city of yours, where Satan beares sway, and prevaileth. As Balaam taught Balac to cast an offence before the14 Because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, &c.
people of Israel, in drawing them to communicate with the Midianites in their Idoll feasts by alluring them to fornication and uncleannesse. 15 So hast thou also them that hold the do∣ctrine of the Nicolaitans, which things I hate.So hast thou them that proceed in the same steps; teach∣ing and maintayning the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, to the very same purpose; tending both to bodily, and spi∣rituall uncleannesse, which wicked heresie I doe justly hate. 16 Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.Repent, or else I will come to take punishment of thee, shortly; and as I sent my Angel with a sword in his hand, to resist Balaam; so will I fight against these followers of Balaam, by my two edged sword, the powerfull word of my Truth, in the mouthes of my ministers, and will con∣found them. 17 To him that over∣commeth, will I give to eate of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he that receiveth it.To him that overcommeth will I impart the true Manna, that came downe from heaven, which shall feed him to everlasting life; and will give unto him a free and full acquitall, and absolution from all his sinnes; & there∣withall a comfortable assurance of his adoption to bee the sonne of God; which blessed condition, as it is new, and strange, in respect of the state of nature; so it is secret, in respect of the certaine knowledge of others, and can∣not be surely discerned by any, but him that hath it. 18 Who hath his eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet, &c.See Revel. 1. verse 14, and 15. 20 Because thou suffe∣rest that woman Jezebel, which calleth her selfe a prophetesse, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eate things sacrificed unto Idols.Because thou sufferest that wicked woman, (which is no better then another Jezebel in the Church) who falsly stiles her selfe a prophetesse, to take upon her to teach publikely, contrary to the modesty of her sexe, and by her teaching to seduce my servants into those two abho∣minable errors of the Nicolaitans, the allowance and practice of fornication, and eating things sacrificed to Idolls. 22 Behold I will cast her into a bed, & them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation.Behold, I will cast her upon tho bed of sicknesse, and inflict a grievous disease upon her; and will pague those that commit adultery with her, and that abet her in her wicked errors, with many sore judgements, &c. 23 And I will kill her children with death.And I will sweepe away her followers, the chidren of her fornication, with violent death, &c. 24 As many as have not this doctrine, and which have not knowne the depth of Satan, as they speake, I will put upon you none other burden.As many of you as have not given way to this wicked doctrine, & have not approved these depthes and subtle∣ties (as they call them, of their profound speculations) which are no other, nor no better then the devices of Satan himselfe, I will lay no other charge upon you then this.
That true and Apostolicall doctrine,25 But that which yee have already, hold fast till I come. and syncere reli∣gion, which ye have received, hold fast to the end. To him will I give power, by vertue of that union,26 To him will I give power over the nations. which he shall have with me, to have victory over all the professed enemies of my truth; and to sit with me, as the assistant, and approver of that judgement which shall be passed upon them. (And he shall in me,27 And hee shall rule them with a rod of yron: as the vessells of a potter shall they bee broken to shivers: even as I received of my Father. as a limme of that body whereof I am the head, over-rule and subdue his enemies, and the enemies of my Church, as a brittle vessell of earth is bro∣ken into shivers, by an yron scepter) even as I received of my Father, so do I impart this power, according to the capacity of my Church, to the members thereof. And howsoever he was obscured,28 And I will give him the morning starre. and basely accoun∣ted of in the world, I will put upon him exceeding glo∣ry, and majesty, and will communicate my selfe unto him, who am the true light that inlighteneth the world. CAP. III. THou hast the reputation of a zealous professour,1 That thou hast a name, that thou livest, and art dead. and faithfull teacher of my truth, yet indeed, thou art no better then an hypocrite, and hast not that measure of true life of grace in thee which thou pretendest. Stir up thy selfe to care, and vigilancy;2 Bee watchfull, and strengthen the things which remaine, that are readie to die: for I have not found thy workes per∣fect before God. and labour to strengthen, and confirme those few good things that yet remaine in thee, which are ready, by thy slacknesse, and neglect, to be utterly extinguished; for I have found thy obedience (how ever seemingly perfect, yet very hol∣low, and defective in the sight of God. I will come suddenly upon thee,3 I will come on thee as a thiefe, &c. and seize on thee by inexpected judgements, &c. Thou hast, under thy charge,4 Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walke with mee in white: for they are wor∣thy. some fewe worthy Christians, even in Sardis, which have not suffered them∣selves to be so much as outwardly tainted with the pol∣lution of the common wickednesse, and Idolatry of the rest; and they shall partake with me of my heavenly glo∣ry; for my mercy accepteth them as justly capable of such happinesse.5 Hee that overcom∣meth, the same shall bee clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the booke of life, but I will confesse his name before my Father, and before his Angells. He that overcommeth shall be clothed with glory and majesty in heaven, and as I have from eternity ordained him to life, and blessednesse; so I will undoubtedly con∣tinue unto him the right, and title thereunto; and will acknowledge him for mine, before my Father, and be∣fore the Angells of heaven.
7 He that hath the key of David; he that openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man ope∣neth.He that hath all power, regiment and soverainty gi∣ven to him over his Church, wherof the kingdome of David was a type, and resemblance; so as he admitteth, and excludeth; forbiddeth and commandeth; saveth, and destroyeth whom he pleaseth. 8 I know thy works: behold I have set before thee an open doore, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denyed my name.Behold I have vouchsafed to thee very faire, and meet oportunities to preach the Gospell; which no man can be able to bereave thee of; for although thou hast not those eminent gifts that some others have, yet thou hast well improved those which thou hast, and hast main∣tained my truth, and hast not denyed my name. See Chap. 2. vers. 9. 9 Them of the syna∣gogue of satan, which say they are Jewes: Behold I will make them to come, and worship before thy feet.I will so worke upon them; that they shall come in, and submit themselves unto thee, and shall humbly wor∣ship God before thee, and the congregation, as true con∣verts, and penitents. 10 Because thou hast kept the word of my pa∣tience, I also will keepe thee from the houre of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to trie them that dwell upon, &c.Because thou hast kept that word, and Gospell of mine, which both injoyneth, and worketh patience in all my faithfull; I will also keep thee from the hurt, and dan∣ger of that grievous persecution, which shall come upon all the Asian Churches. It shall not be long that thou shalt need to endure; hold fast therefore the profession of my Gospell, which thou hast received,11 Behold, I come quick∣ly, hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take, &c. that thou maist not be defeated of that glory which awaits for thee. As the manner of men is to erect pillars for monu∣ments,12 Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall goe no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusa∣lem which cōmeth down out of heaven from my God. to continue their memory; so will I doe to him that overcometh: I will set him up, as a firme and du∣ring pillar; and will establish and settle him as one of those living stones whereof my spirituall Temple consi∣steth; so as hee shall be utterly unremoveable from thence; And I will (as the custome is in such pillars) write upon him the inscriptions of the names of those to whom he appertaineth; viz. the name of my God, and of those habitations above, whereto hee is designed; ma∣king it manifest, that hee is an undoubted sonne of God, and a citizen of heaven. 14 And unto the Angell of the Church of the Lao∣diceans, write, These things saith the Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse, the beginning of the crea∣tion, &c.These things saith that God of Truth, the faithfull and infallible witnesse of his Fathers will, the powerfull creator of all things; by whom the Father made all that was made. 15 I know thy workes, that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would that thou wert cold or hot.I know thy workes, and thy disposition; that thou art of a luke-warme temper, neither opposite to religion,
nor yet a zealous friend to it; I would thou wert resol∣ved one way, or other; I had rather thou wert any thing, then what thou art; open hostility to the Gospell should not so much displease mee, as this hollownesse, and vncertainty. So then,16 So then, because thou art luke-warme, and nei∣ther cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. because thou art thus spiritually luke∣warme, and neither hot nor cold; I will deale with thee as a man doth by luke-warme water (wherewith the sto∣mack is made apt to egestion) cast thee up out of my mouth, and discharge my selfe of any further entertain∣ment of that profession thou makest of mee. Because thou art carried away with a spirituall pride,17 Because thou sayest, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poore, and blinde, and naked; and fondly conceivest thy selfe to be stored with all ho∣ly graces and vertues, and that thou hast no defect in any of them, and art farre from knowing aright the truth of thine estate, how sinfull thou art, how ignorant, how wretched every way; I counsell thee to have recourse unto mee, thy God and Saviour,18 I counsell thee to buy of mee gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest bee rich, and white raiment that thou mayest be cloa∣thed, and that the shame of thy nakednesse doe not ap∣peare, & annoint thine, &c. and by my meanes to furnish thy selfe with all those heavenly graces, whereby thy wants may bee supplyed, which may be to thee in stead of gold to reme∣dy thy poverty, and glorious raiment to remedy thy na∣kednesse, and eye-salve to redresse thy blindenesse. Behold, I have used all meanes for thy conversion; I have patiently expected it,20 Behold, I stand at the doore and knock, if any man heare my voice, and open the doore, I will come in to him, and will suppe with him, and hee with mee. and earnestly importun'd it; and still I continue so doing; and if any man heare the voice of my word, and open the doore of his heart to mee, yeelding to those my vehement solicitations; I will impart my selfe to the soule of that man, and will have mutuall fellowship with him, and he with mee. To him that overcommeth will I give the honour of a meet participation with mee in my glory,21 To him that over∣commeth will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame. in such man∣ner and measure, as every true member partakes of the honour of the head, &c. CAP. IV. AFter this, I looked up; and behold,1 After this I looked, and behold, a doore was opened in heaven: and the first voice which I heard, was as it were of a Trum∣pet talking with me, which said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter. the heaven see∣med to open it selfe to mee, and a large doore appea∣red to be set wide open therein; and as my eye was taken up with this sight, so my eare was filled with the sound of a voice from thence, which was strong and loud, as of a trumpet, talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter ac∣complished.
2 And immediately I was in the spirit, and be∣hold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sate on the throne.And immediately I had, in a further continuation of this vision, represented to mee a glorious throne, which was set in heaven; and a person of great glory sit∣ting on the throne. 3 And he that sate was to looke upon, like a Jasper, and a Sardine stone; and there was a rain-bow round about the throne, in sight like unto an Eme∣rald.And he that sate upon it was God the Father, full of re∣splendence, and majesty, having a shining brightnes, like to the most sparkling pretious stones, and the throne was encompassed about with a glorious rainbow, in the mix∣ture of the colours whereof the greene smaragd-like co∣lour was most eminent; to import that gracious and comfortable reconciliation which is betwixt God, and his people. 4 And round about the throne were foure and twenty seats, and upon the seats I saw foure and twenty Elders sitting, cloa∣thed in white raiment, and they had on their heads crowns of Gold.And round about the throne were foure and twenty seats of state or judicature; and upon the seats, I saw foure and twenty ancient and majesticall persons sitting, which were the Patriarks, and Prophets of the old Te∣stament, and the Apostles, and Euangelists of the new, and the Saints of both; which were honoured with their participation of glory, and their assistance of the righ∣teous judgement of God: And these Elders to signifie that perfect righteousnesse, and glory wherewith they were invested, were cloathed in white raiment, and had crownes of gold upon their heads. 5 And out of the throne proceeded lightnings, and thundrings, and voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the sea∣ven Spirits of God.And God declared his power from that his glorious throne, by thundring, and lightning and dreadfull voices; and to shew the excellent variety of the graces of his spirit, which God hath to give, and dispose for the good of his Church; before the throne there were seaven lamps burning. 6 And before the throne there was a sea of glasse like unto Chrystall, and in the middest of the throne, & round about the throne, were foure beasts, full of eyes before and behinde.And to import how cleare and transparent all things are before the face of God; there was, before the throne, a sea of glasse, like unto chrystall; and round about, and under the throne, as supporters of the frame thereof, were Angels of severall ranks, and imployments, all of them (to signifie their great knowledg, and perspicacity) were full of eyes, before and behinde. 7 And the first beast was like a Lyon, and the second beast like a Calfe, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying Eagle.And these Angels had formes answerable to those e∣minent graces that were in them; as those which were stout and majesticall as lyons, strong as buls, wise as men, swift as eagles. 8 And the foure beasts had each of them sixe wings about him, and they were full of eyes within, and they rest not day and night saying, Holy, &c.And those Angel, s to shew their agility, and readiness to execute the will and pleasure of God, had each of them sixe wings; and to expresse their exquisite knowledge, they were full of eyes within: and they never cease lau∣ding, and praysing the Lord with the joyfull acclamati∣ons of Holy, &c.
And as ascribing all thanks,10 And cast their crowns before the Throne, saying, and praise to God for his mercy in glorifying them, and in an humble acknowledg∣ment of all power and majesty to be derived from him, they did cast their crownes before the throne, &c. CAP. V. ANd I saw, as it were,1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sate on the throne, a booke writ∣ten within, and on the back-side, sealed with sea∣ven seales. a rolle or booke of the great mysteries of the decrees, and counsels of God, in the hand of God the Father, who sate upon the throne; and it was written on both sides, both within and without, to shew that universall providence of God which is in, and over all events and actions; and to signifie the secre∣cy and firmnesse of his said decrees, it was sealed on the backe side with seven seales. And (as the Angels of God are desirous to looke into those great mysteries of Gods will,2 And I saw a strong An∣gel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is wor∣thy to open the booke, and to loose the seales thereof. which concerne the good of his Church;) I saw a mighty, and glorious Angell, proclaming, with a loud voice (in implication of the difficultie, & merit of that wonderfull action;) Who is worthy to open the booke, and to loose the seales thereof? And there was no finite creature,3 And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the booke, neither to looke thereon. either in heaven or earth, that was able to unfold those great, and wonder∣full mysteries, which were contained in that rolle of Gods eternall decree. And one of those glorious persons,5 And one of the Elders saith unto me, Weepe not: behold, the lyon of the tribe of Juda, the roote of David, hath prevailed to open the booke, and to loose the seaven seales thereof. which represented the Patriarchs and Prophets, &c. before the throne, said unto me, Be not discomforted, for that thou hearest not of any Angell or man that is able to unfold and disclose these mysteries; for behold, hee that is God and man, Christ Jesus, who is the King, and powerfull ruler of his Church, of the tribe of Juda, of the seed of David according to the flesh, hath prevailed to reveale, and manifest these great secrets, which have beene hitherto close sealed up, in the counsell of God. And I beheld,6 And I beheld, and loe in the midst of the throne, and of the foure beasts, and in the midst of the Elders, stood a Lambe, as it had beene slaine, having seaven hornes, and seaven eyes, which are the seaven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth. and loe in the midst of the throne of God, and amidst his Angels, and Saints, stood the Sonne of God, Christ Jesus, who as hee is a lyon for his courage, and power, so is hee also a lambe for his meek∣nesse and innocence, as also in respect of that his sacri∣fice for mans redemption, being for that cause repre∣sented in the blood which was shed by him; and this ho∣ly and glorious Lambe, in signification of all power and might, put upon him by his Father, had seven
hornes, importing his forcible meanes to be reven∣ged of his enemies; and to imply his most perfect, and absolute knowledge, had seven eyes, which are the infi∣nite graces of that Spirit which was given him, not by measure; and by him communicated to his Church upon earth. 7 And hee came and tooke the book out of the right hand of him that sate upon the throne.And hee as mediator betwixt God and man, came and received the full notice of the great, and secret counsels of God concerning his Church. 8 And when hee had ta∣ken the booke, the foure beasts, and foure & twenty Elders fell downe before the Lambe, having every one of them harps, and golden vials full of odors, which are the prayers of Saints.And when he had taken that roule or booke, where∣in those counsels were set down, and sealed up: the holy Angels, and Saints which were before the throne, fell downe before the Sonne of God, in way of adoration of him, having every one of them melodious instru∣ments for the celebration of the praise; and golden vials full of sweet incense, representing both their acceptable thanksgivings, and their generall apprecations of peace, and welfare to the Church of God upon the earth. See 1. Pet. 2.9. 10 And he made us un∣to our God Kings and Priests: and we shall raign on the earth.And wee shall raigne, and triumph over our enemies which are on the earth. 11 And the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands.And there was an innumerable number of Angels, and Saints, which joyned together in magnifying the praise of Christ their Saviour, &c. CAP. VI. 1 And I saw when the Lambe opened one of the seales, & I heard as it were the noyse of thunder, one of the foure beasts saying, Come and see.ANd I saw when Christ the Sonne of God opened the first of those seven seales; and I heard a mighty voice, as if it had beene of thunder, from one of those foure glorious Angels, which were next to the throne, saying, Come and see. 2 And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sate on him had a bowe, and a crowne was given unto him, and hee went forth conquering, and to conquer.And I saw, and behold, a notable representation of the happy successe and victory of the Gospell; set forth by the appearance of a white horse, whose rider had a bow in his hand, to signifie the wound that he had given to his enemies; and a crowne was given to him, in signe of tri∣umph and honour; and he went forth to all the ends of the earth, conquering and bringing in subjection, every power that exalted it selfe against him.
And upon the opening of the second seale,4 And there went out ano∣ther horse that was red; and power was given to him that sate thereon, to take peace from the earth, & that they should kill one another: and there was gi∣ven unto him a great sword. I saw a re∣presentation of that bloody tyranny and persecution which should follow upon the preaching of the Gospell, set forth by the appearance of a red horse; and power was given to Satan, which was the mover and stirrer up of these cruell persecutors, the Tyrans of Rome, to take peace from the earth, and to incite them to a mutuall slaughter of each other; and for that purpose there was a great sword, by the just permission of God, given into his hand. And when he had opened the third seale,5 And when hee had opened the third Seale, I heard the third beast say, Come and see, & I beheld, and loe a blacke horse; and hee that sate on him had a paire of ballances in his hand. I heard the third Angell, say, Come and see. And I beheld, and lo, there was made to me a representation of an extreme dearth, and famine, which should follow upon the earth, by the appearance of a blacke horse, whose rider had a payre of scales in his hand; to signifie that they shall bee forced to measure out by drammes, and ounces, that corne which they shall be allowed to eate.6 And I heard a voice in the middest of the foure beasts say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barly for a penny, and see thou hurt not the wine and the oyle. And I heard a voice from among the foure Angells, saying, All graine which is for the food of man, shall bee at an high rate; and as for Wine and Oyle, which are for his pleasure, let spare be made of them; for they shall be rare, and hard to come by. And upon the opening of that fourth seale I looked,8 And I looked, & behold a pale horse, & his name that sate on him was death, and hell followed with him: and power was given unto them, over the fourth part of the earth to kill with sword, and with hunger. and behold a representation was made of a great and ge∣nerall mortality, which should be all the world over; set forth by the appearāce of a pale horse, the name of whose rider was Death; and the grave, or state of corruption, followed after him; and power was given him, to sweep away the fourth part of the inhabitants of the earth, by the sword, and by famine, and sicknesse, and wild beasts, and all other ordinary wayes of destruction. And when he had opened the fifth Seale,9 And when hee had opened the fift seale, I saw under the Altar the soules, of them that were slaine for the word of God. I saw the soules of all those faithfull martyrs, whose lives had been sacrificed for the profession of the truth of God, and for the testimony, which they gave thereunto, even from the first martyr Abel, to this present day. And they cryed with a loud voice,10 And they cryed with a loud voice, saying; How long, O Lord holy and true, dost thou not judge and a∣venge our blood on them that dwell on the earth. out of an holy de∣sire of the vindication of Gods honour, and redresse of the proud and lawlesse impiety of men on earth; How long, (O Lord God, who art most holy in all thy wayes, and just and true in all thy performances) will it be, ere thou take just vengeance on thy bloody & insolent ene∣mies upon earth, who for thy sake have spilt our blood, and exercised all manner of cruelty upon thy Saints? And there was given unto every one of them,11 And white robes were given unto every one of them, and it was said unto them, that they shold rest yet for a little season, untill their fellow servants also, and their brethren that should bee killed as they were, should be fulfiled. a great measure of celestiall glory; and it was said unto them,
that for the full consummation of that blessednesse of theirs, they should comfortably wait yet a while longer, untill the number of the rest of their holy brethren (the Martyrs of Christ, which should be killed for his sake) were fully accomplished. 12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixt seale, and loe, there was a great earthquake, and the Sunne became blacke as sackcloth of haire, and the moone became as blood.And I beheld when he had opened the sixt seale, and I saw a representation of wonderfull great and terrible al∣terations which should bee in the world; both in the Temporall, and Spirituall state; so as the powers thereof were shaken; and those that were wont to bee the com∣manders and lights of the world, were utterly obscured, and deprived of their wonted glory. 13 And the stars of hea∣ven fell unto the earth, even as a figtree casteth her untimely figgs, when she is shaken of a mighty winde.And those that were wont to give subordinate light, both in their great authority, and doctrine, to the world, were now cast downe, and by the force of persecution fell away from the Church, as a figtree casteth her un∣timely figges, when she is shaken by a mighty winde. So also verse 14. 14 And the heaven de∣parted as a scroule, when it is rolled together, & every mountaine and Iland were moved out of their places.And no man shall be exempted from the fearfull re∣venges of God, which shall bee so intolerable, as that all estates & degrees, even the great Potentates of the earth, &c. shall wish they could bee buried quicke under the mountaines, to avoid the dreadfulnesse of Gods judg∣ments which shall seize upon them. 16 And said to the moun∣taines and rockes, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe.Neither shall those severall plagues, and vengeances be more terrible unto them, then the very presence of that awfull God, who sitteth upon the throne, and the wrath of that Lambe of God, who being of himselfe meeke, patient, gracious, is now so irritated by their sins, that his very countenance is worse then death to all his guilty enemies. CAP. VII. 1 And after these things I saw foure Angells stand∣ing on the foure corners of the earth, holding the foure windes of the earth, that the winde should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.NOw lest I should doubt what, in the midst, and issue of these persecutions, might become of Gods Church; I saw the powerfull executioners of Gods wrath, standing on the foure coasts of the earth; even those mighty Spirits, which by the appointment of God have power over the foure windes that blow upon the earth, to raise or restraine them; I saw them by the command of the Almighty staying, and withholding those stormie
blasts from blustering upon the earth, or upon the sea, or upon the trees which lie most open to their violence; in short, I saw Gods mercifull restraint, for the time, of any damage that might come to his Church. And I saw another Angell,2 And I saw another Angell ascending from the East, having the Seale of the living God: and hee cryed with a loud voice to the foure Angells, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea: even the great Angell of the Covenant, Christ Jesus, ascending up from the Ea∣sterne coast (where Jerusalem stood) who by vertue of his Mediatorship had in his hand that Seale, or marke of the living God, which in his eternall decree is set upon all his elect, whereby they are sealed up both to salvati∣on in the end, and to a gratious protection till then; Who did by the mighty voice of his word, command those foure Angells to whom power was given to hurt the earth: Saying,3 Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sea∣led the servants of our God. hold your hands from doing any hurt to the earth, or sea; to the trees that grow upon the earth, or to the people that live upon it, untill we have set the Seale of Gods mercifull protection upon all those faithfull ser∣vants of our God, whom he hath decreed to preserve. And I heard the number of those, whom,4 And I heard the num∣ber of them which were sealed: and there were sea∣led an hundreth and forty and foure thousand, &c. out of all the tribes of Israel professing his name, Christ had marked out for his gracious protection, to bee an hundred forty foure thousand, that is, for each of the twelve tribes, twelve thousand. The specialties whereof follow in their order;5 Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thou∣sand. of the tribe of Juda were marked out twelve thousand con∣verts, or beleeving Christians, &c. And besides these converted Jewes,9 After this I beheld, and Lo, a great multitude, which no man could num∣ber, of all nations, and kin∣reds, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne, and before, &c. I beheld an innu∣merable number of Christians, chosen out of all nations, kinreds, people, & toungs, which stood before the throne of God, & before that immaculate Lambe Christ Jesus, clothed with glorious, and resplendent robes, and ha∣ving palmes of victory in their hands. Who did all with one voice cry out aloud to the praise of God, and professe,10 And cryed with a loud voice, saying, Salvati∣on to our God, which sit∣teth upon the Throne, and unto the Lambe. that salvation and all the glo∣ry thereof belongs unto that almighty God, that sitteth upon the throne, and to his Sonne Jesus, that Lambe of God which takes away the sinnes of the world. And one of those glorious Saints,13 And one of the El∣ders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are araied in white robes, and whence came they? which stood before the throne, as willing to give me occasion to inquire fur∣ther into the quality, and condition of those innumera∣ble company of triumphant persons, which were clad in long white robes, and carried palmes in their hands, asked me who those were that were thus araied; and whence they came. And I, as willing to be informed by him, said; Lord,14 And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest, and hee said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lambe. it is enough for thee to know that; I desire to learne of
thee, who they are; And he said; These are Christians converted frō Paganisme to the Gospell of Christ, which have suffered great persecution for his names sake; and who are clearely acquited and purged from all their sins, by the blood of Christ. 15 Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in the Temple: and he that sitteth on the Throne shall dwell among them.Therefore are they now in this glorious condition be∣fore the throne of God, and sing praises to him in his heavenly habitation continually; And the Almighty Lord God, who sitteth on the throne, shall make them blessed with the fruition of his presence for evermore. 16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heate.They are now past all the danger of those extremities of hunger, and thirst, and all other bodily complaints, whereto they were subject upon earth; neither shall the Sunne scorch them any more, nor any heate, or cold an∣noy them. 17 For the Lambe which is in the middest of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall leade them unto living fountaines of wa∣ters, and God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes.For their blessed Saviour, Christ Jesus, which is in the midst of the throne, shall bee all-sufficient, both for their nourishment, and refreshing; hee shall feed them with hidden Manna, and shall comfort their soules with the waters of eternall life; and God shall fully free them from all trouble and sorrow. CAP. VIII. 1 And when hee had opened the seventh Seale, there was silence in heavē about the space of halfe an houre.ANd now after that the tyrannicall persecutors of the Church, the bloody Emperours which lived in those primitive times, were justly punished by the hand of God, when the seventh Seale was opened, the Church had peace for a short time. 3 And another Angell came and stood at the Al∣tar, having a golden censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that hee should offer it with the prayers of all the Saints upon the, &c.And the great Angell of the Covenant, Christ Jesus, came and stood, as the Mediator and High-priest of his Church, before the Altar of heaven, having, and execu∣ting the gratious office of his intercession; and many holy and effectuall prayers were offered unto him, that hee might by his mercifull, and effectuall mediation present them to God the Father. 4 And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God, out of the Angells hand.And those faithfull praiers, being sweetned by the powerfull, and pleasing intercession of Christ, were with great acceptation received of God, from the hands of Christ his Sonne. 5 And the Angell tooke the censer, and filled it with fire of the Altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and thunderings, and lighten∣ings, and an earthquake.And the same Angell of the Covenant, the Sonne of God, who as he is the just avenger of the enemies of his
Church, (and therefore had cast the fire of his wrath up∣on the earth, on the heads of those tyrans and persecu∣tors, as also of those hereticall seducers which vexed his Church) did now also, in much mercy to his Church, from that heavenly Altar of his, cast downe the fire of holy zeale, and illumination upon his servants on earth; who being inflamed and inlightned therewith, desire and endeavour to oppose those wicked heresies, which had beene broached in the Easterne Churches; and im∣mediately hereupon followed great tumults, and much opposition. And now upon the opening of the seventh Seale,6 And the seven Angels which had the seven trum∣pets, prepared themselves to sound. and these broyles, that followed after in the Chu ch; those seven Angels, which God had appointed to bee the her∣alds of his vengeance to the earth, prepared themselves to sound forth the reports of those severall judgements, and remarkable proceedings of God, with, and upon the world. And the first Angell sounded;7 The first Angell soun∣ded, and there followed haile, and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth, and the third part of trees was burnt up, and all the greene grasse was burnt up. and there followed great store of heresies, and very raging, firy, bloody pro∣secutions of them in the Church; and the third part of the professors of the Gospell, which are the Churches of the East, were grievously plagued, and infested there∣with; these were the heresies of Arius, Macedonius, Eu∣nomius, Photinus, Luciferians, Messalians, Apollinaris, Priscillianus, Pelagius, Nestorius, Eutyches. And the second Angell sounded,8 And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great mountaine burning with fire was cast into the Sea, and the third part of the Sea became blood. and there was an e∣minent part of the Church, even that large and nume∣rous Councell which was met at Ariminum for the esta∣blishing of the Arian heresie, which being fired with that wicked contention, diffused it selfe into the world; and a third part of the knowne Church was infected with it, and moued to a bloody persecution of the truth. So also verse 9. And the third Angell sounded,10 And the third An∣gell sounded, and there fell a great starre from heaven, burning as it were a lampe, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountaines of waters. and there fell out a fearfull Apostasie from the Church of Christ, partly by the seducement of wicked Mahomet, who after some acknowledgment of Christ, fell away and devised with Sergius the Nestorian Monke, and John of Antioch the Arian to frame his cursed Alchoran, and to advance his owne damnable impieties, and he corrupted a great part of the world; tainting both the Springs, and streames of religion; and partly by some dangerous er∣rors, and superstitions, which beganne to prevaile in the Westerne Churches.
11 And the name of the starre is called Worme∣wood, and the third part of the waters became wormewood, and many men died of the, &c.And the doctrines of that wicked impostor were as bitter as wormwood, and did put an ill savour, and odi∣ous distastfulnesse upon all that were mis-seasoned with them; in so much as these seducements proved deadly to many thousand soules. 12 And the fourth An∣gell sounded, and the third part of the Sunne was smit∣ten, and the thrid part of Moone, and the third part of the Starres, so as the third part of them was darkened: and the day shone not, &c.And the fourth Angell blew, and, what with the in∣fection of Mahumetisme in the East, and the corrupti∣ons, and errors which beganne to creepe into the We∣sterne Church, a third part of the Christian world began to be darkned, and to be overspred with ignorance, or mis-beleife, and leese that pure light of truth, which had formerly shined forth unto them. 13 And I beheld, and heard an Angell flying through the midst of hea∣ven, saying with a cloud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth, by reason of the o∣ther voices of the trum∣pet, of the three Angells which are, &c.Whereupon I beheld, and Loe, a swift messenger of fearfull tidings was sent by God unto his Church; pre∣monishing his elect, that they must expect yet more grievous plagues to be inflicted upon the inhabitants of the earth, in the following times, at the sounding of those three other trumpets that yet remained. CAP. IX. 1 And the first Angell sounded, and I saw a starre fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was gi∣ven the key of the bot∣tomlesse pit.ANd the fifth Angell blew his trumpet; and I saw that fore-described Apostate both of the East, and West Church, to receive yet more power to prevaile in their impieties, and ambitions, and, as it were, to set open the gates of hell. 2 And hee opened the bottomlesse pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great fornace, and the Sunne and the ayre were darkned by reason of the smoke of the pit.And accordingly this Apostasie succeeded; so as the instruments, and agents therein, did, by their errors, and impieties, set open the way to the pit of hell; from whence there arose such fogges of mis-beliefe, and erro∣neous doctrine, as that thereby the light of the Gospell was much obscured. And there came out of this hellish smoke new swarmes of Saracens in the East,3 And there came out of the smoke Locusts up∣on the earth, & unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power. and of superstitious abettors of usurpation and errors in the West; which wasted a great part of the Church; and by the sting and poyson of their false doctrine, had permission to envenome very many in all places. Yet so did it please God to restraine the power and successe of their infection and annoyance,4 And it was comman∣ded them, that they should not hurt the grasse of the earth, neither any greene thing, neither any tree, but onely those men which have not the seale of God in their foreheads. as that they should not prevaile over those places, and persons, which he in his secret counsell had determined to preserve; no, not even the most weake & tender plants in his Church; but onely over those men which have not the marke of
Gods particular, and gracious protection set upon them. And even over them also was the power of these noy∣some persons so limited,5 And to them it was given, that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented five moneths, and their tor∣ment was as the torment of a scorpion when he stri∣keth. as that they should not utterly destroy them, but oppresse and afflict them for the space of an hundred and fifty yeares after their first seizure upon every severall region which they should infest, at which time their tyranny should abate; the proceedings of which pernicious agents should be at first more ea∣sie, and tolerable, and afterwards should grow to extre∣mity, and painfull death. And therefore in those grievous oppressions,6 And in those dayes shall men seeke death, and shall not finde it, and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them. both of body, and of estate, and of soule, men shall be so vexed, that they shall be weary of their lives; and shall wish to be freed from that servitude, even by death it selfe, and shall not be allowed it. And the forme and deportment of these infernall lo∣custs was altogether martiall; like unto barbed horses,7 And the shapes of the locusts were like unto hor∣ses prepared unto battell, and on their heads were, as it were, crownes like gold: and their faces were as the faces of men. prepared to the battell; carrying all by a cruell and impetuous violence, and bearing downe all oppositions before them; and through their happy successe, they tri∣umphed as Kings; and had the very formes of crownes upon their heads; and they carried themselves, for their owne advantage, friendly and plausibly to those whom they meant to worke upon. And they were altogether effeminate in their dispo∣sitions, being given up to wantonnesse, and lust,8 And they had haire as the haire of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lyons. and to maintaine their luxurie, they were immoderately rave∣nous, and cruell; by strong hand invading the domini∣ons, and inheritances of their opposites. And they were strongly defenced against all hostile attempts: the Easterne locusts by their owne conquests;9 And they had brest-plates, as it were brest-plates of iron, and the sound of their wings was as the sound of charets of many horses running to battell. the Westerne, by that hand which they had got over the kings and princes of the earth, which were ready prest for their maintenance and supportation; and when they were provoked, their preparations and threats were great and terrible, like to the ratling of many charets, and neighing of horses to the warre. And these hellish locusts,10 And they had tailes like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tailes: and their power was to hurt men five moneths. besides their ordinary ef∣fect of wasting and spoyling the earth, had dangerous venome in them, and deadly stings in their tailes, which were like to those of scorpions, and had permission from God to torment and empoyson those with whom they had to deale, for the space of the forenamed hundred and fifty yeares. And they ranged themselves under one kingdome or government; the Easterne locusts under their Mahomet;11 And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomlesse pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abad∣don, but in the Greeke tongue hath his name Apol∣lyon.
the Westerne under their universall head; both of them under satan the prince of darknesse, who being a man∣slayer from the beginning hath his name from destru∣ction. 12 One woe is past, and behold, there come two woes more hereafter.One great calamity and misery to the Church is alrea∣dy foreshewed; which is in the joynt endeavours of the Easterne, and Westerne locusts; and behold there are two more and more grievous afflictions yet remaining. 13 And the sixt Angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the foure hornes of the golden altar which is before God,And the sixt Angell sounded; and as the temple on earth resembles heaven, and the golden altar in the tem∣ple, being neare seated to the holy of holies, and the pro∣pitiatory, signifies and imports a neare approach to the throne of God, I heard a voice comming as it were from the foure corners of that golden altar which is be∣fore God, 14 Saying to the sixt An∣gel which had the trum∣pet, Loose the foure angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates.Saying to that Angell, which had the charge to sound the sixt trumpet; Hitherto the evill spirits have beene restrained from the extremity of their machinations a∣gainst my Church which is in the Easterne parts, about the great river Euphrates; but now I doe in my infinite justice and wisdome see it to be time to let them loose to inflict their greatest mischiefes upon those coasts. 15 And the foure Angels were loosed, which were prepared for an houre, and a day, and a moneth, and a yeare, for to slay the third part of men.And those foure evill angels, which were to be exe∣cutioners of Gods wrath, were let loose; which howsoe∣ver they were restrained before, yet were ever forward, and eagerly prest to doe mischiefe, according to the pro∣portion of the time limited them; if they were allowed but one houres liberty, they were ready prepared to doe their utmost hurt for that houre; if for a day, or a month, or a yeare, they were accordingly addressed for their execution upon the third part of the inhabitants; by the sword of the Turkes, and those bloodie warres which should be raised by their instigation. 16 And the number of the armie of the horsemen were two hundred thou∣sand thousand, and I heard the number of them.And the number of those Turkish armies shall be ex∣ceeding great, above the proportion of all those Christi∣an forces, which shall oppose them. 17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sate on them, having brestplates of fire, and of jacinct, and brim∣stone, and the heads of the horses were as the heads of Lyons, and out of their mouthes issued fire, and smoke, and brimstone.And then I saw their horses, and the riders on them, in my vision; armed strongly, and set forth in a terrible fashi∣on; their brest-plates and targets representing nothing but fire, and fury against their enemies, and their horses were fierce, and lyon-like, and the riders of them were furnished with such engines of death, as carried sulphur, and fire, and smoke in the mouths of them.
And by these instruments of death a great part of the Europeans were slaine;18 By these three was the third part of men kil∣led, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brim∣stone which issued out of their mouthes. the maine force of the Turkes consisting in their troups of horses, and the military pre∣parations of this kinde. Such power and successe shall they have in their bat∣tailes, and open assaults; but withall,19 For their power is in their mouth, and in their tailes: for their tailes were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they doe hurt. they shall under∣hand worke much secret mischiefe by their serpentine plots, and devices; whereby they shall withdraw many from their Christian religion to accursed Mahometisme. And the rest of those European Christians and neighbouring nations,20 And the rest of the men which were not kil∣led by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship de∣vils and idols of gold, and silver, and brasse, and stone, and of wood, which nei∣ther can see, nor heare, nor walke. which have yet escaped those plagues of Turkish cruelty, have not beene warned by so severe an hand of God to repent of their wicked workes, and especially of their idolatry; wherein they have (under a pretence of holy devotion) wor∣shipped the devill; and falne downe before Idols of gold, and silver, and brasse, and stone, and of wood, which neither can see, nor heare, nor walke. CAP. X. NOw,1 And I saw another mighty Angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the Sun, and his feet as pillars of fire. that in the midst of these broyles and miseries which should befall the world, it might appeare that God had speciall respect to his Church; behold, the great Angell of the Covenant, even Christ the Sonne of God, appeared, as comming downe from heaven, in a very glorious fashion; having, as it were, a bright rain∣bow upon his head, shining with variety of excellent co∣lours; and his face was resplendent, and beamie, like to the Sunne, and his feet were as pillars of fire, to shew the certaine and powerfull revenge that he will take of his enemies. And he had in his hand a little booke, open;2 And he had in his hand a little booke open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth. whether to signifie that abundance of knowledge of Gods word, which should be after the barbarismes of superstition, and Turkish ignorance; or whether to signifie the clear∣nesse of those few prophesies, which yet remained after these fore-mentioned events, to be fulfilled: and he put one of his feet upon the sea, and the other upon the earth, to signifie that he had the power and command of both; and that the things which hee was to speake, concerned all, both continent, and Ilands, and all that lived either on sea or land. And hee spake aloud, with a strong, and mighty,3 And cried with a loud voice, as when a lyon roareth: and when he had cryed, seven thunders ut∣tered their voices. and
dreadfull voice; as when a lyon roareth; and when hee had spoken that which hee would say; seven thunders, as the eccho of that speech of his, were heard to resound with a very fearefull noyse; expressing what he had de∣livered. 4 And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seale up those things which the seaven thunders uttered: and write them not.And when the seven thunders had finished their sound; I was about to write that which was delivered by them; but presently I heard a voice from heaven charging me to the contrary, saying, Keepe unto thy selfe those things which the seven thunders have uttered; and doe not publih them to the world. 5 And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lifted up his hands to heaven.And this glorious Angell of the Covenant, whom I saw stand upon the sea with one foot, and on the land with the other, did in the solemne forme of an oath, lift up his hand to heaven, as calling God the Father, and the holy Ghost to record of that serious truth which hee would speake. 6 And sware by him that liveth for ever and e∣ver, who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and things which are therin, that there should be time no longer.And swore by that eternall, and infinite God who created heaven, and all that is therein, and the earth with all the things that are in, and upon it; & the sea, & all the things therein, that the time, and world were now draw∣ing to an end and (after these things should be fulfilled) should be no more. 7 But in the dayes of the voice of the seventh Angell when hee shall begin to sound, the my∣stery of God should be finished, as hee hath de∣clared to his servants the Prophets.But that in the dayes of the sound of the seaventh trumpet, by which the seventh Angel should blow forth the plague of Gods last wrath; Antichrist should be de∣stroyed, the kingdome of Christ should be erected; and the mystery of Gods finall judgement, (wherein all pro∣phesies shall end) should be accomplished and perfor∣med. 8 And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto mee againe, and said, Goe and take the little booke which is open in the hand of the Angel, &c.Then the voice, which I heard from heaven, spake un∣to me, againe, and charged mee that I should goe, and receive the full and cleare instructions of those myste∣ries, contained in that booke, which was open in the hand of Christ. 9 And I went unto the Angel, and said unto him, Give me the little booke: and he said unto me, Take it and eate it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as hony.And I went unto Christ the Mediator, and humbly besought him that hee would be pleased to give mee the cleare, and perfect understanding of the mysteries therin contained; who graciously condescending to my request, did not onely give mee the booke, but power to com∣prehend it; charging mee to take in, and speedily to di∣gest the contents of it; and withall, fore-admonished me, that the matter comprised therein, howsoever it should
be very sweet and pleasant to mee in the knowledge thereof: yet in regard of the trouble and opposition, which will follow upon the publishing thereof, and con∣veighing of it forth to the use of others, it should be found very bitter, and unpleasing. So also verse 10. And he said unto mee,11 And hee said unto mee, Thou must prophesie againe before many peo∣ple, and nations, & tongues, and kings. As I have under these former visions, shewed thee the state of my Church, and revealed it unto thee, for the further manifestation thereof, to o∣thers; So doe I now againe renew unto thee the repre∣sentation of the same truths, under other formes of ex∣pression; Thou therefore having taken in, and digested the contents of this booke, must prophesie againe of the same things before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings. CAP. XI. ANd now to expresse the state of the Church under the first opening of those seaven seales;1 And there was given mee a reed like unto a rod, and the Angell stood, say∣ing, Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein. there was gi∣ven unto mee a reed like unto a rod, wherewith to mea∣sure the temple and the altar; signifying in effect, that I was enjoyned to take full notice of the condition of the Church of God, under the Gospell, and those that did faithfully, and truly make profession thereof. But I was commanded to neglect and passe over the measure of the outer court;2 But the Court which is without the Temple leave out, and measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two moneths. in token that I should make no reckoning of those that did falsely, and unjustly chal∣lenge to themselves the title of a christian profession, for that they should in Gods just judgement be given over to hereticks and mis-beleevers in opinion, and men su∣perstitious and profane in practise; who should prevaile against the more syncere and sound part of the Church; and hold them under their tyranny, for the space of one thousand, two hundred, and sixty yeares Yet in the meane time I will raise up some few faith∣full witnesses against them, and for my oppressed truth;3 And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesie, a thousand two hundred and three score dayes clo∣thed in sackcloth. and they shall in their severall successions continue to speake against the errours, and corruptions of the times, for that whole space of a thousand two hundred, and threescore yeares, howsoever with much opposition on the part of their enemies, and trouble and sorrow on their part.
4 These are the two o∣live trees, and the two candlestickes standing be∣fore the God of the earth.These are they, whom I will raise up, as the noble, and profitable instruments, and meanes of much grace, illu∣mination, holinesse to my Church, in a continued suc∣cession of times. 5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies, and if any man will hurt them, he must in this man∣ner be killed.And if any hereticke or profane person, shall rise up against them, and oppose their holy doctrine, the power and evidence of that spirit, which is in these messengers of God, shall convince them; and shall bring judgements upon them. 6 These have power to shut heaven that it raine not in the dayes of their prophesie, and have power over waters to turne them to blood, and to smitet he earth with all plagues, as often as they will.These holy men shall prevaile so farre with God, as that upon their prayers (so as it was in the case of Elias) the heavens shall be shut up that no raine shall fall upon the earth during the time of their interdiction; and (ac∣cording to the power given unto Moses) they shall be able to turne the waters into blood, and to bring much variety of plagues upon the earth; and God shall shew that hee beares great respect unto them. 7 And when they shall have finished their testi∣mony, the beast that ascen∣deth out of the bottom∣lesse pit shall make warre against them, and shall o∣vercome them, and kill them.And when they have finished their testimony, which is after a thousand, two hundred and sixty yeares, the Antichristian power shall be more vehemently bent a∣gainst them; and shall strongly labour to suppresse them, by putting some of them to death. And that great and wicked city, which is spiritually resembled by Sodome for uncleannesse, and by Egypt for cruelty,8 And their dead bo∣dies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called So∣dome, & Egypt, where al∣so our Lord was crucified. oppression, and superstition; even that, under whose power and jurisdiction the Lord was crucified, shall be notoriously knowne for her guiltinesse of their innocent blood shed. And those that are favourers of errour, and supersti∣tion,9 And they of the people, and kinreds, and tongues, and nations shall see their dead bodies three dayes, and an halfe, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. in all the kingdomes, and the countries of the world shall gladly heare and see the cruelty, which shall be of∣fered to these faithfull messengers of God; and shall par∣take in persecuting them, both alive, and dead; denying them the rights of Christian buriall; and suffering their carcasses to lye openly in their streets, so long as till there might be danger of their owne annoyance. 10 And they that dwell upon the earth shall re∣joyce over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two pro∣phets tormented them, that dwelt on the earth.And all carnall men, which are superstitiously affe∣cted, and who were troubled with their bold and con∣scionable reproofes, shall rejoyce and be glad at the death of these holy men, and in a congratulation of their riddance, shall send presents to each other. For these are they who by preaching downe their wicked courses, and erroneous doctrines, did much vexe, and disquiet those favourers of idolatrie, and errour. 11 And after three dayes and an halfe, the Spirit of life from God entred into them: & they stood upon their feet, and great feare fell upon them, which saw them.But after they have beene for a short time thus sup∣pressed, persecuted and slaine, the Spirit of God, who is the author of life, shall raise up like minded successours
unto them, who, as if they had beene animated with the same soule, shall maintaine the same holy quarrell; and their insulting enemies shall be much dismayed, and af∣frighted therewith. But as for them, who have beene thus persecuted,12 And they heard a great voyce from heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither, and they ascen∣ded up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them. and martyred; they shall be received triumphantly into hea∣ven, and shall heare the gracious invitation of God, cal∣ling them up to their crowne, and glory; and their very enemies shall be witnesses of their blessed exaltation. And at the same time,13 And the same houre was there a great earth∣quake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slaine of men seaven thousand, and the remnant were affrigh∣ted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. when these revived abetters of Gods truth shall be stirre themselves, there shall be very great commotions, and stirres in the Church; and a great part of the Romane adherencie shall fall off from her; and many thousands of them, who have, against the light of their owne consciences, upheld the errours, and abuses of the times, shall be swept away, with the just judgements of God; and the remnant shall be afraid of the like measure, and shall give glory to the God of hea∣ven, and embrace his holy truth. The fift and sixt trumpet have their severall sounds of fearefull plagues that shall befall to the Christian world;14 The second woe is past, and behold the third woe commeth quickly. the second of those woes, denounced by the sixt Angell, is now so past, as that the maine force of it, is abated; and now the third woe which the seventh trumpet shall proclaime is neare at hand. And the seventh Angel,15 And the seventh An∣gell sounded, and there were great voyces in hea∣ven, saying, The king∣domes of this world are become the kingdomes of our Lord, & of his Christ, and hee shall raigne for ever and ever. who sounds an utter and finall destruction to all the enemies of God, and his Church, blew the trumpet; and immediately there were heard joyfull acclamations in heaven, of the Saints and Angels; which said; Now the enemies of God are quite vanqui∣shed; and the kingdome of God, and his Sonne Christ is advanced, and submitted unto, by all the nations of the world, and established for ever. Then those foure and twenty Elders which represen∣ted the Patriarchs and prophets of the ancient Church of God,16 And the foure and twenty Elders, which sate before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God. sitting before the throne of God in glorious seats, fell downe upon their faces, and worshipped God. Saying, &c. vers. 17. And those prophane enemies of thine,18 And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward un∣to thy servants the Pro∣phets, and to the Saints, and them that feare thy Name, small and great, and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth. which were exasperated against thy Church, and offered all manner of affronts, and violences unto it, shall now finde that the time of thy wrath is comne; and the season of thy last
judgement, wherein all that were formerly dead shal ap∣peare before thee; and receive their retribution, accord∣ing to their workes; wherein thy servants the Prophets, and thy Saints, and those that feare thy name, both small and great shal receive an happy reward of life and glory; and the persecutors of thy Chutch shall be recompenced with everlasting destruction. 19 And the Temple of God was opened in hea∣ven, and there was seene in his Temple the Arke of his Testament, and there were lightnings, and voi∣ces, and thundrings, and an earthquake, and great haile.Then was an open way set forth (to the world) not onely to the true Evangelicall Church, figured by the Temple, but also to the very holy of Holies, and there∣in to Christ the Saviour, figured by the Arke of the new Testament, and withall there was thereupon a terrible execution of judgment upon those wicked enemies of the Church, and Gospell of Christ, in all variety of plagues, and punishments. CAP. XII. 1 And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sunne, and the Moone un∣der her feet, and upon her head a crowne of twelve starres.HItherto hath the estate of the Church beene repre∣sented in two severall visions; now it pleased God to shew the same unto me, more at large, in a third vision; beginning at the primitive times thereof, and continuing till the end of all things. The primitive Church was therefore represented unto me, as a woman resplendent and glorious; though of herselfe, in respect of her nature and sexe, weake and feeble, yet made pure, and majesti∣call by the perfect beames of Christs righteousnesse shi∣ning upon her; the Moone was under her feet, to signifie her treading upon all the transitory, and changeable things of this life, now in the times of her first simplicity; and upon her head was a crowne, not of gold, but of hea∣venly matter, even of starres; to signifie that she is ho∣noured as a Queene in heaven; of twelve starres, to sig∣nifie the heavenly doctrine of the twelve Apostles, the maintenance whereof is the onely glory of her. 2 And shee being with childe cried, travelling in birth, and pained to bee delivered.And she that had been formerly barren, was now fruit∣full, and great with child, ready to bee delivered of her happy burden, longing to bring forth children unto God. 3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold, a great red dra∣gon having seven heads, and ten hornes and seven crownes upon his heads.And there appeared another wonder in heaven; for there was represented to me a fearefull image of that op∣position which should be made to the Church, viz. that the devill (which was resembled by a great red dragon, cruell and bloody) whose chiefe seat and city standeth upon seven hills, being crowned with the command, and government of the world, and having under it many confederated Kingdomes, wherein the strength thereof
consisteth) should stirre up the tyrans of the Roman Em∣pire, to set themselves against it in all violent courses. And the issue of this tyrannicall persecution,4 And his taile drew the third part of the stars, of heaven, and did cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devoure her child as∣soone as it was borne. raised by Satan, was such, as that, by this meanes, very many who were, and might have beene lights to others, were mis∣carried from their Christian profession; and drawn backe to Pagan Idolatry; And these bloody persecutors (a∣gents for the then-Roman Empire) stood ready to watch for any that would, or durst professe the name of Christ; and, so soone as any man did but offer to stand out for the maintenance of the Christian faith, were ready to seize upon him, and to proceed cruelly against him. But in spight of all the malice and opposition of ene∣mies, the Church brought forth,5 And she brought foorth a manchild, who was to rule all nations with a rod of yron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his Throne. through the power of the Gospell, a masculine issue of true and faithfull pro∣fessors; in whom Christ was truly formed anew; even Christ mysticall, that Son of God who should rule over the nations; and in whose right his members partake of the same glory; And this blessed issue of hers was taken into the speciall protection of God, and in their severall times glorified with him. And the Church, viz.6 And the woman fled into the wildernes, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and three∣score dayes. the faithfull professors of Christs name, being after this, persecuted, were glad to retire themselves into deserts, and solitary places, where the providence of God had prepared maintenance, and safe protection for them; where they continued during the heat of that persecution. And the Devill, the arch-enemie of mans salvation,7 And there was warre in heaven, Michael and his Angells fought against the dragon, and the dragon fought and his Angells, raised up watre against Christ and his Church; and there was a very great and sore conflict betwixt Christ, and his faithfull servants on the one part, and Satan, and his complices on the other. But Satan, notwithstanding all his power and malice,8 And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. prevailed not against the Church, neither was permitted to atchive any thing against the salvation of Gods elect. And the great dragon the devill, and Satan,9 And the great dra∣gon was cast out, that old Serpent called the devill and Satan, which decei∣veth the whole world; he was cast out into the earth and his Angells were cast out with him. even that old serpent, which bore a deadly and perpetuall enmitie to Christ, and his holy seed; and who is the great decei∣ver and tempter of the Sonnes of men, was utterly defea∣ted of all power to prevaile against Gods Church; and was put over, and limited to the exercise of his tyranny upon those earthly and carnall men whom he prevailes over. And I heard a loud voice of Saints and Angells,10 And I heard a loud voice, saying in heaven, Now is come salvatiō and strength, & the Kingdome of our God & the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast downe, which accused thē before our God, day and night. try∣umphing in heaven, at this victory of Christ, and defeat of Satan; saying; Now, is salvation without all im∣peachment prepared for Gods chosen; and the strength
and the Kingdome of our God, and the power of Christ his Sonne, is enlarged; for Satan, who is the great temp∣ter, and accuser of Gods children, urging their sinnes a∣gainst them, and pleading for revenge of their mis-deeds, and raising calumnies, and slanders against them, before God and men, is foyled, and dejected. 11 And they overcame him by the blood of the Lambe, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.And these elect children of God have overcomne him; not by any power of their owne, but by the blood of Christ, that immaculate Lambe, applyed to them by a lively faith; and by the power of that mighty word of truth, which they have given their confession unto; and by their resolute, and patient suffering, and yeelding up their lives to a most bitter death for the maintenance of the Gospell. 12 Therefore rejoyce ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them; Woe to the in∣habiters of the earth, and of the sea; for the devill is come downe unto you, having great wrath, be∣cause he knoweth that hee hath but a short time.Therefore rejoyce, O ye heavens, and ye blessed An∣gells and Saints, that dwell therein; for this your happy victory in Christ your Redeemer. But woe bee to you, earthly and carnall-minded men, whose affections are wholly set upon worldly things; for, since Satan cannot have his will of Gods faithfull ones, hee will bee sure to tyrannize over you; and for that purpose, is he labouring in his extreme rage against mankinde, to execute his wrath upon you; wherein he is so much the more eager, and vehement, because he knowes his kingdome draweth neare to an end. 13 And when the dra∣gon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecu∣ted the woman which brought forth the man childe.And when this malicious dragon saw that he was de∣feated of his purposes, of hindring the salvation of Gods Saints, hee turned all his rage against the Church mi∣litant on earth, raysing up by his wicked instruments all manner of persecutions against her, who had brought forth that masculine issue of faithfull professors. 14 And to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that shee might flee into the wilder∣nesse into her place, where she is nourished, for a time, and times, and halfe a time, from the face of the serpent.But unto the Church were given by the wise and gra∣cious providence of the Almighty, many both forcible, and speedy meanes of her delivery, that she might retire, and betake her selfe to a place of more obscure safety; where he tooke order for her preservation and nourish∣ment during all the time of her persecution. 15 And the Serpent cast out of his mouth wa∣ter as a flood, after the wo∣man, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.And the Serpent, when he saw that the speed of her rescue, was such, as that he could not overtake, and sur∣prise her; he cast forth, after her, whole floods of lies, slanders, and reproches, by the mouthes, and pennes of her blasphemous enemies; and broached store of errone∣ous, and hereticall doctrines; wherewith if it were pos∣sible, he might draw her, either into detestation or apo∣stasie. 16 And the earth hel∣ped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth.But this attempt of his was also in vaine, for the pro∣vidence
of God so ordered it, as that all these false re∣proches, and attempts of infection prevailed not, but vanished away, even as a flood of land-water is swallow∣ed up of the earth, and is seene no more. And the devill was so much the more exasperated a∣gainst the Church,17 And the dragon was wroth with the wo∣man, and went to make warre with the remnant of her seed, which keepe the Commandements of God, and have the testi∣monie of Jesus Christ. for that he saw himselfe disappointed in all his projects; and therefore hee ceased not to stirre up warre against those children of the Church, which professed the truth of the Gospell, and indevoured to keepe sincerely the commandements of God, and the onely-true religion of Jesus Christ. CAP. XIII. ANd I stood upon the shore of the Iland Pathmos;1 And I stood upon the sand of the sea: and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads, and tenne kornes, and upon his hornes ten crownes, and upon his heads the name of blasphemie. and behold, there was a further vision presented to me. For I saw out of the ambitious stirres, and tumults of the world, there arose the great Roman Empire, in the forme of a beast, by reason of the brutish conditions of those that swayed it; whose chiefe seate was placed upon seven hills; and whose government was managed by seaven severall formes of soverainty; and whose strength consisted in ten severall Kingdomes, which were under the command of that Empire; and divers prophane & wicked governors of that Monarchy made profession of horrible blasphemies and impieties, in that they chal∣lenged to be stiled and adored as gods. And the beast which I saw,2 And the beast which I saw was like unto a Leo∣pard, and his feet were as the feet of a Beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority. representing the Roman Empire, was, as it were, cōposed of the qualities of those other three former Monarchies which were past; for in fiercenesse and speed of conquest it was like the Leo∣pard of the Greeke Monarchy; and for ravening, like the Persian Beare; and for hautinesse and cruelty, like to the Babylonian Lion: And the devill did by all meanes set forward the power and authority of this Empire, ad∣vancing it by frauds, and cruelties, that it might serve for his owne purposes. And I saw one of his heads wounded deadly,3 And I saw one of his heades as it were wound∣ed to death, and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondred after the beast. in the cutting off of the Cesars line in Nero; and in the inter∣cision of the Empire, for some time, by the Hunnes, and Gothes, and Vandalls, but this wound was soone healed up; and the flowrishing condition of that Empire was such, as all the world wondred at it, and were glad to doe their homage and fealty to it. And men were so besotted with the admiration ther∣of;5 And they worshiped the dragon which gave power unto the beast, and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make warre with him?
that they were ready to adore those hellish powers, by whose meanes, and furtherance, this Empire was so advanced; and to dote upon the honour, and greatnesse of this, which they called a sacred and perpetuall Mo∣narchy; Saying, what Empire was ever so great and large as this, and what nation or Kingdome is able to stand out against it? 5 And there was gi∣ven unto him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemie, and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.And Satan had so prevailed with divers of these Ce∣sars, that in the pride of their heart, they spake horrible blasphemies against God, proclaiming their owne deity, and calling for adoration from the people; and through the permission of God, power was given unto this Em∣pire to prevaile, and execute tyranny and cruelty for the space of a thousand, two hundred, and sixty yeares. 6 And hee opened his mouth in blasphemie a∣gainst God, to blaspheme his name, and his Taber∣cle and them that dwelt in heaven.And these proud and Atheous governors opened their mouthes against God, to blaspheme his name, and to arrogate his title to themselves, as also to slander and traduce his Church, raysing wicked calumniations a∣gainst his Saints and servants. 7 And it was given un∣to him to make warre with the Saints, and to o∣vercome them: and power was given him over all kinreds, and tongues, and nations.And besides their blasphemies, they were permitted in the just judgement of God, to raise cruell persecuti∣ons, against those that professed the name of Christ; and to put them to death; and this power was yeelded to them universally, in all kingdomes, and countries, under their dominion. 8 And all that dwell upon the earth shall wor∣ship him, whose names are not written in the Book of life of the Lamb, slaine from the foundati∣on of the world.And all that dwell upon the earth, under the Roman dition, shall be forced to burne incense to their Cesars; and to worship them as gods, even all they, whom God hath not by his especiall favour, decreed, and designed to eternall life, from eternity, purchased by the death of his Sonne Jesus Christ. 9 If any man have an eare, let him heare.If God have given to any man an understanding heart, and an hearing eare; let him well consider of these great, and mysticall things which are spoken of this Empire. 10 He that leadeth into captivity shall goe into captivitie: he that killeth with the sword, must bee killed with the sword: here is the patience and the faith of the Saints.For as this Roman Empire shall long tyrannize over the world, and lead many thousands into captivity, so it selfe shall be dealt with, at the last; And as it hath beene guilty of much innocent bloodshed, so it shal according∣ly be served againe; and shall perish by the sword of an enemie: But in the meane time, there is much patience required of Gods Saints, and much faith to expect, and attend the accomplishment of these things; which must (though late) yet in their just time be fulfilled. 11 And I beheld ano∣ther beast coming up out of the earth, and hee had two hornes like a Lambe, and he spake as a Dragon;And besides this secular, I beheld a spiritull tyrannie arising from small and weake beginnings, to a great height of pride, and impiety; the semblance and outward shew whereof was meeke and lamb-like; as tending to
the advancement of the name of Christ; but the doctrine and practice of it was proud, and cruell. And hee taketh upon him to exercise all imperiall power;12 And hee exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, and caus∣eth the earth, and them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. making indeed but a mere shadow of the Em∣pire; yet outwardly pretends to draw all the earth to the subjection and obedience of that Monarchy whose deadly wound was healed. See verse 3. And this spirituall tyranny doth advance it selfe conti∣nually by boasting of great miracles,13 And he doth great wonders, so that hee ma∣keth fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men. that are daily done by the abettors thereof; so that as Elias in his time, by calling downe fire from heaven, did approve the truth of his doctrine, and mission from God, so doth this ty∣rannicall state goe about to justifie their teaching and usurpation by strange and wonderfull miracles. And this spirituall tyran deceived the inhabitants of the earth by those miracles which hee had power to doe in the presence of the subjects of that great Empire;14 And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by the meanes of those mira∣cles, which he had power to doe in the sight of the beasts, saying to them that dwell on the earth, &c. and caused the people to renew, and receive a new restored forme, and image of that long vacant Empire of the West, which had received that deadly wound by the sword of the Hunnes, and Gothes, and Vandalls. And he had power to put a new life into that new re∣stored image, or shadow of the ancient Empire;15 And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speake, and cause that as many as would not wor∣ship the image of the beast, should be killed. that it should bee able to doe the wonted actions of life; and make Lawes for its owne government, and the establish∣ment thereof; and joyning the force of his decrees with the edicts of that meanly-revived Empire, should con∣straine all men under paine of death to yeeld their ho∣mage and subjection to that Monarchy of his owne erecting. And he caused all both small and great, rich & poore,16 And hee causeth all, both small and great, rich and poore, free and bond, to receive a marke in their right hand, and in their foreheads. to make open profession of themselves, to be the subjects and vassalls of the Romane Empire; and both in their countenance to declare it, and with their hands to fight for it. And he excommunicated all that would not subject themselves unto it;17 And that no man might buy or sell, save hee that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. inhibiting them from all liberty of trade and traffique, or any affaires of secular com∣merce; which did not professe their reverence and obedi∣ence to that his Latine Empire, and the honourable titles given thereunto. Here is a proofe of the wisedome,18 Here is wisedome. Let him that hath under∣standing count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is, sixe hundred three score and sixe. and sagacity of any reader; let him therefore that hath skill, and knowledge,
reckon the number of the numerall letters, whch are in the name of this Empire; for they make up the name of a man, even of one of the first princes (viz. Latinus) which swayed this government; and the numerall letters of his name make up the number of sixe hudred sixty and sixe. CAP. XIV. 1 And I looked, and loe a Lambe stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and foure thousand, having his Fa∣thers name written in their foreheads.NOw after that I had seene these fearefull representa∣tions of the two great enemies of Gods Church; I had a comfortable sight shewed unto mee of Christ the blessed protector thereof; who was represented to mee, as a lambe standing upon his holy mount Sion; and with him those his chosen servants (in infinite numbers) which had formerly received the marke of his gracious protection; and who had faithfully professed the truth of his religion. 2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harpes.And I heard the heavenly voice of Gods Church una∣nimously praising, and magnifying the name of God, for his wonderfull mercies to them, with such loudnesse, and strength, as if it had beene the sound of many waters, or of a mighty thunder; and I heard the joyfull melodie that they made in the expressing of their thanksgivings unto God. 3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the foure beasts, and the El∣ders, and no man could learne that song, but the hundred and forty and foure thousand which were redeemed from the earth.And these holy choristers sung, not the old song of their forefathers, which praised God for the redempti∣on which was to come; but sung new songs of thanks∣giving for their redemption, already atchieved, in the presence of God and his Angels, and glorified Saints; and none of the carnall, and unregenerate men of the world could know what that joyfull song meant; none having ever found the sweetnesse and comfort of these mercies of God in Christ, but onely his chosen, and re∣deemed ones whom they concerne. 4 These are they which were not defiled with wo∣men: for they are virgins: these are they which fol∣low the Lambe whitherso∣ever he goeth: these were redeemed frō among men: being the first fruits unto God and to the Lambe.These are they, who are neither defiled with bodily fornication with women, nor with spirituall fornication with idols, but have kept themselves chast, and cleane from both those pollutions; these are wholly addicted to the sincere worship and service of Christ; these are bought with a price, even that inestimable price of his blood; being specially dedicated (as the holy first fruits of mankinde) to God and to Jesus Christ his Sonne. 5 And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault: be∣fore the throne of God.These are so justified from their sinnes, by the blood of Christ, and so sanctified from their corruptions, by his
Spirit; as that there is no wickednesse, nor falshood in them; and that being cloathed with Christs righteous∣nesse, they appeare without spot or blemish, before the throne of God. Then I saw another mighty and glorious messenger of God; who for the more speed of delivery,6 And I saw another An∣gell flie in the midst of heaven, having the ever∣lasting Gospell to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every na∣tion, and kinred, & tongue, and people. and safety from all danger of oppugnation, flew with the message of that true and sincere Gospell of Christ, which had beene long suppressed, and opposed by men, the truth whereof is everlasting; having charge that it should be broached, and published to all nations, and kinreds, and tongues, and people, by the faithfull dispensers thereof. Teaching them all the world over,7 Saying with a loud voice, Feare God, and give glory to him. that forsaking all their superstitions, and sinfull wilworships, they should feare God onely, and give glory to him, &c. Then upon the free,8 And there followed another Angell, saying, Ba∣bylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because shee made all nations drinke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. and sincere preaching of the Go∣spell, there followed another messenger, from God, which cryed saying; It is fallen, it is fallen; the mysticall Babylon, the great city of the world; because she hath drawne all nations, to drinke of the cup of her spirituall fornications, and thereby hath caused them to drinke of that cup of Gods wrath, and vengeance, which belongs to those grievous offences. Then followed a third messenger from God,9 And the third Angell followed them, saying with a loud voyce, If any man worship the beast, and his image, and receive his marke in his forehead, or in his hand: with further tidings of judgements, upon those, which doe wilfully maintain the pride & tyranny, and wicked errors of the Antichristian state: saying, If any man doe after these cleare publications of the Gospell give divine wor∣ship to any created power whether civill or spirituall; and shall make profession of his servile and idolatrous prostitution thereunto: See Chap. 13. verse 8. The same man shall drinke of that unconceiveably bitter cup of Gods wrath, and vengeance,10 The same shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powred out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the ho∣ly Angels, &c. without any mixture at all of mercy and remission; and hee shall bee infinitely, and eternally tormented with that fire and brimstone of hell; and both the holy Angels of God, and Christ, the meeke and mercifull Saviour of men, shall see them without pitty, so tormented for ever. So also verse 11. And now upon the sight of these torments inflicted upon wicked and idolatrous men,12 Here is the patience of the Saints; here are they that keepe the Comman∣dements of God, and the faith of Jesus. Gods children shall
well finde the fruit of their patience, and constant pro∣fession of the true faith of Jesus Christ; and their conscio∣nable obedience to the Commandements of God; in that they see themselves free from this grievous venge∣ance, and possessed of joy and happinesse. 13 And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea faith the Spirit, that they may rest from their la∣bours, and their workes do follow them.And I heard a voice from heaven bidding me to write these words following, as worthy of perpetuall remem∣brance and consideration; Blessed are the dead, which have now laid downe their life for Christ, and such as are found in Christ, when they goe hence; no lesse bles∣sed are they then those holy martyrs of the Primitive times; yea, saith the holy Spirit, they are doubtlesse blessed, because they both are freed from those calami∣ties which attended their life; and do likewise receive the comfort and benefit of all the good workes which they did here below. 14 And I looked, and be∣hold, a white cloud, and u∣pon the cloud one sate like unto the Sonne of man ha∣ving on his head a golden crowne, and in his hand a sharp sickle.And I looked, and I beheld a present representation of addresse unto a terrible judgement; for there appeared Christ the eternall Sonne of God, as in his glorious hu∣manity, sitting upon a white cloud, to shew the integri∣ty, and glory of his presence; having on his head a gol∣den crowne representing his Majesty, and power, and a sharp sickle in his hand; implying his readinesse to cut downe the ripe sinnes of the world; and to execute his just severity upon them. So also verse 15, 16, 17, 18. 19 And the Angell thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepresse of the wrath of God.Then the Angell did, accordingly, by the sickle of his powerfull execution, cut downe the sinfull generation of mankinde; and did cast them downe into hell, the place of torment appointed for all the wicked enemies of God. 20 And the winepresse was troden without the city, and blood came out of the winepresse, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.And the execution was wonderfully great, & fearfull, in so much as the blood of the slain was so deepe, as that it reached up to the very bridles of the horses, for the space of two hundred miles in length; so great and ge∣nerall was the destruction of those who did wilfully fol∣low the enemies of Christ. CAP. XV. 1 And I saw another signe in heaven, great and marveilous, seven Angels, having the seaven last plagues, for in them is fil∣led up the wrath of God.ANd I saw another wonder in heaven, great and mar∣velous; for in way of preparation to that last judge∣ment, and execution, I saw seaven Angels which had power to inflict the seven last plagues upon the enemies
of Christ; in which is the accomplishment of all those judgements which he meant to bring upon the kingdome of Antichrist, before his utmost confusion. And I saw, as it were, a sea of chrystall,2 And I saw as it were a sea of glasse, mingled with fire, and them that had got the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his marke, and over the number of his name, stand on the: sea of glasse, having the harpes of God. mixed with some tincture of rednesse, as of the colour of fire (by reason of the persecutions attending the profession of Christ) and I saw them that had couragiously, and con∣stantly stood out both against the impious edicts, for idolatrie, which proceeded from the heathenish Empe∣rours, and against the wicked and sinfull decrees of their successours, and the tyranny usurped by them, standing joyfully upon that glassie sea, (as having escaped all the billowes of their late persecutions) and testifying their joy in outward expressions of a melodious thanks∣giving. And they,3 And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lambe, saying, Great and merveilous are thy workes, Lord God Al∣mighty, just and true are thy wayes, thou King of Saints. in acknowledgement of the benefit of their deliverance from these fiery waves of persecution, sung the same song, that Moses the servant of God uttered upon his deliverance from the red sea; Let us sing to the Lord, for hee hath triumphed gloriously; and together with it, sung a most sweet and pleasant ditty, which was taught them by the Lambe himselfe, Christ their redee∣mer, &c. And after this I looked, and beheld the very inward part of heaven (which was as the Holy of holies,5 And after that I loo∣ked, and behold the Tem∣ple of the Tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened. wherein the Arke of the Testimony was placed) having beene formerly shut, was now opened. And from thence,6 And the seven Angels came out of the Temple having the seven plagues, cloathed in pure and white linnen, and having their breasts girded with gol∣den girdles. even from that more inward and reserved place of glory, came those seven Angels which had the seven last plagues to inflict; and they (to signifie their purity, and faithfull diligence in their executions) were clothed in pure and white linnen, and had their breasts girded with golden girdles. And one of those prime Angels,7 And one of the foure beasts gave unto the seven Angels, seven golden vials, full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever. which were next to the Throne, delivered unto the seven messengers of Gods wrath, seven golden vials, wherein were contai∣ned those deadly liquors of just vengeance, which the everliving God had decreed and appointed to be pou∣red out severally upon his enemies, on earth. And as it was of old in the materiall Temple,8 And the Temple was filled with smoake from the glory of God, and from his power, and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues of the seven An∣gels were fulfilled. that when God would shew his presence there in, the smoke filled the roome, so as the ministers of that holy place could not stand in it; So it was now in the giving of this commission for these seven last plagues; the glory of God did so shew it selfe, as that no man was able to
comprehend the majesty thereof; untill this so important a businesse was dispatched. CAP. XVI. 1 And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven An∣gels, Goe your wayes and poure out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.ANd I heard a great voice as proceeding from God, out of his Temple in heaven; saying to those seven Angels, which were designed to be the executioners of this vengeance of God; Goe your wayes, and poure out the severall plagues upon the people of the earth. 2 And the first went and poured out his viall u∣pon the earth, and there fell a noysome and grievous sore upon the men which had the marke of the beast, and upon them which worshiped his image.And the first Angell went, and poured out his viall upon those regions of the earth, which are under the Roman Empire, and there fell a noysome, and grievous sore, and botch, (like to the sixt plague of Egypt) upon the idolatrous clients of that bestiall government, and the successours therein; and (spiritually) great exaspe∣ration of minde, through envie and malice, against those which preached the sincere Gospell of Christ. 3 And the second Angel poured out his viall upon the sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man; and every living soule died in the sea.And that no part might be free, the second Angell poured his appointed plagues upon the sea, to the effusi∣on of the blood of those that dwelt by, or upon it; in so large quantity, as that the waters seemed as the congea∣led blood of a dead man; so as the corrupted moisture thereof could not but kill all that lived therein; which was literally fulfilled in those bloody battailes, betwixt the Turkes and Christians; and those of hostilely affe∣cted Christians among themselves. 4 And the third Angell poured out his viall upon the rivers, and fountaines of waters, and they became blood.Yea that nothing might remaine pure, and wholsome; as the earth, and the sea were smitten with plagues, so the rivers and fountaines also were by the viall of the third Angell turned into blood (as it was done in the first plague of Egypt,) through that extreme blood∣shed, which the avenging hand of God should justly cause amongst men, by their owne cruell divisions. 5 And I heard the An∣gel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus.And I heard that Angell which had speciall charge given him over the waters, confesse, how just the pro∣ceedings of God were in this vengeance of his; saying, O thou eternall God, who art of thy selfe, and hadst thy being from thy selfe before all beginning of time, and shalt be everlastingly, thou art just and righteous in thus plaguing these wicked persecuters of thy servants. 6 For they have shed the blood of Saints, and Prophets, and thou hast gi∣ven them blood to drinke: for they are worthy.For they have not stuck to shed the blood of thy Saints in their horrible, and frequent massacres; and now thou
hast given them blood to drinke; neither are they wor∣thy of any other potion, who tooke delight to spill it. And I heard a voice of one of those martyrs,7 And I heard another out of the Altar say, even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgements. which had cryed formerly for revenge from under the altar (Chap. 6.) now applauding the justice of this vengeance; saying, Even so Lord God Almighty, thou hast heard our prayers, and hast approved thy judgements to be most true and righteous. And yet further, that even the very heavens,8 And the fourth An∣gell poured out his viall upon the Sunne, and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire. (whose influence had wont to be wholsome, and beneficiall to mankinde) might now be turned harmfull, and deadly to wicked men; the fourth Angell poured out his viall upon the Sunne; and thereupon, that goodly planet which was wont to bring comfort, by the light thereof, to the inhabitants of the earth, became so fiery and scorching, that the beames thereof were intolerable; breeding extreme plagues, and calentures, and other deadly maladies amongst men. And men being broyled (as it were) with the extre∣mity of heate,9 And men were scor∣ched with great heat, and blasphemed, &c. and tormented with the diseases which followed thereupon, in stead of humbling themselves, under the just, and powerfull hand of God, wickedly blasphemed his name; who had the power to inflict these plagues, and they repented not of their sinnes, nor gave him the glory of his justice. And the fifth Angell poured out his viall on the prime seat, and metropolis of the Empire;10 And the fifth Angell poured out his viall u∣pon the seate of the beast, and his kingdome was full of darknesse, and they gnawed their tongues for paine; and the po∣wer and government thereof, both spirituall and tempo∣rall began to be obscured, and abased; and the follow∣ers and abettors thereof gnawed their very tongues for indignation; And instead of acknowledging their errour,11 And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their paines, & their sores, and repented not of their deeds. they blasphemed the God of heaven, because of their deepe discontent, and vexation; and repented not of their wickednesse. And the sixt Angell poured out his viall upon the great river Euphrates,12 And the sixt Angell poured out his viall upon the great river Euphrates, and the water thereof was dryed up, that the way of the kings of the East might be prepared. which was the defence of the easterne Babylon; and as Cyrus, when hee went about to take that city, first drained the channell of Euphrates, and derived the streames another way; so shall it be now ordered, by the providence of God, that this great river shall be made passable to the Kings of the East, that so those of the Turkish Empire may have way and opor∣tunity for their armies against the West. And I saw a resolute conspiracie,13 And I saw three un∣cleane spirits like frogges come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, &c. and combination of Satan, and his two powerfull instruments, the secular and spirituall powers, who agreed to send forth their
most forcible agents for the making of a strong party on their behalfe. 14 For they are the spirits of devills working miracles, which goe forth unto the Kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle.For they are the emissaries of Satan, and for the ef∣fecting of their purpose, doe, and pretend strange mi∣racles; stirring up the Kings of the earth, to arme all their powers, and to bring them forth to rhat great battell, wherein Almighty God hath determined to give that notorious foile unto the enemies of his Church. 15 Behold, I come as a theefe: blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments, lest hee walke naked, and they see his shame.Behold, this which I intend to doe, I will doe it sud∣denly; and inexpectedly: Blessed is he that abideth in prayer, and watching, keeping about him the garments of true righteousnesse, and innocence; lest being strip∣ped thereof, he be put to just shame and confusion. And these people were gathered together by the pro∣vidence of the Almighty,16 And hee gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. through the instigation of their busie emissaries, into a place designed by God for their destruction; as Sisera and his army were brought into the vally of Megiddo for their overthrow. 17 And the seventh Angell poured out his viall into the aire, and there came a great voice out of the temple of hea∣ven, from the throne, say∣ing, It is done.And the seventh Angell powred out his last, and most universall plague, into the very aire, wherein the enemies of his Church doe breath; and there came a great voice out of the heavenly Temple, even from the throne of the Almighty, saying; The overthrow of mine enemies is now comne to a very speedy execution. 18 And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings, and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake.And in a kinde of heavenly applause, to this sentence, and decree of the Almighty; and as an effect of those plagues, which were powred out of the seventh viall, for the confusion of the enemies of God, there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great earthquake and strange commotions, and alterations of the states of the world, such as were never formerly seen, or knowne. 19 And the great citie was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell: and great Ba∣bylon came in remem∣brance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenes of his wrath.And the great city, which was the Empresse of the world by the force of that commotion, was divided into three parts; whiles some adhered unto their old supersti∣tions, and errors, others professed dislike & detestation of them; and a third sort carried them in a neutrality be∣twixt both; and the cities of the Paganish, Jewish, Ma∣humetan profesion fell off from their wonted mis-reli∣gion; and that great city the mysticall Babylon came in remembrance (for her speedy revenge) before God; who now was ready to poure upon her the fiercenesse of his wrath and indignation. 20 And every Island fled away, and the moun∣taines were not found.And every Island fell off, and revolted from her, and those firme stayes which she thought to be most assured, were no more found to stand out for her maintenance. 21 And there fell upon men a great haile out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent, and men blasphemed God be∣cause of the plague of the haile: for the plague there∣of was exceeding great.And as it was in the dayes of Joshua, that God fought
against his enemies from heaven, by casting downe great and weighty hailstones upon their heads, so shall he con∣found his Antichristian enemies at the last, and men in the bitternesse of their anguished soules shall bee ready to blaspheme the name of God which sendeth this judg∣ment upon them. CAP. XVII. ANd there came one of those seven Angells which had the charge of the seven last plagues to be pow∣red upon the world, and talked with me, saying;1 And there came one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vailes, and talked with me, saying un∣to me, Come hither, I will shew unto thee the judg∣ment of the, &c. Come hither, and I will shew thee the judgement of that great citie, who is infamous for her spirituall fornications, and who ruleth over many nations. By whom the Kings of the earth have beene drawne into abhominable Idolatries,2 With whom the Kings of the earth have commit∣ted fornication, and the in∣habiters of the earth, have beene made drunke with the wine of her fornica∣tion. and the inhabitants of the earth have beene deceived, and bewitched with the pleasing doctrine, and practice of her superstitions. So he ravished me away, in an holy extasie of spirit,3 So hee carried mee away in the spirit into the wildernesse, and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemie, having seven heads and ten hornes. into the wildernesse; and there, for the more free and full contemplation of these matters, by the oportunity of the solitarinesse of the place, he represented unto me the Antichristian state, in the forme of a woman sitting upon that great and glorious seat of the Empire, which was distained with horrible and great blasphemies, being situated upon seven hills, and having the command of ten Kings. And the woman was very gorgeously set forth in all manner of rich ornaments, that the earth or sea could af∣ford;4 And the woman was arayed in purple and scar∣let colour, and decked with gold and precious stone, and pearles, having a gol∣den cup in her hand, full of abhominations, and filthi∣nesse of her fornication. and she had in her hand a golden cup, specious in shew, but full of errour and abhomination; which was that poysonous and intoxicating doctrine of heresie and idolatry, wherewith she hath seduced the people of the earth. And in the open shew and carriage of her,5 And upon her fore∣head was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of har∣lots, and abhominations of the earth. any indiffe∣rent man might read thus much; This is that mysticall Babylon, the great city of the world, the most infamous author and patterne of all both spirituall, and bodily for∣nications, and all outrageous wickednesse. And I saw the cruelty of this state and government such,6 And I saw the wo∣man drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration. as that it was even over-laid with the excesse of that innocent blood of Gods Saints, and holy Mar∣tyrs
which it had causelesly shed. And when I saw this sight, I stood marvelling, with great astonishment and admiration. 7 And the Angell said unto me, Wherefore didst thou marveile? I will tell thee the mysterie of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her.And the Angell seeing me thus amazed, said unto me; Why wert thou thus astonished at this sight? I will shew thee the true and plaine meaning of this vision; and the signification both of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, &c. The beast then, which thou sawest, is no other then the Roman Empire;8 The beast that thou sawest, was and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, and goe into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose names were not written in the Booke of life, from the foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was and is not, and yet is. the port and magnificence whereof was very great in the dayes both of their former governors, and especially in the raigne of their late Emperours, Ju∣lius, Augustus, Tiberius, and Claudius; but now in the following times of Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Domitian, is much abated of the former glory, and greatnesse; and is now void by the death of the late go∣vernour; but shall be supplyed againe by much varietie of usurpers (as it were) out of hell it selfe; into which place of perdition they shall soone returne; and those that doe not belong to the election of God, nor are ac∣quainted with the course of his providence, shall wonder at the strange, and uncouth alterations of this vast Mo∣narchy, which was once so glorious, and powerfull, and now is not so great as it was, yet still hath an eminent being amongst men. 9 And here is the mind which hath wisedome. The seven heads are seven mountaines, on which the woman sitteth.This is the interpretation of this vision, according to true understanding, and wisedome. The seven heads are seven hills, whereon that city is built. 10 And there are seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come: and when hee commeth he must conti∣nue a short space.And withall, they signifie seven formes of govern∣ment, or rule, which that state hath beene, and must be swayed by; viz. Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemviri, Tribunes, Emperours, Ecclesiasticall Princes, where∣of the five first are past, and gone; and the sixt of them is now in being; and the seventh is not yet come; and when it doth come, it shall not hold long before it be wasted, and for the time suppressed by the inundation of barba∣rous nations. 11 And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eight, and is of the seven, and goeth into per∣dition.And that last forme of government, which I said should be for a time suppressed, & yet is not comne into being; even that is the eighth in respect of that spirituall power and jurisdiction which it shall challenge and usurpe, and yet is one of the seven, in respect of this tem∣porall dominion, which it claimeth, and shall in due time be destroyed. 12 And the ten hornes which thou sawest are ten Kings, which have re∣ceived no kingdome as yet: but receive power as Kings one houre with the beast.And the ten hornes which thou sawest, are ten se∣verall Kings, but such as are not yet, in being; nor have
their Kingdomes as yet erected; but shall be set up after∣wards, even at the same time, that the second beast shall arise to greatnesse, out of the ruines of the Empire. These are all agreed to give their utmost strength,13 These have one minde, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast. and assistance to that second beast, which is the false Prophet; and shall joyne both their counsells, and for∣ces to that purpose. These shall oppose the government,14 These shall make warre with the Lambe: and the Lambe shall over∣come them. and doctrine of Christ; and at the last, the truth of the Gospell, and the power of Christ shall overcome them, &c. And he saith unto me; The waters which thou sawest,15 And he saith unto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. where this Antichristian state beareth rule, doe signifie, people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. And the ten Kingdomes which thou sawest, represen∣ted by the ten hornes;16 And the ten hornes which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eate her flesh and burne her with fire. shall fall off from that Antichristi∣an state, and shall hate it, and leave it utterly destitute, and forsaken, and shall both professe, and execute all manner of hostile violence against it. For God hath so over-ruled them by his secret and powerfull providence,17 For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their Kingdome unto the beast, untill the words of God shall be fulfilled. as that they have unwittingly done that, which his most wise counsell had determined, in that they yeelded up their Kingdomes unto that se∣cond beast, untill the time should come, wherein the de∣cree of God should be accomplished. And that woman which thou sawest sitting as Sove∣raigne,18 And the woman which thou sawest, is that great citie which raigneth over the Kings of the earth. in this Antichristian state, is that great city, which is the mistresse of the world, and raigneth over all the Kings of the earth. CAP. XVIII. THe mysticall Babylon, the great city and state,2 Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is be∣come the habitation of devills, and the hold of e∣very soule spirit, and a cage of every uncleane and hatefull bird. is falne and utterly ruined; and is becomne a desert ha∣bitation of devills, a place haunted with uncleane spirits, and a desolate wildernesse, for Scrich-Owles, and other ominous birds to abide in. For she hath poysoned all nations with the infections of her spirituall fornications,3 For all nations have drunke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth have committed fornicati∣on with her, and the mer∣chants of the earth are waxed rich thorough the abundance of her delica∣cies. and hath thereupon drawn them into the partnership of her judgements: and the Kings of the earth have beene seduced by her, to her pal∣pable
Idolatries; and the Merchants of the earth, both spirituall, and temporall, are growne rich through the trafique of her voluptuous, and curious delicacies. 4 And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my peo∣ple, that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, and that yee receive not of her plagues.And I heard another voice from heaven, charging all that wish well to their soules, to depart from the super∣stitions, and abominations of that city, and state, and warning them to avoid the partaking of her sinnes, upon paine of partaking of her plagues. 7 For she saith in her heart, I sit a Queene, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.For she saith in the pride of her heart, (as that type of her, the old Chaldean Babylon did (Esa. 47.8.) I sit as a Queene over all the earth; I am not as a solitary widow, but am full of lovers; the great Princes of the world are glad to court me, with their best observances, neither is it possible that I should faile, and miscarry of my great∣nesse, or be in any danger of distresse. 9 And the Kings of the earth, who have commit∣ted fornication, and lived deliciously with her shall bewaile her.And those Kings, and princes of the earth, which have beene drawne into the partnership of her Idolatries, shall bewaile her, &c. And those spirituall, and temporall merchants which were wont to enrich themselves which the costly wares,11 And the merchants of the earth shall weepe and mourne over her. appertaining to her glorious superstitions, shall weepe and mourne, &c. So verse 12. and 13. &c. 21 And a mighty An∣gell tooke up a stone like a great milstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great citie Babylon bee throwne downe, and shall be found no more at all.And a mighty Angell (to represent unto me the irre∣coverablnesse of this mysticall Babylon) tooke up a great stone, like a mil-stone, and cast it into the Sea; saying, Looke how impossible it is, that this weighty stone thus violently cast into the sea should rise up from the bottom thereof againe; so impossible is it, that this Babylon thus dejected by the just hand of God, should ever recover it selfe from this finall confusion. 23 For thy merchants were the great men of the earth: for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.Those that traded in thy spirituall merchandises, were great, and mighty men, and heaped up very great trea∣sures, by that trafique of theirs; for by the inchantments of thy false doctrines, and Idolatries were all nations de∣ceived. 24 And in her was found the blood of Pro∣phets, and of Saints, and of all that were slaine up∣on the earth.For she is found full of blood, and cruelty; as being guilty of the effusion of the blood of Gods faithfull Prophets, and Apostles, and of all his Saints and holy Martyrs upon earth.
CAP. XIX. 1 And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia: salvation, and glory, and honour, and power unto the Lord our God.ANd after these things I heard a very great applause in heaven, given by all the Saints and Angells; and a joyfull acclamation of all the hosts thereof, praising God for the just destruction of this mysticall Babylon. And the smoke which ariseth up from the fire of her destruction, shall ever ascend;3 And her smoke rose up for ever and ever. and remaine as an assured witnesse of that her burning, and utter comsumption. Let us rejoyce and be glad, and give glory to God;7 Let us bee glad and rejoyce, and give honor to him: for the marriage of the Lambe is come, and his wife hath made her selfe ready. for whereas Christ Jesus of old betrothed himselfe to the Spouse, his Church, now the marriage shall be fully solemnized, & consummated; and the Bride his Church, hath decked and trimmed her selfe, with those spiritu∣all ornaments, that are fit for the Spouse of so glorious an husband. And this her heavenly Bridegroome hath granted to her, for that purpose,8 And to her was granted, that shee should be araied in fine linnen, cleane and white: for the fine linnen is the righ∣teousnesse of Saints. the shining and precious rayments of purity, and integrity; which is the dresse that he hath prepared for the soules of his Saints. And the Angell said unto me; Write thou,9 And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lambe, and hee saith unto me, These are the true say∣ings of God. and make an everlasting record of this, which I shall now say unto thee; Blessed are they which are effectually called by God, to bee partakers of the mariage supper of Christ their Saviour; and are therein united unto him; And he said unto me; These things which I have spoken unto thee are the undoubted truths of God himselfe, and shall most certainly be fulfilled. And I, seeing the glory of that Angell,10 And I fell at his feet to worship him, and he said unto me, See thou doe it not: I am thy fel∣low servant, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus: Wor∣ship God: for the testi∣mony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. and hearing him to mention the name of God, fell downe to wor∣ship him; But he forbad this my adoration, and checked me for it, saying; Beware of offering any such kinde of reverence to me; I am thy fellow creature and thy fel∣low servant, and one of thy brethren in office, bearing (as thou dost) the testimony of Christ our Lord; worship thou God onely; as for me, I am one of those ministring spirits, whom God doth use in the revealing of his my∣steries to his Prophets, that they may testifie and de∣clare them to men: and the office of testifying Jesus to men, is of the same ranke with that of revealing him by way of prophesie unto the teachers. And now,11 And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him was called faith∣full and true, and in righte∣ousnesse he doth judge and make warre. after these representations of the bloody oppositions, which should be made to his Church, and the discomfiture of his proud enemies, I saw heaven opened, and there was shewd me a representation both
of the happy triumph of Christ Jesus, and his blessed Gospell, and of a preparation for a further victory: And behold there was shewed to mee a white horse; and a glorious rider sate upon him; whose name was the faith∣full and true God, who doth judge justly, and revengeth righteously. 12 His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crownes, and hee had a name writ∣ten, that no man knew but he himselfe.Whose eyes are as sharpe, and as searching as fire, making passage into the very innermost, and deepest se∣crets of the heart; and upon whose head were many crownes; to signifie his soveraigne command over all the kingdomes of the earth; both hee and his name are infinite, and incomprehensible; neither is any fi∣nite creature capable of the perfect knowledge thereof. 13 And hee was clo∣thed with a vesture dipt in blood, and his name is cal∣led the Word of God.And hee was clothed with a vesture dipt in blood, to shew that hee had already victoriously steeped his garments in the blood of his enemies, and triumphed in their confusion, and so should doe againe; and his name is called, The eternall and incarnate Word of his Father. 14 And the armies which were in heaven, followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linnen, white and cleane.And the armies of the Saints in heaven followed him, in a triumphant, and warlike manner, upon white horses, clothed in perfection of purity, and righteous∣nesse. 15 And out of his mouth goeth a sharpe sword, that with it hee should smite the nations: and hee shall rule them with a rod of iron, and hee treadeth the winepresse of the fierce∣nesse and wrath of Al∣mighty God.And out of his mouth proceedeth that sharp two edged sword of his mighty word; whereby hee pierceth, and subdueth the hearts of all nations; and by the power∣full scepter of that kingdome of his, he swayeth, and go∣verneth them; and hee most justly, and yet terribly exe∣cuteth the fierce, and finall vengeance of God, upon his enemies. 16 And he hath on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written; King of kings, and Lord of lords.And in the demonstration of his power, he hath gi∣ven open markes and proofes of his glorious soveraign∣ty over all creatures; so as he is publiquely proclaimed, and acknowledged, the King of kings, and Lord of lords. 17 And I saw an Angell standing in the Sunne, and hee cryed with a loud voice, saying to all the fowles that flie in the mid∣dest of heaven, come and gather your selves toge∣ther unto the supper of the great God;And I saw an Angell stand in the Sunne (the most conspicuous place in heaven) to execute the office of the great Herald of God, who with a loud voice, cryed to all the fowles that flye in the aire; saying, Behold there is a wonderfull slaughter towards, of all the enemies of Christ; there will be infinite numbers of carcases strew∣ed upon the earth; come therefore, O all ye fowles of prey, and addresse your selves to this great banquet that the great God hath provided for you; 18 That yee may eate the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captaines.That yee may feed upon the delicate flesh of Kings, and great commanders of the earth, &c.
And I saw the great Roman Monarch,19 And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered together to make warre against him that sate on the horse. and his con∣federated princes, and their armies gathered together to make warre against Christ, and his Gospell; and against the faithfull professors thereof. And that same presumptuous Monarch, was overcomn,20 And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which hee deceived them that had received the marke of the beast, and them that worshiped his image; these both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. and taken; and together with him that false prophet, the man of sinne, who had by pretence of many miracles de∣ceived both him, and those that professed their homage to his idolatrous government; and ascribed divine wor∣ship to his shadow, or image, that came in his roome. These both, after their grievous seducements and abo∣minations, were cast downe into hell. As for the remnant of their followers,21 And the remnant were slaine with the sword of him that sate upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth, &c. which out of ignorance, or simplicity maintained their errours and tyrannies, they were slaine by the powerfull command of Christ, and upon their bodily death, all the fowles were filled with their flesh. CAP. XX. ANd whereas in my former vision I had seene the dra∣gon,1, 2, 3. And I saw an Angell come downe from heaven, having the key of the bottomlesse pit, and a great chaine in his hand, and hee laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the devill and sa∣tan, and bound him a thou∣sand yeares, and cast him into the bottomlesse pit, and shut him up, and set a seale upon him, that hee should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand yeares should be fulfilled: and after that hee must be loosed a little season. persecuting the Church under the tyrannicall rule of the heathen Emperours, now I saw an Angell come downe from heaven, having power and commissi∣on from God, to chaine up and imprison the dragon, that old serpent the devill, and to restrain his power during the space of a thousand yeares, after Constantines resto∣ring of peace to the Church; who did accordingly lay hold on him, and shorten and restraine his power, and malice, from his wonted violent, and subtle machinati∣ons against the Church; that hee should not in so pre∣valent manner deceive the nations of the earth, untill that thousand yeares were accomplished; and after that he must be let loose for some further exercise of Gods children, and seducement and destruction of his enemies; but that liberty of his shall be but for a short time. And now I saw such glory and majesty put upon the faithfull ones, in the time that Satan was shut up,4 And I saw Thrones, and they sate upon them, and judgement was given unto them, and I saw the soules of them that were beheaded for the witnesse of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshiped the beast, nei∣ther his image, neither had received his marke upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand yeares. as that they sate upon thrones; and the power of judgement was committed unto them; to manage the affaires of Gods Church, and to execute due censures upon the offenders,
and I saw those faithfull and holy martyrs, which were ready to lay downe their lives for the testimony of Jesus Christ, and his Gospell; and those which refrained from, and abhorred the idolatry of the times; and they lived and raigned with Christ, in a sanctified and comfortable estate here upon earth, framing themselves to all godly courses, during all this time of the thousand yeares of satans restraint. 5 But the rest of the dead lived not againe un∣till the thousand yeares were finished. This is the first resurrection.But for the rest, which lay dead in their sinnes and im∣pieties, they did not at all recover, at the last, this spiri∣tuall happinesse and life, and attaine to the true know∣ledge and fruition of God. This, which we now speake of, viz. the abandoning of the corruptions of the times, and attaining to the true knowledge, and love of the sa∣ving truth of God, and a conscionable obedience to him, is the first resurrection. 6 Blessed and holy is hee that hath part in the first resurrection; on such the second death hath no po∣wer, but they shall bee priests of God, and of Christ, and shall raigne with him a thousand yeares.Blessed and holy is hee that thus hath his part in this first resurrection; for certainly on such, the second death, which is eternall damnation, and separation of the soule from God, neither hath, nor can have any power; but they shall be wholly consecrated to the service of God, and his Christ, and shall here raigne, with him in their severall times, all the whole space of the thousand yeares, wherein satan is shut up: they shall triumph in God, and themselves, whiles the rest of the world is in vexation and bondage. 7 And when the thou∣sand yeares are expired, satan shall be loosed out of his prison,And when those thousand yeares shall be expired, satan shall for the time be let loose; and suffered to raise great tumults, and troubles in the world, 8 And shall goe out to deceive the nations, which are in the foure quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to ga∣ther them together to battle.And shall upon faire pretences stirre up all the ene∣mies of Gods Church, which are in all the regions of the earth, both Scythians, Turks, and mis-beleeving Christi∣ans; and shall gather them together to battle against the little flock of Christ, &c. 9 And they went up on the bredth of the earth, and compassed the campe of the Saints about, and the beloved city, and fire came downe from God out of heaven, and devou∣red them.And they went up into all the coasts of the earth, and by their great number encompassed the small handfull of Gods Saints round about; and taking advantage of their paucity, hemm'd them in, as enclosing the true be∣leeving Church, for the slaughter; But the fire of Gods wrath did, as I were, fall from heaven upon their heads, and consume them, and frustrate all their cruell inten∣tions. 10 And the devill that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophets are and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.And I saw a great, and glorious throne, erected for the last judgement, and the Sonne of God sitting there∣on in great majestie, and heavenly magnificence; at
whose presence, the heavens and earth did melt away, and were so suddainly changed, as that they appeared in their former estate, no more. There shall be now no more dying, nor graves,14 And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death. all these things are at an end; and nothing shall remaine, but a finall damnation of the devils and reprobate soules for ever; and this is the second death. And whosoever was not found registred in Gods eternall election to life, was cast into hell fire.15 And whosoever was not found written in the booke of life, was cast into the lake of fire. CAP. XXI. THen I saw an happy renovation of all things;1 And I saw a new hea∣ven, and a new earth: for the first heaven, and the first earth were passed away and there was no more sea. even the heaven and earth refined to their utmost perfection; for this imperfect condition of the heavens and earth, that now are, passed away; neither was this sea, as it now is, but freed from that impurity and corruption which it now hath. And now in this universall revolution of the world,2 And I John saw the holy city new Jerusalem comming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. I John saw the celestiall city, the purified and glorious Church of God, comming downe as it were from God out of heaven, decked with all kinde of spirituall orna∣ments, and prepared with all riches of grace, and glory, as a fit bride for her gracious husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying;3 And I heard a great voice out of heaven, say∣ing, Behold, the taber∣nacle of God is with men, and hee will dwell with them, and they shall bee his people, and God him∣selfe shall bee with them, and be their God. Be∣hold now, God shall settle his eternall habitation with men; so dwelling with, and in his Saints, that hee shall never be removed from them; but shall in a full and per∣fect manner injoy and possesse them as his people, and they him as their God. Behold,5 Behold, I make all things new, and hee said unto mee, Write, for these words are true and faith∣full. now I will remove away all the impurity and imperfection of my creature; and make all things abso∣lute, and glorious. And hee said unto mee;6 And hee said unto mee, It is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the be∣ginning and the end, I will give unto him that is a thirst of the fountaine of the water of life free∣ly. It is as surely done as if it were past already; I am the first and the last; even the first before all beginning, and the last, after all en∣dings, eternall, without beginning or ending; To him that hath hungred and thirsted after righteousnesse, will I freely give out of the lively fountaine of my grace, and mercy, everlasting life.
7 Hee that overcom∣meth shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and hee shall bee my sonne.He that overcommeth the tentations of satan, and the world, shall be possessed of this heavenly inheritance of glory; and I will be his God and Father, and he shall be my deare sonne for ever. 8 But the fearefull & un∣beleeving, and the abomi∣nable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sor∣cerers, and Idolaters, and all liers shall have their part in the lake which bur∣neth with fire and brim∣stone: which is the second death.But those which have cowardly, for feare of paine, or danger, shrunke from the truth; and the unbeleeving, and those which have lived in abominable sinnes, cruell murtherers, whoremongers, &c. shall have their portion in the everlasting torments of hell fire; which is the se∣cond death. 10 And hee carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountaine, and shewed mee that great city, the holy Jerusalem descending out of heaven from God.And hee ravished mee away in an extasie of spirit, and (as it were) upon an high mountaine, shewed mee the excellent beauty of his now renued, and purified Church, the holy and spirituall Jerusalem; which God from heaven, had put upon that blessed Bride of his. 11 Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most pre∣tious, even like a Jasper stone, cleare as christall.Which was set forth with all heavenly glory; even the glory of Gods eternall presence, and the shining bright∣nesse thereof was like unto the lustre of the most preti∣ous and glittering stones. 12 And had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the chil∣dren of Israel.And (to set forth the magnificence thereof by the re∣semblance of a city built of the most pleasing and preci∣ous matter that the earth can afford) the wals thereof (which are wont to be for defence and ornament) were strong and high, impregnable by any enemy, and per∣fectly safe for the inhabitants; and as it is the praise of a city, that the situation and forme of it gives both secu∣rity from enemies, and easie entrance to the citizens; so it was here, as there was a strong and high wall to keepe out the enemie, so there were twelve gates, to admit of the convenient, and free passage of the inhabitants, that every tribe of Israel might have a gate of his owne. And for the more sure guard of those twelve gates, there were twelve heavenly Angels to keepe them; and eve∣ry severall gate, had the name of a severall tribe ingraven upon it, of the children of Israel. 13 On the East three gates, on the North three gates, on the South three gates, and on the West three gates.For the elect of God which should come from the East coasts, there were three gates appointed, and set open, ready to receive them; For those likewise which should come from the North, three gates; for those which should come from the South, three gates also; and three gates in like manner, for those which should come from the West.
The wall of the city, which encompasseth,14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundati∣ons, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles. and fortifi∣eth it on every side (which is that sacred bond of unity, wherewith the whole Church is knit together, and is de∣fended from the danger of all errour and ignorance) is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chiefe corner stone. And the Angell,15 And hee that talked with mee had a golden reed to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof. who was employed to reveale these things unto mee, represented unto mee a golden met∣wand, which hee had in his hand, as thereby importing that hee was to make manifest unto mee the excellent symmetrie and proportion of this heavenly city, and the gates and wall thereof. And the city is so built and contrived,16 And the city lyeth foure square, and the length is as large as the bredth: and hee measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the length and the bredth, and the height of it are equall. that nothing is wanting to the exquisite perfection thereof; it is every way square, and in all the parts and measures thereof fra∣med by the line and levell of Gods infinite wisedome, and power; able for the largenesse thereof, to containe all those happy soules that appertaine thereunto. The wall or bulwarke of this city is infinitely strong;17 And he measured the wall thereof an hundred and forty and foure cubits, according to the measure of a man, that is, of the An∣gell. being for the bredth of it raised up in twelve severall courses of the firme and invincible doctrine of the twelve Apostles; and thereupon arising up to twelve times twelve cubits; according to the measure, not of an or∣dinary man, but of the Angell, which appeared in a lar∣ger shape. As for the matter, both of the wall and of the city;18 And the building of the wall of it was of Ja∣sper, and the city was pure gold, like unto cleare glasse. it is so pure, and rich, and precious, as no earthly sub∣stance can possibly expresse it; but if ought be more ex∣cellent, and of higher estimation then other, as gold, pearles, and pretious stones of all exquisite varieties, let these serve to resemble the beauty, and unconceive∣able glory of this heavenly city. So also verse 19, 20, 21. And whereas in the old Jerusalem,22 And I saw no Temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lambe, are the Temple of it. Salomons goodly Temple was the glory of that city, now here, in this hea∣venly Jerusalem, there is no one roome set apart for the Temple; but the whole city is the consecrated Temple to God, and to his Christ; neither shall there need any signes or Sacraments of Gods presence, and grace, but the Lord God shall be there really, and essentially exhi∣bited to all his Saints; and God the Father shall there clearely manifest himselfe in his Sonne Christ Jesus to his elect.
23 And the city had no need of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lambe is the light thereof.And this glorious city had no need of any outward, and adventitious light, from the Sunne, or Moone, or stars, which are but the conveiances of this created light to the inferiour world; for the glory of God, the Crea∣tor, doth perfectly inlighten it, more then many thou∣sand Sunnes can doe; and the Lambe, Christ Jesus, is the full and bright luminary, which sendeth forth perfect beames of heavenly knowledge & blessednesse to all his. And whereas the earthly Jerusalem was the recepta∣cle of none but her owne people,24 And the nations of them which are saved, shall walke in the light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glo∣ry and honour into it. abhorring the commu∣nion of the Gentiles; now here, all the elect of all the nations of the world, shall be received into one blessed society, and shall injoy the glorious light of Gods pre∣sence; and the Kings of the earth shall be admitted into it, and shall here so lay downe their glory, as that they shall see and confesse all their earthly pompe and magni∣ficence to be nothing in comparision of this. 25 And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there shall be no night there.And in this citie there shall bee such safety, and such freedome, as that the gates thereof shall not bee shut at all; but ever stand open for the receit and admittance of the blessed Saints of God; even the materiall, and earth∣ly cities are wont to be open by day, but shut by night; but here there shall be no night at all, but a perpetuall day of continuing and constant blessednesse. 26 And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it.And if there be any one amongst the Gentiles, more excellent then other, it shall be his happinesse to be ad∣mitted hither; and here shall he be glad to lay downe all his former glory. 27 And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abo∣mination, or maketh a lie: but they which are writ∣ten in the Lambes booke of life.And yet though the gates shall be alwaies open, shall there be no entrance here, for any impure, and polluted soule; nor for any that liveth in abhominable wickednes, and practiceth lying and falshood; but onely the elect Saints of God, which are ordained to this blessednesse, and sanctified by the blood of Christ their Saviour. CAP. XXII. ANd to shew that there can be no pleasure wanting in this city of God,1 And he shewed me a pure river of water of life cleare as christall procee∣ding out of the throne of God and of the Lambe. the Angell shewed me a pure river of water of life, cleare as Chyrstall, free from those mud∣dy impurities, which wee meet with here below; pro∣ceeding, not out of the Temple (as that which Ezekiel saw) but out of the throne of God, and of the Lambe; The Lord himselfe being that inexhaust fountaine, from which these everlasting refreshments doe proceed.
Whereas in the earthly paradice there was one onely tree of life, which grew in the midst of the garden,2 In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yeelded her fruit eve∣ry moneth: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. as a sacrament and pledge of that eternall life, which man should upon his obedience enjoy; of the taste whereof man was deprived upon his sinne; now in the midst of the streets of this new Jerusalem, and on either side of this cleare river, there is growing this tree of life in a free and plentifull manner; so as there is open accesse thereunto for all commers. And that there may be no danger of either cloying, or fading; this tree of life shall yeeld all pleasing variety of fruits; and shall perpetually flourish, without all inter∣change of Winter, and Summer; every moneth shall be an autumne to yeeld her ripe increase; And this ever-flo∣rishing tree of life, Christ Jesus, by the soveraine leaves of his merits shall be effectuall to heale all the maladies of the beleeving Gentiles. And whereas after mans first placing in paradice, there soone followed a curse,3 And there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God and of the Lambe, shall be in it, and his ser∣vants shall serve him. now in this hea∣venly city, there is no danger, or feare of a curse; but the glorious throne of God, and of his Sonne Christ shall be erected in it for ever, and his servants shall celebrate his name with perpetuall songs of praise and thanksgiving. And they shall have the blessed vision of him;4 And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads. and shall be owned for his before all Saints and Angels. And in that presence of God,5 And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the Sunne, for the Lord God giveth them light, and they shall raigne for ever and ever. there shall bee no sha∣dowing of that bright glory and resplendence, no chang∣able course of day, and night; but the Sunne of righte∣ousnesse ever shineth there; so as there can be no need of candle, or materiall Sunne, to inlighten them; for in Gods light they shall see light, and they shall raigne for ever and ever. Christ himselfe spake in my hearing, saying,7 Behold I come quick∣ly: blessed is hee that kee∣peth the sayings of the prophesie of this booke. Behold I come quickly, neither will delay my returne; but in the meane time blessed is he that carefully thinkes upon, and duly observes that which is contained in the pro∣phesie of this booke. See Chap. 19. vers. 10.9 Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, &c. Doe not seale up this booke,10 And hee saith unto mee, Seale not the sayings of the phophesie of this booke: for the time is at hand. but let the words of the prophesie thereof be open for all men to read, and know; for there is present use of them, and the time is at hand wherein some part of them shall be fulfilled.
11 Hee that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and hee which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and hee that is righteous, let him be righ∣teous still; and hee that is holy, let him be holy still.Now hee that deales unjustly, let him (if hee thinke good) dare to doe unjustly still; and hee which is filthy, let him (if hee list) be filthy still; and contrarily, let the righteous man hold on the course of his righteousnesse, and let the holy man continue in his holinesse. 12 And behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with mee, to give every man according as his worke shall be.For behold, I am now shortly comming; and will not come empty handed; but will bring with me due retri∣butions to every man according to his worke, whether it be good or evill. 13 I am Alpha, and O∣mega, the beginning, and the end, &c.See Chap. 21. vers. 6. and ch. 1. vers. 8. 14 Blessed are they that do his Commandements, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in thorough the gates into the city.Blessed are they which walke holily, and conscionably according to his will, that they may have their part, and portion in Christ, who is the tree of life; and may enter in, through him, which is the way, and the doore, into the possession of the heavenly Jerusalem. 15 For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whore∣mongers.Out of the precincts whereof are justly excluded all filthy and wicked persons; all currish and spightfull snarlers at goodnesse, and contemners of holy counsell, whoremongers, &c. 16 I am the root, and the of-spring of David, & the bright and morning starre.I am both the root of David, whence hee had his be∣ing, according to my Deity; and the branch, that issued from David, according to my humane nature; and I am that cleare light of the world, which inlighteneth it with the beames of knowledge and grace; and all true light, both of understanding and comfort, is derived from mee alone. 17 And the Spirit and the bride say, Come, and let him that heareth say, come, and let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.And the Spirit of God moveth the hearts of his faith∣full ones, and they (which are his spirituall bride) being therewith moved, are ready to second his holy motions; and say in a servent desire, Come Lord, and let him that heareth or readeth this prophesie, breake forth into the same holy desire, and say, Come Lord; and in the meane time, let him that hungreth and thirsteth after grace, come to him; and whosoever is by this Spirit moved and inabled to desire grace from him, let him abundantly re∣ceive of that plentifull grace and mercy comfortably, and freely. 18 For I testifie unto eve∣ry man that heareth the words of the prophesie of this booke, if any shall adde unto these things, God shall adde unto him the plagues that are writ∣ten in this booke.And now, that I may seale up this prophesie with a just and vehement ratification, for as much as I know the devill will be apt to raise questions, and stirre up indea∣vours, for the disparaging of the authority of this booke, I do protest, and testifie to every man that heareth, or readeth the words of this holy Revelation; if any man
shall, upon pretence of defect, and imperfection, adde any thing unto these things which are here written, God shall plague him with an addition of all those fearefull plagues, of death and hell, which are contained in this booke. And if any man (upon pretence of the superfluity,19 And if any man shall take away from the words of the booke of this pro∣phesie, God shall take a∣way his part out of the booke of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this booke. and needlessenesse, or improbability of any passage thereof) shall diminish any part of the words of this prophesie; God shall so wipe his name out of the booke of life, and so thrust him out of the holy city, his new Jerusalem, as that hee will make it manifest to the world, that the same man neither hath beene, nor shall ever be recorded amongst the elect ones, nor had, nor shall have any porti∣on in heaven. And loe, that Sonne of GOD,20 He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come Lord Jesus. which makes this powerfull ratification, saith, Surely, I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come LORD JESU. SOLI TRINVNI DEO, LAVS, HONOR, GLORIA.
ERRATA. Vpon the old Testament. pag. lin. for read 3 18 into ino it 7 8 fo of 9 5 in double in a double 14 39 no ordinary in no ordinary 15 15 being and and being 19 25 they accordingly they shall accordingly 38 15 in margin. verse 6 verse 9 74 2 perceives the paine perceive the plaine 86 6 malactors malefactors 86 10 destable detestable 98 25 ye serve we serve 109 3 there upon there be upon 184 32 all teares all my teares 217 37 finde favour finde savour 227 17 fome former 280 17 naturall mutuall 433 25 Margin. vers. 21 verse 20 continued. 457 5 that a new that of a new 488   Marg. unhallowed unwalled 510 15 Marg. peeces yeares 539 6 impared impured 539 26 fection infection 543 34 to a world for a world 543 35 comne is come 544 36 deject retrect 547 35 like life 548 19 dayes Ieroboam dayes of Ieroboam 550 15 teagerly they eagerly 550 17 tyrannized tyrannize 559 14 be by 595 9 in to 597 38 will I will 620   Verse 15 is wanting in the margin Vpon the new Testament. pag. lin. for read 1 1 catologue catalogue 1 13 Salomon Salmon 2 10 when which 4 33 fater afther father after 5 11 worth worthy 6 47 blessed blessednesse 39 2 will well 43 37 fully foully 47 23 sight light 49 7 toward reward 55 7 by this redundat 63 12 Matt. 1. Matt. 5. 73 18 let there a let there be a 94 23 even that even 05 39 too much much 110 15 by the power the power 128 37 thus ye do it thus do ye 135 6 into in to 144 23 incertaine in certaine 162 46 acquit all acquitall 181 30 nations stand nation stands 182 36 to of 191 20 it were as it were 217 19 abuse abused 221 28 which were redundat 235 37 up upon 238 20 mar. justified inflicted 227   marg. vers. 20 redundat 329 27 made had 340 22 and any 341 26 disdaining not disdaining 342 22 and as 416 20 which with
