10878.7 99843120 7830
¶ The Rules and righte ample Docu∣mentes, touchinge the vse and practise of the common Alma∣nackes, which are named Ephemerides. ¶ A briefe and shorte In∣troduction vpon the Iudiciall Astro∣logie, for to prognosticate of thin∣ges to come, by the helpe of the sayde Epheme∣rides. ¶ With a treatise added hereunto, touchinge the Coniunction of the Pla∣nets, in euery one of the. 12. signes, and of their Prognostications and Reuolutions of yeres. ¶ The hole faithfully, and clerely translated into Englyshe by Humfrey Baker.
¶ To the louynge Reader. IOsephus, the true Hy∣storiographe (gentle reader) hathe wrytten in his first boke of the Judaical hystories y• the fyrst inuēters of Astronomy, and the inquisitours of the course and celestiall mouementes haue bene the sonnes of Seth who wyl∣ling to leaue some memory ther∣of vnto their chyldren and poste∣ritye, dyd ordayne and make two great pillers, the one of earth be∣yng harde dried, and the other of Copper, in the whyche they dyd graue the prynciples of the seuen Artes liberall, and especially that of Astrologie. And they wrote the same in the sayd pillers, to thende that if the worlde shoulde perishe by fier, or by water, (as they dyd
vnderstande of their good father Seth: who had learned the same of Adam) that then one of the sayde pillers shoulde abyde whole, and that the Scyence of Astronomie shoulde not perishe. Some do af∣firme that Abraham dyd first find it, other saye that it was Moyses, Dyodore Sicilian sayeth, that the Egiptyans were the firste Au∣thors, and Herodote wryteth that the Phenicians wer the inuenters, but who so euer they were, it lyt∣tle forceth, let vs therefore leaue the inquisition vnto the curious and praise we God the creatoure of his diuine grace, who hath wil¦led to illuminate the vnderstan∣ding of them whiche haue left vs in writing the art of Astronomie, to our great commoditie and pro¦fyt. And seinge that the people at thys presente are dayly more in∣tentiue, & enclined also to reade &
to haue vnderstandynge in artes and sciences, as some which do fo¦lowe polletycke and cyuell mat∣ters, do applie them selues to vn∣derstād the lawes of Cities, and Regions, and of such thynges as apperteyne vnto the feates of war. Other there be whiche gyue thē selues to read the holly scrip∣tures according to the vnderstan¦dynge of holy Church, to thende that thereby they maye be stirred and brought to lyue more vertu∣ously: and if ther be any which o∣ther wise do, we ought to pray vn¦to God that he wold in suche wise amende theim, that they take not his holy word in vaine: other ther bee whyche are desirous to reade Histories & Poesies, and some haue affection to read bookes of Astro∣logye, & to haue knowledge of the celestiall constellacions, & moue∣ments, vnto whom thys presente
treatise of the rules & documents of the comon Almanackes named Ephemerides (translated into eng¦lishe) shal be right expedient & ne∣cessary, seing yt these rules are the pathe & way vnto the knowledge of the said Ephemerides, for by thē are foūd the course, & mouemēts of the lightes and planets, wyth other necessary thinges of Astro∣logy wherby to iudge & Prognosti eate of the whether, and of things to come, as by the table folowing more plainly doth appere. Take therefore in good worthe (louing Reader) these few rules, being my first traduction, & loke shortely if God spare me life for other wor∣kes apperteining vnto this wor∣thye Arte. ¶ And this gentle Reader, I most hartely the require To examine well these Rules, And thou shalt haue thie desire. Finis.
¶ The Table of the Ru∣les and generall thinges conteyned in this volume. OF the thinges conteined in the beginninge of the Ephemerides. 2 Of the Eclipses of the sunne and of the moone 3 For to knowe the quantitie of the Eclipses. 4 Of the directions and retrogradati∣ons of the. 5. planetes. 5 Of the true mouementes of the ligh¦tes and planetes and other thinges cō¦teined in the seconde face of the sayde Ephemerides. 6 Of the equalitie and vnequalitie of the naturall dayes. 7 The maner howe to bring the true place and mouement of the moone vn¦to the true noone stede or middaye.
8. To knowe the true place and moue mente of the lightes at euerye hower you liste, be it before or after middaye. 9. To bring the true mouement of the moone vnto what meridian ye please. 10. Of the latitude of the .v. planetes, Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercurye. 11. Of the latitude of the moone. 12. Of the aspectes of the moone, vnto the sunne, and planets, and other thin∣ges conteined in the right and seconde face of the sayd Ephemerides. 13. Howe and by what maner ye may bring the newe and full Moone and the Eclipses vnto what meridian you wyll. 14. Of the aspectes of the sunne vnto the planetes, & of the planets amonge theim selues, and of the dragon of the Moone 15. To knowe when the planets be o∣riental or occidentall. 16. To knowe the quantitie of the day
and of the nighte, and at what hower the sunne riseth and setteth. 17. Of the. 12. houses of heauen and of their nature accidental accordyng vn∣to the iudgement of the Astrologiās 18. Howe you may erecte or calculate the 12. houses of heauen accordinge vn to the Ephemerides. 19. Of the diuision of the Zodiake, & of the nature of the. 12. signes. 20. Of the nature and complection of the lightes and the. 5. planets. 21. Of the strength and accidentale na¦ture of the aspectes. 22. The declaracion of the table of the fixed starres whiche are in the sayde Ephemerides. 23. Of the. 28. mansyons or bidynge places of the Moone. 24. A declaracion of the table which is before the Ephemerides, touching the force, dignity, exaltacion, and other ter¦mes or boundes of the planets and eue¦ry of the. 12. signes.
25. General rules & perticulers wher by to iudge of the mutacion & change of the ayre. 26. Other rules and general doctrines wherby to iudge more surely of the va∣rietee of the time and mutacion of the ayre by the coniunctiōs, quadratures, and oppositions, of the sunne & of the moone. 27. Of the aspectes and constellations whiche are to be obserued and chosen, to beginne and ende happelye all wor¦kes and humaine businesse. 28. Of the elections, which are mete to be obserued in the Flebotomie or let∣tinge of bloud. 29. Of Elections to take medecine. 30. Of Elections too sowe and plante trees and vines. The ende of the Table general.
¶Hëare after ensueth the Rules of the Ephemerides, moste amply translated into Englyshe. ¶ Of thynges conteyned at the begyn∣nyng and entring of the Ephemerides The first Rule, or Canon. FOR to haue cleare, and easye vn∣derstandynge of the vse, and practyse of the Ephemerides, in le∣uynge all superflu∣ous thynges & wor∣des, it is conuenient first to note that at the begynnynge: and entrynge of euerye Ephemerides, is wryt∣ten the yeare for the whyche it serueth, and apperteyneth, and after there folow∣eth the common thynges of the ecclesia∣sticall compost and kalender, that is too saye, the circle of the moone, called the golden nombre, the circle of the sunne, the Dominicall letter, and the Indyc∣tion Romane, called in latten Indictio Romana, wyth the monthes and dayes,
vpon the whyche the mouable feastes in that yeare maye be celebrated accordyng to their order. Of the Eclipes of the sunne and mone second Rule. COnsequentlye are noted and figu∣red the eclypses of the sunne, and of the moone, whyche shall appere the same yeare, and fyrste is wrytten the monthe, daye, hower, and mynute, of the mydle time of the sayde eclypses, that is to saye, when the sunne or the moone, shall come into the moste obscuration, or darckenes that maye then happen vnto theym, afterwardes is noted the halfe of the tyme that the sayed eclipses shall en∣dure, or continewe, that is to saye from the begynnynge vnto the greatest obscu∣ration abouesayde, or from that darknes vnto the ende: thirdlye are noted the par∣tes of the sunne, or of the moone, whych shalbe eclypsed, and they are called eclip∣tye poyntes, as well in the perticuler eclipses, as in the vniuersall, and it is cō∣ueniente to ymagen that the Diametre vysuall of the sunne, and of the moone, (that is to saye, taken and ymagened ac∣cording
to the iudgement of the sight (is deuided into. 12. egall partes, the whych are brought backe into the moone, in re∣tournynge towardes the begynnynge of theym, and they doo make the nombre of. 24. And it is to be noted y• the sunne can ne¦uer be eclipsed vniuersallye throughe all places of ye earth, nor yet of one like sort, quātitie, or disposition, by reson of divers aspectes of the inhabitāts, and although the sunne do appeare at some times who¦ly eclipsed, it cānot be ouer al places, nor by any notable space of time, by cause the eclipse of the sunne dothe come by the in∣terposition of the moone, betwene the sunne and vs, and that the moone is of a more sodaine and swifter mouement thē is the sunne, and is more nearer vnto vs and also lesser then all the earthe, and the moone, and the earth are both much lesse then is the sunne, and for to say the truth the sunne neuer loseth his light, as doth the moone entringe into the shaddow of the earthe, when she is Diametrally op∣posite vnto the sunne for the sayde shad¦dowe doth then depriue the moone of her lighte (which she receyueth of the sunne. By the Interposition of the sayde earthe
whyche is then betwene the moone and the sunne. For to knowe the quantitie of the said eclipses. 3. Rule. IN the eclipse then of the moone, if the eclipticke pointes bee lesse then. 12. the eclipse shalbe particuler (as the same of the sunne) accordynge vnto the propor¦tion of the saide pointes vnto. 12., and if the sayde pointes be presisely. 12. the sayd eclipse shalbe vniuersall without during that is to saye that she shall sodenlye be∣gynne to recouer her lyghte, but if the saide pointes bee more then. 12. it betoke∣neth that the moone shall be wholy eclip¦sed by some space of time, and soo muche the more, as the saide pointes are, or shal be in greatest nombre. And to knowe then howe longetyme the moone shalbe wholy depreued of her lighte, you shall take the saide eclipticke pointes, and the mynutes if there be any (for euery pointe is deuided into. 60. mi∣nutes) the whiche you shall fynde in the Ephemerides, and you shall seeke theim at the lefte hande of the table entitulid. Ta∣bula more Lune in tenebris, tempore totalis
sdem defectionis. For at the ryghte hande you shall fynde the howers and minutes, or the minutes only, of the said fatall obscuration. And if you fynde not the mynutes of the saide poyntes eclyp∣ticke precisely in the saide table, you shal then take the moste nearest, and it shall suffice. Example. AS is of the firste vniuersall eclipse of the mone, that came in the yere 1551. you woulde knowe howe longe time the moone was in darcknes depreued totallye of her lyghte, you shall take the poyntes ecliptycke of the sayde eclipse, whiche are. 14. and. 12. minutes and those shall you finde in the aboue named table (in takynge the. 10. minutes for. 12.) and at the ryghte hande ioininge to those. 14. pointes and. 10. minutes, you shal se one hower and. . minutes so long tyme was the mone in full darknes. Of the directions and retrogradaciōs of the. 5. planets the. 4. AFterwardes doth followe vnder¦neth the saide eclipse, the time pr¦fired of the directions and retro
gradacions of the. 5. planetes, that is to saye vpon what daye they do beginne and ende their sayde Retrogradacions, and consequentelye howe often tymes Mercury shall bee retrograde the same yeare, for he by reason of the fwyft moue¦ment of his epicicle is more often retro∣grade then are ye other planets, the which you shal finde lykewyse among the mo∣uementes of the sayd planets whiche are noted in the lefte face of the said Epheme∣rides with this sillable Re. which signify∣eth the beginning of the retrogradacion and with this sillable Di. whiche betoke∣neth the beginninge of the directiō of the same planets. And furthermore the pro¦per mouement of the sayde planets wyll shewe it you, for when the mouemente doth go encreasing from daye to day the planet is directe, & when it doth decrease the planete is retrograde. We doo call the planete directe, when the line of his true mouement goeth after the order of the. 12. signes of the Zodiake, and retro∣grade, when the sayd line goeth agaynst the ordre of the sayd signes, notwithstan¦ding the moone hathe no direction, nor retrogradatiō, by reasō that his epicicle goeth contrarye to the others, and is of
more hasty mouement: But she hath on∣ly swiftnes, or slownes, & is called hasty or slowe. ¶ Of the true mouementes of the ligh∣tes and the planetes and other thin∣ges conteyned in the lefte face of the sayde Ephemerides. 5. rule. THese thinges thus set forthe, there foloweth after the. 12. monethes of the yeare deuided in two faces, of the whyche the lefte face conteyneth the name of the moneth, with the noumbre of the daies of the same, wherof the Son daye is named by the dominicall letter, which hath course for that yeare. And yf there be any sestable daye, it is lykewyse noted, at the leest wise accordinge vnto the cōmon vse of the churche. After there foloweth the true mouementes of the lightes and planetes calculated at none∣tide of euery day, which are deuided and set in. 8. collōnes or spaces, of the which the first is of the sunne, the second of the moone, the thirde of Saturne the fourth of Iupiter the fifthe of mars the sixte of Venus the seuenth of mercury and the eyghte for the intersection or seperacion of the cir∣cle
of the moone, and of the Zodiake, whiche is called Caput draconis, as the ca∣recters or marks of the said planets and of the said dragon (whiche are aboue the heed of euery colompne do shewe) of the which the interpretation foloweth. The Sunne ☉ The moone ☽ Saturne ♄ Iupiter ♃ mars ♂ Venus ♀ mercury ☿ The hed of the dragon ☊ The tayle of the dragon ☋ And it is requisite to note that euerye co¦lompne hathe two orders of noumbers wherof the lest is of degrees & the righte of the minutes of the signe whereof the carecter is nerest collocated or set ouer the head betwene the sayde degrees and minutes: of which carrecters, here ensu¦eth the interpretacion. Signes septen¦trionalls Aries ♈ Taurus ♉ gemini ♊ Cancer ♋ Leo ♌ virgo ♍ Signes meridi¦onales. Libra ♎ Scorpio ♏ Sagitta. ♐ Capri. ♑ Aquari. ♒ Pisces ♓
And thus you haue ryghte againste euery daye, in what signe, degree, or my∣nute, is euery one of the sayde planettes, and the saide section of the heade of the Draggon of the moone, vpon the pointe of noone, of the same day. Of the equallitie, and vnequallitie of the naturall daies. the. 6. BUt it is to bee noted y• the natural daies are supposed to be equall the one to the other in the saide Epheme∣rides, althoughe they bee not so: & that for by cause of the obliquitie, or crokednes of the zodiacke, and of the mouement ir¦reguler of the sunne aboute the centre of the worlde, the tyme then, at the whyche the sunne departeth from the Merediane (whiche is the true noonetide) and goeth into the occident vnder the earth, retour∣nynge by oriente vnto the saide meridia¦ne againe: is the true quantitie of a natu¦rall deye, and the tyme at the whyche all the equinoctiall circle is passed and reuo∣luted or tourned backe vnder the sayde merediane, wyth. 59. minutes and. 8. se∣condes of a degree more, is the measure of a natural daye equall and measurable
according vnto whiche are mae the sup¦putations of the meane and reguler mo∣uementes astronomicalls. And although that there be difference betwene the true and the meane or equall dayes naturall aboue sayde, yet notwythstandynge ther can folow no notable errour for the true place and mouement of the sonne and of the. . planettes, whych are of mouement slowe ynoughe, but onely of the mone by reason of the swiftnes of her mouement. The manner too bringe the true place and mouemente of the moone, vnto the true noonetide. The. 7. VVhen thou wylte then reduce, or bring the true place and mouemēt of the mone vnto the true vulgare or common noonetide at the whyche the true naturall dayes, do begynne and end that is to saye when the sunne is ryghte¦ly vpon the meridianc: thou shalt do thr as foloweth. Take ryghte with the daye proposed, the true place of the sunne, nd of the moone, then entre wyth the sygn and degree of the saide place of the sunn into the table entituled Tabula motus lun in takynge the signe ouer the heade, an
the degree at the lefte syde of the saide ta¦ble: and you shall fynde vnder the sayde signe, righte wythe the sayde degree, the nombre of minutes, whyche you muste take awaye, and substra from the true place of the moone taken in the Ephemeri¦des for to bryng them vnto the true noone tide proposed. And for by cause the de∣grees which are at the left side of the said table do procede from two vnto two you shal take the degre which shalbe most ne¦rest vnto the sayd place of the sunne, not hauyng any regard vnto the minutes, in case they passe not. 30. & when they passe. 30. you maye then adde▪ one degree, with out any errour, for the sayde mynutes. To know ye true place, & mouemēt of ye lightes & planets, at euery howre that a mā please: whether it be, afore or af∣ter noone. The. 8. Rule. ANd if it be cōueniēt to haue ye true place of the sunne or of the moone or of any planet, at what howre so euer it be, either before none or after, you shal take his true place & mouement aun¦swering vnto the nonetide past, and also the same of ye nonetide folowing, as hath ben said before. After you shal substra the
mouemente from the greatest: and that whiche doth remayne shalbe the moue∣ment of the sayd plane answering vn∣to the same natural daye, frō one noone tide to the other, the whyche mouement you shall deuide by▪ 24. in resoluinge the degrees into minutes, and the minutes into secondes, if there be nede, then thou shalt adde so manye times the. 24. parte of the sayd dayly mouemēt vnto the mo∣uement of the nonetide past, as there be howers past since the same nonetide, yf the planet be direct. Or els you shal sub∣stra the same. 24. parte so many times if he be retrograde, & if you haue one quar¦ter, one third, or halfe of an houre more: you maye likewise adde or substraye the fourth, or the thirde, or the halfe of the a∣boue sayd. 24. parte of the sayd dayly mo¦uemēt and by this meane you shal haue that which you demaund. ¶ For to bringe the true mouement of the moone vnto what meridiane you please. 9. rule. ANd although that the Ephemerides last imprinted, are calculated and reduced vnto the meridiane of a Citie of Almaigne called Tubinge, yet ne∣uerthelesse
it is no neede to reduce, or brīg the true places & mouemētes of the sunne and of the. 5. planetes (whiche are slowe inoughe of mouement) vnto anye other meridiane what so euer it be: ex∣cept onely the place of the moone, for the swiftnes of his mouement. The whiche you shall do after this maner. Take the name of your city, or of ye place most ne∣rest to the same, in the table which is cal¦led Tabula regionum, prouinciarum, et oppido∣rum insigniorum Europae. and drawinge to∣ward the right hande, you shal finde vn∣der the charecter of the moone the num∣bre of minutes, which must be added or substraed from the true mouemente of the said moone, which hath bene calcula¦ted by the sayd Ephemerides: accordinge as the letter. A. or. M. being at the left hand shal shewe you, for the letter. A. signify∣eth that ye must adde, and the letter. M. that you must dimynishe or substra the sayde minutes, and therewith you shall finde al at once at the right hande of the sayd minutes, in the laste columpne, the degrees of the latitude, or eleuatiō of the pole Articke of the sayd citie or region, of the which you may haue to do withal as here after you shal see.
Of the latitude of the. 5. planetes. ♄. ♃. ♂. ♀. and. ☿. Furthermore vnder euery columpne of the. 5. planetes, are noted their latitu∣des (that is to say, how much th decline from the eclipticke, calculated onely for the. 1. 10. and. 20. day of euery moneth by the meanes of the which, you may easely proportionate the latitudes of those pla∣netes for all the other dayes whiche are betwene both, of the which latitudes the denominations are noted aboue y• head of euery of the sayd columnes, by the Ca¦pital letters which hereafter folowe S. A. which doth signify the planet to be. Septentrional ascendant S. D. Septentrional descendāt M A Meridional Ascendant M. D Meridional Descendant The which dominations whē they do chaūge are likewise noted by the chaūge of ye sayd capital letters put or set amōg the noumbers of the true mouementes. As if ouer the head you haue. S. A. and then you mete belowe vnderneth in any of the colomnes, this letter. D. it betoke¦neth y• the planet which was septentrio¦nal
ascendant is made septentrional descen∣dāt, so must you vnderstand if it chaunce contrary, and it you haue ouer the head S. A. or S. D. and then you mete. M. that denoteth that the latitude septentrional is conuerted into the meridionall, and contrary wise if after. M. there do folow the letter. S. which is a thing righte ea∣sy to be vnderstande, we call the planet descendant, whan the centre of his epici∣cle, descēdeth from the point of the eccen¦trike the most farthest parte of the earth whyche is called Axe tree, towardes hys opposite whych is the most nearest and is called ascendant, when from the said point opposyte he mounteth towardes the sayd poynt most farthest of the earth. Of the Latytude of the moone. the. 11. THe latitude of the moone, is founde in the sayde Ephemerides by his owne table intituled Tabula latitudiais lunae thus as foloweth. Take the true mouement of the mone, & of the dra¦gons head. ☊ of the same, at the day and hower proposed as hath bene said hereto fore: and resolue the caracters of the syg∣nes of the same mouemēts into the nom¦bers of the saide signes whiche are these that folowe.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 ♈ ♉ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ ♒ ♓ ¶ Then substra the true mouemente of the head of the dragon of the moone, frō his owne proper and true mouement in adding. 12. signes if the substcaction cā not be otherwise made) and that whyche resteth, shal be the true argument of the latitude of the moone, with the which ar¦gumente you shall enter the table of the latitude of the same in taking the noum¦ber of the signes of the sayde argument at the head of the sayde table, and the de, grees at the lefte side, in the line intitu∣led linea numeri, which procede in descen¦ding from the toppe downeward or els in taking the nomber of the signes at the foote of the sayde table, and the degrees at the right hand in the line which amoū¦teth from beneth vpwarders: for in the place at the which y• lines of the nōbers of the sayd signes & degrees do agree to¦gether, you shall find the latitude of the moone in degrees & minutes, the which latitude shall be called septentrionall, if you haue taken the nombers of the syg¦nes at the head of the table, or els meridi¦onall
if the saide signes haue bene taken at the foote of the table. And further the moone shalbe called ascendant if the nū∣bre of the signes of the argument of the latitude be. 0. or. 1. or. 2. in the head, and. 9 or. 10. or. 11. at the foote of the saide table And if the saide nombre of signes aboue saide bee in the heade. 3. or. 4. or. 5. and at the foote. 6. 7. or. 8. she shall be named descendant as the titles and inscriptions of the said table doth declare, being secur y• head & fote of euery colūne of the same ¶ And if it happen that your argument haue any nombre of minutes ouer & be∣sides the degrees, it behoueth to enter the sayd table two times, & to take firste the latitude whiche aunswereth vnto the degrees precedinge immediatlye the sayd minutes, and then the latitude aun¦swering vnto the degrees which next do folowe the said minutes. After it is cōue¦nient to take the difference of both the la¦titudes in substraing the least from the greatest. That done put. 60. for the first nombre, & the nombre of the sayd minu∣tes for the second, and the said difference for the third: and multiply the third nō∣bre by the seconde, and that whiche co∣meth of the multiplication deuide by the
first & you shal haue the fourth noumbre proportionall, the whiche you must adde vnto the first latitude, yf it be lesse then the second: or els substra the same from the sayd first latitude, if it do surmounte the secōd latitude for that which cometh or remayneth therof shal be the true lati¦tude of the moone answering vnto the minutes of the sayd argument. And who that would make shorte, there is no daunger if he leaue the sayd minu¦tes if they be lesse then. 30, or els to adde one degre vnto the degrees of the sayde argument, if the sayde minute do excede or passe 30. and then to finde the latitude as aboue hath bene sayd. Of the aspectes of the moone vnto the sunne and planetes, & other thinges conteyned in the righte and seconde face of the saide Ephemerides the. 12. rule. Consequently in the right and second face of the saide Ephemerides, are compre¦hended the aspectes of the moone vnto the sunne, and vnto the. 5. planetes, and from one of the planets vnto the other: as the superscription of the said face doth shewe. And firste of al is declared the
nombre of the yeare, and the nombre of the monthe and vnderneth the same, the nombre of the dayes of the sayd moneth ioyning vnto the sayd noumbre, are no∣ted the coniunctions, oppositions, qua∣dratures, trines, and the sextiles aspect of the moone vnto the sonne: then frome the moone vnto Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Ve∣nus and Mercury, as it appeareth by the ca¦racters of the sunne and of the said pla∣nets being set above the head of the. 6. colompnes and the sayd aspectes are no∣ted by their figures and caracters, wher of the interpretacion and diffinicion fo∣loweth. ☌ signifieth coniunction, that is to say when, 2. planettes are vnder one like de∣gree accordinge vnto the lōgitude of the Zodiake. ☍ Signifieth opposition, that is to say, when two planets are diametrallye constituted, distante. 6. signes the one from the other. □. Signifieth quadrate aspecte: which is made, when. 2. planets are distant the one from the other by. 3. signes, whyche make the fourthe parte of the. 12. sygnes of the Zodiacke
△. Sygnyfyeth trine aspecte: whyche happenethe when two plannettes are distante the one from the other by foure signes, whyche do make the thirde parte of the sayde. 12. signes of the zodiacke. ✶. Signifieth sextile aspecte: whiche is caused, by the distaunce of two sygnes betwene two planettes. And it is soo na∣med, by cause two sygnes doo make the syxte parte of the. 12. signes of the sayde zodiacke, and it is too bee noted, that the nomber sette after the character of eueri aspecte sheweth the howre in the whyche the sayde aspecte shall happen in recke∣nyng from the noonetide of the same day righ with the whiche is noted the saide aspecte. Excepte the coniunctions and op¦positions of the moone and of the sunne, that is to saye the newe and full moones of the whyche not onely the howres, but also the mynutes are written for the first nombre after the carrecter of the cōiunc¦tion or opposition of the sunne and of the moone, do signifye the howre: and the se∣conde and ryghte nombre, the mynutes that the said coniunctions, or oppositions shall fall vpon. Howe the newe and full mones, and eclypses, maye be reduced vnto what meridiane you will, differynge from the same of the Ephemerides▪ The. 13.
FOr so muche that the sayde new and full moones, and the eclypses of the sunne and of the moone, whiche hap¦pen in theim, are calculated in the sayde Ephemerides for the meridiane of the afore named cytie of Tubinge in Almaigne: it is conueniente  reduce, for the leste, the tyme of the sayde coniunctions, oppositi¦ons, and eclypses of the sunne and of the moone vnto your meridiane, wytheoute hauynge care of the other aspectes the whyche you shall easelye doo by the table entituled Tabularegionum, prouinciarum, et op¦pidorum insigniorū europae thus as followeth. Take the name of youre Citye, or of the place most nearest to the same, in the table aboue sayde, & you shal fynd at the ryghte syde vnder this tittle Tempus, the howers and mynutes, or the mynutes onely, whiche you must adde, or substra rom the howres and minutes of the said coniunctions, and oppositions, and eclip¦ses of the sunne and of the moone: as the ettre A. or M. written at the lefte syde of he sayde howres and mynutes shall
shewe you. Of the aspectes of the sunne vnto the planettes, and of the planettes a∣monge theim selues, and of the dra¦gon of the moone. The. 14. AFterwarde there foloweth vpon the ryghte syde of the sayde face of the Ephemerides, the aspectes of the sunne vnto the planettes, and of one pla¦net vnto a nother, whiche are figured as well by the carracters of the sayde plan¦nettes, as by the characters of the sayde aspectes, of the which the interpretation hathe beene heretofore declared. Conse¦quently amonge the saide aspectes is no¦ted when the moone is in the head or in the tayle of the dragon, whiche are their intersections or diuisions of his circle and of the Zodiake, as we haue said a fore. When she is in the head, she is thus figured. ☽. ☊. and whē she is in the taile she is figured after this maner. ☽. ☋. ¶ When the planets are oriental or oc∣cidental. 15. rule.
FInally is noted ouer the head of eue¦ry columpne of the. 5. planets, vnder their propre charecters, when the sayd planets are orientall or occidentall by these sillables. or. and. oc. and it is to be noted that saturne, Iupiter and mars, are orientall whiles the sunne departeth frō them after the couiunction of him and of the sayd planets, comminge vnto the opposition and occidentall, from the said opposition in approchinge him selfe nere vnto them, vntill the coniunction nexte ensuing. But Venus and mercury are cal∣led orientall, when they do precede▪ the sunne from the east parte, and are seene before the sunne rising and occidentall, when they do folowe the sunne from the west parte, and are seene after the sunne is sette. For to knowe the quantitie of the arti¦ficial daye and of the nighte, and at what houre the sunne rysethe and setteth. 16. rule ANd too the ende that all menne maye knowe, if they canne see the eclipses of the sunne or of the moone which happen nere vnto the hori∣zont
aboute the sunne settinge, or the sun risinge, it is necessarye to knowe the quā¦titie of the dayes and of the nightes arti∣ficiall, and at what howre the sunne ry∣seth and setteth. There is than before the table of the Ephemerides, a table intituled Tabula quantitatis dierum, that is to saye a table of the quantitye of the dayes: the whyche conteyneth in the hedde the lati∣tudes, or eleuations of the pole of al pla¦ces vpon the earth, from. 36. degrees, vn¦till. 55. degrees: and at the left hand there are. 6. sygnes of the zodiack & other. 6. at the righte hande, whyche are distributed from. 3. degrees to. 3. in the middes of the sayd table are comprehended the houres and mynutes of the halfe of an artificial daye, whyche are from the sunne risyng vntyll noonetide, or from noonetide vn¦tyl the sunne settyng, when the sunne is in the signes septrentionalles: or eles the howres & minutes of half of the nyghte whyche are from the sunne settynge vntyll mydnyghte, or from mydnyghte vntyll the sunne rysyng, whan the sōne is in the sygnes meridionalles, knowe then in what signe, and degree the sunne is, and howe muche the poole is eleuated aboue your horizont, as before hath be∣sayd.
And take the sayde sygne and degre at the ryghte, or lefte syde of the aboue sayde table, and procede ryghtelye in the same table, vntyll that you be ustelye at the nombre of youre pole: and there you shall finde the howers, and minutes of the halfe of the artificiall day if the sunne be in the septentrionall parte of the zodi∣acke: or elles of the haife of the nyghte, if he bee in the meridionall parte: what syg¦nes are septentrionalles, and what me∣ridionals hath beene declared in the fifte Rule. The whiche is likewise euident by the sayde table, by these woordes, Sig▪ Bor. fig. Aust. Yf you double then, the sayde ho¦wres and minuttes of the halfe of the ar¦tificiall daye, you shall haue the whole day: and if you do substra them from. 24. howres, there resteth the nyghte. Or yf you double the howres and mynutes of the halfe of the nyghte, you shall haue the nyghte wholye: and if you substra them from. 24. howres, there restethe the artyfyciall day, and by thys meanes you maye knowe at what howre the Sunne rysethe, or settethe euerye daye in the yeare.
For the daye artificial dureth from the sunne risinge to noone, vntill the sunne setting: and the night artificial, from the sunne setting vnto midnight, and so vn∣til the sunne rising. And the natural day of. 24. houres dothe comprehend them both. ¶ Of the, 12. houses of heauen, and of their nature accidentall accordinge vnto the iudgement of the astrologi¦ans. 17. rule. FOr to gather any sruyt of the thyn¦ges abouesayd according to the ha∣bilitie that god hath geuen vnto mē it is conuenient, to treat of the. 12. hou∣ses of heauen, and of their accidentiall nature and how they must be distingued and erected in all regions. In leauinge then a heape of superfluous and vnpro∣fitable wordes, whiche are in the latine rules of the Ephemerides and the va∣rietis of the opinions of the Astrolo∣gians touching the said houses, I wil de¦clare the opinion and maner howe to do them, according vnto the which, the Ta∣bles are calculated which are in the Ephe¦merides, and that all men do commenlye vse now adayes. To come then vnto the
poynt you muste note that as the sunne and the moone and the. 5. planettes, ma∣kinge their reuolution by their propre mouementes vnder the Zodiake, doo cause diuers effectes and sensible muta∣cions in earthly thinges, according vn∣to the diuers proiection of their beames and diuers dispositions of natural thin∣ges here belowe, in makinge their pere∣grinacion from signe to signe, and accor¦ding vnto the nature accidentale, of the 12. signes of the Zodiake: likewise the sayd lightes and planetes, in tourninge round about the earthe by the firste and vniuersal mouement of al the world, frō the orient by the south into the accident, within the time and space of. 24. houres (whiche we cal a natural daye) do cause again euery day of the yeare diuers and perticuler effectes, according as they be in the orient or occident, and notably ele¦uated or depressed vnder y• earth, & y• thei haue more stronge or weake irradiaciō vppon the sayde thinges here belowe on earth. For this cause the Astrologians haue distingued all the roundnes of the vniuersall worlde into. 12. partes (after the nombre of the said. 12. signes) whych are called houses, of the which there are
6. aboue the earth, and. 6. vnderneth par∣petually and in all regions, in the maner and forme as foloweth. First it is to vnderstande, that the me¦ridian circle and the Horizont, do deuide them selues into 2. halfes, and with right angles towardes the South and North, and they deuide the Equinoctiall into 4. quarters, whereof there be. 2. aboue the earth, and 2. vnderneth: two lykewise to∣ward the East, and 2. toward the West. And euery. 4. porcion contemeth. 90. de∣grees. You must thē imagen euery of the said quarters of the equino. to be deuided into 3 egal parts of 30 degrees, euery one of them & by the pointes of the said deui¦sions to passe. 4. great circles, proceding frō the foresaid intersections of the meri¦dian circle, & of y• horizont, by this menes the said 4. circles with y• sayd meridian & horizont (which do make togither the nū¦bre of. 6.) do deuid the equl. & al the sphere of the world into. 12. partes, which we cal the. 1. houses of heauen: the which are or dained & distributed accordinge vnto the succession of the 12. lines of the zodiacke & of the propre mouement of the lyghtes & planets, cōtrary vnto the first mouemēt vniuersall, as it doeth somwhat appeare by this fygure folowinge.
MYne opinion notwith∣standinge is, that the saide. 4. circles oughte to passe by the deuisyons of the Circle vertycall, whiche doth deuy¦de the meridian circle with right angles and not by the equinoctial (yf it be not in the right Sphere) for many good causes and inuincible reasons as is noted in the Cosmographie or Sphere of the worlde, publysshed by Orentius, and in the. 12. Chapter of the seconde boke of the same.
¶ The first house beginneth then in the orientale parte of the horizont, and en∣deth in the next halfe circle which is vn∣der the said horizont, the which house is named the angle of orient, or ascen∣daunt, and horoscope: and it is the house to iudge of all the beginninges of life, & the beginninges of all workes. For by∣cause the first and vniuersal mouement beginneth at the east parte, and rayseth the sterres and planets aboue the earth in such wise that from the orient cometh all vertue and the heauenly goodnes. The second house foloweth after, vnder the said horizont. The which is the house of substaunce as well of necessary thyn∣ges to the life, as of other goodes, of mar¦chandises, of byinges, sellinges, admini¦strators, and helpers. ¶ The. 3. house folowinge endeth at the part of the meridiane, whyche is vnder the earthe, and bath signification vppon brothers, and sisters, cousynes, neigh∣bours and friendes, and vpon smal and short viages. ¶ The. 4. house beginneth at the sayde parte of the meridiane, whiche is vnder the earth. The which is called the angle of the point of the earthe, or of midnight
and of same the bottome or depth of hea∣uen. And it is the house for to iudge of diuisions and heritages, of treasors hide and of all thynges vnmouable The. 5. house foloweth after, the whyche is the house of chyldren, of frendshippe legates and messengers. The. 6. and folowing house, is ended at the occidentall parte of the horizont and hath signification vpon sickenesses, lordeshippes, membres of the body, vp∣on seruauntes, prysoners, and domesty∣call beastes. 7. The seuenth house begynneth at the saide horizonte occidentall drawynge to∣ward the south, called the angle or point of occident, opposite vnto the ascendant: whiche beginneth to descende vnder the horizont. And it is the house to iudge of women, mariages, debates and conten∣tions, of the one halfe of the humaine lyfe. 8. The. 8. house foloweth after appro∣ching toward the South. The whiche is the house of death, and interfection, and of the ende of life. 9. The. 9. and house folowing is ended at the part of the meridiane which is aboue the earthe and hathe signification vppon
long vsages, peregrinations, fayth, reli∣gion, wisedom, and dreames. 10. The tenthe house begynneth at the saide meridiane verticall aboue the earth the whyche called the angle or poynte of the south, or of the middes of heauen, op∣posite vnto the fourth house which is the angle of the earthe, and is the house roy∣all, imperiall, of exaltacion, and honoure noblenesse, and good renoume. 11. The eleuenthe house, foloweth affer, drawing towardes the Easte, the whiche is the house for to iudge of hope, cōfidēce and the fortune of man. 12. The twelfe and last house, endinge at the oriente is the house of sadnes, enuye, malice, deception and craft. And by this maner there be foure angu¦lar and principall houses, that is to saye the first, the fourth, the seuenth, and the tenth. And foure whiche are named suc∣cedinge, that is to saye. The seconde, the fyfthe, the eyght, & the eleuenth, whiche do folowe the other foure abouesayd. The other foure whiche come next after the succedinge houses, are called falling or coming after, which be these. The thirde, the sixt, the ninth, and the twelfth Of the whiche houses this is the figure∣folowing,
after the iudgemente of our Astrologians, and as they are accusto∣med to vse them and to put them in plat¦fourme. The Figure of the xii. hovvses of hea∣uen, after the Iud∣gementes of the Astrologians. The fyrste howse the Angle of Orient. ♈ The second house succedinge. ♉ The third house fallynge. ♊ The fourth house the Angle of the earth. ♋ The fyfe howse succedinge. ♌ The syxte howse fallynge. ♍ The vii. house the Angle of the Occident. ♎ The viii. howse succedinge. ♏ The ix. howse fallynge. ♐ The x. house the Angle of the middes of heuen. ♑ The xi. howse succedinge. ♒ The xii. house fallynge. ♓
And it is conueniente finallye, to note that the lyghtes and planettes do reioise, and haue certeyne power, and acci∣dentall vertues, in some houses more then in other, as dothe heareafter fo∣lowe. ♄ Saturne doth reioyce in the xii. howse, ♃ Iupiter xi. ♂ Mars vi. ☉ the sunne ix ♀ Venus v ☿ Mercury i ☽ the moone iii ¶ Howe to erecte and distyngue the. 12. houses of heauen, after the order of the sayd Ephemerides. 18. rule TO erect thē or caculate the. 12. hou¦ses of heauen is no other thinge but to finde the pointes of the Zo∣diacke, which are noted and distingued by the sixe circles abouesaid: the whiche you shall do by the tables of the Ephemeri¦des thus as foloweth. You must thē first note, y• there are in the sayde Ephemerides
5. tables perticulers, sufficiente for all Europe, calculated for the latitude or eleuation of the poole of. 42. 45. 48. 51. and. 54. degrees. And althoughe that there be difference of. 2. degrees, betwen euerye of the saide eleuations or lati∣tudes: yet can there folowe no notable erroure of the same. If for the degrees left out you do vse of the table whiche is calculated for the next degre. For the ta∣ble of. 45. degrees shal serue principally for the sayde. 45. degrees: and without any notable errour for. 44. and. 46. and the same of. 48. shall serue for. 47. and. 49. degrees and, so of the other. Com∣ming then to the effect, you must consy∣dre the time, at the which you will erect he said houses of heauen, to knowe if it be precisely at none, eyther before or af∣ter. ¶ The firste parte or difference, when the time is precisely at noone LEt it be proposed that you woulde erect the sayde houses at the houre of noone, preciselye, you shall then take the true place and mouement of the
sunne at the sayd houre of none by your Ephemerides. Then you shal take the signe in the which is the sunne aboue the head of the sayd table of the houses whiche is made, or may serue most commodiously for your latitude or eleuation of the pole and the degree at the left hād of the sayd table: in the columne or line of the aboue sayd tenth house, for ye degre is the begin¦ning of the 10 house. Right with the whi¦che degre, in drawing toward the ryght hand, you shal finde incontinent the de∣grees orderly of the. 11. 12. 1. 2. &. 3, house at the said houre of noone. The whyche degrees are of the signes, whose charac¦ters are nerest noted aboue them. And if it happen that the true place & mouemēt of the sunne haue anye nombre of minu¦tes as most often it doth happē then may you leaue those minutes if they be lesse then. 30. or els adde one degree, if the said nombre of minutes do excede. 30. with∣out any errour, or notable interest. ¶ The maner how to proportionate the sayde houses when the true place of the sunne hath minutes. ANd if you wil haue the sayd hou¦ses more curiously: you shall doo thus. Take righte agaynste the
whole degrees of the sunne, whiche are before the minutes, the houses whiche you shal finde at the right hand as I said before. And at the left hande of the sayde houses, take the time, that is to saye the houres and minutes, whiche you shall finde vnder this title Tempus a meridie. Then take the difference of the said time next ensuing (in substraing the lesser frō the greater, and note the same a part vn¦der the same time, Lykewise take the dif¦ference of euery of the sayd houses alre∣dy noted & of the next houses folowing, and note euery difference vnder his pro¦pre house. After this done, entre into the table entituled Tabula proportionū ad 60. mi¦nuta celi domicilus fabricandis satisfaciens. And take at the lefte side of the sayde table the minutes of the true place of the sunne whiche are ouer and besides the degrees, and at the head of the same table take the nombre of the minutes of the sayd difference of time, and you shal finde right with those minutes, the par∣tes proportional of the sayd difference in secondes, or elles in minutes and secon∣des together. The which part proportio∣nall, or the nearest to the same, you shall take at the left side of the table folowing
the abouesayd, which is intituled Tabu∣la quatuor minutorum temporis and the diffe∣rence of euery house (the one after the o∣ther) at the heade of the sayde table: and youshall finde righte againste the sayde nombre the minutes, or the degrees and minutes together, the whiche you must adde vnto the degrees of the house, out of the whiche was taken the sayde diffe∣rence, and there as the sayd houses haue not the difference, you muste adde no∣thinge vnto theym. By this meanes you shal haue the precise iustification of the sayd houses more curious then neces¦sary. Example. And for to haue of all more easier vnderstanding, I haue here giuen you an example, calculated for the middaye of the laste of Jnue. 1540. and for the latitude of. 48. degrees, as is the same of Paris. At the which tyme I did finde the sunne to be in the. 17. degres and. 40. minutes of Cancer. And then I did execute and folowe the rest, as aboue hath bene saide, and I haue taken in the sayd table proportionall at the left hand the. 40. minutes of the true place, & the 4. minutes of the difference of time at the heade of the sayde table, and right a∣gainst those I found. . minutes and. 40
secondes: whiche is the parte proporcio∣nall of the said difference of time, whiche was founde of the. 4. minutes, vnder su∣che reason as haue the. 40. minutes vnto 60. minutes of one hole houre. Afterwar¦des I did take in the said table quatuor mi¦nutorum temporis, the said. 2. minutes and 40. secondes at the right syde, and the dif¦ference of the howses (whiche is but of one degree, at the head of the saide table: and I did finde right with them. 40. mi¦nutes to be added vnto euery house aun∣swering vnto the 17 degrees of the sūne: The which 40 minutes haue suche rea∣son vnto one degree (whiche are worthe 60 minutes) as haue the 2 minutes and 40 secondes, vnto the aboue sayde 4 mi∣nutes of the difference of time), and by this meanes you do anoide a multiplica∣tion and diuision by the saide table pro∣portionall, and as muche by the table quatuor minutorum temporis, besides the re¦ductions whiche shoulde be made. The reste is cleare ynoughe by the dis∣cours, and supputation of the said exam∣ple proposed▪ of the which here foloweth the true description.
The order of the sixe houses orientall. The time frō m today 10 11 12 1 2 3 ♋ ♌ ♍ ♎ ♏ ♐ hou. m. g m g m g m g m g m g m 7 14 0 17 0 24 0 14 0 7 8 The houses aunswering vnto 17 degrees.   4 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 The differences. 7 18 0 8 0 25 22 0 14 0 8 The houses aunswering vnto 18 degrees.   2 40 40 0 4 40 0 0 The partes proportionals.       17 4 24 0 21 4 14   7 4 8 The houses iustified. ¶ The seconde parte or difference, when the time proposed is after none. ANd yf the time proposed be after none▪ you shall take the signe and degree that the sunne is in, by the eight rule, and you shall enter into the ta¦ble of the houses of your region, as before hath ben sayde, taking the degree of the sunne vnder the signe in the columne of the tenth house, and note apart the hou∣res and minutes of the time, whiche you
shall finde at the lefte side of the sayd de∣gre. And if there be minutes besydes the degrees, you shall take the difference of the sayde time, and of the time next folo∣winge, and the parte proportional of the same difference, by the abouesaid table, intituled, tabula proportionum ad 60 minut. &c. with the sayd difference, and the mi∣nutes of the sunne. The whiche part pro¦portionall you shall adde vnto the sayde time which was taken right against the degree of the sudne. Then afterward vn¦to y• time so iustified, you shall adde your time which is past after none, the minu¦tes with the minutes, & the houres with the houres, in addinge for 60 minutes one houre vnto the sayd houres, the whi¦che houres if they do passe 24, you muste substra them, and note the rest. Likewise as many times as you shall haue 6 hou∣res after noone, you shall adde vnto the saide time one minute, by this meanes you shall haue the time iustiied for to fynde youre houses. Then take the sayde tyme at the lefte syde of the table of the houses, vnder the title, tempus a meridie, or the moost nearest vnto it (yf you fynd not the same precisely) and you shall finde at the right hand of y• said time the 6 houses
orientalles aboue sayd, as you may se by the example whiche foloweth, calculated for 8 houres after none of the saide laste daye of June 1540, and for the aboue said latitude of 48 degrees, the sunne beynge then in the 17 degree and 59 minutes of Cancer. The houses aunswe¦ringe to the sayde time proposed.   hour mi. 10 11 12 1 2 3 The time aun¦ring vnto the e of the sunne 7 18 ♏ ♐ ♐ ♑ ♓ ♈ e time after e 8 0 gr gr gr gr gr gr e time iusti∣. 15 19 22 9 25 21 11 28 ¶ The thirde parte or difference when the time proposed is before none. IF the time proposed be before none, there shall be no difference or other difficultie to calculate, ex¦cept that you must substra the time that you do adde when it is after none. Then after that you shall haue taken the true place of the sunne, and haue proportio∣ned the time aunsweringe vnto the de∣gree of the sunne, as before hath ben said
you shall substra from the saide time, the distaunce of the time proposed vntyll none, and as many minutes as the sayde distaunce shall haue of times 6 howres, (in puttinge therunto 24 houres, yf the sayde substraction cannot otherwise be made) and with that whiche shall reste of the sayde time, you shall finde the sayde houses by your table in the fashion and maner as hath bene sayde before of the time after none. And if you do not pre∣cisely finde the sayde time, you shal then take the most nerest, or elles if ye will be so curious that you will haue the extreme certaintie, you shall take the houses whi∣che are right with the time that is nexte lesser then yours, and then with the mi∣nutes whiche do reste, and the difference of euerye house, you shall take the parte proportionall in minutes, or in degrees and minutes, by the aboue sayde table quatuor minutorum temporis, as it hath ben declared and done of the time of the iuste none. The whiche partes proportionals you shall adde vnto the saide houses, for to haue them more precisely. And for the more better vnderstanding, you may ex∣amine the example whiche foloweth, cal∣culated for 8 houres in the morninge, which are foure before none of the aboue
sayde last day of June 1540, and for the saide latitude of 48 degrees, the sunne beinge then in the 17 degree and 21 mi∣nutes of the signe of Cancer. hou. mi. The sixe houses orientals. The time aunswering vnto the degrees. of the sunne. 17 15 10 11 12 1 2 3 The distannce of the time proposed vntyll none. ♓ ♈ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♌ The time iustified which resteth. 2 14 g m g m g m g m g m g m The lesser time most nerest. 23 12 17 0 2 0 1 0 14 0 5 0 23 0 The difference.   2 1 0 2 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 The parte proportionall.     0 30 1 0 0 30 0 30 0 30 0 30 The sixe houses iustified.     17 30 26 0 13 30 14 30 5 30 23 30 ¶ Of the sixe houses occidentals, oppo∣sites, or contrarye vnto the sixe goinge before. VUhan you haue the sixe honses ori¦entals aboue said, by one of the thre rules or differences aforesayd, you shall haue then forthwith the sixe houses
occidentalles, by the signes and degrees opposites, for because that euerye greate circle deuideth in the sphere all other great circles, into two halues, or equall partes. As if the .x. house beginne at the xvii. degree of Pisces, the fourth house (whiche is his opposite, and deuided by a lyke circle) shall beginne at the. xvii, de∣gre of Uirgo, whiche is opposite vnto the saide signe of Pisces, and so it is to be vn¦derstand of all others, by meanes wher of no man doth describe in the tables a∣ny other but the sixe houses orientalles. For it suffiseth to take the partes opposi∣tes for the sixe houses occidentalles, as we haue saide here aboue. The houses and signes opposites be heare noted to thende you may haue the more easye vn¦derstanding & vse of y• thinges aboue said. The signes sep∣tentrionalles. ♈ ♉ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ The signes me∣ridionals oppos. ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ ♒ ♓ The sixe houses orientales. 10 11 12 1 2 3 Sixe houses oc¦cidētals opposi. 4 5 6 7 8 9 These thinges thus declared, you shal make the figure of the. xii houses at the houre proposed, and you shall put at the be∣ouer
all humayne membres, are such as do here folowe. Triplicite cholerike. Aries Are hoate and drye, of the nature of the fi¦er, masculines, of the daye; orientalles, and of the humayne mem¦bers they do rule, the heade Leo the backe and sydes. Sagittar. the thighes▪ Triplicite sanguine. gemini▪ Are hote and moyst, of the nature of the ayre, masculines, of the daye, and occi∣dentales, and of the humayne members they do rule. The shoulders armes & hādes Libra the nauell & lo¦wer parte of the belly. Aquar. the legges. Triplicitie flewmatike. Cancer Are colde moiste, and watery, femenins, of the night, septentrio∣nales, and of the hu¦mayne mēbers they do gouerne. the breste, sto¦mack, & loūgs Scorpio the priuie par¦tes. Pisces the fete.
Triplicite melancholike▪ Taurus Are colde and drye, of the earth, femenines, and of the nighte, me ridionals, and of the humayne members they do rule. the necke▪ virgo the belly & in ward parts Capricor the knees. Lykewise the sayde signes haue other affections, and accidentall natures, seruinge to the mutati¦on of the ayre, for Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricornus are moueable, Taurus, Leo, Scorpius, Aquarius, fyxed, Gemini, Virgo, Sagietarius, Pisces, cômune, or meane, ¶ Of the nature and complexion of the lightes, and of the .v. planetes. The .xx. rule. AFter this it is necessarye to haue the complexion, vertue, & nature, as well of the sunne & of the mone as of the .v. planetes: the whiche is such as foldweth here in orde. The Sunne is hote and drie, louing, geuynge lyfe, and lyghte vnto all na∣turall vertues. And of the members humayne he rulethe the brayne,
the marowe, the sight, the syuewes, and generally all the members of the righte parte of the bodye. ¶ The mone is colde and moist, louyng, of whome the effectes are manifeste, ha¦uing dominatton ouer the stomacke, the bellye, and of the mother of women, and generally ouer the members of the lefte parte of humayne bodye. Saturnels colde and drye, enemye of nature, malitious and enuious, destroy∣er of life, and of the bodye he gouerneth the right eare, the milte, and the bladder: and of humors the inclancholye, and parte of the fleume. Jupiter is hoate and moiste, louinge, sanguine, hauinge regarde ouer the lan∣ges, the sides, the gristels, and of the sede or naturall humour of man. Mars is hote and drye, cruell: and of the humaine bodye is attributed vnto him the lefte eare, the vaynes, the gene∣tories, and of the humors, the choler, and after the opinion of some men, he gouer∣neth the liuer. Uenus is colde and moyste, louinge, flewmaike, and of the bodye humayne he gouerneth the backe bone, the buttoc∣kes: the lower partes of the bellye, the matrice with the mone, and the fate and
the sede, with the signe of Leo. And it is to be noted, that Jupiter and Uenus are called good and fortunate, but Jupiter is the greatest good fortune and Uenus the leaste. Saturne and Mars are called vnfor∣tunate, or euill fortunes, but Saturne is the greatest vnfortunate, and Mars the leaste. The Sunne and the Mone are called meanes, or betwene both, that is to say, neither fortunate nor vnfortunate, but indifferent. Neuerthelesse, Mercury taketh parte alwayes of the nature of the Planete, with the whiche he is contyned, or nea∣rest vnto: for with the good he is good, principally when he beholdeth him with a trine or sextile aspecte. And with the e∣uill he is euill likewise, when he is oppo∣site or comoyned with them, or when he beholdeth him with a quadrate aspecte. Of the force and accidentall nature of the aspectes. The. 21.  ule. FOr somuche that the lightes and pla¦nets do chaunge their influence ac∣cordinge vnto the varietie of the a∣sectes, whiche haue ben declared in the
12. rule, it is conuenient to note the good¦nes and malice comming of the saide a∣spectes, in the fashion and maner as fo∣loweth. Fyrst as touchinge the coniunc¦tion (whiche properlye is no aspecte) you must note that although the coninnctiō be defined to be one, whan the planetes are vnder one like degree of the zodiake, according vnto the longitude of y• same, neuerthelesse in matter of influence, one planete is saide to be conioyned with the other, when the one is entred vnder the beames of the other, although that they be not in one like degre, and foreseynge that the distaunce of the one vnto the o¦ther be lesse thē 12 degres. And the mone or planet so conioyned wyth the Sunne, is sayde to be combuste by the beames of the Sunne, and such coniunction is not proprely a coniunction. And it is to be no¦ted, that when two good planetes are conioyned together, the same denoteth manifest amitie and good wyl of the one vnto the other, & encreasemente of their goodnes. And the coniunction of the good with the euill, diminisheth the ma¦lice of the euill planete, and weakeneth somewhat the goodnes of the good Pla¦nete.
As touchinge the opposition, it is an aspect of manifest discord and inimitie. The quadrate aspect is hate and vnper fite inimitie. The trine aspect, signifieth perfect and manifest loue of the Planetes. The sextile aspecte, is of hidde & secrete beneuolence, and vnperfect amitie. ¶ A declaration of the table of the fixed sterres whiche is in the Ephemerides. The. 22. rule. FOr to knowe the aspectes, not onely of the one planet vnto the other, but also of the sayd planetes & fixed ster∣res, you haue before the Ephemerides a table intituled, tabula stellarum fyxarum in∣signiorum. That is to saye, the table of the mooste notable fixed sterres, rectified in the yeare. 1499. The whiche conteineth first of al at the left side the names of the most notable fixed sterres, after the mem¦bers & dominations of the images & con stellatiōs in the which they ar brought. The afterward doth containe their lōgi¦tude. that is to say, their true place, & di∣staūce frō the beginning of Aries. After the which longitude, there foloweth the latitude of the sayde sterres, which is the deuiatiō & distaūce of y• same fixed sters
from the zodiake or Ecliptike lie, or to∣warde the parte meridionall. Conse∣quentlye foloweth the declination of the sayde sterres from the equinoctial circle, and the difference or denominatiō of the saide declination, that is to be knowen if she be septentrionall by this lettre S. or if she be meridionall by this lettre M. Af∣terwarde foloweth the right ascention of the same sterres, that is to saye, the arche of the Equinoctiall, beginninge at the diuision of the springe time, and heade of Aries, ascending aboue the horizont with the saide sterres in the right spheare, and vnder euery merediane. For all mrdi¦anes are euery one as a right horizonte, and euery right horizont, is that whiche passeth by the poles of the worlde: finally is noted the greatnes or magnitude, and then the nature of the sayde sterres refer¦red vnto the Planetes, as the titles, in∣scriptions, and characters of the saide ta∣ble doth shewe plainely inough. Of the 28 mansions or abidinge places of the mone. The 23. rule. COnsequentlye is to be noted, that euen so as the sunne doth passe the 12 signes of the zodiake in 365 days
and almost 6 houres (whiche maketh the whole yeare) doth cause here below vpon the earth diuers effectes, according vnto the nature of the 12 signes, the diuers pro¦tection of his beames, and the disposition and varietie of inferiour thinges, so like¦wise doth the mone, as touchinge his in∣fluence, passinge the saide Zodiake in 27 dayes, and almost 8 houres, accordinge vnto the metinge together of her, with the fixed sterres, whiche are principally in the 12 signes of the Zodiake, for she causeth diuers alterations, and mutati∣ons in the elementall region. By menes of the which, and to discerne and knowe the effectes abouesaide, the aunciente A∣strologians haue deuided the same time of 27 dayes and 8 houres into 28 egall partes, wherof euery one comprehēdeth 2 houres and 25 minutes and almooste 43 secondes, and to euerye one of these sayd 28 partes, do aunswere 12 degrees, 51 minutes and almoost 26 secondes, the whiche are called the 28 mansions of the mone, of the which the distinctions, and beginninges iustified in oure time, and vnto the ninthsphere, with their natures and properties, ar brought (for more am∣ple ease) into the fourme of a table thus, as foloweth.
¶ Heare foloweth the nature and qualitie of the 28 mansions of the mone, with the elections depending of the same. The 28 mansions of the mone. e or∣ of ye  man¦s. The na∣ture and qualitie of ye said mansi The distin∣ction & be∣ginning of euery man¦sion. ¶ The properties & accidental effectes which the mone causeth in eue∣ry mansion.     S g m   temperate ♈ 19 26 It is good to iourney to ta medicine, to put on newe apparel, and noughte to hier seruauntes. temperate ♉ 2 17 It is good to sayle v∣pon the water, and to bye tame beastes. moyst ♉ 15 9 It is good to bye and sell, to bye tame beastes, and not good to make companies. cold, moist ♉ 28 0 It is good to sow, to put on new appa∣rell, and noughte to attempte mariages.
5 drye ♊ 10 52 It is good to  medecine, to atte mariages, good t ¦tre children in sco & to cease frō tra 6 temperate ♊ 23 43 It is good to m warre, nough sowe, or to begin  good thynge. 7 moyst ♋ 6 15 It is good to  to laboure, to pu  newe apparell, noughte to take  neye. 8 temperate ♋ 19 26 It is good to  medecine, to sha weare on new a¦rell, and to iour by water onely. 9 drye▪ 2 17 It is vnme  sowe, tō take a ¦ney, nd to putt  newe apparell:  to borow wheat 10 moyst ♌ 15 9 It is good to tempte mariage  not good to iour and to chaunge ¦parell.
temperate ♌ 28 0 It is good to sowe, to plant, and not good to release prisoners.   moist ♍ 10 52 It is good to buylde and edifie, to plante, and sow, and good to make mariages.   temperate ♍ 23 43 It is good to sow to laboure, to take ior¦ney, and to make ma∣riages.   temperate ♎ 63 5 It is good to mar¦rye wiues, to take me decine, to sowe, and to plante.   moyst ♎ 19 26 It is good to delue welles, and springes, and noughte to take iourneye.   moyst ♏ 2 17 It is not good to take iourneye, nether to take medicine, ne to bye or sell, nor to weare new apparell.
17 moist ♏ 15 9 It is good to beastes, and to  them to pasture. 8 drye ♏ 28 0 It is good to  landes, to buylde  to receiue digni 19 moist ♐ 10 52 It is good to  causes, to assie  ties, to take iou and not good to 20 moist ♐ 23 43 It is good to  tell, and verye  captiues. 21 temperate ♑ 6 35 It is good to  edifices, to buy  and to sowe. 22 moyste ♑ 19 26 It is good to  medecine, to ta ¦ney, to put on n ¦parell, and nau attempte maria
temperate ♒ 2 17 It is good to take medecine, to putte on new apparell, to take iourney, and nought to make wagers.   temperate ♒ 15 9 It is good to take medecine, and to con∣ducte men of warre vnto battayle.   drye ♒ 2 0 It is good to make noyse, debate, & warre and to iourneye to∣warde the regyon of South.   drye ♓ 10 52 It is not good to begynne anye thinge whatsoeuer it be.   moyste ♓ 23 43 It is good to sowe, to vse marchaundise, to make mariages, and noughte to laye wagers.   temperate ♈ 6 35 It is good to vse marchaundise, to sow to make mariages, and noughte to make wagers.
¶ A declaration of the table whiche is before the Ephemerides, touching the force, dignitie, exaltation, and other termes or boun∣des of the Planetes in euery of the 12 si∣gnes. 24 rule. FOr so muche that the influences as well of the lightes as of the planets, are augmented, when they be in those signes, in the whiche they haue their force or dignitie as when they be in their propre house, exaltation, triplie∣tie, face, or terme prefixed. There is put in the Ephemerides, after the tables of the 12 houses, a table of the 12 signes, of the dignitie, force, and strengthe of the sayde planetes in euery signe and degree of the Zodiake, of the whiche table, the interpretation is manifest and playne y∣nough by their titles, inscriptions, and subscriptions of the same. For first of all ioyning vnto the degrees of euery signe, you haue towarde the righte hande, the depe degres called in latin putei. noted by the letter P. then the degrees fortunates by this sillable For. and the degrees of weakenes and defection of the humaine body, caled Asemene by this leter A. Then
foloweth the triplicities, faces, & tymes prefixed of the planetes▪ marked by the propre characters of them. Consequent∣ly are noted the degrees masculines, by this lettre M. and the feminines by this letter F. The darke and cloudye by this lettre T. The brighte and cleare by this lettre L. and the voyde or emptye by this lettre V. and laste of all at the ende and righte side of euery signe, are noted the degrees of the dignities, of the lyghtes and planetes by ordre, beginning at Sa¦turne vnto the mone, and vnto the inter¦sections or deuisions of ☊ and ☋, that is to saye, of the heade and of the tayle of the dragon of the same, as well by their proper characters, as by the nombre of the said degrees. And vnderneth euerye signe, is noted the house and the degree of the exaltation & detriment of the sayde lightes and planetes, which are thinges necessary & worthy to be noted of al such as do practise the iugemente of the sters. ¶ Generall and perticuler rules, for to iudge of the mutation and chaunge of the ayre. The 25 rule. TO vnderstand and to knowe more easelye how to iudge of the chaun∣gement of the time or wether, and
the mutation of the ayre, it is first requi∣site to knowe the qualitie and dispositi∣on of the foure artes and seasons of the yeare, whiche are suche as foloweth. The springe time is hoat and moist, san∣guine, and beginneth when the sunne en¦treth into the signe of Aries. The somer is hoate and drye, cholerike, and begin∣neth when the Sunne entreth into the signe of Cancer. Harueste is colde and dry, melancholike, and beginneth when the Sunne entreth into the signe of Li∣bra. The winter is colde and moyst, fleu¦maike, and beginneth when the Sunne entreth into the signe of Capricornus. Afterwardes muste be knowen and vn∣derstande the natures and affections of the 12 signes of the Zodiake, here before expressed in the ninetenth rule. For y the planettes (yea those that be of a hote nature) doo beholde the one the other, or be conioyned together in hoate and drye signes, they shall cause heate and excesse of drougth in Sommer, or elles tempe∣raunce of ayre in Winter. And contra∣ry wise, if the sayde aspectes and coniun¦ctions of the planetes abouesayd, do hap¦pen in colde and drye sygnes, they wyll cause in wynter great snowes and yet, and in sommer moderation of the eate,
and in hoate and moiste signes, greate aboundaunce of windes. And if this hap¦pen in waterye signes, they will cause then great haboundaunce of rayne, whi∣che will make the ayre very intemperate in winter, and of a moderate heate in sō∣mer. And so is to be vnderstande, and to iudge conformablye of all lyke thinges, accordinge vnto the nature of the pla∣nets and signes, and the▪ qualitie of their aspectes. Also hauinge regarde with the same, vnto the nature of the▪ fixed sterres likewise of them whiche are most nest vnto the Zodiake. And that not onely in all elections, but also in the mutation of the ayre lykewise, as shalbe perticulerlye recited hereafter. ¶ Perticuler rules of the aspectes of the planetes amonge them selues. ☌ ♄ ♃FIrste the coniunction of Saturne with Jupiter diligentlye obserued in hoate and drye signes, cause the greate drougth many dayes before, and many dayes after the sayd coniunction: and in moist signes, continuall inunda∣tion of waters, and perticuler flouds, be∣cause they abide longe together, for the slowenes of their mouementes.
Likewise the opposition, quadrature,♄ ☍□✶, ♃ or sextile aspecte of the sayde Saturne, with Jupiter, is the cause of great muta¦tions in the ayre, and engēdreth raynes, hayles, and windes many dayes before, and many dayes after the sayd oppositi∣on or aspect. Also there foloweth greate mutations of wether, at altimes, and as often as ther is sextile aspect of Saturne with the Sunne, or of Jupiter with Mer¦curye, or trine aspecte of Mars with Ue¦nus, or contrarywise, the which aspects are commonly called of the astrologians the openinge of the gates of heauens, for so much that they do moue and trouble the ayre, and do cause notable chaunge of weather. ♄, ☌, □ ☍ wt ♂The coniunction, opposition, or qua∣drature of Saturne with Mars, in moist signes, engendreth raine, hayle, and thō¦dre▪ with tempestes  dayes before, and as many dayes after the sayde coniunc∣tion. ♄, ☌, □ ☍ wt ☉The coniunction▪ quadrature, or oppo∣sition of Saturne with the Sunne, cheif¦ly in cold signes, engendreth haile, raine darke wether, thunder, and colde dayes, and notable mutasion of the ayre. ♄, ☌, □ ☍ wt ♀The coniunction, quadrature, or oppo∣sition of Saturne with Uenus in winter
engendreth colde and rayne, principally in watery signes. And in sommer mit∣gation of heate. ♄, ☌, □ ☍ wt ☿The coniunction, quadrature, or oppo∣sition of Saturne with Mercury in moist signes, bringeth rayne, in hote and drye signes, causeth droughte, and in Somer thonder, lightninges, and tempeste. ♃ ☌, □ ☍ wt ♂The coniunction, quadrature, or oppo∣sition of Jupiter with Mars, in moyste signes, causeth raynes, lightninges, and thunders, in Winter shewe and cloudy weather, and in hoate signes and dry▪ causeth excesse heate. ♃ ☌, □ ☍ wt ☉The coniunction, quadrature, or oppo∣sition of the said Jupiter with the sunne▪ causeth greate and mooste vehemente windes, dryuinge away all raynes. ♃ ☌, □ ☍ wt ♀The coniunction, quadrature, and op∣position of Jupiter with Uenus, in moist signes, caiseth colde and mislinges, and that more ceratelye, in case there hap¦pen any coniunction▪ quadrature, or op¦position of the mone, but when they be cooned with other signes, causeth fair wether and windes. ♃ ☌, □ ☍ wt ☿The coniunction, quadrature, or op¦position of Jupiter with Mercurye, cau¦seth great windes, and alteration of we¦ther.
♂ ☌, □ ☍ wt ☉The coniunction, quadrature or oppo¦sition of Mars with the Sunne in fyrye signes, causeth drougth, in waterye sig¦nes thonder and rayne. ♂ ☌, □ ☍ wt ♀The coniunction, quadrature or oppo¦sition of Mars with Uenus in moyste signes, causeth rayne and tempest. ☌, □ ☍ wt ☿The coniunction quadrature or oppo¦sition of Mars with Mercurye in hoate and drye signes, causeth great heate and drougth, in waterye signes rayne, some times thonders and lightninges, with so dayne fierce windes. ☉, ☌, ♀ ☍□ ☽The coniunction of the sunne with Uenus in moist signes by meanes of the opposition or quadrature of the moone▪ causeth raynes. ☉ ☌ ☿The coniunction of the Sunne with Mercury, in moist signes, causeth raine, and in wyndye sygnes, as are Gemini, Libra, & Aquarius▪ do engender winds▪ ♀ ☌, □ ☍ wt ☿The coniunction, quadrature, or oppo¦sition of Uenus with Mercury in moiste signes, causeth rayne, in case they be not et by anye other euell planete. And in ommer they prouoke tempeste, the more if they be in watry signes. And note that ll the Planettes aboue sayde, haue great force, when the mone is in coniun¦ction, opposition, or quadrature wyth
them, and accordinge to the varietie of the nature of the signes, and the qualitie of the houses of the said mone. Note also what is sayde of the coniun¦ction, quadrature, and opposition, the same is ment likewise of the sextile, and trine aspect, but they are of lesse signifi∣cation. ¶ Perticuler rules by the aspectes of the mone with the planetes. ☽, ☌, □ ☍ wt ♄THe coniunction, quadrature, or op¦positiō of the mone with Saturne in moist signes, bringeth a cloudy daye, and colde ayre, according vnto the nature of the signe: And if the Mone do go frome Saturne vnto the Sunne, by coniunction or otherwise, harde wether ensueth. ☽, ☌, □ ☍ wt ♃The coniunction, quadrature, or op∣sition of the moone with Jupiter, in the signes of Aries and Scorpio, sheweth fayre wether, with white dispersed clou∣des. And if Mars be disposed to the same by anye aspecte, it causeth thunders and lightninges, or elles great windes. After the which coniunction, if the mone come vnto Mercurye, there foloweth greate windes, the whiche are mittigate, and layed by the opposition or quadrature of
the sayde mone with Jupiter, but if the planetes whiche be of slowe mouement be not disposed thervnto, the abouesayde coniunction shall bringe fayre weather. ☽, ☌, □ ☍ wt ♂The coniunction, quadrature, or op∣position of the mone with Mars, in wa∣tery signes, causeth rayne, & yf the mone be seperate from Mars, and commeth vnto Venus, there foloweth notable chaunge of wether, but in hote signes causeth diuers coulered cloudes all ouer the elemente, in sommer often thunder, bringinge with them sometimes small mislinges, principally if the planetes be in aspects disposed thervnto. ☽, ☌, □ ☍ wt ☉The coniunction, quadrature, or oppo¦sition of the moone with the Sunne in moist signes, bringeth raynye weather, the more if the mone go from the Sunne vnto Saturne. ☽, ☌, □ ☍ wt ♀The coniunction, quadrature, or oppo¦sition of the mone with Venus, cheiflye in moist signes, rain foloweth: the mone going from Venus vnto Mars by oppo¦sition, quadrature, or sextile aspecte, be to keneth greate varietie of weather. ☽, ☌, □ ☍ wt ☿The coniunction, quadrature, or oppo¦sition of the mone with mercury in moist signes, sheweth great rayne and windes to ensue, the more if she go from Jupiter
and come vnto the sayde Mercury, or if Saturne and Mars be in opposition or quadrate aspecte duringe the sayde con∣iunction. Wherefore you must note in all con∣iunctions of the mone with the planets, The coniunctions and quadratures of them, and likewise of the fixed sterres af¦ter their nature abouesayde. And when the mone is without any aspect in moiste signes and mansions, the same denoteth rayne, wherefore he that will iudge more perfitely, and more surely, it is conuenient in all and euerye of the thinges abouesayde, that he consi∣dre diligentlye the nature of the signes, and of the mansions of the moone, and the disposition of the foure times and seasons of the yeare at their fyrste ente∣rynge. ¶ Other rules, and generall doctrines, for to knowe better and more surelye to iudge of the varietie of the time and weather, of the alteration of the ayre by the coniunctions, quadratures, & opposi∣tions of the sunne and of the mone.
FOr as muche as the mutation of the ayre is one of the most necessa∣ryest thinges, as well for the fruits of the earth, as for the health of the hu∣mayne body, and besides that, one of the partes of the iudgement of Astrologie, more apparent and likest true, I haue set here all at ones ouer and besides the thin¦ges abouesayd, some lessons and notable rules, for to knowe the better and more sbrely howe to iudge of the said alterati∣on of the ayre. First you must diligently note the si∣nifications and general rules which we haue declared in the rule goinge before, for somuche that the generall significati¦ons do chaunge and surmount the per∣ticuler vertues, by reason that the grea∣test vertue draweth vnto him the lesser, and the lesser doth obey vnto the greater, and with this, the perticuler vertues are not of so great vertue and strength, as be the generall. It is then necessarye for all men that wyll iudge of particuler thinges, to con∣sider, and beholde first the thinges whi∣che be vniuersall and generall. As if you wyll prognosticate of the qualitie, and disposition of ani day proposed, you must diligently consider thestate or disposition
of any day proposed, you must diligently▪ consider the state or disposition of the time, in the whiche the sayd daye propo∣sed shall chaunce or happen. Of the whi∣che estate and disposition, you shal iudge by the lorde of the coniunction, quadra∣ture▪ or oppositiō preceding of the Sunne and she mone, and of the signe where she is made. The whiche Lorde of the sayde coniunction, quadrature, or opposition, you shal knowe by the figure of the auen, that is to saye of the twelue houses, and places of the planetes iustlye verefied at the▪ hour of the same coniunction, opposi¦tion, or quadrature. Then when you shal haue the figure of heauen well iustified for the time aboue sayde of the coniuncti¦on, quadrature, or oppositiō of the sunne and of the mone, you shall firste consider in whiche of the 12 houses, and in what signe shall fal the sayd coniunction, qua∣drature, or opposition, and the signe and degree ascendent, with the signes and de¦grees of the other angles. For the▪ planet whiche shal haue in the said places more prerogatiue, force, and domination, shal∣be principall lorde of the saide time and fi¦gure, and that whiche shall haue leaste, shalbe participant in the said lordeship, & dominatiō. And it is to be noted, that the
planet which hath most dominatiō vpon the place of the said coniunction, oppositi∣on, or quadrature, and vpon the signe & degree ascendant, doth surmount all the others, and ought to be in this place pre∣ferred. Loke then of what nature the pla¦nete is which shall rule in the said figure For the vniuersal disposition of the time shall holde the qualitie of the said planet. As if at the time of the said coniunction, quadrature, or opposition, Saturne be founde lorde, the time shall be colde and drye. And if it be Uenus, it shal be moist, and so of others, after their nature, and qualitie, excepte the sunne and the mone: for the best astrologians, do neuer chuse the sunne nor the mone in this place for Lordes nor rulers, for because that they do esteme the 5 planetes to be the onelye moderatours of the time and weather, that is to saye Saturne, Jupiter, Mars, Uenus, and Mereurye. And not wtoute a cause, in the coniunctiō they do chuse the Lord of the place of the said coniunction. And in the oppositiō, the lord of the place of the same of the lightes which shalbe a∣boue thearth, or in thorient precisely, for there is in this place most greatest vertu. Likewise in iudging almost as much by the place of the quadrature of the sayde lightes, for thei take the place of the same
light whiche is aboue the horizont, if the other be vnderneth. And if they be bothe aboue, or both vnderneth the saide hori∣zont (as it chaunceth often times) they take then for the place of the sayde qua∣drature, the place of the same light whi∣che is founde to haue most force and dig∣nitie. As if one of the planeties were in one of the angles, or houses succedinge. and the other in the house fallynge, the same whiche is in the sayde angle, or hoose succedinge, shalbe preferred before the same whiche is in the fallinge house. The whiche force, dignities, and other witnesses of the planetes, you shall extra out of the table, which is expresselye put in the Ephemerides, for the same cause, the whiche hath ben sufficiently declared in the 24 rule. Then when you shall haue the Lorde and dominatoure at the time of the coniunction, quadrature, or opposition of the lightes, you shall fyrste note his nature and qualitie. For moost often times the disposition of the tyme shall resemble the same. Secondlye you shall considre the signe in the whiche is the sayde lorde and dominatoure, for the time shall be disposed vnto the qualitie of the sayde sigue. Furthermore, you shall haue regarde vnto the signe whiche is
then ascendant, and vnto his nature, and of what mansion of the mone he is, with out forgettinge the lord of the sayd signe ascendant. Afterward you shal take hede and se whiche planets are in the angles: for those whiche do occupie the middeste of heauen, or the ascendant, shall be bet∣ter and more stronger then they whiche shall be in the angle of the 7 or 4 house. Consequentlye you shall marke, with whiche of the planetes the mone cometh to be conioyned, or in aspecte after the yd coniunction, quadrature, or oppo∣sition. Likewise you shall note with which of he planettes, or notable fyxed sterres, the lord of the sayd figure i con∣ioyned, or beheld with any aspect. These thynges thus cōsidered, you may bringe to effect, and perfectly iudge as foloweth If the sayd lord of the coniunction, qua∣drature, or opposition, be of a moyst na∣ture, and the places aboue sayd and pla∣nettes being in them likewise moyst: and with this the sayd lord being conioyned, or in any as with any moyst sterres or planettes. And if the moone after the sayd coniunction, quadrature, or opposi∣tion, come to be conioyned, or in aspect with some moist planet ioyned therunto that the qualitye of the time be disposed
vnto moystnes: if all the thinges about∣sayd or the most part of them do tend vn∣to humiditie, you may gather and iudge that the time shall be mayste, and if they tende vnto drouthe, that it shall be drye, and if vnto heate that it shalbe hote: and if vnto coldnes, that it shal be colde: and if there be as many witnesses for the one qualitie, as for the other, the time shalbe indifferent, hauing then knowen the ge∣neral disposition of the time (as now pre∣sently hath ene sayd) you shal discretlye entremingle the applications of the moone vnto the planettes and of the one planet vnto the other, for to indge more certeynly of the perticuler days. And to make an end of this matter, you shall yet note these .ii. lessons, wherof the firste is. that the sygnyfycation of the tyme thus found as hath bene sayde aboue, his ef∣fect principally shall appeare, and come forth, when the moone after the coniunc¦tion, quadrature, or opposition, aboue∣sayde shalbe conioyned or comme vnto some stronge planet, with the sygnifica∣tour of the sayd time. ¶ The seconde is that when the moone shall come vnto the signe ascendant, du∣ring the sayd coniunction, quadrature, or opposition, the time shalbe disposed vn
to the nature and qualitie of the sayde signe. And this suffiseth for the dispositi∣on of the time and chaunge of the wea∣ther. ¶ Of the aspectes and constellations which must be obserued and chosen for to beginne and ende happelye all workes and humayne businesse. The .xxvii. rule. THe dysposition of the heauenly bo∣dyes do grealye inclyne the infe∣riour thinges to bee happely done or begonne, and dothe aduaunce theyn: or elles make late theyr comminge to perfection, and their full and hole effecte to comme forthe, for this cause are here sette forthe by order the elections whiche must be obserued or auoyded in these places beginninge at Saturne and then at the other planettes in order.
Saturne beinge with the moone in Coniunction ¶ Causeth an euell vnluckye daye for all matters, and prin¦cipally it is not good to haue to doo with aged people, ne wt rural folkes nor laborers. sextile aspect ¶ It is good to haue to doo with olde folkes and of good counsel, to edefy castelles and houses, and to erecte thinges that are in ruyne, to plowe, to plant, and nought to requyre the loue of women. quadrature▪ ¶ You must beware and kepe your selfe from olde folkes, and from labouring. or plan∣ting, it is nought also to iour¦ney and leaue to accomplishe thy desire especiallye if it bee euel. trine aspecte It is good to haue to do with aged people, to labour y• earth & vines, to sowe and to plante trees, to fortfye castelles, and to make the foundacion of ci∣tyes and townes opposition. It is neither good to sowe nor to plant, nor to beginune any matter what so euer it be, & it is requisite to auoyde y• cōuer satiō & meting wt olde folkes.
Iupiter be¦inge with the moone in coniunction. ¶ It is good to be conuersant with noble men, with religy∣ous persons and lawyars, & to giue supplications, and re∣questes, and to demaunde right and iustice. Sextile. Aspect. It is good to speake vnto iud∣ges, and ecclesiastical and re∣ligious persons, and to begin all good workes. quadrature▪ It is a mete time to studye in philosophy, to mete with iud∣ges and religious persons, & to require right and iustice. Trine aspect It is good to beginn all good matters and to haue to doo with lawyars, iudges, religi∣ous persons, and their prela∣tes, and to require of theyn: the thinge which they would obtayne. Opposition, It is a mete time to studye in philosophye and to haue con∣uersation with ecclesiasticall persons, and with noble men and to go before Judges.
Mars be¦inge with the moone in Coniunction It is good to auoyde warri∣ours, and all noises, debates, and strife. sextile aspect It is good to leade and en∣courage men of warre vnto the battell, to haue to do with princes and captaines, to buy horses for the warres, and thinges of redde coloure, and to finish all firy workes. quadrature▪ It is an vnmete time to mete with gentlemen, and knightes and to worke in firie workes. trine aspecte It is good to be with war∣riours, and to deuise of things perteininge to the warres, to buy beastes, and to make fyer for the alchmye. opposition. It is an vnmete tyme to treate of loue, and frendships, to take seruauntes, and to be∣ginne any thinge whatsoeuer that it be.
Sol be¦inge with the moone in coniunction. It is good to finishe hidden matters, and secrete counsels, that one would not haue to be knowen, and naught to do a∣ny other thinge. Sextile. Aspect. It is good to haue to do with kinges, princes, wise mē and of counsell, and good to re¦quire right, offices, and digni∣ties. quadrature▪ It is not good to mete with princes, and noble men. Tsine aspect It is good to mete with kinges, princes, counsellers, people of estate, and to require of them right and iustice, and that thinge which a man wold obtaine of theim, and to seke loue and frendship of princes. Opposition▪ It is a very vnhappye daye for all matters, therefore at tempte nothinge, ne any man¦ner of sute, neither plant, build nor iourneye.
Venus be iuge with the moone in oniunction It is good to take a wife, to treate of loue, to haue cohabi∣tation with wemen, and good to take seruauntes. sextile aspect It is good to attempte ma∣riage, to seke the loue of we∣men, to put on newe apparel, and to speak vnto noble men. quadrature It is good also to take a wife, good to woo and to ob∣tayne sutes of womenne, to combe the heade, and to putte on newe apparell. trine aspect. It is lykewise good to take a wife, to combe the heade, to seke the loue of women, to be conuersaunte with theym, and to putte on newe appa∣rell.
Mercurye beynge with the moone in eomunction. It is good and a lucky day to bye and sell, to iourneye, to geue accomptes, good to en∣tre children in liberall artes, and to demaunde benefices. sextile aspect It is good for the versifier, to pleade causes, to geue ac∣comptes, to iourneye, to bye and sell, to vse marchaundise▪ and good to entre chyldren to learninge. quadrature. It is good to calculate, and to render vp accomptes, to send embassage, good to haue to do with penne menne and wryters, to bye and sell, and to iourneye. Opposition. It is good to meete with writers, to bye and sell, to vse marchaundise, to send embas¦sage and messengers, & good to set children to studye and learninge.
Likewise when the moone after her con¦iunction with anye fortunate planette shal be notably remoued farre from the sayd planet, the daye shal be vnfortunate and when she shall be notablye remoued farre from her coniunction with any vn¦fortunace planet, it is the good to worke in all matters, especiallye the moone be∣ing in the signe of Cancer, Taurus, Pi∣sces or Sagittarius, or in the house of the Sunnne, hauynge Trine or Sextil e as∣pect with the sayd Sunne. ¶ Besides this the moone hath certeyne and propre effectes in euery one of the. xii signes, in case she bee not then letted by any stronge signification or constellati∣on. The whyche are suche as foloweth. Aries, It is good to begin that which a man would haue sone ended, and nought to beginne anye thinge that a man would haue to be firme and stable, and to haue to do with kinges, and riche men, good to bathe, & nought to clippe heare, & to sca¦rifye the skinne with cuppinge, of suche as haue disease in their necke and eares. Tau. It is good to beginne suche thinges, as you woulde haue to be firme and sta¦ble, good to sowe, and to plant trees, to labour the vines, to buylde, to be gladde and merye, to comen with women, and
to bye bulles and beues. Gemi It is good to begin the thinges whiche shoulde be of litle duraunce, good to put children to learninge, and not mete to let bloude. Cācer It is good to iourney, to make vyages, and to take electuaries. Leo. It is good to beginne such thinges as shall be of longe duraunce, and stable, and nought to take medecine by vomite and to shape and putte on newe appa∣rell. Virgo It is good to putte children to be in∣structed in learninge, to seke the loue of younge maydens, and not good to mar∣rye. Libra It is good to begin thinges of small duraunce, te ionrney, to bye and sell, to haue to do with religious persons, & not good to haue copulation with women. Scorp It is an vnlucky day for to begin any matter of goodnes. Sagit. It is good to learne to shote in the bow, to vse marchaundise, to be conuersaunte with iudges, and men of lawe, and to haue copulation with women. Capri. It is good to be in company with aged people, to plowe the fieldes, and to decke gardens and vines. Aqua. It is good to edefie towres and
cities, and to buyld houses, to plant trees and decke vines. Pisces. It is good to iourneye and to go a fys∣shinge. And here you must note, that whan the moone is in a moueable signe, it is then good to beginne the thinges, where of ye desire sone to haue an ende, and in a fixed signe, that whiche you desire to be of lōge duraunce. And in common signes, the thinges whiche ye will haue of litle du∣raunce. And whan the mone is cōioyned with the fortunate sterres, the aspecte is fortu¦nate, and contrarywise vnfortunate. Likewise whan the mone is in the sec¦tion or diuision of the head of the dragon thus figured ☊, she is fortunate, and in the section of the taile of the dragon, thus marked ☋ vnfortunate. ¶ Of elections which are to be obserued in the plylebotomie or lettinge of bloud. The. 28. rule. VVHo that will consequently know whan it is good to lette bloude, he must take good hede vnto the aspe¦ctes whiche folowe. Fyrste, if the mone be in coniunctiō with Jupiter in a mete signe, or in trine aspecte, or in opposition
with him, or in in aspect with Venus: it is good then to be let bloude. The signes mete are Aries, and Sagittarius, for the flemmatikes, and the firste parte of Libra, for the melancolickes, and for the cholerickes Cancer Pisces, and the signes disagreīng vnto the Phebotomy are Leo. the seconde part of Libra, & the first part of Scorpius. Likewise is to be noted that al ye hole course of the moone is deuided into foure quarters whyche must also be be obserued. The 1 is from the new mone vn¦tyll. the fyrst qurter. good for yonge peo∣ple, 2 the first uarter the ull mone yonge and myde aged 3 he full mone the. i. quarter. midle aged and olde. 4 the secō quarer the new mone. olde folkes oelye. ¶ Likewise you must cut no vayne, nor touche any membre withany yron oole what so euer it be, the moone beinge in the signe which beholdeth, and hath do∣mination vpon the sayd membre. What membres are subiect vnto euerye signe hath ben declared in the .xix. rule. And on the other part, it is not onelye euel to let bloude, when the moone is in the section of the head or of the tayle of the dragon (thus marked. ☊. ☋.) but al∣so by
with Mars, Saturne, or Jupiter. And this shal satisfy you for me decinal rlecti¦ons. ¶ Of elections for to sowe, and to plant trees and vines. The .xxx. rule. FInally as towchinge the moste apte and mete time, for o sowe & plante trees, & to dece vyn, it behoueth to note that there are▪ v. monthes▪ in the yeare deputed and mooste ete for the same, that is to sa, Marche, Apryll, Maye, Septembre and Octobre▪ But in al times, you must take hede of the euill aspectes of Saturne and of Mars. And to kepe the aspects & places of the moone which do here folowe If the mone de behold Saturn wt trine or sex∣tile aspect, bein in the signe of Taurus, It i good to plant trees & vines▪ Cancer. to ow generally. Virgo. to sowe fielde. Libra. to sow and to garden. Capricor. to sowe generally. Aquarius to plant trees & vines. And especially if the moone do beholde Venus or Jupiter (which are the. . best fortunates) with Trine, Sextile, or qua∣drate, Aspect. And it is good to plante trees at the last quarter of the moone. Conclusion of the Author. And this suffiseth for the declaration vse
and practise, of the matters, conteyned aswel in the Almanackes, or Ephemeri¦des, as in y• Latin rules of the same. In the whiche I haue not folowed the let∣ter worde by worde, but onelye the mea∣ninge and doctrine in chaunginge, ad∣dinge, and substrainge that whyche I thought worthy to be chaunged, added, and substrayed, bycause of the more perfect and easter erudition, desyringe my lord god with all my power to satisfye you herein, and all theim whiche be lo∣uers of this science. Finis. ¶ Virescit vulnere virtus▪ ✴ Here folovveth a singular treatise of Astrologie touching the con∣iunctions of the planettes in euery of the twelue signes, and of theyr Prognostications in the reuolutions of yeares.
IF you desire to knowe euerye yeare▪ what thinges shalbe deere, and what good cheape, or of a meane price, sie what signe is ascendant aboue youre ho¦rizont, at the hour that the sunne entreth into the firste minute of Aries. For the planet whiche shall be then in the sayde signe. shall be Lorde of the saide yeare. Let then be made the figure of heuen in the which lette be ordeined the 12 hou¦ses, accordinge vnto the said ascendent, and let be ordeined the 7 planetes in the sayde houses, as by their mouement pre¦cisely iustified they shalbe founde to be then in heauen. And this done, se and cō¦siderduly the natures of the 12 signes▪ & of the sterres beinge in them. And accor¦ding as by the industry of youre spirite you may esteame and inuente, so iudge of thinges to come the same yeare, as hereafter I shall shewe, for you maye iudge to the veritie. ¶ Of the significations of the planetes in euerye of the sayde signes and houses. FIrst then if Saturne be in the ascen¦dant in the first house or signe, or in the 10. Then all wightie and blacke thinges, as azur, yron, leade, and wollen cloth of black er shalbe dear the same
yeare. And if the sayd Saturne be in the fourth, ninth, and twelfth house, the said thinges shalbe somewhat deare, and not muche. But if he be founde in any of the hou∣ses fallynge, as is the third, six, nynthe, and twelfth, the said thinges shalbe nei∣ther deare nor yet good cheape, but of a meane price. So saye we and muste iudge of other planets and thinges vppon the whiche they haue their signification, of the whi¦che planetes the significations, for to make short, are such as folowe. Jupiter signifyeth oyle, cotton, hony, and siluer. Mars signifieth pepper, targettes, and all other armours. The sunne signifieth gold that is vnforged, and that hath not bene wrought. Venus signifieth al grea¦ses, oyntmentes, spices, white odoriferāt wood, perles and the ornamentes of wo¦men. Mercury signifieth all small grai∣nes, all maner of silke woorkes, as well tisshues as others, nuttes and thinges of like qualitie. And the mone signifieth swete encence, mylke, cheese, and other lyke thinges. Of the signification of the coniun∣tion of the planets in the signe of Aries.
VUhen you shall haue thē made the figure, and found Saturne & Ju∣piter conioyned together in the signe of Aries, or the one of them neare vnto the other, they signifie some newe secte to come. But if in the said signe of Aries are founde to be Jupiter, Uenus, Mercury, the sunne, and the mone, or for the least thre of them, there shalbe greate plentie of all thinges, people shalbe encli¦ned to goodnes, and there shall be great raynes, and hayles, writers and scriue∣ners shall muche profit Cattell shall be at a lowe and vyle price. And the fresshe Riuers and waters shall aboundantle encrease. And if Jupiter and the mone be founde in one like degre of the said signe of Aries, in the orientall or easte parte, it signifieth then that the kinge shal do iu¦stice and right iugement in his realmes and that his kingedome and lordeshippe shall prospere. But if Saturne, & Mars, or Mars and Jupiter, or Mars and Mer¦cury, or the saide Mars and Uenus be founde in the place abouesaide, and ori∣entall parte, there shal be warre, & great effusion of bloude amonge the Arabians in theyr countreis, and they shall be de∣stroyed, & their men of warre taken and seperated into diuers countreis.
Of the signification of the coniunction of the planets in the signe of Taurus. If Uenus and Mars be found conioy¦ned in one like degre of the signe of Tau¦rus, then wemen shall moue seditions against men, hopinge to be violated by them, and there shalbe a greate death of catel. But if Mars be in the signe of Tau¦rus, there shall be warre towarde the South parte, and suche vehemente win∣des, that the fruit shal fal from the trees and the most part shal perishe by drouth. And if Mars, Jupiter, Uenus, and the mone, or three of theim be founde in the place and part abouesaide, men shal ligh¦tely make lies, and there shall be greate noyses and tumult among them selues, and that yeare shall die the most beutiful creatures, for Jupiter and Uenus do si∣gnifie the fayrest, and Mars ioyned and abidinge with theim in the saide signe and degree, shall slea them. And besides this there shall be greate raines, and a∣boundaunce of waters as wel of the sea as of the floudes and riuers. And at the sonth part people shall rise and rebel, de∣siringe to slaye their Lorde, but they can not do it. And if Saturne, Jupiter, and Mars, be in the said degree of Taurus, then the emperours and kinges▪ shal los
their realme, or beinge astonied wyth ouermuch feare shal die. And the men of religion, as chanons and monkes, shall leaue their habites, or els shall dye. But if Saturne & Mars be onely in the same place▪ and signe as aboue, women shall haue diseases in their eates, in the throte and in the priuie partes, and the men in the generall partes, and in the bladder. ¶ Of the signification of the cōiunction of the planetes in Gemini. If the Sunne, Uenus, and the moone are conioyned in the signe of Gemini, the scriueners and writers shall gaine but litle that yere, & seruaunts shal rebel against their Lordes and maisters, but there shalbe great aboūdaunce of corne vpon the earth, and the high wayes il as∣sured, because of the aboūdaunce of the∣ues and robbers. And if Mars and Sa∣turne, or mars and Jupiter be conioy∣ned in the said signe or degre, there shal∣be greate warres in the lande of Arme∣nia in Asia, for their enemies shal runne vpon them, and the moabites shall moue warre, and shall slea their preistes, and they shall go into the mountaynes, tru∣sting in the iudgements of their deuines and prophetes. And from the easte parte shall come a merueilous greate winde.
¶ Of the signification of the cōiunction of the planetes in Cancer. If Jupiter, Mars, the sunne and the mone, be conioyned in the signe of Can∣cer, then terrour and feare shal compasse them, who do stir vp & prouoke the other by offences, and amonges the men, the one shal molest and greue the other. And there shalbe sene many signes in heauen as comets, and fiers flienge, in the ayre, with earthquakes, the waters shal waxe drye, the fruites shalbe corrupted & mar∣red, the sailers shal perishe vpon the sea, the cities, castels, and townes being edi∣fied harde or nere to the sea side, shall be troubled with great feare, and the north winde called boreas shall do muche do∣mage the same yeare. Of the coniunctiō of the planets in Leo. If Saturne, Jupiter, mars, & the mone be found conioyned in the signe of Leo, the people dwellinge east wardes, shall make warres within them selues, & mē shalbe vexed & greued with paines of the bellye, of the stomack, & of the priuie par¦tes. But if Jupiter, mars, and the sunne be in the said signe, the merchaunts shal feare to haue wronge of their Lorde, the wind shalbe great from the easte parte, & the Arabians shal not be without fear.
¶ Of the significatiō of the coniunction of the planets in Uirgo. If Jupiter, Mars, and Mercurye, be conioyned in the signe of Uirgo, all the fruytes of the earth shall perishe, almost all wholy by the greate aboundaunce of Locustes and greshoppers. But if Sa∣turne and the sunne be there founde con¦ioyned and eclipsed, and the heade of the dragon with Mars be there at the same time, or nere therto, then in the lande of the Nubians, and in the South parte, shall be engendred sedicion amonge the poore and riche people. And if Saturne and Jupiter be in the said place, ther shal folow great raine, and the wind shal pro¦cede from the South parte, and all thin∣ges, especially Corne and wine, shall be dere the same yeare. ¶ Of the signification of the coniunctiō of the planets in Libra. If Mars and Jupiter be conioyned in the signe of Libra, the heuen shalbe sene to be redde, whiche is a signe of diseases to come vpon men, & of effusion of bloud But if the Sunne, Jupiter, & the mone, be in the saide place, there shall folowe mortalitie of wemen, and great raynes. And if Mars & Saturne be in the same place, there shall folowe warres, and the
theues and robbers shall fall vpon men by the waye to robbe them. ¶ Of the signification of the coniunctiō of the planetes in Scorpius. If Saturne, Mars, and Uenus be con¦ioyned in the signe of Scorpius, they si∣gnifie that the kinge shall die of poison, and the Lords shall vse detractions, and shal haue enuy the one against the other. And if the moone be there, with anye of these thre, there shalbe such great raine, that it shall seme that the worlde woulde perish by water, as in the time of Deu∣calion. But if Jupiter and Saturne be in any degree of the said signe, then it is conuenient to vnderstand generallye in al sortes, that there shall come false pro∣phetes, bringing in new sectes. ¶ Of the signification of the cōiunction of the planets in Sagittarius. If Mars and Jupiter be conioyned in y• signe of Sagittary, there shalbe made warres alonge the sea side. But if Sa∣turne, Jupiter, mercurye, and the mone be there, the sea and floudes by the great inundation of waters shall so encrease, that the whole worlde shall almooste pe¦rishe by a deluge. The scribes, phisitions astrologians, and preistes shalbe multi∣plied and honoured of the people. And yf
Saturne & Mars, be in the said place, the theues shal robbe the rural people, & thē of villages, and the pirates shall robbe the saylers vpon the sea. But if Mars & Uenus be in the place abouesayd: y• har∣lottes and strompetes shall rauishe their children & doughters, and shall by force bring them into captiuity. Of the signification of the coniunction of ye planets in the signe of capriconus. IF the Sunne Mars & Mercury, be in the signe of capricornus: manye greate lordes shall die, & there shalbe greate in firmities & diseases. The mē shall burne the houses & the barnes with corne, and there shal reigne mereilous great win¦des, in such wise, that smal store of corne shalbe gathered. And if saturne & Mars be in the sayd place: there shall not then folowe so much euel, but the warres shal be great, and mankinde shal much feare god. Of the signification of the coniunction of the planets in the signe of Aquarius. If Saturne, Mars, & the moone be in the signe of Aquarius there shall be li∣tle rayne, & great drouth, but yet the wa∣ters of springes and fountaines: shall sufficientlye abounde: the goers by the wayes shall be assayled by theues, the
ayre shalbe sore troubled and cloudye, & yet shall giue no rayne. And then shalbe borne a man of whom the people shall much reioyce, and vnto whom manye nations shall be subiect: The monest a∣ries & monkes shal greatly abound, and shal be men fearing god. Of the signification of the coniūction of the planets in the signe of Pisces. If in the signe of Pisces be Jupiter, the religion shalbe greatly obserued amōgs men▪ who then that would giue iudge∣ment of thinges which should come in any yeare it is mete that he do examyne wittey the coninnctions, conplexions, and significations, of the planets, aswel by the thinges here aboue written as al∣so by the subtiltie of his vnderstanding in takinge hede vnto the nature of the signes, in the whiche the sayd planetes shal be. And this doing he may giue cer¦tayne iudgemente of thinges to come by the wil and grace of god. Finis. ¶ Virescit vulnere virtus, ¶ Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstons church by Thomas Marshe.
