11553 99854915 20373
❧The Rutter of the See, with the hauons, ro∣des soundynges, kennynges wyndes flodes and ebbes, daungers and coostes of dyuers regyons with the lawes of the yele Auleton, and the iudgementes of the see. ¶With a Rutter of the Northe added to the same. (✚) *
¶The prologue of Robart Copland the translatour of this sayde Rutter. EVery scyence artyfycyal or mortal is moest commenlye enuretd with reason, specula∣cyon, and practyse, by the whyche is knowen and tryed the parfyte doinges of the same, formallye to the behote at the doers, and to them, whiche of ne∣cessite muste set to worke suche as ben practysed and auctorysed ī euery suche scyence as thus. Euery man that entendeth to buyld be it habytacyon, fortresse or other edifice on lande or water, behouethe to haue suche worekemen that can cast the plat and know the substaūce and the groū∣de for the foundacion: and that can saf¦lye, and dyrectlye frame, and rayse the hole worke. For whoso hathe not the veray scyence of Arsmetryke, and geometry to ayme & measure ye platte and coniecture of the hyght, drede and
lenght, and to fortifye it with Pryncy¦palles, gistes, beames, tenaūtes, mor¦teses, coūtrebrases. and not knowing the nombre in eueri piece duely framed is in doute & peryll to lese all the frame and wtout tooles therto belonging, as rule squyre, cūpas, lyne, prychel, tryan¦gle, & such other, & for the safegard & re¦paraciō therof, to store it with brick, or stone, lime, sand, lme, lath bord, nayle tyle, leade, & other Howbeit yt by reasō a man that neuer was builder bi specu¦laciō may rease and edifi, but nothing like yt entired practise. In lyke maner I coniecte that in the feate and course of Nauigacyon or sealyng a man may presume & take vpon him by his specu¦lacyon to cōducte a vessell, as a blynde man ī a desolate wyldernes doth walk tyl he be lost. But ye sure wise & enured maister mariner, or lodeinā, not ygno¦rauntly trusting his own sēsual reasō dylygently for the safegarde of his do¦ynges and assuraunte of his practyse,
consydereth yf his bessell be sure, and decked at all poyntes, and wih greate solicitude sequeth enquyreth, & geteth suche necessary instrumentes as beho¦ueth to the industry of his practyse, as the carde, compasse, rutter dyal and o∣ther whiche by speculate practyse she∣weth the place, that is to say, the costes hauens rodes, soundinges, daungers floodes, ebbes, windes kninges cour¦ses and passages fro land to land, and to be the more sure in the conductynge of his vyage, he busyly purueyeth for all takelynges & store therto behoffull as cables, roopes, ankers, mastes, say¦les, ores, artyllery, vytayle, fresshe wa¦ter, fewell, and other necessaryes. *All this discretely pondred by a sad ingenyour and cyrcumspecte maryner of the Citye of London beynge in the towne of Bourdewes bought a pretye booke Imprynted in the Frenche lan∣guage called the Rutter of the see con∣teynyng many propre feates of his scy¦ence.
And consyderyng that it was ex∣pedient and necessary for all Englyshe men of his facultye to haue it in theyr owne language to the erudicyon, and saue gard of our marchaūtes as other hauntynge the see, not knowynge the content therof. The whiche booke he instāted me lo translate into Englysh. which ouer sene, me thought veray df¦fycyle to me, not knowynge the termes of mariners, and names of the coostes and hauens, for I came neuer on the see, nor by no coste therof. But folow∣yng my copye by the aduyse, and ouer∣syght of certayne cōnyng men of that scyence whiche bolded, and informed me in many doubtes, I did vntertake in doing my diligence: as a blind horse in a myl turnyng the querne ygnoraū¦tly, saue by conductynge of the mylner that setteth hym on worke. De∣syryng all experte maysters to correce this and make other for the comon vit¦lite and safegarde of these our natyfe
countrey men and goodes flotynge in dyuers regyons, In the whych doyng they shall not onely obtayne thankes, laudes and be prayed for in thys world and also in the other, but he hyghly re¦warded of almyghtye God whyche is chefly mayster and lodesman of and to euery streme and coost. To whom be gyuen laude and glorye in the worlde of worldes. Amen. ☞The translatour. Robart Copland. Gentyll maryners on a bonne vyage Hoyce vp the salye, and let god stere. In ye bonauēure makīg your passage It is ful see the wether fayre and clere The nepetydes shall you nothing dere A see bordmates S. george to borow Mary & Iohn, ye shal not nede to fere But with this boke, to go safe thorow
*Of the tides, that is to wyt, the stode and ebbes fro the rase of Sayne into Flaunders. AT the rase of Sayne the moone in the southewest and poynte of souhtful see, & in the southeast & a poynt of easte lowe water. At saynt Mathews ye moone north east, ful see. And south west low water At the fourne the moone northeast a poynt of east full see, and in the south∣west a poynt of west lowe water. At Portsall and at Bergroagh the moone in the east northeast ful see, & the south weste lowe water. At Lyganan the moone in the east northeaste full see, and southeast lowe water. With in the yle of Basepole the moone in the east northeastfull see, and wythoute in the chanell the moone in the easte, and the moone in the southe lowe water. At Melenem the mone in the southe
apoint of southwest low water, and in the west a poynt of Northwest full see *At the .vii. yles the moone in the east southeast full see, and south southwest low water. *Fro the yle of basepole to saynt Ma∣lowes al alonge the coost vnto Carte∣ras the moone in the south lowe water and the moone in the west full see. *At Cause, Granesey, Iarsei, fourne and Clerke the moone ī thy south lowe water to the grouende, and in the west full see. *At Roktowethe moone in the south¦east a poynt of the east full see, and in the cost of garnesey wythout the mone in the southe east lowe water. *At the race of Brehac the moone in the eastful see, & in ye south lowe water ☞At Ferrere the moone in the southe east full see. At the race of Blanchey bytwene the Hag & Aldreney the moone ī the south east, a poynt of the east ful see.
Bytwene Creke & alderney is a bāke called the banke of share, and ouer it is ix. fadomes wythout the casketes the moone in the east southeast full se, and in the southwest lowe water. At the Hag and aldreney the moone in the south a poynt of southwest lowe water to the ground. At the sherbrugh, at Barflewe and at the Hag the moone in the south southwest low water to the grounde. At Carteras the moone in the south south east ful see, and in the west south¦west lowe water. From the chefe of Cause to Diepe the moone in the south southeast ful se In Sayne at the folle deleure, also for the landuange and the mone auay lynge fro southeast full se. Without antifer or Lantrygat vnto the basse of Somme the moone in the east full sec. In some the moone in the south full see, and with nepetydes, and northwynde the moone in the southe
southeast full see. At Staples and boleyn vnto the stabler of Tenet yt moone in the south southeast full see. At the strayte of Calays the moone in the southwest full see. Fro the strayte of Calays to Ostende the moone in the south southeaste low water. Fro Ostende to Blankborowe the moone in the southeast and a point of south low wather, & ouer al the bau¦kes of Flaūdres the moone in ye south, full see. At the Cape Loupin the moone in the south full see. ❧Courses fro the rase of Sayne in to Flaūders, & how the tydes to∣warde Brytayne beareth. WYthin the Chanell of yra is the flode bereth in the easte and, the ebbe into the west. Bytwene Moyles, & Vsshant the floode beareth into the east northeaste & the ebbe īto weste southwest, wt oute ye yles ye shall fynde .xlv. fadomes, and
small grauell. Bytwene Vsshant and Sylley the floode bearethe in the easte northeast. In the gutter of Vsshant ye shall fynde good road at .xxv. fadoms & beware of a rocke that is in the myn¦des of the baye Bytwene fourne, and Bergroagh vnto the yle of Basepoole the flowe bearethe to northeaste, and a poynt of east & the ebbe agayne warde At the coste of the yle of Basepole the flowe beareth into the east south∣east. Within & wythout ye .vii. yles the flowe beareth into the east & poynt of southeast, Wythout Brehac the flowe beareth in the east & the ebbe against it From Brehac the flowe to Saynt Malo the flode beareth east southeast Bytwene casket & alderney ye flow cō¦meth out of southwest vnto halfe flod From Alderney to Barflewe the wa∣ter cometh out of the east. Fro Barflewe to the yles of Marcoll the water cometh out of the south son theast all longe the sayde coost.
Fro barflewe to Lantrygat and the thefe of Causethe water cometh out of the easte northeast, and in the route ye shall finde the soundyng .xvi. or .xviii. fadomes, with a good botome & sande For Lantrygat to the base of Sōme the water cometh fro northe northeast Fro the base of Sōme vnto Boloyne the water cometh fro northe northeast Fro Boleyne to the Hurdels the wa¦ter cometh fro the north. Fro the Hurdels to grauelynge the course without the Base the water co∣meth north northest, and with out gra¦uelynge to Dunkyrke ye water cometh fro the northeast. Fro the bay of the downes to ostende the water cometh fro the northeast, a poynt of the east. Fro Ostende to blankborow the water cometh fro the east northeast. Fro Blankborowe to the poynt of saynt Katherine the water cometh fro the easte and by east northeste.
☞Routes and courses fro the rase of Sayne in Flaunders. ROutes and courses fro the rase of Sayne to com to saint Ma∣thewes, e must go northe warde & bere the poynt of the nedle somwhat aftere borde. Fro saynt Mathewes to Fourne go¦ye on the north northeast and beyonde saynt Mathewes wythout ye poynt in fayre lande. But take good heade, the Fourne & the nedles of ye yle of myght lyeth northeast & southwest. The yle of Basepole and Garnesey lieth northeast and southeast. Roktow and Garnesey lyeth north and south. Garnesey & Aldreney lyeth northeast and southeast. Alderney, and the Cas∣kettes lyeth northeast, and southwest a point of the east & a point of the west The Caskettes, & Lantrygate lyeth east and west, and if ye wyl go to Har∣fewe in Sayne go east southeast. Lantrigat & the shef of Caus lyeth
north and south, and yf ye wyll go fro Lantrigat in Somme and staples the courses lyeth northeast, and southest. yf ye wyl go fro the strayte of Ca∣lays into flaūders go northeast wyth the floode and agaynst water goo east Northeast as farre as the baye of the Downes, & whē ye be at .xvi. fadomes ye be in the right course of the Chanell of Flanders, and whē ye haue .xii. fa¦domes of water ye shal be hard aborde the base, and forth with ye shall fall to thre or foure. ☞Entringes and Harbo∣rowes of the coste of Normandye. YF ye wyll lye at Sherburgh east auker at .vi. fadome, and ye shall fynde fayre botome, & ye shal go north west fro the point of the south and be∣ware of the sayde poynt, for there it is daungerous. ☞yf ye wyll lye at Hagge cast anker beneth the churche at .xii. fadomes.
Yf ye wyll lye at the fosse of Coluyll cast anker wtout at .vii. or .viii. fadōs. Yf ye wyll lye in the roode of the shefe of Caus go in & cast anker at .vi. fado¦mes, and ye shal haue the north fro the land as ye entre, and haue no landuāg of the north northeast. If ye wyl lye in the rode of Dyepe cast anker at, vii. fadōs before ye towne If ye will lye at the base of Sōme cast anker without the bankes, & take hede that the monastery of Cayo be in the east northest, and cast anker at syxe or at seuen fadomes of water. And yf ye wyll go in take hye water vnder you, and take youre markes be∣yonde the castell of Crotey, a lytel with out Lordell, and ye shall go at two fa∣domes and an halfe or thre. yf ye wyll lye beforest aples caste anker at .vii. fadoms or .vi. yf ye wyll lye at anker before Be∣loyn, before the heauen, and caste an∣ker
at .viii. or .vi. fadoms. yf ye wyll lye before the Hurdels wyth a north wynde, cast anker before Ordecellus at .x. or .xii. fadoms and ye shall haue landuang of the north com¦mynge fro hurdels, and ye shall haue a good botome. And yf ye cast anker in the depeste, ye shal fynde rocke and euyl botome. ❧Floodes fro Sylley and England into Flaundres. AT sylley a poynt in ye northest a poynt of east full see, and wyth out silley the moone in the east full see. ¶At Moushole the moone in the east northeast full see to lande. And with∣out the moone in the east southeastful see also. *At Falmouth the moone in the east and. by north east ful see to the lande; and in the east southeast without ful see also. *At Fowy, & at. Plummouth the mo∣one in east full see to lande, and wtout
in the east southeast ful see, also. At Dartmouth the moone in the east full see to land, and without, in the east southeast. At Portlande, without, the moone southeast, and a poynt of the East ful see, at the ankerage of Portlande, thee moone in the east south east full see, At Hounde fast, and at Poole the moone at the southeast ful see, and south west full see. At the Nedles of the yle of wyghte wythout the mone at the Southeast, and a poynt of south full se, at the cost of the sayd yle at an hygh sprynge the moone at the southweast full see. At Shorham the Mooe at south and a point of southeast ful see. At Bewchey the moone in the southe ful see. At the chambre of wynchelse ye moone in the south ful see. At the thwart of romney the moone in the south southwest full see. At the strayte of Calays the moone
in the southweast full see, Courses from ye Cape of Cornewale into flaunders, and how the tydes do∣bere. Fro the Cape of Cornwayle to Le∣zarde the water cometh out of the east, towarde southeaste. Fro Lezard to Dodman and vnto Bodesters called the Sterte the water commeth from the east northeaste. Fro the Sterte to Portland the wa∣ter cometh from the southeast, and as well is the tyme knowen that the flode shall bere in to sutheaste by reason of that ebbe at Portlande. At the yle of Wyght the water com¦meth from the east towarde northeast and yf ye beat the coost of the swingles at two fadomes, the water shall come from the east northeast. ¶Vnto Douer the water commeth from the east towarde northeast. From saynt Margaree to the water commeth from the north.
Into the Temse the water commeth from the east southeast. Routes from, Sylley, & Englande into Flaunders. SYlly and Longshyppes ly east nor∣theast and west southwest. Syllye and Lezarde, lye east, and west. Bytwene Sylly, and Lezarde is a Rocke called Reynoylde stone, called golffe in brytysshe. And who so departeth fro the cape of Cornwaile must sail east southeast for the double Lezard. For so lyeth the two landes. Moushole, & Lezarde lyeth south∣east, and northwest. Lezarde, and Dodman lye northeast and soutwest, a poynt of the east, and a poynt of west Dodman, & the starte lie east northeast, and west south west. The Starte and Portland lye east and West, a poynt of Northeast, and a poynt of southwest. Portlande, and the yle of Wyght
ye east and west. The yle of wight: and Bewchey lye east and west, a point of northeast and a poynt of southwest. Benchey and the poynt of Romney lye east northeast and west southwest. Saynt Margaretes point & Tenet lye north, and south. ¶Entrynges and Herborowes al a longe the coost of Englande. IF yt you will lye at the trauers of Moushole go nygh ye land, & cast anker at .vi. fadomes & ye shalbe in a good place at .vii. fadome, it is al rocke. yf ye wyll entre into falmouthe ye shal fynde a rocke in the myddle of the entrynge, Leue it on the larborde syde and go towarde easte by shore, & whā ye be past it go streight in. For the bay is great sound and large, and cast an∣ker where ye wyll at .xi. or .xii. fadoms amyd the baye, and if ye wyll go at the tornynge of the full see. For there is a∣banke
to passe whiche ye shall fynd a low water and at ful see at .ii. fadomes and a halfe or thre ankeryng, and if ye lyst ye may go into the town of peryn. ¶If ye wyll entre at Plummouth, go in streight, and come not to nere the yle for there is daunger, and if ye wyll lye drye go before the towne and holde towarde the Tour for the causey, and yf ye wyll passe towarde the west, goo nyghe to the mayne lande, and cast an∣ker at .xx. fadomes. ¶If ye wyll entre at Dartmouthe, go beneyth saynte Patrykes mynster, that you shall se at the entrynge of the hau, and holde you toward the west with a south wynd, & giue somewhat a burth fro the pay at of saynte Patryke for bycause that there is the flatte of a rocke, and take hede of the rock on leer borde syde. For this rocke is thwarte of saynt Patryke amyd that chanell, and at the ebbe of a sprynge tyde re∣steth uth .iii. quarters or a fadō, and
cast anker nigh the town at .vi. or.  fadomes. Yf ye wyl passe to portland cast anker at .viii. fadomes, and ye shall haue, lan¦duang of southwind through that yle. yf ye wyl entre wythin the poole go nygh the shore, & ayme the stple of the Poole throught a litle house that is at the entrynge of ye hauen, & go betwene the two bankes, & ye shall fynd at low water .ii. fadomes and a halfe or thre. If ye wyll entre wtin the nedles of the yle of wght, go harde aborde ye ne∣dles right in & beware of ye rocke in the myddes of ye chanel, & amyd ye chanel, ye shal finde viii. or .ix. fadoms & hard aborde, ye nedles is .iii. or .iiii. fadomes If ye wyll lye at saynt Heleyns, cast anker at .vii. or .viii. fadoms & beware the poynt that  hee lytle without. If ye wyl lye without saynt Helens take the floode, & go south southeast, so farforth . ¶If ye wyl lye at.  go to the
sorde and cast anker at .viii. fadomes and ye shall haue laduange of weste southwest, in the myddle of Bewchey: *If ye wyl enter into the chambre of weynchelse, take halfe flode vnder you and se that bewchey be northe of you without Fayrle and goo by the shore and ye shall goo alonge by it, and be∣ware of the poynte that lyeth a lytle without. ¶If ye wyl lye at anker by Romney lye before a small vyllage that ye shal se, and cast anker at .viii. or .x. fadoms For. at .vi. ye shall haue landuange of southwest and rockye botome, and at x. fadomes ye shal haue no landuange of southwest. And at the anker ynge of Romney is a banke wel halfe A quar∣ter of a lyege fro the Dunonnesse, and there is ofte depthe betwene the banke and the Dunionnesse harde abord the banke .xvi. fadomes. And the banke, & the poynt of Romney lye east northest, and weste southwest and there remay¦neth
at the ebbe of a hye floode but one fadome of water ouer that banke, and ye shal fynde good harborow fro Rom¦ney to the Dounes al alonge the same cost at .xvi. or .xx. fadom, and shal haue landuange of the west southwest. ¶If yt ye wyl lye before saynt Mar∣garetes, caste anker at .xvi. fadomes, & ye shall haue landuang of the southest *If ye wyll lye in the downes caste anker at .vi. or .vii. fadomes. Howe the portes and hauens of En∣gland, brytay and Normandye do lye & how many leiges fro one to another Fourney and Vsshant do ly east, and west; and betwene theym there is two leyges. Vsshant and Sylley do ly northeast and southeast, apoint of the north, and apoynte of the southe, and there is by∣twene them .xx v in leynges. *Fourne and Long shypes lie orth
east, and south southest. And there is bytwene them .xxvii. leyges. *Fourne and Darthmouth ly north northest, & south southwest, and there is betwene the .xxxviii. leyges. Fourne & dodman lye north & south & there is betwene them .xxxiii. leyges The yle of Basepole, and Garnesey lye northeast and southwest. Melenen & Bodestour or the starte lye northe and southe, and there is by¦twene them .xxviii. leyges. Garnesey, & Dodmā lye east & south east, and west northwest, and there is betweene them .xxxviii. leyges. *The Caskets and Portlande do ly north; and south, apoynt of northweste and a poynt of southeast, and betwene them is .xx. leyges. *Portlande: and Barflete lye northe∣west, and southeast, and betwene them is .xxviii. leyges. ¶Sainte Heleynes, and the Cule of Haglie northeast, and southwest. And
betwene them there is .xxiii. leyges. *Saynt Heleyne & barflete lye north & south, & betwene thē is .xxiiii. leiges. *Saynt Heleyne & shef of Caus lye northwest, and southeast, and betwene them .xxviii. leyges. *Bewchey, & Barflete lye northeast, and southwest. *The poynt of Romney, and Dyepe lye north, & south, apoint of northwest and a poynt of southeast. And Bitwen them is .xxvi. leyges. *Soundynges that ye shall fynde comyng fro spayne, Leuaunt, or Por¦tyngale to seke Vsshant. A Ship that cometh from Portin∣gale ta seke vsshant or Lizard in this route at, c. or. lxxxx. fadomes and ye shal fynde byg sounding, & shal be nygh aboute to the ayntes. And in this onte at. lxxx. fadomes ye shall fynde cockle shelles and dyntes in the leed. In this route holde on the north tyl ye chaung soundyng.
If ye be at. lx. or. lxv. fadomes ye shall fynde small sande, & mathey grount & ye shalbe at the cost of Vsshant. And yf ye haue tyme & day, go seke it, in the northeast, and ye shalbe aboute x. leyges of the yle. If ye come makyng your Rout a∣bout the Bas frede ye shall fynd cour¦se sande reed and browne, ye shal finde soundynge of .xl. fadomes. And yf ye be towarde the banke of Sylley ye shall haue. lxxxvi. or. lxxxx. fadomes, and ye shall fynde in the leed stony ground, & ye shall make a great way towarde the banke of Sylley. ☞When ye be at. lxxx. fadom ye shal fynde small blacke sande, and ye shall be at the towarde of Lezarde. When ye be at. lx. or. lxv. ye shal fynd whyte sande, and whyte softe wormes And ye shall be very nygh to Lezarde. Bytwene the cape of Cornewayle & Vsshant amyd ye chonel ye shal fynde. lxx. fadome, & nere ynough the shore.
Betwene Dodman, and Fourne in the chanell ye shall fynde lx. fadomes. When ye be thwarte of Plōmouth or the Starte ye shall fynde streymye ground, and dyntes in the alowe, and soundinge of .xli. or .xlii. fadomes. ¶At the cōmyng fro Portlād ye shal haue .xxxv. fadomes, and smal shingle And yf ye be nyghe Portlande ye shall fynde .xxx. fadomes, and stones lyke beanes. And this soūde lasteth to saynt Aldam and in the sayde soūding ye shall fynde whyte stoones lyke bro∣ken aules, and other be grater. and then ye shalbe warte of saynt Al∣dam or of the yle of wyght. And from thense go east warde fro the swyngles Two leyges or thre from the yle of wyght ye shal fynd .xxv. fadome, wyth dyntes and clyftes in the talowe lyke small threde Two or thre leyges frō the caskets ye shall fynde .xl. fadomes, and bygge stones, rugged, and blacke.
Bytwene the yle of wyght and she Hagge the depest is but .xxxv. or .xl. fa∣domes. Betwene the yle of wyght and La∣trygat the depest is but .xxv. or .xxx. fa¦dome Betwene Bechey, and the yle of wyght at leyge from the lande ye shall fynde .xxxviii. Fadomes and popples bygge as beanes. Bytwene fayrle, and somme in the depest but .xxv. fadomes. Bytwene fylstone, and Boloyne is a banlie that is called Ryppe rappe, & is in the myddes of the route as nygh Pycardye as Englande, and harde a∣borde by it is .xxvi. or .xxvii. fadomes. Beneth the Castell of Douer ye shal fynde .x. fadomes. In the strayte of Calays ye shall fynde .xxx. fadomes. Betwene Calays and Thenet, ye shal fynde .xxv. fadome. In the rode of Calays is .xvi. fadome
In the coste of Flaundres at the depest ye shall fynde but .xx. fadome. The kennynges from Sylley, and England vnto Flaundres. ¶From Sylley to Longshyp  is a kennynge. Fro Longships to Lezarde viii. leiges Fro Lezarde to Dodmā a kennynge. Fro Dodman to Rams heade there is a kennynge. Fro Rainshed to the Cape of Beures there is a kennynge. Fro cape of Beures to Torres there is a kennynge. Fro Torres to Portlande .xiiii. leyges Fro Portland to s. Aldam .iiii. leyges Fro Saynte Aldam to the nedles. vi. leyges. Fro Nedles to Saynte Helyns .vi. leyges. Fro Saynt Heleyns to Bewechey xviii. leyges. Fro Bewchey to fayrle .vii. leyges. From fayrle to Romney.
Fro Romney to douer .vii. leyges. Fro Douer to Calays .vii. leyges. Fro Calais to Sluce .xxi leyges. ¶Floodes & Ebbes, fro the foreland or Cape of cornwayle, into wales all a longe by the see coost. At the Cape of Cornwayle the moone in the east northeast ful see, and in the south weste lowe water. At Pastowe the moone in the east and apoint of northeaste full see. At Londaye the moone in the east ful see, and in the south lowe water. At Caldaie the moone in the easte, and apoint of the southeast lowe water. Ad Grashormes the moone ī the easte south east full see. In the Rams eyes, at ye poynt of kar∣dygan the mon in the southeast ful see At mylfort the moone in the east south east full see. At the yle of Fer at ye ile of Colompes, and at Naskingeoles the moone in the east southeast full see.
¶In the route of the yle of Mag∣sykes in the mountaynes of Gaswaye ye moone in the south southeast ful see. And in all the rout of the yle of Man and vnto arglas, and so forth into Scotland the moone in the south. *Routes for Sylley and Englande into wales alonge the coost of wales. SIlley, and Lōdey lye northeast and southwest & betwene them is .xxviii. leyges. The Cape of cornwayle, and Lon¦day lye northeast, & southwest, a point of north and a poynt of south, and be∣twene them is .xxv. leyges. Londay and Calday lye north and south, and bytwene them is .x. leyges. Cape of Cornwayle, and Consquere lye north and south, a poynt of north∣weste and apoynt of southeast, and be∣twene them is xxxiii leyges. Cape of Cornewayle and Maskin geoles lye north and sauth, & bytwne them is .xxxiii. leyges.
Maskyn geoles and Grashormes ly east northeast and west southwest, and betwene them is. two. leyges. The yle of Fer, & Mylforde lye east & west, a poynt of northeast & a peynte of southwest and betwene thē is .ii. leig ¶Courses fro the cape of cornewayle into wales alonge by the see cost From the cape of cornwayle the flod commeth fro the south, and ye ebbe fro the north, and wythoute at two or thre leyges the tyde cometh from the south west. ¶And fro the cape of cornwayle to Londay the ebbe cōmeth fro northeast, & the flode fro southwest & without Londay the flood commeth fro the west, and the ebbe commeth fro the east. Betwene Lōday and Calday the floode cōmeth fro the east northeast and the ebbe fro the east sutheast. Fro calday to, Scalmay the flod com¦meth frō northeast, and the ebbe south west. Bytwene Scalmay and grashormes
the floode commeth fro the south, and the ebbe fro the north. And fro grasholmes all the cost vn¦to Holheed the flod cometh from the soth, and the ebbe agaynewarde, and wythout in the rout it taketh of the northeast and of the southweast. Fro Holyheed to the yle of Man the flode cōmeth fro soutwest and the ebbe cōmeth fro northeast, & alōge the yle of Man vnto without, the flowe cōmeth fro southwest, and the ebbe northeaste Bytwene the yle of man and Scot∣land the flowe commeth fro the east. Bytwene the costes of Scotlande, and the mountaynes of Galwaye the floode cōmeth fro the east northeast, & the ebbe fro the west southwest. And fro the moūtaynes of Galway to the peynt of Lokestene cōmeth the floode fro north northwest, & the Ebbe contrary, fro the poynt to tarke it com∣meth south soutwest, and the ebbe cō∣trary.
*Routes fro Sylley, and Englande vnto Ireland a long the coste. SYlley and cpe of Clare lye East southeast and west northwest & bytwene them is L. leiges. ☞Cape of Cornwayle and the Cape of Veyll lye northwest and southeast, and a poynt of east, & a poynt of west, and bytwene them is .xxiiil. leyges. Cape of Veyll and the cape of clare lye cast northeast, and west southwest, and bytwene them is .xiiii. leyges. Cape of Clare, and ye Musenes lye east and west, & bytwene ye is .vii. leyge Musenes and Dulfay lye east south∣east and west northweste and betwene them. is .vii. leyges. Dulfay and the sonde of Blaskaye lye North & south & a point of north∣west & southeast, take hede of ye neles bytwene them is .xvii leyges. *Blaskaye and thy yles of Darē lye orth northeast, and south southwest.
and bytwene them is .xviii, leges. Blaskaey & blakrocke lye north, & south, & bytwene them is, xl, leyges, And from Blakrocke sayle north, & ye shall go out of Irelande. Bytwene blakrocke and cantere is, vi. kennynges, Courses from the cape Veyll vnto cantere, and how the foldes towarde Ireland to ere. Frome cope of Veyll vnto the yles of wiltay the floode commeth from south¦west and taketh of the east and with∣out in the south commeth the flood fro the west southweste & the ebbe fro the east northeast. Betwene Saltaye, and Vkelo the floode commeth out of the south south west, and the ebbe agayne warde Bytwene Vkelo and Lambaye the flood commeth from the north and the ebbe from the south. And fro the yle of Lambay along the coste the flode cometh fro the south
southeast, and the ebbe agaynwarde. fro Malynes to the poynte of Arglas the floode cometh fro the south south∣west and the ebbe agaynwarde. Fro the poynt of Arglas to Cantere cometh the floode fro north, northeast, and the ebbe fro south southeast. ☞Routtes fro the oy of Bayone along the cost of Gasgoyn vnto the race of Spayne. HE that wyl sayle fro the baye of Bayone alonge by the cost into gyrone, sayle northward and by northwest for to double Alcassone, thē go north, & by the northeast, & ye shall go in the Asues or pole head, to ye way of Anthyoche go on the northwest, the way of Anthyoch lieth west southwest and east northeast, If ye departe from saynt Martyn your ryght course is to go by Bretons way in the west north∣west, and ye shall goo out of the yle of Eus. The way of Brytons lyeth easte,
southeast, and west northwest. The yle of Eus & Bel yle lye north¦west and southeast. And fro Byl yle to glenam goo west northwest, to double the rockes of glenam, and ye shall goo ferre ynough fro Penwarke. Groye and glenam lye east and weste, a poynt of northwest and southeast. If ye wyll sayle wythoute whyte Rocke take mooste of the weste, and to beware of ye white rocke take sure mar¦kes beyonde saynt Nycolas wythout Penfrede and then fere not. And whē yo are in glenā leue the two partes to∣warde the yle of muttō, ye thyrde parte toward Glenam, and go west by shore The yle of Mutton, & saynt Nicolas lye north and south. ☞The route of glenam lyth east, and west Depart from the rout of glenam, and fayle west, and nortwest, and ye shal come before saynt Tudy. ☞And wha that parteth fro the route of Glenam, and wil double Pmarke.
his course is weste, & by southwest, for the route of Glenam, an the fourke ly∣east and west. Penbroke, and fountenance lye, northwest and southeast. The kenynges fro rochell into. Flaunders. Fro la Palace to Bylyuers is .vii, leyges. Fre Bylyuers to Holonue is .vii. leyges, Frome holonue to the yle of Eus is .vii. leyges. Betwene thy yle Eus and Bell yle is, xx. leyges. Fro bell yle to Groye vii. leyges Fro Groye to Glenam vii. leyges Fro Glenā to pēmarke vii. leyges Fro pēmarke to the Race, ix. leiges Fro the Race to. S. Math .ix. leyges Fro S. Mathew to fourne vii. leiges Fro southe to Bergroagh, vii. leyges Bytwene Bargroagh and the yle of Basepole is .xiiii leyges. Bytwene the yle of Basepole, and the
vii, yles is vii, leiges. Betwene the vii. yles and Brehac .vii. leyges. Betwene Brehac and Freel x. leyges Bytwene freel and saynte Malo, iiii. leyges. Fro saynt malo to Chause vi. leyges Fro Cause to Iarsey vii. leyges Fro Iarsey to Hagge viii. leyges From the Hagge to the yle of wyghte xxviii. leyges. Fro ye yle of wyght to Calas .xlij. leyg Betwene Calais & S. luce xxi. leiges These are the. Soundynges cōminge fro spayne on the outwarde pates to the yles north warde, & abau Rochel. IN this saylynge at. l. fadomes ye shal be, xvii. leyges fro and ❧If ye be at .xl. fadome ye shall be at, vii, leyges fro land. *And yf ye be at, xxx, fadoms ye shal be at .vii. leyges. fro lande. If ye be at, xxii. fadoms ye shall at, iiii, leyges fro lande.
In this route ye shall fynde Ose. & ye shall be towarde Maumusson, and nyghe the lande, & ye shal fynd stones lyke peason, & then ye shall be towarde Balyuers or toward Holnne, but go no nighe excepte it be thy daye in this soundyng of .xv. fadomes of water. If ye be south at of the yle of Eus at lx. fadomes ye shall fynde small sande and be .xiiii. leyges fro land. If ye be at. l. fadomes, ye shal be at x. leyges fro land. At .xxx. fadomes ye shall see the yle clerely. If ye be in the see of Layre at .xl. fa¦dome is Ose, tyl ye be at .xxv. fadome. ¶At ye south of Bellye at .xl. fadome ye shal be at .x. leyges of it, & come not nerer then. l. or .xl fadome but by day. For in the rout of Bellye, and glenam at. l. fadome ye shal be nygh the lande And take good hede, for there be false soundynges in the thwart of glenam. and Penmarke.
☞How the land of Brytayne and of Spayne do lye and how many leyges is frome one to aother. BAsefrede and caplye north north∣east and south southewest pellem Penmarke and Sysserges lye northeast & southwest apoynt of south, a poynt of north, and bytwene them is xvi, kennynges, Glenain and saynt Vyncent de la¦berker lye north & south, and bytwene them is. lxxxv, leyges. Groye & saynt Andrew lye north & south betwene them is, lxxxv, leyges. Bel yle, & lardon lye north & south and betwene them is, lxviii, leyges, The yle of Eus & Martrychaco lye north & south bitwene thē is, in. leiges. Holonne & saynt Sebastyā lye north and south. These leyges be fro the buckewe of Gyronde to the buckewe of bayone a∣long the cost of, Spayne, & portyngale
THere is betwene the Buckew of Gyronde and the Buckewe of Bayonne xxv. leiges Bytwen Bayonne and fountaraby is vii. leyges. Bytwene fountaraby and saynte Se∣bastyan is, iiii, leyges. fro, s, Sebastian to quytayre, iii, leyg, fro quitayre to, Montrygo .iii, leiges, fro Montrygo to Vermio v. leyges fro Vermio to Bylbame vi, leyges fro bylbawe to Castres iii, leyges, fro Castres to the Rade iii, leyges, fro the Rade to S. Andrew vi. leyges fro saynt Andrewe to saynt Vyncent, dela bekete .v, leyges fro saynt Vyncēt to Lagues v, leiges fro lagues to Rybdecell v, leyges fro Rybdecel to vyll vicious v. leyges fro vicyous to Gynnon iiii. leyges fro gynnō to pēnes de gōsen ii, leyges fro Gonson to veylles ii, leyges fro veylles to pronne ii, leyges fro pron to Lyenarke, ix, leyges
fro Lyenarke to Rybaydue v. leyges fro Rybaydue to s. fabyan v. leyges fro s. fabyan to Vmero ii. leyges fro Vmero to cap de Vere ii. leyges fro cap de Vere to Ortiguer ii. leyges fro Ortiguer to Sydera .iii. leyges fro Sidera to cap de prieui .iiii. leyges fro cap de pryenl to colome .iii. leyges fro Colome to Sissergues v. leyges fro Sissergues to cormes iii. leiges fro cormes to Mongye v. leyges fro mongye to ye cap of feuyster there is .iiii. leyges fro the Cap fenystre to cea v. leyges fro Cea to Mores v. leyges fro mores to bayōe de moror viii. leigs fro Bayone to camino iiii. leyges fro comino to Vyenne iiii. leyges fro Vyenne to Vyll de count .v. leiges fro Vyl decount to Porto in Portyu∣gale is .iiii. leyges fro Porta de vere de Mōdego .ix. leyg. fro Mondēgo to paradeū .ix. leyges fro Parades to barlynges ix. leyges
fro Berlyngues to rocke de Semper there is .xii. leyges. fro Semper to Cap de fycher .x. leygs fro fycher to Cap. s. Vyncēt .xxviii. ley Bytwene cap. s. Vincēt and cap saynt Maryis .xviii. leyge Bitwene the cap of saynt Mary & the abbeye of Dolues is .xvii leyges Bytwene the Abbaye of Dolues, and saynt Lucas de bemeredo is .viii. ley. ¶Routes fro Pontewe de Feron vn∣to the flome Iordā and how many ley¦ges is bytwene them. POntewe de feron and the yle of cales lye east and weste, and by∣twene them is .xx. leyges. The yle of Cales and Trefaldogar lye east southeast, and west southweste and betwene them is .viii. leyges. Trefalga & the straytes of marock lye east & west, apoynt of southeast & of northwest, & bytwene them is .xii. leyg The straytes of Marock and cap of Gad lye east and west, a point of north
east, and of southwest, bytwene them. lxv. leyges. Cap de gat and the formynges lye northest, and southwest, and bytwene them is. lx. leyges. The formynges & Mayerke lye north east, & southwest, bitwene thē .xxx. legs The yle of Mayerke conteyneth in length .xxviii. leyges. Mayerke and Sardayn lye easte & west, & bytwene thew is. lxxxx leyges. *Sardayn & Fozyl lye east and west and a poynt of Southeast, a poynt of northwest, bytwene them is .xxii. legs. The yle of fozyl in lenght is. lxii. leigs The yle of cecyll, and the yle of sapy∣ence lye east, and west betwne them is. ii. leyges. The yle of Sapience and the yle of Candrye lye east and west, a poynt of southeast and a poynt of northwest, be¦twene them is. lxii. leyges. Candre in length is. lii. leyges. The yle of Candre, and the yle of Fa∣magos
lye east, & west betwene them. cxv. leyges. The yle of Famagos in length. c leyges. Famagos and capde Danaco lye east & west. Cap dedinaco and Floe Iordā lye north and south and betwene them is lxxxx leyges. *Thus endeth the Rutter of the see and here foloweth, the courses of the moone, and iudge∣mentes, of the yle of Auleron. TO reken the Courses of ye moone truly, it behoueth to take for e∣uerie, quarter of the moone .xxxii houres and a half. For two quarters. xlv. houres. For the quarters. lxviii. houres and a halfe. For foure quarters. lxxxx. houres. *Note one cours before the son in the south the moone in the east. For fyue quarters. c .xii. houres, and a halfe. For .vi. quarters .cxxxv. houres. For .vii. quarters. c .lvii. houres, and a
halfe. Fro .viii. quarters. c .lxxx houres. ¶Two course before the sonne in the west the moone in the south. For .ix. quarters. cc .ii. houres. Fro xi. quarters. cc .xlvii. houres. for .xi. quarters .xlvii. houres. for .xii. quarters. cc .lxx. houres. *The course before the sonne in the west, the moone in the south For .xiii. quarters. cc .lxxxxii. houres. and a halfe. for .xiiii. quarters. ccc .xv. houres. for .xv. quarters. ccc .xxxviii. houres & a halfe. ¶Another course before the sonne in the south the moone in the north and so of other. Note it well and shal fynde .vii .c .xx. houres. HE that wyl rekē the moone well by the dayes, oughte to take for euery quarter of the moone thre quarters and halfe a quarter of a daye and an houre and an halfe.
And for two quarters there is a day & thre quarters, an halfe a quarter of a daye. For thre quarters there is two dayes, thre quarters, an houre and an halfe. For .iiii. quarters is thre dayes, and thre quarters of a day. ¶One course before. ❧And for .v. quarters there is foure dayes and a halfe foure houres and a halfe. For vi. quarters is v. dayes, and an halfe, and halfe a quarter. For .vii. quarters there is .vi. dayes, & a halfe. an houre and a halfe. For .viii. quarters there is .vii. dayes, and a halfe. ¶Two course before. ¶For .ix. quarters .viii. dayes & halfe a quarter, an houre and a halfe. Fo .x. quarters .ix. dayes, and .ix. hou∣res and a halfe. For .xi. quarters .x. dayes .vii. houres and a halfe. For .xii. qaurters .xi. dayes and a quar¦ter of a daye.
¶Thre course before. ¶For .xiii. quarters .xii. dayes foure houres and a halfe. For .xiiii. quarters .xiii. daies and half a quarter of a daye. For xv. quarters .xiiii. dayes, an houre and a half. For .xvi. quarters .xv. dayes & nomore ¶Thus ye shal fynde but .xxx. dayes in euery moone. *Note this well. *At .xviii. dayes and .xviii. houres of the Moone, the Sonne in the south, what shall ye tyde be at glenā. Answere It shalbe lowe water, and the moone shall be in the north and ye shal haue thre wyndes bitwene the Moone, and the sonne. *These be the customes of the Vicoūtyes of Brytayne. ALshyppes or other vesselles when they go to wracke by aduenture on the coostes of Brytaine be as yf they were
wonne to the sayde Vicount so that no marchaūt nor other shal take nothing but they that saueth thē which oughte to be rewarded after theyr deseruyng. That is to wytte, yf they goo at auen∣ture of the see to fetche them ferre they haue the thyrd part. And if they take it on shore they shall haue but a cōpetent rewarde, as iustyce requyreth. And bycause the countrey of Brytaine is so {per}eryllleous that, scantly a ship cā sayle thyther the spare of .ii. yeres with outcommynge in daūger of the sayde fordship. Therfore it was accorded by¦twene the sayde Duke and all maner of shyppes, by the assente of the Kynge of fraunce, at the prayer, request, & sup¦plycacyon of all the countrey, that the sayde erle shuld giue seales the whiche bene called bryfes to whome he would in his grounde, and so where holdē all the shyppes that laded in the duchy of Brytayne vnto the realme of Spayne to take the sayd brefs on payue to lese
the sayd shyp and the goodes. ¶It was a greed therefore amonge theym that what shippe that auētured into this sayde ground, & fyndenge the brefes in wytnesses of the registres of the places where they doo lye that the sayde Lordshyp ought not to take nor suffre to take any of the goodes that is in it, nor of the wares that is saued, sa¦uyng the ryght of the sauers yt was a∣greed bycause thy laboure to saue the goodes, & by these couenauntes of bre¦fes, al maner of shyps & marchaūyse bē assured of ryght & noblesse of ye sayd prynce, & they ought to shewe to the ad¦myrall or his lieftenaūte ye brefes of al the vyages that they haue made in a hole yere, at al tymes yt he wyl requyre thē or else he maye holde thē as for fayt & bycause yt the kynge of Spayne nor his portes, nor Englyshe mē were not at his agrement to sayle vnder ye fyrste condycyon, in case yt they come laded or voyde from theyr coūtreyes, yf they by
charged where the bryfes be they must take of them. for yf they be without thē they be at the prynces pleasure bodye and goodes. THe ordinaunces wherfore the vy¦count of Leon is acustomed to ye seales called seales of cōducte and not brefes was because the sayd Vycoūte was at the passage there as it behoued al vessels to assemble, laden or empty, to thēde that none should misdo other bycause thei were of straūge coūtres it was agreed yt he shuld kepe vesselles to saue & cōducte them toward theyr lan∣des frō the sayd harborowe, & to suffer that all maner of people myghte take vitailes on his foresaid groūd, it was accorded therfore that he shuld haue a certayne somme for the seales. And in case yt any ship passed forth without ta¦kyng vytayle on his said grounde not hauing the sayd seales, to be forfayt in body & goodes. And ye said vicoūt may
folowe then what parte soeuer they go and leade them wyth hym as thynges forfayted to iustyfie in his said ground and they beholden to shewe all the sea¦les of vyages that they haue made for yeares, & by thys the sayde Vycoūt is holden to kepe the sayd vessels in peace within this sayd ground to hyr power And this is his ryght wyth the mynde of many Syth the Lordes of Brytain haue conquered the sayd Vycount, and these be the two noblesses of the prince. And syth the sayde noblesses were hole to hym hath wylled that the Spanyer¦des and other that they maye take har¦borowe in his ground without aduen¦ture charged or to be fraught fro stra∣unge landes, yt where the brefes should be saufe to them to demaunde the sayd brefes wyth in the thyrd tyde after that they haue cast yt anker, on lande in the hauen to rest, or els to fetche thē, what parte soeuer they be, in case that they shoulde not haue passed by the race of
saynte Mathewe, but yf they do not passe, they shall not be saued by suche wyll and maner. ☞Here begynneth the iudgementes of the See, of shyppes, of may∣sters of maryners, of mar¦chauntes, and of al theyr doynges. FYrst one mā is made mayster of the ship and the ship belongeth to many parteners & departeth frō the coūtey of whence it is, and cōmeth to London or o another place, and is fraught to go into a straunge coūtrey the mayster ought not to sell the shyp without he haue a procuracyon or ly∣cence of the owners. But yf he haue nede of money for the expenses of the shyppe, he maye laye to guage some of the take lynges, by the counsell of the maryners of the shyppe. This is the iudgement.
A Shyp lienge in a hauen, and taryeth for ye freyght & tyme to departe, the mayster ought take coun¦sell wyth his felowes, and saie, mates howe lyke ye this wether, Some wyll saye it is not good, let it ouer passe. Other wyll saye the wether is good & fayre. The mayster ought to agre to ye mooste, or els yf the shyp peryshe he is boūde to restore the value as it is pray¦sed, yf he haue wher with. This is the iudgement. IF a shyp pereysh in any place the maryners ought to saue the most parte of the goodes in the shyp & in so doyng the mayster ought to gyue them theyr costes reasonable to good to lande, yf they haue saued so much that the mayster may do it. And the maister may lay to bledge of the saued goodes to some honest man for them. And if he can not helpe them so he is not boūde to rewarde them, but they to lose theyr
rewardes whē the shyp is lost. And the mayster maye sell no takelynge of the shyp but yf he haue procuracyon or ly∣cence of the owners. But he ought to put them in saufgarde to the tyme yt he do'th knowe the wyll of the owners, & he ought to do it the moost truely that be can, & yf he do otherwise he is holdē to make amēdes if he haue wherwith. This is the iudgement. ALso yf a shyp departe fro Bur∣dewes or another place laden, it chaunceth somtyme that it wracketh and the moste parte of the goodes that may be his saued, the marchaūtes & ye mayster be at greate stryfe, & the mar∣chaūtes aske their goodes of ye master They ought well to haue thē, hauyng the freyght as yf the shyppe had made the vyage kēnyng, by kēnyng, & cours by cours, if it please the mayster & if ye mayster wyll he may amende hys ship yf it be in case to be lyghtlye mended, &
yf not he may hyre another shyp to fy∣nyshe his vyage, and the master shall haue his freyght, as yf he had saued the goodes, and the freight of the sayd goodes yt be saued ought to be rekened poūde by pounde, & the goode to paye the parte of the costes that were done in sauinge of the sayde goodes, & yf so were that the mayster & the marchaū∣tes do promise to tolke that shuld help to saue the shyp & goodes, to haue the thyrde part or halfe by thē so saued for the peryll yt they be in the iustyce of the coūtrey ought well to regarde what la¦bor & payne they haue done in the sa∣uynge and after that payne (not contē¦tynge the promisses made by the sayde mayster & maryners) to rewarde them YF a shyp departe fro any place la¦den or not, & aryuethe at another place the maryners ought not to go out without lene of the mayster, for yf the shyp shulde peryshe or hurte by
any aduēture, thei be holdeen to make amendes. But yf the shyppe were in a place where it were ankered wyth two or thre Cables they maie well go oute wythout the mayesters leue, leauynge some of the maryners to kepe the shyp and goodes, and they to come betyme to the shyp and yf they tary longe they oughte to make amendes yf they haue wherwyth. Suche is the iudgement. MAriners bynde them wyth theyr mayster & anye go out wythout leaue of the mayster and drynke dron∣ken and make noyse and stryfe so that anye of them he hurte, the Maiester is not bounde to cause them to be healed, nor to puruey oughte for them, but he maye well put them oute of the shyppe But yf the maister sende them in anie erande for the profite of the Shippe, and that they shoulde hurte theym, or that anye dyd greue them, they oughte to be healed at the costes of the shyppe
This is the iudgement. IF it chaunce that any mariner be taken with sickenes in ye ship doing seruyce therto belōgyng the Master ought to set him out of the shyp, and seke lodgyuge for hym, and ought for to fynde hym light, as talow or candel and gyue to hym a lad of the shyppe for to take hede of hym, or hyre a woman so kepe hym, and oughte to puruey hym of suche meate as is vsed in the shyp that is to wite as muche as he toke when he was in health and no∣more but yf the mayster wyl. And if he wyll haue deyntyer meates, the may∣ster is not bounde to gette him any, but to be at his tostes. And yf the shyp be redie to departe it ought not to tary for hym, and if he recouer to haue his hire in prayeng and rebatyng that the may¦ster layde out for hym. And if he dye hys wyfe or nexte kyn or frēde oughte to haue it for hym.
The iudgement, is suche. ALso a shyp is freyght to go toward London, or elswhere and yf it do chaū¦ceth that tourmēte taketh it beinge on the see, and it can not escape but yf the goodes because out the mayster ought to saie, mates it behoueth to caste ouer these goodes to saue the shyp, & if there be any marchaūt that wil answer and wyll be contrary of the castyng out by theyr reasons & wyl not agre, the may∣ster neuertheles oughtnot to leaue but cast ouer so much as he shal se nede. He & the thyr departe of hys felowes ma∣kyng theyr othes on ye holy gospel whē they become to the right place of theyr discharge yt he did it for to saue the bodi of the ship & the other goods that is yet in it & ye wynes yt were cast ouer ought to be praysed at the value of them ye be come saufe, & when they shall be lode they oughte to be deuyded pounde by pounde among the sayd marchauntes and the mayster ought to deuyde, and
teken the shyppe or thre freyght as his choyse and for recouerynge of the do∣mages the maryners oughte to haue a tonne fre, and any other ought to haue parte after hys deseruynge, and yf he hath not behaued hym as a good man to haue nothyng of the franchyse. And the marchauntes may charge the may¦ster for it by his othe. This is the iudgement. SO maye chaunce that ye mayster muste cutte of his mast by force of ye wether, but he ought to cal ye mar¦chauntes that owe the goodes, yf anye of them be there and saye. The maste must nedes be cut to saue the shyp, and goodes, it were resonable by trouthe. And somtyme behoueth to cut a sōder Cables and leaue the Ankers and ro¦thers to saue Shyppe and goodes all these thynges bene rekened pounde by pounde. And whē god sendeth the ship to dyscharge in saufte the marchaūtes
ought to paye eche theyr rate without delay, or to sell or guage for money, or euer the goodes be out of the ship. And yf the shyp be at hyrynge, and the may¦ster tarye by reason of ther debate and perceiueth lekage, he ought not to part with the losses but haue his freight as yf the tones were full. This is the iudgement. WHen a shyp cōmeth saufe to the ryght dyscharge ye master shuld shewe ye marchaūtes the ropes yt they haue to hoyse withal. And if they se nede, the mayster ought to amende them. For yf the tonne lese bycause of the hoysinge or of the ropes the may∣ster and the Mauers amonge theym muste paye the marchauntes, and the master ought to pay after as he ought to take for the vnladyng, and the vnla∣dynge to be set fyrst to recouer the los∣ses, and the resydue to be departed a∣monge them. But yf the ropes breake
without that the Maister shewe them to the marchaūtes they are bounde to recompence the domage. But yf the marchauntes saye, the ropes be sure, & good, if they breake eche of thē ought to haue parte of the domage, that is to wite ye marchaunte that oweth yt wine onely, and the mayster & the maryner This is the iudgement. A Shyp beinge charged at Bur∣dewes orels wher, & hoyseth the sayse for to go wyth the wines, & the mayster and hys maryners trym∣meth not theyr sayl as it shulde and yl wetherynge taketh them in the see, in suche maner yt the takelynge crusheth or siniteth out the botome of ye tonne or pype, the shyppe beyng saufaryued at the ryght dyscharge, the marchauntes sayeth to the mayster, that y his take lynge there wyne is lost. The mayster sayeth nay, and yf he wyll sweare, and thre or four or halfe a dosyn of his ma¦ryners
or any of them whiche the mar¦chauntes wyll that the wyne was not lost by theyr defaute nor by thyr take∣lynge as the marchaūtes put on them they ought to be quyt. But yf they wil not swere they be boūde to ordre theyr sayle well and truely or they parte fro theyr charge. This is the iudgement. A Mayster hyreth hys maryners and ought to kepe them pesably and ostre to be theyr Iudge and yf any say yt hys felows lyeth, hauinge breade and drynke at the table, ought to paye .iiii. d. And yf anye belyeth the mayster to pay .viii. d. Or yf the may∣ster belye any also to pay .viii. d. And yf the maister smite anye of the mariners the mariner oughte to abyde the fyrste buffet be it with fyste, or stath with his hande but if he smite any more he may defende hym. And if a maryner smite ye maister to pay .v. s. or. to lese his fyst. The iudgement is such.
ANye shyp freyght at burdewes or any other place & cometh to his right discharge, and be char∣ged halfe party tonnage and smal lod∣mans seruaūtes ben to the marchaun¦tes. The custom of Brytayn is all they that be taken steth they passe the yle of Bas, & bepayuz la main. And they of Normandie and Englande, and flaun¦dres, syeth they passe Garnesey, & they of syeth they passe Garnesey do not. This is the iudgement. IF variaunce fal betwene the may¦ster of a shippe, and the mariners the mayster oughte to take the tor¦well a waye that is afore the mariner or he put hym out, and if the maryner offer to make Amendes at the Agre∣ment of hys mates that be at the table and the mayster wyll not but putteth him oute, the mariner maie folowe the Shippe till it come to the ryght dys∣charge, and ought to haue as good wa∣wages
as, yf he had gone in the shyp, amendynge the trespace at the verdite of his felowes, And yf so be that ye mai¦ster take not in as good a maryner as be, and the shyp by chaūce take harme the mayster is boūde to restore the shyp and the goodes, yf he be able. This is the iudgement. IT may so be that as a shyp ly∣eth ankered at rode, another shyp cometh oute of the see, and by mysguiding hitteth against the ship that is in the waye, so that the shyp is domaged with the strocke that ye other shyp gaue it, and there is wyne shedde on both bartes, the losse ought for to be praysed and deuyded halfe to halfe by¦twene the shyppes and the wines loste in the sayde shyppes also amonge the marchauntes, and the mayster of the ship that hyt the other must swere on a booke, and hys marchaūtes wyth him that he dyd not with is wyll. The rea¦son
why this iudgement was made is that an old shyp wyllynglye lyeth not in the waye of a better so ferforth as it knoweth not to domage it by greuyng but whē it knoweth well that it muste parte byhalfe, it wyl passe by out of the waye. Suche is the iudgement. TWo shyppes or mo lyenge in A hauen, at scante water, and one of the ankers lye to nere another shyp, the mayster of the sayd shyp oug∣ht to say. Mayster take vp your anker it is to nere vs and maye do vs harme And if they wyl not remene it, the may¦ster and hys maryners that myght ha¦ue the domage maye take it vp, and set it ferther from them, but yf the other wyll not suffre them, and it do them do¦mage, the other muste restore it, and yf so be yt they had fastened to it, no. But and yf it do hurte they be holde to yelde the hurte all alonge, & yf they lye drye in a hauē, thy ought to set markes at
theyr ankers that may playnly be fene aboue the water The iudgement is such. IF a shippe be ariued to be charged at Burdews or at any other place the mayster is holden to say ta his felowes. Mates wyll ye freyght by youre selfe, or be alowed at the freyght of the shyp. That is to be at theyr own prouysyon. They muste answere what they wyll do, yf they take at ye freyght of the shyp, they shall haue as the shyp shall haue. And yf they wyl freyght by them selfe they oughte to freyght it in suche wyse as the shyp do not tary. And yf it chaunce that they fynde noo freight the master is not to blame, and oughte to shewe theym theyr fare, and may set ye weyght of theyr shyp meate to eche of them, & yf they wyll laye in a tonne of water they maye▪ for a tonne of wyne, and yf throwynge ouer into the see happen the ton of water oughte
to be for a tonne of wyne, or for other goodes, pounde to pounde, wherby the maryners maye healpe them in the see. And yf so be that they freyght it wyth marchaundeyse, suche fraunchyse as the maryner hath ought the marchaūt to haue. That is the iudgemente. THe mariners of Briain ought to haue but one meale a day, by reason of that they haue drynkes go∣ynge, and commyng, and they of Nor¦mandye oughte to haue two meales of the kytchyn on the daye, bycause they haue but water goyng at the shyppe co∣stes. And when the shyppe is at the shore the maryners to haue wyne to drynke and other at the fyndyng of the mayster. This is the iudgement. A Shyp cōmeth to dyscharge, the ma¦ryners will haue theyr fyndynge some there be yt haue neither bedde nor caben in the shyp, the mayster maye retayne
of theyr hyre fyll the shippe be there as they toke it, yf their put no good suerty to furnisshe theyr viage. This is the iudgement. ALso the mayster of a shyp hyreth his maryners in the town that is of some of theyr owne fyndynge, and other at hys coostes. It chaūceth that the shyppe can fynde no feyght to go where he wold be, and they must go ferther. They that fynde them selfe ought to folowe hym, but they that be a thys coastes he ought to rayse theyr wages, kennynges by kennynge, and course by course, after the rate of theyr hyre for to go to a tertayne place. And yf they go nerre then the place, or well as ferre as they were hyred to all to be alowed but they muste yelde the shyp, where they toke it, and set it at the ad∣uenture of god. This is the iudgement.
WHhen a shyp cōmeth to Brystow or any other place Of such meat as is in the shyp, two of the mary¦ners may beare to shore a mease or an halfe mease, suche as they be cut in the shyp, and such breade as they haue, as maye eat at one tyme, but no drynke. And thy oughte to haste them shortly aborde agayn that the mayster lese not the ernestes of the shyp, for yf the may¦ster haue domage by that losse, they be holden to alowe it. Or yf any of theyr felowes hurte hym selfe for lacke of helpe, they be holden to heale hym and to make a fyne at the verdyte of one of the maryners, and of the mayster, and of them of the table. This is the iudgement. YF a mayster freyghte his shyppe to a marchaunt, and sette a cer∣taine terme within the which at ye mar¦chaunt shoulde lade, redy to departe, yf the marchaunt doth it not, but kepe the
the Maister and hys maryners by the space of .xii. or .xv. dayes or more, som∣tyme he leseth his wetherynge & tyme by defaute of the marchaunt, the mar∣chaunt is holden to make the mayster amendes. And of such amendes as the mayster hath the maryners ought to haue the fourth parte, and the mayster the other iii. partes, bycause he findeth theyr expences. This is the iudgement. CErtain marchauntes or one frei¦ghteth a shyp, & setteth it in way The sayd ship entreth into a ha∣uen, and is there soo lōge that money faileth them. The maister ought for to send in hast into his coūtre for money, but he ought not to lease hys armogā for yf he do he is boūd to redresse al the domages of ye marchaūts. But he mai take of the wyne, & of the marchasites goodes, & make sale for his store. And whē ye shyp cōmeth to ye right discarge
the wyne that the wayster hath so ta∣ken ought to be praysed after the rate as the other shalbe solde comenly and neyther more nor lesse. And the maister ought to haue his freyght of the wyne that he hath taken. This is the iudgement. A Lodesman vnder taketh to lade a shyp to hulle or to other places, yf he fayle, & the shyp perysshe to the marchaūtes domages he is bounde to restore the domages yf he haue wherwith. And yf he haue not wherwith to lose his heade, and yf the mastes or anye of the maryners or Marchauntes do smyte of hys heade they be not bounde to make amendes, but they ought fyrste to knowe before they do it if it be able ta make a mēdes This is the iudgement. TWo vessels be felowes to take Herynges or Makerelles, they
ought to laye as many gynnes one as another. and they be a greed to parte the gayne by halfe bytwene them, and yf it chaunce that one of them peryshe bothe men, gynnes and other thynges and the other scapeth and cometh sauf to shore, the frēdes of hym that is ded asketh part of the gayne that they ha∣ue made, of the gynnes, hearynge, and vessell. They shal haue parte & gayne of the gynnes and hearynge, by the o∣thes of them that be scaped. But of the vessell they get nothynge. This is the iudgement. A Sippe hoysseth vp at the dis∣charge and lyeth dry where she is so iocoud that the Maryners taketh at the mayne. Maste, or at the scurtyll before or behynde the mayster ought to encrease hyre theyr kenninge for kenneynge, and in wyndying of wy¦nes it chaunceth that they leaue a pipe or other vessell open, & haue not wel fa∣stened
it with roopes at the ende of the shyp and it slyppeth and falleth vpon another, and marreth them bote, the Mayster and maryners ought to re∣store the marchauntes, and the Mar∣chauntes must paye the freyght of the two pypes, bycause they shal be payed at the pryce that other besolde. The mayster and maryners ought to sette theyr hoyssynge fyrst to recouer the do¦mage pounde to pounde. The owners of the shyppe shall take nothynge, for it was faut of the mayster, and mary∣ners in fastenyng of the pype. This is the iudgement. WItnesse the seale of ye ile of aulerō establysshed by the contractes of the sayde yle, the Tuesday after the feast of saynt Andrewe. The yeare of our Lorde. M.CC.lxvi. Finis.
¶A newe Rut∣ter of the See, for the Northe; partyes. Compyled by Rycharde. Proude. M.D.XLI. BArwyke lyeth southe & northe, of the Colde stone lande, and Barwyke hauen lyeth west nor west & east south east & frō bābewe vnto the poynt of the land. The course lyeth north & southe, but beware of the Golstones, it flowes north nor west, & quarter tyde vnder roder from Tyn∣mouth to fayreylād, ye course is northe Northwest, and south south east. And Tynmouth is tyde northeast, & south west betwexte the headland and honde clyf the course is norwest & southeast & it flowes west southwest east northeast & at Why thy is half tyde, & from Hōd¦clyf
clyf so forth to humber the course is southeast and by south and nortweste and by northe, from Lyernesse to the heade lande the course nor nor weste, & south south east, at the heade land the stremes set norweste and southeast and it flowes on the heade Lande of holdernes northeaste & quarter tide in the fayre way and at the heade Lande quarter tyde, & halfe quarter and, yf ye go fro Lyernesse to the shelde ye shal go east south east, for to go cleare of to sand and if ye halfe a neb go southeast and by east, and yf ye go from sporne the shelde And wynde be at Northe west, your course is southeast, tyll ye be paste well Bankes in the welles flowes west, and East, and there goeth also streames vnder other, and at the sheldes it flowes on the Lande, West nor weste halfe streames Vnder other by the Lande to ye come to Wynter townes, and fro Wynter townes to ye, come to Kerkely Roode, it flowes
on the land, it flowes northwest and quarter & half quarter tid vnder other & yf ye go frome shelde to the Helmes, and it be in the nyghte ye shall go but x. fadom of the coste tyll ye gesse be passe the Lymber & vry. And so go the estemmar course tyll ye come to .xiiii. fadome and goo your course sodtheast tyll you be past the holmes. But the mooste wysdome is to byd tyll da∣ye. From Kerkeley roode holmis to orforde, and be westin, it flowes on the lande south southeast, and at the halmes heade quarter tyde fro or ford¦nes to or wyll wannes the course is. southwest, and floweth south easte, and in or wyll hauyn within the were south and north and ye go fro or wyll wannys to the nesse ye weste go southe west fro the nasse of makres, of ye spette youre course is west south west, and it flowes south and by east brynge your markes togither: That is the paryshe
church steple out be east the abbaye of saint Vsseys, then go your course ouer the spetes south tyl you come in ten fa∣doms or .xii. fadome thē go your course with the sho south southwest. Yf it be flode come not within eyghte fadomes And ye bryng you to .xi. fadome or .xii. fadoms then goo youre course into the Tēmes with ye grenebanke west south west and at the sho it flowes south and north, and out of Orwilwandes to go out at the flod your course is east south east for cause of ye roge and the ackes tyl ye come to .xv. fadomes dep, & for the landefang, then ye may go southe southeast tyl ye come to .xviii. fadomes thē ye must go southe one glasse or two glasse for cause of the knocke. Then go south southwest and fetch vp Tenete & tetch vp .vii. fadomes on the breke thē go your course south, it is your fayre way, & take the knok in Kentisee it flo∣wes south, and at the north hed of god win the streames rēneth to south south
west and at the south heed of goodwin the streme renis to south west, and by south it flowes fro tenet to wyze on both sydes on the mayne Lande south south east, at sandwych at downes goo to south by east, And in the downe goo halfe tyde vnder other, and yf ye ryde in the downes And wyll in to Sande∣wych hauen ye muste ryre and it be to∣nynge wynde at east, southeast moue. And yf it be a folowing wynde ye may bide to south east mone. And ye bowne to Calays hauē, and ryde in dowues, & the wynd be west southwest or south west, ye must rere I north east moone and get you into your markes, the ste∣pell in the Fanne, then go your course, east southeast ouer & after your tyde serue your wende, And Loke you seke Cales hauen, at south southeast mone or south and by east And yf ye turne in the Downes, come no neare goodwyn thē .ix. fadome, ne no neare the brakes them fyue fadome, from saint Marga∣retes
stayre and ye wil go to donginas your way is south, southwest & retch xviii. fadome depe betwixt-saynt Mar¦garetes stayre and Donginas goeth halfe tyde. And fro dongynas to hyld ninas youre course is easte and west. Donginas and the water of sinn lieth east southeast, and west norwest, Dun¦ginas and depe lieth south easte and by easte, nor west and by west and Don∣ginas and saine heed south southweste go from donginas and ye haue .xx. fadome depe. go west south west, that is your course alonge see. And at don∣ginas is half and is halfe quarter tyde And vnto Hastynge halfe tyde, and at Becheffe quarter tyde, Becheffe and Depe south east, and norwest becheffe and sayne heed south and north the hy∣land of a Rondel and strouttart south southeast, and nor nor west, the sayne hed and wolues hed southeast, and nor weste Barflette nas and wolneserde south southeast, and nor norwest.
The schapel hogges and neldes south and northe. The hagge be east, Ro∣kys nese, and Wolnesord south and by west, north and by east. Wolnesorde and Garuesaye south southeweste and quarter tyde vnder other at Wolne∣sord. From Wolnesord to the Begge of saynte telynes halfe tyde vnder other And from saint Telines to chaike sord is halfe tyde, and a south mone make hyest water with in wight nedelles. And they forne lieth south west and by west, and northeast and by east the nel¦des and ye cornelāde west and east and the nedylles it flowes south east, and by south from the nedelles to portland west south west, and east north east at the Poll within Hauen it flowes nor west, and southeast, and in the fayre waye southe southeast & north north west, at Waymouth within the hauen east and west at the byll at Portlande south southeast and north north weste. The sayne heed and Portelande lyeth
west northwest, & east southeast. Port¦lande and Garnsay south and north. Sayne heed and the Hyunde by west dartmouth east and by south west and by north Portland and bery lande east and by north, west and by south Bery lande and Sterte-west southwest and east north east. Bytwyxte Portland and start euery hauen is tyde east west Bytwyxte Berylande and the landes ende of Englande that is halfe tyde in the fayre waye Bytwixte the start and Lessart the course is east and west and beware of the Edy stones al the ha∣uens he ful Bytwixte the Starte and Lessarte the course at weste southweste moone the landes end and Lessarte ly¦eth east south easte and west Norwest at the landes ende lyeth the. Raynolde stone a lytle yurth of but .xii. fadomes shal lede you wythout hym And south south west of the landes ende lyeth the Golfe the Lange shyppes and the lan∣des ende lyeth nor nor west, and south
south east, the lange shypes and saynt Mary oūde of Sylly lieth west south west and east northeast. Saynt Mary stound and Vishāt lyeth nor west, and by north south east, and by south. Syl¦ly and the sayne lyeth south south east and nor norwest, The sayne & Vsshant lyeth south and north. Vsshant and the Popyll hope lyethe north and by west, and south and by east. Vsshant and Lyssart north and south, Lyssart and saynt Mary stounde of Sylly ly∣eth weste and easte, but beware of the Gulfe, but Saynt Mary stounde and the Forne nor west and southeast. The Forne and Popyl hop nor north west. and south south east. The Forne and Lyssart north and by east, and south & by west. The Forne and the Gred by east. Falmoth north and south. The forne and the Ramhed nor north east, and south southwest. Vsshant and the Ramhed north east and by north south west and by south. The Forne and Be¦ry
lande north east and by north, south west and by south. The Starte and Baspal north and south. Base∣pal and Ramhede north and by weste, & south & by east. Garnsay and the Hiwnd by west Dartmoth west north west, and east southeast. (*) ∵ ❧FINIS.
