12865 99852542 17867
THE CHRISTIAN LIFE AND DEATH, OF MISTRIS KATHERIN BRETTERGH, LATE wife of Master WILLIAM BRETTERGH, of Bretterghoult, in the Countie of Lancaster Gentleman. With the manner of a bitter conflict shee had with Satan, and blessed conquest by CHRIST, before her death, to the great glory of God, and comfort of all beholders. MICHA. 7. 8. Reioyce not against me, O mine enemies: though I fall, I shall rise againe: And when I sit in darkenesse, the Lord shall be a light vnto me. PSALM. 37. 37. Marke the vpright man, and behold the iust: for the end of that man is peace. LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1634.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, grace and peace in IESVS CHRIST. VVHen Achimaaz the sonne of Zadoc requested that he might be the messenger to bring Dauid word of Absoloms death, Ioab would not suf∣fer him: Thou shall not (saith he) be the messen∣ger 2 Sam. 18. 19, 20. to day, but thou shalt carry newes another time, but to day thou shalt carry none; for the Kings sonne is dead. He knew Dauids affection was such, that the newes of his childes death would bee most heauie to him, and the messenger himselfe not wel∣come for his message sake. This is all our infirmity, no tidings more grieuous to us, then when wee heare of the death of those whom wee loue. The Parent bewailes his Childe, the Husband his Wife, the Friend laments the death of his Friend, and wee thinke it the losse of another friend to depart with this our griefe. Iacob mourned for Ioseph his sonne, that hee would not bee comforted of a long season, but thought hee would Gen. 37. 3. weepe for him as long as he liued. When the Amalekites had burned Ziklag, and led away captiue the mens wiues and their children, Da∣uid 1 Sa. 30. 4. Ioh. 1. 19. and his campany wept, till they could weepe no more. When La∣zarus died, his sisters, Martha and Mary were much discomforted for him. So heauie a thing wee see it is to bee seuered for a time from those that are deare vnto us. One onely thing there is, which is able in this case much to temper our affections; when we see our friend to die in the Lord; that is, in comfort of conscience, and assurance of saluation through Christ. This blessed departure God giues to many, for diuers good purpo∣ses. First, that the world may know that peace is the end of the iust, and comfort in death is the portion of the righteous. Secondly, That his eternall truth in our holy profession may appeare to bee able to comfort us, not only in our life, but in our death also, when all other comforts forsake vs. Thirdly, that our enemies may see our faith is not in vaine. Fourthly, that the weake by their example may be en∣couraged to a holy life, when they see it bring with it so happy a death, and that they may be strengthened against the feare of death, seeing it is alwayes comfortable to those that lead a godly life. Fifth∣ly, and finally, that the friends of the departed, by their heauenly de∣parture, may be admonished not to mourne so much for their death, as to reioyce for their life, and to thanke God, that euer it was their lot, in any degree to be ioyned or matched with so blessed seruants of God.
This Gentlewoman, Mistresse Katherine Brettergh was one of this number: her life, as long as God continued it, was deere to those among whom she was, as the life of a friend might be. Her husband, friends, kinsfolks, brethren, sisters, and all the godly that knew her, enioyed a great blessing of God of her: and her death (no doubt) was grievous to her husband, as the death of a vertuous yokefellow. This is the thing I thought with profit might bee presented to the view of other also that knew her not: for when I had for my owne priuate vse, and the vse of my friends faithfully collected (out of the fresh memories of those that were present, and eie-witnesses as well as my selfe) and set downe the manner of her sicknesse and death: I considered, that the knowledge thereof could not but bee welcome to all those that desire to dye the death of the righteous. And so the same causes that moued me to collect it, gaue mee also occasion to publish it. I remembred the saying of one, That it is is great piety to set forth the vertues of the departed, if they haue excelled therein; yea it is Nazianz. Monod. Bailii. a meanes to encrease grace in our selues. I thought so great mercie of God shewed to one among vs, ought not to be forgotten, but should remaine to us and our children an example, to teach vs how good God is to them that loue him, and to assure vs that he will neuer for∣sake vs; but, in like manner as he did her, helpe and comfort vs, when we shall by death be called vnto him. I considered the vngodly and vncharitable tongues of the Papists abiding in our Country, who, since her death, haue not ceased to giue it out, that she died despairing, and by her comfortlesse end, shewed that she professed a comfortlesse Religion. Wherein they bewray their malice and madnesse, and shew themselues of what generation they are, euen a people (saith Ieremie) which bend their tongues like bowes for lies: and (as Dauid saith) make Ier. 9. . Psal. 11. 2. ready their arrowes to shoot at them which are vpright in heart. And lastly, when I remembred the censure giuen by our Sauiour Christ of the woman, that powred costly oyntment on his head, a little before his Passion, though some of his Disciples vniustly blamed her for the same, saying, What needed this wast? yet he himselfe did not only excuse her for that fact, saying, shee did it to bury him: but also com∣manded, that wheresoeuer the Gospell should bee preached throughout the world, there also that which shee had done should bee spoken of, for a Mat. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. memoriall of her. Euen so, seeing this vertuous Gentlewoman hath been vniustly accused by some popish persons, I thought it it, that she should not onely be iustly excused, but also that a true history of her holy life, and Christian death, should be now published in print, as a briefe history to be seene and read for a memoriall of her. I had no other odours wherewith to embalme her, I am but the penman, the thing it selfe was her owne, wrought in her by the spirit, of diuine prouidence, the which God grant that we may all imitate. Amen.
The holie Life and Christian Death, of Mistris KATHERIN BRETTERGH. THis Gentlewoman was borne in Cheshire, the daughter of Iohn Breuen of Breuen∣stapleford Esquire, well descended, and of an ancient House. Her education before her mariage was such, as became the pro∣fession of the Gospell, in godlinesse and purity of life and Religion, and well be∣seemed the house where shee was brought Staple∣ford. up. The Scriptures shee knew from a childe, and by reading thereof, gained such knowledge, that shee was able readily to ap∣ply them when occasson was offered, as we may see at the time of her death, and that so fitly, and effectually, that shee seemed to haue made them her dayly meditation. For the things of this world shee was moderate, and sober, and by her Christian life and death, shee might teach many Gentlewomen, how vaine the plea∣sures and fashions of this World are, and how farre vnable to bring that peace to a distressed heart, that the embracing of true Religion can. Shee used not to ga abroad with wandring Diah, to ncing grenes, markets, or publike assemblies; but rather with Han∣nah Gen. 34. 1. a. 1. 9 1. did chuse to tread vpon the dust of the Sanctuary, and walke in the waies of Sion; yea, with Dauid rather to be a doore∣keeper in the house of God than to haue society with the wicked, Psal. 84. 10. or to dwell in the tents and tabernacles of the vngodly. The Sab∣bath day was alwaies deere and welcome to her, what time shee would not be without the Word preached, though many times she went farre for it. Her delight was still to consecrate it glorious to the Lord. And as it is said of Iosiah, his heart melted when hee heard 2 Ki. 22. 19. the Law; so may it be said of her, her heart was so tender, and full of compassion, that oftentimes she was scene to heare Sermons, reade, pray, and meditate with teares.
Shee made conscience of all slaue; yea, of the least sinne, such as worldlings count no sinne: shee neuer vsed to sweare oath great nor small; nor yet to abuse her tongue with vaine or vnseemely speeches; no not so much as a iest-lye, or immodest word; neither durst shee name the Name of GOD, or take his titles in her mouth without great reuerence. In priuate speech where shee might speake with profit, shee did it so well, that her speeches might haue beene deliuered by a stronger vessell then her selfe: her words being so well seasoned, and proceeding from such a san∣ctified heart, did alwaies minister grace to the hearers. Psal. 16. 3. To reade, to pray, to sing, to meditate, was her dayly exercise; and her chiefest delight was in the holy society of the Saints vpon earth (which I say not for any cause, but only to shew the foun∣taine from whence her godly end flowed, and that the World may see some there be, which chuse rather to bee ioyned with the people Heb. 11. 25. of God, than to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season; and these I doubt not haue chosen the better part.) Finally, the precepts of the Lord were precious vnto her; for from her childehood she fea∣red God, and walked before him: both knowledge and sanctifica∣tion did ioyne in her, the fruites and effects whereof did appeare in her life, and was seene at her death, to the glory of God, and comfort of all beholders. She was not like the simple Popish women of our dayes, which 2 Tim. 3. 6, 7. Act. 17, 11, 12. are euer learning, and neuerable to come to the knowledge of the truth; but rather like the Noble men and women of Berea, which receiued the Word of God with readinesse, and were able to dis∣cerne of Paul and Silas preaching. But why doe I speake of Po∣pish women, whose vnderstandings are darker than the darkenesse of Egypt: Let vs come and examine many other which seeme to detest Poperie, and aske them a reason of their faith; they can tell you a tale of their ruffes, and their pride, and their vanity: but for Religion, it is the least thing they regard, or seeke to know: which I speake not so much to solace my selfe in the sinnes and sim∣plicitie of others, as earnestly desiring all Gentlewomen, that ei∣ther knew this holy Saint of God, or hereafter shall heare of her, in stead of your glasses at home, wherein you pricke and prune, and pinne your selues, to looke into this glasse before your eyes, that so her life, and death, may bee an example for you to follow.
When she was about twenty yeeres old, (by the consent of her selfe and her friends) she was married to a young Lancashire Gen∣tleman, Master William Brettergh of Bretterghoult neere Liuer∣poole: one that likewise embraced Religion sincerely, and for the same indured many grieuances at the hands of Papists. Two yeeres and more she liued after she was married, and had issue onely one daughter: during which time, this couple liued to∣gether Anna Bret∣tergh. in such mutuall ioy and comfort, as well beseemed the chil∣dren of God, which make profession of his truth. And although this Gentlewomen came from the inhabitants of Abraham, to dwell in Sodome, amidst the tents of Kedar, that is to say, among Ps. 120. 5. inhumane hands of bruish Papists, induring many temporall grieuances from them yet her knowledge, patience, milde inclina∣tion, and constancie for the truth was such, as that her husband was farther builded vp in Religion by her meanes, and his face dayly more and more hardened against th deuill, and all his plaguie agents: the Popish Recusants, Church Papists, prophane Atheists, and carnall Protestants, which swarmed together like ornets in those parts. It is not vnknowne to Lancashire, what Horses and Cattell of her husbands were killed vpon his grounds in the night, most bar∣barouslie at two seuerall times by Smiary Priests, (no questi∣on) and Recusants that lurked thereabouts. And what a lsse and hinderance it was vnto him, being all the stocke hee had on his grounds to any purpose: This fell out not long after shee was married to him; yet this was so farre from dismaying her, or wor∣king such passions in her, as are common to her sex, that shee ra∣ther Iohn Wright in∣tosquier, Richard Orme. Raph Hea∣ton, &c. and many . rejoyced, then sorrowed; turning it into matter of praising God, and submitting her selfe to his good prouidence. Oft shee would haue said, It is good that such things bee; but woe bee to them that doe them. It is good in God, thereby to chasten his children, and preuent some sinne, which he saw vs like to fall into. It is good in respect of Gods Church, that the weake may be con∣firmed in the truth; and that Papistry may bee disgraced, when the World shall see such wickednesse flow from it. It is good in GOD, that so the wicked may bee without excuse at the day of iudgement, when their conscience shall tell them, that howsoeuer GOD suffers them to doe such villanie for some iust cause
knowne to himselfe; yet they commit it only of malice and reuenge. Oftentimes also in these vexations, shee would haue said; the mercies of God are infinite, who doth not onely by his Word, but also by his Justice, make vs fit for his Kingdome. Little doe our enemies know, what good by these things they doe vnto vs, and what wracke they bring to their owne Kingdome, while they se forth the wickednesse thereof. Many times shee would pray that God would forgiue them, which had done them this hurt, and send them repentance: and shee would call vpon her husband, that hee would doe the like, and blesse them that cursed him. And for feare Mat. 5. 44. lest her husband should faile in that point through infirmity and weakenesse, as it is said of Iob, who offered sacrifice for his sonnes, lest peraduenture they should sinne, and blaspheme God in their Iob. 1. 5. hearts: so shee neuer failed, but dayly prayed vnto the Lord to san∣ctifie her husbands thoughts, and direct his heart aright, onely to seeke Gods glory, without either desire of reuenge, or satisfying his owne affections. So humble was her spirit, so carefull to auoide and preuent sinne, both in her selfe and others: and so milde of nature, that as Iacob with his mildenesse softned the malicious Gen. 33. 3, 4. heart of Esau his brother: and Dauid by his kindenesse in the caue, changed the fury of Saul, into weeping and confession, that Dauid was more righteous than hee: so shee by her meekenesse, humili∣ty, 1 Sam. 14. 17, 18. and vnspotted carriage in the World, forced some of the ad∣uersaries to religion, to speake well of her. For her life, shee was well reported of all that knew her. Piti∣full and bountifull was shee to the poore, and slacked no opportu∣nity to doe good wherein she could; but constantly held her course, and kept her times of praying, reading, and meditating, (wherein shee had plentifull gifts) and contiuuasly used the same at such times as were fitting for her estate, sex, and calling. At the exerci∣ses of Religion, as prayer and instruction in her family, she would not be wanting: besides priuate prayer, and meditation which she omitted not, but vsed dayly, both in her chamber, as also abroad secretly and solitarily in the Orchard, Garden, or Fields, as Isacks manner was. In reading the Scriptures shee vsed euer∣more Ge. 24. 63. to taske her selfe, eight Chapters a day at the least, and for the time which shee saw euill or idlely spent, without doing some good, shee vsed to call the time of tentation. Many times also
she would read some godly writer, or expositor of Scripture, or in the booke of Martyrs; and was seene to weepe most bitterly, when either she had read of that which touched her affections neere, or of the cruell Martyrdome, which the deere Children of God were Exo. 13. 13. Psal. 16. 4. Ephes. 5. 3. Iudg. 6. 31, 32. Eccles. 4. 25. 28. put vnto, by the cruell and wicked tyrants of former dayes. For Popery, she saw it so grosse and foolish, that she would not once name it, except it were to argue against it, but neuer for it: so zealous was shee of Gods glory, and loued the truth so entirely, that shee would not once open her mouth to plead for Baal. Sinne aboue all things was hatefull vnto her, for thereat shee would haue grieued, as well when shee had seene it in others, as in her selfe. One or two examples I cannot omit, wherein shee be∣wrayed a worthy spirit, sanctified by the Spirit of God, and pre∣pared for all the assaults of Satan. On a time, as her husband and shee were riding toward the Church, he was angry with his man: Alas husband (quoth shee) I feare your heart is not right towards God, that can be thus angry for a trifle: And weeping shee said fur∣ther, you must pray against this your affection, and alwayes bee sure your anger bee of God, for else how dare you appeare this day be∣fore his Minister? And offer vp your prayers in the publike congre∣gregation of the saints of God? Another time, a Tenant of her husbands, being behinde with his rent, shee desired him to beare yet with him a quarter of a yeere, which he did: and when the man brought his mony, with teares she said to her husband: I feare you doe not well to take it of him though it be your right, for I doubt he is not well able to pay it, and then you oppresse the poore. So great a compassion had shee of other mens wants, that all things being duely considered, and rightly weighed, methinks I may say of her, as Paul said of Timothie, I know none like minded. Phil. 2. 20. Thus after she was married, shee continued in the things shee had learned, and held her profession with much sincerity, that the common enemies to our religion (the very Papists) had nothing to say against her, but confessed her life was vnreprooueable. And as for the godly that knew her, they alwayes acknowledged that modesty, and vertuous carriage in her, ioyned with knowledge and practise of all the duties of religion, that they had lust cause to re∣port of her, as of a sound and faithfull professor of the Gospell. Two yeeres, and something more shee liued with her husband,
till about , it pleased God to send her that sicknesse whereof on Whitsonday 1601. she died. Her sickenesse tooke her in the manner of a hot burning Ague,  D. 01. which made her according to the nature of such diseases, now and then to talke somewhat idely, and through the tempters subtilty, which abused the infirmity of her body to that end, as hee often∣times useth to doe in many, from idle words, to descend into a hea∣uie conflict, with the infirmity of her owne spirit; from the which yet the Lord presently and wonderfully deliuered her, giuing so ioyfull an issue to the tentation, that shee might well vse the words of the Prophet, as afterwards she did, For a moment O Lord thou diddest hide thy face from mee, for a little season, but with euerla∣sting Isai. 54. . mercy thou hadst compassion on me. On Saturday seuen-night before Whitsonday, what time she sickened, she began to feele some May 23. little infirmity and weakenesse of faith, more than shee had wont to shew, but shee soone ouercame it. On Munday night it encrea∣sed vpon her, and the assault of the enemie began to be sharpe, and May 25. so continued till the next day at afternoone; what time God deli∣uered her, and sent her peace, and comfort of conscience, and so en∣creased the same in her continually till shee died. The manner of her affliction was this: First, the seuerity of Gods iustice, and the greatnesse of her sinnes began to come into her minde, which much afflicted her, M. William Brettergh. Master Will. Fox. M. Edward Aspinwall. M. Iohn Brettergh. Mistris Mad Bret∣tergh. Mistris Scholastica Fox. William Woodward. Elizabeth Challoner. and shee would often speake of it. Then shee accused her selfe of pride, that shee had delighted to much in her selfe, and her beauty. Afterwards she thought she had no faith, but was full of hypocri∣sie, and had not embraced religion so earnestly, nor glorified God so worthily (especially with her tongue, which oft she repeated) nor loued him so sincerely, as she ought to haue done. Sometime she would cast her Bible from her, and say: It was indeed the booke of life, but shee read the same vnprofitably, and therefore feared it was become to her the booke of death. Sometimes she would say her sinnes had made her a prey to Satan; a spectacle to the world; a disgrace to religion; and a shame to her husband, kindred, and all true Christians: and here she would weepe bitterly. Sometime the originall corruption wherein she was borne, troubled her, and the sinnes of her parents, and the common parents of all, the eaters of the forbidden fruit: as if that had made her vnworthy of God,
and were then laid to her charge. Many times shee accused her selfe of impatience, bewailing the want of feeling Gods Spirit, and ma∣king doubt of her election, and such like infirmities. She wisd, that she had neuer been borne, or that shee had been made any other creature, rather than a woman. She cried out oftentimes, Woe woe, woe, &c. a weake, a wofull,  wretched, a forsaken woman, and such like pitifull complaints against her selfe, with teares continu∣ally trickling from her eyes. She complained of grieuous thirst, such as all the water in the sea could not quench (and yet when drinke was giuen her, sometimes refused it, sometimes tooke a ve∣ry little of it:) swat burst out vpon her exceedingly, and sometime her body burned extreamely. So it seemed the sorrowes of death hemm'd her in, and the griefes of hell laid hold vpon her. Some∣times she was very dull in prayer, and once when shee should haue said, Leade vs not into tentation, shee made a stop, saying, I may not pray; I may not pray (being interrupted, as she said, by Satan) and so shewed much discomfort: howbeit she was not fe till e could both pray, and make confession of her faith with speciall applica∣tion to her selfe. Besides these ry darts of Satan, she was once or twice troubled with vaine speeches, as of her childe, the killing of her husbands cattell, that shee thought shee saw a re by her, &c. But euery one saw that these things proceeded of weaknesse, emp∣tinesse of her head, and want of sleepe, which her disease would not affoord her. These its, though they were for the time grieuous to her selfe, and discomfortable to her friends; yet were they neither long, nor continuall, but in the very middest of them would shee oftentim giue testimony of her faith, striuing and fighting against her tenta∣tions. Many times when the landers by iudged her afflictions at the sharpest, would shee call vpon God, lifting vp her eyes and hands to heauen, and desire him to giue her strength against her ten∣tations. Many times with a cheerefull countenance she would de∣sire those that were by, not to faint, or to giue her ouer, but constant∣ly to pray, and helpe her against the tempter. Once in the midd'st of her tentation, being demanded by Master William Fox: whether Will. Fox. she did beleeue the promises of God, or no? and whether she could pray? she answered. O that I could, I would willingly but hee will Mark. 9. . not let me. Lord I beleeue, helpe my vnbeleefe: which she pronoun∣ced
with a still voyce. And when he replied, that if she had a desire to pray and beleeue, she did pray and beleeue, and that so effectual∣ly, that hell gates should not ouercome her, according to that of the Apostle: God accepteth it according to that a man hath, not accor∣ding to that a man hath not: she was much comforted thereby.  Cor. 8. 12. Once after a great conflict with Satan, she said: Satan reason not with me, I am but a weake woman, if thou haue any thing to William Brettergh. say, say it to my Christ; he is my advocate, my strength, and my re∣deemer, and he shall pleade for me. Sometimes when she was af∣flicted with the accusation of her sinnes, and want of feeling Gods mercy, she would with many a pitifull sob and much weeping, pray to the Lord Iesus Christ, to helpe and comfort her a poore, wofull, Iohn Bret∣tergh. distressed woman, and requested others to pray for her. And when shee was mooued to make confession of her faith, she would doe it oftentimes, saying the Apostles Creed, and concluding the same Edward Aspinwall. with words of application to her selfe. I beleeue the remission of (my) sinnes, the resurrection of (my) body, and eternall life (to me) Amen. And hauing done, shee would pray God to confirme her in that aith, euer concluding with the Lords prayer, as de∣uoutly and reuerently as any that were present. A Christian friend, who by his dayly attendance on her, discharged the duty of a faith∣full Christian, standing by told her that no tentation had be fallen her, but that which appertained to the childe of God, and that God William Woodwaad. is faithfull and true, and had promised to giue an issue with the tenta∣tion: whereas she expressed great comfort. Master Edward Aspinwall, a faithfull professour of the truth, and a true Israelie, was much with her in the time of her sicknesse, and ministred much heauenly instruction vnto her, and comforted her at all times with apt places of Scripture, meeting with her Isai. 40. 1, 2. 28. 29, 30, 31. Isai. 41. 8, 9, 10. 13. 14. 17. 18. Isai. 4. 1. 8. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 13. 14. 15. 16. Isai. 43. 1. 2. 5. 15. Mat. 11. 28. temptations: and so put the sword of the spirit into her hand. He propounded to her the most plentifull comforts of God vnto his Church, in the 40, 41, 42, and 43. Chapters of Isaiah, vttered in such speeches and phrases, a might most fitly answere her discom∣forts. Also he directed her to consider the Passion and Prayer of our Sauiour Christ, for all his, Iohn 17. Matth. 26. Luke 22. 23. But especiall did hee often iculcate that sweet inuitation of our Sauiour: Come vnto me all you that trauell and be heauy laden, I will ase you. But the difficulty she had sometimes to apply these
generals vnto her owne soule in particular, made the ease more full of anguish to her felfe, and fearefull and lamentable to the standers by: Albeit shee acknowledged Gods Maiesty, mercy, faithfulnesse, and truth; yet still complained she of her owne weak∣nesse, and vnworthinesse, and could hardly appropriate each thing to her selfe. To helpe her somewhat herein (for properly otherwise, it is the peculiar worke of the holy Spirit of God, to perswade the heart and soule of her particular interest in these generall promises) she was told, that the Almighty who was mercifull, as she had pro∣ued, and faithfull, as she confessed, intended all these mercies to as many as hee did call, and make promise to. And that hee called her shee must needes confesse, both because that then shee not onely her selfe read, but hard others reade those blessed words of God vnto her: and also for that in former times, she had been touched with the loue of God, and that his truth: and had well profited in the detestation of sinne, and imitation of her Sauiour in a holy life. And for the proofe thereof, shee was wished to remember in former times her Baptisme, her frequenting of Sermons, and often receiuing the most comfortable repast of the holy Communion, her dayly, and almost continuall exercise of reading, meditating, and praying, &c. Also hee assured her, that neither the present agony she was in, nor the speeches thn in that distresse, tending to the sig∣nification of despaire, extorted from her, were any iust causes, why either she, or any that heard her, should iudge fearefully of her, be∣cause all might see the fault was not in her will, as appeared by her prayers, confessions, plaints, sighs, teares, and grones to God for mercie, and full assurance in the blood of Christ; but in her iudgement, not able at that time to discerne the wayes of the Al∣mighty: And therein (he told her) she was made conformable, not onely to many the holy Saints of God, Iob, Ieremy, Dauid, and others more, but also to her head, our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus, of whom wee reade, that some have cursed the day of their Iob 31. &c. Ier. 20. 14. Iob 6. 4. 8. 9. Iob. 16. 9. Lament. 3. &c. Psal. 6. 3. birth, and called for their end, and darknesse to couer them: They haue beene as men without hope, and swallowed vp in despaire: They haue cried, how the wrath of God hath torne them, and the terrors of the almighty have fought against them: They haue had no peace in their soules, nor comfort in their consciences, their pray∣ers
have beene shut from God, their sinnes haue beene terrible vnto Psal. 38. 4. &c. Psal. 71. 7. Psal. 77. 1. 7. &c. Psal. 51. 5. Psal. 102. . &c. Rom. 7. 24. Mat. 27. 46. Mat. 26. 38. Hob. 5. 7. them, crying that their iniquities had gone ouer their heads, and were a burden too heavy for them to beare: And they have thought themselues spectacles of shame and reproch, and as monsters vnto men: They were grieved for the sinnes of their parents, and com∣plained that they were desolate, forsaken, and most miserable and wretched in the world; yet for all this were they still the deare children of God, as you are this day. Nay (saith hee) I pray you consider, what corments God inflicted vpon his deare Sonne on the Crosse: did hee not cry out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? He complained, that his soule was heavie vnto death; yet was he heard in that which he feared, and God deliuered him. After this, hee read vnto her the 22. Psalme, wherein Dauid com∣plained partly of his owne, but principally of the most bitter an∣guish which our Sauiour Christ endured, and suffered in body and soule, putting her in minde, that her case was not so bad as Davids, not much vnlike our Sauiours, who endured all that, and more for her; and therefore she had no cause to feare, seeing Christ had obtained victory, and would vndoubtedly bee with her, deli∣uer her, and eternally glorifie her with himselfe for euermore; and so continually hee propounded to her such comfortable places of Scripture as might meete with her infirmities. This greatly re∣freshed her, and gaue her occasion many times to call vpon God, for increase of grace, and deliuerance from her grieuous temp∣tations: The which God of his accustomed goodnesse vouchsa∣fed, on Tuesday, about three a clocke in the afternoone, what time May 6. shee felt her selfe in very good measure deliuered from all her for∣mer feares and afflictions. But on Saturday next after, which was the day before her death, shee was wholly released, and filled with such inward comfort, that it greatly affected vs that saw it. This is the summe of that temptation which she had, wherein what can any man see that might giue iust occasion to report our religion comfortlesse, or the Gentlewoman died despairing? This we are sure of, that to be without temptation is the greatest temptation: as also, that nothing esell her, which hath not befal∣len the holiest of the children of God. And shee that considered her owne corruption) which how great it is in the best of Gods Saints, I need not say) and bethought her selfe of the punish∣ment
due thereunto, if God in iustice should reward her; no mar∣uell if she brake out sometime into heauie complaints. I make no question it was the worke of God in her, to suffer Satan to ac∣cuse her, and afflict her for her sinnes, that so shee might the better see them, and consider the hanousnesse of them, and before her de∣parture repent her of them, and betake her wholly to Christ for the sauing of her soule. And if it pleased God thus to make her possesse her sins before she died, let those which neuer yet knew the weight of their sinnes, e wise in time, and remember that hee shall neuer haue his sinne forgiuen, which first or last doth not vndergoe a holy despaire for it, and acknowledge nothing to remaine in him∣selfe, but matter of iudgement and condemnation: and comfort and eternall life to flow alone from Iesus Christ. And as for those, which haue learned to scoffe at the terrors of Gods children, and to censure such as are at sometimes cast downe with feeling the anger of God against sinne, let them consider the blessed issue that God gaue to the troubles of this Gentlewoman, and let them acknowledge his worke in her. And if they will not doe this, but proceed to traduce the dead, then let them call to minde, those of the Popish crue, and persons of greater note among them, than this Gentlewoman was, which haue died most fearefully indeed. Cardinall Sadelot, Iacobus Latomus the Di∣uinity Fox. Act and Mon. p. 104. 61. pag. 198. Reader at Louaine, Homester the Frier, Guarlacus, Bom∣lius, Crescentius the Cardinall, Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Win∣chester, and diuers the bloudy persecutors in Queene Maries time, and some of the Popes themselues, as namely, Francis the Monke, one of the ten popish persons con∣uerted in France, An. Dom. 1601. See Hasen Miller. hi∣storia Iesi∣tica, who sets downe certaine examples of the Iesuites to this pur∣pose. Pope Sixus Quintus of late yeeres; all which died most fearefully and misera∣bly, and shewed manifest signes at their death, that their popish superstition was the condemnation of their soules. And if they will iudge of my religion by my death, let them acknowledge their religion is the doctrine of desperation, and that the truth and faith which was able to fill the heart and toue of this blessed Gen∣tlewoman at her death, with such heauenly comforts, is the do∣ctrine of Christ, reuealed from heauen, that wee might liue and dye in it. From Tuesday, till Whitson euen, her comfort still increased, and temptations banished away. Shee would th very cheare∣fully ioyne with the company in prayer, and singing Psalmes, as
occasion offered, and performed all such duties, as was meet fo her in that estate. One day, her brother Master Iohn Breuen of Iohn Bruen Esquire. William Brettergh. Will. o, Iohn Bret∣tergh. William Woodward. Iohn Hol∣land. Maud Bret∣tergh. Scholastica Fox. 1 Pet. 4. 17. 18. Iohn Hol∣land. William Brettergh. William Woodward. Breuenstapleford came from his house in Cheshire to visit her, and after some kinde salutation passed betweene them, hee said vnto her: Sister, be not dismaied at your troubles, but remember what the Apostle saith, that iudgement must begin at the house of God: To whom shee answered, as one that was also very readie in the Scriptures, with the very next words following, True it is, and if it begin at us, and the righteous shall scarce be saued, where shall the sinners and vngodly appeare? After that, she prayed with him, and sung a Psalme with him, as one that receiued great comfort by him, and acknowledged in him, a heart set to seeke the things belonging to the Kingdome of Christ. During this time, in the night with such as waked with her, shee would pray and rehearse for her comfort many texts of Scripture, and namely, the 8. to the Romans, many times concluding and closing vp that she read, or repeated, with prayer, and most comfortable bles and applicati∣ons thereof to her selfe, with shew of such ioy and comfort, that the hearers reioyced at it. When Richard Orme. Iohn Hol∣land. William Brettergh. Will. Wood∣word. Will. Fo. Reuel. 21. 6 William Brettergh. Will. Fox. Psal. 119. 71. 72. William Brettergh. M Bret∣tergh. William Brettergh. . 8. 15. Will. Fox. she receiued any meate, shee prayed God not onely to sanctifie those creatures for her bodily sustenance, but also to fill her soule with the waters of life, often repeating that of the Reuelation, To him that thirsteth, will I giue of the waters of life freely. One time she tooke her Bible in her hand, and ioyfully kissing it, and looking vp toward Heauen, she said that of the Psalme: O Lord, it is good for mee that I haue beene afflicted, that I may learne thy statutes: The law of thy mouth is better to mee than thousands of gold and siluer. Another time shee called her husband to her, and said: O Hus∣band, beware of Papistry, keepe your selfe holy before the Lord: Yeeld not to the abomination of the wicked, lest they reioyce, and so you dishonour God, and destroy your owne soule. Againe shee said, Let my little Childe bee brought vp among the Children of God, and in the true feare and knowledge of his Maiesty; so shall I meete her in heauen, whom now I must leaue behinde me on earth. Againe sometime she would pray with a low voyce to her selfe, and that saying of Paul, Wee haue not receiued the spirit of bon∣dage to feare any more, but the Spirit of adoption, whereby wee
cry Abba father, was much in her mouth: and the last words Ab∣ba father, she would double oftentimes ouer. She would sing to her selfe the last verse of the 13. Psalme. I will giue thankes vnto the Lord, and praises to him sing: Because he hath heard my request, and granted my wishing. Finally, in these and such like exercises and meditations, did she spend the whole time of her sicknesse, after the Lord had once enlar∣ged her heart from the tentations of Satan. But vpon Saturday about eleuen of the clocke in the morning, Maij 30. the Lord disclosed himselfe in mercy, to her more plentifully, than euer before, and as I may say, hee dealt familiarly with his hand∣maid: for from that time, to her very death, which ensued the next day, the feeling of Satans tentations seemed quite to be ba∣nished from her; so that she made no shew of them, her thoughts were not occupied with the world, husband, childe, or any thing else, to our thinking; neither was her sickenesse troublesome to her, as before it had beene: but as one raised from death to life, or rauished in spirit, so seemed shee to vs that stood by: her counte∣nance ioyfull: her tongue flowing with the praises of God: and her voyce as most heauenly musicke and melody of peace, soun∣ding praise, and honour, and glory to God in a wonderfull man∣ner, as followeth. About eleuen of the clocke shee began to tremble and quake a little, and withall shee asked her husband if he would helpe her William Brettergh. Maud Bret∣tergh. Elizabeth Challoner. with prayer to God against the tempter, saying, will yee neither pray with me, nor bring some godly man that may put holy things into my minde, whereby I may bee able to resist Satan: hauing thus said, shee vttered these words: O Lord God of my saluation, helpe my weaknesse, plead thou my cause, O God of truth, for in thee doe I trust. After this, they prayed together, and shee answe∣red Amen to euery petition. Then after this shee required him to reade some part of the Scripture: whereupon hee read vnto her the 8. to the Romans, the 91. Psalme, and the 17. of Iohn, the which as he read, and came to the fourth verse, I haue finished the worke which thou gauest me to doe, and now glorifie me: She desired him to pause a while, and then said, Blessed be thy name, O blessed Sauiour, perfect the worke I humbly beseech thee which thou hast begun in me. Then as he read the 9. verse, I pray not
for the world, but for them which thou hast giuen me, for they are thine: she interrupted him againe, saying, O Lord Iesu, dost thou pray for me? O blessed and sweet Sauiour, How wonderfull! how wonderfull! how wonderfull are thy mercies! Reade on said shee, the blessedst reading that I euer heard, the comfort whereof doth sweeten my soule. Then reading verse the 22. And the glorie which thou gauest me, I haue giuen them, that they may be one as we are one. With maruellous ioy she vttered the words of Da∣uid many times ouer, I confesse before the Lord his louing kind∣nesse, and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men: for hee Psal. 107. 8, 9. hath satisfied my soule, and filled my hungry soule with goodnesse. When he came to the 24. verse, Father I will that they which thou hast giuen me, be with me, euen where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou hast giuen mee; Stay, said shee, and let mee meditate on the goodnesse of the Lord, for this is the swee∣test saying that euer came to my soule: for now I perceiue and feele the countenance of Christ my redeemer is turned towards me, and the bright-shining beames of his mercy is spread ouer me: Oh happie am I, that euer I was borne, to see this blessed day! Praise, O praise the Lord, for his mercies; for hee hath brought mee out of darkenesse, and the shadow of death; he hath deliuered my soule from the snare of the hunter, a hath taken me out of the denne of Lions, euen from the iawes of Leuiathan, that piercing ai. 7. 1. and crooked serpent, and hath set me in a place of rest, and sweet refreshing: Oh praise the Lord, O my soule, all that is within mee Psalm. 103. 1, , 3, 4. praise his holy name: my soule praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, which forgiueth all thine iniquities, and healeth all thine infirmities: which hath redeemed thy life from the graue, and crowneth thee with mercy and compassion. This shee often re∣pented: And then againe remembring the 21. and 22. verses of the 17. of Iohn, shee said: O my sweet Sauiour, shall I be one with thee, as thou art one with thy Father? And wilt thou glorifie mee with that glory which thou haddest with the Father before the world was? And doest thou so loue me (which am but dust and ashes) to make me partaker of glory with Christ? What am I poore Psal. 144. 3. Psal. 8. 4. wretch, that thou art so mindefull of me? Oh how wonderfull! how wonderfull! how wonderfull is thy loue! Oh thy loue is vn∣speakable, that hast dealt so graciously with mee! oh I feele thy
mercies, and oh that my tongue and heart were able to sound forth thy praises as I ought, and as I willingly would doe! oh that you all would helpe me to praise the holy one of Israel, the God of all consolations! And thus for the space of fiue houres together at the least, she continued praising and lauding the Lord, with such a gladsome and heauenly countenance, testifying such inward ioy, from a comfortable feeling of the mercies of God in her soule, and vsing such sweet sentences and sugred phrases of perfect and holy eloquence, as the truth thereof, if it could haue beene taken, were admirable, continuing so many houres together; some part whereof was this. O my Lord, oh my God, blessed bee thy name for euermore, which hast shewed me the path of life. Thou didst, O Lord, hide thy face from me for a little season, but with euerlasting mercy, thou Isai. 54. 8. hast had compassion on me: And now blessed Lord thy comforta∣ble presence is come, yea Lord, thou hast had respect vnto thy handmaid and art come with fulnesse of ioy, and abundance of con∣solations: O blessed be thy name, O Lord my God. Then shee re∣peated part of the 16. Psalme, saying: The Lord is the portion of Psalm. 16. 5. 9. 11. mine inheritance, wherefore my heart is glad, and my tongue reioy∣ceth: Thou wilt shew mee the path of life: In thy presence is ful∣nesse of ioy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for euermore: Oh that I could therefore praise the Lord, as he is worthy to be prai∣sed! I will sing to the Lord, I will sing to the praise of the God of Israel: come, come, (saith she) and helpe me, O helpe me to praise Iudg. 5. 3. the Lord. And with that shee began to sing the third Psalme, and continued to the end of the Psalme, as perfectly, and with as sweet a voyce, as euer she had before in her health; and concluded with the 49. verse of the 106. Psalme. The Lord the God of Israel, be blest for euermore: Let all the people say Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore. And after this she said, O praise the Lord, for he hath filled mee Psal. 16. 6. with ioy and gladnesse of heart, and brought me from the gates of hell, and of death: repeating that of the 16. Psalme, My line is fallen vnto me in a pleasant place: yea I haue a faire heritage, for the Lord is the portion of mine inheritance: The place where I now am, is sweet and pleasant: oh how pleasant is the sweet perfume of the place where I lye! It is sweeter than Arons composed perfume Exo. 30. 3.
of principall spices: how comfortable is the sweetnesse I feele! it is like that odour that proceeds from the golden censer, that delights Rvel. 8. 4. my soule. The taste is precious: doe you not feele it: Oh so sweet it is! yea sweeter than myh, the hony, or the hony combe. Let me therefore sing againe, and againe vnto my Lord, and my God. Then she did sing the 19. Psalme, beginning at the 7. verse, How perect is the Law of God, &c. and so on to the end of the same. And after that spirituall reioycing, in singing of Psalmes, shee then prayed vnto God faithfully, and praysed the Lord againe ioy∣fully. And being still full of these, and such like heauenly conso∣lations, she did sing againe most hartily, vnto the praise of God the 136. Psalme, Praise ye the Lord for he is good, for his mercy indu∣reth for euer: &c. In which Psalme, for his mercy endureth for euer, is 26. times repeated. A Christian friend comming in at M. William Fox. the same time, which was about six of the clocke in the euening, maruelling to see her exceeding ioyes, and heauenly harmonie, wherein she continued with such words and phrases, that were so spirituall, prayed for the continuance of the same vnto the end: whereupon she then burst out, relating further of her ioyes, say∣ing: William Brettergh. Will. Fox. Will. Wood∣ward. Oh the ioyes! the ioyes! the ioyes! that I feele in my soule! oh they be wonderfull! they be wonderfull! they be wonderfull! And after that, shee prayed for increase of faith, and that God would strenghthen her against tentations, with continuall crauing of remission of sinnes, euer meditating of heauenly matters, as by her sudden and often breaking out into heauenly speeches, and phraises, did appeare: for the same euening shee lying still and silent for a while, One prayed her to remember the Lord Jesus, Will. Fox. and that shee would in her heart, pray for constancy in her ioyfull course; whereupon shee answered with a delightsome and cheere∣full countenance, and comfortable voyce: Oh (said shee) so I doe, for the Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom then shall I feare? Though an host pitch against me, yet my heart shall not be afraid, Psal. 27. 1, 3 for the Lord hath said, I will not leaue thee nor forsake thee. In∣deed, Deut. 4. 31. I should verily haue fainted, but that I beleeved to see the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the liuing. And now my heart Psal. 27. 13. Psal. 108. 1. is ready, my heart is ready and prepared, yea it panteth after thee O God: as the Hart braieth after the riuers of water, so panteth my Psal. 2. 1, 2 soule after thee O God; my soule thirsteth for God, euen for the
liuing God. When Lord, when shall I come and appeare before thy presence? &c. Saying then further, Lord, sith it hath pleased thee William Brettergh. to prepare my heart, whether to life or death, thy will be done, dis∣pose of me to thine owne glory, I am thine Lord, worke thy bles∣sed pleasure, and good will vpon me. And after this shee fell into a short slumber, and awaking said, as the Spouse said vnto Christ in the Canticles, Oh come kisse me with the kisses of thy mouth, for thy loue is better than wine? Oh how sweet the kisses of my Cant. 1. 1. Sauiour be? Then one said vnto her, alluding to that place of S. Will. Fox. Iohn, Reuel. 3. 8. and praying that the Lord would annoint her, with the eye-salue of his grace, that shee might see and behold his glory. To whom she answered, Mine eyes are opened, mine eyes are opened, though for a while thy were closed vp, and shut; yet now I thanke my God, mine eyes are opened and I doe feele and see the euerliuing mercies of my Christ: saying then further as it is in the 27. Psalme. Thou saidst, seeke my face: my heart answered to Psal. 7. 8. 9. thee, O Lord, I will seeke thy face. O hide not therefore thy face from me, nor cast thy seruant away in displeasure, thou hast beene my succour, leaue me not, nor for sake me, O God of my saluation. And being wiled to commit her soule into the hands of Christ, William Brettergh. Psal. 31. 5. she said: O Lord Iesus, thou hast redeemed me, pleade thou my cause, for into thy hands alone doe I commit my spirit, O thou God of truth. And then feeling more ioy to abound, one praising God with her for his great mercies shewed toward her, shee further William Woodward. Mat. 11. 25 said: I giue thee thanks O Father, Lord of heauen and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise, and men of vnderstanding, and hast opened them vnto me thy poore handmaid, which am but dust and ashes. O how mercifull and merueilous gratious art thou vnto me! yea Lord, I feele thy mercy, and I am assured of thy loue, William Fox. and so certaine am I thereof, as thou art the God of truth, euen so sure doe I know my selfe to bee thine, O Lord my God; and this my soule knoweth right well, and this my soule knoweth right well: Psal. 139. 1. William Brettergh. Iob 19. 5. 6. 7. which speech of her assurance, she often repeated. Presently after this sitting vp in her chaire, she sung the fourth Psalme; and then being laid downe againe in her bed, shee confidently spke these words: I am sure that my redeemer liueth, and that I shall see him at the last day, whom I shall see, and mine eye shall behold: and though after my skin, wormes destroy this body, yet shall I see
God in my flesh with these Eyes, and none other. Then came into see her toward euening, Master William Har∣rison the Preacher, praysing God for her continuance, in that her M. William Harrison. William Brettergh. Will. Fox. Iohn Bret∣tergh. William Woodward. ioyfull and most happy course: and perswading her to an holy perseuerance in the same, shee thanked him, and desired him to re∣ioyce in Christ with her, and to praise God for his mercies to her, and said. O Master Harrison, my soule hath been compassed about with terrors of death, feare within, and feare without, the sorrowes of hell were vpon me, knots and knorres were vpon my soule, (which twice or thrice she repeated) and a roaring wildernesse of woe, was within me; but blessed, blessed, blessed, bee the Lord my God, who hath not let me comfortlesse, but like a good shepheard, hath he brought mee into a place of rest, euen to the sweet running Psalm. 23. 2. 3. waters of life, that flow out of the Sanctuary of God, and he hath lead me into the greene pastures, where I am fed, and exceedingly comforted: yea, hee hath restored my soule, and lead me into the plaine and easie paths of righteousnesse. The way that now I goe in, is a sweet and easie way, strowed with flowers, and as a fine san∣die Psal. 147. 14. way; yea, it is more easie and soft than the sand, for I goe and tread vpon wheat, euen vpon the finest flower of wheate: Oh bles∣sed be the Lord; O blessed be the Lord, that hath thus comforted me, and hath brought me now to a place, more sweet vnto me, than the Garden of Eden. Oh the ioy! the ioy! the delight some ioy that I feele! Oh how wonderfull, how wonderfull, how wonder∣full is this ioy! O praise the Lord for his mercies, and for this ioy, which my soule feeleth full well, praise his name for euermore. And these praises of God, she soundeth foorth, like Dauids harmonie, William Brettergh. William Woodward. being indued with Dauids spirit, to the praise of the eternall and mercifull God, continuing all night in such like prayers and prayses to God, except some small time, that shee was silent and quiet. Master Harrison prayed twice with her that euening, as al∣so in the morning (being Whitsunday.) After hee had prayed once with her, going then toward his publike charge, shee sent for him, to pray once more with her before he went, which he did; to the ioy and gladnesse of heart, both of her, and all that were present: M. Edward Aspinwall. Will. Fox. William Brettergh. and so hee tooke leaue of her, and departed. Another faithfull man or two came presently in the morning, and diuers other well affected, who were with her at the time of
her death, and often prayed with her that forenoone, shee still Iohn Bret∣tergh. William Woodward. Mistris Maud Bret∣tergh. Mistris Scholastica Fox. Elizabeth Challoner. and diuers mo. Psalm. 30. 10, 11, 12. abounding in spirituall comforts and consolations: sometimes as one awaking out of sleepe, she would say, the Lord was her kee∣per, and deliuerer. Againe, one saying vnto her, the Lord blesse you: Yea, (said she) and the Lord Iesus blesse vs all. And so seeming to sleepe a little while, and awaking againe shee said: Lord I trust in thee, haue mercy vpon me, giue me strength to praise thee: defend and preserue me in the houre of tentation, and lay no more vpon mee, than thou wil enable me to beare. Afterwards being asked, if shee would haue them ioyne in prayer together againe with her. O yes (said shee) for Christs sake I desire it: saying thus to her selfe: Heare O Lord, and haue mercy vpon me: Lord, bee thou my helper: thou hast loosed my sacke, and girded me with gladnesse: therefore will I praise thee, O Lord my God: I will giue thanks to thee for euermore, With that, all that were present did ioyne in prayer with her, and in conclusion sing the Lords prayer, which she said with them, to thine is thy kingdome; her strength then being gone, her tongue failed her, and so shee lay silent for a while, euery one iudgeing her then to be neere death, her strength and speech failing her: yet after a while lifting vp her eyes with a sweet countenance and still voyce, said: My war∣fare Isai. 40. . Psalm. 73. 25. 26. is accomplished, and my iniquities are pardoned. Lord, whom haue I in Heauen but thee? and I haue none in earth but thee: my flesh faileth, and my heart also, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for euer. He that preserueth Iacob, and defendeth his Israel, he is my God, and will guide me vnto death: guide mee O Lord my God, and suffer me not to faint, but keepe my soule in safetie. And with that she presently fell asleepe in the Lord, pas∣sing away in peace, without any motion of body at all; and so yeelded vp the Ghost, a sweet Sabbaths sacrifice about foure of the clocke in the afternoone, on Whitesunday, being the last of May, 1601. This was the death of that vertuous Gentlewoman, happily dying in the Lord, and reaping the benefit of a holy profession: wherein wee cannot but acknowledge and reuerence the mercie of God, who in our greatest infirmitie makes his grace to shine most clearely. A sure testimony of the truth of our profession, seruing to incourage vs therein, and to moue vs to a godly life. It must
be a diuine. Religion, and a truth comming from God, that thus can  the heart and mouth of a weake woman, at the time of death, with such admirable comfort. And a wretched conceit, and mere Antichristian is that religion, which so hateth and per∣secuteth this faith, which is thus able to leade the true-hearted professors thereof, with such vnspeakable peace vnto their graues. Her funerall was accomplished at Childwall Church on Wednesday following, being the third of Iune, 1601. And now for conclusion, seeing this blessed Gentlewoman is taken from among vs, and receiued into the holy habitations of the heauenly Jerusalem, there to remaine in ioy, glory, and blessednesse for euermore; let vs lament for our losse, but reioyce for her gaine: and let vs pray, that in heare wee could as willingly wish to bee with her, as she is now vnwilling to be with vs. Salomon saith, The memory of the iust shall be blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prou. 10. 7. FINIS.
