13175.15 99848033 13105
A boke of the propreties of Herbes called an her¦ball, wherunto is added the time yt herbes, Floures and Sedes shold be gathered to be kept the whole yere, wyth the vertue of ye Her∣bes when they are stilled. Al∣so a generall rule of all ma∣ner of Herbes drawen out of an auncyent booke of Phisyck by W.C. ☞
¶De virtutibus herbarum e primo de littera .A. ¶Agnus castus. THys herbe Ag∣nus castus that men do cal Tut¦sayne, and other wyse Parke le∣ues, this hath le¦ues somdel red lyke vnto the leues of Orage, and thys herbe hath se∣nowes on hys leues as hath Plan¦ayne, and it hath yelowe flowers & bereth blacke beris & it groweth in dry wodes, yt vertu of this herbe is, it wyl kepe men & women chast For as Discolidion & Placens do say, this herbe is called Agnus ca∣stus for ye knowledge & the vse of thys herbe maketh men chast, and thys herbe wyll open the pores of man and let out wycked humous and sprytes of his body, this herbe
destroyeth the moysture of mānes fede. Also ye same auctor sayth that yf thys be sodē with Fenel, in Asel it is good to destroy ye dropsi. Also if this herbe be sodē with smalage, and Sage, in salt water, and after¦warde the hynder parte of a man∣nes hed be well wasshed herwyth it heleth it and vnbyndeth an euyl that is called Lytargy. Also thys herbe destroyeth the foule luste of Lechery and it be dronkn, or yf it be borne a bout hym, therfore som¦tyme they do eat it rosted, bycause it shall kepe them chast, for yf this herbe be eaten rawe, it wil engēder head ache. Thys hebe is good to defie the hardnes and stoppyng of the Mylte. Also a playster of thys herbe is good to do awaye ache of a mannes heed, that is engendred of wycked humours. Thys herbe is hote & drye in the seconde degre. ☞Apium.
This herbe Apium, is a herbe that mē do cal Smalage, or stāmarche, the vertue of this herbe is this. It wyll make a man to pysse, & opyn the stoppinge of the lyuer, also the sede of the herbe hardneth a man∣nes wombes, and it draweth wyc∣ked humours of a mannes bodye vnto the head & to ye stomake and the wombe, and therfore it noyeth them that haue the fallinge euyl, & to women that be with chylde, for whan it draweth suche humours to the wombe and engendreth that be the cause of pestilence, and ther∣fore it is cōmaunded of leches that women that be with chylde & they that kepe suckynge chyldrē shulde nat eat nor drinke of this herbe for dred of yt fallyng euyl, for it is hote and drye, & there be speces therof, y• ioye is good for colde playsters tempered with flower, and for scal¦ding, this herbe is hote in ye .i. degre
¶Anetum. ☞This herbe Anetum that men do call Anete otherwyse Dyl, thys herbe hath leues lyke to Fenel but the sede is somdel brode as Orage sede is, the vertue of thys herbe is thus. It wil make a man pysse, al∣so it swageth rumblinge in a man¦nes wombe, and wycked wyndes in the wombe, also it distroyeth the vexinge, the sede of this herbe brēt and layde vpon a woūde it heleth soone & namely yf a mā be scalded in hys membres or on hys yarde, strowe the powder therof & it shall hele, or what maner of euil that ri∣seth in a mannes yarde it shalbe hole in the same maner, a playster made with the same pouder, & she∣pes talow and blacke sope, is good for ye Emaraude this herbe is hote and drye in the seconde degre. ¶Apiume risus. This herbe Apiume risus is cal∣led
Cerfoy or Cheuile, the vertue of thys herbe is and it be dronken wyth wyne it shall make a man to pysse well and it delyuereth a man of ache in the rayne & in the blad∣der, and it be dronken with wyne it letteth out and vnbyndeth the wic¦ked wyndes and vnsloppethe the wombe and the lyuer of all maner wodnes. Thys herbe with holdeth castyng. Also a plaister made with this herbe tempered with Aisel de∣stroyeth wylde fyre and heleth the Canker and al other woūdes, thys herbe is one of the Smalaches, & it is hote and dry. ¶Absynthium. ☞Thys herbe is called Worme∣wode. The vertue of this herbe is. It is good to comforte the here & clēseth the stomake. Balien sayeth that the herbe hath .ii. vertues one is laxatyue, and the other is cōsty∣pulatyue. Therfore Galien sayeth
that if thys Herbe be geuen to an euyl, of the which the matter is not fully defyed, it shall harde the sto∣make, and let the dgestion, and yf the matter be ryped, it shal make a man laxayue, and esily put away the matter, if this herbe be dronke with Spyconarde, it swageth the stomake and of the wombe that is engēdred of wycked wyndes. Also if this herbe be tēpered wyth hony it wyll ease the swellyng in a man¦nes mouthe. Also it doeth awaye the blacke myste in a manns eyes and clereth the syghte, and yf thys herbe be powned wyth the gal of a Bull and afterwarde putte into a mannes eyes, it putteth awaye all maner impedymētes of the syghte. Arthamesia. Thys herbe is called Mug∣worte, the vertue of thys herbe is this. If a mā bere this herbe about hym he shal not be wery of traue∣lynge
in hys way, also if thys her∣be be powned wyth talowe, it hea∣leth the sornes of a mānes fete and a kynge also. And if it be within a house, there shall no wycked spy∣ryte abyde. Also if this herbe be stamped and tempered wyth run∣nynge water it healeth the akynge of a mannes guttes & many other euylles, thys herbe is hote and dry in the seconde degre. Affodylius. Thys herbe is called Affodyl, The vertue of this herbe is that ye leues ben good to hele the dropsy, and the leues of ye flowers begood to be dronken to hele venim of wic¦ked bestes, also the ioyce of this her¦be and Myrre, and Saffron tem∣pered togyther in whyte wyne & a lytell boyled ouer the fyer & clen∣sed thoroughe a clothe is good to hele rinnynge eyes, also the rote of this herbe brēt to powder, is good
to heale sore eares and restore thē agayne, also take an harde cloth yt is roughe and wete it in the ioyce of the herbe, and rubbe the mor∣phewe therwith syttinge againste the soone and it shal do awaye the morphewe, thys herbe is hote and drye in the seconde degre. Aristologia longa. Thys herbe men do cal it Red mader, the vertue of thys herbe is thus. It wyll vnbynde the stop∣pyng of the lyuer & let passe wyc∣ked wyndes that be stopped wyth in mannes body, also if it be dron¦ken with wine it clenseth and pur∣geth al men of al maner of venym that is in a mannes body. Also it clenseth and purgeth all maner of dyseases that be roted within and wythout in the vaynes, and in the teath, that ben rotten. Thys herbe is hote and drye, and it muste be gathered in herueste, there be two
speces therof. Aristologia rotunda. Thys herbe aristologia rotun¦da men do call it Galingale meke, the vertue of this herbe is thus as Apocras dothe saye, yf the sayde herbe be dronken wyth hote water then it is medicinable and curable for those men that bestoppped in the breast, and for the swellynge euyl, and for the Podagar, and for the Cramp, thys herbe is hote & drye and it must be gathered in haruest and it is a spece of the reed Mad∣der. ¶Abrotanum. This herbe abrotanum mē cal it Sothernewode. The vertue of this herbe is thus, yt yf they breake the sede and drynke it wyth water it healeth mē that haue ben bytten with any venemous beaste. Also thys herbe destroyeth wormes in a mannes wōbe, also pouder of this
herbe medled wyth barly mele vn∣byndeth and breketh harde postu∣mes, also thys herbe brente and the asshes medlyd wyth oyle, it resto∣reth there as man lacketh here, this herbe is hote and drye. ¶Ameos. ¶Thys herbe Ameos hath leues lyke vnto Eldren, but they be lesse and the sede is lyke persly sede, the vertu of thys herbe is thus, if it be tempered with honye it sleth wor∣mes that be in a mānes bodye, and it vnbindeth the greate stoppynge of windes, and it breketh the stone, and it chafeth a mannes stomake that is colde, it chafeth the lyuer & the raynes, and it heleth woundes and the bytynge of venemous be∣stes, this herbe is hote and drye. ¶Alleluya. Thys herbe Alleluya men cal it wodsore or sub worte, this herbe hath thre leues of the whiche two
be rounde a lytle departed aboue, and it hathe a whyte flower, but it hath no longe stalkes, & it is wyn∣sore, and it is lyke .iii. leued grasse the vertue of this herbe is thus. If it be rosted in the asshes in, Reed docke leues, or in reed worte leues, it freteth awaye deade flesshe of A wounde, this herbe groweth mu∣che in woodes. ¶Asterion. ☞Thys herbe Asterion groweth amonge stones and in hyghe pla∣ces, this herbe sheweth by nyght, thys herbe hathe yelowe flowers hole and rounde as a Kockebel, or els lyke to Foxegloues, the leues of thys herbe be round, and blewe, & they haue the marke of the mone in the myddest, as it were .iii. leued grasse, but ye leues therof be more and they be rounde as a peny, and the stalke of this herbe is reed and this herbe semeth as it wer muske
and the ioyce therof is yelow. And thys herbe growethe in the newe moone without lefe and euery day spryngeth a new lefe to the ende of xv. days, and after .xv. dayes it lo∣seth euery day a lefe as the moone waneth, and it spryngeth and wa∣neth as doth the moone, and where y• it groweth there groweth greate quātyte. The vertue of thys herpe is thus, they that eate of the berys or of the herbe in wanynge of the moone whan he is in sygno virgi∣nes, yf he haue the fallyng euill he shalbe hole therof, or if he bere this herbe boute hys necke he shalbe holpen without doubt, and it hath many other good vertues. ¶Agrimonia. ❧ This herbe Agrimonia mē cal it Egrymonye. The vertue of this herbe is thus, & it be eatē the herbe and the roote grene, it healeth the akynge of the wombe. Also yf the
herbe be dryed and poūned to pou∣der & drōke with water it is good for the same euyll, also the sayde herbe tēpered with Aysell is good to hele a wounde that is hurt wyth yron, also this herbe vsed in metes is good to hele the akynge of sores in the mylte & it is good for Trey∣tes. ☞Auencia. This auencia is called Auen, the vertue of this herbe is thus yf it be dryed and pouder made ther∣of wyth wyte wyne warmed or els luke warme water & gyue it to thē that hath the feuers, & it shal helpe him much and ease him, also it he∣leth woundes & Cankers yf it be dronken. Altea. Thys herbe is called holy hoc∣ke or the wylde malowe, the ver∣tue of thys herbe is thus, take and stampe it & frye it with shepes ta∣lowe
and make a plaister and laye it to a podagar mā, & it shal helpe hym within thre dayes by expery∣mente al auctours do saye and af∣fyrme that thys herbe soden wyth Uineger and Linsede. and a play∣ster made therof & layde to the side of any person, it departed and hel∣peth wycked gatherynges that be engendred in a mannes body, thys herbe groweth in gardens & moist places. ¶Amarisca. ☞This herbe is colled Dogge fenel, or Maithē, this herbe is mu∣che lyke to Camamyle for it hathe a white flower as Camamyle, but it stinketh, the vertue of this herbe is good to drynke the ioyce therof for to hele the Canker and the py∣pes of the Emeraudes, and there be .ii. speces therof, the one hathe a white flower, & the other hath a ye∣lowe flower, & it groweth in corne.
¶Auticula muris. Thys herbe is called Mousere The vertue of this herbe is, yf it be dronken it helpeth the Quinsy, also the ioyce is good to hele al ma¦ner of woundes. ☞Apium Emoroidarum. This herbe is called crowfote thys herbe hath leues departed as it were Rāmes fete, thys herbe ha∣the a longe stalke in the myddes, & groweth in watery places, & hathe yelowe flowres. Apium ranarum. Thys herbe Apium ranarum that men call water crowfote, thys herbe hath yelow flowres as hath crowefote and of the same shape, but the leues are more departed, & it hath a longe stalke, and out of that one stalke groweth many stal¦kes small by the sydes, thys herbe groweth in watery places. Triplex domestica.
Thys herbe Atriplex domestica, men call it Orage, or medolious. Anabulla. Thys hrbe Anabulla men call Spourge. Acus demonis. Thys herbe Acus demonis is an herbe that men call Poukenel. Argentilla. This herbe Argentilla that mē cal Argentyl, thys herbe hath litel leues somdele rounde, and wythin they be ragged, as it were ye leues of Eufray, and it growith moche amonge whete, and ther be .ii. spe∣ces therof, the more and the lesse. Acus mustela. Thys herbe Acus mustela is called Groundeswelye, it is good for playsters. Allium. Thys herbe Allium is called Garleke, the vertue of thys herbe is this. It wyl vnbinde all wicked
wyndes wythin a mannes bodye, and it helpeth a man to make wa∣ter, but it noyeth a mannes eyes, bycause of the great byndyng and drynkynge, he that hath voluptu∣osly it drinketh and destroyeth the syght, and it destroyeth and heleth venim within aman. Also it heleth all colde sores as it were tryacle. Also it heleth the scabbes and mor¦phewes or bladders in what ma∣ner place they be in a mānes body, so that it be well froted therwyth, thys herbe is hote and drye. Amsum. Thys herbe is called anise, the vertue of thys herbe is this, it vn∣byndeth the stoppyng of the liuer, and of wicked wyndes, & of greate humoures and encloseth the milte, also it stereth a man to make wa∣ter and to swete, also this herbe ma¦keth a mannes wombe laxatyue if it be to harde and the sede must be
parched or rosted in al maner me∣decynes, that it wyll worke the ra∣ther, thys herbe is hote and drye. ❧ Hic incipit litiera .B. Et primo de Bethonia. BEtyn men do call this herbe, ye vertue of thys erbe is thys, yf it be stamped and thā layd to a wounde in ye head that is smiten with a stroke it shal heale the wound fayre, and drawe out the brokē bones if ther be any as leches do say, also yf a mannes eyes do ake, take the water or the ioyce therof, & it shal amende hem greatlye. Take Betin and stampe hym and temper hym wyth water or with wyne warmed and drynke it .x. dayes and it shal destroye any webbe in the eyes of any persone. Also if your eies be waterye, eate euery daye a lyttell betayne, and it
shal do the much good, also if you haue akynge eares, take the ioyce therof & temper it with rose water, and warme it a lytle and droppe it in thy eares and stoppe them wyth wolle, and thou shalt be hole. Also yf thou do blede much at the nose, ake and stampe Betine with salte and stoppe thy nose ther wyth and it wyll staunche. And if thou haue sore tethe, wyth Uyneger or wyth Aysel let it sethe well yl it be more than halfe wasted, than as hote as yu mayst suffer it suppe therof, and holde it in thy mouth tyl it be cold, than spyte, it out and do thus ofte and thou shalt be hole. Also for the coughe take the ioyce or pouder of Betyne and medyl it with hony, & make therof a lectuary, and vse it. ix. dayes and thou shalte be hole. And if a man maye not holde hys meat within him take the same me decyne and gyue him .iii. sponeful
therof with a sponefull of water. Also yf a mannes yarde be swolen or that it be sore, take Beteyne and stampe it with white wyne tempe∣red and it shalbe hole. Also if a mā be Podagat, take Betayne &, sethe it well in water and gyue to hym to drynke and wasshe hys fete ther with and lay the herbe aboute hys fete on a clothe, and it wyl amend hym much. Also take and eate Be¦tayne or pouder therof. & you shal nat be dronken that daye, all these medicines haue ben proued of this herbe. It is hote and drye. Balsaminta. Thys herbe Balsaminta cal∣led horse mynte or water wyne or brokemynte, and also thys herbe doth growe in waterye places, the vertue of this herbe is to cōforte a mānes stomake and maketh a mā wel to defie hys meat. Also y• oyce and clarifyed honye, & Reed wyne
boyled togyther, & it shal do away the cold fro a mānes stomake and wycked wyndes within hym, also the ioyce or els the powder of the herbe dronken wyth Redde wyne hote, maketh women that be wyth chylde soone and esely to be deliue¦red of theyr childrē, Thys herbe is hote and drye. Blta. This herbe Bleta is called Be¦es, ad there be .ii. speces therof as Diascorides sayeth, the one is whyte and the other blacke, ye ver∣tue of this herbe is thys yf ye ioyce therof be put in the nosestrylles of a man it clenseth a mannes heade. Also it swageth the akynge of the eyes of euery person, it clenseth the heade from nyttes & frō other ver∣myne. Also it repayreth and amen¦deth a mannes heare of hys heade also this herbe destroieth botches & ils, also Diascorides sayeth, yf a
man vse ouer muche of thys herb y• it norysheth wycked humoures in a man for it is hote. Borago. Borago is a comon herbe, the verue of it is thus. It wyll clense the reed colour of a man. Also this herbe is good to destroye the Car∣dyacle, and the postumes that be gathered of the blacke colour. Also the water dronke wyth wyne ma∣keth a man glad and merye, thys herbe is hote and moyste. Bugla. Thys herbe Bugla is called Brounwort this herbe hath leues lyke a browne colour with a blew flower, and somwhat boistous, the vrtue of this herbe is thus. It wyll heale woundes in a mannes head, and if thys herbe be dronken it heleth & strenghnth the bones that be broken in ye mannes heade thys herbe breketh and destroyeth
the rewne and the akynge of the hed, this herbe groweth in woodes muche and it is hote and drye. Burneta. This herbe Burneta is called burnet, the herbe hath blewe flow∣ers as hathe Hayhoue, and smale ragged leues lyke Tanye leues, y• vertu of this herbe is thus. It wil destroye the greate humours and laxatyue within a man. Also it ope¦neth the stoppynge within a man∣nes lyuer, & maketh a man to pysse wel. Also it maketh one to auoyde the yelowe euyl. Also a porcion of this herbe medled wyth honye and whyte wyne helpeth & vnbyndeth sore stytches of the rybbes & in the tetes, there be ii. speces therof the one groweth on hylles and ye other in medowes. Bursa pastoris. This herbe Bursa pastoris is called sheperdes pus, thys herbe
hath a smal stalke and ful of braū¦ches and ragged leues & a whyte flower, the coddes therof be lyke a purse, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, drynke it wyth reed wyne, or with mylke and it wyll staunche ye blody menson, it is hote and drye. Borago siluestris. This herbe Borago siluestrys is lyke to comen borage, but the le∣ues be somwhat smaller and it gro¦weth in feldes and in wayes. Billire. This is called byller, The ver∣tue therof is good to rype botches and it is hote and drye. Camomilla. Thys herbe is called Camomyl the vertue of thys herbe is thus yf it be dronke with wine it wyl breke the stone, and it destroyeth the ye∣lowe euyll. It helpeth the akynge and the desease of the lyuer, yf it be
strayned it helpeth & swageth the sores in amānes mouth, it is good for akynge in a mannes head and for the megrym, thys herbe is hote and drye. Calamintum. Thys herbe is called Calamint the vertue of this herbe is thus, it destroyeth a mānes talent, as ypo∣cras saieth, the be .iii. spyces ther∣of, one that is stonye, another that is of the erth, and the .iii. of the wa¦ter and all they be hote and dry, it that is wateri maketh a mā moist, it that is stony maketh a man hole yf ye drynke it, yf he haue dronke any venemous drynke, thys herbe made in a playster & lay it to a ve∣nemes wounde it draweth out ve∣nym soone. Also who so drinke the thys herbe .iii. dayes, it shall helpe hym of the yelowe euell. The o∣ther is erthly it is helpynge for le∣pery, the ioyce of thys herbe and
it be put into the eares of a man it wyll slee wormes in a mannes hed and comforteth the stomake, and helpeth to defy it, and it wythdra∣weth castynge. Crassula maior. This herbe is much like vnto Orpyn, the vertue of this herbe is thus, yf it be layde to a wounde by it selfe it shall hele it without anye other helpe. Crassula minor. Thys herbe is called stonchore or Stonecroppe, the leues of thys herbe be sūwhat lyke vnto Orpin and it groweth on houses and wal¦les, the vertu of this herbe is thus it wyll make a man to cast. Cicuta. This herbe is called Hemlocke or herbe Benet, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, the ioyce of this her∣be kepeht maydes tetes smal, also
thys herbe ofte dronke kepeth and destroyeth the great appetyte of le¦cherye. Also the ioyce tempered wyth Swynes grece, destroyethe the hote Podagre, and swage the the great swellynge, for it is colde and drye. Centaurea maior. Thys is named the more Cen∣tory or earth galle, his flowers be yelowe in the croppe, his vertue is yf it be sodden in good wine it wil hele the syckenes in the liuer, it dra¦weth out wycked humours in the mylt, thys hath ben proued, and it be soden in water it is good to hle a wounde, yf there be a canker & it be anoynted ther wyth it wyl make it hole, thys herbe is hote and drie. Centauria minor. Thys hebe is the lesse Cento¦ry, it hath .iii. braunches cōmynge out of a rounde more wyth a eed
lower. His vertue is this, the pou¦der or ioyce therof is good, for bi∣tinge of an adder or any venemus beaste yf it be droken with wyne and the ioyce is good to anoynte sores therwith yf ye haue any ve∣nym within you, powne it small & temper it wyth Aysell and drynke it and you shall cast out al the ve∣nym within you. Caruo. This herbe is called Caraway thys herbe hathe leues somewhat lyke to Fenell with a longe stalke, and a round sede more than persly sede. The vertue of this herbe is to destroye wycked wyndes and the coughe and it is good for the Frē∣sye, and for bytynge of venemous beastes. Also thys herbe medled is good for scabbes, and Tetters. Also it restoreth heare there as it is fallen away, this herbe groweth in moyste places.
❧ Celidonia. Thys herbe is called Celondy or Tetterwort, his vertue is as po¦liminus sayeth yf the byrdes of ye swalowe be blynde, the damme of the byrdes fetcheth of this herbe & healeth theyr eyes therwyth, it is good for ye cāker in a mans mouth it is good for the toth ache & to clē¦se a mānes head, this herbe is hote and drye. Culamen. Thys is called Hertnote, Dyl∣note, Skycte or holy wort: he hath leues lyke Fenell with whyte flo∣wers & a smale stalke it growethe in wodes and medowes, hys ver∣tue is to eate awaye deade flesshe this heb put to a sore that lacketh heare, it wyll restore the heare and heale the place. Colewortes. This herbe is good to clēse fres∣she woūdes, the canker, to norysshe synowes, & to heal sore eyes that
be almoste syghteles, it encreseth a womans mylcke the ioyce tēpered with Alume and Asell, it swageth the Leper, and it is good to kepe a man frō dronkenes it is hot & dry. Coliandrum. Thys herbe is called Colyan∣drum the vertue of thys herbe is thys, yf the ioyce therof be dronkē wyth hony it wyl slee wormes in a mannes body, and hardeth a man¦nes wombe, the sede is good to do awaye the Feuers that come thre dayes, thys herbe is hote and dry. Capillus veneris. Thys herbe is called mayden here or waterwort. This herbe hath le∣ues lyke vnto ferne; but ye leues be smaller, & it groweth on walles & stones & in ye middes af ye lefe is as it were black here, ye vertue of this herbe is this it wyl brke ye stone, & it be drōkē with wine it dstroyeeth venym and it is colde and drye.
Crocus. This herbe is called Saffron, the vertue of this herbe is thus, it wyl destroy all maner of abhomy∣nacyons of mannes stomake, and wyll make a mā to slepe, it is good for many medecynes and namely for cokes to colour their meat their with, it groweth in gardens, and it is hote and drye. Centinodium. Thys herbe is called Sparowe tonge, the vertue of thys herbe is to breke the stone, and it is hote and drye. Caprifolium. This herbe is called wodbynd and it hath a whyte flower, ye ver∣tue of thys herbe is good to heale Cankered woundes, bladers, and akinge tethe and sores in the toos of a man Also it is good for the swellynge in a mānes body that is venimed, thys herbe is hote & dry.
Canabaria. This herbe is called wyld hēpe or holy roppe, it is lyke vnto hēpe his vertue is if a man haue the fe∣uer frete well his pounce therwyth and he shalbe hole, and it groweth in watery places. Costus. Thys is named Cost or lesse De¦tyn, hys vertue is to heale the sick∣nes of the breste & of the longes & it wyll breke the postume. Also it draweth out euil humours of a mannes heade, it is good for a mannes stomake. Cepe. Is named an Onion, hys ver∣tue is to cōfort a mannes stomake it purgeth somwhat the fleume it nessheth somwhat the wombe. Al∣so and it be stamped and tempered with honye and Aseyll, it is good for the bytyng of a hoūde, Also the ioyce tēpered with womans milke
is good to hele the akynge of eres, Also the ioyce tempered with anye lycoure is good to drynke for any mā that hath lost hys speche. Also the ioyce put in ye nosethrylles bre∣keth oute the wycked rewme and ye stoypyng of a mannes head. Columbina. Thys is named Columbyne, hys vertue is good for hym yt hath the quynsy. Thys herbe muste be gathered in August. Cominum. Thys is called Comyn, the le∣ues therof be much lyke vnto Co∣lyādre, it hath many braūches com¦myng out of one stalke, it is strōg of sauour, hys vertue is to destroy wycked wynde and other euilles, in a mannes stomake, it helpeth to make water, it is hote and drye. Cardiaca. Thys is named Cardyacle, it hath leues lyke to blynde nettels &
it hath lytell coddes with sede, hys vertue is good for the falling euil. ¶ Cisara. Thys is called a Frence peas, it hath leues and coddes like vnto o∣ther pees but y• leues be nat so gret nor so longe, and there be .ii. spyces therof. Camelon. ¶Thys is called a woluisshe thi∣stell or a wylde thystell. He hathe whyte leues great & brode & a reed flower, it groweth by wayes, the vertue of this herb is yf thou take this herbe whan the sone is in Ca∣pricorne, and the moone be newe: while thou berest it aboute y• there shal no myschefe the befall. Cauda pulli. ☞Thys is named Coltes tayle, this herbe hath leues lyke to wyld comin, but they be nat stalked like Cabachis. ☞This is named Frēche wortes it is hote and drye.
Caulus gallica. ☞Thys is named wylde Tansy Caulus agrestis. Thys is an herbe that men call Gland, or kouratum, the leues be lyke vnto plantine but they be nat so muche, it hath a white flower & groweth in waters. Cimbaria. Thys herbe men do cal it Peny worte, thys herbe hath rounde le∣ues, if groweth on walles. Consolida maior. This is named Cōfery, it hathe leues lyke to Horshelme, but they be nat so white, there be two speces therof One wyth a whyte flower, the other with a reed, His vertue is yf a man be brosen or broken with in take the rotes of this herbe and toste them in the asshes and let the sycke eate therof fastynge .iii. and he shalbe hole. Also it helpeth to ga¦ther broken bones, it is hote and
moyste, and it bereth blacke sede. Consolida minor Thys is called daysy or Brous∣worte, hys vertue is yf it be stam∣ped and layde to a botche, it shall hele it and breke it, for it is a spyce of the Confery. Consolida media. Thys herbe is called Methyn, thys herbe hath longe leues and a lytel endented and a white flower and the flower is somwhat lyke to the Daysy. ¶Hic incipit lettera D. Et primo de Dragantia. DRagaunce or Serpentine this herbe is called. The vertue of this herbe is this if it be stamped and dronckē wyth wyne, it dothe awaye all maner of venym. Also it doth awaye the a∣kynge of eres yf they be anoynted therwith. Also the pouder therof blowen in a mannes nose, shall clē¦se
a man of the Rewme, and it is good to destroye the coughe, and to destroye the canker and the fre∣tyng of wycked windes this herbe is hote and moyste it muste be ga∣thered in Iune and Iuly. Diptanum. Thys is called Detander or de∣tayne. The vertue of thys herbe is thus, yf it be dronken it wyll dely∣uer a woman of a dead chyld Also thys herbe wyll draw out a thorne or an yron out of a mans body, it is hote and drye. Dancus asinius. This is called Danke, his ver∣tue is to heale the dropsy, & bytyng of venemous beastes. Also it ope∣neth the stoppyng of the lyuer and of the mylte. Also it vnbyndeth the wombe and maketh it laxatiue it is hote and drye. Dens leonis. Thys herbe is called Dandely∣on,
the vertue of thys herbe is, the More is good for the feuer quoti∣dian. Dens canis Thys is named houndest othe it hath leues like to dandelion but they be lesse and the braunches be nat lyke and they droppe mylke. Daucus creticus. Thys herbe hath leues lyke to wylde popy, but the leues be more whyte, it hathe a flower of purple coloure and it growethe in wheate thys herbe is hote and drye. Dragancia. ❧ This is named Drage fe¦mell, it hath leaues lyke to Re, but it hath whyte spectes it hath an euen stalke the length of .ii. ca∣bites, and it berethe  as it re a cluster of Grapes, and they be yelowe it growethe in moyst pla∣ces, the vertue is yf it be stam∣ped, and medled wyth Oyle and
ut into the eyes of a man it shall do awaye the akynge therof. Also the more therof and the more of the whyte Onion stamped therewyth and tempered with honi, it healeth all woūdes that the Canker hathe be rysen in. Also who froteth hys hādes with y• more, yf it be ī May without doute he may take adders they shall nat venim him. Also the ioyce destroyeth y• darkenes about a mannes eyes, yf they be anoyn∣ted therwith. Also yf the ioyce be dronken with wine it destroieth le∣chery, and it is moyst and colde. ¶Hi ncipit littera .E. Et primo de Enulacampana. ENulacāpana is called orshelme, the vertue  his herbe is thys yf a man haue wagginge teth and he eate of thys herbe, they shall fasten agayne, it helpeth a man to make water yf it be dron∣ken
it deliuereth a womā of a dead chylde, it is good for the chough it hardeth a mās wōbe it is hote and moyst. Endiuia. Thys herbe is called endiue or southystle, hys vertue is yf ye ioyce therof be medled wyth hote water & dronken it helpeth the stoppynge of the mylte and of the lyuer. It is good to heale the elowe euyll and y• feuer tercian. It is good for hole postumes and for to swage greate hetes of the lyuer & of the stomake and it is colde and moyste. ¶ Erua. ¶Thys herbe is named Skyr∣wyte, This herbe hathe leues lyke to Byllerin but they be not so lōge & it hath a greatter more, hys ver∣tue is the leues be good to heale a mannes mouthe, yf it be holden longe therin. Also the ioyce of thys herbe sodden & afterwarde drōken
it destroyeth the blacke colour. Also this herbe oft vsed styrreth a man to lechery and to make water, Also the more stamped and medled with oyle and hony clenseth aman¦es chynne yf it be anoynted ther∣with. Also the ioyce therof dronkē delyuereth men and women of the coughe, for it is hote and drye. Eufrasia. Thys herbe is called Eufrasy it is good for eyes and hath a lyt∣tell ragged lefe. Ehullus. This herbe is called walwort, it hath leaues lyke to Elder leaues it hath a longe stalke, the vertue of thys herbe is good to destroye the dropsy, scabbes and etters and it draweth waye wicked humours out of a man, thys herbe is hote and drye. Edera.
Thys herbe is called Iuy, thys herb is lyke to brayn, y• vertue ther of is. If it be sodden in wine, tyl it be thycke, & then lay it al hote to a both and it shal breke it. Also if y• haue ōny aking in the head take ye ioyce therof & oyle of roses & white wyne & medle it together & anoynt thyhead therwith and thou shalbe hole therof. Edera terrestris. Thys is an earth Iuy, it hathe leues lyke to Catmynt but they be not so muche, and hath a reddy flo¦wer, ye vertue of thys is yf it be so∣den in Swynes grece, it is a good oyntment for al maner aches. Enforbium. Thys is called lary, this her be hath leues like to Sauge but y• leues be broder & ounder, his ver¦tue is if he be put in potage it wyll make the fleshe tender. Elleboras albus. Thys Pellyter of spayne, or
lunge worte. Thys herbe hathe le∣ues much like to pedelion, but thei be not so much slyt without and it hathe a flower as it were a Pars∣neb, hys vertue is if he be put into the nosethrylles of a man, it wyll make hym to nese. Also it healethe scabbe, the morphewe, and tetters. Also it purgethe a man of wycked coloures of the flewme, and of the Emerodes yf he be layd to ye place that is deseased. Also for the tothe ache it is good yf it be sodden in A sell and kepe it as hote as he maye suffer in hys mouthe and it good to purge a mannes stomake and wombe. Also the powder therof putte in grewell shal slee wormes and the ioyce medled wyth mylke sleeth flyes, it is hote and drye. ¶Elleborus niger. ¶Thys is called Pedelyon hys leues be muche lyke to lunge wort but they be not so white, & it hathe
a brode flower & a blacke rote, hys vertue is if it be made in pouder it wyl destroye and slee rattes & thys herbe is hote and drye. ☞Epatica. ¶ This herb is called lyuerwort, hys vertue is to destroye & clense ye hardnes of ye lyuer. Also if it be me¦dled wt fresh grece it wyl hele woū¦des and it is good to hele the feuer quartayne. Erpina Thys herbe is named Foxgloues. ❧ Ebulus minor. ☞This is the lesse Walwort. It is somwhat lyke to Walwort and the leues be a lytell redde. ¶Hic incipit litera .F. Et primo de Flāmula. FLammula is called Sperewort or Laun∣cell it is muche lyke to a spere and in the crop of the stalke commeth many fayre & smal braunches and
it hath a white flower and it grow¦eth in waters, his vertu is yf a mā haue the feuers and the poūces of him anoynted therwyth he shalbe hole, & it is good to breake botches and byles and it is hote and drye. ☞Fumus terre. ❧ Thys herbe is called Fumito∣ry or erth Gall, hys vertue is to cō¦forte a manes stomake. Also it gy∣ueth a man appetyte to meate and it helpeth a man to make water, & it openeth the lyuer, and it clerethe a mānes blode. Also yf any drinke therof with whei, it destroieth scab¦bes, ytches, bladders, and wycked humours, it is hote and drye, Fumicretum. ¶Thys is called Fumicrete, this herbe hathe is a longe stalke, and it hath leues lyke to thre leued gras and it hath oddes, hys vertue is yf it soddē in water it maketh a man laxatue without anye perell
and is hote and drye. Fragra. Thys is called Strauberye, the vertue of this herb is good for ble¦red mē. Also it is good to destroye the webbe in a mannes eyes. Also the ioyce of it medled wyth hony & dronken heleth the mylte. Fabaria maior. Thys herbe is called Brock∣lēpe, thys herbe hath leues lyke vn¦to Bēstede, & it groweth in waters Fabaria minor. Thys is the lesse Brockelempe it hath leaues in maner longe and somewhat rounde lyke to myntes This is good to lay to a place that is brosed or to be wellynge yf it be fryed with shepes talowe. Filix. Thys herbe is named Ferne, of his be .iii. speces. The fyrste is Pompody the secōde is Osmunde and it groweth in dyches and wod¦des,
and it hathe a greate more, as pynapples, it is good to heale bro∣ken bones. The thyrd is Euferne, and it groweth in walles, & Polpo¦dy groweth in Okes, it is good to make a man laxatyue. This ferne groweth in woodes, it is good to heale the Podager. And it maketh synowes stronge. Filipendula. This herbe is called dropwor the vertue of it wyll destroye the wycked wyndes aboute a mannes lyuer and hys mylte and it is good to destroye the stone, it is hote and drye. Feniculum. Thys herbe is called Fenel or Fenkel, the vertue of thys herbe is this, yf the sede be dryed it is good and comforteth the stomake it ope∣neth the stoppynge of the raynes of the blader. Also ye ioyce is good to do awaye the webbe of the eyes
of a manne, and it be dronken with wyne, and water, it is good to do a way all maner of venym. Also the ioyce dropped in the eres of a man, it wyl slee wormes in a man. And also if it be dronken with wyne yt wyll breake the dropsye and al ma¦ner swellyng, and kepeth hym frō castynge, and if it be dronken with wyne and water, it maketh a wo∣mans mylke to encrease. Also if yt be medled wyth oyle it ys good to hele a mannes yarde that is swol∣len. And this herbe is hote & drye. Faxinus. Thys herbe is named Hertwod, hys vertue is if he be powned and layde to a sore, it wyll heale it. Feniculus poeticus. Thys is called wormesede. It is good to destroy wormes in a mā¦nes body, this herbe is hote & dry. Febrifuga. Thys named Fetherfoye, hys
vertue is to comfort a mannes sto¦make it is good to aswage ye axes cotidian, the cramp, and to temper it that commeth of colde stomakes Also it is good to lay to a sore that is bitten wyth venemous bests I wyl hele it shortely and it be layde therto. Also if it be tempered wyth Aysell it wyll do a waye the Mor∣phewe. Also if it be stamped and layd to a wounde in the whiche be broken bones, it shal bring the bro¦ken bones togyther and heale thē & the rote therof is good to stoppe the blody mension. And this herbe is hote and drye. Filago. Thys herbe is called Feldwort or Hore worte it is a lytell herbe, & it groweth in whete. Flamenula. Thys is called the lesse Sper¦worte, this herbe hath smal leaues lyke gras, but it is sharpe lyke a
spere and it groweth in feldes, hys vertue is yt a head be cutte it wyll heale it anone. Hic incipit littera .G. et primo de gratia dei maior. GRatia dei maior, this her∣be is called the more Gra¦tia dei. Granum. This is Gromel or Lyche wale the vertue therof is good for the stone, and for al euilles in the blad¦der. Thys herbe is hote and drye. Genestula. This herbe men do call it Ge∣nestre or brome it hathe leues lyke to Spyngeruell, and it hath a ye∣lowe flower his vertue is to knyte bones and synowes to gyther. Gencianus. Thys herbe that mē do cal Fel∣worte or Balmoyne, hys vertue is yf it be dronken with water and
and hony it helpeth the swellynge in a mannes body, in hys stomake & it is god for venemous beastes, & it delyuereth a woman of a dead chylde, it is hote and drye. Galanga. Thys is named Galingale, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, it cō∣forteth the stomake & maketh hym well to degeste hys meate, and vn∣byndeth and letteth oute wycked wyndes of a mannes body. Granum solis agrestis. Thys is called wyld Gromel, it is somewhat lyke to other Gro∣mell, but ye sede therof is somwhat graye it groweth in dyches, & it is good for the stone. Gladiolus. Thys herbe is called Gladon, the vertue of it is good to make a man to cast.
❧ Hic incipit littera .H. Et primo de herba cruciata. HErba Cruciata is a herbe y• men cal Crō∣worte this herbe hath litle leues and asmal stalke wyth white flo¦wers, and it is like to a crosse, thys is good to heale woundes. Herba cristofori masculi. Thys is called Cristofer, the male it hath leues like to the Crou¦sope, but they be more whyt and nat fully so longe, it hathe yelowe flowers, hys vertue is to heale the Epylence and the frensy. Herba Cristofori femini. Thys is named Cristofer female it hath leues lyke to herbe Peter, but they be nat in all so whyte and it growethe muche by the waters syde it hath a longe stalke. Herba walteri. Thys is herbe walter, it hathe
leues lyke to Persly and the leues be sūwhat chycke fatte and thēder. Herba Robrti. Thys is named herbe Robert, it hathe leues lyke to herbe Benet and it hath small flowers lyke to purple coloure, and it hath a strōg sauour, hys vertue is to hele woū∣des, ye pouder of it wyl slee cākers. Herba Martis. Thys is called Mortagon. It hathe leues like to the capitall let∣ter .M. and some braūches hath, ix leues and some .x. and some more. Hastucaregia. Thys is named Wooderoso yf the more therof be stamped & dron¦ken wyth wyne, it wyl heale a sore in the mouth. Also ye sede stamped and dronken wyth stronge Aysell wyll staunche the Flyx and make the wombe harde. Herbe Petri. ❧ Thys is named the Couslope
Herba Iohannis. This is called saint Iohānes worte the vertue of it is thus, yf it be put in a mānes house, ther shall come no wycked spirite therin. Hic incipit littera .I. Et primo de Iusqbiamus. IUquiamus is called Henbane, his vertu is good for ye gout, & na¦mlye those yt come of melācoli. Also the sede therof and the sede of Humlocke medled to gyther & a candell made therof, or brent vpon a tyle stoone, and let the smoke go vp īto a man∣nes mouth in especial amonge the teth, and it wyll slee wormes. Also the rotes be good for the toth ache, Also the ioyce therof is good for al woundes. Also it swagethe the coughe and the hote postume, and the hote Podager. Also the sede of
thys herbe shulde be gathered in ye moneth of August. Thys herbe is colde and drye. Isopus. Thys herbe is called Isope, his vertue is if a manne take the ioyce therof, and put it in hys mouth, it will heale all maner of euils in the mouth. Also it sleeth wormes in a mannes wombe & maketh it nessh Also if it be drōken grene or ī pou∣der it maketh a man wel coloured it is hote and drye. Ireos. This herbe is called Saue, it hath leues much lyke vnto the flo¦werdelyce, and it hath a whyte flo∣wer, it growethe in water, the ver∣tue of it is good to heale the aking of synowes. Also if it be dronken wyth wyne or ale, it wyll destroye wicked humours in a mānes brest and the coughe. Also it destroyeth
the crampe, it healeth the bytynge of venemous beastes. Also if a wo¦man haue a dead childe within her it wyll delyuer her wythout peryl, it is hote and drye. ☞Iris. Thys herbe is called Flower-delyce, thys is lyke to an herb that is called Saue, almost in al fetu∣res, but the flower is more ynde blewe, thys herbe groweth in wa∣ter and gardyns. It is of the same vertue that Saue is of. Iarus. Thys herbe is named Cocko∣pyntell thys herbe hath leues lyke Mercury, & a flower lyke to Dra∣gaunte, and it is bytter and pryc∣kynge vpon the tonge, hys vertue is yf a mā haue any swellyng vpō the tonge or any swellynge aboute hys eres, take the herbe and sethe it wyth Tuberosetatibus in wine and oyle and wyth comyn & make
a playster therof and laye it to hys ares & it will make him hole. Also take the knobbes of the rote, and drye them and clense thē, and they haue vertue to make a man laxati¦ue yf it be constypulatyue. Also yf thou wyll make thy face whyte & clere take the powder of the rotes and laye it in rose water, and set it agaynste the sonne, tyll it be consu¦med, do so twise or thrise, than rub thy face wyth the powder or what other place thou wylte, to frete a∣waye the superluite of the flesshe Thys herbe is hote and drye. Iasia nigra. Thys is called Madefelon or bulwede or knapwede. Iasia alba. Thys is called Golegras or wyld ansy, it is good for clensing of a mans lymmes. Ipia maior. Thys is named Pympernel, it
hath leues like to Cheken meate i is good to heale woundes and to destroye venym and to hele a man of the postume & to heale sore eyes Ipia minor. This herb is called Chekē meat. ¶ Iametus rusticus. ¶ Thys herbe is called Blewche tyme or andode or Kabowe. Hic incipit littera .L. Et primo de herba Lanisticum. LOuage thys herbe is called, his vertu is mu¦che in the sede the more therof is good to bedrō¦ken wt wyne to heale a manes sto∣make, & for other cuylles wythin a man, and for to make good degs∣styon, it is hate and drye. Lingua ceruina. This is called Hertis tonge, ye ver¦tue of it is good to ripe a postume
& breke it yf it be sodē wyth oyle of Roses and a playster made therof and yf it be dronken wyth wine or ale, it wyll harden a mannes wom¦be and it is hote and drye. Lilium. Thys is called the Lylie, ye ver∣tue of thys is yf it be stāped wyth talowe & oyle and a playster made therof and layde to a place there as the postume is, it shall rype it & make it to breke. Also take a great quantyte of the rotes and the sede of the Docke, & the more of Loua¦che and putte al these in wine, and oyle, the space of .ix. dayes and af∣terwarde sethe it and clense it, and do therto wexe and make therof an oyntment, and that is good to hele the sore & the hardnes of the mylte. Also ye ioyce therof is good to hele the venym of adders. Also laye the ioyce therof to a wounde that is
bytten and it wyll hele it, also take the rotes and roste them and tem∣per them with oyle of Olyue, and laye it to a place that is brent, and it wyll heale it. Also this herbe is good for many other thynges and deseases yf it be dronken wyth ale, wyne or water. Also it healeth and comforteth muche a mannes sino∣wes. The vertue of thys herbe is in the Mores, and thys herbe is hote and drye. Ligustum. Thys herbe is called Primrose, thys herbe is good to potage. Also the ioyce putte in a mannes nose it wyll destroye Megrym. Lingua bouis. ❧ This is called langdebefe the vertue of thys herbe is good to do away ye redde colour of a mā. Also yf it be dronken it dothe away the Cardyacle and other wycked hu∣moures in a mannes longes. Also
the ioyce of this herb drōken wyth hote water, maketh a man to haue a good minde and good witte, this must be gathered in Iune or Iu∣ly, it is hote and drye. Lingua serpentis maior. Thys is calley Adders tonge, this herbe hath leues lyke to Affo∣dyl, but they be more grene, and also more sharpe in the ende, thys must be gathered in Apryll. Lengua serpentes minor. Thys is called the lesse Adder¦tong, thys herbe hathe leues some∣what lyke to Pygyll, and it hathe a yelowe flower and out of the stal¦ke cōmeth many branuches and it groweth in wodes. Lingua canis This is is called hundestonge, it is good to destroye the couge & the possume, & it wyl type a boche Lingua hiccina. This is called Buckshorn of
Swyneskerce thys herbe hath le∣ues faltred as it were an Hertes horne, and growethe crepynge by the grounde, and it hathe a lyttell whyte flower, it groweth in wate∣ry places. Lupinus. Thys is called Lupyne, thys herbe hath leues like to fyue leued gras, the Lupine hathe .vi leaues and it hathe a whyte flower, and a whyte seede that is somwhat lyke and it bereth coddes somwhat like vnto Bene coddes, the vertue of thys herbe is thus, yf a man haue wormes in hys wombe, take the sed and make mele therof and the ioyce of wormewod and hony and make a cake therof and eate it and it vnbyndethe the stopynge of the liuer & of the mylt. Also it is good to destroy ye dropsye. Also take the same mele & the ioyce of Arsmerte and make therof past and lay it to
thy eares and it shall kyl the wor∣mes within them, or if thou make a cake & hete it, it wyll do the same Also if thou wyll take the ioyce of Lekes and temper it with the mele and put it in thy eres, it shal clense them fro al wycked humours and stynkyng. Also take the same mele and temper it with oyle and it wyll breke and rype al maner of postu∣mes, thys herbe is hote and drye. Labrum veneris. Thys is called Southystel, the vertue of thys herbe is thys, yf a man haue a hote feuer, take the ioyce therof & temper it wyth hote water and let hym drinke it and he shalbe hole. Also if a man haue ve¦nym within him, take thys herbe and drye it and make pouder ther∣of and do the pouder in good wine and let slym drynke it and it wyll cast vp all the venym, it is hote & drye.
Lauendula. Thys is called Lauēder, yf this be soden in water gyue that water to a man that hath the palsy and it wyll hele hym, it is hote and drye. Lactuca. Thys herbe is called Lettyse or stope worte, the vertue of thys herbe is thus. If it be eaten rawe, or soden it engendreth good blod. Also thys herbe soden with a lyttl Asell and Saffron and than drō¦ken, it helpeth a man that is stop∣ped in the lyuer and in the myle. Also yf a man may nat slepe, take the sede of thys herbe and stampe it to powder and temper it wt wo∣mans mylke and make a playster therof on lynte, and laye it to ye tem¦ples of thy heade, and thou shalte slepe well, or els drynke the pou∣der therof with mylke. Also take the sede & temper it with oyle of Roses, and make a plaster
and lay it to the stomake, and it is good to destroye the hote postume Also drinke the ioyce of thys herb or pouder of the sede for it is good to hele the Flixe. But who yt vseth thys herbe ouermuche, it wyll de∣stroy theyr syght, this herb is colde and sumwhat moyste. Lactuca siluatica. Thys is calld wylde Lettyse, thys herbe hath leaues lyke to the thysbell, and they be sharpe & kene and it hath a flower of purple co∣lour and it groweth in Feldes and in whee, Thys herbe is hote and drye. Lactuca leporina. This herb is called Harchysell this herb hath leus lyke to Sow¦thystell, but ye leues be nat so ende¦red, it droppeth mylke, the vertu of this herbe is thus, yf a hare eate of thys herbe in Somer whan he is mad he shalbe hole also take thys
herbe and ley it to a mannes syde whan he slepeth or els yt he knowe nat therof, and it wyll hele hym of the feuers. ¶Lollium. This herbe is called Cockle this herbe hath vertue yf it be dronken wyth Raddysshe and a lytell salte, it is good to hel the Canker or o∣ther woundes in peryll. Also it is good to comforte the stomake and the lyuer. Also it wyl vnbinde wor¦mes in a mannes stomake. Also it helpeth a man to make water, and it is good for sore eyes. Also sub∣tumigacion therof wyl make a wo¦man to bere her chylde withoute a¦ny peryll or harme. Also it wyl as∣swage the great paynes of akynge of the lyuer it is hote and drye. Lapacium rubeum. This is called the reed Docke, if ye a man take the ioyce therof & hold
it in hys mouth, it wyl aswage the toth ache. Also yf a man haue the kynges euyl, take this herbe & seth it in wyne and strayne it and giue hym to drynke and he shalbe hole yf he vse it ofte. Also yf a man rub hym wyth the ioyce, it doth awaye euyll ytchynges. Also thys herbe is good to delyuer wyndes that be stopped in a mannes stomake bal¦kyng. Also thys herbe is good to make scabbes and botches ripe. Al¦so it is good to make a mā to haue a harde wombe, it is hote and dry. ¶Linum. This is called Flex, it is good yf a man take the sede therof & seth it in water, it maketh a man laxa∣tiue, and it is good to make a play¦ster therof for akynge sores. Also ther is another spece therof that is called Custula, it is named in En¦glyshe dodure, and it groweth a∣monge Flexe, the vertue of this is
good to purge a man of the colour Also yf it be takē and a great quā∣tyte therof sodden in Myrre and oyle togyther, and a playster made therof, it is good for the raynes & for the brest, and for other akynge lymmes. Lauriola. Thys is called Lawrell, it wyl make a man laxatyue & it is good to purge a man of flewme and of the colour, it is good for a mā that may not eate, for if the ioyce therof be put in hys eres, or if ye sayd her∣be be stamped and a suppositorye be made therof and layd on cotten it wyl hele, it is hote and drye. Liquiritia. ¶Thys is named Lycoryse, the oote of thys herbe is swete and it moysteth y• kyndely hete of a man and it is good for the coughe. Also yf it be sodden in water, it wyll de∣stroy a mannes thurste. Also it ma¦keth
a mannes breste, hys throte & hys longes, moyst and in good tē∣per. Thys is colde and moyst. ☞Lappa. Thys is called Clote, or Burres Lappa ameria. ❧ Thys is called a clote. ¶:De littera .M. et primo de Millefolio minore, Mylfoyle ye lesse this her¦be is called. There is no dyfference of kynde nor vertu betwene mil¦foly the lesse, and myl∣foly the more, saue the more grow∣eth in gardens, & the lesse in wylde place they be both of one strength hys vertue shalbe declared in Mil¦foyle the more folowyng by letter. Mercurialis. ☞Thys is called Mercurye, hys vertue is good if a mā haue akīge in hys wombe, gyue him to drinke
the ioyce and he shalbe hole, it wyl clēse the stomake and the sede wyll do the same. Also the ioyce tempe∣red with whyte wyne is good to heale sore eyes, and yf a worme or other venym haue bytten a man. take the ioyce and warme it, and wasshe it. Also yf there be any wor¦mes copen into a mannes eaes, take ye ioyce and warme it and put it into hys eres and he shalbe hole Thys herbe is hote and drye. Menta. ☞Thys herbe is called Minte, hys vertue is yf it be ofte eaten, it will slee wormes in a mānes wōbe Also if a mā haue botches or other rennynges or swellynge in hys heade, take thys herbe and stampe it and lay it to the sore and it wyll hele it. Also yf a mānes tothe or the flesshe of ye tothe ake or stinke, take thys herbe & sethe it in white wyne and in Aylell, and take ye lycoure &
wasshe his mouthe therwith, than take the pouder of the herbe and tube well hys tethe therwyth, & he shall haue a swete smelling mouth Also take thou thys herbe & Aisell and make sauce, and it wyll make the to haue a talēt to thy mete, also whē there shalbe gyuen any mede∣cyne to destroye venym, it wyll be good to be gyuen with the ioyce of thys herbe, for it hath many ver∣tues and namely for venī, there be manye spyces therof and it is hote and drye. Menta romana. Thys is named white Mynt, the vertue therof is the ioyce, it wyl slee wormes in a mannes wombe. Also the ioyce wyll slee wormes in the nosethrylles of a man. Also the pouder therof caste in a mannes meate, it shal make hym wel to de∣fye hys meate. Malua.
Thys herbe is called Malow the vertue of it is good yf the lea∣ues be stamped and layd to a man¦nes stomake it wyll breake a hote postume in the begynnynge, or els medle thy herbe wyth freshe swy∣nes grece and laye it on a hote tyle and lay it al hote to the postume & it shal rype it and breake it. Also it is good to destroye the hardenes of a mannes liuer and mylte. Also it wyll make a man laxatyue, and it is good for playsters, it is colde and moyste. ¶Morell or nyght shadowe. ¶ Thys herbe is colde & dry in ye ii. degre, the leues, the braūches & the frute therof be ryght good and beste whan they be grene, they be good for stoppinge of the Splene and the lyuer, & beste for the Ian∣desse to drynke the ioyce of it wyth a lytell Ruberbe. Also for a postu∣me in the stomake, in the bowelles
or in the lyuer seth the ioyce therof with barly water and drynke it. ¶Mastyke. ☞Thys gūm is hote & dry, in the secōde degre It is a gūme of a tree growinge in a parte of the countre of Grece in the latter ende of Uere the men of that countre slit the tre∣es and than make the grouude cle∣ne aboute and lay clothes rounde aboute the trees, or some other con∣ninge to kepe the gumme from the grounde in closynge of it, to know whiche is beste to take, the beste is whyte and clere, the whyt coloure is nexte the best & yt is medled with erth & sūwhat dake, y• beste masty¦ke he hath vertue of cōstraynīg, cō¦fortīg clēsīg & losing of humours descendynde fro the head aboue to the eyes and to the tethe, and for the deseses of the temples made of and ascendynge wynde fro the sto∣make
to the head. Take pouder of Mastike, wyth whyte swete wyne and the whyte of an egge & medle them wel togyther and ye wyll ye may put in frankensence and play¦ster it to the themples. Also sethe Mastike in water and drinke it & it wyll comforte well the stomake, and make good dygestyon, and it comforteth and relaxeth ye stomake and put to it Fenel sede, and it put¦teth out wynde out of the stomake Also a playster made of Mastyke and Bole Armoniake & the whyte of an egge and vyneger and lay it on the forke of the stomake or brest it wyll cōstrayne well the coloryke vanite. Also seth Mastike in rayn water and drynke it wt warme wa¦ter and thys medecyne is good for the Flux of ye wombe that cōmeth of a sharpe laxe that was taken be¦fore to stoppe hym. And boyle Mastyke in rayne water, or Rose∣water
with two or thre cloues and drynke it warme and that comfor∣teth the vomyte and ye Flux of the wombe that cōmeth of sharpenes and violence of the medecine. Also Mastike must haue but lytel boy∣lynge for hurtyng of his vertue & it shulde be gyuen warme, for it cō¦strayneth more whan that it is gi¦uen warme, Than whan it is ouer much hote. Magerum. This herbe is hote and drye in the seconde degre, the flowers and leues be vsed in medicines, it shuld be gathered in somer whā it flow∣reth, and drye it in the shadow, It may be kept a yeare, it hath vertue of confortyng, of losynge, yf consu¦mynge, and of clensynge. Yf the powder of it be dronke in wyne, or els boyle the pouder of it in wyne & it wyll hete well a stomake. Also it comforteth the degestyon. Also
take ye leues and flowers of marge¦rum and powne thē a lytell & mak them hote in a panne, and lay it to the greuaūce and it taketh awaye the desease in the stomake that co∣meth of wynde. Also for the rewm in the head, take thys herbe & bind it warme aboute thy heade. Also it dryeth the mother and consumethe the superfluyte of it. Millefolium maior, or yarowe. ☞Kynge Achilles foūd thys her be, & wyth it he heled his men that were woūded wyth yron, for woū∣des stampe thys herb with swines grece, and playster it to the woūde and it shall hele it, and the same is good for an ache in ye breste or side it ys good for them that maye not pysse, take the ioyce of thys herbe and vyneger & drynke it, and mer∣uelously it helpeth a wounde that hath tokē colde. Stamp thys her∣be in butter and lay it to the woūd
and it wyll heale it well. Also to de¦gest the stomake or that lyeth there in, take the ioyce of it and medle it with water and honye and drynke it warme. Also for deseases in the body take the pouder and medle it wyth wyne or wyth good ale and drynk it and it helpeth much. Also it is good for hart breimyng. Also for the head ache stampe thys her∣be and playster it to the head. Also for bytyng of a wood dogge, stam¦pe this herbe wyth the graynes of where au it heleth it. Also for him that may not holde his meat, stāpe thys herbe wyth wyne and drynke it warme. Motherworte or Mugworte, ❧ Thys herbe in latyne is called Artemesia, and it is hote and drye in the .iii. degre, thys herbe helpeth a woman to cōceyue a chylde, and clenethe the mother and makethe a woman to haue her flowers and to
destroyeth the Emeroydes on this maner, Fyrste they muste be gathered, thē take pouder of Mo∣therworte and of Horehounde to gyther and strawe it on ye pappes. Also yf a childe be dead in the Mo¦thers wombe take Motherworte & stampe it small & make a playster therof and laye it to her wombe al cold, and with the grace of god she shall haue haue deliueraunce with out perell, It is good for the stone and the grauell in the raynes of a man or of a woman, yf a mon bere thys herbe vpon him there shal no venemous beste greue hym. It is good for the yelowe yaundes and yf it be dronken wyth wyne, for, it comforteth the stomake & makethe a man or woman to haue good co∣loure. Maces. This spyce is hote & drye in the .ii. degre maces be ryndes or huskes
it groweth aboute the Nutmegge as ye rinde groweth about the Ha∣sel mutte, it maye be kepte .x. yere ī his vertue it is confortynge, dissol¦uynge, and consuminge, the know¦lege of fine maces is thus, it shuld be in coloure lyke to fyne golde or els like to golde, that syluer is gylt with, the whiche hath a sharpe ta∣lage with a bytternes, & it lokethe lyke to earthe, & it is to be refused, for it hath no sharpe sauour, for a colde stomake that maye nat defye nor degeste well, take maces and boyle them in wyne and drynke it, Also a good plaster the whyche is best for a feble stomake, make ou¦der of Mastyke and of maces and medele them with oile of roses and wexe and make a playster therof & lay it on the stomake of ye seke per∣son. Also to clense the braine of su∣perfluous humours, take a quan∣tyte of Maces and chewe thē well
in thy mouth and holde them there a whyle, and that shal lose the fu∣mosite of humours that ryse vp to the braynes and purge the super∣fluite of it. Also for feblenes of the stomake & ye lyuer of a colde cause and for ye colyke, and for the desea∣ses of the spyrytuall membres, or flewme, boile maces in the ioyce of Fenell and in the ende of the boy∣lynge, put in a lytell wyne, than strayne it and drinke it for it is the beste remedy for the fore said desea¦ses. And for the ache of the herte, vse powder of maces in thy metes and drynkes. Menta. ¶Thys is named ye reed Mynte it is hote and drye in the .ii. degre, and there be, ii. other myntes, but I meane house mintes, the whyche properly is sayde garden myntes, for that moste comonly is in mede∣cines bothe grene & drye, for great
holsomnes it shulde be dryed in a shadowe place, & so it wyll be kept a yere in great vertue, to dyssolue or lese to cōsum of his proper qua¦lite and to comforte of hys swet sa¦uour, for ye stynkyng of the mouth and filthe in the gūmes and of the teth washe thy mouthe and gum∣mes wyth vyneger that mintes be¦sodenin, and after rubbe him with the powder of myntes or with drye myntes to prouoke the appetie, whā an impedyment of the stoma∣ke that cometh of colde humours beynge in the mouth of the stoma∣ke make a salue of Myntes and vyneger with a lyttell Synamun and peper and vse it well agaynst vomytes that comethe of feblenes of the stomake or of colde causes. Sethe myntes in Sauge water & vyneger and dype it to and laye it on the mouth of the stomake wyth the myntes that be sodden therin.
Also gyue to the paciente to eat of the same Myntes for the synco∣pyne and feblenes in Feuers, and with out feuers, or of medecyne, or of what cause it be, stamped Myn¦tes with vyneger and a lytle wyne yf the pacyent be wythoute Feuer, and yf he be with Feuer, stampe Myntes with ynege alone, thā make a toste of sower breade and toste it well tyl it be almost brente than put it in that lycoure and let it lye there in tyll it be well soked, than put it in to hys nose and rub hys lyppes, gummes, teth and tem¦ples therwyth and bynde it to the pulse vaynes of his armes. and let the pacyent eate the moystnes that is lefte and swalowe it in. For to clense the mother, take the tender croppes of Myntes and seth them in water or wyne and playster it to the share, and to the raynes a∣gaynst the cōgelyng in a womāns
brest take the smal stalkes of mine eies and sethe them in wyne & oyle and playster it aboute ye tetes Also be it knowen that whan any mede¦cyne shuld be gyuen a gaynste ve∣nym it shoulde be gyuen wyth the ioyce of myntes for myntes haue a maner of strengthe of drawynge out of venym, or els it shulde be wyth wyne that myntes hath ben¦sodden in, for stopping of the splen and the lyuer and of the wayes of the vryne of a cold humour and of a hote withoute Feuer, Take the ioyce of myntes alone, or myntes soden in wyne, or the ioyce of myn∣tes medled with hony, and gyue it to the pacyent. To slee wormes in the bellye, take the ioyce of myntes and drynke it, & thou shalte be hole Also ye ioyce of myntes fleeth wor∣mes in thy eares. For a tetter take the ioyce of myntes and put therto brimstone and vynegre and medle
them well togyther, & anoynte the tetter therwyth and thou shalte be hole. For a wounde in the heade, stampe mintes and laye thē on the wounde. &c. For payne in the syde take myntes and seth them in olde wyne or ale & with it stampe .xviii. graynes of Peper and drinke it in the night, there be but lyttell dyffe∣rence betwene thys mynte and the romayne mynte, thys is the gardē mynte. ¶N. littera et primo de nux muscata. NUtmygge is hote & drye in the .ii. degre, ye best groweth in ynde and in the time of his ripinge, it is gathered and .vii. yeer it maye be kepte, they that be playne & heuye after theyr kynde be beste to be chosen. Also whan they be broken they fall nat to powder, but they haue a swete
and sharpe sauoure, yf they lacke any of these aforesayd, they be nat good for medecynes, he hathe ver∣tue of comfortynge by his swete sa¦uoure, or coldnes and feblenes of degestyon of the stomake, take in the mornynge halfe a Nutmige or a hole Nutmegge and eate it. Also for a colde stomake that is feble of degestyon and for the lyuer gyue hym wyne that the Nutmegges is boyled in. Also for the same boyle Nutmegges, and Mastyke ī wine and drynke it, thys is good for the deseases in the stomake, and in the bowelles to breake in wynde. Also in the recoueryng of a syckenes to cōforte the spyrytual mēbres boile Nutmegges and mastike in wyne and drinke it. Also take a Nutmeg and smell to it, and it wyll cōforte the spyrytuall membres. ❧ Napo. Thys is named Nauewe, it de∣syreth
grounde that is fattye, and sandy, it growethe beste in suche grounde. The propertie of the Na¦uewes is he changeth and turneth into rape, and after that it turneth into nauewe. The beste do growe in grounde well dōged and turned Also it proueth weil in places that stuble of corne hath bene in y• same yere. If they growe to thycke plucke some vp here and there, so that the other maye proue yt better and those that ye plucke vp set thē in voyde places. They shulde be sowen in the ende of Iulye and in Auguste, the beste sauored Naue∣wes be they yt be longe & strayghte and nat ouer great nor braunches in the rootes, bu a strayght roote, Also of Nauewes maye be made a passyng good meate wyth a lyttell salte and vyneger, hony and mus∣tarde and with swete spices and it maye be made wythout spyces Na¦uewes
be hote in the second de∣gre and they noryshe muche, but they be hard of degestion, they ma∣ke the flesh softe & wyndy but lesse wynd than rapes. Therfore whan ye seth them in water, cast that wa¦ter away, and seth them in another water and so hys hard substaunce is tempered by that, and so menely betwene good and euell they engē¦der noryshīg, for they that be thus sodden be nat harde of degestyon, they make one wyndye, and they make stoppynge of vaynes and of poores but yet they be profytable yf they be sodden twyse and bothe the waters to be caste away, & they to be sodden wyth the thyrde wyth fatte flesh. ❧ Hic incipit littera .O. et primo de Olibano. OLibanum is called Frankē¦sence, This is hote and drye in the .iii. degre, it is gumme of
a tre in Inde, the cleneste is the beste Also there be trees of that kynde growyng in Bamake, but nat so clere nor good, for it is dar∣ker of coloure, therfore it is to be re¦fused in medecine, it hath vertue of comfortinge by hys swete sauoure Also of closynge and cōstraynyng for the tothache that cōmeth of su∣perfluyte of humours of the heade and specially by the vaynes, make a plaister of pouder of frākensence with wyne & the whyte of an egge, medle them togyther and playster them aboute the templs, Also to stoppe the wayes of the vaynes a∣boue, take Frankensence and che∣we it well in thy mouthe and that shall stoppe and let the flux of hu∣mours comyng downe to the nose¦thrilles. Take pilles of frākensēce & swalow them downe in the mor∣nynge, then boyle frankensence in wyne and at euē dryncke that whā
thou goest to bedde. Also these py¦les be good to helpe the degestyon of the stomake, and good agaynst sore bolkinges. Also to the confor∣tynge and clensynge of the Mery∣ce, and helpynge of conception in y• receyuynge the fume of frākensēce bynethe. Also boyle pouder of it in wyne and whan it is meely warm dippe a cloth in it and lay it so war¦me to the share of the pacyent, and greatly it comforteth the Matrice. Hic incipit littera .P. Et primo de Pruna. AL plumines be colde & moyste, some be whyte some be blacke & some be redde. They that be blacke and some what harde be the beste, they be called Damsons, and whan they be rype gather thē and slet them & sprynge
Uyneger vpon them, and so they may be kept in a vessell of woode a yere, and fyrste whan they be cu they must be layde in the sonne .xv dayes to dry, these Damsons haue vertue of coldnes and clensyng of the inwarde partes wherfore they be good in feuers that be sharpe & for costyfenes of the belye that cō∣meth of drynes or of Colorike hu∣mours dryenge, if it be newe gyue it hym to eat, if it be dry boyle it in water & gyue ye pacyente to drynke therof, thys is good for the Feuer tertian, for stoppynge of the lyuer, for the yaundes and sharpe feuers it soteth the bely, it is good for de∣faute of appetyte, and for many o∣ther deseases. ☞ Peper. ¶This is called Peper, it is hote and drye in the .iiii. degre. There be thre maners of Peper. Blacke whyte, and longe. Diascorydes
and Constantyne sayeth that they be frutes of tres growing in Inde and some saye that Peper is made blacke with brennynge in the fyre for whan it is gathered there be a great multitude of serpētes about it, & therfore they put it in the fyre to brenne the serpentes yt be about it, the Sarysyns drye it in an ouē bycause it shall nat encrese in an∣other lande. But of al the Pepers, the blacke is the beste and the most holsome. Take peper and put it in to the nosethrylles & it wyll make the to nese, and sethe peper and fig¦ges in wyne and drynke it, and it wyll clense the spyritual membres of tough humours, and it is good for the pose that is taken of colde. Also for the same eat pouder of pe¦per with fygges. Also powder of peper put in a mannes meat com∣forteth the degestion of ye stomake also put lōg peper ī a rosted apple
and eate it, and it shal comforte the degestyon. Also pouder of Peper wyll freate awaye deade fleshe or proude flesshe, & longe, Peper cō∣forteth more thā blacke. Also blac¦ke Peper hath vertue of losynge, comfortynge, and of drawynge, i clenseth the spyrytual membres of colde flewme & vycyous humours and beste whan the pouder of it is eatē with fygges for he hath great strengthe of heatinge and comfor∣tynge the stomake prouokynge ap¦petyte, but to Sanguyne and Co∣lorike persōs, it is nat good to vse peper, for it dryeth & brēneth blode and it engendreth leprye and other euyll syckenes. Plato sayeth that Peper is foule to se in syghte, with out blacke, & within with a sharpe sauour and a swete odour, littell in quantyte and muche in vertue. Pympernell. Thys herbe is good to hele woū¦des
and to destroye venym, and to hele a postume and sore eyes. Pulegium. ❧ This is named Puleol royall it is hote and drye in the .iii. degre In the tyme of flowring it shulde be gathered, and it maye be kepte in his vertue a yere, whan it shall be vsed in medecynes, take ye leues wyth the flowers and strype them fro the stalke, and it hathe vertue of losynge and consumynge, for ye cold humours in ye head take pou∣der of it and hete it wel in a Skel∣let, and al hote bynde it to the gre∣uance without any lycoure. Also for a great cold taken in the head, and for a tough humor or a wate∣ry humoure make a gargrysme, sethe ulyoll royal & rye fygges in a tarte vyneger, & take a good sponful therof as hote as ye maye suffre it, and holde it in thy mouth tyll it be almost colde, than put it
out and take asmuch more, and do so thre or .iiii. tymes and that shall purge thy head wel of flewme. also sethe it in wyne and drynke it and it is good for the desease of the sto∣make & guttes, and for colde cau∣ses, or for wynde in the stomake. Also it is good for toughe flewme in the brest, yf thou take pouder of it, and medle it with claryfied hony and make a lectuarye therof and vse to eate therof, or take the herbe therof & boyle it with wyne, honye or water and vse to drynke therof. Also for the blacke coloure drynke y• ioyce of it, or boyle it wyth wyne & thou shalt be hole. Also for a it∣chynge byle, laye this herbe in wa¦ter, and vse to wasshe the ytchynge therin warme & thou shalt be hole. Also for ache take this herbe al gre¦ne and stampe it & plaister it to the ache and it wil ease it. Also against
the cough boyle thys herb in wine and drynke it luke warm and this wyll make one to pysse well. For the desease in the bely stampe this herbe wyth comyn and water and lay it hote to the nauel and lightly it shall be hole, for the diseases in ye lyuer stampe thys herbe and tem∣per it with water and vineger and drynke the ioyce therof, and thou shalbe hole. For an ache in ye legs or armes take the leues of elders & Pulioll royall of euery lyke much and stampe them togither wel and playster it to the greuannce, and it is good for ye feuer tercian, yf thou take the braunches of thys herbe & wrappe it in a good locke of wolle and gyue it to the pacyent and let hym smell therto, before the feuer come on hym, and that shall do hī great ease. For the heade ache take thys herbe & bynde it fast round a¦bout thy hed and anone it ceasethe
the ache. Also yf a woman haue a dead chylde in her wombe stampe thys herbe and gyue her to drynke with olde wyne, and she shalbe de∣lyuered of it, by the grace of God. For the crampe drynke the ioyce with vyneger fastynge and it wyl put it away. Pencedanum vel Feni∣culus porcinus. ☞ This herb is call maysh Hog∣ges fenel or mayden wede thys her¦be is hote and drye in the .iii. degre whan thys herbe is gathered for medecynes the roote is better than the herbe whan the rotes be gathe∣red they may be kepte all a yere, it hath a purginge vertue, it is good for the strangulyō or the flyxe and good for stoppynge of the splene & the lyuer, boyle this herbe in wyne or water and gyue it to the paciēte to drynke. Also sethe it in oyle and wyne and playster it to the share &
it wyll helpe the strangulion or the flix. Also the same playster is good for hardnes of the splen it molyfi∣eth that. Also agaynst the cold hu∣mours of the spyrytuall membres gyue hym to drynke water wt bar∣ly and thys herbe sodden to gyther and if it be a feruent cold humour than sethe the Barly and the herbe in wyne, and gyue it to the pacyēte to drynke with Lycoryce. Petrocilium. Thys is called perslye, thys is hote and moyst in the thyrde degre It multyplyeth greatelye mannes blode and doth away the Tysyke, it helpeth well to destroy the Feuer tertian, it is good for the syde and the dropsy, it comforteth the herte and the stomake, and it is good in potage and to stoppe chyckens. Peritorium. Thys herbe is called peritory &
it is hote and dry, ye vertue of thys herbe is thus. If a man haue an euyll stomake or els akynge with∣in hym, take thys herbe and sethe it in thy potage and eate therof and thou shalt do well. Also thys herbe is good to hele one of the stone, yf he be bathed with it. ¶Pastinaca. Thys is called a perseneppe, it is hote and moyste in the seconde degre. Ther be two maner of pers∣neppes, the one is the Persneppe of the garden, and the other is the wylde persneppe. They be more vsed to meate thā to medecyne hys vertue is to engēdre thycke blod & much, wherfore it styrreth the luste of the body yf it be much vsed ther¦fore it is good for amā that is new¦ly recouered out of hys great syke∣nes to vse to eate of it a whyle. Also they be good to be eaten rawe or sodden for y• melācoly humours
grene and not drye. To make a se∣rope to styrre the lust of the bodye and for to comforte the, degestyon take rootes of Parsneppes & sethe them well in water, thā take them ot and caste away the water, and the rotes that be in gobbets, boyle thē agayne ī water thā put therto hony well clarifyed and lette them boyle vnto the thyckenes of hony, and cōtinually styre it, that it cleue not to the vessell and in the mydle of the boylynge, put in almondes yf ye haue them, in the end of the boylynge, put in gynger, galenga¦le, and a lytell peper & nutmegges & other swete sauored spyces. Also Parsneppes may be so wen in De¦cember, Ianuarye, and March, in fat grounde depe doluen and lose groūde and beste digged, and they be somwhat wyndye. Boyle them in two waters but caste awaye the fyrst water. Also there is Parse∣neppes
that is somwhat redde, the whiche maye be eaten both rawe & soden, & with thē and Nauewes to gyther ye maye make a very good meate and faire and rede in colour the whiche be sodden as Parsnep∣pes be. Plantago. ☞This is called Plantaine, it is colde and drye in the .ii. degre, for head ache take Plantayne & bynd it aboute thy necke, & the ache shal go out of thy head. Also for desea∣ses in the body, sethe thys herbe in good lycour what ye wyll and vse to drynke it and it shall clense the mawe & the other inwardes. Also for him yt bledeth at the nose gyue hym to drynke the ioyce of it and it shal cease lightly. Also yf ye body of any man be wexen hard. stampe thys herbe with grece and make a playster of it & laye it on the hard∣nes and lyghtly it shalbe softe and
make it hole. Also for byting of a serpēt, take thys herbe and drynke it wyth wyne. Also for the desease in the mouth take the ioyce of thys herbe & holde it long in thy mouth and eat the leaues of thys heb for hym that maye not wel pysse sethe this herbe and drinke it. Also for a rotten humour in the breast and a¦boute the harte take the ioyce of thys herbe the wayght of .x. d. and medle it with honye and giue hym to eate a sponfull at one tyme and that shal purge the breste, for ache in the rte take thys herbe with vy¦neger and drynke it. Also it heleth woundes and clēseth the fylth out of woundes. Also it swadgeth ran kelynge and staunchethe the men∣cyons both with drinke and wyth playsters made with pouder of Ar¦moniake and of sandragoune and Barly medled wt the whyte of eg∣ges made in a playster & layd to ye
sore for the Canker and the payne in the gūmes, take the ioyce therof and medle it with hony and vyne∣ger and pouder of Alume and that shal slee the Canker in the mouth. Also for the feuers, stampe .iii. Ro∣tes of Plantayne, & tempre it with water and gyue it hym to drynke that hath the feuers and he shalbe hole, for the Iaundes stampe Plā¦tayne and Lettyse togyther & tem∣per them wyth vyneger and make a plaster there of and laye it to thy ryght syde & vse it tyl thou be hole, and it is good for the bytyng of an adder, drynke ye ioyce of it & lay the substaunce of the herbe to the sore, for the same hange the rote of plan¦tayne aboute the necke of the paci∣ent and meruelously it helpeth, for the potager, and for the disease in y• synowes stāpe the leues of it wyth a lyttell salte and playster it well therto, and meruelously it helpeth.
Portum. ❧ Thys is called a leke, it is hote and dry in the .ii. degre, it desyrethe loue ground and fat and wel dū∣ged in that they shall beste profyte in hote places and tēperate. They may be sowen in Decembre in tem¦perate places & colde. They maye be sowen in Ianuary, February & Marche, whan the grounde is wel dygged and dyghte, and it may be sowen by it selfe or medled with o∣ther sedes of herbes in good fatte grounde well dygged and turned aboue it with good dōge, this sede wolde be sowen somewhat thycke and whan they be somwhat sprōg take vp the greatest lekes & plante them in forowes, but take a waye none of theyr roote whan ye set thē in ye forowes, but whan ye set them wyth a dyble, than cutte a way the rotes almoste vp to the leke head & awaye the vppermost of the leues
they may be planted in Iulie, Au∣guste, September & October, they be much profitable in March, and in Apryll nexte folowynge, but in your plantynge you shall nat seke after fate softe ground for menely groūde that is beste & that groūde that is almoste drye is beste, there is two maner at settynge of lekes, one is in forowes, as is the maner in Bonony and the forowe muste be fro the other a spanne large, and the lekes mast be set in the forowe iiii. fyngers brede eche fro other, & whan ye mnke nexte forowe caste the earth on the lekes and treade it downe softely with thy fote. The ii. maner is thus whā the groūd is well dygged & raked than make ho¦les with a great dyble & euery hole fro other a large spā more ī which the lekes must be set in, but fyl nat thy holes nor put earth on thē but let thē be voyde, iii. wekes whā we¦des
growe amonge them pul them vp & kepe thē clene fro wedes. Di∣uers auctours saye that the Lekes that be thus planted be better thā any other, or they may be well plā∣ted amonge great onyons & whan the onyons be taken awaye, wede the leke and you shall fynde them fayre and good and whā ye plucke vp, leue some in a place, & leue som for sede, y• whych sede may be kept iii. yere, and it be hanged vp in the hulles, Lekes be beste soden, or .iii. tymes wasshed before they be eatē. For a woūde take lekes and stam∣pe them wel with hony, and laye it to the wounde, and it wyll heale it, for the coughe take ye ioyce of lekes vse to drīke it, for y• same take ye ioy¦ce of lekes & medle it with womās mylke and vse to drinke it, & it wyl clense the longes of al vyces. ¶Fracturas sotidat duritiasque relaxat.
vulnusque appositum ceto cū sale claudit. ☞Diretrum. Thys is called Pellyter, it is hote & dri in ye .iii. degre, the rote is vsed in medecynes, fyue yere he may be kept in his vertu, & know ye wel y• hs sharpnes is not knowē, it shold be powned & holdē in ye mouth, He hath vertu of losīg & drawīg & of cōsumīg. To make a gargarisme take pelleter & fygges & boyle thē ī vyneger or swete wyne & it wil clē¦se y• brain of superflute of flume al¦so if it be chewed in ye mouth it hel¦peth ye palsy in ye tonge. Also for ye Palsye & podagar stāpe it & sethe it in wine & oyle & plaister it to the greuāce this plaster helpeth much therfor if thou may haue grene peliter stāpe it & lay it soking ī wyne xv. dayes, & after boile it wel & put therto wexe & oile for this is ye best oyntment for al ye foresayd desease
❧ Papauer. Thys is called Popy, it is cold and drye, There is two maners of them. The whyte Popye is colde and moyste and it is good to cause one to slepe. The sede therof well gathered maye be kept ten yeare, it hath vertue of clensyng. It is put in medecynes wyth a determyna∣cyon as the sede maye be receyued of white popy or black. For to pro¦uoke a slepe make ye a playster of eche of them or one of them wyth womans mylke and the whyte of an egge and laye it to the temples. The woman of Salerne gaue to yonge chyldred the popye but they wolde gyue them no blacke popye for it made them to much heuy. Also for a hote postume in the be∣gynnynge and for chafynge of the lyuer take the sede of whyte popye or els the herbe of it and stampe it and medle it wyth oyle of Roses
and playster it to ye greuaūce. Also for drynes in feuer eyke, and in o∣ther feuers take & hete oyle of vyo¦let medled wyth powder of poppye sede, and annoynte the small of the backe therwyth. ☞Pollipodium. Thys is called pollipodye, it is hote in the .iiii. degre and dry in the seconde degre. Thys Pollypodye is ferne that groweth vpon Okes or on walles, or stones but the pol¦lypodye that growethe on okes is the best. Gather the rotes of it and lay it a day in the sonne, chose that is grene, and that which appereth dry whan it is broken it is to be re¦fused, he hath vertue of dissoluing of drawyng of purging flewme & specially melancoly, wherfore com¦munely he is put in boylynge and to sleumatyke and melancolyous hole men, he is gyuen to preserue theyr health, and knowe well that
in ye boylynge of pollypody shuld be put in some thynge to exclude & put out ventuosyte as Anyse sede fenell sede, or Comin or els al these a foresayd sedes for thei exclud out muche wynd and vnbynde the hu∣mours. Also for the Etidian and for Ilica passio and to kepe a man¦nes helth, do thus stampe halfe an vnce of polypody or an vnce yf ye wyll haue it muche laxatyue, than boyle it with Prunes nnd vyolet∣tes in Fenell water or Anyse, in a great quantyte than strayne it and gyue it the pacyente at mornynge and euenynge. Also stāpe it & sethe it in water with Fenell sede and wt water, & make a broth wt a chekin therin with swet sauored spyces & gyue ye pacyēt to eate. Also make a drynk therof after this maner stāp it & boyle it ī wine & after put mor wyne therto and so make vp your drynke with swete sauored spyces
Pionium. Thys is called Pyony, it is hote and drye in the seconde degre, so sayth Ypocras & Galyen the good phylosophers, thei say that ye roote therof groweth to dyuers medecy∣nes and it wyll laste ten yeres, and it is colde for the palsy, dry the rote and drinke pouder with Caster sod¦den in wine. Also the same is good for the Stone. Also yf a man be costyue and maye not goo to the draught, take and strowe the pow∣der therof on Cotten and put it in to hys foundement, and drynke ye powder in whyte wyne. Also for a man or woman that hath the fal¦lynge euyll eate it and drynke it in wyne. Also hange the rote a∣boute hys necke and it wyll saue hym withoute doubte wythin .xv. dayes. Also it helpeth the sores in the mouth. Also yf thou sethe it in wyne, it helpeth the splene. Also
drynke Pyony with water & hony and do therto powder of Colyan∣der and thys is good for the stoma¦ke, for the mylte and for grauell in the raynes. Also it is good for wo∣men for dyuerse deseases, Also sethe it in whyte wyne and gyue a woman to drynke therof & it wyll hele her bledder & make her to pisse the stone, and it will hele her of the Marris. Also Pyony sede whan it is blacke it maketh delyueraunce of the bed of the childe in her wōbe and at euerye tyme whan he shall vse to drynke it, she muste drynke xv. sedes an tyme. ☞Q. Littera. Et primo de Quiquefolia. QUynckfolie is colde & dry ī ye secōde degre, this herbe is good for ache in a mannes limmes & for ache of ye head, mouth, tonge, and throte, that be sore, take & sethe
thys herbe in wyne & gyue the pa∣cyent to drynke therof thre dayes, fyrst and last and he shalbe hole. Also stampe it, and drinke the ioy∣ce of it in ale & it wyll cease the a∣kynge and ye gnawynge of a man or womā. Also yf a man blede sore at the nose, gyue hym to drinke the ioyce of it with wine, and anoynte his head wel with the ioyce of thys hethe, and anone the bloode shall staunche. For to sle a Canker, seth it in wyde and the grece of a swine and make a plaster therof and lay it on the Canker and it shall sle it, Also take pouder of quyncke foy∣le and medle it with hony and ther with rubbe thy mouth, tonge, and throte, and the chekes wythin and it wyll purge it well. Also for poy∣son and bitynge of a serpente take the ioyce of ye Quynckefoyle, and drynke it with wyne & merueloslye it resysteth venym.
Hic incipit littera .R. and fyrst of Rybeworte. RYbeworte is good for ye feuer quartayne, take the ioyce of thys herbe and drynke it two hou∣res before ye thynke the disease shall come to you and by ye grace of God it shal go from you. Rednetle. ¶Take Redde Netels, and stāpe thē small & sethe thē in an earthen pot with a porcyon of whyte wyne til halfe be wasted, and giue the pa¦cyent to drynke fyrst and last war∣me, and laye the herbes to the foū∣demēt, as hote as the pacyent may suffer it, and vse thys medecyne til he be hole. ¶Rosa. ❧ Thys is the red Rose, it is cold in the fyrst degre and dry in the se∣conde degre. Dry roses and grene
roses be vsed in medecynes, and of grene roses be made many confec∣cions. Also dry roses be put in me∣decynes, whan a receyte of roses is made, for they be soone made in powder of roses is made Mell ro∣set, Suger roset, syrop of Roses a∣lectuary of Roses, water of Roses and oyle of roses. Mell roset is made thus, take fayre purified ho∣ny, & newe redde roses the white en¦des of thē clipped away than chop¦pe them small and put them into the hony and boile them menely to¦gyther, to knowe whā it is boyled ynoughe, ye shall knowe it by the swete odoure and the coloure ruffe Fyue yeres he may be kepte in his vertue, by the roses he hath vertue of cōfortyng, & by the hony he ha∣th vertue of clēsynge. In winter & in somer, it maye be gyuen compe∣tently to feble sycke slumatyke me¦lancolye, and Colorike people also
Mulsa is made of water and mell roset, and it may be geuē after the iii. day yt it cōmeth out of the bath for to clense toe stomake of cold hu¦mour gyue him mel roset wyth wa¦ter that fenell sede is boyled in put¦tynge therein .iii. graynes of salte, yf the sycke may take it this shuld be the quantyte of roses and hony. In .vii. pound of hony put a poū¦de of Roses, Suger roset is made thus. Take newe gathered Roses and stampe them ryght small with Suger than put it in a glasse and xxx. dayes let it stande in the sonne and styrre it well and medle it wel togyther & so it maye be kepte thre yeres in his vertue. The quantyte of Suger & Roses shulde be thus in .iiii. pound of Suger a pounde of Roses, he hath vertu of cōstray¦nynge and comfortyng of the flux in the wome. Take Suger roset and powder of Mastyke of euery
one a drame, and medle thē wel to¦gyther and giue it to the sycke oft, than geue him rosewater that Ma¦styke and cloues be sodden in. Sy¦rope of Roses is made thus, some do take roses dyght, as it is before sayde and boyle them ī water, and in the water strayned they put Su¦ger and make a syrope therof, and some do make it better for thei put roses in a vessel hauyng a strayght mouth & they put to the roses hote water, and they let it stande a day and a nyght and of that water put¦tyng to it Suger they make syrop and some do put more of roses in the foresayd vessell & more of hote water, and let it stand as is before sayde and so they make a reed wa∣ter, and make therof a syrope. And some do stampe newe Roses and then strayne out the ioyce of it and Suger therwyth they make syro∣pe and thys is the best makinge of
syrope & knowe it well that syrope made of fresshe and newe Roses, fyrst somwhat meanli thei laxe, in ye ende they bynd, but syrope made of drye Roses fyrste and laste they bynde Syrope of Roses hath ver¦tue of comfortynge and constray∣nyng against the flux of the wōbe and the vomyte, gyue it to hym with rayne water or with rose wa∣ter in a feuer. After letting of blod gyue it him wyth cold water. Also the same for the Sincopyne. Oyle of roses is made thus, some boyle Roses in oyle and kepe it. Some do fyll a glasse wyth Roses & oyle and they boyle it in a caudron full of water & thys oyle is good, some stampe freshe roses with oyle and they put it in a vessel of glasse, and set it in the sonne x. dayes and this oyle is good agaynste chafyng of the lyuer, yf it be anoynted there∣wyth. Also it is good for ye desease
in the head that cōmeth of hete, a∣noynt the forhead and the temples with oyle of roses. The water of Roses hath vertue of comfortyng and constraynynge agaynste the flux of the wōbe and vomyte. Also gyue him Rosewater boyled wyth Mastyke and cloues it is beste a∣gainst the flux and feblenes of ver¦tue, yf it come of a flux by a sharp medecyne. Also rose water is good for the Syncopyne and the Cardi¦acle gyue it hī to drynke & sprynge the water on hys face and y• water is good for eyes and in oyntmētes for the face, for it taketh awaye the wemmes and the superfluyte and strayneth not the skynne. Also dry Roses put to the nose to smell do comforte the brayne and the herbe and quencheth the spyryte. Also agaynste the flux of the wombe of coloure gyue hym Roses boy∣led in rayne water. Also a playster
made of roses and the whyte of an egge and vyneger & dyp a sponge in it and lay it on the mouth of the stomake agaynste the syncopyne, gyue hym to drynke water that ro∣ses haue ben boyled in, and gyue hym pouder of roses in a rere egge to make oyle of roses, take .ii. li. of oyle a .li. and an halfe of roses and put all in a glas, and put the glas in a Caudron full of water and hange it therin and boyle it tyl the thyrde parte be wasted, and after strayne it thorough a linen cloth & kepe it for your vse, for this oyle is losyng and serueth for many thin∣ges. Some do put rose water in a glas and they put roses with there dewe therto, & they make it to boy∣le in water, than they set it in the sonne tyl it be reed, and thys waier is beste, thys hathe vertue of com∣fortynge and constraynynge and for the fluxe of the wombe, and a∣gaynst
the vomyt. Rosemary. ¶Thys herbe is hote and drye, take the flowers and put them in a linen clothe and so boyle them in fayre clene water to the halfe and coole it, & drynke it for it is mouch worthe agaynste all euylles in the body. Take the flowers and make powder therof and bynde it to the ryght arme in a lynen cloth and it shal make y• linght and mery Also eate ye flowers with hony fastynge with sower breade & ther shall ryse in the none euyll swellynges. Also take the flouers and put them in a cheste amonge your clothes, or a∣monge bokes and moughtes shal not hurt thē, boyle ye flowers in go¦tes mylke and thā let thē stande al a nyght vnder the ayre fayre coue¦red after y• gyue him to drinke ther¦of that hath the tysyke & it shall de¦lyuer hī, boyle the leues in whyte
wine and wassh thy face therwith thy bearde and thy browes & there shall honorne grow out, and thou shall haue a fayre face. Put the le¦ues vnder thy beddes head & thou shalbe deliuered of al euel dremes, Breke the leaues small to pouder and lay them on a cāker and it shal sle it. Take the leues and put them into a vessel of wyne and it shall preserue it fro tartnes and euel sa∣uoure, and yf thou sell that wyne thou shalte haue good lucke in the sale. If thou be feble with vnkyne¦ly swete, take and boyle the leaues in clene water and whan the water is colde, do thereto as muche of whyte wyne, and thā make therein soppes & eate wel therof, and thou shall recouer appetyde. If thou haue the fluxe byole the leaues in stronge Aysell and bynde them in a lynen clothe and bynde it to the wombe and anone ye flue shal
withdrawe. If thy legges be blo∣wen with the gout, boyle the leues in water, and than take the leaues and bynde them in a lynnen clothe about thy legges and it shall do the good. Take the leues and boy¦le thē n stronge Aysel and bynde them in a clothe to thy stomake, & it shall delyuer the of all euylles, If thou haue the coughe, drynke the water of the leaues boyled in whyte wyne, and it wyll heale the Take the rynde of Rosemary and make powder therof and drinke it for the pose and it shal helpe the, Take the tember therof and brēne it to coles and make pouder therof and than put it in a lynen clothe, & rubbe thy tethe therewith, and yf her be any wormes therin it shall sle thē & kepe thy tethe frō euylles. Also make the a boxe of the wod & smell to it and it shall preserue thy youthe. Also pu therof in thy do∣res
or in thy house and thou shalte be withoute danger of adoers and other venemous serpentes. Make the a barell therof and drinke thou of the drynke that standeth therin and thou nede not to feare no poy∣son that shal hurt the and yf thou set it in thy gardyn kepe it honestli for it is much profytable. Also if a man haue lost his smellyng of the ayre, or els he maye nat drawe hys breth make fier of the wood & take hys breth therwyth and geue it hī to ease and he shalbe hole. Ruta. ¶ Thys is called Rewe, thys is hote and drye in the .ii. degre, the le¦ues and the sedes be vsed in mede¦cynes ye sedes may be kept ten yere and the leues a yere, he hath vertu of purginge, dissoluynge and con∣sumynge, for the head ache take ye ioyce of rewe and hete it and put it into his nosethrylle for it purgeth
out fleum and clensēth the brayne, the ioyce soden with wyne is good for the same. For feblenes of sight put Rewe in a pot with ale and let the pacient vse to drynke of it. For stoppynge of the splen and lyuer, the stranguri & the fluxe, seth Rew in wyne wyth rootes of Fenell, or pouder of Rewe, with the ioyce of Fenell, and drynke it warme. Also for and ache or fretyng, stāpe Rewe with powder of Comin and playster it to the greuaunce. Also agaynste venym, drinke ye ioyce of Rewe. For bytynge of venemous best or worme, playster Rewe to ye bytynge. For feblenes of eye sight styll water of Rewe, and roses, to¦gether and put therof in your eies Also an oyntmēt for sore eyes, stā∣pe Rewe and Fenell togyther of yche lyke muche by weyghte and medle thē with hony, and Eufrose and it is good oymente for eyes.
Take Rewe, Comyn, and Peper, of yche like much by weyght, and grynde them small to gyther and medle them wyth hony and vene∣ger and it is good for the ache in ye breast and in the raynes. ☞Hic incepit liriera. S. Et primo de Sinapio. SImapum is called mustar¦de, it is hote and drie, in the medle of the .iii. degre, and nat the herbe, but the sede, is put in mede∣cynes. Fyue yeare he maye be kepte in hys vertue. He hath ver∣tue losynge, of drawynge, of ma∣kynge thyne, and of consumynge. For the palsy of the tōge take and chewe the sede in your mouth, and holde it vnder the tōge and it shall do you good. Also for the Palsye in other membres sethe the sede in wyne and laye it to the sore place
and is beste in the begynnynge of the dysease. Also take the pouder of it, and put it into your nosethrilles and it will make you to nese and it clenseth the brayne and superfluite flume. Also sethe it in wine and fig¦ges & holde it warme in your mou¦the tyll it be al most colde thā take as much and do so .v. or .vi. times a day asmuche another day & this is good for an olde pose of chough and flumy humour in the the head Also for stopping of the splen and the lyuer sethe the sede in water wt rotes of Fenel, than strayne it and put therto hony and gyue it to the sicke to drinke. For hardnes of the splē sethe the herbe of it in wyne & playster it to the greuaunce for to rype and breke a postume, stampe thys herbe well with hogges grece and laye it to the postume. Also for Strangury take the herbe of thys
and sethe it in oyle and wyne and playster it to the greuance, and it wyll louse it. Also for the Ciatica∣and for other olde sores take mu∣starde sede and the thyrde parte of crōmes of white brede, and figges, hony, and vineger, after as the ach of the sore requyreth the more of ye fygges and the hony that is there the more sharper is the strength of the sede, and the more bread and vi¦neger that is in it, the more weker is the sede, but I say nat yt ye shall put thys confection to al sores but to great and olde sores. Hys vertu if yf he be eaten it sharpeth a man∣nes wyt, it clenseth the bely, it bre∣keth the stone it purgeth the vryne menstrosite, and comforteth the sto¦make. ¶Smalage. Take Smalage sede Rewe sede, Peper and salte and grynde them wel togyther and tempre thē with
wyne and drynke it, for it is good for colde and wycked humours in the stomake and comforteth the sto¦make the lyuer and the longes, it is good for woundes. For ranke∣lynge and to cease the brennynge and akinge, and to bringe them to theyr kynd againe. Also it is good to drynke for the feuer tercian. Saluia. Sage is hote in the fyrste de∣gre and drye in the seconde degre the leues onely be taken in medecy¦nes both grene and dry, he may be kepte a yere, there be two manners of Sages, the garden and ye wilde Sage, yf thou wilt haue Sage in for medecynes take ye leues of gar∣den Sage, for that cōsumeth more and comforteth more thā the other dothe. For the palsy, sethe the leues of sage ī wine & vse to drīke it. For the same sethe ye leues ī wine & plai¦ster it to ye greuaūce, also it is good
to put in sauce, for the strangury, ye flux, & the matrice it clenseth, sethe the leues in water & let the pacient set ouer it & receyue ye hote fume of it and it shall do hym much good. Also it is good for venym or poy∣son, sethe Sage in ale or wine and vse to drinke it .iii. dayes and thou shalt be hole, bi ye grace of god. for the stomake drynke ye ioyce of sage with water and honye, & it is good to clense a mannes bodye to vse it bothe rype and grene, it wyll make a mānes bodye clene, therfore who that vseth to eate of thys herbe, or drynke it, it is meruayle that anye inconuenyence shulde greue them that vse it, If ye haue an ytchinge on you, wasshe it wel wyth ye ioyce of this herbe & it shal slee ytchyng. Also drinke sage with wyne & a li∣tell worme wode and it shall cease the ache vnder the sydes, the wōbe and the stomake, it is good for the
palsy and dropsy. ☞Sytureia. Thys is called Sauery, it is hote and dry in the .iiii. degre, sethe it in wyne or water, and dryncke it and it purgeth the raynes, ye blad∣der, the menstruosyte in the bowel∣les, it purgeth the longes, and lo∣seth great humoures and compel∣lethe and putteth hym out by the mouth by spytynge, therfore he is brennynge and styrrethe hym that vseth lechery, therfore it is forbyde to vse it muche in meates. Soke it in vyneger or wyne and drynke it and it shall make the haue a meke stomake. Also whan it flowereth it shuld be gathered and dried & pou¦der made therof. Also take ye pou∣der of sauery & boile it wt clarified honi & vse to eate therof, or boile it in wyne, & drinke it, and it wyl lose coughe flum in ye brest. Also for fre¦tynge in thy bely drynke pouder of
it in warme wyne and thou shalbe hole. Also if ye take the lesse sauery it hath the same vertue & strengthe that the other Sauery hath. Also make grewell with water and flu∣wer, and pouder of Sauery & eate therof & that shall clense all ye spiri¦tuall membres of a man. Saxfrage. ☞Thys is hote and dry in the .iii degre, for the stone, sethe the rote of it in wyne and drynke it. Also it is good for the desease of the colyke & the strangury, and the pouder of it be eatē with an egge, it is good for the same. It maye be kepe in hys vertue .iii. yere. Scabiosa. Thys is called Scabias, it is hote and dry in the .iii. degre, to dri it ther is no profyte in it, for scab∣bes take ioyce of it, Uyneger and oyle, and boyle them to gyther tyll they wee thycke, and kepe it for it
is good for scabbes. For the Eme∣rawdes sethe them in water, than set ouer it and take the flume of it and vse it & thou shalbe hole, stāpe it and sethe it wyne & that drynke, is good to dystroy humours in the stomake, and drynke it euery daye fastyng wyth Eurose & thou shal be hole, and thou shall neuer haue the pestelence bredynge wythin the whyle thou do vse it. For the leuer stampe it and sethe it in wyne and drynke it. ¶Sothernwode. Thys herbe is good for the cou¦ghe and for byting in the bely and in the breste, and for disease in the bones, and good for thē that maye nat well pysse take the sede of thys herbe and stampe it and drynke it wyth water, & it is good for all the aforesayde. Also for the desseases ī the syde, stampe thys herbe wyth Betayne and drynke it and it hel∣peth
well. Also for the bytyng of a serpēt and for venym, stāpe thys herb and drinke it with wyne, and it is good. Also for the colde feuer stampe thys herbe wyth wyne and drnycke it and thou shalte be hole. Syngrene. Thys is colde and moyste in the thyrde degre ye ioyce of thys herbe and also the same herbe is ryghte necessary for many deseases, stam∣pe thys herbe wyth grece and play¦ster it to the desease & maruelously it helpeth. For desease and darke∣nes of eyes, stampe this herbe and put of the ioyce in ye sore eyes For chafyng of the lyuer take the ioyce of it and vyneger & dyppe a cloth therin, and playster it to the gre∣uaunce. For bytynge or scalding make an oyntment of the ioyce of thys herbe and oyle of Roses, and waxe, but laye it nat to tyl after the thre fyrst dayes, but fyrste anoynt
it with grece and such other. Also for a disease of a hote cause thys herbe is good to be layde therto. Stycheworte. ❧ Thys is called Stycheworte or birollōg this is hote & moyst ī ye fyrst degre, ye vertu of this herb is, it is good to hele woūdes & sore eis Scamony. Scamony is hote and drye in the .iii. degre ye leues onely be beste in medecenes it may be kept a yere in hys vertue or two for nede. For the disease in the stomake boyle le∣ues of it in wyne, & drynke it. Also the aforesayd drynke is good for ye bely, & for the strangury, and flux. Also astewe made with boyling of it ī water, or wine is good for y• for sayd, if it be boyled in oyle & play∣ster it to ye aforsayd, for it is better. Sene. ❧ Sene is hote & drye in the .iiii. degre, it groweth in y• other syde y•
see and most aboute Babylon: the best be the floures and the braun∣ches of it, It is good for many de∣seases as the fallynge euell: for ye Sinacop, for ye splen, for the Eme¦rawdes, and for the quartayne, sy∣rop made of it boiled in water and suger, is good for al the aforesayd. Syrop made with the ioyce of Bo¦rage is good for the forsayd. Also Dascorides cōmaundeth to make Exmel of the aforesayd with boy∣lyng of vyneger and honye and it wyl be good for the aforsayd, And thys herbe may be kept ten yere. ❧ Selondyne. Thys is hote and dry in the .iiii. degre, & Galen saythe yt it is good for sore eyes, take ye ioyce of selon∣dyne and boyle them wel togyther in a panne & whā it is cold anoynt the eyes therwith. Take Selōdine and wryng out the ioyce & medle it with whyte wyne and anoynte thy
vysage therwith & it shal do away frekeles of y• vysage, ye ioyce of se∣londine & gotes dōg medled to gy¦ther small in a morter, thā if yu lay it to a cāker in a womans pappe, it shal sle the cāker. Also take ye ioyce of selōdyne & pouder of brimstone and medle them well togyther & it wil helpe to do away ye Morphew And sethe the rote in wyne, & whā ye pot is takē downe let hī hold his mouth opē ouer it yt the breth mai go into his body, & that shal slee ye canker in the mouth, it is good for hym yt hath dronken venym wyth his owne stale & that wil saue him ❧ Sauayne. ¶Thys is hote and dry in the se∣conde degre, it is good to slee wor∣mes in the wombe and to brīge thē out yf it be soden in wyne & gyuen to the pacyēt to drynke. It is good wyth butter or greace to make an oyntment for ye scabbe that rēneth
to hele it & dry it vp, and it is good for the head ache, yf it be stamped and tempered wyth Uyneger and make a playster therof and laye it in the temples and vpon the molde of thy hende. ❧ Scabiose. Thys is colde and moyste in the ii. degre, stampe it and sethe it in wyne and that drynke is good for the lyuer. And it will destroy wyc∣ked humours in the stomake, and drynke it euery day fastyng wyth Eurose & thou shalt neuer haue po¦stume bredinge within the as lōge as thou doste vse thys medecyne. ¶Littera .T. Et primo de Tapsu babasto. THys is called Molen, it is colde and dry. It is good for the Eme∣rawdes & it be sodden in wyne and scommed clene. Also it is good to wasshe the
greuaunce therwith, it is good Al¦so for the flux in the belly. Towne cresses. Thys herbe is hote and drye in the .iii. degre, the sede wyll endure good fyue yere. It is good to staū¦che the flux & the mencyon, yf thou take the sede and bruse it in a mor∣ter of brase & giue the sike to drink therof thre dayes euerye daye pe∣ny weyght at ons wyth reed wyne warmed and ī those thre dayes he shalbe staūched, or els he shal dye, of that euyl, it is good for the palsi and for the male flanke, take ye sede and sethe it wyth wyne & do it in a poket & bynde it to the side ther as y• greuaunce is. Also it is good for hī yt maye nat well pisse, take yt sede & seth it ī wyne & oyle olyue & bind it to thi share. It is good for a mā¦nes fundamēt y• goeth out, yf it be take of cold, thā it must be put in a¦gayne and strawe ye pouder on the
fundament thy rayne wyth Honye and than strowe the pouder aboue with the powder of Comē or pow∣der of Calafyne, for al these be kīd¦ly for it. Also take the stalkes of to¦wne Cresses, and brenne them and there shall no venemous beaste ne worme abyde the sauour nor smell therof but he shall dye or fly awai Littera .U. Et primo de herba Uiole. VIolet is colde in the fyrst degre, and moyst in the se¦conde. For blaste in the eyes, take ye rotes of Uio¦lettes and stampe them wt Myrre & Saffron and at nyght laye it to ye sore eyes. Also for wounde in the head stampe the leues of Uiolettes with hony and vyneger, and play∣ster it to the wound and it shal be∣le it. And for them that may nat sle¦pe for syckenes sethe thys herbe in water and at euē let hym soke wel
his fete in the water to the ancles, whan he goeth to bed binde of this herbe to his temples & he shal slepe well bi ye grace of God. Take Uio¦lettes Myrre and Saffron, & ma∣ke a playster and laye to the sore e∣yes that be swollen and it shall cea¦se akynge & bate the swellynge. Uua suauis. Thys is called the swete Ray∣sen, it is hote and moyst it hath ver¦tue of clensynge, scourynge or smo¦thynge. Raysens eaten or boyled in wyne is good for ye cold coughe Sethe them in wyne and they be good to playster on the cold postu∣me and good for a colde stomake. Ueruayne. Ueruayne it hote and dry in the seconde degre. It is good agaynst al maner of euyls, of venym yf the pacyent drynke it & tempered with wyne and stampe the herbe & lay it
on euery maner of bytyng of veny¦mous beste, and it wyll drawe out the venym and saue the sore, who yt vseth it, it wyll make good breth and do a way stinke of the mouth. Also who that hath ye feuer tercyā take .iii. rotes, and thre croppes of the same herbe and stampe them & temper thē with fayre clene water and gyue it to the pacyent to drīke Also who that hath the feuer quar¦tayne, let him take the same drinke Also it is good for the stomake, the lyuer, & lōges. Also take veruayne Betayne, & Saxfrage & of euerye of them like muche and stampe thē wyth wyne tempered, and thys is good for them that hath the stone. Also they that bere veruayne vpō thē they shall haue loue and grace of greate maysters and they shall graunt him his askynge of his as∣kynge be good and ryghtfull.
Hic incipit littera .W. Et primo de Watercresses. WAter cresses be hote & dri in the seconde degre seth them in water, by them selfe and drynke it or se∣the it ī flesshe and sup of the broth, and it wyl clense well the inwarde membres. Also it is good agaynst the Strangulion and the flyxe of the same. Wild neppe or wodbynd. ¶This herbe bereth a flower like to the Hop, and after the flower he bereth a grene berye, and it hath a great rote, the vertue of the herbe is moste in the roote, it is good for sinowes that be shronken or cut to make them sople and to haue their owen course in theyr proper kynde Go to ye rotofe wylde Neppe, that is lyke wodbynde and make a hole in the myddes of the rote tha thā couer it well agayne that no ayer go out
nor that no rayne go in nor water, powder nor the sonne come nat to muche to it, let it stāde so a night & a day, thā after that go to it, & thou shalt fynd therin a certayne lycour take out that lycoure with a spone and put it into a clene glas and do so euery daye as longe as thou fin¦dest ought in the hole & thys must be done in the moneth of Apryll or Maye, than anoynte the sore ther∣with agaynst the fyre than wete a lynen cloth in the same lycour and lappe it aboute ye sore and it shalbe hole in shorte space, on warantyse by the grace of God. For the goute a soueraygne medecyne. Take the rote of wylde Neppe, and the rote of ye wylde Docke soden by it selfe and cut thē in thyn peces & pare a∣waye the vtter inde and cut thē in quarters, thā boile thē in clene wa∣ter .ii. or .iii. houres, than stāpe thē in a morter as small as can be, thē
put therof a quantite of soote of a chymny, and temper them with y• mylke of a cowe, that the herbe is of one coloure, than take the pysse of a man that is fasting and make a playster therof, and boyle it togy¦ther and as hote as ye maye suffer laye it to the greuaunce a day, and a nyght and so do nyne tymes, & it shal heale the on warantyse, by the grace of God. Wormewode. ☞This is hote & dry in the secōd degre, it is good for wormes in the wombe if it be stamped, & the ioyce wronge out & myngled with swete milke, and gyuē to the pacyente to dryncke, & sethe this herbe in wyne and make a plaister to the wombe, Make pouder of wormwode, Cen¦tory, Bettayne, of eche lyke, muche by wayghte and medle all well to¦gyther, and the pouder wyll slee wormes in the wombe both whan
it is eaten in potage and dronken. Also for the mylte that is swollen of a colde mater, sethe it in wyne & let the sycke dryncke therof, and yt shall heale hym, & make a playster of the substance of the herbe & laye it all hote to thy wombe agaynste the greuance. Also temper worme∣wode & temper it with vīeger and with rosted sower breade, grounde therwyth, & with the ioyce of Min¦tes, and the ioyce of Plantayne, of euer ych lyke much, and frye them well togither, than make a plaister & lay it to the mouth of ye stomake and this shall staunche breking or castynge. For wormes in a mānes eares be it serpent, or erewyke, take the ioyce of wormewode & put it in the eare. Also for the dropsy seth it in wyne and gyue the sycke to drynke at morninge and euenynge and it shal helpe hym.
¶The vertues of Wa∣ters stylled. WAter of Wormwode, for ye stomacke, lyuer & the spleene, for wor¦mes in the bodye, for the Iaundyce, & drūc¦kennes, and for the syght. Water of Sentory, for Appetite for the Lyuer & the Milt, wormes, and Sauceflewme. Water of Mugwort, for the ma¦tryce. Water of Dyttayne, for poyson, Uenome and Pestylence. Water of Fumitory, for y• Mor∣phew, Lepry, Scabbe, Dropsy, ly¦uer, Splene, Costyfnes and the Matrcie. Water of Ysope, for the Coughe Lunges, brest, the stomake, for the Pose and the guttes.
Water of Horehoūd, for the Cou∣gh, lunges, brest and colica passio. Water of Bawme, for the Mo∣ther, the Matrice lyuer, and splene Water of Calamint, Mugwort, Ysope, Brookmynt, Fumytorye, & Bawme of eche a lyke muche, and of Wormwood, a les parte. These are good waters for the Matrice, & for the reteynyng the floures. Water of Calamynt, is good for the stomake. Water of Plantayne for ye Flixe and hote Dropsye. Water of Fenel is good for a swe¦ling, and for sore Eyen. Water of Endyue for the drop∣si, liuer Iaundice and Stomacke. Water of Borage, for the stoma∣ke, Colica passio, and other sicknes of the bodye. Water of Saugle, is good for ye Palsye. Water of Bytayne, is good for
the hearynge and for all maner of syckenes in the body, for ryght as musterd is sauce for most kynd of meates: so is Bytayne to all other herbes. ¶The tyme of gathering Sedes Floures Herbes and Rootes. SEdes shoulde be gathered whē they be fully ripe, and the moystnes therof sōthyng dried awaye. Floures sholde be taken when they begyn to faule or fade. Herbes shold be gathered when they be full of moystnes, before they begyn to shrynke. Rootes sholde be gathered whē the leaues faule. Frutes sholde be gathered and taken at theyr ful greatnes before they faule, and the heuyer, and the sadder, that the frutes be: the better they are. And those that be greate &
lyght: be not so good. And they be better yt be gathered infaire wether than they be yt be gatherd in foule or Raynye wether. Herbes that grow in the Feeldes: be better than those that growe in gardeines And those yt grow on y• hilles be best. And cōmōli feeld her¦bes be smaller than towne herbes. Many herbes there be that haue a speciall time to be gathered in, in whyche tyme, yf they be gathered: they haue theyr vertue in ful strē∣gthe, more than they should haue, yf they were gathered in any other tyme. Some helpe, whēsoeuer they be gathered, & some be nought, yf they be not gathered in theyr due tyme ☞ Bytayne, shal principall be gathered in August, wt the see∣des & rotes wt ye Iuce. And it shal∣be dried in the shadow, or in the sō∣e, for need. For medicen, it may be gathered in any time: but euer yt is
better y• is gathered, wythout moy¦sture, & before the Sonne risinge. Swyne grasse, may be gathered when so euer you need. Camomil, shalbe gathered in april Perytory, should be gathered in Iune, before the Sonne ryse. Red Dock, may be gathered whē need is. Lāgdebefe shalbe gathe∣red in Iune and Iuly. Peniwort, shalbe gathered in the begynnyng of wynter. Germander, shalbe gathered in Lammas Moone. Dragāce, shalbe gathered in Iu∣ne and Iuly. Columbine, shalbe gathered in Lammas moone. Adders tōgue, shalbe gathered in April. Pedelion, shalbe gathered after ye mid day, when ye lyst. Groundsil, shalbe gathered after myd daye.
Walwort shalbe gathered when ye wyll. Uiolet shalbe gathered in Mar∣che, and in thys moneth shold Su¦ger Uiolet be made and Sirup, al¦so Oyle of Roses, of Camomyl, of Lillyes, and of Chesboll heades, yt is called Popy. And Rosemary flo¦res, in Maye. Centorye when it begynneth to floryshe. Organ in the moneth of Iune. Calamint in the moneth of Iune, Hartes tounge, in Nouember, Aristologia rotunda in heruest, & the other in the same tyme. Garlycke when ye wyl, wild Gar¦lycke when it florisheth. Agnus Castus, whē it florisheth. Gourdes in thend of September or in October, when they be rype, they shold be dried in such aplace yt the Sonne maye come to them all the daye.
Wylde Neppe beryes sholde be gatherd when they be yelowe. Cucumers sholde gathered whē the Fruite is rype, & the frute shold be layd vnder Uynes, where as ye sonne hath not his ful strength, v∣pon it, and in a moyst place that it may rotte, for than sholde ye sede be good and full of Kernelles. Citrull sholde be gathered when the frute is ripe and it shold be dri∣ed, in a drye place in the sonne. Water of Calamynt, shold be ga¦thered when it floureth and dryed in the shadow, and it wilbe good a yere & no longer. Saffron, shold be gathered be∣fore the Sonne ryse. Dodour groweth amōge Flaxe, shold be gathered in sommer when it begynneth to floure, & it may be kept thre yere. Drauke sholde be gathered whē it floryshith and sholde be dried in
the shadowe and wyll last a yere. Elebor, shold be gathered in her∣uest tyme. Fenyl, sholde be gathered in the begynnyng of Heruest, and a yere it may be kept, and the rotes of fe∣nell, shold de gathered in the begin¦nyng of the yere, and wyl endure a yere. Baldemonye, otherwyse called Gencyane, shoulde be gathered in the last ende of the yere, and maye be kept .iiii. yeres, the Rootes of it is vsed. And for to know it: one is, it is right bitter, for the lesse bit∣ter it is, the wors it is, another is, it is somwhat yelow, and not clean yelow, but sad. Galyngall yt is called in Phi∣sycke, Syperus, it maye be gathe∣red in eche tyme of ye yere. The best tyme is in the ende of Uere, it must be laied .iii. dayes in the sonne, that the moysture therof rot it not lyte∣ly,
and then kepe it in the shadow. Floure Deluce, shold gathered in thend of Uere, and dried in the sonne, and it wyl last .ii. yere. Sisalido, is the Roote of Phi∣lipendula, and that serueth to me∣dycen, and shalbe taken out of the erth, in the ende of Heruest. Auence leaues serueth more to medicens then the Rootes, the ver∣tue of it is best, whiles it is greene, and his vertue is to dissolue, con∣sume and open. Take Grapes before they be ri∣pe, and wring the youce out of thē, and than drye theym in the Sō¦ne, and make pouder of them. That pouder is good to be vsed in meates for cast¦tyng y• cōmeth of Co∣lericke humours and for the Flyxe.
¶A generall rule of all maner of herbes. IT is a generall Rule, that from the eyghte: Kalendes of the mo∣neth of Aprell: vnto ye moneth of Iulye, all maner of leaues of herbes be best, and from the .viii. Kalendes of Iu¦ly vnto the .viii. Kalendes of Oc∣tober: the stalkes haue mooste vertue. And from the .viii. Ka¦lendes of October: vnto the .viii. kalendes of A∣prell: all maner of Rootes of Her∣bes be in their ful strēgth. Finis.
¶Here begin¦neth the table of thys boke. AGnus castus Apium. Auetum. Apumeresus. Absentium. Atamasa. Affodillus. Aristologialou. Aristolegia rot. Abrotinum. Ameos. Alleluya. Asterion. Agrimonia. Auentia. Altea. Amarisca. Auricula muris Apium emo. Apium canarus Axtiplex do. Anabula. Acus demonis. Argentila. Acus mustela. Allium. Amusm. B. ¶Betonia. Blomte Bete. Borago. Bugla. Burneta Bursa pastoris. Borago syues. Byllyre. C. ¶Camamilla. Calamintum. Crassula maior Crassula minor Citura. Centauriama. Centaurinmi Cura Celidonia. Culamen. Colewortes. Coliandrum Capillus ee. Corcus Centonodium Caprifolium Canabaria. Costus. Cepe. Columbina. Cominum. Cardiaca. Cerasa.
Camelon. Cauda pulli. Cabochis, Caluus gallica Caluus agrestis. Cimbaria. Consolida maior Consolida minor. Consolida md. D Diaptanum. Dragantia ma Dancus arininus. Dens leonis. Dens canis. Dens creticus. Dragantia fe. E Elena campana. Endua. Eruca. Enfrasia. Ebulos Edera. Ederaterrestris. Euforbium. Elleborus albus Elleborus niger. Epatica. Erpina. Epulus minor F Flaminula. Fumus terre. Fumicretum. Fragra. Fabaria magor. Fabaria minor. Filix. Filipendula. Finiculum. Faxinus. Finiculus poet Febrifuga. Filago. Flaminula miū. G Gracia die ma. Granum. Genestula. Gencianus Galanga. Granum solis agitu Gladiolus. H Herba crutiata. Herba Christofory masculi. Herba Christofo∣ri femi ni Herba waleri Herba Robarti Herba Marcia. Hastuca regia Herba Petri Herba Iohannes. I Iusquiamus Isopus Ireos Iris. Iarus
Iasia alba Iasia nigra Ipia maior Ipia minor Iacenitus rusti. L Lanisticum. Langua cecui Liliium. Ligustum Lingua bouis Lingus serpentes ma¦ior. Lingua serpentis mi. Lingua Canis Lingua Hercina Lupinus Labrum veneris Lauendula, Lactuca Lactuca Siluat Lactuca Lepo Lollium. Laparium rust Linum. Lauriola. Licorisa. Lappa. M ¶Millefolum Mercurialis. Menta. Menta romana Malua. Morel or nyght-shadowe. Mastyke. Magerum. Millefolium ma¦or Yarowe. Motherwort or Mogwort. Maces. Meuta rubea. N. Nux muscata. Napus O ¶Olibanum. P ¶Pruna. Peper. Pinpernella. Pulgium Peucedanum vel. Feniculus por Peorocilium. Peritorium. Pastinaa. Plantago. Porrum. Pireteum.
Papauer Polipodium Pienium. Q Quinque foliū R ¶Rybworte. Reed nettell. Rose rube. Rosemary. Ruta. S ¶Sinapium. Smalage. Salua. Statureia. Saxfrage. Scabioso. Sothernewode. Syn grene Styche worte Scamony, Sene. Selondine, Sauayne. Scabiosa. T ¶Tapsu barba. Towne cresses. U ¶Uyolet. Uua suauis. Ueruayne. W ¶Water cresses. Wylde neppe. Wormewode. FINIS. ¶Imprynted at London in the Fletestrete at the sygne of the Rose Garland by me Wyllyam Copland. for Iohn wyght
