14081 S119558 99854765 20209
Informacōn for pylgrymes vnto the holy londe.
Fro Calays to Rome. by Fraūce ¶ Fro Calays to Boloyne lyeux .x. myles .xx. ¶ Pycardy To Montrell lyeux .x. myles .xx. To Abuile lyeux .x. myles .xx. To Amyas lyeux .xi. myles .xx. ¶ Fraunce To Cleremount lyeux .xiiij. myles .xxviij. To Parys lyeux .xiiij. myles .xxviij. To Monhery lyeux .vij. my es .xiiij. To Estamps lyeux .vij. myles .xiiij. To Tury lyeux .x. myles .xx. To Orlyaunce lyeux .x. myles .xx. To Weson lyeux .vij. myles .xiiij. To Swame lyeux .v. myles .xv. To Nouil lyeux .iiij. myles .xij. ¶ Barry. ¶ To Burges lyeux .vi. myles .xviij. To Donleroy lyeux .vij. myles .xiiij. To Culuer lyeux .vij. myles .xxi. To Molyns lyeux .vij. myles .xvij Burbony To Veroins lyeux .v. myles .xij To Palisse lyeux .iiij. myles .viij. To Pacaudiere lyeuxs .iiij. myles .xij. Lyones To Rona lyeux .iiij. myles .xij.
To saynt Saffryn lyeux .iij. myles .ix. To Tarrara lyeux .iij. myles .ix. To Brayle lyeux .iij. myles ix. To Lyon lyeux .iij. myles .ix. To voelpillera lyeux .v. myles .xij ¶ Dolpheny. To Burguin .lyeux .ij. myles .vi. To Durdupin lyeux .ij. myles .viij. To ponthenezin lyeux .iij. myles .xij. ¶ Sauoy To Aquebelleto lyeux .ij. myles .viij. To Chambery lyeux .ij. myles .viij. ¶ Ancipiunt montane To Mountmelyon lyeux .ij. myles .viij. To Aquabel lyeux .iij. myles .xv. To Shawmer lyeux .iiij. myles .xij. To saynt Iohn de Murian lyeux .ij. myles .vi. To saynt Michael lyeux .ij. myles .vi. To Orela lyeux .i. myles .v. To saynt Andrewe lyeux .i. myles .v. To Modon lyeux .i. myles .iij. To Burget lyeux .i. myles .ij. To Vsse lyeux .iij. myles .ix. To Tromylion lyeux .ij. myles .vi. To Lynnyngbure lyeux .i. myles .iij. To Suza lyeux .vi. myles .xviij. ¶ Ytalia / {per}montē Senis. & incipiūt miliaria. ¶ To Velona myles .x.
To Turin .myles .x. To Sheuaus .myles .x. To Salis .myles .xvij. To Versel .myles .vij. ¶ Lumbardy To Nouera .myles .xij To Myllan .myles .xxv. To Meriniano .myles .x. To Lood .myles .x. To Plesaunce .myles .xx. To Florencehole .myles .xij. To Burgosanctdouy .myles .viij. To Palma .myles .xv. To Regio :.: .myles .xv. To Modina .myles .xv. To Ansella .myles .xiiij. To Bonony .myles .vi. ¶ Incipit Scarparia To Plenora .myles .viij. To Liuana .myles .viij. To Scargalazo .myles .iiij. To Florincefola .myles .x. To Scarparia .myles .x. ¶ Finit Scarparia To Florence .myles .xiiij. To Sancassan .myles .viij. To Tauernell .myles .vij. To Pogepons .myles .v.
To Sena .myles .xij. To Boncouent .myles .xij. To Sayntclerigo .myles .viij. To Palya .myles .xiij. To Aquapendent .myles .xi. To Mountflascon .myles .xiiij. To Viterbe .myles .viij. To Rassilion .myles .ix. To Turbecan .myles .xiij. To Rome .myles .xiiij. ¶ Sūma .ix.C.lij. ¶ From Rome to Naples ¶ Fro Rome to Merena .myles .x. To Belletir .myles .x. To Saramoneta .myles .xv. To Pepirn .myles .xij. To Tarrasena .myles .xij. To Fownde .myles .xij. To Mola :.: .myles .x. To Sesa .myles .xv. To Capo .myles .xviij To Vers .myles .viij. To Naples .myles .viij. ¶ Sūma miliar. C.xxx. ¶ Fro Rome to Venyce.
¶ Fro Rome to Castellanoua .myles .xiiij To Liuita .myles .xiiij. To Naruya .myles .xiiij. To Terne .myles .vi. To Spoliat .myles .xij. To vircano .myles .xv. To Seruello .myles .ix. To Musha :.: myles .iiij. To Belforde .myles .xij. To Macherato .myles .xiij. To Racanato .myles .x. To Modondelarett .myles .iij. To Osmo .myles .vi. To Ezy :.: .myles .xiiij. To Sinagaye .myles .xv. To Fauo .myles .x. To Chatholico .myles .xv. To Rymene .myles .xv. To Portesesenato myles .xv. To Rauenna .myles .xx. To Auelana :.: .myles .xlv. To Furnasa .myles .xx. To Fosson .myles .v. To Brondalo .myles .vij. To Cloge .myles .iij. To Venyce .myles .xxv. ¶ Sūma miliar .CCC.xli.
¶ Fro Venyce to Myllayn Fro Venyce to Padwa ({per} mar & aquā. Myles .xxv. To Vincente .myles .xviij. To Verona .myles .xxvij. To Piscaria .myles .xv. To Lowna .myles .xij To Bressa .myles .xv. To Cocay .myles .xij. To Bargamo .myles .xviij To Myllayn .myles .xxx. ¶ Sūma milliar .C.lxxij.
Informacio peregrinacōis ad sanctū sepulcrū by the duche waye. ¶ Fyrste to goo to Douer. and fro thens to Cala∣ys by water .myles .xxx. Grauenynge fro thens .iij. myles duche Donkirk .iij. myles Newport .v. myles Oudenbarugh .iiij. myles Brugis .iij. myles Vrsyll .iiij. myles Gaunt .iiij. myles Dyrdermount .v. myles. Mawhemlyn .iiij. myles. Marscot .v. myles. Dyest .ij. myles. Arsull :.: .iij. myles. Beelsyn .ij. myles. Masecright .ij. myles. Gulpe .ij. myles. Acon .ij. myles Goylke .iiij. myles. Berghle .iij. myles. Coleyne :.: .iij. myles. Bmme .iij. myles. Remaghe .iij. myles. Andernake .iij. myles.
Coueleyns .iij. myles. Bobbarde .iij. myles Wesell .iij. myles Bagragh .vi. myles Lorygh half a myle. Benge :.: .i. myle & an half. Menske .iiij. myles. Wormys .vij. myles. Spire .vi. myles & an halfe. Brussellis .iij. myles & an half Faynge .iiij. myles. Kanstatt .iij. myles. Elsyng. :.: .i. myle. Gyppyng .i. myle. Geelsyng .ij. myles. Vlme .iij. myles. Mēmynge .vi. myles. ℞empton .iij. myles. Nesselfauge :.: .iij. myles. Fylsshe .i. myle. Atteruange .ij. myles. To Lerme .ij. myles. ¶ Et ibi mons magn{us} vocat Mountlerme To Lerme .ij. myles. Nazare .iij myles. ¶ Hic videatis quia sūt due vie. vna ad Ve∣nisiam & alia ad curiam romanā. Et hec est via ad curiam romanam.
¶ Vmbst .i. myle Laundeth .ij. myles. Lawdek .ij. myles. Moūt Nicholas. &. Chapell .iij. myles. Molles .iij. myles. Merane .vi. myles. Payle .iij. myles. Skolter .i. myle. Trent .v. myles. Vrfrette :: .iij. myles. Veron .vij. myles. Scala .xij. myles. Octia .xviij. myles. ¶ Hic pertransiuim{us} aquā. et soluimus qui∣liber .iiij. katerinos. Et aqua vocat Pows. Merandula .xij. myles Saynt Martyn .v. myles Doneporte .v. myles. Castell Iohn .x. myles. Doleyn .x. myles. Florusole :.: .xxx. myles Skarpery. .x. myles. florance. .xiiij. myles Castellū sancti Cassiani .viij. myles Castellū sancti Donati viij. myles. Sene .xiiij. myles.
Bonecouent .xij. myles. Sanctū clericum .viij. myles. Redecoffre .xij. myles. Aquependaunt .xij. myles. Saynt Laurence .v. myles. Beitsen .iij. myles. Mountflasske :.: .viij. myles. Viterbce .viij. myles Sowters. .x. myles. Rome .xxiiij. myles. ¶ Via de Roma ad venisiam Fro Rome to Castellonouo .xij. myles. Arenyane .x. myles. Castellane .viij. myles. Castell Leonarde .v myles. Outreole .iij. myles. Narnya .vij. myles. Sancti Emini .vi. myles. Sancta Fida .xij. myles. Tode :.: .iiij. myles Perose .xx. myles Pount le pater .v. myles. Engobin .xv. myles. Cantyane .x. myles. Fyrmynyane .xv. myles. Vrben .iij. myles. Mountfloure :.: .xij. myles. Remell .xij. myles. Fro thens to Venyse .vij. sco∣te
myles {per} aquam. ¶ A venisia vs{que} Nazare Meistre .v. myles Treuyse .x. myles. Conyngane .viij. myles Seriuale .vi. myles. Affortyma .ix. myles. Vngaron .iij. myles. Hospitale :.: .iiij. myles Saynt Martyn .vi. myles. Burgh̄ .vi. myles Lampettes .iiij. myles Vngaron .vij. myles. Buttestane .v. lmyes. Alandre .i. myle. Netherthorpe :.: .i. myle. Valespergo .i. myle. Burnell .ij. myles. Mulburgh̄ .iij. myles. Motre. ij. myles. Steresen .ij. myles. Isebroke .viij. myles. Nazae .vij. myles.
Chaunges of money fro Eng∣londe to Rome & to Venyse ¶ Calays AT Calays ye shal haue as many plackys for half a noble englysshe. or for a dukate. xxiiij. plackes. That is beste moneye vnto Brugis. ¶ Brugys ¶ At Brugis ye shal haue as many plackes for hal¦fe a noble or a dukate as ye had at Calays / ¶ For a gylden .xix. vplackes. ¶ And for a gylden of lyly¦ars .xxiiij.. ¶ And .xvij. mytes for half a noble / Or for a dukate .xxxi. lylyars. It is Braban moneye / And in Braban vplackes ben callyd styfers. ¶ A placke is worth .ij. grotes of flemysshe callid peny∣es. To a grote .ij. half penyes. to an half peny .ij. farthinges Xlviij. mytes to an vplacke. to a grote xxiiij. to an half peny .xij. to a ferthynge .vi / ¶ A ly¦ly placke is .iij. half penyes flemysshe. ¶ A lylyar is worth .xxxvi. mytes. Thre plackes ben worthe .v pence englysshe. ¶ V. gyldens & a placke be worth ij. nobles englysshe. A gylden is worth .iij. shelyng / of englysshe money. / This money woll serue well to Coleyn. ¶ Coleyn ¶ At Coleyn ye shall haue reynysshe gyldens & co¦leyn
penyes. Ye shall haue for a gylden .xxiiij. peni∣es. For a coleyn peny .xij. hallardes or myrkyns. all is one. And they woll serue to Menske. ¶ .iiij. hal∣lades ben worth an half peny englysshe. ¶ Brugys ¶ Take in your chaunge fro Brugys of gyldens wyth a rounde balle & a crosse aboue on the one sy¦de. they ben good vnto Rome. and the beste by all the waye. ¶ Take none englysshe golde with you from Brugys / for ye shal lese in the chaunge. And also for the moost parte by the waye they woll not chaunge it. Renysshe gyldens they knowe well by all the waye. Awd in them ye shall lese but lytyll or noughte. ¶ Menske ¶ At Menske ye shall haue bemysshe & blaffardes and other hallardes. ¶ A renysshe gylden is worth there .xxi. blaffardes. and as many of bemysshe. ¶ A dukate of Venyse is worth .xxvi. bemysshe & iij. hallardes. ¶ A bemysshe or a blaffarde is worth there .xi. hallardes. they laste to Kempston. Be∣mysshe woll serue wel to Rome. ¶ And .xij. bemy∣sshes is .xi. pence englysshe. ¶ Kempston ¶ At Kempton ye shal haue ferars & crousars. for a bemysshe .xi. ferars. For a crousare .v. ferars. For a gylden .xix. shelynges & .iij. ferars. Xlvi. Crou∣sars for a gylden & a ferar.
¶ Trent ¶ At Trent ye shall haue kateryns & marketes. For a bemysshe .ix. kateryns. And of marketes to a bemysshe .iiij. Two kateryns and two bagantines for a market. ¶ A maker is a galyhalfpeny. at Ve¦nyse called a soulde. ¶ Bolen̄ ¶ At Bolen̄ ye shall haue boleners & other kate∣ryns & bayokes ¶ A bolener of Bolen̄ is worth .vi kateryns vnto Rome. & at Rome. ¶ Sene ¶ At Sene a bolener of Rome is worth but .vi. ka¦theryns & an half. And the same bolener is worth at Rome .vi. kateryns ¶ A dukate is worth at Bo¦lon̄ .xlvi. boleners. ¶ A gylden at Bolen̄ is worth. xxxv. boleners. It is good syluer. ¶ And of bayokes xlviij. to a gylden. A bayoke is worth .iiij. kateryns ¶ An olde bolener of Bolen is worth .i. peny eng∣lyssh. And they ben best from Bolen̄ to Rome. ¶ Rome ¶ At Rome ye shall haue bolendynes of Rome & bayokes & other kateryns / For a dukate of Veny¦se .lxviij. bayokes / For a dukate of Rome .ij. lesse / or for a dukate of Florence. And of bolendynes for a dukate .xlviij. For a gylden .xxxvi. boleners. Of bayokes to a gylden .liiij ¶ And for a dukate x. pa¦pall grotes of bolendynes of Rome. Of bayokes iiij. to a papall grote. To euery bayoke .iiij. kate∣ryns.
¶ To eueri kateryn .xij. pychelynes callyd in Rome denares. ¶ It̄m from Rome to Venyse olde boleneres of Dolen̄ woll serue well all the waye and grotes of Venyse. and souldis callyd with vs galyhalfpeny∣es & kateryns. ¶ And be well auysed that ye chaunge not to ma¦ny kateryns / For they laste but lytyll way there be so many dyuers chaunges of them in dyuerse lord∣shyppes. And the kateryns of the one lorshyp woll not goo in the nexte lordshyp: ¶ Venyse ¶ At Venyse ben grotes & grossettes & s̄ callid the¦re souldes & bagantynes. For a dukate of Venyse is worth .xxiiij. grossones. and a s. and of grossettes xxviij. and .ij. s̄ for a dukate of Rome or of Florē¦ce .iiij. s̄. lesse for a grote or a grossone. All is one. Viij. s̄. for a grosset .iij s̄. for a soulde .xij. bagancy∣nes. For a dukate of Venyse ye shall haue .v. li. &. xiiij. s̄. A. li. is worth .xx. s̄ that ben galy halfpeny¦es. And to euery .s̄. xij. bagantynes. ¶ Curphu ¶ At Curphu ye shall haue torneys. blacke money xxiiij. for a venyse grosset .vi. for a venyse. s̄. ¶ Att Curphu. at Modn. & at Candy a soulde of torne∣ys is but .iiij. torneys / Therfore beware & aske yf ye bye ony thyng whether they saye a soulde of tor∣neys or of syluer /
¶ Modon̄ ¶ At Modon̄ ye shall haue but .v. torneys for a so¦ulde somtyme. & somtyme more. ¶ Candy ¶ At Candy ye shall haue .v. torneys / & somtyme vi. as the Seignouri woll sette it. And there they haue besaundes callyd parper. ¶ A parper is wor∣the .xxxij corneys. ¶ Rodes ¶ Att Rodes ye shall haue gillottes & Ionettes & asperis. ¶ A gillot is worth a Ionet & an half. A Ionet is worth .xxxij. denares of Rodes. An asper is worth half a Ionet. that is .xvi. denares. A gillot a Ionet & an asper ben syluer of Rodes. saue ye as∣per is money of Turky & syluer ¶ A venyse duka¦te is worth .xix. Ionettes &. viij. denares. ¶ Cypres ¶ In Cypres ye shall haue grotes of syluer & hal¦fe grotes & other denares of blacke money & besaū¦tes. ¶ A besaunt is worth .xlviij. denares. And .vij. besauntes & an half to a dukate of Venyse. A gro¦te of Cypres is worth .xxxviij. denares / A dukat of Venyse is worth .ix. grotes & an half. An half gro∣te is worth .ix. denares & sic de singulis ¶ A gros∣set of Venyse is worth there but .xvi. denares / A. s̄. but .iiij. torneys & sic de singulis. ¶ Surrey ¶ In Surrey ye shall haue dremes & half dremes
Two dremes ben worth .iij. venyse grotes. A dre∣me is worth .vi. s̄. of Venyse. A dukate of Venyse is worth .xix. dremes. ¶ Dukates. grotes. & souldes of Venyse woll go well in Surrey and none other wythout grete losse. A Good prouysyon whan a man is at Ve∣nyse & purposeth by goddys grace to passe by the see to porte Iaffe in to the holy lon¦de. and so to the sepulcre of our lorde Ihesu Criste. in Ierlm. he must dispose hym in this wyse. ¶ Fyrste yf ye shall goo in a galey. make your co∣uenaunt wyth the patron̄ betyme. And chose you a place in the sayd galey in the ouermest stage / For in the lowest vnder it is ryght euyll & smouldryng
hote and stynkynge. ¶ And ye shal paye for youre ship freyghte. and for meete & drynke to port Iaffe and agayn to Venyse. l dukates. for to be in a goo¦de honest place. and to haue your ease in the galey and also to be cherysshed. ¶ Yf a man shall passe in a shyp or a caryk. then̄e chose you a chambre as nyghe the myddes of the shippe as ye may / For there is leest rollynge or tom¦blynge to kepe your brayne & stomacke in tempre. And in the same chambre to kepe your thynges in saufgarde. And bye you at Venyse a padlocke to hange on the doore whan ye shall passe in to ye lon¦de. And ye shall paye for meete & drynke & shyppe freyghte to porte Iaffe & agayn to Venyse .xxx. du∣kates at the leest. ¶ Also whan ye shall make your couenaunt take good hede that the patron̄ be bounde vnto you alle before the duke of Venyse in a .M. dukates to kepe all manere couenauntes wyth you. That is to wy¦te. that he shall condute you to certen hauens by ye way to refresshe you. & to gete you fresshe water & fresshe brede & flesshe. ¶ Also that he shall not tary lenger at noo hauen than. thre dayes at the moost wythoute consent of you all. And that he shall not take in to the vessell neyther goynge nor comynge noo manere of mar∣chaundyse wythout your lycence for to dysease you in your places. And also for taryenge of passages by the see.
¶ And by the hauens that here ben folowynge he shall lede you yf ye woll. ¶ Venyse ¶ Fyrste fro Venyse to Pole by water .C. myles From Pole to Curphu .vi. C. myles. From Curphu to Modon .iij. C. myles From Modon to Candia .iij. C. myles. From Candia to Rodes .iij. C. myles. From Rodes to Baaffe in Cypres .iiij. C. myles From Baaffe to porte Iaffe wythouten more. .iij. C. myles. ¶ But be well ware ye make couenaunt that ye co¦me not at Famagust in Cypres for no thynge. For many englysshe men & other also haue deyed. for that ayre is so corrupt there aboute and the water there also. ¶ Also se that the sayd patron̄ geue you euery day hote meete twyes at two meeles. The fore none at dyner. and the after noon̄ at supper. And that the wyne that ye shall drynke be good and the water fresshe & not stynkyng. yf ye come to haue better. & also the byscute. ¶ Also ye must ordeyne for yourself & your felowe yf ye haue ony thre barelles eche of a quart. whiche quart holdyth .x. galons. Two of thyse barels shol¦de serue for wyne & the thyrde for water. In the one barell take red wyne. & kepe that euer in store. and tame it not yf ye may tyll ye come homeward
agayn wythout syknesse cause it. or ony other spe∣cyall nede / For ye shall fynde this a specyall note & yf ye had the flyxe / For yf ye wolde geue .xx. du∣kates for a barell ye shall none haue after that ye passe moche Venyse. And the other barell shall ser∣ue whan ye haue spent out your drynkynge wyne to fylle ayen at the hauen where ye shall come nex¦te vnto. ¶ Also ye must bye you a cheste to put in your thin¦ges. And yf ye haue a felowe with you. two or thre ye nede then̄e to bye a cheste that were as brode as the barelles were longe. And in the one ende ye ne¦de locke & key and a lytyll doore. And lay the barel that ye woll came fyrste at the same ende. For yf ye shipmen or other pylgrymes may com̄ therto they wol came & drȳke of it. & also stele your wat{er} whi¦che ye wolde not mysse ofte tymes for your wyne. And in the other parte of the same cheste ye maye laye your brede. chese. spyces / & all other thynges. ¶ Also ye must ordeyne you byscute to haue wyth you / For though ye shall be at table wyth the pa∣tron̄: yet notwythstondyng ye shall full ofte tymes haue nede co your owne vytaylles / As brede. chese. egges. wyne. & other to make your collacōn / For so me tyme ye shall haue feble brede & feble wyne. & stynkynge water. soo that many tymes ye woll be ryght fayne to ete of your owne.
Pylgrymages in Nazareth ¶ Primo vbi sepultus fuit sctūs stephanus prima vice quando fuit lapidatus in Gazar damula. que distat a Ierlm per iactū balistie. ¶ Item Albiera castrū vbi est ecclesia beate marie virginis. in qua recognouit {per}didisse filiū suū puerū Ihūs. ¶ Item puteus Samaritane. ¶ Item ciuitas Neopolosa vel Cicher. in qua sepulta sunt ossa Ioseph qui fu∣it venditus in egyptū. ¶ Item ciuitas Sebasten in qua fuit Incarceratus & decollatus sanctus Io∣hannes Baptista. ¶ Item castrum Iehenen in quo Cristus mundauit decem leprosos. ¶ Item in ciuitate Naym cristus resuscitauit a mortuis fi∣lium vidue. ¶ Item in ciuitate Nazareth est eccle¦sia in qua virgo maria fuit annūciata vel saluta∣ta ab angelo. ¶ Item fons de quo puer Ihūs por¦tabat aquam matri sue. ¶ Item vbi iudei volue∣rūt precipitare cristū Ihūs autem transiens {per} me∣dium illorum ibat. In descensu montis Thabor vbi cristus discipulis suis dixit. Nemini dixeritis vi¦sionem hanc. quo tempore transfiguratus est. ¶ Item ciuitas Capharnaum in qua Cristus fe∣cit multa miracula. ¶ Item mare Galilee in quo cristus fecit multa signa. ¶ Item in ciuitate tyberiadis est vbi cristus voca¦uit matheū. ¶ Item vbi cristus resuscitauit a mor¦tuis filiam Archisinagogi.
¶ Item vbi xp̄s comedit cum matheo. ¶ Item mons vbi xp̄s saciauit .v. milia hominū de quinque panibus. ¶ Item alius mons vbi xp̄s saciauit qua tuor milia hominū de septem panib{us}. ¶ Item ci∣uitas Sydon̄ vbi mulier dixit cristo. Beat{us} venter qui te portauit. ¶ Item ciuitas Tiris vbi xp̄s sa¦ciauit filiam chananee. Peregrinacōes damasci. ¶ Primo est ecclesia sancti Saluatoris in qua sūt plures muros vbi fuit miraculū de Iudeo qui {per}cussa ymagine crucifixi cū gladio sanguis viuus ema nauit. quo visus Iudeus erat cōuersus ad fidem et multi alij. ¶ Item vbi sctūs georgius interfecit dra conē et liberauit filiā regis. ¶ Item iuxta damascū cristus dixit paulo. Saule saule. &c̄. ¶ Item in mu∣ro damasci adhuc est fenestra vbi & per quā sanct{us} paulus exiuit. ¶ Item infra ciuitatē est ecclesia & dom{us} vbi sanctus paulus fuit baptizatus. ¶ Item domus ananie discipuli qui paulū baptizauit. ¶Item ad quatuor miliaria vltra damascū est ec¦clesia sancte marie de Sarena. Peregrinacōes montis synai ¶ Primo. ciuitas Gazara in qua sctūs Sampson
And at Ierlm there is good wyne & dere. ¶ Also se that the patron̄ take charge of your har∣neys wythin the shyppe tyll ye come agayn to the shyppe. ye shall tary there .xiiij. dayes. ¶ Also take gode hede to your knyues & other sma¦le Iapes yt ye beere vppon you / For the Sarrasyns wol go talkyng bi you & make gode chere: but thei woll stele from you yf they maye. ¶ Also whan ye shall take your asse at port Iaffe be not to longe behynde your felowes / For & ye co∣me betyme. ye may chese the best mule or asse that ye can / For ye shall paye no more for the beest than for the worste. ¶ And ye must geue your asse man there of curteysye a grote of Venyse. ¶ And be not to moche before neyther to ferre behynde your fe∣lowes for by cause of shrewes ¶ Also whan ye shall ryde to flume Iordan ta∣ke wyth you out of Ierusalem brede. wyne. water harde eggys / and these. and suche vytaylles as ye maye haue for two dayes. For by alle that waye. there is none to selle. ¶ Also kepe one of youre botelles with wyne yf ye maye whanne ye come from Flume Iordan to Mountquarantyne. ¶ And yf ye goo vppe to the place where our lorde Ihesu Cryste fasted .xl. dayes It is passyngly hote and ryght hyghe. And whan ye come downe agayne For ony thynge drynke
noo water. but rest you a lytyll. And thenne ete bre¦de. & drynke clene wyne wythout water / For water after that grete heete gendreth a flyxe or a feuour / or bothe. that many one haue deyed therof. ¶ Faciatis lxam in banco recipe ducatos de vene lijs de pōdere & de nouo sacco siue ducatos siue gro¦ssos venicianos siue argenteos. Tributa in terra sancta. ¶ In primis in naui apud portiaffe ad patronū {pro} saluo conducto et {pro} specie{bus} & confeccōibus ad do∣minos sarraceno{rum}. .i. ducat ¶ Item apud portiaffe .vij. d &. xvij. gross. ¶ Item in rames ad dn̄os .ix. g. ¶ Item ad scim georgiū .i. g. ¶ Item {pro} asino de rames ad Ierlm .vi. g. ¶ Item in Ierlm ad sepulturā bte marie .iij. s̄. ¶ Item in monte oliueti vbi xp̄s ascendit .ij. s̄ ¶ Item in sepulcro prima vice .i. g. & an half. ¶ Item in sepulcro scda vice .iiij. g. ¶ Item ibidm. tercia vice .ij. g. ¶ Item apud Bethleem .i. g. ¶ Item ad sctm Iohēm .i. g. ¶ Item in {per}egrinacōe fluminis Iordani .x. g. ¶ tem {pro} tributis in diuersis locis .vij. g.
¶ Item ad cōsulem in Ierlm .i. ducate & iiij. g. ¶ Item {pro} drugemamio .xv. g. & an half ¶ Item ad consulem in rames .ij. g. & an half. ¶ Item alia vice {pro} spie{bus} ad dn̄os .ij. g. & dī. ¶ Item {pro} asino de rames ad portiaffe .iij. g. ¶ Item in curtesij {pro} asinis & drugemamns et in alijs exspensis .ij. ducates & an half.
IN the seuen and twenty daye of the mon∣the of Iune there passyd from Venyse vn¦der saylle out of the hauen of Venyse acte the sonne goyng downe. certayn pylgrymes towar¦de Ierusalem in a shippe of a marchauntes of Ve¦nyse callyd Iohn Moreson. The patron̄ of the sa∣me shippe was callyd Luke Mantell. to the nom∣bre of .xlvi. pilgrymes. euery man payend some mo¦re some lesse as they myghte accorde wyth the pa∣tron̄. Some that myghte paye wel payed .xxxij. du¦kates. and some .xxvi. and .xxiiij. for meete & dryn∣ke and passage to porte Iaffe. And from thens to Venyse agayn. ¶ So they passid forth eest sou∣theest by the londe of Slauony. leuynge it on the lefte honde / It is two hundrid myles from Veny∣se. ¶ And there is a grete cyte callyd Iarre vnder the domynacyon of the Venycians. ¶ And in the same cyte lyeth Simeon Iustus. ¶ And they pas∣syd forth by an yle of the ryght honde callyd Lys∣sa. In whyche ben grete hylles and mountaynes. And in those hylles growyth grete plentee of Ro∣semary in lengthe as it were fyrses. ¶ After they came to a stronge wallyd towne of the Emperours of Constantinople callyd Arago∣se. foure hundryd myles from Venyse. ¶ And they saylled soo forth tyll they came to the yle of Cor∣phu on the ryght honde. & Turky on the lyft hon∣de. eyght myle bytwene both londes.
¶ On Frydaye at euen they came to the hauen of Corphu. There is a good towne & two stronge castelles stondyng on two hyghe rockes. It is a go¦de yle & a plenteuous. There they speke greke. It is vnder the Venysyens. ¶ On Sonday next after noon̄ they saylled from thens eest southeest. leuynge the londe of Corphu on the ryght honde. & the londe of Turkye on the lyfte honde. ¶ On the Wenesdaye nexte after. to an yle on the lyfte honde callyd the yle of Modon̄. It is a grete yle & a plenteuo{us}. It is .iij.C. myles from Corphu And there growyth wyne of Romeney. There is a good towne & a stronge castell. It is in Grece. and vnder the Venysyens. ¶ On the Thursday nexte after noon̄ they sayled from Modon̄ eest southeest. leuynge the londe of Modon̄ on the ryght honde. ¶ On Frydaye nexte after they passyd by a fayre hauen towne .xx. myles from Modon̄. callid Coro¦na. It is vnder the Venysyens. And so they sayled forth tyll they came an hundryd myles from Can¦dy. And there they sayled vp & downe thre dayes & two nightes in grete peryl besyde grete rockes. and durste not passe for the wynde was agaynst them. And one of the rockes is callyd in Greke Ouogo. whyche is to say in englisshe. edgyd. An edgydhyll It is shapen lyke an egge. Vppon the lyfte honde.
vi. myles wythin. there is stondynge yet of ye tem∣ple wherin Appollo was worshiped. And in the sa¦me temple Elena the wif of kyng Menelaus was rauysshed of Parys of Troye & lad in to the coū∣tree of Asia. And ye same yle where the temple was whiche was callyd of the grekes in olde tyme Del¦phos in latyn Cirigo. ¶ On Wenesday in the mornynge next after they came to Candy .iij. C. myles from Modon̄. Ther is a stronge castell & a large. & a fayr towne wyth∣out the castell well walled. & a stronge hauen wal∣lyd strongly / This yle is a grete yle & a plenteuou¦se of all manere thynges. Thei be Grekes in that yle And the Venysyens ben lordes there. And euery yere or euery other yere there is chosen a duke by ye same Venysyens. There growyth the wyne callyd maluesey. Somtyme they were callyd Cretes. It is of them wreten (in actibus applo{rum} (Cietenses sem{per} mendaces male bestie) ¶ In that londe .xxx. myle from Candy is an olde broken cyte. whyche was callyd Cretina. And a lytyll besyde there stondyth an olde broken chyrche. whyche was buylde in the honour of Ihesu Crist. & halowed in the worshypp of Titus e{pre}us. To whom Poul wrote in actibus aplo{rum} Ad titū) ¶ A lytyll besyde that place there is an hyll callyd Laborintus. and that is a meruey¦lous place wythin forth. wroughte out of harde sto¦ne of the rocke. and the grete hylle aboue. A man
maye goo wythin that place dyuers wayes. some waye .x. myles. and some waye more / & some waye lesse. And but yf a man be wel ware how he gooth in. he may so goo he shall not come out agayn the¦re be soo many tornynges therin. ¶ In this yle as they saye there were somtyme an hundred cytees & an hundred kynges. In this cyte the sayd pylgry∣mes taryed a moneth. And there was grete heete / For from May to Halowmasse there groweth noo grasse. it is soo brent wyth the heete of the sonne. And then̄ aboute Alhalowmesse begynnyth grasse herbes & floures to sprynge. And it is there thenne as Somer in Englonde. so in the wynter it is tem¦perate noo colde but lytyll. There is neuer snowe nor froste wyth yse. And yf there come ony froste with a lytyl yse. they woll shewe it eche to other for a merueylle. ¶ And fro, May tyll the later ende of Octobre there is noo reyne nor clowdes but ryght selde. but euer the sone shyneth ryght clere & hote. And abowte saynt Martyns tyme the sonne is as hote there. as it is in August in Englonde. And so it is in Rodes and Cypres. and alle that countree eestwarde. ¶ From this hauen they passyd the Wenesday nex¦te before ye Assumpcōn of our lady. and saylled eest southeest. leuynge Turky on theyr lyfte honde. ¶ On our lady daye the Assumpcōn they came to Rodes before noon̄ .iij. C. myles from Candy on ye
ryght honde. There they taryed .xviij. dayes. The¦re is a fayre castell & a stronge. In whyche castell ben the knyghtes of the Rodes / And there is a goo¦de cyte well wallyd wyth double walles. and a fa∣yr hauen closyd with stronge walles & toures. And on the eest party of the hauen. there stondeth on a strong walle .xiiij. mylles of stoon, euery wyndmyll as it were a strong toure. ¶ Of that place it is wre¦ten that Poul wrote (ad Colosences) to that same place. ¶ The fyrste day of the moneth of Septembre in the euen tyde they sayled from Rodes towarde Ie∣rusalem .vij. C. myles eest southeest. leuynge Tur∣ky on theyr lyfte honde. So they saylled forth fro Rodes & neuer stryked saylle tyll they came to port Iaffe. ¶ In the vigill of our lady in the feest of the Na¦tiuyte they came to port Iaffe. and there they tary∣ed Mondaye & Tewesdaye in the shyppe. tyll they had theyr sautconduyte. And on wenesdaye in the mornynge they entred in to ye londe at porte Iaffe. ¶ At porte Iaffe begynnyth the holy londe. There Peter reysed from deth to lyfe Thesbitan the ser∣uaunt of the apostles. ¶ There is Indulgence .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ And a lytyll besyde southwarde. there is a stoon where Peter stode & fysshed whan our lorde callyd hym. and sayd to hym (sequere me)
¶ At porte Iaffe they payed are they came oute of the shyppe euery pylgryme one dukate of Venyse. for mangery and for saufconduyte to the patron̄. And at porte Iaffe euery pylgryme payed for try∣bute .vij. dukates & .xvij. grotes. ¶ On Thursdaye they toke theyr asses and rode to Rames. There they payed euery man a grote venycyan to his asse man for curteysye. And there they were receyued in to an hospytall. and there ta∣ryed all daye. ¶ On Fridaye in the mornynge they went to sa∣ynt Georges where he was martyred. ¶ And the∣re is an olde cyte. whyche is callyd Lida. There e∣uery man payed a grote venycyan. and came aga∣yn to Rames. where they taryed al that daye. whi¦che Rames is a grete cyte and moche people therin ¶ And there was borne Ioseph of Aromathye as it is sayd. ¶ And at saynt Georges is .vij. yeres & vij. lentes. ¶ On Saturdaye betymes in the mornynge they rode towardes Ierusalem. And a lytyll fro Rames is the sepulcre of Samuel the prophete. ¶ Also fro Rames is .xij. myles to the castell of Emauns. wher the two discyples knewe Cryste in brekynge of bre¦de after his resurreccōn. ¶ Also a lytyll ouer the mydwaye towardes Ie∣rusalem is the valeye of Terrebynti on the lyfte honde. where Dauid ouercame Golyam.
From Rames to Ierlm is .xxiiij. myles. Soo bi .ij. at after noon̄ the same Saterday they came to Ie¦rusalem / where they were receyued in to an hospy∣tall a lytyll from the sepulcre. And therin they were all that daye. & all that nyght. ¶ On a sonday in the mornynge they began their pilgrymage. And a frere of mount Syon went w them to enfourme the places. & the perdons of eue¦ry place. ¶ Thyse ben the pylgrymages wythin the cyte of Ierlm. ¶ The fyrste is before the temple of the sepulcre doore. There is a foure square stoon whyte. where vppon Criste restyd hym wyth his crosse whan he went towarde the mount of Caluarie. ¶ Where is Indulgence .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also the hous of the ryche man. whyche denyed Lazare the crūmes of brede. ¶ In the sepulcre chirche of our lord on the north syde of the temple. is a chapell where Criste appe∣ryd fyrst to his moder after his resurreccōn / and sa¦yd (salue sancta parens) ¶ And on the ryght honde of the awter there is a wyndowe in whyche stondyth a pyllar to the why¦che Criste was bounden & beten wyth scourges in Pilates hous. ¶ On the lyfte honde of the awter in a wyndowe stondyth a lytyll crsse. whyche is made of a pyece
of the holy crosse. ¶ Also in the myddes of the same chapell is a roū¦de stoon of dyuers colours. where saynt Elyn pro∣ued the crosse that Crist deyed vpon with reysynge of a deed man to lyfe. ¶ In eche of those places ben .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also wythout the same chapell doore. is a roun∣de stoon & an hole in the myddes where Crist appe¦ryd to Mari Mawdeleyn after his Resurreccōn in lyknesse of a gardener. and sayd noli me tangere) ¶ There is Indulgence .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll from thens is a chapell where Ihu Criste was prysoned whyle his crosse was in sha∣pyng. ¶ There is Indulgence .vij. yeres & .vij. len∣tes. ¶ And there is a nother awter where ye Iewes cast lotte for the clothes of Crist ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. len∣tes. ¶ Also in the eest ende of the temple. there is a cha¦pell descendyng .xxxij. grecys. where saynt Elyn fo¦unde the crosse ¶ In that place is Indulgence (a pena & culpa) ¶ Also a lytyll aboue is a chapel in worshyp of sa¦ynt Elyn. ¶ There is .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also aboue in the temple a lytyl from thens. the¦re is a pyllar of marbyll vnder and awter. on ye whi¦che Criste was sette, & crownyd wt thornes ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes.
¶ Also a lytyll from thens is a fayre chapell .xix. steppes hyghe .iij which is the mount of Caluarie where Crist suffryd passyon for all mākynde. And there is a morteyse in the clyffe. whyche dyde cleue whan Crist yelded his spyryte. ¶ Also there is the morteyse in whyche ye crosse sto¦de. ¶ In this chapell is Indulgence (a pena & cul¦pa) ¶ Also before the temple doore is a place as it we∣re a sepulture where Crist was layed whan he was taken downe of the crosse. And there he was noyn¦ted & lappyd in clothe. ¶ There is also (a pena & culpa) ¶ Also in the weste ende of the temple is a chapell in the whyche is a foure square stone. where ye an∣gell sate. and sayd to the thre maries quē queritis) ¶ Also in that chapell is a nother lytyll chapell in whyche is ye sepulcre of Ihesu Crist where he was buryed & rose fro deth to lyfe ¶ A pena & culpa) ¶ Also in the myddes of the quere there is a stoon & an hole in the myddes. Where Crist sayd to his discyples Here is the myddes of the worlde. ¶ Also in the cyte wythout the temple ben certayn pylgrymages. The fyrste where the Iewes compel¦lyd Symon to take the crosse of Ihū whan he wen¦te to the mount of Caluarie. ¶ vij yeres & .vij. len∣tes. ¶ Also there is a place where Crist put downe the
crosse. and torned vnto the wȳmen. sayenge (Noli∣te flere su{per} me sʐ su{per} filios vestros) ¶ vij. yeres and vij. lentes. ¶ Also there is a place where our lady rested her se¦eng her sone beeryng the crosse. There is a chyrche called Ecclesia de spasmo ¶ vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also there is an arche wherin ben two stones. vp¦pon the one sate Pylate whan Ihesu was demed to deth. And in the other sate Ihesu. ¶ vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also the stole of our ladi .vij. yeres & .vij lentes ¶ Also the howse of Pylate in whyche Crist was scourgyd & demed to the dethe. ¶ There is (a pena & culpa) ¶ Also the howse of Herode in whyche Crist was ladde & in scorne clothed in whyte. ¶ There is In¦dulgence .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also the place wher Crist forgaat Mary Maw¦deleyn her synnes. ¶ There is Indulgence .vij. ye∣res and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also within the vtter gates of Salomons tem∣ple is Probatica piscina. ¶ There is also Indulgē¦ce vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll from the same temple is Porta au¦rea. ¶ Also the gate of saynt Stephen by ye whyche he was lady to be stoned to deth (vij. yere & .vij. lentes.
Pylgrymages in the vale of Iosephat. ¶ Fyrste the place in whyche saynt Stephen was stonyd to deth ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also the water of Cadron where the body of ye crosse laye many yeres for a bridge ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a chapel in the middes of the vale wherin is the sepulcre of our lady descendyng .xxviij. grecis ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyl thens is a chapell where Crist .iij. ti¦mes prayed to the fad. It is vnder a roche of stoon in the erth. ther is Indulgence .vij. yere & .vij. lent. ¶ Also in the same vale is a chyrche of saynt Ia∣mys ye lesse. in whyche he was the tyme of the pas¦syon of Crist. Where he promysed he wolde neuer ete ne drynke tyll he knewe Ihesu rysen. And there is the sepulcre of Zacharie the sone of Barachie. whyche Iewes slewe betwene the temple & the aw¦ter. ¶ There is Indulgence .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. Pylgrymages of the mount of Oliuete ¶ A lytyll entryng vpon the mount of Oliuete is the gardyne in whyche Crist was taken wyth the Iewes ¶ .vij. yeres & vij. lentes.
¶ Also a lytyll aboue towarde the same mount is a place where Crist sayd to his discyples Vigila∣te & orate ne intretis in temptacōem ¶ .vij. yeres & vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll from thens is a place where saynt Thomas of Ynde receyued the gyrdill of our lady ascendynge to heuen. ¶ There is Indulgence .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll fro thens is a place in ye same way where crist wept vpon Ierl'm sayeng (Nō relinquet in te lapis su{per} lapidē ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyl fro thens vpwarde is a place where thangel apered to our ladi wt the palme. sayeng Gale die eris assūpta in celū) .vij. yere & .vij. lent. ¶ Also aboue there is an hyll on the lyft honde cal¦lyd Galilee. in whyche place Crist appered to his discyples after his resurreccōn ¶ A pena & culapa) ¶ Also there is a place where the chyldren of Isre caste braunches of olyue trees in the waye. & dyde hym worshyp ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a quarter of a mile fro the thens is the mo¦unt of Oliuete south fro Galilee. In that place is an olde rounde chyrche where our lord ascended in to heuen. And there is seen the steppes of his fote) ¶ A pena & culpa) ¶ Also a lytyll fro thens descendyng doūwarde is a brokē chyrche of saynt Pilagie. where thapostles made the Crede. There is .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes.
¶ Also in ye same waye is a place where Crist pre¦ched often to the appostles ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes ¶ Also in the same waye a lytyll more descendyn¦ge is a place where was a chyrche of saynt Marke In whyche place Crist taughte the (Pater noster) to the appostles ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll thens is a place & a stoon on why∣che our lady rested her vpon. visytynge the holy pla¦ces ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also the chyrche of saynt Iames aforsayd. Pylgrymages in the vale of Syloe. ¶ In the vale of Syloe is a welle where our lady wasshyd the clothes of Ihesu Cryste. ¶ There is .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll wythout is a place where Isaye ye prophete was sawed wyth a sawe of tree ¶ .vij. ye∣res and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll thens on the ryght honde a lytyl de¦cendynge is a water rennynge out of an hyll. Why¦che is callyd Natatoria Syloe ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll thens aboue hangynge on the hyll ben places lyke caues. where the apostles were hyd in the tyme of the passyon of Cryste ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes.
¶ Also a lytyl from thens is a place whyche is cal¦lyd Archeldemak or Camp{us} sctūs. whyche was bo¦ught wyth .xxx. pence that Crist was sodle fore. There is .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. Pilgrymages of mount Syon ¶ Acte the highe awter of mount Syon there is a place there Crist made his maundy with his discy¦ples ¶ .vij. yere & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also on the ryght honde of the water is a place where Christ wyssh his discyples fete on Sherethur¦sday. sayenge (Mandatū nouum do vobis) ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ And wythout the chyrche on the south syde is a lytyll fayre deuowte chapell. where the holy ghost descended on the appostles on Wytsonday. ¶ The¦re is (a pena & culpa) ¶ Also in the cloystre byneth is a chapell where sa¦ynt Thomas of Ynde put his fyngre to Cristes si∣de or wounde ¶ .vij. yere & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also at the eest ende of mount Syon is the pla∣ce where the Pascall lambe was rosted ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also the oratori of our lady ¶ vij. yeres and .vij lentes. ¶ Also the sepulcre of Dauid. Salomon. Ezechie & other kynges of Iudee.
¶ Also at the northe syde of the chyrche is a stoon̄ vppon whyche Crist stode whan he preched to hys discyples ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a nother stoon̄ where our lady sate & herde the prechyng of her sone ¶ .vij. yere & .vij. lentes ¶ Also a lytyll more weste north weste is a place where our lady deyed. ¶ There is Indulgence (a pena & culpa) ¶ Also a lytyll thens is a place where saynt Iohn the Eeuangelist sayd masse before our lady ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also on the north syde a lytyl besyde mount Sy¦on is a place there Cayphas hous was. In whyche place Criste was put in pryson. ¶ And there is the stoon that was put on the sepulture of Cryst for he sholde not ryse. By the whyche it is sayd in scrip∣ture (Quis reuoluet nobis lapidem ab hostio monu¦menti. erat quippe magnus valde ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ There ben Iacobines and kepe that place wor¦shypfully. ¶ There Peter denyed our lord And a lytyl from thens where he wepte the denyenge of oure lorde .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyl waye from mount Syon is the pla¦ce where the Iewes wolde haue arested the body of our lady saynt Mari in the beere ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes.
¶ Also wythin the chiryerde of mount Syon on ye north syde is a place where saynt Stephen was bu¦ried the seconde tyme. ¶ There is Indulgence .vij yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also where saynt Mathewe was chosen one of the appostles ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also the chyrche of saynt Aungell whyche was the hous of Anne the byshop ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a lytyll thens in the highe waye towardes the hospitall from mount Syon at an hygh stoon̄ walle in the ryght honde is the place where Criste appered to the thre Maries on Ester daye in the mornynge ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Ibi similit est castellū Dauid Pilgyrmages of Bethleem ¶ From Ierlm to Bethleem ben fyue myles and in the hyghe waye thre myles from Ierusalem is the place where the sterre apperyd agayn to ye kyn∣ges of Coleyne ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a place where was a chyrche where Elias the prophete was borne. ¶ Also the sepulture of Rachelis the prophete. ¶ In Bethleem is a fayre chirche of our lady in whyche is a place where Crist was born vnder the hyghe awter vnd erthe ¶ A pena & culpa.
Also a lytyll by in the same chapell the cratche of our lorde ¶ A pena & culpa. ¶ Also aboue on the ryght hond of the quere is an awter where Crist was circumcided. ¶ There is a pena & culpa) ¶ Also on the lyfte honde of the quere there is an awter where the thre kynges made theym redy to theyr offrynge ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also in the cloystre of the same temple or chirche is a chapell descendynge vnd erth. where saynt Ie¦rom torned the Byble oute of Ebrewe in to Latyn ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also in the same chapell a lytyl thens is ye sepul¦cre of saynt Ierom ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also ryght nyghe by is the sepulcre of the Inno¦centes ¶ .vij. yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also two myles on the north syde from Bethle∣em is an olde broken chyrche where the angell ap∣ryd to the shepeherdes ¶ .vij. yeres .vij. lentes. Pilgrymages of saynt Iohn ¶ Fyue myle from Bethleem & fyues myle from Ierlm in mount Iudee is a chyrche. And atte the hye awter our lady saluted saynt Elizabeth. And there oure lady made the psalme of (Magnificat) ¶ .vij yeres and .vij. lentes. ¶ Also in the same chyrche bynethe in a walle
on the ryght honde is a stoon whyche hydde & clo¦syd saynt Iohn Baptist in his chyldehode whan Herode sought the chyldren of Israel the Innocen¦ces. and slewe them ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a nother chyrche aboue the roof of the sam̄ chyrche in whyche the angell apperyd to Zacharie the fader of saynt Iohn. sayenge Eo qd non credi∣disti verbis meis eris tacens vs{que} in diem natiuita tis eius) ¶ And in that place he made the psalme Bn̄dictus dn̄s deus israel. ¶ There is .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also a quarter of a myle is a chyrche where sa∣ynt Iohn Baptist was born ¶ A pena & culpa) ¶ Also four myles from thens towarde Ierusalem is a chyrche. wherin vnder the hyghe awter is an hole where a piece of the holy crosse grewe. ¶ And there was somtyme the orcharde of kynge Salo∣mon ¶ In that place is Indulgence .vij. yeres and vij. lentes. Pylgrymages in Bethany ¶ From Ierusalem two myles on the eest partye towarde Flume Iordan in Bethany is a temple where lazare was buryed. And in the sayd temple is a lytyll chapell. there Crist stode whan he reysed Lazare from deth to lyf ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also the hous of Symon Leprosus where Mari
Mawdeleyn anoynted Cristes fete. and wyped the¦ym wyth her heere ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also in a place halfe a myle thens, where the sa¦yd Mary and Martha sayde to Criste Domine si fuisses hic. frater meus. &c̄) ¶ Also a lytyll thens is the hous of Martha & al∣so the hous of Mary Mawdeleyn. Pylgrymages of Flume Iordan ¶ From Bethany to mount Quarentine ben .xxi. myles. In whyche mount is a chapell wherin Cri¦ste fasted .xl. dayes. ¶ There is a pena & culpa) ¶ Also in the toppe of the same mount is a place. where the deuyll sette Crist & tempted hym (Om∣nia regna mundi) sayenge (hec omnia tibi dabo si. &c̄) ¶ Also fyue myles thens is the cytee of Ierico. in whyche Ihesu Crist preched often tymes. ¶ Also foure myles & an halfe from Iericho is a chapel of saynt Iohn the Baptist / where he sayd (Ecce agnus dei) ¶ .vij. yeres & .vij. lentes. ¶ Also there bi is the wyldernesse where saynt Io∣han Baptist walked. ¶ Also half a myle fro that chapell is Flume Ior∣dan. where Ihū Crist was baptized of saynt Iohn Baptist. ¶ And there is also Indulgence a pena & culpa)
¶ Also I counsell you to haue wyth you out of Ve¦nyse Confeccōns Confortatiues Laxatiues Restric¦tiues Grenegynger Almondes Ryce Fygges Rey¦sons grete & smalle. whyche shall doo you grete ea¦se by the waye. And Pepyr Saffron Cloues & Ma¦ces a fewe as ye thynke nede. and loof sugre also. ¶ Also take wyth you a lytyll caudron. a fryenge-panne. Dysshes. platers. sawcers / of tree. cuppes of glasse. a grater for brede. & suche necessaryes. ¶ Also ye shall bye you a bed besyde saynt Mar∣kys chirche in Venyse / where ye shal haue a fether bed. a matrasse. a pylowe. two payre shetes / and a quylte. & ye shall pay but thre dukates. And whan ye come agayn bryng the same bed agayn and ye shall haue a dukate & an half for it agayn though it be broke & woren. And marke his hous & his na¦me that ye bought it of ayenst ye come to Venyse. ¶ Also make your chaunge at Venyse. And take wyth your at the leest .xxx. dukates in venyse gro∣tes & grossones. Ye shall haue at Venyse for a du∣kate of Venyse .xxviij. grotes & an half. And after ye passe Venyse ye shall haue in somme place but. xxvi. & .xxiiij. And take wyth you thre or foure du∣kates in souldes. that ben galyhalfpenyes of Veny¦se. for euery grote of Venyse .iiij. souldes. And take wyth you from Venyse .i. dukate or .ij. of torneys. it
is brasse money of Candy. It woll goo all ye waye by the see. ¶ Ye shall haue .viij. for a soulde at Ve∣nyse. at Modon. & at Candy often but .v. or .vi. at the moost. ¶ Also hyre you a cage for half a dosen of hennes or chekȳs to haue wyth you in the shyppe or galey For ye shall haue nede to them many tymes. And bye you half a busshell of myle sede at Venyse for theym. ¶ Also take a barell wyth you for a sege for youre chambre in the shyppe. It is full necessary yf ye we¦re syke that ye come not in the ayre. ¶ Also whan ye come to hauen townes. yf ye shall cary there thre dayes. go betymes to londe / for then̄ ye maye haue lodgynge before a nother / for it woll be take vp anone. And yf ony good vytayle be ye maye be spedde before a nother. ¶ Also whan ye come to dyuers hauens beware of fruytes that ye ete none for no thynge. As melons & suche colde fruytes / for they be not accordynge to our complexyon. & they gendre a blody fluxe. And yf ony englysshe man catche there that syknesse. it is a grete merueylle but yf he deye therof. ¶ Also whan ye shall come to porte Iaffe. take wt you oute of the shyppe vnto londe. two botelles or two gourdes. one with wyne a nother wyth water eche of a potell at the leest / For ye shall none haue tyll ye come to Rames. & that is ryght feble & dere
fuit mortu{us}. ¶ Item in monte synay est monaste∣riū sācte marie rubo in qua requiescit corp{us} sancte katherine. ¶ Item post tribuna isti{us} ecclesie est lo∣cus vbi xp̄s ap{per}uit moysi in medio rubi. ¶ Item in medio montis est locus vbi Helias fecit peniten¦ciā. ¶ Item in sūmitate montis deus dedit tabu∣las legis moysi. Item viridariū vbi onefrius fecit penitenciā. ¶ Item alius monsscte katherine vbi angeli posuerūt corpus eiusdem sctē. ¶ Item ma∣re rubrum. Peregrinacōes terre egypti ¶ In ciuitate messare vel cayre sunt multe ecclesie xp̄iano{rum} int quas est ecclesia sancte marie de Co∣lūpna. in qua est corp{us} sancte barbare. ¶ Item flu¦men qd venit de paradyso. ¶ Item vine a balsami ¶ Item monasteriū sancti Antonij & pauli primi heremite. macharij. & alia multa. ¶ Item a {pre}dicta ciuitate messare {per} tres dietas in patria egypti est q̄∣dam patria noīe Menpheluto. in qua est monasteri¦um Iacobita{rum} noīe Elmarath. vbi est capella vbi beata maria stetit per .vij. annos cū filio suo Ihu & Ioseph. Et celebratur ibi festū ab om̄ibus xp̄ianis terre egypti in die Ramis palma{rum}. ¶ Item in ci∣uitate alexandrie sancta katherina fuit marteriza¦ta. ¶ Item ibi est mortu{us} sanctus Elemosinarius Iohes patriarcha. ¶ Item ibi fuit sctūs marcus
euangelista et postea sepultus. Reditus & reuersio dictorū pere∣grinorū versus angliam ¶ Apud portiaffe reueniendo & velando die Iouis proximo post festū translacōis sācte Thome apud Salyna vel Salaȳna .xiiijo. die Iulij die sabbati velabam{us} dsus mirram. In vigilia sancti petri ad¦uincula in nocte apud mirram illa nocte ad cata∣mo. Ciastino die post testū sancti petri velāuimus vsus rodes. Dies martis post festū {pre}dictū apud ro∣des. Die Iouis fecim{us} velacōem versus candiam. In vigilia assumpcōis beate marie in candia. Die martis proximo velabam{us} dsus modon̄. In .xviijo. die augusti in modona. In proximo die lune vela∣bamus apud aragosiam. Xxvio. dic illi{us} mensis in portu arogosie. Iijo. die post velabam{us} dsus paren∣siam. Viijo. die mensis octobris in parencia. Iijo. die velabamus dsus veniciam. Iiijo. die. videlt die ve¦neris circa horā decimam in venisia. Proximo die post missam vsus ferariam. Die martis in matu∣tina in feraria. De breuitate et vanitate huic mūdi.
¶ Audite oēs in pplo negligentes aliquando cog¦noscite. Ite ad sepulcra mortuo{rum} et videte exempla viuenciū. iacent ossa. perit homo. et tamen reseruat̄ causa eius in iudiciū refuit et i{pre}e similis nobis ali∣quando homo in vanitate viuens in sclo. studens diuicijs. multiplicauit agros. plantauit vineas. im¦plens horrea sua in appotecis multis. et letatus est in habundancia sua. Et ecce sublata sūt om̄ia ab oculis suis. Iacet in sepulcro redact{us} in puluerē. De fluxerūt carnes quas delicijs nutriuit. Abcesserunt nerui a cōpaginibus suis. sola sūt ossa que remanse rūt in exēpla viuenciū. Cognoscant reliquias mor¦tuo{rum} viuentens putant eū requiescere corpus et ha∣bitat in inferno anima eius. et non videbit vlteri∣s lumen.
Here foloweth the langage of Moreske & of other countrees also. I whada / ij ettenin / iij telate / iiij. arba / v camate / vi sette. vij saba .viij temane .ix tessa .x asshera .xi hadasshe .xij attanasshe. xiij telatasshe .xiiij abata∣sshe .xv camatasshe .xvi settatasshe .xvij sabatasshe .xviij tematasshe .xix tessatasshe .xx esshere .xxi wa∣hadaesshere .xxij tellatyne .xxiij wahadatellatyne. (&c̄ vs{que} ad .xl. ¶ Brede ghobbis. wyne nebete. water moy. flesshe laghe. fysshe semek. Come tale goo roa. Good mo¦row sabalkir. Good euyn mesalkir. Content bes∣melle. Geue me attyne. Fressh terre. salte mala. ly¦tyll swyre. Potage tabahaghe. It reyneth mataha. Moche kytir. Wynde awa. Now dilawaght. how moche bekem. Wyll you detryght. I wyll anastare. Geue me hate. Gramercy ectharlak herak. Mo∣che gode do it you sahagh. Ye be welcom marre ha¦babak. Sytte downe hocoyte. Ryse vp coome. Wyl¦te thou goo betrightrea. ye ee. Thou shalt be payed to morow Zee fook bocula. Nay legh. Good taybo. Euyll maletaybo. Noughte fusshare. To nyghte delile. In the mornynge agade Anone fissa. soden stawa. Fyre nare. What tidynges aschabare. The∣re howne. Here menn ahowne. Slepe neyme. I wyl
not goo maberet roo I goo hanna roo. Mylke le∣ben. A henne digiage. These inben. An asse homa∣ghe. An horse pharasse. A mule begel. Eggis beyet Greke I ena .ij dua .iij. trea .iiij. testera .v pende .vi hexe .vij esta .viij octo .ix ennea .x deca .xi endecaena .xij ende cadoa .xiij decatrea .xiiij decatessera .xv decapente. xvi decahexe .xvij decaesta .xviij decaocto .xix deca∣ennea .xx choshi .xxx trenda .xl serenda .l penynda. lx exinda .lxx esteminda .lxxx octoinda .lxxxx emnin da .C chato .Cxx enacho .CC duacessia. Geue me doiso mo. Brede ypsome. Salt alas. Ap¦pill mela. Butter foter. Flesshe creas. Moton proui¦do. Peeis pidea. Fyre fotia. Wyne crasse. Water ne¦ro. Chese galatiry. Eggys ouago. Porke grony. Fyssh̄ opsaria. Hēnes oringha. Gose pappia. Mus¦cles mydea. Oystres ostridia. Vinegre accide Che∣ryes charasse. Candyll kiry. Cuppe cuppa. Percely colomyndo. Garlyk scorda. Oyneons croundea. Grapis stephile Shone pappoche. Hosen calsshe. Sherte camisa. Cappe takkia.. Figge sica. Nay o∣che. Yes nesshe. See ne. God saue zass. Gramer¦cy spolate. A peny cartsa. Good nighte calamitra
.Good morne calemera. Good euen calaspera. Good day calaporn̄. Haue ye exe. How moche po∣sso. Dame hyra. Myn mo. Brynge hither ferto do Drawe onogale. Take drynke na pnme. To ete na fao. Ynough sone. No more detholoplne. Syre offende. Tell me the waye diximo strata. Welcom̄ calasartis. That tut. Wyth good wyll mitteka wylt thou telysale. Where is the tauerne ecke ca∣nowte. Whyther gost popays. Come hyther ela do. Sytte cattese. Goo ame. Anone ligora. Brynge me ferme. Potage fayte. Dysshe mecrutea. God othes. Be wyth you metacena. My lady kyramo. What sayest cheleys. I vnderstonde ye not den so gre to. Whens comest apopoarkistis: whyther wolt thou pothelles: Goo naye passe. To the towne sta¦choreo. To londe geys. Drynke pisse. The see tha¦las. Hous spite. In to breke thy faste pame na is∣tone. Ete brede fae ipsome. The nombres of the langage of Turky. ¶ I bir .ij equi .iij vg .iiij doit .v bex .vi alti .vij yedi .viij zaquiz .ix doguc .x on .xi. oubir .xij on equi .xiij on vg .xiiij on doit .xv on bex .xvi on alti .xvij on ye di .xviij on zaquiz .xix on doguc .xx on ygrimi .xxi ygrimi bit .xxij ygri equi .xxiij ygri vg .xxiiij. ygri
doit .xxv ygri bex .xxvi. ygri alti .xxvij ygri yedi. xxviij ygri zaquiz .xxix ygrimi doguc .xxx tut. Staciones in Roma. ¶ Dominica in Septuagesima ad sanctū laurencium extra muros ¶ Dn̄ica in Sexagesima ad sanctū paulum. ¶ Dn̄ica in quinquagesima ad sanctū petrum. ¶ Feria quarta in capite Ieinuij ad sctam sabinā ¶ Feria quinta ad scm̄ georgiū ad velū auteum ¶ Feria sexta ad sanctos Iohēm & paulum ¶ Sabbato ad sanctū triphonem.
¶ Dominica prima Quadragesime ad sanctū Iohēm aternens. ¶ Feria scda ad sanctū petrum aduincula ¶ Feria tercia ad sanctā anastaciam ¶ Feria quarta ad sanctā mariam maiorem ¶ Feria quinta ad sanctū laurencium in pams{per}ua vbi assatus fuit ¶ Feria sexta ad sanctos apostolos ¶ Sabbato ad sanctū petrum apostolū iuxta sanc¦tos Iohēm & paulum ¶ Dominica secūda Quadragesime ad sanctā mariam de dompnica ¶ Feria scda ad sanctū clementem ¶ Feria tercia ad sanctam balbinam ¶ Feria quarta ad sanctā ceciliam ¶ Feria quinta ad sanctā mariam transtiberim ¶ Feria sexta ad sanctū vitalem ¶ Sabbato ad sanctos marcellum & petrum ¶ Dominica tercia Quadragesime ad sanctum laurencium extra muros ¶ Feria secūda ad sanctū marcum ¶ Feria tercia ad sanctā potencianam ¶ Feria quarta ad sanctū sixtum ¶ Feria quinta ad ecclesiā sctō{rum} cosme & damiani ¶ Feria sexta ad sanctū laurencium in lucina ¶ Sabbato ad sanctam susannam
¶ Dominica quarta Quadragesime ad sanctam crucem Ierlm. ¶ Feria secunda ad sāctos quatuor coronatores ¶ Feria tercia ad sanctū laurenciū in damasco ¶ Feria quarta ad sanctū paulum ¶ Feria quinta ad sanctū martinum in monte ¶ Feria sexta ad sanctū eusebium. ¶ Sabbato ad sanctū nicholaū in carceribus ¶ Dominica in passione dn̄i ad scm̄ petrum ¶ Feria secūda ad sanctū grisogonum iacentem in Iarra ¶ Feria tercia ad sāctos cornelium & ciriacum ¶ Feria quarta ad sanctū marcellum ¶ Feria quinta ad sanctū appollinarem ¶ Feria sexta ad sctm stephanum in selio monte ¶ Sabbato ad scm̄ Ioh̄em ante portam latinā ¶ Dominica in Ramis palma{rum} and scm̄ Iohēm laternensem ¶ Feria secunda ad sanctū achilleum ¶ Feria tercia ad sanctam priscam ¶ Feria quarta ad sanctā mariam maiorem ¶ Feria quinta ad sanctū Iohēm latnensem ¶ Feria sexta in passione in capella Ierlm ¶ Sabbato pasche non est stacio ¶ Die Pasche ad sctām mariam maiorem
¶ Feria secūda ad sanctū petrum ¶ Feria tercia ad sanctū paulum ¶ Feria quarta ad sanctū lamencium extra muros ¶ Feria quinta ad sanctos apostolos ¶ Feria sexta ad sanctā mariam rotundā ¶ Sabbato ad scm̄ Iohēm laternensem Nota de significacōe singso{rum} membro{rum} ecclesie ¶ Si qis scire {pre}optat qid singla mēbra ecclie signi∣ficat hic audire potest.:. ¶ In {pre}mis dicend est qid sit ecclia. Ecclia est con¦gregacio fideliū. ¶ Hostiū ecclie fidē signi. ¶ Due {per}tes ecclie duos pplos signifi.s̄ iudeicū & gentilē. ¶ Singlilapides xp̄ianos signi. ¶ Turris ecclie confessionem signi ¶ Colūpne ecclie {pre}latos signi. ¶ Fenestre diuinas scripturas signifi. ¶ Tintin∣nabula signifi. {pre}dicatores. ¶ Altare. crucē xp̄i sig∣nifi ¶ Corporale. sudariū signi. ¶ Calix sepulcrū signi. ¶ Patena. lapidē su{per} sepulcrū positū signi. ¶ Vinū signat deitatē. ¶ Aqua signi. humanita tē. ¶ Dexta pars gaudiū signi. ¶ Sinistra pars vallem lacrima{rum} signi. vnde sacerdos stans in dex
tera parte altaris recedens ad sinistram significat adam missū in paradysū in vallem lacrima{rum}.
