15032 99856422 21971
A declara∣ration of such tem∣pestious, and out∣ragious Fluddes, as hath béen in di∣uers places of England. 1570.
To such as haue been touched with these Calamities of vvater, by the greate Fluddes in this present yere 1570. DAVID the Prophet, in the .107. Psalme, spea∣kynge of the marueylous workes & wounders y• god doth by his power shew before the sonnes of men: stirreth vp the Godly to prayse and extoll his ma∣iestie, and mooueth the wicked and stub∣born, to the feare and dreade of his ho∣rible vengeance. He turneth (saith he) the Flouds into a wildernesse, and the springes of water into drie grounde,Psal. 10 33. & a frutefull lande into barrennesse, for e wickednesse of them y• dwel therein. Which notable sentence, may be well considred, more aptly applied, but cheif∣ly of vs well examined: waying how fearfully the Lorde hath bestowed vpon vs his, meruelous iudgements, in y• he hath turned many of our fruitful Feelds
and Marshes, Pastures and Meadowes into vnmercifull Flouds and streames, vnlooked for, by changyng as he did in the olde worlde, the moderate course of the vpper Fountaines; which were or∣dayned to water the earth, and so to make it fruitfull, into immoderate, and vnseasonable Fluddes, which in steede of makyng fruitfull, hath made barren many places of the Earthe in this our countrie by destructiō of the Creatures, as Pastures, Corne, Cattell, Sheep, Neate, Horse, Beastes, Oxen, Kine, and such like, with some of y• bodies of men, though not so generally, as in the first Floud, neither half so extremely, as our sinnes doo deserue, which craue not so light a scurge as moyste and coolynge plashes of water, but hot and burnynge flakes of Fyre and Brimstone, whiche for lesse offences God poured vpon So∣dome & Gomorrah. The cause of which barrennesse (as Dauid saith) in this our fruitfull countrie, is our wickednesse, whiche are the inhabitants of the same, as is to be approued by markynge the fruites, and operation of two kindes of
people within this land: especially vpon whom these calamities haue faullen, to weete, the Riche and the Poore. As concerning the one, namely the Riche men,Esay. 3. if euer the Prophet Esayes woe, against them that ioygne house to house and lande to lande (till there be no more place left for the poore) coulde euer be applied it may be applied vnto them, whiche as Amos the Prophet saieth,Amos. 4. are the fat Kyne of Bason in the Mountay∣nes of Samaria, which oppresse y• poore and destroy the needy. To whom Abacuk saith, That their couetousnesse is an euil couetousnesse to their houses, whereby they seeke to set their neast on hie, and to escape from the power of euill. Thou hast (sayth the Prophet) conseled shame to thine owne house, and by destroying many people, and hast sinned agaynst thine owne soule. For the Stone shall crie out of the wall, and the Beame out of the Timber shall answer it, as now the Seales of the War & Parchment of the Leaces hath cried vengeance and de∣struction to the Leasemongers of Eng∣land: and the conditions haue cried out
of the Leases, which haue béen enhaūsed and raysed, answeryng, woe worth such couetous caytifs, as haue caused the care full cries of so many poore. Thou righte∣ous God, plague these couetous Lease∣mongers, these greedy grasiers, which haue cōuerted the Tillage, of much era∣ble ground, to the grasing of Shéep, and Northern Oxen, whereby they enriche them selues with the ruine and decay of thousands, round about them. Thou God that seest this their vnmerciful dealing, open the cloudes, water their pastures sowne with sheep, in steede of men and Corne of all graines, geue their flocke moysture, that they may see them by thousandes swim aboue the ground, and at the fall of the waters, to lie deade vp∣pon their watred land. Which crie God hath heard, and this is the cause of suche ruin and destruction. The Riche are so welthie, that they are without Iudge∣ment, without mercy, and that hath caused their Heards to be wasted, their Flockes to be deminished, their Gran∣ges made pasturelesse, with the pitifull fluddes past, wherby much of their sub∣stance
hath perished. For whose sakes also the Poore are made partakers of these greate losses. Those riche Lande∣lordes, yet addynge to their troubles, whom the Lorde hath smitten, by exac∣tyng still their outragious Rents, as∣well for the halfe yere past, wherein these perils haue hapned: as before, not considering y• the Lorde did it to plague them withall, because of their couetous∣nesse. God geue them repentance, be∣fore the Lorde be too to much sturred, and prouoked to anger, by their wicked∣nesse: Least y• if these fauourable thret∣nynges be despised, the Iust and righte∣ous God, doo in steede of water, raygne downe Fier & Brimstone vpon them, and in stéede of the ouerflowing of their pastures, with watry streames: ouer∣flow the carelesse consciēces, with cruel flames of Hell fire, & euerlasting damp∣nacion: and in stéede of the losse and wracke of sheep and cattell, Shipwrack and Landwracke, of bothe their bodies and soules, which all their rustie Golde and Siluer shal neuer be able to recouer agayne. And the Poore, God geue them
patience to beare this the Lordes visi∣tation thankfully: knowynge that the poore crieth, and the Lord heareth him, and that the Lorde is the refuge and strong hold of the poore, in time of neces∣sity, who hath his eares open, to heare their complaintes, and is ready at hand to help them and receiue theyr prayers. God graunt that they murmure not at God handyworke, in striking the litle they had, but that they may say, with blessed Iob, the Lord gaue it, the Lorde hath taken his owne agayne, blessed be his name for euer and euer. So shall wee be Gods humble Children, bothe riche and poore, embrasing his Rods of correction, as meanes to amende our liues. The riche forsaking their former couetous vnmercifull gréedinesse: The poore learning to be more thankful and faithful in staiyng vpon Gods prouidēce that God may restore vs from the hand of straungers,Psal. 144. whose mouthe talketh of vanitie, and their right hande is a right hande of falsehood: That our Sonnes may be as the Plants growynge vp in their youth: and our daughters as the
polished corners of the Temple: That our countries may be full and abundant with diuers sorts, and that our sheepe may bring foorth thousands, and tenne thousandes in our streetes: That our Oxen may be strong to labour, and that there be no inuasion, nor goyng out, nor decaying in our stréetes, which blessings God wil multiply vpon vs, if wée al wil once begin to feare him, blessed are the people that are in such a case, yea blessed are we if the Lord be our God, his won∣ders make vs feare and obay him, his mercy make vs al to loue and serue him, through his Son, Iesus Christ, our only sauiour. AMEN.
Math. 22. Geue vnto Caesar that which be∣longeth vnto Caesar, and vn∣to God, that belongeth vnto God. 1. Peter. 2. Submit your self to all maner or∣dinance of man for the Lordes sake: whether it be vnto the Kyng, as to the chief head, ei∣ther vnto Rulers as vnto them that are sent of him, for the pu∣nishment of euill doers, but for the praise of them that do well. Deutro. 11. He that obeyeth the voyce of God, is blessed, and he that o∣beyeth not is cast of.
A declaration or discourse of the great wonderfull ouerflowyngs of wa∣ters within this Realme of Englande, wherby hath béen much losse of grounde Cattell, Houses, and goods, to the vtter vndooynge of a greate numbre of men, beside the losse of the liues of many men Women and Children, most lamenta∣ble to heare. Which was in the yeere of our Lorde M.D.LXX. Bedforde. THE fift of October aboute midnight, the Water ouerflowed so much, that men were fayne to forsake theyr Beddes, and one woman drowned. Where also were lost a greate num∣ber of Sheep, Oxen, Kine, Horse and other cattel. Amongst other there, one maister Cartwrite Gentleman, hauing his House inclosed rounde a∣bout, the water cam in so much, that
a Carte beyng loden with Thornes did swim aboute the grounde. He lost by the same Floud, Sheep and other cattell, to the value of an C. poundes. The same Gentleman had a close gate by the high wayes syde, where y• water ran ouer so extreme∣ly, that at the fal therof it made such an hole, that it was .xl. foote deep, so that no man could passe that way without great daunger. To the fil∣lyng vp of the said Hole, or Pit, was cast in by the men of the said Towne xxv. loades of Fagots, and .xx. loade of Horse Doung, which said Fagots and Horse doung, filled not the hole. Also one maister Lee at the Freers in Bedforde, hauinge a fayre yearde wherein was greate store of Elme trees, wherof .lx. were blowen down with the rootes pulled cleane out of the grounde. Also he had a close of Conies that were cleane destroyed.
In the Countie of Norfolke. THE Sea brake in between Wis∣bich, and Walsockenne, and at the Crosse keyes, drowning Tilney, and olde Linne, Sainct Mary Teding, S. Mary Tid, S. Iohns, Wawple, Walton, and Walsocken, Einney, Iarmans, and Stowe brinck all be∣ing within the space of .x. Miles. At the Crosse keies the goodman of the Inne had built an house, with a strong Foundacion ioyning vnto an other House being olde and not so strong, wherin were certain Guests and when the water came in so vio∣lently the goodman of the house be∣ing in the stronger House, called the men out of the olde House, and they would haue gon downe the stayres, but the water was so high that thei could not com down, wherfore they
went back againe, and brake an hole into the other House, where they went thorow, and the last man was no sooner in: But the olde house fell downe. The Walles of the houses were broken downe, and the Horses that were tied at the Maunger, (which was made fast in ye grounde) did swim in the water, when the Stable was clene caried away, vn∣till the waters were aswaged, and were saued a liue, and y• people were constrained to get vp to the highest partes of the house, and to be caried away in Boates. At Yermouth a greate parte of the Bridge was caried away. The house vpon the Hauen, called the Hauen house, wherin was one Nicholas Iosselin, the Hauen man, and his sonne, with all their tooles was caried into the Marshes .vi. miles from the Hauen where it stode vpright where they continued long
time without meate or drinke. Item at Iermans brig streete, was very much hurt doone, by extreme Fluds that were there. Item one Thomas Smith of Yar∣mouth lost a Ship, and .vii. men and a Boy in it. Item, at Newarke by Yarmouth were lost .xii. Saile. Item, a greate Hulke loden with Oyle and Pitche, was lost at Worry Sand, and about .xx. men lost therin and .xxx. saued by the Hulke boate. In the Bishoprike of Ely: THese townes and villages were ouerflowed, that is to say, Wis∣bich, Guyhorn, Parson, Droue, and Hobshouse. This Hobshouse being an almes house (and the water brea∣king down the Walls of it) the wind blew the clothes of from the bed of a
poore man and his wife, they béeing a colde, a waked and sodenly stept out of his Bed to reache vp his Clothes, and stepte vp to the Belly in Water, and then he thinking himselfe to bee in daunger (as he was indeede) and he knowing the best way to escape the daunger of the Water, tooke his wife in his neck and caried her away and so were bothe saued. Item in Wisbich was a Garden, a Tenice play and a Bowlinge Alley walled about with brick (which was worthe .xx.li. by yeare to the owner) quite destroyed by the water. Lincolne Shire. MUmby Chapel the whole town was lost except three houses. A Ship was driuen vpon an house the Saylers thinking they had been vpon a Rock committed themselues to God, and three of the Marriners
leapt out of the ship and chaunced to to take holde on the house top and so saued them selues: and the wife of the same lying in childe bed did clime vp into the top of the house, was al∣so saued by the Marriners, her Hus∣band & childe being both drowned. Item the church was wholy ouer∣throwne except the steeple. Betweene Boston and Newcastle were .lx. Sea vessailes, as smal ships Craires, and such like, lost vppon the Coastes of Boston, Hummerston, Marshchappell, Tetney, Stepney, Nercots, Kelby, and Grimsby, wher no ship can com in without a Pilate, which were al lost with goods, corn, and Cattel, with all the Salt cotes, where the chief and finest Salt was made, were vtterly destroyed, to the vtter vndooing of many a man and great lamentacion bothe of olde and young. Wentford Bridge being very strong
of .viii. Arches in length, had .iii. of the Arches broken, and cleane caried away. Maister Smith, at the Swanne, there had his house (being .iii. stories high,) ouerflowed vnto the thyrde story, and the wals of the stable were broken down, and the horses tied to the Maunger, were all drowned. Many men had great losse, aswell of sheepe, Kyne, Oxen, great Mares, Coltes, of the breed of the great hor∣ses, and other cattell innumerable, of which, the names of many of them shall here folow. Maister Pellam lost .xi.C. sheep at Mumby Chapell. In Sommercote were lost .v.c. sheep that were of the inhabitaunce there. Item betweene Hummerston, and Grimsby were lost .xi. c. sheep, of one maister Speneers, whose shepheard about midday comming to his wife, and asked his Dinner, and she being
more bolde then mannerly, said hee should haue none of her, then hee chaunced to looke toward the Mar∣shes, where the sheep were, and saw the water break in so fiersly that the sheepe would be lost, if they were not brought from thence, saide that hee was not a good shepheard, y• would not venture his life for his sheep, and so went straight to driue them from thence: both he and his sheepe were drowned, and after the water being gon: he was found dead, standyng vpright in a ditch. Maister Thimbleby, lost .CC.xx. sheepe. M. Dimock, lost .cccc. sheepe. M. Marsh▪ lost .ccccc. sheepe. M. Madison, lost a ship. M. William Askugh of Kelsey, syr Hugh Askugh. M. Merin. M. Fitz Williams of Maplethorp, lost by esti∣macion .xx.M. of cattell one & other. Boorn was ouerflowed to y• mid∣way
of the height of the church. Steeping, was wholy caried away, where was a waine lode of Willowe toppes, the body of the Waine, with the Willowes, caried one way, and the Axiltree and Wheeles, an other way. Huntington Shyre. IN the Town of S. Eeds, ye water flowed into the Town in such aboundaunce, that it ran thorow the towne and the Church, being in the midst therof, hauing about the Churchyearde a Bricke wall, of two yeards hie, was so ouerflowed, that Boates were rowed ouer it without touching of the same. Item, a litle from Huntington, were three men riding, vppon the Causey being then ouerflowed (the water on the Causey beeing not deep, and thinking no daunger therin) chaun∣ced
to com into a place wher the wa∣ter had gulled away the Earth, and the Grauell, were caried away with the water: and Willowes growing on both sydes the way two of them caught holde on the Willowes and left their Horses, and saued them selues, and the thyrd chaunced to catch a very litle twig of a Willowe, betweene his Fyngers, hauing very litle hold, and forsaking horse, which was caried a great way from him, had much paine to keep his hold on the twig, and holde his head aboue the water, and his Horse returning with force against the streame, came againe vnto him, and vnder him, by which meanes, he set his feete vpon him and gat better holde of the Wil∣lowe and so saued himselfe, and the Horse was immediatly caried away that he neuer saw him after. Item, Holland, Leuerington, New∣ton, Chapell in the Sea, long Sut∣ton,
and Holbich, were ouerflowed. And in this Country also was great losse of Cattell. Stafford Shire. IN the lowe parts in Moorland in a litle towne called Cliffeeld there was a man, his wife, and a suc∣king childe in her armes, ouerwhel∣med and slaine, by the violence of the waters, and the boistrous windes. Warwick Shire. THE Water, called Hauen, that passeth by the Towne, called Stratford vppon Hauen, did runne with suche violence, that meeting with the Water called the Siuerne, droue it backe .x. Miles, against the cource ouerflowing much ground and drowning much Cattell.
Northampton Shire. IN Newport town, were two hou∣ses ouerthrown▪ and in one of thē an olde man, and an olde woman were ouerwhelmed and slain, and in the same Towne on the back syde of the Sarazins head, the water did spring out of ye hard grauelly ground and flowed so fast that certayne Merchaunts (sytting there at diner) were fayne to rise and departe from thence to saue them selues. Buckingham Shyre. SIR Henry Ley, Knight, lost by the flouds of water the number of .iii .M. sheep, besydes horse and other Cattell a great number.
Sussex. IN the Wish at Rye, (a place so cal∣led,) the water came in so suddenly and flowed so hie, that the people were faine to clime vp, to the highest partes of theyr Houses, remaining there in great feare, vntill they were holpē by other men, which did fetch them, with Boates from their Win∣dowes, and highest partes of theyr houses, who were glad to escape with sauing theyr liues, and losyng their goods. The cheefe time, and spring of this Tide, was about midnight, wherby there was great losse of sheepe, and other cattel with out number, to the vtter vndoing of many a poore man, and great losse of many other, whose pitious case, is to be lamented. At Rye, the water flowed so vehe∣mently,
that it brake into the Mar∣shes, & made such a way that where of late yeares, a smal Uessel could not passe in at halfe floud, now a great Uessell may come in at lowe water, where also, is good Harborough for ships, not only to the greate commo∣dity of all Saylers, that haue to do there: but also profitable to the most part of the inhabitants there. Of those marshes, one maister She∣pherd, was chiefe owner, who had many Poles, standyng in the same place, very meete for the drying of their fyshing Nets, for the which he receiued money of them that dryed theyr Nets there, and although hee was payde for the same sufficiently inough, yet being not therwith con∣tented, he gaue them warning that they should pay more money, or els they should no more han their nets there, ye which (eue in the same
to passe by Gods ordinaunce, that they were by the floud that night, caried all away, so that his deniall, lost his Poles and saued their nets, to the great comfort of a great num∣ber, though it were contrary to the sayd owners expectacion and will. Kent. AT Broom hil, in Romney marsh, iiii. Miles from Rye, the water came in so outragiously, that it brake down the marsh walles, one maister Bury, being owner therof, who lost by the same a thousand one hundred threescore and two of his Sheepe, and it is thought that the marsh is neuer like to be gotten againe. Item, at Erith breach, a Mariner riding by the Marshes, seeing two maides in the marshes, & perceiuing
the waters breaking in so fast, that the Maides were not like to escape: rode vnto them, and one of them gat vp behind him, and the other tooke holde on the Horse taile, and by that were both saued from drowning. In the same marsh, were drowned a great number of sheepe. Item, there in a Marsh land that was sowen, were two boyes keping Crowes, in the after noone, saw the water breking in so rashly, gat them vp into a cart, that was not far from them, where they were faine to tary vntil the next tide, which came in so boistrously, that it had like to ouer∣throw both the Cart and the boies, and the one of thē being more stron∣ger then the other, kept the other in his armes, where he with cold, wet, and feare died, so that he was faine to let him fall from him into the ma∣ter, when he perceiued that he was past recouery.
A little from that place, were also drowned .M. of Sheepe, and many other Cattell. Essex. FRom a Towne called Raynam, vnto the town named Maldon, all along by the Water syde, were the Marshes all ouerflowen wherin were a great number of cattell drow∣ned, to the great losse of many a man. Suffolk. IN Clay, were two Shippes laden with Danske Ware, came to shore with no man in them, nor any man can tell of whence they are. In Clay, the dwellers there lost a ve∣rie great Percell of Salt, and Her∣rings,
Barelled, beeing housed in an house Walled with Brick, three foot thicke, & yet the Wall was broken downe. Also, ther was lost much Saffron ground, with many other thinges moe, to the great hindraūce of many a man. Item, in Walderswick, Dunwich, and Blaybrooke, was great losse, of Boord, Planck, Timber, and Salt. Oxford. A Great parte of the Bridge, by Magdalen Colledge, was born cleane away, and many Trees were turned vp by the roote.
WE Reade in the Ser∣mons of Ieremie the Pro∣phet, the .44. Chapiter that Ieremie did laboure to bring them from Ido∣latry which were fled into the Land of Egipt to Pathors, and declared what plagues and miseries God had laid vpon them, and would lay vpon them, til they were destroied vtterly, which councel of the Prophet, they not onely little set by, but were with malice and extreame impudent mad∣nesse so incensed, that they gaue a plaine aunswer to the Prophet. The wordes which thou hast spoken in the name of the Lorde vnto vs wee will not heare them: But we wil do whatsoeuer thinge goeth out of our owne mouthe, as to burne incence to the Queene of Heauen, and to poure out Drinck offrings vnto her as we haue don, both we and our Fathers,
our Kinges, and our Princes, in the Cities of Iudah, and in the streates of Ierusalem: for then had we plen∣tie of Uitailes, and were wel and felt no euill, but synce wee left of to burn Incence to the Queene of Heauen, and to pour out the drinck offrings, before her, we haue had scarcenesse of all thinges, & haue been consumed by the sword, and by famine, which im∣pudent aunswere, may be likened to the answer of our Egiptian Papists or Babilonicall Idolators (Which in times past, sang Salue Regina, and Regina Coeli letare, to the virgin Mary, whom Idolatrously they call the Queene of Heauen) To the Prea∣chers of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, we heare your words that you speak in the name of the Lorde, but as for vs, wee will neuer beleeue them, but wil be as wee haue been. Though wee cannot haue our Peeuish Ido∣latry, and Apish Religion openly, yet
we wil in harts (vnrefourmed) sacri∣fise to ye Queen of Heauen, & say, Ma∣ria Mater gratia, Mater misericordia, tu nos ab hoste protege, in hora mortis suscipe: y• is. Mary thou mother of grace, and mother of mercy, in like case defend vs from our Foes, wee pray, and take vs in our dying day. As al our blinde generacions haue done before vs, as our good holy Fathers, the Popes, haue taught vs from time to time, and as our Fathers, and good Caco∣like Kinsfolks haue don, in the coun∣treies of England, and the Cities of Britaine, and in the streetes of Lon∣don, Caunterbury, Yorke, Bristowe, Sarisbury, Westchester & Norwiche and as our good Bretherne in Nor∣thumberlande, and Westmerlande, Ridsedale, and Tidsedale, and our friends of the Bishoprik of Durham, and our false folish fauourers of Fa∣bles in Suffolke, and Northfolke, of late haue done, Which wee if their
quarters, gracious Queene of Hea∣uen, did not more feare vs that hang on London gates, & diuers Towres & Trees, in this countrey then either our obedience to God or Queene, doth mooue vs) would euen now do also, as our fathers haue done before vs, for then when the Masse was vp, Images of blissed holy Saints, the holy Rood, and our Lady, sainct Thomas of Canterbury, & Saincte Fraunces, with his bloudy syde, and all the trimsy trash, and peltinge paltrie, of that holy, holy, Whore of Rome, our mother holy Church, then had we a mery world, althings were plenty, wee had Uictailes and all things in abundance, and felt no yll, but synce this new fangled Reli∣giō, which they cal the gospel, which our Fathers neuer knewe, (and yet were led to the Deuill well inough) was Preached: wee haue had scar∣citie of all things, and haue ben con∣sumed
by Sword and famine, with Fyre and water, as now al men may see by these great Fluds, which God hath sente to plague them for their Heresy, & because they haue despised our old, auncient, & holy Churche, & Religion yt hath continued in wor∣ship this seuen or .viii. hundreth yere (& lesse) & haue brought in, this new religion that began but in Paradice and was deuised but the last day, (when God before the Worlde was made, in his euerlasting wisdome, and good purpose, of meere know∣ledge thought it good.) Thus I say do blind Idolaters make argumēts, esteeming Religion, by the belly, and in steede of acknowledging Gods workes, (which sendeth both plenty and Dearth, Raine, and drie Wea∣ther, Fluddes, and dry land, Riches, and pouerty, sycknes and health, at∣tributing all to theyr dome Idolles, which are cursed with their makers,
and worshippers, but as Ieremie sayde to the Egiptian Israelitish Idolaters: so I might sai to our Ro∣maine Popisticall Englishmen, the Lord saw your peuish Idolatry and in steede of plagues, gaue you much abundance of mercie, whiche might haue mooued you from Idolatry, to his trewe religion, but when he saw your Impudencie, and Whores For∣heads, that would not repent, and be ashamed of your brutish Idolatry he plagued you, and Scoured you, and that by many fearfull Roddes, from which your Queene of Heauen could not saue, nor all your Idolles deliuer you, in the daies of your sayd Sacrifice, when euery Church had a Lady priest, & euery Church a God lockt in a Box, in the middest of your Idolatrie, were there not as great, and greater showes of wrath felt as now ther is laid vppon vs, that are in the light of the Gospell, I must
needs confesse, to punish, as I haue sayd in my Epistle, the lewde liuers vnder the Gospell? yes verely. For in the dayes of Kyng Henry the, viii. I will not reape open what hath hapned before in older monumnts, when Gylford Marsh in the countie of Sussex nere to Ry, was drowned with all the Cattell & sheep, a moun∣tyng to merueilous number, with much of Chaynecourt Marsh, Kyte Marsh, and the marshes of the Isle of ene in Kent: when your queen of Heauen could not saue them, but that they were faine to fetch Hay∣stackes and Beanestackes, to stop vp Damines, for feare of drowning all the Country about, which time also the country of Sealand was drow∣ned, from Armew to Dort, wher not only sheepe and Oxen were lost, but all that euer inhabited, within .xxx. mile compas, yea wherin our Ladies Preestes, our Ladies Pictures, yea
your Queene of Heauens Temples, your Alters and Pixes, with your reall Gods, which innumerable wer all drowned, not beyng able to help themselues and their worshippers, but perished with bruit beasts, and the whole country, which shal neuer be recouered agayn. When also a∣boute .xxxvii. yeere agon, there was such a Hayle, as slew both men and Cattell and Corne-beaten downe in the time of Haruest, that not with∣standing Deruelgethren the Welshimēs Idol God, all y• Corne was destroyd beyng (redy to be reaped) in the eare on the grounde, and in many places of England, notwithstanding your Queen of Heauen, whom you serue in all blindenesse of Popery. There came such Rayne, by the space of .v. weekes, with such fearful Haile that all the Wheat, Barly, Beans, Otes, & other grayne, with Apples, peares and other Fruits, were vtterly lost,
neuer reaped. Mowne, nor gathred, but rotten in the Earth, and beaten to Morter with the showre. About which time also, all Plumsted Mar∣shes here by y• Thames were drow∣ned, which lye almost al wast til this day. Also in Queen Maries daies, when the Queen of Heauens sacri∣fices were agayne erected, why dyd she not saue Sandwich Marshes, & the Cattell and Treasure therein. Ely marshes, and the marshes of the Isle of Hartly: the Marshes of Herne and Whitslable. Besyde the miserable Famin that God sent ouer all this land, when Wheat was at a French crowne a Bushell, and many that could get neither Wheat nor Barly, nor Beans, were glad to eate Acorn breade, and many to sterue for lacke of Beans and Acorns: when Spanish Mules and Iades were fed with Wheat: besyde the sword, and Robberies of straungers, that
the Queene of Heauen suffred hir worshippers to be plagued with al, that rightly they might accuse them selues of such vile sinne as caused god to be angry, which also (and not our Religion) is ye cause (as theirs was) of our Fluds & other Rods of Gods correction to make holely to liue in so holy a Religion, bothe vpon the Papistes and Christians, powred at this time by Gods Almighty hande on the Papists for theyr blindnesse, on the lose liued professours of the Gospel for their lewd conuersation. God geue vs al grace truly to repent and by Iesus Christe, so to seeke for Pardon, that for him and through him, all our ignorance, blasphemie & Idolatrie, weaknesse, lewdnesse, and Hipocrisy, may be forgeuen in this world, that in the world to com wee may haue life euerlastyng. Amen FINIS. ({quod}) T. Knel. Iu.
Imprinted at Lon∣don in Fleetstreet, by William▪ How: for Iohn Allde, and William Pickeryng. 1571.
