15305 99838641 3027
A SERMON PREACHED On Munday, the Seauenteenth of MARCH, At Westminster: At the opening of the PARLIAMENT. By the Bishop of BATHE and WELLES. LONDON, Printed for RICHARD BADGER. 1628.
EPHES. 4. 3. Endeauouring to keepe the Unitie of the Spirit, in the band of peace. THIS Chapter is a great Scripture for Vnity. For, here we find there is but One Lord whom we serue ver. 5. But One God and Verse 5. Father, whom wee wor∣ship and obey: ver. 6. But One Spirit whom Verse 6. we receiue, while he sanctifies vs: ver. 4. Verse 4. One Lord, One God and Father, One Spirit. Three in One, all Three but one God, bles∣sed for euer. But one Baptisme, by which we are cleansed. But one Faith by which wee beleeue: ver. 5. But one hope vpon which Verse 5. we relye: v. 4. But one knowledge, by which Verse 4. we are illightened: ver. 13. But One Bodie of Verse 13. which we are members: ver. 4. Different Verse 4.
Graces, but all tending to One Edification. Diuers offices, but all ioint-Ouerseers of the same worke; Till the Building be One and we One in it, ver. 11. Ver. 11, 12. This Chapter is as pressing a Scripture for Exhortation. And the first Exhortation is, That men would walke worthy of their Calling: ver. 1. Their calling to be Christians; Their Ver. 1. calling in Christianitie. And that to shew themselues worthie, they would endeauor to keepethe Vnity of the Spirit in the band of peace: ver. 3. Ver. 3. All for Vnity. And let me tell you. VVe often read of One in the Scripture: but the word Vnity in the Abstract, is no where read either in Old or New Testament, but onely in this Chapter, and here 'tis twice. For we are exhorted to keepe it: ver. 3. But how Ver. 3. long? why euen till we be made perfect: ver. 13. that is, to the end ofthis life. Ver. 13. VVhy, but what need was there of this Exhortation at Ephesus? What? why sure Ibid. very great need. For Saint Anselm tells vs, Schisma fuit, there was a Schisme and a rup∣ture there. And Charismata, the eminent
Graces which God had giuen many of them, was made the cause of the Schisme. For Corruption at the heart of man breedes pride euen out of Gods graces. And they which had these gifts despised them which had them not, and separated from them. This gaue occasion to false teachers to enter in, and lye in wayt to deceiue: ver. 14. This Ver. 14. was the state of the Church of Ephesus. How was it in the Citie and the Common-wealth there-while? How? why, the Citie was then a very famous Citie in Ionia, a part of Asia the lesse. At this time subiect to the Ro∣mane Empire. Their Proconsul and other De∣puties were ouer them, Acts 19. But Diana Acts 19. 38. was goddesse there and the Citie heathen. Ephesus then was Ethnicke: No Reli∣gion but Paganisme auowed by the state. And the Citie was a stranger to the Church that was in it. A Stranger and without as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 5. Yet such is the force 1. Cor. 5. 12. of Christian Religion, that as Herod & Ie∣rusalem were troubled when Christ was borne S. Math. 2. So here Demetrius and Ephesus S. Mat. 2. 3. were troubled when the name & Religion
of Christ was borne and nursed vp among them. For the word of God did no sooner Act. 19. 20. growe and preuaile at Ephesus: Acts 19. 20. but by and by there arose no small trouble about it: ver. 23. Ver. 23. The Citie and the state Heathen, yet trou∣bled when Religion came in: Therfore, A Ci∣tie & a state Christian must needes be more troubled when Religion goes out. And the ready way to out Religion, is to breake the Vnitie of it. And the breach of the Vnity of Religion will be sure to trouble the City first, and hazard the state after. For the state, whether Pagan or Christian, hath euer smar∣ted more or lesse, as the Church hath crum∣bled into Diuisions. S. Paul I know wrote this Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, not the Citie. And hee called for Vnitie bound vp in peace for the Churches good, without any expresse mention either of Citie or state. Yet hee well knew that the good both of the State and the Citie would follow vpon it. For Vnity is a binder vp; And Vnity of Spirit, (which is religion's vnity) is the fastest bin∣der
that is. And lest it should not bind fast enough, it calls in the band of peace. So that no man can exhort vnto, and endeauor for the Vnity of the Church, but at the same time, he labours for the good of the state. And if it were so at Ephesus where the state was Heathen; much more must it needs be so, where the state is Christian. I shall follow my Text therfore both in it selfe, and in the Consequent which fol∣lowes vpon it. In it selfe, and so 'tis for the Vnitie of the Church. And a maine Text it is Ibid. (sayth S. Ierome) against Heresie and Schisme. In the Consequence it hath: And so tis for the Vnity of the State. And a full Conse∣quence it is. For Vnitie not kept in the Church is lesse kept in the state And the Schismes and diuisions of the one, are both Mothers and Nurses of all disobedience and dis-ioynting in the other. So the Apostles exhortation goes on directly to the Church, by Consequent to the State. And it will behoue both Bodies that all the seue∣rall members of each Endeauor to keepe the Vnity of the Spirit in the band of peace.
The Text hath sixe particulars. For first,  here's the thing it selfe, to which the A∣postle exhorts. That's Vnity. Secondly,  All Vnity will not serue the turne. It must be the Vnity of the Spirit. Thirdly, what's  to be done with this Vnity, It must be kept. Fourthly, there will bee no keeping of it,  without a strong Endeauour. Fiftly, this  Endeauour to keepe will bee to no pur∣pose, if it be not in peace. And sixtly, Peace  it selfe cannot hold it longe, except it bee bound vp in Vinculo, in the strongest band that peace hath. I beginne with that which is the matter  of the Apostles Exhortation. Tis Vnity; A very charitable tye, but better knowne  then loued. A thing so good, that 'tis neuer broken but by the worst men. Nay, so good it is, that the very worst men pretend best when they breake it 'Tis so in the Church; Neuer Heretick yet rent her bow∣els, but he pretended that hee raked them for truth. Tis so in the state. Seldome any vnquiet Spirit diuides her Vnion, but hee pretends some great abuses, which his inte∣grity
would remedie. O that I were made a Iudge in the land, that euery man which hath any Controuersie might come to me, that I might doe him Iustice. And yet no worse then Da∣uid was King, when this Cunning was vsed, 2 Sam. 15. Vnity then both in Church and 2. Sam. 15. 4. Common Wealth is so good, that none but the worst willingly breake it: And euen they are so farre ashamed of the breach, that they must seeme holyer then the rest, that they may bee thought to haue a iust cause to breake it. Now to be one here whether in Church  or Common-wealth is not properly taken, as if all were to be shrunke vp into one Body. But One is taken here (saith Paulinus) pro Epist. 5. multorum vnanimitate, for the vnanimitie and consent of many in one. And the Church and Common-wealth, take them seuerally, or together, they are, they can be no otherwise One then Vnione multorum, by the vniting and agreeing of many in one. And so S. Luke, Acts 4. The Church Acts 4. 32. was a multitude of Beleeuers, sed covnum, but they liued as if they had had but one
heart among them. This Vnity then is so Vnin est aliquo∣um distinctorū Thom. 2. 2. q. 17. . 3. c. One, as that it is the vniting of more then one: yet such a vniting of many, as that when the Common Faith is endangered, the Church appeares for it as One. And when the common safety is doubted, or the common peace troubled, the state appeares for it as one. As Israel was said to be knit together as One man: Iud. 20. And indeede when One Iud. 20. 11. Man is not more at Vnitie in himselfe for his owne defence, then the Church and state are for publike defence, then both are iustly said to be at Vnitie. You see what Vnitie is. Will you see  what hurt followes vvhere tis broken? First, Fraction makes vneuen reckonings. And tis hard, very hard, for a man that breakes vnitie to giue either God or man a good account of so doing. Hard to giue account, but that's not all. For, if Vnity be broken, if a Diuision bee made, the parts must be aequall or vnaequall. If the parts be aequall, neither of them hath more then halfe its strength. If they bee vnaequall, one hath not so much. And that
which hath more, vsually hath more pride, and so lesse will to vnite. And yet for all this pride, farre weaker it is, then when there was Vnity, and altogether. Nay, in breach of Vnity there is not alwaies safe∣tie for the greater against the lesse. For in that greeuous breach in Israel, when the Eleuen Tribes came out against Beniamin foure hundred thousand strong, and their quar∣rell good, yet they fell twice before them, Iudg. 20. Iud. 20. 17. Nay this is not all, not any almost of the hurt which followes in either Church or state, when discontents haue swallowed vp their Vnity. For the Church. Nothing (saith S. Ibid. Chrisostome) doth so prouoke God to anger as to see diuisam Ecclesiam, his Church purchased by one blood, to be One Body, made more, made other then One. And for the Common-Wealth. A people is as one Cittie, yet such a one Lib. 2. de Ord. c. 18. (saith Saint Augustine) cui est periculosa dissen∣tio, as to whom all breach of Vnity is full of danger. For Church and state together; It was a greeuous Rent among the Iewes, when Manasses deuoured Ephraim,
Ephraim Manasses, and both fell vpon Iudah, Esay 9. What followed? was God pleas'd Esay 9. 21. with this, or were the Tribes in safety that were thus diuided? No sure. For it followes. The wrath of the Lord was not turn'd away, but his hand was stretched out still. Still? How long was that? How long? Why, Till Ephraim and Manasses which could not agree at home, were with the rest of the ten Tribes carried away into perpetuall captiuity. And Esay liued to see his Prophecy fulfilled vpon them. For they were carried away by Salmanasar in the sixt yeere of Hezekiah, when Esay flourished. This wrath of the Lord was fierce, and the people dranke deepe of this Cup. There∣fore I goe a farre off both for time and place to fetch this Instance: And doe you take care not to bring it neerer home. And I pray obserue it too: The hand of God was stretched out vpon Ephraim and Manasses, but there's no mention, which was the first, or which the greater offender, Ephraim or Manasses. What's the Reason? 'Tis because the breach of vnity scarce leaues any Inno∣cent;
and the hand of God is stretched out vp∣on all. I presse Vnity hard vpon you (pardon me this Zeale.) O that my thoughts could speake that to you that they doe to God: or that my tongue could expresse them but such as they are: Or that there were an open passage that you might see them, as they pray faster then I can speak for vnity. But what then? will any kinde of Vnity  serue the turne? Surely, any will doe much good: But the best is safest; and that is the Vnity of the Spirit. The learned are not altogether agreed  heere, what is meant by the Vnity of the Spi∣rit. Cal. Bucer. La∣pide. Ibid. For some thinke no more is meant by it then, a bare concord and agreement in minde and will. Lett's keep this, and both Church and state shall haue a great deale of free∣dome from danger. But others take the V∣nity Lyra. Hu. Card. Amb. Cath. Beza. Lapide. Ibid. of the Spirit to be that spirituall concord, which none doth, none can worke in the hearts of men, but the Holy Ghost. And I am apter to follow this sence: because if you take it but for a bare agreement in
iudgment, Saint Paul had said enough by naming Vnity, Hee needed haue made no Addition of the Spirit. And because in the Text 'tis  which for the most, points out the Holy Spirit. And because else Saint Pauls words (which Bucer calls Arden∣tia verba, zealous and burning words) adde Ibid. nothing to any euen the Coldest exhortation of the Heathen to Vnity. The Vnity then of the Spirit, to which the  Apostle exhorts includes both; Both concord in minde and affections, and loue of charitable vnity, which comes from the Spirit of God, and returnes to it. And indeed the Grace of Gods Spirit is that alone, which makes men truly at peace and vnity one with another. Ei tribuendum non Nobis. To him it is to bee attributed, not to vs, (saith Saint Augustine) Tra. 110. in S. 10. Tis Hee that makes men to be of one minde in an house, Psal. 68. Now one minde in the Psal. 68. 6. Church, and one minde in the state, come from the same fountaine with One minde in an house; All from the Spirit. And so the Apostle cle erely ver. 4. One Body, and one Verse 4. Spirit, that is, One Body, by one Spirit. For
'tis the Spirit that ioynes all the members of the Church into one Body. And 'tis the Church that blesses the state, not simply with vnity; but with that vnity with which it selfe is blessed of God. A state not Chri∣stian may haue Vnity in it. Yes. And so may a state that hath lost all Christianity, saue the Name. But Vnity of the Spirit, nor Church nor state can longer hold, then they doe in some measure obey the Spirit, and loue the Vnity. This vnity of the Spirit is closer then  any corporall vnion can bee. For Spirits meete where Bodies cannot; and neerer then Bodies can. The Reason is giuen by Saint Chrysostome: Because the Soule or Spirit Hom. 9. in Eph. of man is more simple and of one sorme. And the Soule apter in it selfe to Vnion is made more apt by the Spirit of God, which is One, and loues nothing but as it tends to One. Nay, as the Spirit of God is One, and cannot dissent from it selfe; no more ought they whom the Spirit hath ioyn'd in One: and the Spirit hath ioyn'd the Church in One; Therefore he that diuides the Vnity of the
Church, practices against the Vnity of the Spirit. Now this vnity of the Spirit (so called,  because it proceeds from the Spirit of Grace, continues in Obedience to it, and in the end brings vs to the Spirit that gaue it) is the cause of all other vnity that is good; and the want of it, the Cause of all defects in vnity. The presence of it is the Cause of all vnity that is good: Of all with∣in the Church, no man doubts. But 'tis of all without the Church too. For no Hea∣then men or states did euer agree in any good thing whatsoeuer, but their vnity proceeded from this Spirit, and was so farre forth at least a vnity of the Spirit. And for states that are Christian, and haue mutuall relations to the Church that is in them: S. Gregories Rule is true. The vnity of the state Lib. 4. Ep. 76. depends much vpon the peace and vnity of the Church: therefore vpon the guidance of the same Spirit. And as the presence of the vnity of the Spirit is the Cause of all vnity that is good: so the want of it is the Cause of all defects
in vnity. For as in the Body of a man the Spirit holds the members together; but if the soule depart the members fall asunder: So 'tis in theChurch (saith Theophilact) and Ibid. so in the state. So litle vnity then in Christen∣dome as is, is a great Argument, that the Spirit is grieued, and hath iustly withdrawn much of his influence. And how is the Spi∣rit grieued? How? why, sure by our neg∣lect, if not contempt of Him as Hee is One. Esay 11. 2. For as He is the Spirit of fortitude, Esay 11. there wee'l haue him, he shall defend vs in warr. And as hee is the Spirit of Wisedome, there wee'l haue him too, he shall gouerne vs in peace. But as heis One Spirit, and re∣quires that wee keepe his vnity, there wee'l none of him; though we know right well, that without vnity peace cannot continue, nor warre prosper. One vnity there is (take heed of it) 'tis a  great Enemy to the vnitie of the Spirit, both in Church and Common-wealth. S, Bafil calls it Concors Odium, vnity in hatred Episl. 63. to persecute the Church. And to this worke their's vnity enough; Mentake counsell toge∣ther,
Psal. 2. Saint Augustine calls it vnitatem Psal. 2. 2. er. 6. de verb. Dom. c. 12. contra vnitatem. A vnity against vnity; when Pagans, Iewes, and Hereticks, or any profane crew whatsoeuer, make a league against the Churches Vnity. And about that work, that the name of Israel may bee no more in re∣membrance, that there may be no Church, or no reformed Church, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, the Philistins, and they that dwell Psal. 83. 4. In Psal. 140. at Tyre are Confederates together, Psal. 83. S. Hilary will not vouchsafe to call such vnion vnity; Indeed it deserues not the name. 'Tis not vnity (saith he) be it in Church or be it in state: but 'tis a Combination. And hee giues his Reason. For vnity is in faith (and Obedience:) but Combination is Consor∣tium factionis, no other, no better, the con∣senting in a faction. And all Faction is a Fraction too, and an Enemie to Vnity, euen while it combines in one. For while it com∣bines but a part, it destroyes the vnitie of the whole. Is the spirit in this? Out of question, No. For a Faction to compasse it's end, I will not say, when it sees a theefe it consents to
him; or that it is alwaies partaker with the Adulterers: but this it doth: It speakes a∣gainst its owne Brother, and slanders its owne Mothers Sonne, Psal. 50. Can any man call Psal. 50. 19. this the Vnity of the Spirit? Or is this the way to Vnity? And now I cannot but wonder what words S. Paul (were he now aliue) would vse, to call backe Vnity into dismembred Christendome. For my part, Death were easier to mee, then it is to see and consider the face of the Church of Christ scratched and torne, till it bleeds in euery part, as it doth this day: And the Coat of Christ, which was once spared by Souldiers, because it was seamlesse. S. Ioh. 19. Rent euery way and S. Ioh. 19. 23. which is the miserie of it by the hand of the Priest; And the Pope, which Bellarmine Bellar 3. de Ec∣cles. Mil. c. 2. §. Nostra autem. hath put into the Definition of the Church, that there might bee one Ministeriall head, to keepe all in vnity, is as great as any, if not the the greatest cause of diuided Christianity. Good God, what preposterous thrift is this in men, to sowe vp euery small rent in their owne Coat; and not care what rents
they not onely suffer, but make in the Coat of Christ? What is it? Is Christ only thought fit to weare a torne garment? Or can wee thinke that the Spirit of Vnity which is one with Christ, wil not depart to seeke warmer cloathing? Or if he be not gone already, why is there not vnity, which is where ere he is? Or if he be but yet gone from other parts of Christendome, in any case (for the passion & in the bowels of Iesus Christ I beg it) make stay of him heere in our parts. For so the Apostle goes on. Keepe the  Vnity of the Spirit. This Exhortation requires too things  (saith S. Ierome:) the one, that they which Ibid. haue this vnity of the Spirit keepe it: the o∣ther that they which haue it not, labour to get it. And certainely nothing can be more beneficial, or more honourable either for Church or state, then to get it when they haue it not, or to keepe it when they haue it And this is implyed in the very word, which the Apostle vses, Keepe. For no wise man wil aduise the treasuring vp & keeping of any thing, but that which is of vse and
benefit. And the word  doth not barely signifie to Keepe, but Tueri, to defend too, which is the stoutest keeping. Now all wise men are for vnity: And all good men for the vnity of the Spirit. Yes (saith Saint Isidore) Boni seruant, Good men keepe it. In Gen. c. 7. VVise and good men keepe it; why then none but fooles, and bad men breake it. Slie and cunning men perhaps may haue their hands in Diuisions, but wise or good men they are not. For are they not all with∣out vnderstanding that worke wickednesse? Psal. 53. And a greater wickednesse men Psal. 53. 5. can hardly work, then to dissolue the vnity of the Spirit in either Church orCommon∣wealth. For they doe as much as in them lies to bring profanenesse into the Church, and desolation vpon the state. Keepe there∣fore the vnity of the Spirit. Keepe Vnity: why, but what needs that?  will not vnity keepe it selfe? 'Tis true; vnity is very apt to hang together. It proceeds from Charity, which is the glue of the Spi∣rit, not seuered without violence. Yea, but for all this, it needs keeping. In the Church
it needes keeping: And therefore the Pro∣phets and Gouernors of the Church are called Custodes; Keepers, Watchmen and Ouer∣seers, Ezek. 3. & Acts 20. And they must Ezek. 3. 17. Acts 20. 28. watch as well ouer her peace, as her Truth. And yet there are so many that scatter the tares of Schisme and Heresie, that her vnity is not kept. In the Common wealth it needs keeping too. For her Gouernors are Custodes Ciuita∣tis: Keepers of the Citty. But there also, there are not few that trouble the waters for their owne fishing. And many times a Common-wealth is in danger to loose her Vnity, iust as Ephesus did, Act. 19: At which Acts 19. 32. time all the Cittie was troubled, but the greater part knew not why. And the true Cause of the Diuision was no more but this Demetrius and his fellowes were afraid they should loose their gaine, if Diana and her Temple kept not vp their greatnesse. Now this noyse at Ephesus doth not  onely tell vs that Vnity needs keeping, but it informes vs farther of the way to keepe it. The way to keepe vnity both in Church
and state is for the Gouernors to carry a watchfull eye ouer all such as are discoue∣red, or feard, to haue priuate ends. For there's no priuate end, but in something or other it will be lead to runne crosse the publique: And if gaine come in, though it be by making shrines for Diana, 'tis no matter with them though Ephesus bee in an vp∣roare for it. And certainely there's no keeping of Vni∣ty in either Church or state, vnlesse men will be so temperate (when it comes to a lumpe at least) as to lay downe the priuate for the publique's sake, and perswade o∣thers to doe the like: Else (saith Saint Chry∣sostome) Hom. 9. in Ephes. Quicquid ducit ad amorem sui, diuidit vnitatem: whatsoeuer leads men to any loue of themselues and their owne ends, helps to diuide the vnity. And the Schoole Tho. 2 2. 9. 183. A. 2. ad 3. applies it both to Church and state. For in the Church they which seeke their owne, and not that which is Christs (who is publi∣cum Ecclesiae, the publique interest of the Church) depart from the Vnity of the Spirit. And in an earthly Cittie, the vnitie of that
is gone, when the Cittizens studdie their owne, not the publique good. Why, but when then is Vnity to be kept?  When? why, surely at all times, if it be pos∣sible. But especially it is to bee kept, when Enemies are banded together against Church or state. Then aboue all other times looke well to the keeping of Vnity. Am I deceiued? or is not this your Case now? Are not many and great Enemies ioyn'd a∣gainst you? Are they not ioyned both a∣gainst the Church and against the state? Are they ioyned, and are you diuided? God forbid. It cannot be that you should so for∣get the Church of Christ, or the Bowels of your owne Countrey, and your own. Ioyne then and keepe the Vnity of the Spirit, and I'le feare no danger though Mars were Lord of the Ascendent, in the very instant of this Session of Parliament, and in the second house, or ioyned, or in aspect with the Lord of the second, which yet Ptolomey thought Aphoris. 84. brought much hurt to Common-wealths. But suppose all danger ouer (I would it  were) yet keepe Vnity at all times. For Ene∣mies
are as Cunning as malice can make them: And if Vnity be not kept at all times, at that time when tis not kept they'l make their breach. And they'l make it certaine∣ly. For if the Vnity of the Spirit be gone, the Spirit is gone with it; And if the Spirit bee gone, Christ is gone with him: And if they be gone, God the Father is gone with them. And what misery will not follow when an Enemy shall come vpon a state, and finde the whole blessed Trinity, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost gone from it, to accompa∣ny that Vnity which is banished out of it? Yea but you will say; If Vnity be lost, we  wil quickly fetch it backe againe. Soft: First tis more wisedome to keepe it then to bee driuen to fetch it backe. Secondly, before Vnity be thrust off, it would be well thought vpon, whether it be in your power to bring it backe when you will. The Spirit, I am sure, is not, and tis His Vnity. And, loose it when you will, 'tis like the losse of health in the na∣turall body; Iust like. For there euery Disease is with some breach of Vnity; either by Inflammation in some noble or vitall
part: or by strife in the humors: or Luxati∣ons in the loynts: or by breaking veines or sinewes; still with some breach ofVnity. Well. What sayes the Patient therewhile? What? Why, He sayes he wil recouer his health, & then take care to keepe it. Yea, but what if Death seaze vpon Him before health be re∣couered? What then? Had it not beene better & safer a great deale to keepe health while he had it? And is not death a iust re∣ward of his distempering his humors? I will not apply, to either Church or Com∣mon-wealth: but certainely 'tis better for both to keepe the Vnity of the Spirit; then trust to the Recouery of it when 'tis lost. Keepe then the Vnity of the Spirit; but  know withall, (and it followes in the Text) that if you wil keepe it, you must Endeauour to keepe it. For it is not so easie a thing to keepe Vnity  in great Bodies as 'tis thought; There goes much labour and endeauour to it. The word is  studie, be carefull to keepe it. Saint Augustine reades it Satagentes doe In Psal, 99. enough to keepe it: And hee that doth
enough, giues not ouer doing till it bee kept. Nay, the Apostle comes so home, that hee vses two words, and both of singular care for Vnity. For He doth not simply say keepe it: Nor simply endeauour it, but studdie and endeauour to keepe it. Now no man can keepe that is not carefull; And no man will endeauour that is not studious. Neither is it (saith Saint Chrysostome) euery mans sufficien∣cy Hom. 9. in Eph. to bee able to keepe Vnity: And the word implies such an endeauour as makes haste to keepe: And indeed no time is to bee lost at this worke. VVhy, but if there be neede of such en∣deuouring,  whence comes it, that that which clings so together, as all Vnity doth is so hard to keepe? Whence? why I'le tell you: I presume you'll endeauour the more to keepe it. First, then tis hard to be kept, in regard  of the nature of this Vnity. For bee it in Church, or bee it in Common-wealth tis Vnum aggregatum, One by Collection and Coniunction of many. And the Schoole
teaches vs, that this Vnity is Minima Vnitas, Tho. p. 1. q. 31. . 1. 2. A Vnity that is least One: And therefore aptest to fall asunder. Both because many are not easily kept at One; And because eue∣ry one of the many by reason of the contra∣ry thoughts and affections which diuide him, is not long together one in himselfe. Which is the Reason (as I conceiue) of that in Philo. That a little difference is able to Philo apud Tho. . 2. q. 183. d. 2 3 diuide a Cittie. Secondly, tis hard to keepe in regard of  Opposers against it, and slie practicers vpon it. And they are many. Dauid complained of them in his time, Psal. 120. My soule hath Psal. 120. 5. long dwelt with them that are Enemies to peace. And ther's no Church, nor no state, but hath some of these. And since the plotting and studdie of these is to breake, you must endeauour to keepe the Vnity of the Spirit. And you'll finde the worke hard enough. But as to keepe Vnity is a worke of Diffi∣cultie,  and takes vp much endeauour of the best: so 'tis a glorious worke, and worth their endeauour. It is a pitifull thing to see a man but reputed wise, and his Endeauour,
vaine: But beside the comfort that is with∣in, there's a great deale of honour to see a wisemans endeauour like himselfe. And nothing is more like wisedome then Vnity. For wise Counsells, are seldome better knowne by any thing then this; That as they are in themselues One and varie not; so they tend to One and distract not. That One end is verity in the Church; Safetie in the state; and Vnity in both. Notwithstan∣ding this, Good God, what spending their is of great endeauours, about vanity, and things of naught? Halfe that endeauour spent in keeping Vnity, would doe what all our hearts desire, and more too. VVhy, but then how shall we be able to  set our Endeauour right to the keeping of this Vnity of the Spirit? How? why the Apostle tells you that too, ver. 2. And the way he Verse 2 proposes is so direct, that I dare say, if you endeauour, you shall keepe the Vnity of the Spi∣rit, both in Church and state. First, then all Endeauour to keepe the Vnity of the Spirit is void, if it bee not vertu∣ous. For the Spirit will neither bee kept,
nor keepe men together in vice. Next, Among all vertues foure are most necessa∣rie to preserue Vnity. The Apostle nameth them; and I'll doe no more. They are Hu∣militie at the heart. Meekenesse in the Carri∣age. Patience in point of forbearance. And Charitie, whose worke is supportation of the weake that scandall be not taken, and Vnity broken. And Concerning this last great vertue whose worke is supportation of the weake, 'tis an Excellent passage which Saint Augu∣stine n Psal. 99. hath. Art thou so perfect that there is no∣thing in thee which an other need support? I wonder if it be so: Tis rare perfection. But be it so. Why then thou art the stronger to support others. Is vnity like to be broken, and dost thou say thou canst not support others? Ergo habes quod in te alij sustineant. Therefore thou art not yet so perfect as thou thoughtest, but thou hast somewhat that others may sup∣port and beare in thee. Endeauour then to keepe the Vnity of the Spi∣rit,  that we must. But in what is Vnity best preserued? In what? why that followes
next. Tis in peace, saith the Apostle. Now Peace in this place is not taken as  'tis opposite to Warr. But it is that Peace, which opposes all iarring and falling out, especially falling off one from another. It is not considered heere as opposite to warr. For that Peace and Warr cannot possibly stand together. But this Peace in which Vni∣ty is kept, is most vsefull, most necessarie, when Warr is either threatned or begunne. For as there is most need of Vnity against Vnited Enemies: so is there most need of peaceable dispositions to Vnite at home, a∣gainst forces from abroad: Therefore the Learned agree heere, That Peace stands for a Calme, and quiet dispose of the hearts of men, and of their carriage too, that the Vnity of the Spirit may be preserued. And certaine∣ly without this peaceable disposition, tis in vaine to say wee endeauour for Vnity; either to get, or to keepe it. The Peace then heere spoken of, differs  not much from the vertue of meekenesse. Onely it adds aboue meekenesse towards o∣thers, quietnesse with them. As it agrees
with meekenesse, so tis the way to Vnity: As it adds aboue it, so tis the Treasurie in which Vnity is kept. Tis an ancient Rule for kingdomes and a good. Iisdem Artibus Salust. in Coniur. Cal. quibus parta sunt facilè retinentur. They are kept in subiection, order, and obedience, by the same vertues by which they were first gotten. Now the vnity of the Spirit is a great part of the Kingdome of grace; There∣fore this Kingdome too, if it be gotten, as it is, by peace, then in peace it must be kept For you shall neuer see the Vnity of the Spirit dwell in a froward heart, that is enemie to peace. That affection of which Saint Bernard Epist. 252. was, is the great keeper of Vnity. And sure he dwelt in peace. Adhaerebo vobis etsi nolitis, etsi nolim ipse. I will sticke and bee one with you, though you would not haue me doe it: nay, though any tentation in my selfe would not haue me doe it. And therefore they are quite out of the way, in the Church (saith Saint Ierome) that thinke Ibid. they can hold the vnitie of the Spirit, Dis∣fipatâ pace, when they haue shaken peace
asunder. And they are as farre mistaken in the Common-wealth, that steepe all their humors in gall, and yet would intitle them∣selues Patrons of vnitie. And surely such, in what state soeuer they liue, know not of what Spirit they are, though all other men see, tis fire they call for, S. Luke 9. S. Luk. 9. 55. Why? but what need is there of this Ex∣hortation  to Peace? this Endeauour for Vnity? what need in regard of the times, the time it selfe preaches, I may hold my peace. But what need there is in regard of mens persons and conditions, which are to comply with the times, that I'le tell you. The best peace that is, and the fairest calme, that the Soule of man hath, is imperfect in this life. What then? What? why there∣fore saies the Schoole, though the Soule bee at Tho. 2. 2 q. 29. A. 2. 4. rest and peace with God and consequently in it selfe and with others, yet there is still some repugnancy, both within, and without, which disturbes this peace. For whatsoeuer is imper∣fect is vnder perturbation. And the more a Man is troubled, the lesse perfect is his peace. Out of which it followes againe, that all
Exhortation to recall a mans passions to peace is very needfull for the keeping of vnity: And hee that is offended at S. Pauls Exhortation to peace, is not at peace in Himselfe. Will you say farther, that this peace which  keeps, and this vnity of the Spirit which is kept, is the blessing and the gift of God? It shall euer bee farre from me to denie that. But what then? Because they are Gods bles∣sings, must not you endeauour to get them? And because they are Gods gifts, must not you be carefull to keepe them? Nay, ought not you be the more carefull to keepe, when God himselfe is so free to giue? Tis true, You cannot endeauour till God giue grace; But tis true too, that you are bound to en∣deauour, when hee hath giuen it. Bound certainely; and therefore Saint Ierome ex∣pounds Ibid. this, which is but Councell and Exhortation in Saint Paul, by a Precipitur. Ther's Gods command vpon you, that you en∣deauour for vnity in peace. And now, what if God haue giuen suff∣ciencie, nay abundance of Grace, and yet
there be no Endeauour, can any bee blamed then for want of vnity but your selues? 'Tis true, that except the Lord keepe the Citty, your Watchmen wake in vaine, Psal. 127. But is it Psal. 127. 2. any where said in Scripture, that if you will set no watch, take no care, that yet God will keepe the Cittie? No sure. And this will euer bee found certaine, when and wheresoeuer the Vnity of the Spirit is not kept, then and there was want of mans en∣deauour to keepe it in peace. And whensoe∣uer God laies that punishment which fol∣lowes Disunion vpon a Nation, the Sinne vpon which the punishment falls is com∣mitted by mans misendeauouring, or want of Endeauouring. But Peace it selfe cannot hold Vnity long,  if it be not a firme and a binding peace. And this brings in the end of the Text, the kee∣ping of Vnity in Vinculo Pacis, in the band of peace. First, then if you will keepe a setled vnity,  you must haue a firme peace. The reason is, because in this Vnity many are brought together. And many will not be held toge∣ther
without a band. Saint Augustine disco∣uered this. Vnitas fine nodo facilè dissoluitur. Lib. 1. De Doct. Christiana prolo. That Vnity (saith he) which hath no knot, is easily dissolued. This Vnity is so comfor∣table, so beneficiall both to Church and state, that it cannot be too fast bound. But if it be not fast bound, both it and the be∣nefit will soone be lost. Now in vinculo, in that which bindes  this is to be obserued: It compasses about all which it containes, and then where it meets there's the knot. So that which is bound is held close within the Imbracings of the band. And the band is not of one substance, and the knot of another, but both of one and the same substance. So tis heere. For the vnity of the Spirit is contained and compassed, as it were by peace: Peace goes before it, to bring it in: And Peace goes with it when tis in: And Peace goes round about it, to keepe it in. And where the two ends of Peace meete, there vnity is fast and knit vp. And the knot is of the same substance with the band, Peace too. And therefore where the ancient reading of the Text is To
keepe Vnity in the band of peace, there some will haue it, to keepe Vnity in vincu∣lo Lapide. Ibid. quod est pax, In that band which is peace. This band as 'tis the band of vnity; so 'tis  well fitted to the vnity it bindes. For if you marke it, it bindes vnity, and the band is but One. In vinculo pacis: in the band of peace; One band. And yet that which is vnum is not vnius, that which is but One, is not onely of One. For it bindes many, whole Churches, whole Kingdomes. And both bodies are euer safest, when the band is One; and that One able to hold them. For when this One band of peace cannot binde close, tis a shrewd Argument, either that some ill humor swells, and will not endure the band; or that the band it selfe is strained and made weake. And in both these cases, timely helpe must be applied, or the vnity of the Body is in Danger. You may see this plaine in the Naturall body. The out-band of the body is the skinne. If the body be too full of humors, and they foule and in Motion, the body swells till the
skinne breaks. So tis in the Church, and so tis in the state, when the Body is too full of humors. The inner-band of the body is the Sinewe. 'Tis  the very word which the Apo∣stle vses; The band or the sinew of peace. If the sinew bee broken or ouer-strained, theres much paine and weaknesse in the body, and the members hang as loose, as if they were falling one from another. And so tis in the Ecclesiasticall; And no other then so, in the Ciuill Body. If there be but a straining in the band, though perhaps the si∣new be not yet broken, tis high time to looke to the Vnity of the body. Well. What Remedie then? What? Why, sure there's none but Vinculum Vinculi: The sinew must haue a swathe: And that which was wont to binde the body, must bee bound vp it selfe. And if the Cure light not into honest and good Chirurgions hands, it may proue a lame Church, and a weake state euer after. God blesse the body therefore, and direct the Chirurgions. Now as the Band of these great Bodies,
the Church, and the state, may be broken: so the knot, which hath euer beene hard to vntie, may be cutt. And both Church and state haue euer had Cause to feare both, both breaking and cutting. Saint Ignatius was afraid of this in the Church, by and by after the Apostles times. And therefore Epist. ad phile∣delph. He writes to the Church of Philadelphia, In any case to flie and to shunne  the par∣tition or cutting off this knot. And indeed tis not fit for any man imployed about this band of peace, to haue his Rasor about him. And Dauid was afraid of this in the state; and hee had Cause, great cause. For some wilde vnruly men cryed out then. Lett's breake their bands in sunder, and cast their cords from vs, Psal. 2. What bands? Why, Psal. 2. 3. All the bands of peace, and all the bands of allegiance too. For the Consultation then was (saith Caluin) to depose Dauid. But hee that In Psal 2. dwells in heauen, laughed them to scorne, ver. 4. Verse 4. And then brake them in peeces like a Potters vessell, ver. 9. Now the Breakers of the band Verse 9. of peace both in Church and Common∣wealth are pride and disobedience. For these
two cry one to another. Thatis, Pride to disobedience, Come lett's breake the band. And this is very obseruable, and with  reference to this band of peace too. You shall neuer see a disobedient man, but hee is proud. For hee would Obey, if he did not thinke himselfe fitter to gouerne. Nor shall you euer see a proud man stoope to binde vp any thing: But if you see him stoope, take heede of him, 'tis, doubtlesse, to breake the band of peace. The Reason's plaine; If hee stoope to binde vp, Hee knowes hee shall bee but one of the bundle; which his pride cannot endure. But if he stoope to loose the band, then he may bee free, and shew his vertue (as he calls it) that is, hope To runne formost in the head of a Faction. Fond men, that can bee thus bewitched with pride against themselues. For when they are bound vp, though but as one of the Bundle, yet therein, vnder God, they are strong and safe: But when the Band is bro∣ken, and they perhaps, as they wish, in the Head, headlong they runne vpon their own Ruine.
Thus you haue seene the Apostles care for Vnity: For Vnity, but faine would he haue it of the Spirit. This Vnity hee desires you should keepe; yea studdy and endeauour to keepe, as the Spirit is ready to preuent and assist, that you may bee able to keepe it. This Vnity must be kept in peace: And if you will haue it sure, in the band of peace. That which remaines is: that you obey and follow the Apostles Exhortation. That all of you in your selues, and with others, endeauour to keepe the Vnity of the Spirit in the band of peace, both in Church and Common-wealth. For good Counsell, such as heere our Apostles is, doth not make Church or state happy, when tis giuen, but when tis followed. And to the danger that may come, it addes guilt, to all such as will not obey the counsell, that they may preuent the danger. And let me say thus much for the Vnity of the Spirit; 'Tis that which ties vs one to another, and all to God, and God to all. Without God wee cannot be safe, either in this life, or that to come. And without this
Vnity, no man is sure of his Neighbours assistance, nor any man of Gods. But by this Vnity, GOD himselfe is content to be bound to you. And that which is bound, is sure, and ready at need. Et fortis cum Hom. 9. in Eph. debili ligatus, & illum portat & se (saith Saint Chrysostome.) And strength bound to weakenesse, beares vp both it selfe, and weakenesse. And in this sence I can admit of Scaligers Subtilty. That Vnity is Omni∣potent. Exerc. 365. §. 1. Keepe Vnity then, and be sowre (tis ho∣nourable Iustice) vpon any that shall en∣deauour to breake it. He deserues not to liue, that would dissolue that band, by which God hath bound himselfe to assist the Church, and the Common-wealth. Our Aduersaries make Vnity a Note of the Church, and they perswade such as will be∣leeue them, that wee haue no Vnity, and so no Church. I would not haue Occasion gi∣uen them to inlargé their doctrine; lest in the next place they take vpon them to proue, that we haue no Common-wealth nei∣thor, for want of Vnity.
Now to Keepe Vnity, I haue made bold to direct you one way already; and heer's an other. 'Tis necessary that the Gouernors haue a good and a quick eye to discouer the cunning of them that would breake the Vnity first, and the whole Body after. You shall giue a guesse at them by this. They'll speake as much for Vnity as any men; but yet, if you marke them; you shall still finde them busy about the knot, that bindes vp Vnity in peace: somewhat there is that wrings them there. They will pretend perhaps, tis very good there should be Vinculum, A Band to binde men to Obedience, ô God forbid else: but they would not haue the knot too hard. Take heed. Their aime is; They would haue a little more liberty, that haue too much already. Or perhaps they'll pretend, they would not vntie the knot, no, there may bee danger in that, but they would onely turne it to the other side, be∣cause this way it lyes vneasily. But this is but a shift neither. For turne the knot which way you will, all binding to Obedience will be grieuous to some. It may be they'll protest,
that though they should vntie it, yet they would not leaue it loose. They would per∣haps tie it otherwise, but they would bee sure to knit it as fast. Trust not this pretext neither. Out of Question, their meaning is to tie vp Vnity in a Bow-knot, which they might slip at One End when they list. In∣deed, whatsoeuer they pretend, if they be curious about the knot, I pray looke to their fingers, and to the Band of peace too. For whatsoeuer the pretences bee, they would be at the dissoluing of Vnity. Well. Prouide for the keeping of Vnity; And what then? Why, then God blesse you with the Successe of this Day. For this Day, the seuenteenth of March, I. Caesar ouer∣threw Sex. Pompeius. And that Victory was in Spaine; and Spaine which had long beene troublesome, setled, and came quietly in, by that one Action. And this very Day too, Fredericke the Second entered Ierusalem, and recouered whatsoeuer Saladine had taken from the Christians. But I must tell you, These Emperours and their forces were great keepers of Vnity.
The first Lesson at this Daies Euening pray∣er, is Iudg. 4. There Sisera, Captaine of Iabins Iudg. 4. Army, fell before Israel. But I must tell you; The two Tribes, Zabulon and Nepthali, went vp in great both Vnity, and courage against them, Iudg. 5. And I make no doubt, but this Iudg. 5. 8. Day may be a Day of happy successe to this Church and state, if S. Paul may be heard, and that yet (before it be too to late) there bee a hearty Endeauour to keepe the Vnity of the Spirit in the Band of peace. And now, to conclude. I beseech you Remember, That all this Vnity and Peace, what ere it be, and when tis at the best, is but Vestigium, a track, and a footing of that euerlasting peace which is to come. And I would not haue you so loue this peace of grace, that you should at any time forget the infinite peace ofGlory: The band where∣of nor Earth, nor Hell can breake. For tis not folly onely, but madnesse (saith Saint Gregory) to loue this Peace, this Vnity, which Par. 3. pastor. curae. Ad. 23. is but a foot-step, a print in the dust, soone worne out, soone defaced: and not loue God and his Peace, A quo impressum est:
whose very foot made this so safe, so hap∣py, so pleasant as it is. But I cannot but hope better things of you, and such as accom∣pany safety heere, and Saluation hereafter. For you haue not so learned Christ, as that you can preferre any Vnity before his, Or neg∣lect the safe keeping of that which is his footstep in this world; The Vnity of the Spirit. Let vs therefore all pray vnto GOD: That he will euermore giue both the King and his People, the comfort of his Spirit: That that Spirit of his may so direct all your Counsells, that they may be for Vnity. That following the direction of this Spirit of Grace, wee may enioy the Vnity of the same Spirit, both in Church and Common∣wealth. That all our Endeauours, publike and priuate, may tend to the keeping of this Vnity. That our keeping of Vnity may bee such as it ought, In Peace, in the very band of Peace. I beganne with Saint Pauls Exhortati∣on. I end with his Prayer and Benediction. . Thess. 3. 16. 2. Thess. 3. Tis the prayer of this Day. For
tis the second Lesson at Euening Seruice. The God of Peace giue you peace alwaies, and by all meanes: Peace in concord, and Peace in Charity: Peace on Earth, and Peace in Heauen: Peace of Grace, and Peace in Glo∣ry. To all which Christ for his infinite mercies sale bring vs all. To whom with the Father and the Holy Spi∣rit, bee ascribed all might, Maiesty, and Dominion, this day and for euer. Amen. FINIS.
