16617 99857601 23362
CERTAINE ENGLISHE Verses, presented vnto the Queenes most excellent Maiestie, by a Cour∣tier: In ioy of the most happie disclosing, of the most dan∣gerous conspiracies pretended by the late executed Trai∣tours, against her royall person, and the whole Estate. AT LONDON Printed by Henrie Haslop, and are to bee sold in Paules Church-yard at the signe of the Bible. 1586.
THE TRIVMPHS OF TROPHES, In Saphie verse of Iubiles. IF DAVID daunst for ioy beforeExultes can∣tate Domino, & inbilate Deo Iacob. Psal. 80. the Arke being a king If Barac sang when Israels foes were foild, Then victors wee that Deboras song may sing Our Iudith stout Holosernes Mates hath spoild. If Rome of Romane Triumphes earst was oft so gladPsallite Domi∣no in Cithara in unda & vo∣ce carminis. Psal. 98. and likewise Greece of Grecians Trophes ioyed: If Iewes of Iubilees their onlie mirth haue had then England leap, and laugh aloud for Queene enioyd. Now Baal and Bell, now Titanes sonnes are slaine,Clangite iu∣bam, sumite psalmii, & dat tympam cum nablo. Psal. 80. their Prophets false their wicked Priests are kild Their Pluto howles that Babels brood are taen, their Tower did fall that Nimrods Imps did build. Sith Nessus brood and Cassius crue are knowenTu deus dissipa∣ & co∣segisli capita, draconū in aquie ps. like Siluane Centaures conspirde your Realme to quaile, Take courage Queene, for Sinon sleights abroad are blowen, the Traitours found, and yet the treasons faile. These Cicloppes seede which at your crowne doe kickeDemersae sunt gentes in foue quam fecerunt. and frame a forme to make your kingdome bleed, Like Giants seeke with stones the starres to strike but mist the marke and wound themselues in deed: They vowd Zopirus vowes, to please Darius beckSepulrum pa∣tens guttur co∣rum. Psal. 5 they sought a new deuise which Sphinx of Rome thē taught, They faine would finde, that England had one neck, that by a stroke the head might off they sought-
Gladiū strinxe∣runt▪ & arcū te∣tēderunt impij, vt iugulent cor qui recto sunt corde.Their match was made, their wager was not wonne, their snares were laid, but yet their purpose mist, Their day decreed, and yet the deed not done, a will they had you see, that wanted what they wist. Vt arent cada∣era uorū in ci∣bum aabu coe∣li. Psal▪ 93.What thought Pyragmons sprats to doe, we know, their Romish Iesabell Naboths vineyard sought, Who like Medusa bends her cursed Bow the onlie Circes, which hath this mischief wrought. Deus vltionom est Dominus. Psal. 94.These vipers tend with Briareus hundred hands, with hundred Argus eies these Scorpions wait, These busie Basilisks and brood of Cocatrice stands like Nilus Crocodiles hungrie for their bait. Callidū excogi∣tarunt consiliū contra dominii. Psal 93.These sucking serpents, these monstrous snakish crewe, these blooddie Dragons like spitefull Asps are set, With Hidras heads which erst Alcides slue are now of late with our Bellona meete. Vt Ierusalem poncrēt in acer∣nos ruinarm. Psal. 79.Of Canaan faine▪ they would a Chaos make, and bring Palladium in, our Ilion to deface, A spoile for Hispaine, a feat for Fraunce in hand they take and quite to make an end of Brutus race. Via impiorum tenebrosa, nesci∣unt vbi corru∣ant. Prou. 4.Thus these climing mates Euceladus like attempt, in armes seeke Ioue from skies by force to take, They seeke the Sun, the Moone, the Starres in great contempt to obscure their light a deadlie Eclips to make. Sepè expugna∣uerūt me a iuuē tute mea nunc dicat Israel. Psal. 129.They seeke with Phaaeton Phoebus charge to rest, Vulcans net, Gordions knot they would vnknit And breake their blooddie blades on Pallas breast, thus they couet much in Moses chaire to sit. To wrest from Hercules hand his Club, who can? who may from Ioue, his lightning take by force? Homers verse, who can disgrace? I say no man, who then can touch a sacred Princes coarse.
Though Casar was in Senate slaine by Brute his friend, Though Cirus head was bathd in blood luke warme,Sanguis angui∣nis merces Deut No maruaile though, for blood requireth blood at thend but mercie too much thine, I feare doth harme, For if Laban was for Iacob sake so blest, and Putiphars hap,Genes. 30 39. by Iosephs meane no lesse Our hap, our blisse, our ioyes wherein we rest▪ For whom it is, we must of force confesse. Who with Ionas gurth hath sau'de vs from the Sunne,Tegmen a tur∣bine & vmbra∣culum ab aestu dominus. Deut. 33. Who with Aser shoes, hath kept vs from the mire? Who hath with Dauids sling Golias mates vndone. our Cynthia, she who hath appeas'd Iehouas ire. These on Bellerophons horse doe ride in skie,Quaerunt ani∣mā meā & mo∣ditati sunt tota di dolos Ps. 38. with Icarus wings to clime in cloudes is their drift, These would make Architas woodden Doue to flie, What blinde Teresias doth not see their shift. In Phaetonissa schoole,Pone cos domine vt clibanum ig∣nis, in tempore irae tuae. Psal. 21 at Endor they were taught, with Dracos inke to write, with Creons seale to signe, With Iudas kisse to kill, with Hamons haue they sought, both Iudaes spoyle, and Sions fall in fine. These seceet Satires, these cruell Catelins wait, these dogs of Moabs house greadie of their pray. Like Eumenides whelpes tending on their bait, Vultures for Prometheus guts readie set in ray. They ventured Acherontas depth to wade,Apericulis per∣sequentium & a conuentu ma∣lignanton tu salus mea. they striued through Stigtas streame to saile, Mauger of Megeras head away they made, by Carons help, Elisius field to assaile. To make spotted Ewes with Iacobs stick they sought,Eijce fulmen & dissipe eosmitta sagittas tuas & disturba illos. Psal. to walke vnseene, with Giges ring faine they would Of Simon Magus these men would faine be taught, like Curres by Circes charm'd to be with Liones bold.
Leuate sign  est .Circes cup is falne, Calipsos sauce is shed Balims brood is bd, their Harpies are descried, Cerberus soppes are found, Cirens songs are red thus is Accaron knowen, and Romane Idoll tried. Car  Psal. 25Their drinke is blood, their bread is humane flesh, Consuls heads with Preachers tongues their food, & what Is their daintiest dish▪ Princes harts I gesse, Thus like Basan Bulles, they feed their Pope with fat. Conati sunt pri∣ anna mea. Psal. 25.But time decreed, how long should Assur liue, and God foretolde, when Pharaoes life should end, To take thy life the man of sinne doth striue, in vaine O Queene, when Angels thee defend. Non obeniet ti bi malii, nec ap∣propinquabit plaga taberna∣culo tuo. Psa. 62▪Could Ionas in the raging Seas be drownd? could Lions Daniel in their Dennes deuoure? Might Misael burne in fiie furnace bound? durst Traitours blade attempt our sacred Princes bowre? Non est consiliū nec prudentia contra Dominū.A blast of winde made Th'assirians hoast to flie, Earthen pots made Madianites to take their flight, Hornes threw Ierichoes wall flat on ground to be, God, makes Flies, Frogs, Rats and Lice, for him to fight. Pone coscut rotam, & sicut stipulamanto vetum. Cains curse, Herods death, I wish on them to fall, that seeke a sacred Prince with secret sword to kill, Iudas death to good for Iudas mates I call, who bathes in blood, and drinke of blood their fill. Iavet gladius corn in cor co∣r. Psal. 37.But Serpents neuer build in Boxe, nor breede in Cipres tree, no Canker can the Emerald touch, Euen so these hellish Heliottes cannot feed, on her whose vertues rare amaseth such. Profer lanceā, apprehēde clyp & singe in aux∣il . Psal. 36. These Minotaurus brood from Rome, from Creete, with sword and fire, in Albion swarme like Bees Like Sampsons Foxes with fied tailes and feete, they dread no death to winne a Popish fees.
In Rhodes was neuer seen, they say, an Eagles nest some hold it so, tha Creete can breed no Owle, And Crowes in Athens were neuer seen at least that England breedes no wolues, an error foule. Cymerians blinde, that haunts Troponius Caue, could neuer bide the shining Sunne in sight,Qui ambula in tenebais odi lucem. Who still in darknesse dwell, the light doe neuer craue, but like Cacus Captiues shrouded ae with night. A simple Goat could asswage god Faunus ire, a grunting hog could Neptunes rage appease,Dij Gentū va∣ni sunt. Deus noster coelos fe∣cit. A seelie Cocke could coole Asculapius fie, but Lions round, the bull of Rome must please. His Dan and Bethell, sacred Pantheon cald, his sinagoge esteemes no Oxe, no Calfe,miserunt in Ig∣nem sancta tua & polluerūt ta∣bernaculum no∣minis tui. Ps. 74 no Bull, But blood of kings in Royall seates enstald, wherein Perillus part he plaies at full. No fire in Rome could Romulus staffe consume, no meanes might make king Pyrrhus toes to burne But Pope with Naeuius knife euer durst presume, with Briers and Brambles make Caedar trees to mourn. But might these mates haue had but Aarons rod in hand or could haue borrowed Elias cloke no doubt,Anima nostrasi∣cut passer ereptae est ex laqueo ve∣nantium. Psal. They had made the Seas, on both sides for to stand, that Fraunce and Spaine might make the slaughter out. Their Dagon fell,Quis deus prae∣ter Dominum? quis ortis? si∣cut Deus noster Sam: 22 our sacred Arke stood vp, their Pharao myst, our Moses did preuaile, Their crosse was downe, our crowne did neuer stoupe, Their Barge did sinke, our Ship top gallant saile, Noughtie Nabals curse on Dauid neuer fell?Cadant a consi∣lij suis quoniā rbelles sunt ti∣bi. Psal. Achitophels cruel counsaie did no good to Absalon, when Absalon did rebell? Semei could doe no harme, when Semei God withstood.
Elizeus bones could raise the Dead from graue, Peter's shadowe passing by, Act ap 5 Act. cap. 9. made sicke men hole. Paules handkercher from death, did many saue, thus vertue deales to vertuous men her dole But Balles of Rome and Beares of Hispaine did more, they murther whom they will, and pardon whom they list, Kings from crownes depriue,Spiritus procel∣larum eit pas callicis corum. Psalr and kings to crownes restore, thus to shadow Caesar states, the Pope hath euer wisht. If Dathan and Abiron sanke for treason wrought, if Assur,Pluet super im∣pios laqueos, ig∣nem & sulphur. Pharo so enuied Dauids seat, If Greekes Iewes and Gentiles Iacobs starre haue sought, these Gorgons would Eliza faine from Crowne defeat. When Perseus sword shall snatch of Medusas head, when Mercuries whistle lulls Argos eies to sleep, When Phaebus faulchon kils monstrous Python dead.Inueniet manus tua iniico tuos. Psal. then shall Eliza make Romane Cerberus creepe: Though still you beare, the Oliue branch in breast. yet some wish you Hermes Harpen in your hand, Though you the Lambe imbrace, the Lion is your beast, for mercie must with iustice ioine to rule a land. Cleanse Angeus hall, destroy Stymphalides seede, your souldiers readie preast,Dispelle eos sicu pale a a facie venti. Psal. 1. do stand in aray, Thunders, hailstones, brimstone, fier, your foes shal speede Angels armd, hosts from hie, God himself will say. Sent & saluē  augures coeli qui contemplāur sydera: Esa 47.To Curria trudge, of Sibill knowe your fates, to Ammons priests, at Ammons temple scrape. To Delphos post, call and knock at Phaebus gates, to knowe of Phaebus how traitors best may scape. Dux foemina factum.No Iewell, Gemme, no goulde to giue I had, no Indian stones, no Persean gaze in hand No pearles from Pactolus to a Prince, yet glad, these happie Halcions daies to see in Britaine land. FINIS. L. L.
