17207 99840187 4663
THE BVCKLER OF BODILIE HEALTH, Whereby Health may bee defended, and sicknesse repelled; consecrate by the Au the vse of his Cou shing from his heart (though it were to his hurt) to see the fruites of his labour on the constant well∣fare of all his Countrie-men. By Mr. IOHN MAKLUIRE, Doctor in Medicine. EDINBVRGH Printed by Iohn Wreittoun 1630.
TO THE MOST NOBLE, WOR∣THIE, AND GENEROVS LORDS, MY L. CHANCELLER, PRESIDENT, and the rest of the Lords of his Maiesties most honorable privie Counsell. MY LORDS, THE Philosophers, who haue serious∣ly by contemplation considered the na∣ture of man, haue learned into the schoole of veritie, that he is the chiefe of all creatures vnder the Sunne, seing all things in this theater to be made for his vse, the Heaven, the elements, and all that doth de∣pend of them appointed for his service: More∣over they found such perfection in his fa∣bricke, so great miracles in his works, that they could not find any thing in all this v∣niverse, to whom they should licken him well except the world it selfe, so they haue cal∣led him Microcosme, or little world, being (as Plutarch sayeth) the abridgment of the whole globe: For it is certaine that GOD in the creation made all things before man, and when hee was going about to make him, hee made an reflexion of his divinitie, and tooke a view of all his workes, that he might print in this his last worke the quintessence
all other, with the beams of his owne image: as man surpasseth the rest of the creatures in dignitie; so the Magistrates private men: but amongst the Magistrates of this King∣dome, your LL. keepe the first ranke both by place and worth: for in maintaining of peace and banishing of troubles, in advancing and approving of the good, and suppressing the evill, your LL. haue given an cleare manife∣station of both prudencie and vigilancie. I knowing how your LL. did affect these who stu¦dy to the well of the publick haue made bold to publish this smal work with your L names in the frontispice of it, as most due to you: nam vestri interest ne quid detrimenti respublica capi∣at. Truely if the smyling brightnesse of your LL. sweetly shinning countenance had not glansed on my dazled eyes, should haue beene forced with Diogenes in the day light with a candle to looke for a man festered with the milke of letters, and now become a father and favourer of all such, whose emolument depends from the advancement of vertuous studies Your LL. presence at the entrie, Will preserue it from the virulent byting of viperous invy∣ers, and so shall incourage me to imploy the small talent the Lord hath imparted to me to your LL. service, and the vse of the publick as your LL. Most humble servant I. Macluire D. M.
TO THE TRVE∣LY NOBILITATE HONORABLE, AND GENE∣ROVS GENTLEMAN, IAMES MONTGOMERY ESQVIER, SONNE TO MY LORD VISCOVNT OF the Airds, in the Kingdome of IRELAND: Health. Right Honorable, and worthie Sir: HAving after a long calculation found out tyme of my conception, almost doubting of the father, (as few ho∣nest women doe) I knew in end the childe belonged by right to you, which (yet honest woman like) I present to you, willing it should carie your name in the fore-front: Reject it not Sir, either by reason of the vnlawfuluesse of the tyme, being now eleven yeeres past since my first conception, where others take but eleven months at the most: the first li∣neaments being drawne, and carefully: yee,
fatherly, vnder the cover of your wings by heate till it tooke lyfe, hatched in the Vni∣versitie of St. Androws eleven yeares since: or because of the vnlikenesse of the birth, which doth not resemble you the father, (yet it is no wonder Sir) it being (babe like) toothlesse, tonguelesse, sightlesse, noselesse: yea, wholly senslesse, and so vnable to bite againe the back∣bytter, or make answere to the Critick babler, to flee the Viper in the way, r smell a farre of the sclanderous Censurer, whose throate is be∣come an open sepulcher: You Sir the father, having with the proportion of the members the sharpnesse of the senses, and sweete harmony of these outward decorments, that inward or∣nament of all, to wit, these eminent faculties of the soule, which kithes in your concepti∣on, graue and solideratiocination, and memo∣rie furnished from former observations, with a copious matter to all sorte of wholesome dis∣course, so that in-bred naturall wisedome, and painfull acquired learning, hath made you Sir (absit verbo invidia) justly to be thought by me (who scarcely seeth any thing clearely) , a just dimension of all things, required in a noble generous mynd, and a pro∣perly proportioned person. Receaue therefore this silly babe Sir, and let the perfections which are in you, supplie the defects that are in it
maintaine it by your authoritie from the vn∣christen: yea, vncharitable railing tongues and ryving hands of all Waspe-like searchers of poysoun amongst hony flowers, divel-like by invy hinderers never authors or furthe∣rers of any good enterprise, aiming at the well of the publick, but them I regarde not: laugh you Sir, and let them lightly it; receaue you it, let them reject it: to you Sir only being con∣secrate, I doe offer it as a sure badge of my constant desire out of ardent affection Sir to liue and die, Your most affectio∣ned servant, IOHN Makluire, Doctor in Medicine.
TO THE READER. REceaue gentle Reader this little trea∣tile with that mynd it is presented, which is humble without alledged pride, and sincere without affected fard: on∣ly desirous to serue GOD, for which end I was formed, and the countrie to which end I was called: least now I should be idle, while the Sunne of knowledge is eclipsed by the clowds of ignorance, which hath bred such an apprehension of supposed weak∣nesse in the mynds of many, when this sci∣ence is inclosed in the person of a young professor: that old ignorant ruffians, practi∣sed Man-slayers, are repute only worthie Physitians, whose best cure hath beene vpon their owne purse, if they haue bene but a by∣stander in some desperate recoverie, they are sclandered with it, though guiltlesse, and this hath bred their reputation, to whom if once yee send your vrine, yee must re∣solue to be sick howsoever, for they will never leaue examining of it, till they haue shaked it in a disease. Of such our countrie and citie is filled, for none from the Preacher to the cobler, or the Lady to the landres, but all doctorate deceavers: by this the
sorcerer venteth his divelrie: the seminarie Priest his Poperie. To you be it said my Lords of his Majesties Counsell and Ses∣sion, and on you be laide the blood of thse poore ignorant innocents, dayly precipi∣tate to their graue. By this neglect GOD is bereft of his servants, and the King of his subjects: helpe this my Lords, and let not this old science, commanded of GOD, followed by Kings and Princes, im∣braced of all, and renowmed by all, over all, secund to none, (divinitie except) decay amongst you, and restraine pantodidactos extravagant spirit, (more ignorant than the Oxe or Asse, while hee knoweth not his owne cribbe) within the borders of his profession, showing whatsoever his vocation bee, Mr. Perkins superscription of his bookes, Minister verbies, hoc vnum age, that medicine flouri∣shing in this Kingdome, not only my old Lord Doctor, but also young Master Doctor may liue by the labour of his hands, destitute of other lands.
In IO AN. MAKLVIREVM (siue lyradem) . AOnidum pater est, idem est Asclepii, Apollo; Illius inventum est ars metrica & medica. Verum Asclepiadis citharamque & Paeonis artem, Musarum vt famulis tradidit Aoniam. ieridum nato simul atque Epidaurii alumno Phoebus avus Lyradae donat vtramque lyram. Macte lyrâ vtrâvis, canones dignate modosque Tradere Paeonios, ludere & Aonios. Ludebat G. Sibbaldus . In Authoris nomen, Mak. hoc est filius. Lure, id est esca. PErge salutiferam sic impertirier escam, Iure salutiferae diceris filius escae.
In Libri inscriptionem MIlitia est quicquid mortales degimus aevi: Quàm fit opus clypci nemo negabit ope. Mysticus est Mystae; Medicae hîc Maklurius artis Porrigit, ingenii nobile deig na sui, Qnisquis amas sanam, quo{que} sano in corpore mentem, Sanus si es, sanum qui tueatur habes. In Zoilum. TEntas Maklurii incassum discerpere nomen, Livide, praeclarum iam super astra volat. Pat. Sandaeus. Author ad Censorem. CVM tua non edas carpismea dogmata Censor, Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. Candidus imperti meliora vel vtere nostris: Aut alios nostro mitte labore frui.
The Contents of this Booke. THE naturall causes of death. Pag. 1 The vse of meate, drink, sleepe, &c. 3 Of phlebotomie, or drawing of blood. 6 A remedie for drunken cummers. 8 Of Lochleaches Blood-suckers, and wic∣ked men Blood-drinkers. 9 Of purges for the body. 10 Of purges for the purse. 18 Of vomiting. 19 The inconvenients of long sleeping. 23 Meanes for expelling the whole excre∣ments of the body. 24 The tyme, terme, and other circumstan∣ces of exercising. 26 TOBACCO. 30 Dinner tyme, and meates in generall, 38 A remedie for growne greasie bellyes. 39 Of bread, 41. Of flesh, 42. Fowles. 45 Of Egges and milk. 46 Herbes for eating. 51 Drink in generall. 53. Wyne, 54 Beere, 55. Water. 46 What should be done after dinner. 57 Passions of the mynde. 59 Supper tyme. 62 The Cookes good parts. 63 After supper what, and the Aire. 64 The praises of night drunkards and vaine
Rorers. Pag. 6 Bed tyme, and sleepe. 6 Procreation with the circumstances. 7 Complexions 7 Sanguineans and their dyet 7 Cholericks dyet. 7 Melancholicks dyet. 7 Flegmaticks dyet. 8 Age in generall. 8 Bairnes meate. 8 Youths meate. 8 Middle-age dyet. 8 Old mens meate. 8 The carelesse care of a young lasse for old man. 8 The seasons. 9 The dyet of the spring. 9 Of the summer. 9 Of the harvest. 9 Of the winter. 10 A regiment for women with childe. 10 For women brought to bed. 10 For the child. 11 For the Nurse. 11 Of waining the babe. 12 Greedie misers, godlesse heires. 12 Bairnes diseases. 12 The markes of both true and false con∣ception. 12 FINIS.
THE BVCKLER OF HEALTH. GOD the Creator made man with a soule immortall, and a body subject to death, be∣ing composed of foure ele∣ments, of contrary quali∣s, which doth combate still amongst emselues, the stronger stryving to sub∣e the weaker, hence commeth many eases, and in end destruction: Moreo∣r our lyfe is sustained by two pillars,  wit, by the naturall heate, (which is  chiefe instrument of the soule) and the bred moist, or sappe of the body, which  the nurishment, or foode of this heate,  is the oyle in the lampe, of the light, ich humour failing, the heate must needs rish: but so it is this humour can not
still last, because the naturall heate: doth day∣ly destroy it, and although there be day∣ly reparation made by the heate, and the blood that proceeds from the heart by the arters to all the members of the body, yet the sappie or humide substance that is dissolved is much purer than that which by reparation doth succeede to it: for our naturall heate being dayly weakned, is not able to make vp her losses, by as good as it hath loste: as wyne the more wa∣ter bee mixed is the weaker, so our na∣turall heate, and inbred sappie substance is dayly weakned by the apposition of new aliment or foode, having still some thing vnlike the former: Adde to these that the dissolution of the body is continuall the reparation, but by litle and litle, after ma∣ny alterations: heere yee see, that the na∣turall heate devouring this our naturall in-bred sappe doth destroy the selfe in end. And although that these things doe im∣pose a necessitie of death to man, never∣thelesse hee may not only prolong his life (considering heere the second causes on∣ly) but also preveene sicknesse, and keep himselfe in health, and that by the righ and moderate vse of these outward cir∣cumstances
in themselues indifferent, and o good, if rightly and circumspectly vsed, ut evill, if not: These are the aire, meate, rink, sleeping, waking, motion, and rest: he excretion of the excrements of the ody, and the passions of the minde, all which are so necessarie to the lyfe of man, hat it can not last long without the vse of he same, for the continual dissolution of the ody requireth a reparation by meate. Then eepe is needfull for the disgestion and estitution of the spirits, waking for the xercises and functions of the spirits, and he stirring vp of the naturall heate: and est is necessare for the refreshing of both ody and spirites wearied: and seing na∣ure can not turne all her meate in good ubstance, the excretion of the superflui∣es was needfull. The passions of the ynde by reason of the objects that are ffered, good or evill, can not also bee shewed: for the moderation then of these ircumstances remarke these few Canons ollowing. Canon 1. It is expedient for the preserving of ealth, and preveening of diseases, that e∣ery one whose age and force doth per∣mite,
should everie yeare draw blood and purge, and that in the spring, because the body replenished with humors doth rea∣dily at that tyme fall in diverse diseases, while as the naturall heate revived, by the approching of the sunne towards  doth attempt the expulsion of these hu∣mors out of the body, from the which enterprise of nature ariseth a conflict, if nature haue the victory, man escapeth: but if shee succumbe, man dyeth: that nature doth thus attempt the expulsion of these humors, it is knowne by these intercuta∣nean diseases, as are itch, pustuls, byles, vl∣cers, and such like, which wee see com∣monly in the Spring to fall out. The body in the winter by two meanes is replenished with humors, the one is by that extraordinarie appetite whereby men are carryed: yea, rather forced to eate more meate in that season than in the Sum∣mer: this appetite proceedeth from the greater heate of the stomack then, than at any other tyme. The other meane whereby the body is replenished, is the envyro∣ning cold, whereby dissipation of these three substances (to wit, the airy, humide and solide is hindered, as also the excreti∣on
of the vapours by the small holes, or pores of the body. It is therefore need∣ull to helpe nature, and light her of this burhen, by drawing of blood, or phlebo∣tomy and purging: And because the re∣ward of Physitians in this countrey being frequently, My Lord, GOD reward you, hath made Physitians to bee scarse, and no wonder, for how shall his L. liue vpon this rent, is it not to content my Lord with the poore folks almes, who get of∣ten GOD helpe you, they differ in forme, but not in matter: this scarsitie constrai∣neth the Gentlemen to commit themselues to bee handled by ignorants, who least they should deale with them as that Chi∣rurgeon of Iedburgh dealt with his pati∣ents, who forced all them of whom hee drew blood, their wound vnder-cotting, to returne to haue it healed, and being asked the reason of this of his little boy, hee answered, that for making of the wound by opening of the veine, hee gote a Wea∣ther, but for curing of the same a Kow, that every one may vnderstand for his owne well, I will insist a little on phle∣botomie and purging. Of Phlebotomie.
PHLEBOTOMIE then is an eva∣cuaion of the vitious humors abounding in the body, mixed with the blood, by the opening of a veine. This is either vrged by the present dis∣ease, which admittes no delay, or it is voluntare for the preveening of the im∣minent, when the present danger doeth presse, it maye bee at any time of the yeere, or any houre in the daye or night without exception, and that in diverse places of the bodye, as the nature of the disease shall require: when it is by ele∣ction, or voluntarie for preveennig of fu∣ture diseases, the most fitte tyme of the yeere, is the Spring, in the latter end of March, or the beginning of Aprile, and the most proper houre in the daye is the morning: an houre or more after you are awake, hauing made a cleane Ship, fore and est, (as the Sea-men saye:) the most accommodate place is the veine basilike, or lever veine, the Chirurgian hauing rubbed it with his hand, or a drye cloth before, for the gathering of the bloode thither, then having tyed it, let him make the incision beneath the place, where it meeteth with the veine Cephalicke, about
two fingers breadth, hauing marked the place before, and anoynted it with a litle oyle, holding the veine fast, lest it should slyde with the thumbe of the left hand if the incision bee made with the right hand, and leaning the hand wherewith hee openeth the veine on the arme of the patient, that it may bee stable, and giuing him who is bled a battoun in his hand, for to stirre his fingers, to that ef∣fect the bloode may issue the better, and hauing drawne such a measure as the na∣ture force and age of the person may well suffer, slacking the band, let him laye v∣pon the wound a little peece of linnen cloath dipped in water and tyed softly by a band of linnen till all danger of new bleeding bee past, keeping still the arme all that daye free from all motion. Blood may bee taken in greater measure of sanguineans and bilious, than of me∣lancholious, and phlegmaticks, of young men than of old, and of men than wo∣men. Except it bee of such who by often sacrificing to Bacchus, their head takes now and then a giddie startling, their tongue a tedious tratling, their taile a vile wauering. These monsters of na∣ture,
shame of their sex, crosse of their husband, and disgrace of kin, friend and allyance should bee bledde in both the leggs and armes, and in the croppe of the tongue, by a crosse sneck to that end, it may bee made slower for talking, and stiffer for drinking, least continuing in this wicked mood, they make their husbands Cuckolds, their bairnes bastards and beggars, themselves whoores and theeues. Iustly many are molested with such beasts, who glames at the turde for the twelfe pence sticken in it: the corrup∣tion of our tyme being such that Tome the tinklers sonne metamorphosed in a Gentlman, sutes mistresse Marie my Lords daughter, and Sir Iohn my Lords second, speares out for Sandie the Souters fourtie thousand mark Iennie. This Tom aiming at vanitïe rather than vertue, comes to honours or hornes by his wife, and Sir Iohn looking to geare more than to grace, is often perplexed, while the trash is wa∣sted, by a Masie Fae or a Maly Dae. I wonder that their vnequall conjunctions doe not fill the countrie with monsters lyke Muiets which is begotten betuixt a Mare and an Asse.
Of Loch-leachs. Some vse Loch-leaches when they can∣not haue the vse of drawing of blood. These little beastes are not to be applyed presently, after they come out of the wa∣ter, but they must bee keept foure and twentie houres in a vessell, full of faire water, that they may spue out this, while the filthie mudde & drosse is within them. They should bee gripped with a whyte innen cloath, for the bare hand cankers them. The place to the which they are to bee applyed, should be smeered over with blood, to that end they may enter the sooner: and when yee would haue them to fall, sprinkle a little Aloes or salt on them, if yee would them to draw more then they are able to containe, cut off their taile while they are yet hanging, and if the bleeding' stanch not after they are fallen, apply with a band, of cloath or wooll brunt and beatten to pouder. There bee other Loch-leaches or blood∣suckers not spoken of here, such bee gold greedie, inventors of new impositions, faith lesse victuall forestallers, and treacherous quarrells, and processe hatchers, who be∣reauing by these meanes his innocent bro∣ther
of his goods the entertainers of his life, may bee tearmed rather man slayars than blood suckers. These vnlyke to the former, does sucke the best blood but like the former in others, for they never of them selues fall from that sucking till they bee not able to containe any more; if ye sprinkle them with the sharpe pouder of Aloes, (that is with justice) then they fall, and if you continue to persue them by the same, you shall find them as the former by salt, so they by it are forced to spue out the vndigested blood of the poore, and cut mee the taile from them that is, make them quyte of wyfe and barnes, in whose person they feare the curse of the great judge. These grinders of the face of the poore, shall never make an end of sucking. These as vnworthie to bee thought or spoken of by any good Christian, I leaue to bee handled, yea, justly to bee hanged by the Iustice heire, and if they amend not, to bee tormented by the great Iustice prison-keeper heere∣after. Of purging. And because our countrie Leeches, con∣sidering the disposition of the people a∣mongst
whom they liue (who esteeme well of no meate but that which rakketh the belly, though it were draffe and satlings: so they think of no physike, but that which sendeth them three or foure score tymes to the midding) doth carie about with them commonly for this ende (to vse their termes) colocinthida, stibium, and diagirdium, violent firie remedies, where∣by the body is mightily endomaged: it shall not bee a-misse to consider what pur∣ging is, and the nature of the remedies proper for the same. Purging then (as commonly it is ta∣ken) is a cleansing of the body of the superfluous humors by vse of medicine working downeward, the purgatiues are diverse, according to the diverse nature of the humors that is to bee purged. The humors are three, bile, flegme, and Melancholy: the purgatiues are either gen∣tle, mediocre, or violent. The gentle purgatiues of bile, are Casse, manna, the juice of Roses, Tamarinds, sweete prunes. Casse being of temper hote and humid, being corrected because it is winde, with anyse or finckle seede, it may be given to
all sort of persons, to bairnes halfe an vn, to aged an once and an halfe, or two  the most. Manna being temperate in qualities may bee given the weight of an vnce to bairnes, and two or three vnces for men, for some men correct the slownesse of it, by three or foure graine weights of diagridium. The juice of roses is hote and dry in the first degree, the dose is from an vnce and an halfe to two vnces, the syrope of rose solutiue made of this juice is from an vnce and an halfe to foure. The dose of Tamarinds is from halfe an vnce to a whole. Sweete prunes are given in number from twelue to foure and twentie. The mediocre purgatives of bile, are A∣loes, Rheubarb, Myrabolans, Citrins. The dose of Aloe hote in the second, and dry in the third degree, according to Galen, is from a dragme to one and an halfe, or two at the most, it is most vsed in pilluls; because it is sharpe and byting, it is corrected with mastix, and being slow of operation it is hastned by the juice of roses. Rheubarbe hotte and drye in the se∣cond
is giuen from a dragme and an halfe to two, and because it is slow in opera∣tion, there is adjoyned to it cynamome or spice. The Myrabolans citrins are almost of the same facultie with Rheubarbe, but that they bind more: their dose of olde was from two dragm. to halfe an vnce, Mesue giveth them to the weight of five dragm. they are rubbed with the oyle of sweete almonds for their drynesse cause. The violent purgatives; are Diagrid: Azarum and Centaurie the lesse. Diagrid: beeing hotte and dry in the third degree, is given to the weight of ten graines, it is corrected because it by∣teth sore with the juice of quinces, and gumme, tragacantha, and with mastix, for the keeping of the stomake from hurt by it. As for Azarum and Centaurie the lesse, because they are out of vse I passe them over. The composed remedies purging bile, are syrupes, opiates, electuaries, or pi∣lules. Syrupes, as the syr. of rose: whose dose is from an vnce and an halfe to foure.
The syr. of Cichorie with Rheubarb, given according to the same quantitie, but of lesse force. The opiates, are Catholicum, Diacassia, Diaprunum simplex: their dose is from halfe an vnce, to one and an halse. Tri∣phera persica, and Diaprunum solutivum, are much more violent: their dose is from three dragm. to sixe, or an vnce at the most. The Electuares, are the electuare of Roses that is of great force: his dose is from two dragm. to sixe, or an vnce at the most: the electuarie de Psillio is after the same manner. The pilules are pilulae sine quibus Au∣reae, de Rheu. their dose is from a scru∣ple to foure: Remarke heere that pilules are seldome vsed to purge bile. The simples that purge Melancholie are Senne: polypod. as gentle purgatives. Senne is hotte in the first degree. and drye in the second: his dose given in substance, is two or three dragm. in in∣fusione: from three to sixe, in decoctio∣ne, an vnce; his wind is corrected by a∣nise, and his slownesse by cinamome, and ginger.
Polypode is hote in the second, dry in the third, his dose is from two dragm. to halfe an vnce, his drynesse is corrected by glycyrize. The mediocre purgatiues of melancho∣lie, are; Epithimus, Myrabolam Indi. Epithimus is hote, and dry in the se∣cond, his dose is from a dragme to halfe an vnce; Mesue did giue the weight of halfe an vnce, his drynesse is corrected by rasins of the sunne. Myrobolani indi are of the same nature, that the myraboline citrons are. The Ancients had by these, fumaria, a∣lias, earth-smoake, cuscula, and the bark of capres. The violent purgatiues, are, black elle∣bore: lapis armenius and lapis Lazuli, black hellebor hote and dry in the third degree, his dose prepared is from 15 graines to halfe a dragme, it is prepared when they stick an aple with little peeces of it, and with clowes, and so rosteth both vnder the ashes, the which apple is vsed, the peeces of ellebore being casten away, it is infused in hidromel or barley water, from the weight of a dragme to halfe an vnce. Lapis armenius is in the first, hot and dry
in the second, his dose vnwashen is from halfe a dragme to a whole, but washen to a dragme and an halfe, it is corrected by frequent washing, without the which it procureth vomite, lapis lazuli is lyk it every way. The composed purgatiues of melancho∣ly, are, opiates, confections, pilluls. Opiates, as Catholicon, Diasenna, their dose is from an vnce to one and an halfe. Confections, as confectio hamech, his dose is from three dragme to six. Pilluls, are pilulae de fumaria, which are seldome vsed in melancholy. The simple purgatiues of flegme gen∣tilly, are, Carthamus, Myrabolani, Che∣bulae, Sarcocolla. Carthamus hote in the first, dry in the second, his dose is from 2 dragmes to an vnce, it is corrected by cynamone and anyse. Myrabolani chebulae are like in all to the cittrins. Sarcocolla, hote in the first, dry in the second, his dose is from a dragme to two, his slownesse is corrected by gingiber. The Mediocre, are Agaricus hotte in the second degree, and drye in the first:
is dose is from a scruple to two dragm.  slownesse is corrected by ginger, or pica Nardi. The violent purgatives of flegme, are Turbith, Hermodactes, Colocinthis: Me∣oacham; Ialap and of olde, Sagapenum, poponax. Turbit is hotte and drye in the se∣ond degree: his dose is from three scru∣les, to foure, it is corrected with ginger. Hermodactes, hotte and drye in the se∣ond: the dose and correction of the same s that of Turbit. Colocinthis, hotte and drye in the hird: his dose corrected, that is, the Trochiscks of Alhandal, is from six graines o fifteeene, and to the weight of a scruple or the strongest. Maechoacham, hote in the first dry in he second, a remeedie fit for all sorte of eople, his dose infused in white wyne s from two scruples to a dragme. Ialap roote is to bee taken after the same manner, and in the same quantitie. The remeedies composed, are, opiates, lectuaries, pilluls, trochisks opiates, as ca∣holicum, diaphenicum, whose dose is from alfe an vnce to a whole for the strongest.
Electuaries, are electuarium de citro, his dose is from halfe an vnce to six drames Diacarthanium, his dose is from halfe an vnce to a whole. Pilluls, as of Agarice, Stomachiae, & sine quibus, their dose is from halfe a dragme to foure scrupuls, pilulae cocciae, faetidae, lucis majores, arthriticae, de her∣modactilis, their dose is from two scru∣puls to a dragme Trocises are de agarico, their dose is from two scrupuls to a dragme: trochi∣scis of alhandall, their dose is from sixe graines to a scruple. Their bee other sort of purgatiues, which men call purse purgations, and these are of three sorte as the former, gentle, me∣diocre, or violent. The gentle comprehend the modest, and moderate charges of an honest house. The mediocre are the just reward of the physitian, the due of the scholema∣ster, and the fitting of the conscientious merchand compts. The violent conteane the gorgeous de∣pursements to the Goldsmith for lace, cuppes, and such like, the persuing by law some tedious processe by the firie vi∣olence
of these two, the poore purse which ften taketh an irremediable fluxe, and yeth of the skitter: His Majestie with is most honourable and wise Counsell, by an act of parliament (evill keeped) ath found out a remeedie for the former: would GOD the wisdome and concord of his subjects would admit an other for he latter, for then the Nobilitie and Gen∣rie should not bee so lukken-handed to other professions. Of Vomitores. Because some (as bilious constituti∣ons) are sooner and better purged by vo∣miting then purging: and seeing it is much vsed, consider with mee the reme∣dies of it. Vomitores then as the purgatiues are of three sortes, to wit, gentle, mediocre, and violent, the gentle are such as doe procure it in burdening the stomack by their quantitie, as warme water, fat broth, butter, oyle, and the like taken to the measure of ten or twelue vnce. The mediocre are the seede and flower of Anyse, the seede and roote of orage, the Latin terme is atriplex, the roote of azarum, given from a dragme to foure
and agarick, his dose a dragme. The vehements are, the sede and flower of broome, to the quantitie of two dragmes, gratiola from a dragme to one and one halfe. Some of the Ancients thought it to be expedient for the health to vomite everie moneth, and that after a great carrouse, but this counsell needeth not to be given to the soukespikkets of our age, who asthey drinke like Suiczers, yea rather like swine, they cast as Dutches, yea rather like dogs, it were little fault for punishment to pinch so these intemperate and vntymous abu∣sers of GODS creatures, vntill they were glad with the dogs to returne to the vo∣mite, And this much to you Drunkards. It is heere to be remarked that growne fat men should not bee purged by vo∣miting, for by the prease, yee will easi∣ly breake some veine in their body: nor melancholicks, for they hardly purge vpward; nor asthmaticks, or such as hath any impediment in their breath, through the infirmitie of their lights, for by it they are much more weakned, yea some∣tymes torne: nor hectiks, for their body being already worne, is wholly casten
downe, nether they who are of a weake eade, tender eyes, of a long neck and  narrow breast, only cholericks, being of strong firme constitution, not burde∣ned with flesh, and much subject to the vomiting of bile, yallow, greene, or sea colored: as also phlegmaticks of a rude robust nature, whose stomack is full of flegme, should be purged vpward by vo∣mite, and that with great caution follow∣ng in it, the advise of some vnderstan∣ding man, for no lesse danger floweth from he extraordinarie dose of vomitores nd the malegovernement of the pati∣ent both after, and while it worketh then by purgatiue medicines. I haue only heere for breveties cause touched the qualities of the medicaments, and their dose, living the forme of exhibition, and preparation to the giuers, that takes vpon them to mi∣nister physicke in the country. It is to bee remarked, that except the bodie bee so full of blood and humors, that the physicke cannot pearce through them, purging ought to precead phleboto∣mie, howsoever the bellie should alwayes bee emptie and cleane of the excrements.
The patient should keepe himself warme while the medicine is working helping the operation by a gentle motion as also by a little thinne warme broth after the taking of it about a littl space. And because that the not working o medicine doth affraight many, it is to b vnderstood, that some will not moue th bodie any way, and yet doe little or no harme to it, such are gentle & mediocre me∣dicines, the gentle purgatiues, when they purge not, are turned by nature into the blood, the mediocre into the nature o the humour, which they purge whithe bile, pituite, or melancholie, but the vio∣lent cast the bodie in a fever readilie, and become venemous, while as nature o∣vercome hath not force to expell them, but the other two being overcome by nature, are reteined within the bodie, so that the stay of them is from a weake∣nesse in them, but the stoppe of the last is from a weaknesse in the bodie. Gentlemen therefore seing you know both the names and varieties of the pur∣gatiues spare not to aske at your Leeches what they be ere yee take them.
Bairnes before they bee eighteen or wentie yeare of age, and old men after ourtie, (except they be of a strong com∣plexion) doth not stand in neede of this yearly purging. Canon. 2. The bodie being thus made cleane, take heade least by overcharging of it yee file it a new, for being in some fashion, weakned by the former remeadies, it doth not shortlie admit that measure of nu∣triture that it did before, it is expedient therefore to come to your accustomed dyet by degrees, least a new file require a new clense, and too often scowring of the potte although it were of brasse weares it. Canon. 3. Flee mornings sleepe, and lazie lying in winter after six, and summer after se∣ven, for long lying to the health is hurt∣some. Because it hindreth the cleansing of the bodie from the excrements, (and judge you giue it bee either handsome or whol∣some to see the midding at the fire-end) while it stoppeth the passage of the spi∣rits animale, the causes of motion for their expulsion.
it sharpeneth, or by the haemorroides o some other way, it procures melancholie hypochondriake, sometimes the fever quar∣tan, sometimes other diseases, for this is good, the barke of the roote of Tamarisk, and of capres with the foresaid herbs. The retention of the sweate causes the itch. scabbe, pustuls, and such like, there∣fore it is to bee procured by frictions baines and exercise. Of exercise. Because that frictions, and baines are not much vsed, leaving them wee shal speake a little of exercise. Exercise should be much regarded an moderatlie vsed, by those who hath  care of their health, this Galen, testifiet in his booke of good and evill meate i these words, For the keeping of healt a continuall rest is a great hinder: as i the contrare, moderate motion is a gre helpe. By exercise the members of th body are hardned, and so made fitte t sustaine any labour, the naturall heate i quickned, and so prompter for his fun∣ctions, and the body is made more agil and nimble in his actions. Heere by ex∣ercise I vnderstand honest games and p∣stimes,
not these debosht lose-tymes, cards, dyce, tables, and such like fathers, and fosterers of jarres and mischiefe, bookes furnishing lyes, oathes, blasphemie, hurt∣some to the health of the body, trouble∣some to the good of the estate, and hin∣derance to the rest and peace of the soule: I leaue such devyces of Sathan entysing to sinne to bee thought or treated of by ragged ribaulds, and lowsie licentious lim∣mers, the fittest pen-men of such a pro∣cesse, discharging by the right of a phy∣sitian, and the charity of a Christian, all generous honest spirits, who tends the health of their body, the wealth of their estate; and aeternall wellfare of their soule of such hel-bred conceats. The tyme most proper for these honest exercises is the morning, when the sto∣mack hath made an end of his digestion, and the belly of his expulsion, so that both ee lightned of their burthen. Hence we may see how our dayly custome of exer∣ising after meate is not good: first, hen by this our motion the digestion is hindred by a catching of our meate to nd fro, as the Plough-man doth with his aill in his coge, when hee would haue
them faine cooled, this catching suffereth it not to settle it selfe in the ground of the stomack, the place of digestion: second∣ly, because the body by exercise being made hote, draweth from the stomack and the lever by the meanes of this heate, the meate before it bee well prepared, which breeds obstructions in the veines within, and scabbes without, our scabbed schollers, that keepeth no fit tyme, nor just terme of their pastimes, may suffice to instance this alleagance. The terme or end of exercising, should bee when the face becommeth red and swelled and the sweate issues foorth through the whole body, leaving it before reddnesse, turne to palenesse, and swelling to swamp∣nesse, and sweate to be like weet: other∣wise in stead to bee refreshed yee shall be wearyed, and for dissipating of the hu∣mores by the pores of the body, yee shall dissolue the spirits by the passages of the same. Some exercises imploy some par∣ticular members of the body, as the Tay∣ler his hands and head, the Webster his legges and armes, the Tobacco man his mouth and nose, the Beggar the nailes of his thumbes, and tongue, Cou∣pers,
Trumpeters, and Pipers, their heekes, hands, and mouth: the most firie and wicked scolds their tongue, and the icentious whoores their taile: these I passe y, not having many particular exercises o treate of vsed amongst vs worthie of consideration, or speciall delineation, and very few vniversall, except the foote-ball, which often doth more good to the Chi∣urgians, than evill to the Physitians by a∣y helpe the body getteth: the gooffe and rcherie, from the which exercises they come ofter hungrie than sweating, and the innice or ketch the best of all, if it bee moderately and orderly vsed. In all exercises whereby men sweates,  except these that are vnder the sheetes) hese things are to bee remarked: first, hat in your gaming your mynde be free f all feare, the gadges being little or none, otherwise the minde shall bee in a con∣inuall vexation, and neither body nor mind hall receaue any recreation: Secondly, if  tyme of game you thirst, let your drink ee small aile, taken in a little quanti∣ie, not water, for it by the open passa∣ges going streight to the liver, will coole t too much, on the which insueth often
hydropsie, nor wyne, for by it the lyver already heate is set on a fire, on the which followeth frequently a fever: Thirdly, af∣ter your exercise haue a care to cause rubbe away the sweate in a warme chamber with dry warme linnings see that the body rub∣bed bee straight, least the wrinkels of the skinne doe hinder the issuing of the sweate, see the rubbers bee many and nimble, and that they rubbe not over hard, for this doth stoppe the passages, nor too soft, for it goeth not halfe farre in, but a medio∣critie in all things is good. The excrements of the heade in the mor∣ning ought to bee purged by sternutato∣ries or sneezngs of betonie, leafes, or mar∣joline leaues, and by masticatores chawed, which because they are litle in vse, I will passe over them, and speake of that which supplyeth their place which is Tobacco. Of Tobacco. Tobacco is an hearbe fetcht from the West Indies to vs, some calleth it Ni∣cotiana, from Master Iohn Nicote, that brought it first to France out of Portu∣gall, hee beeing Ambassadour for the time there. The Portugalles brought it first in Europe, out of the Iland Trinada, and
om Peru in the continent of America, ome tearme it petoun or tobacco. Tobacco is of a temper hotte and dry, s appeareth first from the effects thereof, s to purge cold and moist humours, as egme, or pituite: hence it is that it doth arme to fyrie hotte bilious persons, ex∣cept it bee taken in little quantitie, and hat for the cleansing of the head from hese cold superfluous humours, which a old stomacke hath sent to it; com∣monly these men haue cold stomacks, hot ivers, and weake heads, (for these three eadily follow one another:) so the cold stomack filleth the head with colde va∣ours, and the mouth with cold humors s doe appeare by their continuall spitting. It hurteth also melancholiens (if it bee ot for the foresaid reasons) by drying of heir body too much, but aggrieth best with the pituous gmatick, as dayly ex∣perience doth approve. Secondly, from he byting qualitie that is in it, by the which it moveth vomite. Thirdly, from he purging facultie downward. Fourth∣ly, from the penetrative subtile facultie outward, as appeareth by the issuing of sweate, after the vse of it in some. Fifth∣ly,
from the thirst and drouth it moveth, which is taken away by the vse of drink. Sixthly, from the wind it dryveth forth and that both vpward and downeward. Lastly, from the giddinesse of the head, which proceedeth from a melting of the flegme through the head, which bee∣ing melted, it stoppeth the passages of the spirits: so the stronger the Tobacco bee, the sooner it melteth it and more of it, and therefore strong Tobacco moveth this giddinesse most and soonest: this giddi∣nesse is stopped by a drink of ale, or any cooling drinke, which sendeth vp grosse thicke vapours, the which doe hinder the further operation of it: and condenseth, or congealeth the egme melted by it. This giddinesse of the head is a reason that some alledge to prove the coldnesse of it, which might bee alledged aswell o of wine or strong drinke, that doeth no lesse procure the same dissinesse of the head but they will haue it to proceede from a narcotick, or stupefactive qualitie in it, as the chesbow, and suchlike cold things by their coldnesse doe produce such effe∣ctes, I wonder how dare they that saye so, bee bold to vse it, seeing it is of such
stupefactive cold, and doe not rather ab∣staine from it, and hinder others also, but I thinke they doe jeast, for if it were true that it were so as they saye, some had lyed by it long agoe, specially after so great taking of it: I knew two Gentle∣men that after supper tooke soure-score pipes, if it had beene narcotick, they had never drunken any more. The fittest tyme of yeere for taking it, is, first, the Winter: next the Harvest: last the Spring: and no wayes in Summer. The moste proper time of the daye is the morning and evening before meate, no wayes af∣ter it, except it bee they to whome of long it hath proved helpfull for the ex∣pelling of the winde, and digestion of their meate. The seasons wherewith it aggrieth best are the colde and moistie: these circum∣stances remarked taken in a reasonable quantitie, that is, a pipe for two: I think it shall doe no harme, yea, rather freeing the head of the great burthen of egme: it preveneeth the diseases that may flow from the aboundance of it: such as apo∣plexie, epilepsie, paralysie, lethargie and others, but mee thinks the Tobacco man
barking as a dogge at the Moone, at these courious observations and idle restrictions of tobacco, (for so hee tearmes them) and crying that all men at all time when their appetite inordinate biddeth them, and their purse serveth them may take of it, and it is no wonder hee so doe, for it is meate, drink and cloathes to him: his Shop is the randevouse of spitting, where men dialogue with their noses, and their communications are smoake: in it hee play eth the Ape in counterfaiting the honest Merchant man with his diverse rolles of Tobacco, new come vp out of the cel∣lar, where they laye well wrapped in a dogges skinne and soussed: hee knoweth himself how, and yet sweareth that they are new landed from Verinus, Virginia, or S. Christophers. If hee bee not content with this, hee shall haue more when I come againe, as hee well deserveth: for his wares are both deare and evill; deare, while hee taketh a pennie for a pipe, and his welcome Gentlemen: and evill, for h seedeth his guests neither on rosted, no sodden meate; but on white, or blacke∣burnt meate, without drinke, grace, ta∣ble, plate, truncheour, or serviture, yea,
scarce a stoole to sitte on, and is not this  brave Innes my Masters? The excrements of the lights are grosse egmes, which are expelled by the mouth ter the vse of some incisive and deter∣e things, as are sugar candy, glycyrize, sope, tussilage, and their syrupes pre∣ared. There bee some excrements which are  tearmed, when they abound and so armes rather by their quantitie, then eir qualitie, there are semen, and sanguis enstruus, that is, mans seed, and womans owres. Either of the which being cor∣upted, breedeth diuers diseases: means herefore ought to be vsed by the which hey may bee expelled. The means for expelling of the seede,  that naturall conjunction of man and woman, whereby the members are made ore agile, the spirit more joyous, (licet ulgo dici soleat omne animal post coitum iste: sed hoc statum à coitu fit) shagring and oller is banished from betuixt man and wife: peace is made in the house, and fil∣ie polluted dreames, in the night are revened, but who may not lawfullie en∣y these middes, let them hold downe
nature by the vse of others, such as are phlebotomy, fasting sobriety, and the vse of cooling meates. Womans flowers are moved by the decoction of hysope, Mugwort, Marjoline, and other aperitiue herbs prepared in white wine, with the vse of stoues, and frequent frictions of the thighes. Exercise being ended, and the body thereafter having reposed about the ele∣venth houre, or sooner in the summer, when as the appetite doth require, let it bee answered by meate, which because it is of greater importance than any of the rest of the circumstances, and moe incon∣veniences doe follow vpon the inordinate or immoderate vse of it, plures enim oc∣cidit gula quam gladius, wee shall insist a little in it, first in generall, and next in particulare. Of meats in generall. As good meate engendereth good blood, so evill produceth vitious humors, which causeth diseases. Let vs therefore make choise of the meate, of good substance, of easie dige∣stion, and that hath no abundance of ex∣crements.
The qualities of meate are knowne by their temperament, or by their consi∣stance: meates should not bee neither o∣ver hotte or colde, over drye or moist by nature, nor over fatte nor leane, but keeping the middes. Grosse and viscuous meate causeth obstruction (to these that haue narrow passages) in the liver, milt, neares, and stoppeth the pores of the whole body by a grosse blood, but these who are of a good constitution, and hath the passa∣ges larger may vse of them boldly with∣out hurte, for grosse and viscuous meate nourisheth much, if it bee well digested in the stomack, it agreeth well with la∣bourers whose naturall heate is stirred vp by their exercise, as also these who haue suffered long hunger. Light meate and of subtile substance are not meete to leane people, and of a hote complexion, because being quickly dige∣sted, they intertaine not the body halfe well, but they are sitting for growne, and grosse bodyes, whose passages through the body being straite, are not well aired, also for flegmaticks, and for these who are of a weake stomack.
The reparation of the body ought to be according to the dissipation of the same, wherefore they who are of hote complexi∣on, and worketh much, must eate more than cold dispositions and idle bellyes, who∣soever by over-charging of the stomack giues their naturall heate much to doe, (which is the instrument of nature for nourishing the bodie) they praecipitate themselues willingly in many diseases, wherefore every one should rise from the table with appetite. All varietie of dishes is noysome to the stomack, because that by variety, corruption of meate in the stomack is procured, while as easie digestable meats are mixed with difficile, also men by varietie, which gi∣veth contentment to the tast, are indu∣ced to surfet: but this seemeth vnsavor to the tast, and vnpleasant to the eare of these spycie jacks, who haue no vse all the day over for ten fingers but to fill sixe puddings, (and yet a poore wife will fill sixe score in an houre) whose belly is become like the Britones, who because of his wives insolencie, (that would needs mount her tyme about) and of his owne big belly did apprehend he was with child.
I would have such greasie barrells for their healths sake to take a quarter of an houres course betweene the Castle-hill and Arthurs seate twise in the morning, com∣ming thereafter (if they bee hungrie) to their dinner made vp of an halfe pennie loae, two egges, and a cuppe of small Beere: and after meate, for digestions cause returning to their walke; going to bedde without supper: if this pyning of the panch doeth not make them light, I will haue no money for my medicinall receipt. Let these whose God is their bellie, and guide is their taste (for they inquire still to Iohn Good-Ales house) and who are no lesse nose-wise than a brow∣sters Sowe, in smelling a dish of goode meate a farre off. Diminish both of the quantitie, and qualitie of their dishes, and imparte of the superplus to their needy brother, who is come of Adam accor∣ding to the flesh, aswell as they, and may bee of ABRAHAM according to grace, Christians by profession, and who knoweth but Sanctes by election. Did the Master preferre thee over his house, and goods for the satisfying of thine in∣ordinarie appetite, and thy childrens only?
or to giue the bread of the children to dogges or horse, as our great men doe, rather than to the poore: and shall not thou expect: yea, when the Master com∣meth, get the reward of the vnjust stew∣ard, amend, or looke for it. The supper must bee longer than the dinner, (if the body bee not subject to distillations) because the tyme is longer betweene supper and dinner, than betweene dinner and supper: meate should bee well chawed, or if it bee lett over, for evill chawed meate troubleth the stomack, hence it is, that they who hath many teeth liue long, because they chaw well their meate: light, liquide, and meate easie of digesti∣on, should be taken before grosse meate, and hard of digestion, neverthelesse when the stomack is louse and verïe hungrie, you may doe the contrarie. It is expedient that every one should keepe a certaine houre for taking of meate, and this houre should bee when the sto∣mack requires refreshment, the former in∣gestion being digested, and the stomack emptie: this rule is evill keeped by our morning drinke, (which sometime makes drunke, and so not fitte for dinner) our
foure houres pennie, (that often buyeth a pynt of wyne-seck, I had it never so cheape) our collation after supper made in a three pynt tubbe, (I can not call it a dish) of wyne, milk, suggar, and some spyces, I would content mee with it all the day long. This much in generall, followeth in par∣ticulare to speake of meate, and first of bread. Of Bread. Bread keepeth the first ranke amongst all other meate, as the ground of others, for all other meate (though never so good) are without it vnpleasant, yea vnwholsome. The best bread is that which is made of wheate, good wheate is grosse, full, thick, weightie, firme, of collour yallow, cleane, and that hath great quantitie of flower. Bread made of pure flower, well boul∣ted, nourisheth much in litle quantitie, but it is of slow digestion. Bread made of the bran or clattes nou∣risheth little, and filleth the body with excrements, and because the bran hath an detersile facultie, it goeth quickly throgh. Bread made of both nourisheth well, and keepeth an open belly.
Ry bread is black, heavie, engendring melancholious blood, more proper for ru∣sticks than burgesses. Barley bread is very dry, of little nou∣rishment, and louseth the belly: beare meale is better mixed with ry meale, that the viscuositie of the one may be corrected by the brtitlenesse of the other. As for oate bread it is more vsed amongst vs than the goodnesse of it doth require. Bread vnleavened nourisheth much, but it engendereth grosse blood, it is of an e∣vill digestion, breedeth obstructions, and louseth the belly. Evill wrought bread is viscuous, of evil digestion, as also that which is made of grumly or troubled watter, when it hath not gotten eneugh of the fire, it is heavy and of hard digestion, that which is hard∣ned in the oven is better than that which is hardned on the ashes. Hote bread by reason of the viscositie is hard to digest, procureth an inflation in the stomack, obstruction in liver, and other parts within the body. Old bread of three or foure dayes los∣seth all the taste, becommeth dry and wi∣thered, evill to digest, of slow passage, bin∣deth
the belly, and engendreth a melan∣cholious blood. The crust of bread breeds bile, fit on∣ly for these whose stomack is moist and humid: Tairtes, flammes, pyes; and all other sort of baken meate, are more to the satisfying of the tast than for health of the body, for they are heavie in the stomack, and burdeneth it, and stoppeth easily the passages of the veines in the liver. Of Flesh. Beasts according to the varietie of their kynd, age, manner of living, constitution of body, and of the place where they feade, are different in the temperature and vertue of their flesh. The flesh of fatte beasts is better than that of leane, and of libbed than vnlibbed, because they are fatter, and not so hote, except it bee for these who hath beene in the battell where the vppermost gote the worst, where stricking at their nigh∣bour with over great force, and too good will, hath hurt themselues with their owne speare, for such some say, that a kynd of vnlibbed beastes are good: yea, the stones themselues. The flesh of young beasts, because ten∣der,
moist, soft and easie to digest, and of great nourishment, is better than that of old beastes, which is dry, hard, of li∣tie meate, and hard to digest. The wild beastes that keepe the hilles are dry, and haue fewer excrements, and leanner then others: Galen. preferreth the flesh of porks, of a midde age to other beasts, because it draweth neere to mans flesh than others doe, and also because it nourisheth well, and breedeth good blood, but because it is viscuous, it is hard to digest to these that hath the stomack moist, and humide: Moreover, as experience hath taught, the great vse of this flesh causeth leprosie: hence it was forbidden to the Iewes, because they were subject to this maladie. Beefe nouisheth much, but it engende∣reth a grosse melancholick blood: young beefe is better than old: Harts flesh is of a difficile digestion, and as the beefe ingendereth grosse blood. The goates flesh is better than the bucks and the kiddes than the goates. Lambs flesh is better than Yewes, and Wedders than Lambs, because as nou∣rishing, and not so humide and slubbrye,
the Rammes is the worst of all. Old haires flesh causeth melancholious blood: young haires is better and more pleasant: the Coney is better than either of them. Of Fowles. Amongst the Fowles that are about the house, the Hen and Capons keepeth the first rank, they engender a blood of a me∣diocre substance, because they are neither too hote nor too cold: Chickins are more delicate than they. The Brissell-fowles are heavy and hard to digest, wherefore in France they are both larded and spyced. The Gouse aboundeth in superfluous ex∣crements, is of harder digestion than other sowles, except the wings. The Duckes, and all other water oules is humide, viscuous, flegmatick, excre∣mentitious, and of adure digestion, where∣fore they are not so wholesome, as these of the land. Amongst the birds of the field the Partridge beares the bell, being of easie digestion, and causing good blood, and the younger are better than the elder. Next the Partridge is the phesane al∣most of the same qualities that it is, the Quallies are not lesse praised, except in
the countries where there is abundance of hellebore, whereon they commonly feade, they are best in harvest. The Doues are hote of nature, they set the blood on fire: and readily of Venus games moues a desire, vnfitte for these who readily doe fall into a fever: The Pi∣geons are better than the doues, the doues are best in the spring, for they eate much corne. The Coushins flesh is hard to digest, yet it is not evill in the winter, if it bee suffered to hang a while, so that it may become tender. The Turd or Cuzell is delicious ingen∣dring good blood, but some thing hard to digest: Martiall extolleth it highly in these wordes, Inter aeves Turdus si quis me judice certet, Inter quadrupedes gloria prima lepus. Pluvers, mearls, turturelles, are not to bee rejected, for the former laudable qua∣lities, which are to bee found in them. Of Egges and Milke. The egges of hennes and phasanes ex∣cels the egges of other beasts, gouse egges are worst of all, except swynes egges. New laide are better than old, and sodden than fryed, and rosted than sodden,
and potched than rosted, the soft than the hard. Milke hath three diverse substances, a serious or watrie, whereof is the whey a thicke and grosse whereof is the cheese, and a fatte and creamie, whereof is the butter: but of our Edinburgh milke where the two parte is water, and the third part milke, there would bee little cheese and no butter. Milke if the stomack bee cleane the body whole, and no other meate mixed with it, nourisheth much, otherwayes it corrupteth easily and quickly. Yew milke hath more of the grosse & thicke substance, whereof the cheese is made, then of the other, and by this means it is nourishing, but heavie to the stomack. Asses milke is of contrare con∣sistance, kyne milke is thicker and fatter then yew milke, and so fitter to make butter, it is nourishing and makes an o∣pen bellie. Goate milke is neither too thicke nor too thinne, neither over fatte nor over leane, and so it keepeth the middle betuixt extremities, neverthelesse it should not bee vsed, either without suggar or hony,
water or salt least it lapper in the stomack. Womens milke is fittest for bairnes or hectickes, because of the resemblance of nature. New milked milke is best, because milk changeth quickly. Sodden milke nourisheth more than raw, but it is binding because thicker. Milke of fatte and lustie beasts is bet∣ter than of leane and hungred. Fresh butter is a little hote, with time it becommeth hotter, it is not verie nou∣rishing, but it softeneth and louseth the bellie, it is good for the lights and breast. Cheese is not to bee much vsed, for it ingendereth grosse humors, breedeth obstructions, binds the bellie, and is hard to digest, the new is better then the old, the soft then the hard, and that which is made of vnrained milke is better than of rained. Over viscous cheese, as also over brit∣tle, is not good, mediocritie is best, cheese without any evill or strong taste is bet∣ter than other. Newe, softe, and sweete cheese, is of a colde and humide temper, but the old, hard, salt cheese, is hote and dry, too
great vse of it ingenders the stone in the neares. This curious sifting of the nature of cheese, and improbation of the great vse of it, will seeme first ridiculous and then odious to the mourish men of Kyle and Galloway, the quintessence of whose meat (that is milke) is cheese, the which the goodman hath keeped for his owne mouth as a desert, (being neverthelesse at break∣fast, supper and dinner, the first, last, and only dish) and for the Lairds, or the wyse blacke men, the Ministers, when they come abrode: the bairnes contented with froth, crap-whey, or lapperd milke, I thinke that if the bodies of these bodies, were chymicallie dissolved: the princips to wit: sal. sulphur. and mercurius, should savour of cheese, milke, and yet they are as daft as if they were made of Wine and Wastels, which they often speake of, as the rarest dainties they either saw or hard of. Of Fish. Fish are of complexion cold and hu∣mide, for being still in the water they must needs keepe the nature of the water, the ouritute they giue is more light, slub∣rie, and sooner dissipate, than the repa∣ration,
which is made by the vse of the beasts of the land. The fish that are of a solide and firme substance are most nou∣rishing and wholesome, because lesse fleg∣matick, for this cause sea-fish because fi∣mer are better than fresh-water-fish, a∣mongst the fishes of the sea, these that vseth about rockes are best. Amongst the fresh water fishes these that haunt the rivers are better than these that haunt the stancks or loches: and fish of a running river, and craggie, with clear water, is to bee preferred to them that are taken in a dead running poole, or in a troubled muddie water. Fish as milk would bee eaten, when the stomack is cleane of filthie humours, and they would not bee mixed with other meate, least they corrupt, as quickly they will. The drowners of meale with malt, to whom the bone of a herring, or a threed of salt beefe will serue to bee kitchin to a quarte of ale, sayes, that fish should swimme, I answere, in water: but if thou take more of aile, beere, or wyne, or a∣ny other strong drink then serues to wash it downe, it will come aboue the broth,
and so not boile well. I will not insist in the particulare enu∣meration, least it should reduce the Lector to a tedious calculation: the generalls may suffice, if they be well remarked: It may be thought a praeposterous order this, to put the flesh before the kaill, but heere I keepe ordinem dignitatis, non methodum sa∣nitatis. Of herbs fit for eating. Herbes in regarde of other meate are of little nurishment, yet they serue some for cooling, others for heating, being pre∣pared in broth, sallads, sauce, or other wayes. Amongst the herbs that are commonly vsed, the lactuce is the first, beeing of more wholesome sappe than all the rest, it cooleth the body, procureth sleepe, and hindereth dreames. The garden Cicorie is of the same qua∣lities, but it is not so pleasant to the tast, nor of such good sappe. The Souroke is good for eating, because of the sowrnesse, it quencheth thirst, pro∣cureth appetite, and mitigateth the heate of the stomack and liver. Purpie cooleth much, quencheth thirst, holdeth downe Venus, tempereth the teeth, being out of stile, by the vse of soure things.
Kaill ingendereth evill blood, troubleth the stomack, and the sight, and moveth strange dreames. Spinards ouseth the belly, and moisteth the body, but they are windie. Bourrage and buglosse purifieth the blood and keepeth the belly open, their owrs are good in a sallad, for to refresh the spi∣rits, and rejoyce the heart. Artichocks heateth the blood, and pro∣voketh Venus to battell, they are good for the stomack, and giveth appetite. Cresson is of qualitie hote and dry, pro∣voketh vrine, and is eaten ordinarly raw in sallads. Menth fortifieth the stomack, and helpeth the appetite. Cerefole and Finkle is good for the sight, augmenteth the seede, and ingendereth milk to Nurses. Parsley is agreeable to the stomack, and profitable to the neares, because it is diuretick. Sauge helpeth ap∣petite, and digesteth crudities out of the stomack. Hysope purgeth the lights from the flegme, by the subtilitie of it: thyme doth the same. Rayfords taken after meate helpeth digestion, but before meate they lift vp the meate in the stomack, Neeps are windie, of little nurishment,
and engendreth wormes in little bairnes, little, are better than the great, they should bee eaten with pepper. Carrets, are worse than they, Sybouse, Onyons, Leeks are agreable to pituitous and flegmatick per∣sons, but noysome to cholerians, and to these who are subject to a sore head. But I think wee haue eaten long enengh without a drink, let vs now goe to it. Of drinke in generall. Drink, as I think (and so thinks the drunkard) is no lesse worthie of conside∣ration for the health than meate. There bee sundrie sorts of drinke vsed among vs. as wine, ale, and beere, for no man drin∣keth water with his will. Drinke should bee answerable in pro∣portion to our meate, for if wee drinke more than serves to syne downe the meat, and mixe it there downe, the meat will swimme aboue, and so shall not digest: drink may bee taken more larglie with dry solide meat, than with liquid humide. They who haue a hote liver, and a weake head, subject to distillations should abstaine from strong drinke, chiefly after their meat, but these whose liver is tem∣perate, and head strong may take a lick
of the best, quale Deus creavit, after their fruite, quia post crudum merum. It is not good to drink with a naked stomack, for presently it runneth through the body to the nerues, whom it debili∣tateth, and maketh the body the more subject to cold diseases, as the goute, paralyse, trembling, and such like: It is al∣so troublesome to the digestion to drinke betweene mealles, for it hindereth the same, as water in a pot, stayeth the boy∣ling of it: because while the concoction is making in the stomack, the mouth of it is closed: hence is it that men much subject to companionry, and so to extraordinary drin∣king, findeth their meate still rowing vp and downe, some for their ease are for∣ced to cast it: It is not good to drink when bed-time draweth neere, for readily it mo∣veth the theume to fall downe, except it were of water after too much wine, ei∣at supper, or before, and that to hinder distillations. It followeth to speake in par∣ticulare of drink, and first of wine, as best. Of Wine. Wine is verie profitable for the vse of man, it stirreth vp the naturall heate and fortifyeth it, and so procureth the appetite,
helpeth the digestion, ingenders good blood, purifies the troubled, openeth the passages, giues good colour, cleanseth the braine, sharpeneth the witte, makes the spirits subtile, and rejoyceth the heart of man, as sayeth the Psalmist, if so be it be taken moderatly. Wine is of fiue fold difference, the first is taken from the colour, so it is either whyte or red, yallow or tannie, and black: the second from the taste, as it is either sweet, sowre, or of any austere taste: the third of the smell being of a sweet, hea∣vie, or no smell: the fourth from the con∣sistance, being either subtile or grosse: the fifth, from the age, as it is old or new: Of all wine the red and thicke wine is meetest for the ingendring of blood; next blackish, grosse, and sweet wine, to them succeeds whyte and thick, or grosse wine in substance and austere in taste, last of all whyte thin small wine: Wine as it is agreeable to phlegmaticks, so it is hurtfull to bilious hote natures, over old, and too new wine should be eshewed, the one because too hote, the other because no heate at all. The second drink is beere, which as it nourisheth more, so is of a grosser substance
and harder digestion, than the wine, if it bee but new made or troubled, it cau∣seth obstructions, and swellings, it trou∣bleth the head, moveth the colick, gravell, and difficultie of pissing, specially if it bee byting, if it bee too old and very sharpe it hurts the stomack, and nerves, and ingenders evill blood, wherefore it is best that is well sodden, purified, and cleare and of a middle age. Of Water. Although that water bee the most sim∣ple sorte of drink, and the most common, yet because of least worth it is put be∣hinde. Galen. proues good water by three sen∣ses, by the sight, being cleare and cleane, by the mouth, that hath no strange taste, and so not bitter nor sowre nor salt, but almost without taste, & by the nose that it hath no smell, adding thereto that it must be light in the bellie, suddainly changed, that is, soone hote soone cold, and that it doth not passe through sulphureous mynes or such∣lyke. There bee fiue sorts of water, to wit of raine, fountaine, river, well, and stank. Raine water although according to the
weight it bee lightest, yet it is not the best, being made of the vapours which doeth proceed from the earth, whereof some be of the rivers, others of loches, stanks, gut∣ters, standing waters, and of the sea, as also of the exhalations of pestilent places and of dead bodies. Fountaine water is best of all, next ri∣ver water, last Well water, the worst of all, is stank water, river water is the better it stand till it settle, fountaine wa∣ter the better it looke to the East, and Well water that the Well bee not too often covered, but that it get the aire sometimes. Canon. 6. After meate abstaine from all vehe∣ment motion or exercise, all curious dis∣puts or carefull meditations, discoursing of some good purpose, procuring laughter, joy, and mirth, whereby the spirit may be revived, and the digestion helped. If the great men of the country knew what good these sort of discourses did for the health of the body, and the recreating of the spi∣rit, they would with greater avidity drink in, in their young and tender yeares letters, for the better fashioning of their manners
and forming of their minde. And also cary a greater respect to Schollers then they doe: and not studie only to be well versed in Arcadia, for the intertaining of Ladies, or in the rowting of the tolbuith, for commoning with Lawers. So that they esteeme more of a Page of the one, or a pok-bearer of the other, then of any Sho∣ler whatsoever, except my Lord Bishop, or Mr. Parson: this frowning of our Greats hath moved many poore soules flee first to Dowy, and then to Rome, and from thence post to hell: having receaued the marke of the beast that is a bull of his holynesse to passe Scot-free at Purgatorie, not being able to procure the favourable presence, or gratious asistance of any noble for his furtherance in studyes and advance∣ment in degrees, in the countrie wherein hee was borne. O what a shame it is to see a great Man without Letters! Hee is like a faire house without plenishing, a goodlie ship without furnishing to persue or defend: a Herauldry without honour, beeing lesse reall than his title. His vertue is, that hee was his fathers sonne, and all the ex∣pectation of him, is to get an other. No
man is kept in ignorarance more, both of himselfe and men, for hee heareth no∣thing but flatterie, and vnderstandeth no∣thing but folly; thus hee liveth till his Tombe bee made ready, and then is a graue statue to posteritie. Thus it is ex∣pedient to passe two or three houres after dinner, for the well both of the bodie and minde: that you may know this the better and so belieue it the rather: Con∣sider with mee alittle the passions of the minde, such as joye, sadnesse, choler, and feare. Of the Passions of the minde. Although wee bee often deceived in the decerning of good and evill, follow∣ing ofter the applause of the sense, than the judgment of reason, neverthelesse wee seeke alwayes that which wee thinke be good, and fleeth that which we apprehend to bee evill. Hence it is, that wee are moved by diverse passions vnruled, ac∣cording to the apprehension of good, or evill, either present or absent; the which passions according to the consideration of the object either enlargeth or draweth in the heart, in the moving thereof, they moue also the spirits and naturall heate,
so that the colour of the face is suddain∣ly changed. From the opinion of present good a∣riseth joye, and of the good to come, de∣sire, vnto the which choler doth adjoyne the selfe, which is a desire of revenge, from the apprehension of present evill commeth sadnesse, and of the evill future, feare. Ioy comes of the heart inlarging the selfe sweetly, for to imbrace the object that is agreable to it, in the which dila∣tation, it sendeth foorth aboundance of the naturall heate with the blood, and the spirits, a great portion whereof comes to the face when one laugheth, by the which the face swels vp, in such sort, that the brow becomes tight and cleare, the eyes bright, the cheecks red. An other part is sent through the members of the body. Cupiditie or desire, and choler, doeth dilate or inlarge the heart also, that, through the desire of the thing it loueth, this, for to sed quickly, the spirits with the blood from the centre of the body within, to the habite of the same without: for the fortifying of the members that they may reveng the wrong wee haue received.
Sadnesse, greife, or melancholy, in the contrare doth in such sort, shoote vp or draw together the heart, that it fadeth and faileth: This hindreth the great gene∣ration of the spirits, as also the distribu∣tion of these few, that are ingendred, whereby the vitall facultie is weakened and also the rest of the whole bodie shirps. Feare causeth retire on a suddaintie the spirits to the heart from the rest of the bodie, hence the face becommeth pale, the extremities grow colde with a trem∣bling through all, the voyce is stopped, the heart leapeth as it were, & that by reason of the great multitude of the blood and spi∣rits, whereby it is almost smothered, so that it cannot move freelie. Amongst all the passions of the mind oy is the most wholesome, because it gi∣veth such contentment to the spirit, that the body is participant by a simpathy. The reasonable passions are called affecti∣ons, but the sensuall are termed perturba∣tions: the passions ought to bee modera∣ted, for Plato writeth in his dialogue, called Carmides, that the most dangerous diseases proceede from the perturbation of the spirit, because the mynde having
an absolute authority over the body, doth moue, change, and alter it in a moment, as it pleaseth. Wee should then affection the objects in so far as reason will permite: for ex∣cessible joyes doe so disperse the blood, with the spirits through the whole body, from the centre to the extremities, that the heart is wholly destitute of his naturall heate, from whence commeth first a soun∣ding, and by and by death, of excessible joy, the Poete Phillippides, the wise Chi∣lon, Diagoras of Rhode suddenly dyed: And suddaine feare chassing the blood and spi∣rites to the heart their fortresse, frequent∣ly causeth death, by the suffocation of the naturall heate. Canon 8. About the sixt houre the stomack re∣quiring, returne to meate, let your supper consist rather of rost meate than sodden, because it nurisheth more, in lesse bounds, it is lighter, and hath fewer excrements: it should neither be too sore rosted, (for then it is saplesse,) nor yet halfe rosted, for the superfluous humiditie is not dri∣ven out by the force of the fire. Heere I can not passe by a great vn∣cleannesse
of Noble mens cooks, who af∣ter that they haue sweeped the pot with the one end of their aprone, and the plat with the other, they draw off my Lords meate with the whole, dirtie as it is: and for to make place to a new speet, placeth the same vnder the droppings of the vn∣rosted meate, interlarding their owne grease amongst these droppings: and yet the cooke dare not bee reproved, for he in his kit∣chin is like the devill in hell, curses is the very dialect of his calling, hee is ne∣ver good Christian vntill a hizzing pot of aile hath slaicked him, like water cast on a fire-brand, and for that time hee is silent: his best facultie is at the dresser, where hee seemeth to haue great skill in military discipline, while hee placeth in the fore-front meates more strong and har∣dy, and the more cold and cowardly in the reare, as quaking tarts, and quivering custards, and such milk-sope dishes, which escape many tymes the fury of encounter, and when the second course is gone vp, downe hee goeth vnto the celler, where hee drinks and sleeps till foure of the clocke in the after-noone, and then retur∣neth againe to his regiment.
Canon 9. After supper it is expedient to walke a little softly, for the procuring of the discent of the meate to the ground of the stomack: this walke ought to be in plea∣sant fields, free of all vnwholesome vapor, which may procure vomite by the viru∣lencie, or the filthinesse of the smell: and seeing this after supper doth permitte mee to visite the fields, and take the air, come foorth yee also who loue your health, and consider the same with mee. Of the Aire. Such as the aire is such are our spirits, our humours, our blood, and our mem∣bers: for by, that it furnisheth matter and nouriture to our spirits, it passeth so quick∣ly through the body, that it printeth pre∣sently the qualities wherewith it is indu∣ed in the parts of the same, and therefore there is nothing able to change more short∣ly the body than it; so that from the con∣stitution of the aire, the good or evill dis∣position of the spirits, humors, and mem∣bers almost doe depend, we should there∣fore haue a speciall respect of the same. For to vnderstand the goodnesse of the aire, wee would not only consider the first
qualities of it, whereof two are actiue, to wit, heate and cold: and two passiue, humiditie, and drynesse; but also the second qualities, taken from the substance, as grosse, or subtile, pure or mistie, cleare or dark: wee may adde to these the qualities that flow from the state of it, as constancie, and mutabilitie, equalitie and inequalitie. A good air then hath no excesse in the qualities, that is, neither too hote nor cold, moist nor dry: if it exceede this measure, it is better to decline to drouth than to waknesse, for drouth is still more whole∣some than raine: It is also of a mediocre sub∣stance betweene grosse and subtile, being pure and neate, cleare and light, constant and equall: such an aire reviues the spi∣rits, purifieth the blood, procureth appe∣tite, helpeth the digestion, banisheth the excrements foorth of the body in good tyme, coloureth the face, rejoyceth the heart, quickneth the senses, sharpneth the wit, and fortifieth the members, so that all the actions of the body animals, vi∣tals, and naturals are made better by it. A suddaine change in the aire is evill, but especially if it changeth from great hu∣miditie and waknesse, to great heate or
cold, for the raine having filled the body with humores, the following heate doth putrifie them, or the cold hindring their exhalation doth procure their corruption. A contaminate aire with filthy exhala∣tions, arysing from standing waters, dead carcases, middings, gutters, closets, and the filth of the streets, (all which if any where are to bee found heere, which ar∣gueth a great oversight of the magistrats, bringeth a great hurt to the inhabitants, and a great good to the Physitians, Apo∣thecaries, and bel-man) corrupteth the spi∣rits, and humors, and engedereth often a deadly contagion or pest. High places (as hilles) are fittest for the morning-walke, because the sun bea∣ting on them, first doth dry vp the va∣pours thereof; but low wallyes in midowes and about fountaines are most proper for the evening. If Gallants! the health and well-fare of your body, and the care of the felicitie e∣ternall of your soule doth not worke in thee a detest irreconcilable of drinking this tyme, which would be spent in wholesome walkes, and holy conferences, let shame deterre you: For what I pray you is a
drunken man, hee is one that hath let goe himselfe from the hold and stay of reason, and lyeth open to the mercie of all ten∣tations, no lust but finds him disarmed, and fencelesse, and with the least assault entereth, every man seeth him, as Cham saw his father, the first of this sinne, an vncovered man: and though his garment bee on, yet hee is vncovered, the secree∣test partes of his soule lying in the nakedest manner visible, all his passions come out, all his vanities, and these shamefuller hu∣mours, which discretion clotheth, his bo∣dy becommeth at last like a myrie way, where the spirits are clogged, and can not passe: hee is a blind man with eyes, and creeple with legges: Tobacco serues to aire him after a washing, and is his only breath: in a word, hee is a man to morrow-mor∣ning, but is now what yee will make him. And should our gallants bee drunke? the chiefe burthen of whose braine is the car∣riage of their body, and setting of their face in a good frame, which they per∣forme the better, because they are not di∣stracted with other meditations, whose outside when yee haue seene, you haue looked through them, yet they are some∣thing
more than the shape of a man, for they haue length, bredth, and colour, their pick-tooth beareth a great part of their discourse, so doth their body; the vpper parts whereof are as starcht as their lin∣nen: they are never serious but with the Tayler, when they are in conspiracie for the next device: they are furnished with jests, as some wanderer with sermons, some three for all congregations, one e∣specially against the Scholler, whom these ignorant ruffians know by no other defi∣nition but sillie fellow in black, they haue stayed in the world as cyphers to fill vp the number, and when they are gone, there lacketh none, and there is an end. Canon 10. When the stomack is lightned of the burden of meate about three or foure houres after supper, goe to rest, and sleepe: and because a great part of our life is spended in sleeping and lying, wee shall make a little digression for its cause. Of Sleepe. Sleepe giveth rest to the facultie ani∣mall, and vigour to the naturall: for when the spirits animales are dissipate by labour, then sleepe seaseth on vs, through the meanes
of the naturall heate, which in the dige∣stion of the meate, sends vp vapours to the head, the which being condensed, and turned in a grosser substance by the cold∣nesse of the braine, doth stoppe incontinent the passages of the spirits whereby the body is moved. Sleepe ought to be quy∣et, profound, and of moderate length: for sleepe troubled with dreames, or so light, that little sturre doth awake, or hinder it, is not good, long sleepe is worst of all, for it hindereth the evacuation of the ex∣crements, gathereth abundance of super∣fluities, maketh the head, and the whole body heavie and drowsie, the spirits dull, senses stupide, and the members lazie. Sleepe should bee continued while the digestion bee absolved, which in some is sooner, in others latter: neverthelesse it is commonly ended in six, seven, or eight houres, when the digestion is perfite, then the belly doth the duetie, the water is golden coloured, the stomack is not ben∣ded with wind nor troubled with evill smel∣ling rifts, the body is nimble and quicke. Choleriks should sleepe more than phleg∣maticks, that their body by sleepe may be made moist: bairnes and old men, theu
young men or of middle age, the one to hinder thee to fast dissipation of their flux∣ile and humide body, through the open pores, the other for the helping of his di∣gestion: after great varietie, and much meate, sleepe should be longer than at other tymes, as also after heavie labour, and long travell. In your lying, the head, shoul∣ders, and the vpper part of the body should bee higher than the rest, that the meate regorge not to the mouth of the stomack: It is not good to ly on the back, for by that posture the neires are made too apte to the making of gravell or stones: the veine caue, and the great arterie, which doe leane on the loines, made warme, sends vp many vapors to the head, and the excrements of the head, that should bee evacuate by the nose and the mouth falleth downe the back, it will doe no harm to ly sometimes on the bellie, for help∣ing the digestion, if the eyes bee not sor or weake: The first sleepe should be on the right side, that your meate may goe downe to the ground of the stomack, that the liver, lying as it were vnder it, may serue for a chouffer to it, to helpe the concoction, then turne to the left sid
that the vapors gathered in the stomack may exhale, and in end returne to the right side, that the digestion being made, the chile may bee the more easilie send to the liver, and so distribute through the whole bodie. The members, the time of sleepe, should not bee straight, but some thing drawne in, for the rest of all the mus∣cules consists in a moderate contraction. It is not good to sleepe with an emptie stomack, or after any heavie, or sore worke for the bodie is thereby dryed, and becom∣meth leane. And because procreation is a thing most necessarie for the preserving of mankynde, I cannot passe by heere, but I must speake of it, seing things remarkable in it. Of Generation. Nature carefull of the owne conserva∣tion, so it perish not, hath given vnto everie creature for this end a certaine desire of eternitie, the which not being able to bee attained to, in the person of singulare things, it doth obtaine it by pro∣pagation. Therefore the elements are pre∣served by the mutuall change of one in an other: the mettalles by addition or op∣position, the living creatures by genera∣tion:
The generation of living creatures is by the seede of both male and female, vnited in the matrix of the female, fo∣stered and made fertile in some kynd, by the good disposition of the same: so that for procreation there is required the seede of both, at one tyme ejaculat, or soone after: A matrix of a moderate temper, neither too hote, nor too cold; too moist, nor too dry: As also a convenient tyme of copulation, the which is, after the three concoctions are ended, and this tyme is about the latter end of the second sleepe, so that thereafter the body be refreshed by a little slumber, and that for the repara∣tion of the spirits dissipate: The immo∣derate vse of this naturall exercise doth weaken the body, and hinder all genera∣tion, and the inordinate doth procreate weake and vnable birth, by reason of the seede which is not eneugh fined, or ela∣borate: this appeareth clearely in the re∣marke of Burges, and Countrey-mens bairnes: the one, to wit, the burges be∣ing begotten in the fore-night, while the father his spirits was lifted vp, and mo∣ved to such worke, by the vse of strong wine, spyceries, and other hote meate
being weakly: The other to wit, the Countrey-mans child being of a strong con∣stitution, while as the father wearyed by his dayly labour, doth delay his dallying till the morning, t vbi aliquamdiu indulsit Veneri, vxor ne ingrata videretur, ait Deus benedicat relliquijs. Now as the CREATOR did finish his worke after mans creation, so heere I at mans gene∣ration, beseeching thee, my Lord and my GOD, who made all things perfect in the beginning, and man the most perfect of all: casting all vnder his feete, to teach him his perfection by creation, and his dignitie by high vocation, that hee may cary him∣selfe conforme to the one, perfitly, shun∣ning all base deboshing of that divine impression of the Majestie supreme, And for the other, thankefully in serving thee his Lord with all, whereof thou made him Lord, and honouring thee in the ordinate taking, and moderate vsing of all these thy creatures, AMEN.
A PARTICVLARE REGIMENT ACCOR∣DING TO THE COM∣PLEXION, AGE, AND REASON. NOT having thought it sufficient for the preserving of health, to haue spoken in generall, least any thing should seeme deficient, I haue parti∣cularized some generals diversified accor∣ding to the varietie of the temperature age and season, and first of the temperature. Of temperature or complexion in generall. Complexion is a proportion of the first foure elementarie qualities, made fit for the naturall functions: the which is either temperate or intemperate: A temperature temperate, is a harmonie of the foure first elementarie qualities justly mixed for the perfect acting of all the functions of the body: An intemperate is, where there is al∣way some qualitie or other surpassing, the
rest, of the which there bee eight sortes foure simple; where onlie one qualitie ex∣ceeds the rest, as heate, or cold, and foure composed where there bee two qualities excessiues, as heate and drynesse, cold and waknesse together: These are either na∣turail, as when they hinder not manifestly the actions of the bodie: or vitious, when as they exceed so, that they hinder the same. A temperate complexion should bee keeped by the lyke, and the intemperate corrected by the contrare, as the hote, by cold: the dry, by moist. Of sanguineans. From the varietie of the complexions, floweth the varietie of humours, for the temperament makes humours lyke to the selfe, so if it bee verie temperate, it pro∣duceth perfect temperate blood, and so it subjects all the rest of the humours to the same, if the complexion be hote and humide, it filleth the body with blood, too hote and humide, so being hote and dry, it bredeth bile, cold and wake, phleg∣me, and when it is cold and dry, melan∣cholie. A temperate sanguinean bodie is of a
ediocre grosnesse, moderate in heate and umiditie, neither too hard, nor yet too soft, f good colour, mixed of red and white, he haire some-what yallow and curling, ll the members proportionable, the spi∣it is gentle, judgement good, manners weete, disposition merry, carriage modest, ill, free and liberall, so that they are braue n person, discreete, wise, peaceable, honest, overs of knowledge, courteous, gratious, ffectioners of dames, mirth, pastime, and good cheere: and because they keepe (as  were) the middes betweene the ex∣reames, they are not readily sicke. Sanguineans then of a temperate comple∣xion should flee all excesse in any thing, and every thing that is of an excessiue qualitie. Sanguineans intemperate are fleshy, rud∣ie, have great veines & arteries, of difficile respiration, the body is heavy and often weary with little labour, the spirit simple, given rather to sottish follies than to seri∣ous affaires, they are subject to many dis∣eases, proceeding from the inflammation of the blood, as fevers, flegmones, fluxe of blood, and such like: they should keepe a verie straite dyet, vse cold and dry things, for the correcting the intemperancie of the
body, as in their broth, sicorie, surocks lactuces, and the like, drinking of water aile, or beere, little wyne, moderate ex∣ercise, much sleepe hurteth, to preveene diseases phlebotomie is expedient. Of Cholericks. Cholericks hath a leane body, thin and hoarie, dry and hard, the veines and ar∣ters great, the colour yallow, pale, or brown, the haire red or blackish, the spirit quick, subtile, hastie: the judgment light, vari∣able; the cariage inconstant, the courage martiall, so they be nimble in body, prompt in spirit, hastie in all their actions, vehe∣ment in their affections, impatient, soone angrie, and soone pleased, ingenious in invention; but proude, bold, impudent, vanters, scorners, crastie, vindictiues, quar∣relous, rash, and vndescreete, vnfit to beare charge eithe in state or warre, as vnable to indure heate, hunger, travell, watching, and other incommodities of warre, their sleepe is short and troubled. They should keepe themselues out of the sunne in an aire cold and humide, vsing cold refreshing meates, as by the forena∣med herbs, fruites cold or sodden, barly, prunes, melons, cucumbers, and to sause
their meat, either boyld, or rosted with he juce of grenads, oranges, and cytrons, r verjus, they ought to eate much, and ften, to vse little wine, moderate exer∣ise, eshewing the excesse of Venus, anger r wrath, and all deepe meditation. Of Melancholicks. The predominant humours in the body, giveth still the name to the complexion, o they in whom through their cold and dry temperature, melancholie aboundeth, are called melancholicks: such are of a bo∣dy, cold, dry, rude, without haire, having straite veines and arteres, the colour is browne or blackish, the countenance sad or trist. Among all the complexions that are intemperate, there is none to be preferred to the melancholick, provyding it con∣teine it selfe within the tearmes of health: for of all men the melancholicks are fit∣test to carrie charge, the sanguineans are given to their pleasure: The bilious ha∣ving their head full of quick silver, they lack judgement and deliberation: The pi∣tuitous are so lumpish, that they care for nothing but to haue their back at the fire: and the bellie at the table: so melancholicks
are of all most fit: First, because they doe their bussinesse with due deliberation: Se∣condly: because they are quyet and not babblers or talkatiues, doing their af∣faires without dinne: 3. because so∣litarie and retired, so that their spirits not being distracted, they may thinke on their affaires the better, taking greater pleasure in the profound meditation of serious busi∣nesse, than in idle toyes. 4. Because they seeme sad in companie, not taking plea∣sure in gaming, laughing, fooling or in idle spending of the time, and yet they liue verie contented, when they are where they may recreat their spirits, not having any thing, affords them greater content∣ment, than to moderate their meditations, and to be imployed in serious matters, (it is agreable to all men in authoritie, to haue a graue countenance and some∣what severe) 5. Because they are fearefull when they see any danger, not willing rashlie either to hazard their lyfe, honour, or estate, so they interprise nothing light∣ly. 6. Because constant in their opinions, words, and deads, for having past any thing thorow the alembick of reason they cannot bee brangled 7. Because slow to
wrath as also to be appeased, except it be those who hath beene first bilious, and now are melancholicks, they will haue some shorte fittes, smelling of their for∣mer disposition. 8. Because they are com∣monlie good husbands, and doth not spend their goods idlely. 9. Because they are couragious, respecting their honour aboue all things. They should flee the aire that is grosse and thick, choising the subtile and cleare, shunning also meates that are viscuous, windie, grosse, melancholick, and of hard digestion, choosing the flesh of Veilles, muttons, kiddes, capons, partridges, and of young beastes, rejecting the old, vsing boyl∣led meate often, with burrage, buglosse, endiue cichorie, but no cabbage, beattes, neippes, oynions, sybouse, and no bitter, or sharpe byting herbs, as also no beanes and pease: their drink should bee white wine, or cleare fyne beare, moderat exercise, and pleasant games: long watching is noysome, sound sleeping wholesome, their belly still should bee keeped open. Of Flegmaticks. Flegmaticks are of colour white or gray∣ish, their face bowden or swelled in some
kynd, the body growne, soft, & cold to the touch, without haire, the veines and ar∣teres straite, the haire white, the spirit lumpish, and stupide, so they are slowe, sweere, heavy, cowards, sluggish, sleepie, subject to destillations, vomiting or spi∣ting of flegme, colick, hydropsie, and o∣ther sicknesse proceeding from flegme. They must make choyse of hote, & dry things which may correct their intem∣perate complexion, as the aire hote and dry, such lyke meats of the same qualities, their bread of good flower, well hard∣ned, mixed with a little salt and annise, their flesh rather rost than boyld, be∣ing of easie digestion, and few excrements, as capons, pigeons, partridgs, young co∣nies, and kiddes, and birdes of the field, fleeing these of the river, as also swyne flesh, lambe flesh, and Veilles, with all boyld meate, all fish, all sort of milk. Herbs, hote, as sauge, menth, marjoline, hysope, thym, rosmarie, and the like are to bee vsed, but cold as lattuces, and pourpie to bee refused, they should combe well their head in the morning, rubbing it with their necke, striving to purge the head of a the excrements: too long sleepe is naugh
for them, and alwayes while they sleepe, looke they keepe the head and feet warme. The change of dyet accor∣ding to the age. It is a thing most sure, that although man should doe all that is required for the keeping of his temperament na∣turall, yet hee cannot stay alwayes in one estate without alteration; hee is first by na∣ture hote and humide, yet with tyme the heate and naturall moyst is so diminished, that in end hee becommeth cold and dry: so that by processe of tyme, the body of it selfe doth change. The Physitians look∣ing to the most sensible changes, hath di∣vided the lyfe of man in fiue parts: infan∣cie, bairnly age, youth, middle age, and olde age. The infancie is hote and humide of com∣plexion, but the humiditie surpasseth the heate, and keepeth it so in subjection that it can not kyth, it continueth from the birth to the fourteenth yeere: Bairnely age or adolescencie is also hote and hu∣mide, but the heate in it beginneth to ap∣peare: so the voice in male children be∣commeth austere and grosser, all the pas∣sages of the body are inlarged: in women
the pappes hardneth; and groweth greater, and they begin to haue their naturall flowrs: It is from 14 to 25, which is the terme and end of grouth: Youth is hote and dry, full of fire, agilitie, and force, it is the flower of the age, and is from 25 to 35, in it cholere or bile doth reigne, as in the former blood: Midde age fol∣loweth, which keeping the middes be∣tweene the extremities, is the most tem∣perate of all, in it the force beginneth to declyne, but it is recompensed by the gifts of the mynde, which are in greater mea∣sure than before, as discretion, wisedome and judgement, lasting from 35, to 49: And old age beginning there, containeth all the rest of the life vntill the end: It is the most cold and dry tyme of the life, by reason of the destruction of the natu∣rall moist by the inbred heate, abounding neverthelesse in humide pituitous excre∣ments: hence their eyes are still watring, their nose dripping, and their mouth be∣ing full of water, they are still spitting. The division of ages must not alwayes bee taken from the tyme: for some sooner, others latter, according to their complexi∣on, runneth thorow all these spaces, so
the sangineans beare their age better than the rest who become sooner old. Seing then the body doth change the temper according to the course of the yeares: It is needfull to diversifie the dyet: and because I am to speake of infancie heereafter, passing it, I will first treate of the bairnly age. Of bairnly age. Bairnes are of a very good temperature: hence it is, that they agree better with the spring than any other season, because of the temperate air; as also with tempe∣rate meates: and seeing their body by the softnesse and raritie of it is much subject to dissolution, they haue neede of much foode, otherwise their bodies in place of growing shall decrease and diminish, as witnesseth Hipp. they should not sleepe so much as infants, but being stronger, they ought to vse exercise more than they: this is the tyme wherein they should bee in∣structed both in liberall and mechanick artes, that thereby both the body and mynd being coupled, Cupids darts get no entrie, for they should flee all violent exercise, and Venus games, because they hinder the grouth of the body, and being subject to bleeding, they ought to eshew everie ex∣cesse,
whereby the body is made hote, stry∣ving to keepe a mediocrisie in all things. This is evill keeped by these who pam∣per their bairnes bellye with spiceries and strong drink, which so dryeth, that some of them can never bee quenched. Of Youth. Young men being of complexion hote and dry, should vse a dyet cold and moist: for this cause wee see they are most whole∣some in the winter, because it is contrare to their bilious temper: they should shun all heate either in the air or meate, as garlick oynions, mustard, pepper, ginger, and all other suchlike: also all strong drink, as wine, aquavitie, rosa solis, and the like: or violent exercises, because they procure a fever, sore∣nesse of the head, and troubleth the spirit: in this age men are meetest for any charge in publick or warfare. This is the tyme most proper for mar∣riage, for bairnes procreate of bairnes, or old men are commonly infirme, either of body or of mynde, but begotten in the flower of the age, when the body and spi∣rit are at the best, are found to bee most able for any businesse: for Venus if it be moderate, doth not hurte thē as other ages,
by reason of the force of their members: yea, they are by it made more gallant, and lustie. Of middle age. Men of middle age ought to keepe a more temperate dyet than the former, not declining so much to cooling things, because the heate of youth is past: so a temperate aire, temperate meate taken in lesse quan∣titie than before, because the body hath left growing, also moderate in exercise, im∣ploying better the spirit than body, flying all griefe and sadnesse, because that age is most subject to melancholy: they fall rea∣dily in agues, phrenesies, pripnenmonies, pleurisies, cholere, dysenterie, and other such like diseases bilious, through abun∣dance of bile, gathered in the youth: and according as their naturall force dimini∣sheth, and old age approacheth, they be∣ginne to find a shortnesse in the breath to presse them: for the preveening of these, they should keepe a mediocrisie in their dyet betweene youth and age. Of old age. Old men should striue to correct their cold and dry complexion by hote and hu∣mide dyet: and therefore flying all cold∣nesse
in the aire, keeping them by a fire∣side, hote meates of good and easie di∣gestion are best, as capons, hennes, pi∣geons, partridges, veill, and muttoun, soft new laide egges, and such like cheere: fi∣shes are not for them: spices, as ginger, cannell, mustard should bee much vsed by them: they must beware of overcharging their stomack with much meate, for they may readily by this meanes chock their naturall heate, being now but small: it is better to eate often and little, espe∣cially they who are decreeped: for they are like lampes, in the which the light is almost extinguished, which must be in∣terteined by a gentle effusion of oyle, because much at once will suffocate it, and too long with-holding will procure the evanishing of it: strong wine, rather old than new is fit∣test for such, and therefore it is called their milk: it is granted to them to sleepe a∣little after meate, chiefly in the sommer, because they are commonly troubled with night-watching, by reason of some by∣ting vapours, arysing from one abundance of a salt flegme in them: they should keepe themselues free of all the violent passions of the mynde, chiefly of chagrin
and melancholy, living, joyfull and mirry, rejoycing all their senses with pleasant ob∣jects, their eyes with the varietie of plea∣sant flowers, and diverse colours, carying still some pretious jewels in their ringes, and among others the saphere, the emrode because the greene or violat doth conserue the sight best of any: Their eare with the musicke of voyces and instruments, inter∣taining them also with pleasant discourses, flattering them in all, and contradicting in nothing: the smell with muskue, sweete waters, and muske bals, and the taste with some daintie dishes: But this too curious caring for a Carion, will seeme tedious to the view, and troublesome to the eare of our young wenches, who looking to the Mammon rather than the Man: and the wealthie estate more then healthfull bo∣dy, hath tyed themselues to bee helpers, and vpholders of the chivering and shak∣ing bones of an old man, but pleasantlie pulling them downe: the poore man con∣senting: yea, assisting to his fall, these wagges hungrie for young fresh meate, longe to laufe vnder a mourning weede, in beholding the piafing cariage, and hearing the in∣tysing; yea, rather ravishing discourse of
a young Bravado, of whose words they reape greater contentment, than ever they did of the old mans deeds: A just reward for dotting Loue. Of the seasons. As the vicissitude of the night and the day proceeds from the motion of the Sunne, from the East to the West, in 24. houres space, even so the change of the seasons commeth from his course, from the West to the East, about the twelue signs of the Zodiack, making thereby the dayes longer or shorter. By this approach∣ing or retiring of himselfe in his com∣ming and going, the Air receiueth many di∣vers alterations being subject to receaue the impressions and influences of the hea∣venly bodies: for the Sunne heateth and dryeth by his heate: the Moone in the contrare cooleth, and humecteth, or ma∣keth moist; so when the day is long the Air is hote and dry, and when it is short it is cold and moistie, but when they are of equall length, the Air is temperate by the equall force of both alike communicate to it. The Ancients from the course of the Sunne in the Zodiack did remarke soure
speciall changes in the Air, which are made by the qualitie & inequalitie of the nights nd dayes: therefore they haue divided he yeare in foure seasons; The Spring, the Summer, the Harvest, and Winter, the which are divyded by two equinoxes, the one falling in the Summer, the other in he Harvest, and two solstice; one in Sum∣mer, and an other in Winter, equinox is an equalitie in length of the night and day, which befals to all the world alyke, when the Sunne is vnder the equinoctiall lyne; the first is in March, the other in Sep∣tember. Solstice is, when the Sunne com∣ming to such a point, standeth and cannot goe forward, but from thence turneth his course backward, the first in lune, the o∣ther in December: This change in the air causeth a change in our bodies, from the which, according to the diverse season, di∣vers humours doe abound, requyring the changing of the dyet, for this cause wee shall insist in everie one in particulare, and first. Of the Spring. The Spring beginnes at the equinox, when the sunne first enters into Aries, and ends at the solstice of the summer, when
hee enters in Cancer, containing a parte of March and Iune, and all Apryle and May: from the equinox in the spring till the solstice in summer, the day still grow∣eth longer, the night shorter, for in March the night hath twelue houres, the day as many; but from thence till the end the day groweth longer, but the night shorter. The first signe of the spring is called Aries, that is, Ramme, because hee pun∣sheth (as it were) with his hornes the borders of the new yeere: the sunne then in the middes of March beginning to re∣cover his force, & display liuely his beames. Taurus is so termed, because the tyme ma∣keth for the coupling of the bulles or ox∣en, for labouring the ground being fred from the rigour of the winter, and moist∣ned with the drops of pleasant raine: Ge∣mini hath the name from the duplication: yea, rather multiplication of the grouth of the groūd: Pleiades or 7 stars are at the back of Taurus, and Hyades (so called, because rainie) at his head. The Poets feinzie that they were the Nymphes of Bacchus: they cutte short often the hope of the labou∣rer: for when they rise, the Sunne being opposite to them; and the Moone re∣countering
also, if none of the other Pla∣ets doe not interveene in hote signes, here followeth many heavie raines, which poileth the cornes and fruites of the ground,  from tyme to tyme some dangerous ayes, at the end of the spring, which are urtfull to the good of the earth, hath eene remarked, The spring is of temper ote and moist: yea, these qualities are so empered in it, that it appeareth no wayes xcessiue, neither in the one nor other. Amongst the signes of the spring Aries is more moist and humide, than hote, yet emperately, but in Gemini the heate go∣th beyond the humiditie. The spring keepeth a midde temper be∣wixt the great heat of the summer, and he extreame cold of the Winter, two ex∣remities, wherefore it is more wholsome nd lesse dangerous, than the rest of the easons, although sicknesse bee frequent in , yet that proceeds from the multitude f humours, which the winter hath gather∣d in the body: and now are melted by the heate of the season, nature stryving to ex∣ell them, such are melancholie, epilepsie, the quinance, but they proceede from melan∣holicke humours, which the Harvest be∣fore
had gathered in the body, such are distillations, cough, and other cold diseases flowing from the aboundance of phlegme, gathered by the Winter: The proper dis∣eases of the spring are scabbes, puuls, tumours, and goute, but these are all with¦out danger, and cause health to the bo∣die, being clensed from all vitious hu∣mours by such meanes: so the spring is the most wholsome of all the seasons, for if it get a body with good humours it keepeth it so in health. Yet if it doth sur∣passe the limites of the owne tempera∣ture, it is no lesse fertile of sicknesse than the other seasons, so Hipp. sayeth, if the winter bee dry and cold, and the spring hote and humide, the summer is accompa∣nied of necessitie with many fevers, oph∣thalmies, and dysenteries. And if the win∣ter bee gentle, warme, and rainie, and the spring dry and cold, women with children, who should be brought to bed in the spring, doe with light occasion parte with child: and if they bring foorth without danger, their birth commonly is weake and sub∣ject to sicknesse: for the bodies by the clemencie of the aire made soft, moist, and open, receaues easily within the cold of
the circumsisting aire, so that the children ong accustomed with the heate, bestrick∣ken powerfully by the coldnesse of the ire, dyeth in the belly of the mother, or fter the birth not dying, liveth vnarmed by nature, against all danger. For prevee∣ning sicknesse: It is good to purge in this yme, and to draw blood: This season re∣quireth a dyet conforme to it selfe in tem∣per, so if cold in the beginning, it should haue the dyet of the winter, and if very hote at the end, the dyet of the summer: he meates agreable for this season are Veilles and Kiddes, fish haunting about ockes, soft rosted egges: foules are not good hen, because they are about their procre∣tion: boylled meate is better than rosted, & more drink, & lesse meate, than in winter. Of Summer. Although the sunne bee the father of ll the rest of the foure seasons, yet hee carrieth greatest respect to the summer of any, it receaueth greater force from his beames, and is made more like his father than the spring his elder brother, or the rest that are younger: It is he that makes the loue of the spring, and of Dame Flora, to bee faecund and fertile, in receiving the
sweete droppes sprinkled by the spring in the bosome of the earth, Ceres doth pre∣sent him with Cornes, Bacchus with wines and Pomon with fruits. Summer beginning at the solstice, when the sunne enters in Cancer the 11 of Iune, and endeth at the equinox of the Harvest, the sunne being in Libra, the 13 of Sep∣tember, from his solstice in summer, till the equinox in Harvest, the dayes short∣neth still and the night groweth longer, and then they are of equall length. Among the signes, Cancer is more hote than dry, Leo extreame hote and dry, in Virgo the drouth surpasseth the heat, Cancer tak∣eth the name from the back going of the sunne, being at the hight as a partane doth, and Leo is so called, because the sunne is red and burning then as a Lyon: Vir∣go by reason of the earths infertilitie, in that season, the earth being dryed by the heate of the sunne: The sunne entering in Leo, the little dogge beginneth to kyth, and so soone as hee enters in the first de∣gree, the great dogge is perceived: which hath eighteene starres, the little dogge is called by the Greeks Syrios, because of his great heate and drouth, the little dogge
appeareth a day before the great, the first the 16 the latter the 17 of Iulie, while the dogge doth make his course, the space of six weeks in the caniculare dayes, hee augmenteth the heate of the sunne by his presence, ingendring many diseases from extreame heate, for the moderating of this heate, the LORD hath appointed cer∣taine North winds, verie gentle, called Etesias, that is yearely, because they ap∣peare ordinarly about the rysing of the dogge, and continue from three houres in the morning till night dayly. The heate of the sommer is so great, that it not only dryeth the body, but also pear∣cing thorow the skinne, it dissolveth not only the humour betweene the hide and the flesh; but also the spirits: so it weakneth the body, and ingendereth much bilious blood, from the which floweth vomiting of bile vpward, and dysenterie from bile downeward: This tyme would bee enter∣teined by refreshing things, as a cooling aire, and cold meates, vsing much purpie, actuces, endiue, sourocks, and other herbs, both in broth and sallad, eating rather boy∣led than rosted, having for sause vinegar, the juice of sydrons, or oranges, flying
all spyceries: and because the weaknesse of the body doth not admitte much meate at once, and the great dissolution of the same doth require great reparation, to eate little and often is best for this tyme: drink would bee taken in greater quantitie, but weake in qualitie: exercise should be little and that in the morning, and they that can not sleepe, the night may repose a little after dinner. Of Harvest or Autumne. Although Autumne hath just reason to bee sad, seing his father the Sunne to leaue him, and take his journey towards a strange countrie, and his mother the earth to bee sorrowfull by reason of her golden lockes which are dayly fading, and her pleasant laughing countenance that is chan∣ging to bee vnpleasant and shaggring. Yet shee may rejoice with her husband Bac∣chus, having through their louely conjun∣ction brought foorth wyne, and by the helpe of Pomon many fruites. The Autumne beginneth at the Equinox, and endeth at the solstice in the winter, conteaning a part of September and De∣cember, and whole October, and Novem∣ber, from the beginning the day still short∣neth,
and the night groweth long, for in September the day and the night hath each of them twelue houres, but from thence the day diminisheth, and the night grow∣eth longer. Amongst the signes Libra is more hote than cold: Scorpion is very hote and dry: Sagittarius is more cold than dry. Libra is so called, because the night and day are in equall ballance: and Scorpion by reason of the byting of the cold sub∣tile aire, as a scorpion, making the earth dry and cold. And Sagittarius, while by the shooting of his arrowes, hee makes as it were the ground and all things dead. In Libra, Bootes a signe with 22 starres, where∣of the ehiefe is Arcturus, is remarked: The Harvest is cold, in regarde of the Sum∣mer, and dry in respect of the Winter: it is not absolutely hote or dry, cold or humide, and so not temperate, as is the spring: for there is not only found an in∣equalitie in the whole season, but also in one day, which is now warme now cold, as at noone it is hote, at night it is cold: This inconstancie causeth diverse diseases inconstant and dangerous, by the producti∣on of humors of inequall temper, throgh the cold it hindereth the dissipation of the cho∣lere,
ingendred in the summer, by the which it causeth a change of the same bile in me∣lancholy, which is not absolutely cold and and dry, but of inequall temper, being more dry than cold: so wee see sundrie diseases of the summer to bee revived by it, and many severs, quartanes, and erra∣tiques, inflation of the ratte, hydropsies, lienteries, sciatiques, passions, ashmatiques, epiplespies, and others, the quartanes, pro∣ceeds from a black melancholious blood which then abounds: the erratique evers of the inequall temperature of the aire, the swelling of the melt, of the abundance of the melancholick humor: for the prevee∣ning of their maladies, it is good to purge this season: wee ought to shunne the cold aire of the morning and evening: meates of moderate temper should bee vsed, ta∣king more meate in summer, but lesse drink and stronger. The Winter. It is no wonder to see the winter still weeping because of his far distance from the Sunne his father, regrating still his mo∣ther Vestas case, droupping for her hus∣band Titans long absence, who carieth on her head a white vaile in place of her
daintie coffe, flowred with roses, and win∣ter with his teares doth pavie the ground with pleasant cristall, but seing the same tramped vnder foote, renuing his teares, hee turneth all into myre and clay. The winter beginneth at the solstice, which is in it, when the sunne entereth in Capri∣corne, and finisheth at the equinox in the spring, when the sunne beginneth to en∣ter into Aries, it containeth three signes, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, a part of December and March, but whole Ianuar, & Februar, from the beginning of winter to the end the dayes grow longer, the night shorter, at the end they are of equall length, being the equinox: Capricorne is more cold than humide: Aquarius is both cold and moist extreame: Pisces is more wak∣than cold. Orion kytheth his whole force in the beginning of winter, who affraigh∣teth much the Sea-men, moving still stormes at his rysing. The most frequent disea∣ses of the winter, according to Hipp. are the pleurisie, and peripneumonie, because the instruments of respiration are hurte by the coldnesse of the aire, it moveth also destillations by the nose, rheumes, cough, paine of the breast, side, loines, head, dis∣siues
and apoplexies, when the head is full: for to preveene these wee ought to cover well the body, but especially the head, breast, and feete, and vse hote meates and dry: Salt meate and venison is better now than in any other season: rosted meate is better than boyled, spices now are good, and hote herbs; more meate may bee ta∣ken now than in summer, but not so of∣ten, and lesse drink than meate, but strong, because the humiditie of the season, and long sleepe doth moysten the body much.
A REGIMENT FOR VVOMEN WITH CHILD, BAIRNES, AND NOVRSES. THE good Gardner hath not only a care of the impe and tree; but also of the seede which kyths by his carefull choosing, and labouring of the ground for this end. At whose example, (that this my worke should not be manck in any thing) I haue made digression conteining the safe keeping, and right governing of the ground, wherein man his seede is sowne. Women with child are likned to one bearing a weightie burden, by a small threed tyed to their hands, who going, softlie, and warily may happily bring their burden to the purposed place: but if they bee agitate by any inordinate or violent motion, easily their burthen partly by the weight, and partly by reason of the small
string will fall to the ground: so it sa∣reth with them, for if they move vio∣lently, or suffer agitation either in a Coach or chariot, or by any other sort of ry∣ding, or if they bee troubled suddainly by the passions of the mind, or vse evill food, smell evill savoured things, behold things fearefull, a suddaine impression of these be∣ing first in the spirits, next in the blood and last by these in the tender bodie of the child, the knittings breaking, they readi∣lie are brought to bed before tyme. For this end let them haue a care to keepe a moderat dyet in all things, vsing good and nourishing meats, being more sparing in the first moneth then afterward, because the menstruous blood doeth then abound, not imployed either for grouth, or nourishing of their birth as yet; it is better to take often and little rather than too much at once: they should flee, all meats of a bytting facultie, also all windie, all procuring either the fluxe of their wa∣ter, or of their flowers, as capirs, oynions, garlik, safrane, and strong wine: they should vse little drinke, least the ligaments be∣come, slbrie, shunning darknesse, solitari∣nesse and melancholie. The first moneth
should bee quyetly past over without mo∣tion. The second a soft gentle walking is good. The third a little quicker. The fourth, fifth, and sixth admitte greater ex∣ercise, and stronger motion. The seventh, eight, and till halfe of the nynth, requires some greater rest and quyetnesse than the former, among these the eight as most dangerous, would bee quyetest and most carefullie keeped, from the middle of the nynth till their birth, a more quicke mo∣tion, and frequent, exercise is properest for the furthering of the same. They should shun the companie of men the first moneth, for feare of a new conception, afterward they may bee more bold: also all passions of the minde, because by chasing the blood inward, they choke the child, which of∣ten falleth out in great wrath, or sadnesse. Too long sleepe is not evill, from the which they should awake quietlie. They should keepe themselues from excessiue cold or heat, and from the North and South wind, for both the one and the other doe moue a distillation, from whēce a cough, the which hastneth their birth before, the tyme flying alwayes the noyse of thunder, & guns of great belles, and the like: and because
that women with child, either hath lost all appetite, or are troubled with an in∣ordinate, as a desire to eate strange things, as also with a paine in the stomack, gnaw∣of the heart, great spitting, short breath, sore head, swelling in the legges, and an vniversall heavinesse thorow the whole bo∣dy, proceeding from the suppression of their flowers, (yet there be some so full of blood, who hath them, the first moneths, others all the tyme) least these and the like by weakning of the mother, doe precipitate both mother and bairne in hazard of death: it is better to purge these vitious humors, than to suffer such manifest dangers. The properest tyme for purging, according to Hipp. is from the fourth moneth to the seveneh; for the child (saith Galen.) is tyed to the matrix of the mother, as the fruites are to the trees, the fruites new budded out haue the stalk so tender that little shaking will make them fall, but be∣ing with tyme more firmely tyed to, they are not so shortly broken, till the tyme of their maturitie, where they fall off them∣selfe without helpe; so women with child are in lesse danger the fourth, fift, and six moneths, then the first and the last.
Women with child should not be bled, except in a great necessitie, least the bairne by bleeding, frustrate of his foode, bee forced to breake foorth before the tyme to looke for meate; yet there bee some women who are so full of blood, that except you draw blood of them, they will chocke the child in their belly, of such blood may bee taken once or twise. Women with child should cast away their buistes, which they vse, to keepe them small about the middle, and that so soone as they find their bellie to swell: for they hinder the grouth of the child, and con∣straineth it often to come foorth before the tyme. Whosoever hath of custome to parte with child, through the moistnesse of their bairne-bed, let them weare about their neck the Eagle stone, called by the Greekes Aetites, applying this plaster o∣ver the belly and the loines. R. Gallarum nucum cupress. sanguin. drac. balaust. myrtill. rosar. an drag. 1 ss. mastic. myrrh. an drag. 11 thuris hypocistid. aca∣ciae. gummi arab. bol. armen. an drag. 1. camphor. scrup. ss. ladan. vnc. ss. terebinth. venet. 11 picis navalis. vuc. 11 cerae. q. s. fiat emplastrum secundum artem extenda∣tur
super alutam ad praefatum vsum: If the passage of the belly bee stopped (as often it falleth out) the last moneths, the trypes being straitted by the matrix, let them vse broth of barley, malves, beetes, and mir∣curial. Of their governement, the tyme of their birth, and after the same. There bee three things required to a na∣turall birth, the first a-like fordwardnesse both in the mother and the child: so the child requiring more meate than the mo∣ther can afford, and greater libertie to take the aire, hee tares with his hands and feete his thinne membranous sheettes: the ma∣trix againe wearied of its burden, doth contract the selfe, for the expelling of it: Now if any of these bee inlacking, their birth is not without danger: for if the whole action be imposed on the mother, as it falleth when the child is dead, or verie weake, it is with great paine, which sometymes bringeth death: and if the child get all the businesse to doe, by reason of the mothers weaknesse, it is of no lesse hazard. The second is a due forme, which Hipp. describeth in his first booke
de morbis mulierum, and in his booke de natura pueri, in these words: A childe (saith hee) if the birth be naturall com∣meth foorth head-long, and he giveth the reason in an other place of this, because the parts aboue the middle are heavier than beneath it: Moreover if the feete come first foorth, they in stretching of them∣selues should stoppe the passage to the rest of the body: so the custome of the Anci∣ents was, (as reporteth Plinius in seven bookes of his naturall history,) and is now also to carie the dead with their feete for∣mest, because that death is contrarie to life. The third thing required, is, that it bee quicke, easie, and without great paine or many symptomes. The tyme of birth. Nature (saith Arist.) hath set downe a certaime terme and tyme of birth almost to all the creatures, only man hath diverse tymes: so the doue hath her mouthly birth: the bitch keepeth still foure moneth: the mare nine moneth, the Elephant two yeare: only woman changeth, having for terme the 7 8. 9. or 10 moneths: the first is the seventh, before which no childe can bee liuely: the next is the eight, in the
which, according to Hipp. and other Physi∣tians are not liuely: the nynth is the mostna∣turall, and best of all: the tenth and eleventh in the first dayes are liuelie also, although that birth doth not fall often foorth in them. Now that women be not troubled be∣fore the tyme, remarke heere the signes of birth approaching, these are, a paine from the navell to the secret parts going about to the loynes or small of the back; a discent of the bairn-bed causing a swel∣ling about the privie members, a rednesse of the face: the mouth of the matrix open and straight, and in the entrie of it there is found a lumpe about the great∣nesse of an egge a shivering through the whole bodie, and in end a certaine liquor issueth foorth: first in little quantitie then more larglie: and lastly there floweth a watrie blood if it bee a femall chylde, but pure, if a man child. There are three things to bee remar∣ked about the tyme of the birth. The first, that the travelling woman be not burdened with too much meate, for thereby the naturall heat is drawne from the matrix to the stomack. Secondly that the Mid-wyfe doe not handle roughly, the bairn-bed of
these who are long in travelling, but gentlie their hands being oynted with oyle: Thirdly that the woman bee not troubled, till the foresaid signes appeare, especialy the straight¦nesse of the mouth of the matrix, and the eshuing of these humidities. These ap∣pearing, let her so be placed that her loins bee free, lening most on her back and shoulders, her heeeles bee bowed inward toward her buttoks being lifted vp, and that her thighs bee so farre asunder as possible they can. Thus let her leane ra∣ther than sit, holden vp behind by a chaire, or the bed-side. Others standing do bring foorth their birth leaning to their hands, fastned to an hold. This tyme if the air of the chamber bee too warme, it must bee refreshed by opening of the windows, least they faint. And when the paine re∣turneth, the mouth of the matrix being o∣pen, let her who is travelling containe her breath, keeping her mouth and nose fast, and presse downe-ward with all her power, the Midd-wyfe softly with her hands hel∣ping her by pressing also from the navell downward, desisting when the matrix be∣ginneth to close, least they travell in vaine. The childe should bee received by the
mid-wife in a soft small and warme linnen cloath, and that quyetly, least any of the members should bee hurt. This done, the woman should bee laide in her bed, in a darke chamber, with her thighes asunder, least the issuing of the blood should bee stopped, which ought to bee dryed vp by the oft changing of warme clothes, least either by the sharpe byting, or the vn∣wholesome stinking, it grieue the delyve∣red. It were not amisse to ty a band of two hand-breadth about her navell, both for the furthering of her purgation, as al∣so from hindering of inflations from cold wind, which readily then entereth through the emptinesse of the matrix, which there∣after breedeth a suffocation of the same: after her delyverie a drink of the best in little quantitie will doe no harme: let her absteane two dayes from flesh, vsing the while caddels, aleberries; and such like ea∣sie digestable meates, and nourishing, for the repairing of her forces, eshewing all suddaine charging of the stomack, either by the great quantitie, or diverse qualitie of the meate: for her weake force doth not admit that, rather come by degrees to the former dyet, shunning all suddaine
repletion after such an evacuation, it is bet∣ter to giue them oft and little, eight dayes being past they may eate more largely, e∣specally if they nourish their child. They should absteane from all kind of herbes, fruites, and legums, that is pease, beanes, and the like. If after her deliverie her paine continue, the Mid-wyfe shall search the bairne-bed if there bee any congealed blood in it, (as sometimes there is, which being taken away the paine ceaeth) or any lumpe of flesh: applying also to her navell the secundines or after birth yet warme, the skinne of a Ramme hote from the sheepe aliue. When they come to nourish the child, they should cause sucke the milk of their breast the first two or three dayes, by some old woman, that the old vnwhol∣some milk may bee drawne foorth, and better supplie the place of it, twentie dayes is the terme of purgation after a man child, and fourtie after a fmell, the which space they should keepe themselues free of the societie of man, yet these that are of strong constitution, will purge sufficiently in eight or ten dayes. Of the government of the Child.
So soone as the child is brought foorth, his navell should be cut about three finger broad from his bodie, and then tyed in the lovest part, and sprinkles in the vpper∣most parte, where the incision was made with the powder of bol. armen. sanguinis. draconis. sarcocolle. myrrh. and cumini and then covered: bounde vp with a little wooll dipped in the oyle of Olives, afterward see it bee washen in warme water by the Nurse, and oynt againe with the foresaid oyle, his nostrils should be softly opened and his pricke looked if the passage be open: his eyes tenderly wiped, his fundament rubbed and handled, for the procuring of the passage, to the clensing of the stomack from a part of the menstruous blood lur∣king in it, drawne in while hee was in his mothers belly, the which staying, and not cast out, presently after his birth, or at the farthest the first day doth cause ei∣ther death, or the epilepsie: It is remar∣ked, that this issuing before the birth doth foretell a parting with child. For the purging of the child from this black blood, it is good before hee sucke any to giue him of hony halfe an vnce, of fresh butter two dragmes, with halfe a scruple
of myrrhe, and when the halfe part of the navell falleth away, it should be sprinkled againe with the powder of burnt leade, and afterward wrapped in warme clothes. The member are to be stretched foorth, and made straight by the warme hand of the Nurse, for now they are ready to re∣ceaue any crooke or hurte: The child should bee washen twyse a day, in the winter with hote water, and in the summer with warme: neither must hee bee longe kee∣ped in the water, then the body becom∣meth hote and red. Keeping his nose and eares free from the droppes: being wa∣shen and dryed, let him be laide straight with his armes, close to his sides, and his feete together in warme fyne linnen, then put in his craddle, with his head, and vpper parts highest, that the humidi∣tie may fall from the head to his lower parts, layed on his back, for that is the surer, then on either of the sides, least his soft bones, and lightly tyed, by weake bin∣dings, vnder the burthen of the whole bo∣dy doe bow, or bee disjoynted: but so soone as his teeth doe come foorth, hee may bee accustomed to ly now on the one side, now on the other: aboue his head
in the craddell their should bee placed small twigges, or wands bowed, covered with clothes, or in place of these a little canopie, whereby the wavering, and incon∣stant motion of the childs eyes may bee restrained and corrected, least by long loo∣king too earnestly to any thing a-side, he become glyed, or by inconstant wavering to and fro: of still winking and moving, ringle sight, for a frequent turning of the tender eyes, turneth in end to a habite, which can not be forborne: so a childe by oft looking to his gyed Nourse, will become so in end, having imprinted by long custome a habitude in the muscels, moving the eye towards the nose, which are stronger than the opposite muscles, such-like bairnes by oft vse of the left hand, becommeth more perfite of it than of the right. Of the Nurse. There is no milke so proper for the child as the mothers, being accustomed in his mothers belly to feede on it while it was as yet blood, and now turned by the pappes into milk: but when the mo∣ther can not, being either sickly or weake,
or lacking milk sufficient, or pappes compe∣tent. Let them make choise of a Nurse, with these conditions following: first, that she be of a temperate complexion, not subject to diseases, of good colour, and proportion of body, neither too fat nor too leane, but proper and handsome, with pappes of me∣diocre consistance, that is neither too lit∣tle nor too bigge, nor long and hanging, neither over soft or hard, with the ends long eneugh, that the child bee not trou∣bled in gripping hem, with the brest large and great: Secondly, let her bee in the flower of her age, that is, betweene 25 and 35: one younger aboundeth in super∣fluous excrements, and older is too dry, by lack of the naturall moist, and heate dayly decressing: Thirdly, see shee be di∣ligent, lustie, merry, sober, chast, meeke, not sluggish nor sadde, no gluttoun, nor de∣licate of her mouth, no drunkard or vn∣cleane, not cholerick, or envyous, but gen∣tle and courteous: for the child doth not follow so much the nature of any, (except the parents) as the Nurses: Fourthly, that shee bee not of a long tyme delyvered, for when they passe two moneth without causing suck their pappes, nature becom∣meth
forgetfull to furnish them matter for milk: Fiftly, that she be not with child, otherwise the best part of the blood will bee imployed for the intertaining the child in her belly: Sixtly, that her last birth be a man child, because her blood is purer, and the excrements are fewer, and so the milk must bee better: Seventhly, that she hath beene brought to bed at the tyme, for they who are before the tyme, are com∣monly sickly, or infirme: Eightly, that their milk bee of an mediocre substance betweene grosse and subtile, thick and cleare, of colour white, of tast sweete, in smell pleasant, and in sufficient quantitie. The Nurse should vse much nourishing meate (except shee abound in milke) and of easie digestion, as wheate bread of two dayes, the flesh of vealles, kiddes, fowles and birds of the field, pearches, trouts, solles, pykes, and soft rosted egges, flying all spyceries, all sowre or bitter things, and mustard. Fruites are not good, ex∣cept prune-damase, and igges: nor wine, or strong drink, neither the companie of man. First, because dallying with Venus troubleth the blood, and consequently the milke: secondly, because it diminisheth the
quantitie of the milke, by turning the course of the blood downe-ward from the breast to the matrix: thirdly, because it giveth the milk an evill smell by the cor∣ruption of its qualities: and lastly, because it lifteth the Nurses apron, and putteth a kidde in her kilting. Milke is deficient to the Nurse, either from lacke of meat; great care, too much griefe and paine, or from any in disposition of the whole body, or of the pappes on∣ly, if lacke of victualls cause it, cause help her dishes both in quantitie and qualitie: if care, griefe, or paine, cause banish them. Goates pappes or yewes boyled with their owne milke haue a peculiar facultie for restoring of the milke lost, as also wheate bread baken with kynes milke, decocti∣ons made with the leaves and seede of greene finkle, or of anise and milk. The Nurse should haue care to keepe the chylde in a place of temperate aire, shunning the Sunne, the night, raine, and all sort of intemperate season. The quan∣titie of the milke is to bee taken from the age, complexion, and the desire the child hath to sucke. The first moneth lesse, by reason of his inabiltie to digest much: af∣is
better for him: so hee that is of a com¦plexion humide sooner than hee who is drye: also one that is wholesome, than he who is infirme and sicklye. Diseases al∣so according to their diverse nature will change the terme, causing waine him soo∣ner or later: such-like the season, for in Summer it is not good to waine him, for to give him solide meate in place of his milke, which are not so easily digested: in like manner the region, for in a coun∣trie verie cold hee may bee wained in the midst of summer, & in a very hot, in the hart of winter. Also the sexe for the males may bee sooner wained than the femals: be∣cause they haue their teeth sooner, and haue greater heate and force to digest their meate. Hee should bee wained by little and little, by giving more seldome the pape and ofter of other meate. And if hee bee not willing to quyte it, you must cause rubbe the head of it with wormewood or Aloes or any bitter thing. Being wained, Veilles, mutton, capons, henns, partridges, and birds of the field are fittest for them: boyled meate is better than rosted; soft egges are never evill, so
prunes boyled with suggar: they must ab∣staine from oynions, leekes, sybouse, gar∣li, mustard, salt meat, or spyced, olde cheefe, baken meat. Their drinke should bee small aile or watter, no wayes wyne, because it easily hurts their braine and nerves, being as yet weake and tender, as also addes heat to heat, whereby their na∣turall moysture or humiditie is dryed vp. The child should sleepe much because he is of a moyst complexion, and sleepe moisteneth more by hindering the dis∣sipation of his naturall humide substance: hee should ly on his back, till his mem∣bers bee strong, and hee beginne to vse stronger meat than milk: and easie rock∣ing is best, for by it the naturall heat re∣tires the selfe within, and the spirits be∣come drowsie: but a toylsome catching, tosseth the milk to and fro in the stomack, hindereth the disgestion, troubleth the spi∣rits and braine. So soone as he awakes in the morning, you must haue a care that his bodie bee made cleane, from all the excrements, by the seidge below, and by purging the head aboue at the nose, washing his mouth,
eares and eyes, and combing of his head, both for the lightning of the same and making of the haire pleasant and faire. And having attained to the age of five yeares, send him to the Schoole, where hee may with the elements of knowledge, bee informed in the rudiments of pietie, that is, taught to know loue, feare, and serve his GOD The neglect of this makes them first disobedient to their parents, next shameleslie debosht thirdly, spectacles of mi∣serie through their tragicall end, or objects of pitie, having nothing to spend: our thriftie yea rather theifie parents now a dayes, stry∣ving per fas & nefas, by hooke and crook to bigge a hedge of earth about their chil∣dren, either they liue within this hedge a firie divell, or a sillie foole. The frenetick foole (when old miser is gone to hell to beare Dives companie, who living, would not bestow a pennie on the poore, or dying, leaue any of his goods for any pub∣lick worke, as planting of Seminaries of learning, building of Kirks and Hospitals:) not able to suffer the heat the hedge doth make, presently maketh a breach, in tur∣nng his fathers cape (as old as the King) in a silke bever, his two pennie band in
a thirtie pound ruffe, his coate and cloake of the wyfes making, in some rising silks and his doubled with panne drop de sean cloake. His course prickes, in stoc∣kings, garters, roses, russet walking bootes, and gingling long necked spurres, his prentise in a page. Thus breach being made, where through the Gallant hath past his body, next the tempestuous winde of the vengeance of GOD, which the fa∣ther had scraped together with the goods, seaseth on the hedge, and entereth the bet∣ter of the breach: this wind is, some mis∣cheife befallen this Gallant in his intem∣perat over night drinking as murther, or by his immoderate gaming at cards and dyce, (the divells two speciall factors) as losing of a great part of his goods: the murther takes his head, losing, takes his wit, so that thereafter, as a madde man, desparing of recoverie, with both his hands he throw∣eth downe the hedge, and scattereth the same abroad to everie one passing by: thus my Gentleman the last yeere, by the meanes of his geare, supposed a Lords peere, this yeere being poore is a beggars brother, and yet these gentills are very frequent a∣mongst vs: so for one lawfully begotten,
and truely nobilitate, by vertue there be twentie earth borne bastards, new start∣vps, by the excrements of their mother the earth: if I were a noble, I should be ashamed of such a mother. The silly foole sitteth within his hedge, like a gouse on egges, then presently a cunning catching Lawyer marries his sister, who findeth out some clause in his evidents, by the which hee alledgeth a parte of the hedge to belong to him, so my block-head getteth vp to hold vp his hedge. The while hee is a strugling with his partie, there commeth one behind him, (a pirate by sea, or a thiefe by land,) and hee pulleth downe a parte of it: next his wife at home tyed to him a duarfe, or an impotent, either of body or of mynd, some∣tymes of both, (forced by her parents) allured by his goods to match with him: yea, (if without offence I may say it) holden like a Kow to the Bull, (not en∣joying, though a reasonable soule, the li∣bertie of the prettie birds, vnreasonable beasts, who doth make choise of their owne mates,) maketh of a silly asse a horned sheepe: Thus the Lawers chyding, the Pirats or theeves robbing, the wifes whoo∣ring
abateth the poore sottes little cou∣rage, and not prevailing for all his toy∣ling, hee returneth gouse-like to his nest againe, where wringing his hands, and han∣ging his head, his geare hee seeth spent, while hee hath neither meate, drinke, nor clothes of it. Of the diseases befals Chil∣dren, and their cure. Although that children bee best pro∣vyded in naturall heat and moysture, from the which the life of man depends, yet they are subject to many diseases. Chil∣dren that are all over scabbed, also that cast much flegme and pituite at mouth & nose, suchlyke these whose bellie is verie louse, if it doe not proceed from too great aboundance of meate, prognosticks a more constant health to follow. The infirmi∣ties of babes, are pustuls in the roofe of the mouth, called the water canker, vo∣miting, cough, watching the night, feare in the sleepe, waknesse of the eares, and in∣flamation of the navell. And when their teeth breaks foorth, they are troubled with a itch in the gumes, fevers, convulsions, fluxe, and when they become older and greater, an inflamation in the waxe kirnels
disjoynting of the vertebres or links of the back, a shortnesse of the breath, the gra∣vell, wormes, cruells, and other tumors in diverse parts of the body. The pustuls of the mouth, according to Galen. commeth of the sharpnesse, and serositie of the milk which easily exulcerateth that place, being as yet tender: Vomiting is from the a∣bundance of the milk, over-charging the weake stomack: the cogh is from the humi∣ditie of the braine distilling on the lightes. night watching, of the sharpnesse of the vapours that ariseth from the stomack to the head Feare in the sleepe, is of the meate corrupted in the stomack, which sendeth evill vapours to the head, from the which aryseth dreames, procuring feare. The run∣ing of the eares is, from the humiditie of the braine: the inflammation of the navell proceedeth of the evill cutting and binding of the same: The icth of the gumes, from the pricking of the teeth prea∣sing foorth. The fever floweth from the paine the teeth maketh, from the night watching, and from the inflammation of the gingives. Convulsions are from the former causes, as also from the cruditie of the nurishment, which hurteth the ner∣vous
partes, which are not as yet strong. The fluxe commeth of the indigestion of the stomacke. The inflammation of the waxe kirneles, and likewise the dislo∣cation of the linkes of the backe, are from defluxion from the head, as also the shortnesse of breath called Asthma. The gravell taketh the origine from aboun∣dance of raw humours ingendred of the gluttonie of the chyld, the which going to the bladder, furnisheth matter to the heate, to worke on for the production either of a stone, or of gravell. Wormes breeds of the corruption of the superfluities of the body, and of the great heat of the same. Tumours, Cruels, and the like, of the a∣boundance of the foresaid supperfluities. Hence it appeareth that bairnes are sub∣ject to many sicknesses, which ariseth ei∣ther from the comming foorth of the teeth, or from the evill nourishment they haue gotten in their mothers bellie, or of the evill milk of the Nurse, or from their e∣vill guiding, by their mother and Nurse, or from their owne gluttonie, or immo∣moderacie in soucking, drinking, eating, moving, or sleeping. For to make the teeth come foorth easily, and so to preveene the
sicknesse that may flow from thence, as fevers, convulsion and the rest: the Nurse must rubbe the gumes gently with her finger, both for to open the passages and also to draw foorth the water that is within, bowing the childs head that the rheume may powre out, afterward oynt the same with oyle of camomile, or sweat almonds, or dukes, or hennes grease, or with hony, or fresh butter. During this tyme, hee should souck lesse then before, also abstaine from all chawing meate, not v∣sing any thing that is actually cold, for feare it ding back the humour sent thi∣ther to prepare the passage to the teeth that are comming foorth, for the eshewing of the rest of the diseases, let the mother, the childe, and the Nurse keepe the dy∣et that hath beene set downe to them, and so I leaue them. Of conception according to the diverse sortes of it. As conception doth cause joy when it is found to bee true; so being false, the hopes frustrate, moveth griefe. For prevee∣ning these suddaine changes, I haue thought it expedient to annexe heere the markes of both the one, and the other.
The signes of true conception. There bee diverse signes of it which are commoun to it, with a false concep∣tion: passing these, I will heere make men∣tion of the chiefest: as are, the retention of the seede by the femell sexe, after the lawfull and naturall imbreacings of both the sexes. Next a contraction of the ma∣trix, which breedeth a shivering through the whole body, and a coldnesse a-longst the back. Then within a little space a smal∣nesse of the belly, especially about the ne∣vell, where it appeareth to be some-what hollow, and when the tyme of her flowers draweth neere, in place of them she finds her papes become hard and hote, at the end of three or foure month the child doth moue. Of false conception. There bee diverse sortes of it, arysing either from a lumpe of flesh, in the matrix, called mola, or from a wind or a watter: A mola is a lumpe of flesh without shape, bred in the matrix, which either sooner or later is cast foorth. It is caused of a little portion of seede ivironed, and al∣most chokked by a too great abundance of menstruous blood, and so the spirits are not able to sorme any thing: The marks
are one in the beginning with a true con∣ception, as a stopping of the flowers loosing of appetite, loathing, vomiting, swelling of the belly, and growing of the papes. But after they differ, for with a true con∣ception a woman dayly after the first mo∣neth groweth lustier, with a mola dayly worse, after the third or fourth moneth a child moveth, but a mola never except, when the woman turneth in her bed, and then like a stone it falleth from one side to an other: it moveth often by this fal∣ling the paines of her birth, without ef∣fect. It hath moreover a certaine pricking and grinding in the belly; also being pres∣sed by the hand, it giveth place or way to the presser, returning againe to the owne roome, which a child or true conception will not doe. Such like the belly is much harder with a mola than with a child. In a mola the monethly courses rusheth of∣ten foorth like little peeces of flesh in great quantitie, and then the woman dayly be∣commeth extenuate, in end all the body shirping, and the belly growing, it resem∣bleth an hydropsie, yet it is different from it by the hardnesse of the belly by it, and in not receaving any impression made by
the finger or hand: it brings an vniversall lasinesse of the whole body, with a softnesse of the members and trembling; sometimes a swelling of the eyes and lippes, a dissi∣nesse of the head. A mola is cast foorth sometyme after fourtie dayes, sometymes after three moneth: others keepe it two, three, foure, or fiue yeeres, yea all their life. A false conception from wind or water. Such sorte of false conceptions befalleth when the monethly courses are stopped to a woman vsing the companie of man, and her belly riseth, the rest of the marks of a true conception concurring, she not having for all this conceaved any liuely thing, but something correspondent in substance to some of the elements, as wind or water: the cause of these is the seede of both the sexe infirme and weake, receaved by a matrix of the same indisposition, by the which meanes the spirits contained in the seede, doth evanish: it may proceede al∣so from a small skinne, closing the mouth of the matrix, and so stopping the issu∣ing of womans monethly courses, where∣by the belly swelleth, and is bended, vpon the which there followeth often the fittes
of a woman travailling: this is knowne to bee the cause, when that the skinne is cutte, and the blood gusheth foorth, and shee is fred of her paine: To try these sorts of conceptions, wee should try if the woman hath beene troubled before by corrupt, or vnnaturall courses, (as com∣monly they doe preceede) vpon the which hath followed presentlie this swelling of the belly, whereby it differeth from a true conception, in the which the wombe first is drawne in, before it be bended foorth: if the matter of this false conception bee windie, it is knowne by the resounding of the belly beatten thereon, like vnto a drumme: also by a paine of the heade, loynes, backe, and of the privie members. If water cause it, there is perceived into the motion from one side to an other, the noise of water catched to and fro; also a dropping of a serious watrie ma∣ter from the secreete places, which is ve∣rie byting, and of an evill smell, the feete, face, and eyes swell in it, the whole body becommeth pale, and they looke like hy∣dropicks, and almost the rest of the marks of a mola are to be found heere, from this disease women become often barren.
The not distinguishing of a true concep∣tion from the false, hath beene often trouble∣some and chargable to diverse: Such was the case of a Lady in Burdeous, who after nyne moneths carefull carying of her selfe, least shee should hurte her supposed child, and three weekes troublesome travailing, in end was delyvered of a fart forsuith: Let any man who is feared for to be deceaved either with pillowes vn∣der the kilting, or farts in the skirping, supplie that which hath beene omitted by me, for I hope not to be de∣ceaved this twelue mo∣neths by my wife, and so farewell. FINIS.
