17217 99845426 10323
A TREATISE OF ARTIFICIAL FIRE-VVORKS Both for VVarres and Re∣creation: with divers plea∣sant Geometricall obserua∣tions, Fortifications, and Arithmeticall Ex∣amples. In fauour of Mathematicall Students. Newly written in FRENCH, and Englished by the Authour THO: MALTHVS. Printed for RICHARD HAVVKINS, and are to be sold at his Shop in Chancerie lane neere to Serieants Inne. 1629.
A TREATISE OF ARTIFICI∣ALL FIREWORKES by F Malthus LONDON for Richard Hawkins in Chancery Lane. 1629
THE PREFACE Apologetique to the Reader. ALthough that Warres haue beene authorized by the diuine powers, as witnes∣seth the new and old Testa∣ment, yet me thinkes I heare many nice, peeuish, and ignorant braines blaming me for setting downe to the view of the world (at a few leisurely houres) so many wayes and inuentions how to corrupt and destroy what nature and art striue to make, edifie and conserue, to whom I an∣swer they haue the same reason to exclaim against iustice which hath found and or∣dained
many meanes to abolish and ex∣terminate wicked offenders: for my in∣tention is here but onely to finde inven∣tions to confound and ruinate Rebells and their habitations; that afterward Empires, Kingdomes, and Common-wealths may the better liue in peace and tranquilitie: and what more is I haue set downe perspicuously this Treatise of Fire-workes, which many heretofore haue written with confusion and great dan∣ger, having pend large Volumes with most ample and idle discourses touching this subiect, whose names for modesties sake I will not here set downe with an in∣famous character to posteritie (as Master Robert Norton hath done some few slight offenders names in the Preface to his translation of Vianos works, which he calleth his owne, hauing onely added seuen figures taken out of Thybourels
booke, and transposing the Authours workes to disguise it) that I bee not ac∣counted amongst the calumniators of this age, who write with serpents tongues spit∣ting their venome vpon the silent and sleepig innocents gone before vs. But I will onely shew their errors in generall, that the learners may the better auoyde them: For in some you shall see prescri∣bed all sorts of Apothecaries drugges for the compounding of Fire-workes, which are no more capable of fire then stones, earth, or mettle, as Adamant-stone, Verdigrease, Cristall, Vitrioll, Salarmoniacke, Sublime, Mercurie, with a number of the like, which in the iudge∣ment of ignorants may produce in Fire-workes wonderfull effects. In others you shall finde the coniunctions of com∣bustible materials in such a sort or man∣ner
disposed and ordered to such strange ends, that you would say they were set downe to make the Reader laugh, rather then for seruice of Fire-workes eyther for Warres or Recreati∣on, as the meanes how to poyson an Armie in the wide Field by the smoake of an artificiall Ball, is it not to be thought a very prettie imagination, or else that the Ball ought to bee some∣what bigge; and afterward which is more ridiculous, you shall finde in the same Authours the same ingredients and mixtures prescribed for Fireworks for Pleasure and Recreation: which to mee seemes strange, that the Fire-workes whose smoakes are so venemous even as to poyson Armies in the open Fields, shall bee also fit to burne in the middle of a Cittie or Towne a∣mongst
thousands of people for Re∣creations: now all these idle conceites with a number of the like are printed in many new and recent bookes, the Authours whereof doubtlesse haue set downe all these ridiculous inventions by ignorance, (thinking them good) and not of purpose for spight; and therefore they doe deserue pittie rather then blame; as well as Master RO∣BERT NORTON, (who hath er∣red onely in attributing another mans workes, and faults to bee his owne) and what is it that giues mee cause to thinke that all these haue erred by ig∣norance, is because that all their workes are alike where that they doe speake of Fire-workes. But reading these absurdities with a great quantitie of others, which made mee take reso∣lution
to set my penne to paper, and shew to posteritie how and what way to auoyde their errours, having heere set downe the true rules and mixtures re∣quired for Fire-workes, both for VVarres and Recreation, with some few Geometricall obseruations necessa∣rie for the practise of Fireworkes in warres; and also I haue added vnto it certaine rules and maximes of Fortifi∣cations, very requisite for Enginiers to haue in their memorie, with a compendi∣ous Arithmetike, hauing written the whole first in French at some broken houres whilest I followed the warres; and bringing certaine coppies from the Presse to my speciall and very good friends; at whose requests I haue translated the same into English, that others might not translating it, mistake my meaning;
and the worke being already but of small commendations, they to make it of les∣ser. Adiew. London the 22. of May. 1629.
To the Authour. THy Archimedean hand hath learnt to frame Celestiall Meteors out of Nitrous flame: And represents strange fires of differēt sorts Suted to Martiall vse, & Courtly sports: So pleasing that great Kings haue spar'd some houres To be spectators of thy golden showres. The Thames and Seyne haue seen thy Balons fly, From their affrighted bosomes to the skye: Swift beyond all beliefe; as if thy ayme Were, to restore Prometheus theft againe. Were, when their force seems spent, breaking a∣sunder They rain down stars, or els outroar the thunder. The Roman Apotheosis I deeme, Would still haue had a reuerent esteeme, If they had vs'd these miracles of fire, To mount their Caesars soules, & beare thē higher Then Eagles flight, but now they serue to raise, The Pyramis and Trophe of thy praise.
And sure thou hast attain'd sufficient glory, In perfecting the Pyrotecnique story: Which some tooke vpon trust, & by concealing Their creditors; made borowing to seem stealing. But their fire's out, now thine hath pass'd the Presse. For greater fires do extinguish lesse. WILLIAM BASTIAN studious in Mathematicks.
A TREATISE OF FIRE-WORKES. for Warre. CHAP. I. TO imitate nature, our first and chiefest tea∣cher, who far from er∣ror seemes to haue pro∣duced and brought forth all things y a curious and speciall order; without whose beautifull disposi∣on on the whole world had still con∣nued in the most prodigious con∣sion of Caos, which displeased the ure aspect of the highest, eternall
and divine powers, being but a cloud or mixture of darknesse. My intention is here to institute and obserue an order, treating of euery thing one after another in his pro∣per and conuenient place: begin∣ning with artificiall Fire-workes, as the chiefest and principall cause which hath vrged me to take my penne in hand, the description of those which belong to warres, shall obtaine the first place, and next the Fire-workes for recreation or plea∣sure, passing from these to many pleasing Geometricall obserua∣tions, aswell of Mecanical ob∣seruation, as by the sines, tangents, & succents, ioyning to them a most easie & succent method to fortifie all places regularly and irregularly. And to conclude I will adde many
briefe and instructiue Arithmeti∣call examples. Now to begin with the Fire-workes for warres, I will first de∣scribe the Morter-peece, and the vse thereof: that being an instru∣ment, the most noble, the most v∣niuersal, the best of greatest effect, and of most wonderfull operation of all the instruments, the practise wherof may be vsed amongst Fire-workes for warres, for this instru∣ment may serue for a Petard to split, breake and hurle down dores, gates or walles, likewise to massa∣cre, teare in pieces, ouerthrow and confound assailants of any place or breach: and for diuers other most worthy offices, and acciden∣tall occasions, which happen in the troubles of warres: whereof I will
not here make a long, weary, and tedious discourse, but in few words cleerely set downe the vse of this instrument for the shooting of di∣uers sorts of granads, stones, or o∣ther weighty burthens to ruine re∣bels, their habitations and dwelling places. Then first of all I will treat of the mettle, whereof this instru∣ment ought to be made, and mea∣sures appertaining thereunto.
CHAP. II. The manner how to make the Morter-Peece. THis Instrument may bee made of diuers sorts of mettle or stuffe, accor∣ding to the means, times and occasions which shall offer themselues to those who would make them, or cause them to bee made. The first and chiefest mat∣ter of all, is red copper, brasse and tinne, but very little of the two last, such as Canons are made of, with∣out any other brickle or harsh met∣ mingled with it, and beeing
made of this stuffe, let the measures following be observed. If the dia∣meter of the calliber or bore be one foot, let the morter be two foot of length, & let the sack or hole for the powder be the third part of a foot broad, and halfe a foot deep, and let the mortar beare in thicknes an inch and a halfe, about one foote high, and the rest onely one inch thicke, the foot shall bee one inch and a halfe thicke, and made square whether the instrument be for the seruice of warres, or recreation, as doth plainely demonstrate the Fi∣gure A following. The second met∣tle is yron, such as commonly Ordnance for ships are made of: and being cast of this stuffe, the rules prescribed shall be found fit, onely let the mettle be somewhat
hicker in euery place. The third nd fourth, and most common materialls are past-boards and can∣as, or pastboords and chord, and either or these materialls must bee ioyned together with glue, and be∣ing to bee made of either of these materialls there must be had a wo∣den
foot, with the powder sacke or hole made hollow below in the wood, as is represented by the Fi∣gure B. the precedent measures be∣ing obserued which is the third part of the diametre, &c. But if the instrument be to bee made of either of the two first mettalls, that belongs to the Foun∣ders office, but of the two last ma∣terials euery man at his owne pleasure may compose it of what size he please, and to begin he must haue a wodden rowler of such big∣nesse as he shall desire to make the diametre of his Morter-peece, and vpon that rowler let the pastbords and canuas with good store of glue be rowled: which being done, let them dry a while vpon the rowler, and another while off from the
owler, and when this kinde of truncke is very dry, let the woden foot be ioyned to the one end with glue and nailes very fast; and then couer the whole with chord and glue againe; which being well dryed, the instrument may bee of long service, provided that it bee not over-charged, and as for the length, the longest carry furthest, and the thickest dure longest, by the figure C. precedent the instru∣ment is represented perfect, with the touch-hole in the right place required.
CHAP. III. The manner how to make granades or mettle for the morter, or hand. ALl granads being made to breake, ought to be composed of the most brickle mettle that may be found, as of brasse, adding the third part of Tin to it. (as the Founders know right well) they may be also made of yron, or of glasse to cast out of mens hands, so that the glasse bee made very thicke, and these will worke won∣drous effects, especially in any throng of horsemen or footmen. And as for the thicknesse of those which are made of brasse, if the di∣ameter
be one foot, let the mettle be one inch thicke, and let them be somewhat longer then they are round as doth demonstrate the fi∣gure A. leauing at the one end, as it were a handle, and on the other, a screwed hole; by which meanes the granad may be charged, also, let there be made a hollow vice fitting for the former screw, which vice shall be filled with a slow composi∣tion made with gunpowder well ruised and culled, and then made nto past with oile of petrole: but if the powder be excellent good and strong, then mingle with a pound of powder, one ounce of Charcoale dust, to make it vveaker, then let he composition bee vvell beaten nto the hollovv vice, vvhich is re∣presented by the figure B.
And the granad shal be filled with fine gun-powder, which being full, let the vice be screwed into the hollow hole of the granade, onely it is to be noted that the vice must not be open at the lower end, but haue a bottom sodered strongly, wherein shall bee made three or
ure little holes about the bignes of a tag of a point to giue fire to e powder when the granad hath fowne the space required. For the performance wherof it is need∣full that you know the quicknesse o slownesse of the mixture wher∣with the hollow screw is to be fil∣ld. And for the better experience, it shall bee conuenient to make of all of one with a granade made  wood, cloath, pastboord, or a∣y other stuffe filled with earth, ut let it be neere to the weight of ose which you desire to make vse of, afterward, and by that meanes you may know how long ou ought to make your hollow vices, which are called by their roper tearmes Port-fires, and hus much of your granade being
performed, novv let it bee all covered over, vvith either Chord, Canuas, or Pastboord, and dip∣ped in glue or in pitch; this co∣vering may be neere halfe an inch thicke: to the end that the granade going out of the Mor∣ter vvith violence it breake not, and vvorke his execution vpon your selfe or your company in∣stead of your enemies; of vvhat mettall soever the granad is made, these rules are to be observed, and by the figure C, is represented a granade quite finished; and dipped into pitch, by vvhich meanes it may bee conserved many yeares: these sorts of gra∣nads vvorke great effects falling vpon houses; they cast downe the vvalles and coverings, like∣wise
they vvorke vvonderous o∣perations amongst either horse∣men or footmen, tearing both man and beast in pieces, sparing nothing.
CHAP. IV. The manner how to make Gra∣nads of Canuas for the Morter. THe operation or exe∣cution of these sorts of granads made of Canuas is quite con∣trary to those prescribed: these are onely fit to set a Towne on fire, the houses whereof are most couered with reede, straw, or broome, they are not of so violent execution as the precedent, yet notwithstanding of as great cost, and for the making of them, you must haue a wooden
owler, which is represented by the igure A, of the bignesse you desire o make the granad (which alwaies ought to be lesse then the Calliber or bore of your morter, to the end hey may bee covered afterward) nd vpon the rowler make a sacke of uch cloth as you please, as doth re∣resent the figure B, cutting a piece to ouer the vpper end, when the sacke hall be full of the composition fol∣owing. Take foure pound of salt∣eter, two pound of gunpowder-ust, two pound of brimstone, all hese being well pulverised, let them e moystened with oyle of petrole, nd then fill your sackes with the ame, and cover them with chord, which done, pierce the sacke full of holes with a great bodkin, as repre∣senteth the figure E, and in euery
hole, place a little yron barrell char∣ged like a pistoll barrell, these little barrells are represented by D, which must be driuen into the sacke vp to the head, and the granad being thus disposed, let there be made at the one end a hole about one inch deepe, which shall serue to prime it with
powder-dust, moystened with oyle of petrole, onely it is to be noted that the touch-holes of the little barrells be made somewhat large, to the end hat the rust stop them not, being ong time kept amongst the salt-pe∣er, and so they may be conserved many yeeres, and ready for service n all occasions, the figure C. doth emonstrate the granad perfect and urning.
CHAP. V. How to make fiery arrowes. TO avoyde all confusion, I will treat first of all the fires which are cast with violence, and af∣terward of those which may be cast out of mens hands. And first it is to be observed, that fiery arrowes are of great effects and noysome at sea, specially if the ships approach any thing neere, so that they may bee  or cast into the sayles chording  of the ships, either by cros-bowes, long bowes, or any other meanes, for so much as a ship being
once a fire, hardly can it be extingui∣shed. And thus the arrowes ought to be made: first a long shaft of wood, nd ioyned to it an yron head made after the manner of the figure A, and about the middle of that head, make fast a linnen bag in the forme of an oliue, leauing open a hole at he end before, as may be seene by the figure B, that it may bee filled with the composition following. ake one pound of Saltpeter, halfe a ound of gunpowder-dust, and alfe a pound of brimstone in ovvder: all these ingredients eeing well mingled, and min∣ed with oyle of petrole, then fill e bagge round about the arrow ead, noted by B, and then let all be well bound about with wyre. And r the priming of these arrowes, dip
cotten weeke into gunpowder, wet with water, but let the cotton be wel dried again before it be applied to the arrow head. Now for the ioyning of your arrow head, to the wodden shaft it ought to be so slightly fast∣ned to it, that being shooke into any sayle, cordage, or wood, so that if a∣ny
one would plucke it backe, the shaft should slip out of the head, and so continue burning in the place pretended, and to hinder that one may not pluck out the head with their hands, there may be made  small hole quite through backe∣ward, and so the fire will hinder a man from touching any part there∣of, alhough it should sticke in other of his fellowes clothes. There may e made little arrows of the same fa∣hion, to be cast out of mens hands in ny meetings, assaults, breaches, or ther occasions; and if there shall be reat hast for the making of them, esse fashion may serue, hauing onely ttle stickes of wood, about a foote nd a halfe long, and in stead of the ead prescribed, a pyke (like a reat nayle) and in lieu of feathers,
pieces of past-boord, stucke into the ends of the wood being slit, but the former composition shall be requi∣red. CHAP. VI. How the granads are to be charged into the morter. ALthough it seeme to be but a small difficulty to charge the granads into the mor∣ter, yet it is the greatest mastery and most curious worke which hath beene found amongst fireworks, and the most industrious
Enginers that ever I yet saw, haue af∣ter beene deceived therein, and shor ut their granads, they not taking ire, which is absolutely one of the greatest faults that may be commit∣ed. Then to avoyde such great er∣ors it shall be needfull to note ma∣y obseruations following, where∣of the first is that you put not too much powder in your morter, mar∣marked A, but onely the powder-ckefull; secondly, that the priming f your granad be firme, not spoy∣ed with dust or dyrtie moistnes, or other like thing, that it bee not also too dry, least all breake about your selfe going out of the Morter taking re too quicke, which all fire-works re very subiect to doe, then take eed that the granad enter not too ardly into the morter, which will
cause it to breake in the discharging, also it is not needful that it enter too loosely. All these things being well obserued, you must haue alwaies rea∣dy port-fires for your morter, which may be made about the bignesse of your litle finger, and hollowed with∣in about the bignes of a quill, even
to the bottome, noted B, this port∣fire is to enter with a vice into the touch-hole of the morter, about half n inch, and to turne the vice with∣out any key: there may be made 4, buttons at the out-side of the vpper nd, and let this portfire be charged with a slow composition, mingling 4. ounces of charcoale with a pound of powder-dust, this being done, and your granad placed in your morter, o that it shake not, close vp the hinks round about your granade, within the morter, with grease, waxe, itch & grease, or any such like thing you may so cover the granad with ome such stuffe; that in any weather wet or dry, you shal find no difficul∣y to shoote off the granad in any place wheresoever you please.
CHAP. VII. The manner how to shoot the granads. THere is no lesse difficul∣tie well to discharge the granads then to charge them, but the contrary will easily appeare, for it is there where the hazards and dangers most great, doe meet together. And the first of all are the aduersaries Canons from whose dangers the Enginier shall easily conserue himselfe, as fol∣loweth, causing to be made a trench like vnto an halfe moone, the con∣nexity thereof being towards the e∣nemy,
as appeareth by the figure A, this trench shall be of such bignesse s the Enginier may conueniently place all such things as shall be need∣ull for his present vse. The second difficulty following, is how to shoot hem right to the places of any Fort or Towne desired, being not possible o see the places to take leuel at them without eminent danger of their Canon and musket-shot: which dif∣ficultie shall be thus auoyded, and et leuel right, and send the granads o the places required: let there bee e two staues set vpright, betweene he Towne, Fort, or Cittadell and the Trench, the one of these staues shal be somewhat long, the other may be hort, and that, planted vpon the rim of the trench; but the longest omewhat distant in a right line to∣wards
the place pretended, as doth demonstrate the figures BC, these staues shall be so disposed that you may see the extremities of each, be∣ing in the trench out of the enemies sight, and by the sight of these two extremities, you may direct your gra∣nads at your pleasure inclining your
orter-piece vpon either side, as shal  needfull without danger of the e∣mie, having onelie knowne the di∣nce betwixt the trench and the wne, or place of the towne which u shal desire to destroy. The third d last difficultie is to know the true ngth or distance that your morter oth beare, of which to be certaine, u must trie it before, shooting gra∣ds of the same weight, & with one rt of powder, and with a leuel, take vers sorts of elevations, & so may ou know such an elevation doth oa∣e so far, and such carie so far with ch powder such a weight, being arged, the maner of taking these ∣vations is represented by the figure , & the level in a bigger volume by e figure E, this leuel being placed pon the mouth of the morter piece,
vnder the foot thereof: wedges, yo may giue to the morter what inclination shall be required: and to b sure from all harme of your own granads, which by chance may brea going out of the Morter-piece, le there be made in the trench a little corner hollow into, or behind the which you may alwayes retyre, having given fire to the Morter. It shal be also needful that some one watch where the granad doth fall whethe too short or too farre; that you may the better direct the next shot: thi method is to bee observed in shoo∣ting all sorts of granads, stones, o other like things.
CHAP. VIII. A most violent method to set a Towne on fire. HItherto there hath not been found any means or inuention more cer∣taine or violent, where∣by one might convey fire for the de∣struction of the eemies habitati∣ons then by the helpe of the prece∣dent granads, which very hardly cause any disorder or combustion, vnlesse amongst houses covered with straw, whereof few are to bee found in goodly townes. And there∣fore I will here prescribe a ew way
much different from the others be∣fore written▪ against which hardly or not at all may be made any resi∣stance or possibilitie for defence, the violence, rage, and order being of such a fearfull power and execution, prouided that the Enginier doe but meanly effect his purpose & designe, and for the practise hereof, let there be made a kind of well in the ground but sloping, as doth demonstrate the figure A, of such deepenesse as shall be thought fit, but it is to bee noted, that the neerer you are to the towne, the lesser slooping will be best, and most easie for the perfor∣mance. The hollow pit or well be∣ing made, let there be placed in the bottome thereof one or two barrells of gunpowder, as shall be seen need∣full, according to the proximite or
stance betweene the place and wne, & these barrels may be places ry conueniently placed with good ore of straw about them to keepe em from the moystures of the rth. And in one, or else in both,  shall place a gunlocke, making  to the clicket thereof a chaine of
sufficient length to reach out of the hole vpon the plaine ground, but this chaine shall be curiouslyy lodg∣ed in a small gutter, which afterward shall be covered with earth, to the end that the fire doe not ouer-heate it, then cover the barrells of powder with strong woodden planckes, or broade stones, covering them againe with earth, and then lay good store of fresh straw and bauins, and fagots, and in the midst of these let there be placed a great fagot, made of peeces of timber, of a reasonable length, beng well bound together with chains of yron in three or foure places, as doth appeare by the figure B, and then set fire on the straw wood, and all that shall be in the pit▪ giving the great wood time to kin∣dle, and this great fagot being in a
great arder, let the chaines be drawn which are tyed to the latches of the gunne lockes, and doubtlesse you shall see braue sports; and if there be many pieces of Ordnance about the towne or place thus besiedged, let them be all disposed ready to shoote where this great fagot fals, and who∣soeuer would hut this inuention in practise, ought to make many of these pats about a towne, giuing fire to them all at once: but the Ingini∣er to know iustly how far these great flaming fagots may flye, the hollow pit declining so many degrees, hee ought to make tryall before in some large place, where he may haue room for his experience: now resteth only to explicate how a man may giue fire to the stra in the pit without danger, for so much that euery man
would not least all should take fire together. Then to be free from this perill, it may be fired by a traine of powder, by a Gunlocke, a piece of match, a candles end, or other like inuention: Peradventure, you may thinke that there may be danger in drawing the chaine when all is on fire; to which I answer these may be ioyned to it, a chord of such length as shall seeme necessarie; The Engi∣nier who shall put this in practise, may adde of his inuention what hee thinkes fit, Facilius est enim addere in∣vento quam in venire.
CHAP. IX. How to make Granads to cast with mens hands. HAving taught how to make Granads for the Morter, which by the vi∣olence of that most won∣derfull instrument may be transpor∣ted very farre over waters, walls, or bulwarks, working strange and rude executions or effects, I will now shew how it shall bee easie to make two or three sorts of Granads to bee cast out of mens hands, the effects whereof are no lesse to bee esteemed then the other, chiefly in assaults,
whether it be for the offendants or defendants. The chiefest and of greatest operation is made of any kind of brickle mettle as the prece∣dents▪ and their fabrication is not much different from the other, onely more rounder and lesser, and the sin∣gle ones hauing a long neck to seem for the Port fire, as doth appeare by the figure A, and first of all the gra∣nad is to be filled with fine gunpow∣der, and afterward fill the neck with a slow composition as followeth. Take 1. pound of gunpowder dust, two ounces of charcoale dust three ounces of saltpeter, al these well min∣gled together, fill the portfire requi∣red, but this mixture must be well beaten into the port-fire, and the gra∣nads being thus finished, they may be kept a yeare, ten yeares, yea twen∣ty
if need be. It is to be noted that hese granads must not be freed vn∣till a man is ready to cast them a∣way even in the same instant, be∣cause the port-fire being consumed, the granad breaks in divers pieces, and each piece sufficient to kill ey∣ther man or beast, and therefore the
handling of them is somewhat dan∣gerous. The second manner of Gra∣nad to bee cast out of the hand, is made also of brickle mettle, but hath no necke for a Portfire, but is onelie round, hauing in one side a hole as appears by the figure B, and at this hole it is to be filled with drie pow∣der, and then is to bee put into this hole to stop it, cotten wieke made as followeth. Take good Gunpowder and steepe it in faire water, and being dissolved, take the cotten wieke and steep it in the Gunpowder dissolued, which done, hang it out to drie; but let it be doubled eight or ten times, to the end that it may the better re∣ceiue the powder, and being drie, cut it in such pieces as you shal need, put∣ting the one end into the Granad at the hole, and then put that Granad
into another pot a little bigger then the Granad, as appeareth by the fi∣gure C, so that you may put a little drie powder round about the lesser Granad betweene the pots and Gra∣nad, then cover the mouth of the last earthen pot either with leather or such like stuffe; and bind it round about with wyre, but first put the wire through pieces of match about halfe a foot of length as may appear by D, and when you desire to make vse of this sort of granad, set on fire euery end of these pieces of match, and cast the pot away, which fal∣ling either vpon the ground, or anie souldiers Armour, you shall see the earth-pot breake, the Granad split, and worke such furious effects, eyther at a breach or anie approch. The third sort of Granad is made
much like to either of those prece∣dent, except onely it may bee made double or single, of glasse or of earth onely shall be needfull to be made very thicke, and if it be to be made single, the portfire ought to be either of wood or of pastboord, and well glued in, and this last sort may work great effects. Now having somwhat largely treated of the morter, gra∣nads, and of their vse, I will speake a little of other oyly fireworkes very pernicious and noysome to all assai∣lants.
CHAP. X. How to make fiery wheeles to be cast with mens hands. FOr as much as euery souldier wil not med∣dle with making nor casting out of his hands granads, the handling of them being somewhat dangerous, I will here teach ano∣ther manner of fireworkes, which is not much lesse offensiue, which being well compounded and com∣pacted, and for the making thereof, these are more ingredients required, then for the precedents, and is more
difficultie in making of them as fol∣loweth, Take foure pound of gun∣powder in dust, one pound of char∣coale dust, two pound of tarre, two pound of salt-peter, and one pound of Rosin. All these ingredients be∣ing well mingled and heat ouer the fire, steepe tow or flaxe in the same,
n then wrap the tow or flax about  whope, which is represented by A, and then cover all this againe with Gunpowder dust, & in time of need giue fire to them, and cast hem a∣mongst your enemies; onelie is to be obserued that the whops or circles ought not to be to large, but falling vpon a many of souldiers they may there stay and sticke, and to make them more troublesome and intang∣ling, two may be tied a crosse on a∣nother, and then falling vpon anie man, he cannot choose but be much astonished with such a fearefull ele∣met, and put his company in great disorder.
CHAP. XI. How to make a Shippe of wilde Fire. AFter a sufficient discourse of all manner of Gra∣nads, fierie arrowes and burning wheeles, I can∣not thinke it extravagant or amisse to lay open to the industrious or cu∣rious, a method how to make a fiery ship at sea, which shall not begin to burne till it hit against some other vessell, rocke, or such like obstacle, or be hooked or grapled on the in∣side to be drawne a shore. Hee that
will vndertake to build one of these must spare no reasonable cost to put his intentions or designes in execu∣tion, and first of all must be had one ship or many, according to the times and occasions wherein they shall be required; and within the shippe shall bee disposed great store of broken Canons well charged with bullets, and from one Canon to a∣nother shall be ioyned a port-fire, so that the first, having taken fire, all the rest must neede doe the same; these Canons shall haue their mouthes put out of the Gun-ports ready to bee discharged; this done, let there bee good store of dry straw, small dry wood, and tow and flaxe steeped in pitch, turpentine, rosine, and tarre; mingle and wrap the tow thus stee∣ped, about and amongst the
wood and straw, and place it be∣tweene all the Canons; the straw and small wood shall be so disposed, that it may take fire when the best part of the Canons are discharged, and the peece of Canon which is to giue fire to the straw, shall be set with the mouth vpward to blow part of the decke away, and at the same time giue fire to great store of granads of all sorts, to adde mus∣ket-barrells to barrells of Gunpow∣der ranged in order aboue the deck, to blow out these things by order, now one, then another by the helpe of slow portfires, but the beginning of this sport ought to be very violent and furious, to frighten and also teare in pieces the enemies at once, & that the rage hereof be the more furious, let the greatest part of the Canons
oot off thick one after another e∣n with the water, and at the same  the Granads shall flye the one re off, the others fall neere, now a rrell of gunpowder blowes out a rt of the flaming ship here, and a∣n another barrell caste out a quar∣ of the vessell ardent there, casting uers sorts of fire here and there as ls, arrowes, granads, double and gle ones, made of the compositi∣ prescribed in the 5. and 10. chap∣s, but to hinder all the barrells of wder from taking fire together, hich is no small difficultie, euery rrell ought to be plastered over, d then covered with glue and a re-cloth, and then put into another rell; but to make them take fire e∣y one at your pleasure, put a Port∣ vnto thē, of such length, & slow
composition, as you shall thinke fitting. Now to begin this mad spor fasten three or foure good strong gunlockes within the ship, at one en of the traine, which is to giue fire to the first Canon, and to every clicke or tackit of the locks, fasten an yro rod, and let the other end of the
rod passe through the ship, and ee made fast to peeces of strong wood, in the manner of a gyrdle on he outside of the ship, which is re∣resented in the figure by the points; o that touched vpon the outside a∣y thing rudely, the locks must needs trike fire, and set going all the rest; nd to make it give fire being hoo∣ked in the inside, to draw it ashore,  out of the way, let there be made ast to each clicket of the locks, long wyers, and the other ends of the wyres may be fastned to pieces of wood in the inside of the ship, round about the edge, so that the first thing that shall touch it, sets all going as vpon the outside, but the pieces of wood vpon the outside ought to be very neere the water, as doth demon∣strate the figure with the points, and so
to conduct this ship as neere to t place as may bee, without dang there may be fast ioind to the stern piece of timber noted A, B, to the en whereof may bee fastned two lon ropes, and to them two little boats, i which men shall be for the conducting therof. This here is but a spar of inuention, to which the industrious Enginier shall adde of his wha he please, and take this but for an en∣try of such workes; for although haue here set downe gunlockes▪ t giue fire to the Canons, my meaning is that they bee made like gunlocks but ten times stronger, and harder i going off, leauing to the iudgemen of the discreet Enginier, the true dis∣position of his owne designes.
CHAP. XII. How to make a Pe∣tard. DIego Vsan, a Spaniard, Francis Tibourele a Lo∣reine, and Master Ro∣bert Norton an English man, hauing al written of fireworks, and neither of them all vnderstan∣ding how to charge a simple Petard, I thought fit to end these fireworkes for wars by the description of the same, that being of great violence to make entries & breaches into towns castles, or houses, the morter prescri∣bed, may serue to petard a place
as hath beene sayd already: but who∣soeuer would make exactly a Petard, ought to cast a Morter much like vnto an Apothecaries morter, as doth represent the figure A, obser∣ving the rules following, if you make it, to weigh sixe pound of mettle, let the calliber or bore be of such big∣nesse to containe one pound of pow∣der▪ or one pound and a halfe: if you adde or diminish more or lesse met∣tle, augment or diminish the calliber likewise, to hold the fourth part of powder which the mettle doth weigh; and for the charging of the Petard, fill it only with the best gun∣powder you can, almost to the brim; and then couer it with a round bord made fit for the purpose, leauing a∣side all frivolous directions, written by others aforenamed; and for the
riming of the Petard, make a port-fire of slow composition, as for the precedent fireworkes of what length you please; and to breake open the place you desire if it bee accessible, then with the heele or breach of the Petard vpon the ground or some great stone or piece of wood, and the
mouth against the part of the dore, gate, or elsewhere, which you shall iudge fittest, but if the place bee vnaccessible, then make a kinde of a little Cart with two or foure wheeles, as doth appeare by the figure B with a long forke very strong to beare the Petard, and al∣so support the requile of the Pe∣tard shooting off: This forke is represented by C, but the backer end of this forke must bee stayed either in some hole, or against a stake, or other meanes; Now here in this treatie not intending to imitate these late Authours, who writing of artifiiall Fire∣workes; have prescrbed natures and compositions of almost all manner of drugges, the meanes
whereof may bee found in anie Apothecaryes shopppe, doubtlesse eyther to perswade the curious Readers that they had profound knowledge, many rare secrets, or else the better to hide their igno∣rance, by that great confusion and expence, whereunto few or none would extend and vse their purses to make proofe and expe∣rience of. I will finish this trea∣tie of artificiall Fire-workes for Warres, and goe forward to the second treatie of Fire-workes for pleasure and recreation, and ex∣plaine in the Preface apologitike, for what vse all these vnknowne dregges are fit for, which seemes to those that are ignorant of such rare and wonderfull effects. As
Salarmoniake, Antemonie, Arse∣neeke, Vitrioll, Stonelime, Thutie, Adamant stone, not forgetting quick siluer.
THE SECOND TREATISE OF AR∣tificiall Fire-workes for pleasure. CHAP. I. PErspicuous & plain shall be the method to make all manner of Fire-workes for pleasure, (which heare I will set downe for the contentment of all curious and ingenious Artists) with∣out such a number of vnknowne dregges for mixtures, as many here∣tofore
haue prescribed more fittest for some prodigious actions, then to mingle for artificiall fireworkes; and principally for those which are in∣vented for pleasure, for these haue no need of venemous smoaks to poi∣son the spectatours, making mirth turne to mischiefe (which notwith∣standing cannot be done in an open ayre) neither haue they need of such a continuing, ardent and violent flame, as to consume Cities or habita∣tions, but onely of a gentle and plea∣sing flame to the eyes of the specta∣ctors; and thus they are divided in∣to three sorts; The first are those which ascend and mount into the ayre; The second are such as con∣sume vpon the earth; The third and last sort, are those which swim and burne in the water. Those which
worke their effects in the ayre, are kewise divided into three sorts, the hiefest and most noble of all are the allouns; The second the rockets; nd the third are flying saucissouns, hose which stand fixt vpon the round are also distinguished into hree sorts; The first are the rockets or the ground, the second the fierie nces and the third saucissouns: The res for the water, may haue their iple diuision; globes or balls make he first, double rocket; the second, nd single ones the last; and to treate f euery one in particular, I wil begin ith the rockets for the ayre; and rst of all describe their moulds, and he measures which must be obser∣ed in making of them.
CHAP. II. A method to make moulds for rocket for the Ayre. ALthough that ballou are absolutely th most noble sort of fir workes, yet for so muc as all great fireworkes are compose rather of rockets, then of balloun I thinke it conuenient, to begin th second treatise with these: first of a making the description of the moulds, which may bee made eith of brasse or wood, the one being  good as the other for vse, if the measures following be obserued; whic
all be conuenient for all sorts of gnesses, because they depend one∣ vpon the calliber or bore, and that eing enlarged, the other parts will e all enlarged also, that being dimi∣shed, all the rest will be diminished kewise. Then to make a mould, the lliber wherof shall be suppored an ch of diamer, and is represented  the figure A, then the mould ight to be sixe inches in length;  the breech which is represented y the figure C, must enter into the ould one inch and a halfe, and the och noted with O, should be three ches and a halfe long, and a quar∣r of an inch in bignesse, and the wler D, which is to rowle the artoush or coffins of paper vpon, all be three quarters of an inch in gnesse, & the rammer E, to charge
and ram the rocket, shall be some what lesse then the rowler, to the en that it may enter easily into the catoush or coffins. Also it shall be made hollow,  deepe as the broch is long, as dot appeare at P, because the rocket mu be loaded, the broch being in it,
r the massif marked with F, shal be  the same bignesse as the charger. he 2. other owlers noted G, G, or  make serpents, as shall be instru∣ed hereafter, and the bodkin H, is  make holes through your starres,  shall follow, the Lanterne I, is pro∣er to charge the composition into  rockets. The figure noted K, is  cartoush or coffin ready to bee harged, and by the figure L, is re∣resented a rocket quite made. This ethod prescribed may be obserued  all sorts of moulds, for if you ould make one lesser, as of halfe an ch, the calliber or bore, then the ngth must be 3. inches, which is 6. alfe inches, the breech shall enter 3. uarters of an inch, the broch shall be  inch 3. quarters long, & the rowler r the cartoush shall be half a quar∣ter
of an inch; but if you make the cal∣liber of two inches of diameter,  the mould be 12. inches in length the breech shall be 3 inches, and th broch 7. inches of length; and so fo all the other parts appertaining to th mould. Now followes the descripton and manner how to make a roket.
CHAP. III. How to make a flying rocket for the Ayre. FOr to make the mix∣ture or composition of all middle-sized rockets, take a pound of gunpowder finely uised and boulted with two oun∣s of charcoale-dust, mingle these ell together, and try one rocket, hich if it breake, adde more char∣ale dust to the composition; but the rocket doe not ascend, beeing eak, adde more powder dust boul∣d as before said; and so shall you
make your composition stronger  weaker according to your desire; ∣stead of charcoale, you may put secoal, saw-dust, or any other lik thing, so that you keepe a Medium not putting too much nor too little which thus you shall know if th rocket mount not, you haue adde too much coledust; but if it break you haue not put coledust enough for the charcole-dust which you p into the powder dust, is onely to m∣derate the violence of the powder and to make the rockets tayle appe more beautifull; which sea-coa doth as well as charchoale, and  charge the rocket with this comp∣sition as it ought to be many rul are required or to be obserued; and  of al that in charging the rocket, yo put not too much cōposition at on in the cartoush or coffin; 2., that
e beaten with a mallet 3. or 4. good rokes; and then put new composi∣on thereupon, beating it again with lowes as before; and thus putting  at seuerall times the quantity of ne or two spoonefulls, at each time eating it well with a mallet, and let ot the cartoush bee filled higher hen the mould, but being iust full hereto, then double downe halfe of he paper with the bodkin beating it as he composition before) & at last ierce 2. or 3. holes with the same odkin to the powder to giue fire, to ither stars, serpents, or faucessous, as hall be taught following; and these oles are represēted by C, let the rest of the cartoush be cut even with the mould, and thus must be made all orts of rockets, great or little ones. t is to be noted, that the compositi∣on prescribed is fit; for all sorts of
rockets, great or little, but onely it must be made weaker for great one then for little ones, adding more charcoale to it, for the whole secret is in making the composition neither to strong, nor to weake, and not as al writers hitherto haue thought, fol∣lowing each one the others errors,
thinking that the true manner of ma∣king excellent rockets, is to put ma∣ny ingredients into their compositi∣ons, wherein they haue all erred ab∣surdly; and last of all Master Norton, for absolutely the best composition is, that which is made of fewest in∣gredients; and the rockets made thereof may be kept many yeares, and good at all times.
CHAP. IV. How to make moulds for Rockets for the ground. THe mould must bee o∣therwise made then the precedent, because such violence is not requi∣red in these, as in those which moūt into the ayre, but onely of somewhat longer continuance; and therefore these measures following shall serve at all times, neuer being made bigger nor lesser, but alwaies the same for all occasions. Let the calliber behalf an inch, the diameter; and 5. or 6. inches of length; and the rowler for the car∣toush
shall be foure lines in diameter which is the third part of an inch, and the rowler to charge withall some∣what lesser to enter without spoyling the cartoush: next let not the broch be longer then 3. quarters of an inch; and the breech shall enter halfe an inch into the mould; and the cause of this great alteration is, that the rock∣ets which mount into the aire, haue need of great and violent strength; and by consequence last not long, but wee desire that those vpon the ground may dure a long while, with a gentle motion, which shall be easi∣ly performed, the rules following be∣ing obserued.
CHAP. V. How to make the composition for rockets vpon the ground. THis is the easiest compo∣sition of all others, for in this shall be nothing re∣quired, but onely Gun∣powder well beaten and boulted, so that it be as fine as flower, and then fill your rockets by little and little, well beating it into the cartoushes or coffins with a mallet, as the rockets for the ayre, and being full within an inch of the brim of the mould, double downe one quarter of the paper, or cartoush, beating or pressing it with
3. or 4. good strokes of the mallet, and then with your bodkin, pierce a hole to the composition; which done; put into the cartoush about the charge of a Pistol, of good gun∣powder, and then double down the one halfe of the cartoush, giuing a gentle blow or two with the mallet, & with a smal cord, or big line, choke the rest, and what shall rest aboue the choaking, cut it off, leauing a pi∣ked point, as appeareth by the figure E, in the 3. chapter of this Treatise; and your rocket being thus finished, and primed with a little wet pow∣der, and layd a drying, shall be ready for all occasions.
CHAP. VI. The manner how to make Serpents. THe Serpents are to bee made eyther of the composition for rock∣ets on the ground, or of that for the ayre; for being filled with the compositi∣on fitting for the grouund; they will spreade and sparkle liuely in the ayre, but if filled with the o∣ther composition, they will fall weaving neerer together; notwith∣standing
eyther sort will shew di∣vers pleasing actions in the ayre, being made as followeth. Let the cartoush be about foure inches long and rowled vpon a rowler, some∣what bigger then a goose quill, as is represented by the precedent figure G, in the third chapter, the paper ought to goe about the rowler nine or ten times, and then choaked al∣most in the middle, yet leaving a little hole to see through, and the longest part shall be filled with the composition, but the shorter with fine grayned powder, and choaked close; also the longest end must bee halfe choaked close; as doth appeare by the figure F, chapter third but if you desire not to haue them wamble in the ayre, then let them not bee choaked after the compo∣sition,
but as doth represent the figure G, both which figures, F, G, represent Serpents quite fini∣shed.
CHAP. VII. How to make golden rayne. MAny there are (specially in France) who make rock∣ets, yea and boast that they are perfect therein, who know not what golden raine is, but thinke it to be some other thing then it is; wherefore to put them out of doubt, and to teach all others who desire the knowledge thereof, I will here set downe the description and maner how to make it. Take goose quils, and cut off the hollow ends, leaving them as long as may be, as the figure K, doth demonstrate third
chap. and fill these quils with the composition of rockets for the ayre, at the last stopping euery one with a little wet powder to keepe in the dry powder, & crowning a rocket with these (as shall be taught following, chap. 12. in its true place) will shew a most glorious & pleasing raine, wch some hauing in times past seen, haue called it golden rayne for the beauty thereof, but of later times it is more commonly called golden hear: many beautifull and strange figures may be represented in the ayre, with this ma∣ner of rayne, as shall follow in the 13 chap. treating how to represent ma∣ny sorts of figures in the ayre with rockets.
CHAP. VIII. The manner how to make Starres. ALthough that there bee many sorts of composi∣tions for stars, yet I will set downe here but two of the best; all the rest being nothing worth, but friuolous and expensiue: the fist and best sort, is to be made of dry powder, and the other of moy∣stened powder as followeth. For the sort take 1. pound of saltpeter, halfe a pound of brimston, and a quarter of a pound of gunpowder dust, al these be∣ing pluried & mingled together,
wrap the quantity of a nutmeg in tow in a linnen rag, or in paper, and bind it fast, as appeareth by the pre∣cedent figure H, chap 3▪ and to prime them, you must pierce them with the bodkin, and put stoupell or cot∣ten wieke dipt in powder through them (which shall be made as fol∣loweth in the 11. chap.) and to make the second sort, take 1. pound of salt∣peter, and halfe a pound of powder∣dust, and halfe a pound of brimstone all these wel pulverised and mingled together, moysten them with eyther oyle of petrole, or els wih fair water onely, to make a past of them, wher∣of make little balls about the bignes of a musket bullet, and whilest they are moist, rowle them in dry powder dust, then let them dry, and then may you employ them at your pleasure,
without further trouble; for the last powder in which they are rouled, doth serue for their priming. This last sort of starres doth not make so beautifull a shew in the ayre as the others, for falling downe, the flame of them takes the forme of a lampe, hauing no force to expel it like wings as the others doe, for the flame of the others blowing out of the two sides pierced, make it stretch in length, and by that meanes shew greater in the ayre.
CHAP. IX. How to make Starres giuing great Reports. TO make Starres, that each one shall giue a report like a Pistoll or bigger gunne, you must first make little saucissons (as I taught in the chapter following, but the saucis∣son need not to bee couered with chord) and being made and pierced, take as much of the former dry com∣position, and bind it to the end of the saucisson which is pierced, making a hole through the composition, and passe a piece of stoupell or cotten-wieke
as in the other starres; but if you take of the moyst composition, you may onely leaue the paper hol∣low at the end of the saucisson, fit∣ting to contain the quantity of com∣position required, putting a little grained powder before, and prime these starres as the others, of the same composition; these starres are very troublesome and little in vse, because that a great rocket can carry but few vp into the ayre, and by consequence worke but a small effect, and moreo∣uer they are very long in making. One may make Starres in the same manner, which ending, turne to ser∣pents and others as shall please the workeman.
CHAP. X. The manner how to make Sau∣cissons. IN this chapter, my intention is not to treate of the sau∣cisson which flyes into the ayre, but only of that which stands firme in great workes, or else which is applyed to rockets, which thus is made as followeth; you must haue a rowler of such bignes as you desire to haue the concauity of your saucisson, wherupon rowle as much paper as you please, and then choake
it at the one end; which done, fill it with grayned powder, & choake the ther end also, and cover all the sau∣isson from the one end to the other, with small chord, as doth represent he figure I. chap. 3. and glue that ord with strong glue all ouer, and when you would make vse of these aucissons, pierce them at the end with your bodkin, and put into the ole a quill filled with fine powder dust, which shall serue for a portfire, and the other end of the quill shall passe through a board, whereupon you meane to fasten them, and shall enter into a portfire in the other side of the wood, which shall be fastned all along the wood, and so may you fasten what store you please neere together, or farre asunder, this quill is represented by the figure L, and
by this meanes one end of the  fire beginning; all the whole ran of saucissons will giue their repor one after the other. But if your sacisson is to be applied to a rocket, shall onely be pierced at one end, a primed with a little grained powde and fasten it to the top of the rock either with paper, parchment, or an thing else, so that the rocket, endi the saucissō, may take fire; so shal yo not faile of your intent or designe.
CHAP. 11. How to make Stoupel or preparing of your Cotten wieke. TO make Stoupell, not the meanest, but the best that may be made to giue fire (which in per tearme is called estoupel∣g) to all manner of fire-workes.  Cotten-wieke, and double it oft as shall bee needfull for your , as if it were to estoupel your fie∣ances; then double it eight or ten es, and also for the stoupeling of
great rockets; but if it bee to  through your starres, then 4.  threds shall suffice; so hauing do led your cotten wieke fitting for yo purpose, steepe it in faire water,  then wring it betweene your han and take gunpowder dust, witho other mixture, and steepe it in  water, not putting too much wat nor too little, but onely till it app like durt, and then put into it  cotten wieke, and there turning a winding it till it hath sufficiently  powder in euery place and  cell, then draw it out, putting a  dry dust vpon it, & hang it a dry in the sunne or els-where, and  being dry, you shall haue the  excellent stoppel that may bee ma for your vse at al times, leaving  all such ingredients which ignora
eme so highly of, as Aqua-vitae,  wine, strong lee, quick-lime, ger, vrine, and diuers others, for ich I would not lose so much  time as to repeat them, but  goe forward, and shew how to  all the parts of a rocket.
CHAP. XII. The manner how to assemble and set together the parts of a rocket. WHen the rocket is finished and taken out of th mould noted A, in the fi∣gure of the 3 chapter, an the rocket is noted with the letter  in the same figure, then must yo ioyne to the end of the rocket, which is not choaked an empty cartoush  coffin, much bigger then the rocke is large, which is represented by  in the same figure, in this cartous you shall put your serpents, golde rayne, starres, saucissons, or othe things at your pleasure, but first of
you must put in the bottome pow∣der dust; onelie enough to couer the bottome of the large cartoush; and then put the serpents with the ends downeward which are to take fire; and likewise the golden rayne in the same manner, but it is the custome to put a little powder dust amongst the stars; this cartoush being thus fil∣led, couer it with a single piece of paper, and afterward paste vpon that a picked cap made also of single pa∣per, and to make perfect your rocket you must binde a rod of such length and waight, that being bound to the rocket, it must weigh down the roc∣ket on your finger being neere to the rocket, and then stoupel your rocket, hat is to say, prime it with cotton-wieke, and it is thus finished either o fire or keepe.
This method is fit for all sorts of rockets, great ones or little ones, ex∣cept that little ones must haue the vpper cartoush no bigger then the rocket, onely to hold halfe a dozen of starres or serpents, or one saucis∣son for so much as many beeing fired together, great confusion would happen, if great rockets should bee put together, and not prepared o∣therwise.
CHAP. XIII. How to represent diuers sorts of fi∣gures in the Ayre with Rockets. THe first and most ra∣rest is a tree or foun∣taine, and is made put∣ting many little rock∣ets vpon one great rocket, passing all the rodes of the little ones through the large cartoush of the great rocket, and if the little rockets take fire while the great one is mounting vp, they will represent
a tree: but if they take fire when the great rocket is turning downe againe towards the ground, then they will bee like to a fountaine of fire, and if there bee two or three little rockets hauing no rods amongst others they will make di∣vers motions contrarie to the rest
most pleasing. The second figure is the golden rayne; and that is made when manie quils filled (as aforesaid) are put vpon a great roc∣ket: for certainelie all those quills taking fire will seeme like a great shower of fierie rayne to those who are vnder it, but to those who are a side of, like beautifull long haire. The third figure are Starres, which are represented putting one∣lie manie Starres vpon a great roc∣ket. The fourth are serpents which are alreadie described, but to make all these prescribed figures varie, you may tye manie little ones to∣gether by the ends, which take not fire, the quils, or serpents may bee tyed in like manner; but the thread wherewithall they are tyed, must be at least two or three inches
long, betwixt each one, and you shall see diuers sorts of figures in the ayre, changing themselues into much varietie.
CHAP. XIV. How to make fierie boxes. THe fire-boxes are made of many rockets being put into a large cartoush the bottome whereof is couered with powder dust, and pier∣ced in the middle to passe through a port fire or stoupell, to giue fire to the rockets within the cartoush or coffin, which flying out, leaue the cartoush most commonly whole and vncracked, those boxes are onely to be coured with a peece of paper, that the rockets taking fire may flie out
without resistance; and the reason why they are to bee couered, is be∣cause if manie be made one neere to another, they should not take fire all at once.
CHAP. XV. How to make fierie Lances. THe vse of these lances is alwaies required in all great fireworkes, where∣fore here shall be descri∣bed the manner of their making. Their cartoushes are to be made as other cartoushes for rockets; onely these may be made of pastbord, and glued as they are a rowling, if it bee to make great ones, but if for little ones, then paper shall suffice, the car∣toushes being made, let them be fil∣led with the dry composition prescri∣bed
for starres in the 8. chapter of this treatise, and prime them with wet gun powder, & the lower end of the cartoush is commonly stopped with a peece of wood, to the end that they may bee nayled or stucke when they shall bee needfull, the wood being about two inches long out of the cartoush.
CHAP. XVI. The manner how to make Rockets for the water. TAke fire & water being two e∣lements of contrary qualities, the one to the other cause the rockets which worke their effects in or vpon the water to appeare to the spectators more beautifull, and seem more rare and admirable, although that all sorts of rockets being fired, will worke their effects vpon or vn∣der the water, but this onelie is to be noted, that those which are made
for the ayre, or for the ground, haue such strength and force, that beeing once kindled and cast into the wa∣ter, they will consume themselues there, and not rise vp swimming as those which are made artificially for the water as followeth. To make good rockets for the water, the calli∣ber of the mould ought to bee one inch of diameter, and in length eight inches, the breech to enter one inch, hauing no broach; the rowler for the cartoush shall be three quarters of an inch of diameter, and the charger shal be somewhat lesser then the car∣toush being ready to bee filled as the others. Of two sorts of compositi∣on, you shall make one as followeth (if you desire to make a great fierie tayle appeare vpon the water, Then take one pound of salt-peter, halfe
a pound of powder-dust, halfe a pound of brimstone-dust, and two ounces of charcoale-dust: but if you desire to haue it to burne cleere like a candle vpon the water, then take one pound of salt-peter, halfe a pound of brimstone-dust, and three ounces of powder-dust, all these must be well mingled together, as all other compositions) and with either of these compositions, fill your cartoush, and ioyne to the vp∣per end a saucisson, and then couer it all with melted pitch, rosine, grease, or painting, to hinder the water from spoiling the paper: and to make it float and swim vpon the water, bind a rode about two foot long to it as to the others for the ayre. Now if that you desire that this Rocket
charge his actions vpon the water, swimming now vpon the water, and now vnder the water, put here and there powder dust, powre to the quantity of halfe a spoonefull as you charge it; also may you make it change colour, now red and then white fire, onely changing the com∣position in filling it, and so the indu∣strious may adde many changes and diuersities as they shall thinke fit: but if you are to make a great number for a great fireworke, then the plainest are the best, onely filling therewith the first composition; but they must be filled two or three fingers breadth with fine powder dust, to make them flye farre off, or else they must be made like rockets for the aire, and afterward charge them foure inches with composition made for water;
but to be the more certaine, it is best for those who haue great works, to make to trie one or two before they finish many, that the better they may attaine their designes, which with eie they may accomplish, if the rules prescribed be obserued; for as I think there is not one rule neglected apper∣taining to the fabrication of these fireworkes prescribed; and now I will set downe the manner how to make all sorts of ballouns and flying saucissons, which are absolutelie the beautifullest parts of fire-works for pleasure, and after them I will de∣scribe a braue fireworke for pleasure with the manner how to place, dis∣pose and range euerie peece and part thereof, to make their play in order.
CHAP. XVII. How to make Girondells or fierie Wheeles. A Girondell (or as some call it a fierie wheele) is often required in great or little fireworks for pleasure, and therefore I haue thought fit and ne∣cessary to set downe their descripti∣on, as well as of al other parts of fire∣workes: for according to the applica∣tion of the Girondels in a Fireworke, one may iudge of the Enginiers in∣dustrie, for being well applied, they
adorne very much a fireworke, and being ill applied they spoyle all. And to make them, you must make wheels of wood as bigge as you pretend to make Girondells, and vnto those wheeles bind fast rockets of a meane bignesse, binding the mouth of one towards the tayle of the other, and so continuing vntill you haue filled your wheele quite round, which done, couer them with paper pasted very curiously about them, that the one taking fire, they take not fire al∣together, but the mouth of one shall be left vncouered and ready primed, fit to take fire, the which ending shal giue fire backward to the next, and so one to the other, euery one his turne: there may bee bound fi∣erie Lances to these Girondells ei∣ther vpright, or neere overthwart,
which will shew diuersitie of fire the wheele turning: also there may bee added to these wheeles boxes of fire, prouided that they be artificially ap∣plyed in such manner, that they bal∣lance the wheele equally, although the proper vse of girondeles, is onely to garnish the angles of a great Fire∣worke, without much trouble, for that confusiō is too frequent in fire∣workes; and therfore it shall be expe∣dient to auoide the multitude of fire∣workes too neere compacted toge∣ther; but placing them as much di∣stant as conueniently may be admit∣ted, by which meanes you shall bee the better able to attaine your de∣signes pretended.
CHAP. XVIII. The manner how to make Ballouns. THe ballouns being the perfectest part of all ar∣tificiall fire-workes for delight, I thought best to set their description heere apart from the others, to the end that the learners might the better and more easier attaine to the knowledge and perfection thereof; and being that I haue already described the morter, which is represented by the figure A, following, I will onely referre the reader to the second chapter of the
first Treatise for warres, where hee he shall find sufficient instruction for the making of the instrument. But to make a Balloune shall be required a woodden rowler, which is repre∣sented by the figure B following▪ this rowler must be of such bignesse as you desire to make the inside of your balloune; vpon which rowler, let there bee rowled as many past∣bords as you shall think sufficient for strength being well glued together and choake this cartoush at the on end, leauing a little hole for a portfire as shall follow, and glue it in. This portfire shall be made iust like vnto  rocket for the ground, but only tha the composition may be somewha slower; as for the ayre, and to know of what length this portfire ough to be, it shall not bee amisse t
try a balloune filled with earth; then your portfire being well fastned to the balloune; place all your serpents within it, putting nothing else a∣mongst them, but onely one or two saucissons, to breake the balloune on high, when the serpents be all on fire, these saucissons must be made of the length of your serpents, and your serpents may be of the bignes of your rockets for the ground be∣fore prescribed, but not so long, and they may bee filled with the composition either for the ground, or for the ayre: but it is to bee no∣ted, that they must bee primed with the composition for the ayre, pressing verie stronglie the priming powder into the throat or gorge of the serpents, if it bee put in drie: but if that wete, then onely with
the end of a sticke, or else with ones finger put in a little; as for other ser∣pents and the two saucissons shall haue their primings somewhat lon∣ger then the serpents, to the end that all the serpents may be a fire before that the balloune breake. The ser∣pents being not made too long, one
may put two or three rankes in one balloune, as appears by the figure C, or one ranke of serpents, and over them many Starres; all these things being thus disposed within the car∣toush, let it be choaked at the other end; and then prime the ballouns with cotten wieke steeped in gun∣powder as the stoupel before spoken of; but this cotten must be well fast∣ned to the end of the port-fire with strong packe-thread, which done, charge the balloune in your morter, as is taught in the 6. chap. of the first Treatise; and you may shoot it when you please. This balloun is represen∣ted perfect by the figure D, but if you will fill your ballouns with stars only, another manner of proceeding shall be required; for as you put in your starres into the cartoush; let
there bee powder-dust mingled a∣mongst them here and there to giue fire to the starres, and to breake the balloune being vp in the aire. There is also another sort of ballouns to be made, but the expence of making thē is so excessiue, that few or none will be at the cost, yet the description shall now follow. In stead of serpents made of paper, you may haue them Iron about the bignes of your little finger, and one inch and a halfe of length, or two inches; and neer to the bottome there must be a double bot∣tome in the middle whereof there shall be a little hole, that one may fill the space between the two bottoms with corned powder, and the rest is to be filled with a composition some∣what slow, the diffrence betweene those of Iron, and the former of pa∣per,
is that many Iron ones may bee laid in a lesser space; but in stead of a pastbord cartoush, there must bee had a woodden box, made by a Tur∣ner, and couered with canuas and glue; the portfire must be made also of Iron, like to a little hat, hauing in the bottom two or three little holes to giue fire to the serpents; but for the expence of one of these, there may be made halfe a dozen of the others, nay neere a dozen, wherfore I would wish no man to trouble themselues with this sort, vnlesse it be for the pleasure of some great Prince.
CHAP. XIX. How to make flying Saucissons. THe method which must be obserued in making flying saucissons, is most easie, prouided that one knoweth already the manner how to make the common sort before pre∣scribed, for the cartoushes are to bee made all alike; onely excepted that those which are for flyers, be some∣what longer then the others, they are to be charged in like maner as the o∣thers, but the corned powder being
put in, there must also be a litle pow∣der-dust put after it, and beaten with a mallet, as the rockets for the ground yet let not more then the thicknesse of a finger be of dust-powder, and then choake it almost quite together leauing onely a hole as big as a small goose-quill, to which you shall put a little wet powder-dust for priming. They may be made otherwise, as fol∣loweth, which will make a more beautifull shew; first of all, you must charge the cartoushesas the common saucissons, and then choake them as the common leauing onely a little hole to take fire at, or if the hole chance to stop quite vp, open it with a bodkin, but the saucissons being charged and choaked, there must be part of the cartoush left ouer and a∣boue that which is charged, which
part shal be filled either with powder dust, or els with composition of roc∣kets for the aire beaten wit a mallet, as before mentioned, I thinke it shall be needles to tell you that they ought to be couered with chord, being that it is sufficiently demonstrated before, it is to be noted that the saucissons which haue the powder within the choaking, doth turne wonderfully in the aire, but the other sort which haue the composition after the choa∣king, flye vp like to a rocket, almost carrying a great tayle after them but the tayle of the others sheweth but very little, they are both sorts repre∣sented by the figure E, in the 18. chapter.
CHAP. XX. How to make short Gunnes for the Saucissons. HAving already treated suffi∣cintly and amply of the fa∣brication and making of the Morter, in the imitati∣on whereof most easily may bee made Canons to shoote flying Sau∣cissons very high in the aire, making them of the one or the other matter or stuffe prescribed for the Mor∣ter in the second chapter of the first Treatise, but the powder sacke needs
not, and the touch-hole ought to be in the middle of the bottome; also it shall be necessary that euery Canon haue a little breech to passe through a peece of wood, wherein they may be fastned, so that a port-fire may be layed from one to another, these are represented by the figure F, in the eighteenth chapter.
CHAP. XXI. The manner how to dispose and build a great or little Fire∣worke. IT is a custome and vsual thing among the braue and skil∣full Painters; 1 to teach their appren∣tises how to draw limbs, or members, as the eye, the nose, the mouth, the eare, the hand, the foot, and afterward the whole bodie; and in like manner, the most
learned and famous Philosophers, beginning their schooles, teach their disciples what is materia, forma, & primatio; and afterward, totum compo∣situm; and to imitate them in this Treatie, I haue taught the one after another, all the parties required are necessary for the composing & buil∣ding of a beautifull fireworke for de∣light, hauing begun with the rockets for the ayre, afterward the rockets for the ground, the saucissons & rockets for the water, and following the bal∣louns and flying saucissons with all things belonging vnto them; and to auoyd falling into the old prouerbe (Ex omnibus aliquid, & in toto nihil: to know somthing of euery thing, and nothing perfectly) I haue here set downe after all these parts the de∣scription and manner how to assem∣ble,
build and dispose any manner of artificiall fireworke great or little: and to begin, you must first cause to be built a scaffold trianguler, square, round, or of such forme and bignes as you shall desire to haue your Fire∣worke, your scaffold being built, dis∣pose thereupon your statues or fi∣gures
which shall be prepared for it, let them be made of osiers, and coue∣red with paper or canuas, and curi∣ously painted as here is represented in this figure. Mountains, buildings and many statues, all which are to be supposed, onely osiers and paper, or canuas painted, your figures or sta∣tues thus disposed vpon your scaf∣fold, round about the flore therof, shal be layed your saucissons, being alrea∣dy fastned to peeces of timber, and to the pillers of your scaffold or raile, shall be fastned your firie lan∣ces one right vpward, and the other flat along, each distant, the one from the other about halfe a foot; and vn∣der the firie lances, let there be nay∣led a ranke of boxes of fire, which shal be ranged vpon peeces of wood as the saucissons; all your fireworkes
being thus disposed, you may place in the side which is of least esteeme, your partments of rockets made like vnto square chests, or long boxes, of such bignes and length as shal be re∣quired to hold those rockets which you meane to place in each one: bu1 these boxes must haue a false bottom full of holes for to passe euery rod of euery rocket apart, and hauing fil∣led let the boxe (which by proper name is called a partment) be coue∣red with a leafe or two of paper pa∣sted close; but to giue fire to the roc∣kets, let there be made a hole thorow the partment, through it shall passe a little peece of stoupel, or cottē wieke and giuing fire to that, all the rockets within the partment, fly out, and in the same manner shall you giue fire to all your fierie lances with a stou∣pel
going from the one to the other; and as for your girondells, you shall giue fire to them with a match, as you desire that they should play, and by this meanes all your fire-workes shall begin to play at once, except those parts which shall bee reserued without priming to be fiered by the hand, as best shall seeme to the artist or enginier, and so the industrious shall not faile to accomplish his de∣signes, obseruing all the rules prescri∣bed; which being at large laid down I will goe forward to the next chap∣ter, and there shew how to make a most pretious vnguent for all maner of burnings, as well of common fire, as of artificiall fire, if by hazard anie mischance arise,
CHAP. XXII. A most pretious vnguent for any burning. LEt no man wonder if (hauing ended this Trea∣tise of fireworkes) I take in hand to describe a lit∣tle part of Chirurgerie, whch I con∣fesse to haue taken out of a Treatise written by Thybourel, a Chirurgion of Loraine, and hauing made expe∣rience of this vnguent diuerse times as well for burnings, as that for other accidents, I may say with bold∣nes & truth, that there was neuer the
like secret of this kind left to posteri∣tie, specially against hurts come by fire, and which leaues lesse scarres af∣ter the healing of the places woun∣ded, and therefore I haue set downe the very words which Thybourel hath written in the last chapter of his 4th. booke, intituled Recueil de plusieurs machines militaires. Take fresh hogges grease or lard, as much as you please, and boyle it, taking off the skim vntill there arise no more skim; then set the lard three or foure nights in the ayre abroad, after which it must be washed in running water, to take away the saltish nature, and also to clense it white, then melt it, and keepe it for your vse. Bacon may serue in stead of lard.
Otherwise. The white of an egge or fresh butter being mingled together and well beaten to an oyle are excellent. Another sort most excellent. Take a stone of vnslacked lime (or o∣therwise called quicke lime) and let it dis∣solue in cleere water, and when the wa∣ter is setled, powre it gently out from the lime through a linnen cloth, then put as much sallet oyle as you take water toge∣ther, and beating it all to an oyle, you shal haue a most excellent vnguent for all kind of burnings, neither of these vn∣guents haue any scarre, but are precious remedies for the afflicted
We haue seene Impostures▪ couer sores with this water alone, but obseruing su∣perstitious ceremonies, saying vaine pray∣ers, but we assure the posteritie, that the water onely is sufficient to heale wounds and sres, onely washing them with it, and couering them with a linnen cloath wet in the same water, without any super∣stition, it doth modifie and percute, by which it doth supply nature, and doth heale sores better then our ordinary vnguents. Thus may you see how this braue Chirurgion that set forth to the face of the world the perfection of this vnguent (which cannot be sufficient-praised) confirming by his own con∣fession, that the Chirurgions do not vse such good remedies in their shops and ordinarie operations; wherfore I haue set downe his owne words, that no man may esteeme mee
inuenter of Calumnies, against the practitioners of Chirurgery, nor any others, as many now adayes seemes to write with serpents tongues, stin∣ging vertue on euery side, against whō viperous venoms patience is the only antedote, leauing them to sweat, vexe, and torment themselues in their insatiable rage, and to end my dis∣course touching the perfection of this vnguent, I will assure all these who shall haue neede and make vse thereof, that they shall find in opera∣tion what I haue here set downe in description.
A Treatise of practicall Geometrie. TO satisfie diuers of my friends and yeeld to their desires (whose treaties haue bin such powerfull commands to me, that I haue beene constrained to lay aside and forsake my own pro∣per will and follow theirs, I haue set forth this little Treatise of practicall Geometrie to the view and censure of the world, which I acknowledge to be vnworthy of so many singular and industrious wits, as yearly spring vp in this Iland, and the adiacents
thereunto, notwithstanding I haue giuen way to their requests for their priuat contentment, and to assure the world that I haue nothing, no not my owne will proper to my selfe, but that I will follow as neere as possible I may the precepts and documents of that ancient, wise, and diuine Philo∣sopher Plato, who saith, Non nobis nati sumus, sed patriae & amicis; we are not borne for our selues, but for the seruice of our countrey and friends: then for the satisfaction of my friends and seruice of those who will accept these my labours, I haue cleerely and in few words set downe the manner how anie man (who hath neuer so little studied Geometrie) may take a∣ny distance, or heighth, depth, or breadth with two little stickes, yea een strawes, being laied a crosse, al∣so
I haue set downe a method how to take any kind of heighth, distance or depth, with the Sector without a∣nie arithmetike or rule thereof: and also by the sines tangents and secants, the whole beeing very portable, to refresh the memorie, & to streng∣then and augment the knowledge of those who (for want of practise) haue not the perfect vse of those in∣struments: then first of all I will set downe the manner how to accomo∣date and dispose the sticks, twiggs, or strawes for the measuring of any di∣stance.
The method how to make the Crosse. HAuing two stickes, the one long, and the other some∣what short as are represen∣ted in the figure following by CF, and DE, then marke vpon the sticke CF, points the one distant from the other precisely, halfe the length of DE, and let there be a hole made through the sticke DE, so that it may slide vpon CF, from end to end, and you shall know the two parts of the crosse by these names,
the longest part CF, shall be called the index, and the shortest DE, the crosse. Now if you haue any heighth to take, then fasten to one end of the crosse, as to D, a perpendicular or plummet, and for the more easie and iust operation, you should haue a foot to support the crosse; the instrument being thus prepared, you may mea∣sure with great facility either heighth breadth, or depth, as followeth.
PROPOSITION I. How to take a height accessible. LEt it be proposed to take the heighth of the To∣wer AB, to the base or foot whereof one may easilie approach▪ dispose the crosse of your instrument in such sort that DCE be of equall distance there one from the other; as thus, settle your crosse vpon the first point of the index; then setting the instrument to your eye, goe either neerer, or re∣tire farher from the obiect you de∣sire
to measure vntill you see A the highest part thereof by the two ex∣tremities of the crosse CD, (the in∣den being paralled to the earth) which will happen in the point C, and not else-where: that being mea∣sured, will be alwayes the iust height of the Tower required, onelie ob∣serue that you must alwayes adde to the distance betweene you and the Tower the length of the foot, which supporteth your instrument, and so you shall haue preciselie the heighth required: for scarce euer will it hap∣pen, that the instrument may be pla∣ced leuell with the base or foote o the height required, but if that should chance to be, then the extre∣mitie of the index C would ariue in the point G, and so nothing to be ad∣ded, but onelie measure the distance
betweene G and B, and that would be the iust height required; but if it chance that you may not plant the instrument in the point C, by reason of some inconueniences which may happen retire further backe, and put forward the crosse to the second point of the index, and then accord
your visuele lines to see the point A, (the index alwaies being paralel to the ground) which then will happen twice the height required, distant from the foot thereof: but if it hap∣pen that going backe you ascend a∣nie little mountaine, or descend into any little valley, you are then to ob∣serue some point in the wall of the Tower, which the index shall direct you to by the line visuel, & adde on∣lie the height thereof vnto halfe the distance twixt you and the Tower, and that shall be the height requi∣red most exactlie: and thus you shall neuer faile in your operations.
PROPOSITION. II. How to take a height inaccessible, or one height vpon another height. SVppose the altitude BC, to be required, to the foot whereof one may come may come no neerer then to the point D, then at the point D, accord your visuell lines in B and C, the index being alwaies leuell with the ground and the crosse fixed vpon the first marks or point of the index,
then set a marke there in D, and go∣ing backe towards F, as farre as E, and put forward the crosse to the second point of the index, and then direct your lines visuel againe in B and in C which will arriue in E, and not elsewhere, then measure the distance betweene DE, which will be the al∣titude
precisely required, but if you desire the heighth of the Tower B, and mountaine leuell with the foote of your instrument, then you must adde the length of the staffe, which supporteth it as in for∣mer obseruations. And to haue the altitude AB vpon the top of BC, you must take two other obseruati∣ons in FG as before, setting your in∣strument in F, the crosse being fix∣ed vpon the second point of the in∣dex, and direct your visuell lines in A and in C, and then set vp a mark in F, and goe backe, putting forward the crosse to the third point of the index, and direct your visuell lines againe in A and in C, which will happen in G, and not elsewhere, then measure the distance betweene FG, which shall bee equall to the
altitude of the Tower AC, and haing taken already the altitude BC, you may verie easilie substract the little altitude BC from the greater Altitude AC, and then will rest the altitude AB, which is re∣quired.
PROP. III. How to take any distance vpon a place accessible or inaccessible. IF it were proposed to take the distance AB, and that the place were accessi∣ble onelie in the middle vpon the ne CF, then dispose your instru∣ment as before the crosse placed vp∣on the first point of the index, and going forward or backward vpon he line CF, direct your visuel lines  A and in B by the two extreami∣es of the crosse, the end of the index
resting against your eie, then measure the distance betweene you and the point F, and that shall be iust half the distance required betweene AB, but if the place be inaccessible, so that you may not approch neerer then the point D, put forward the crosse to the second point of the index, & then
direct your visuel lines to AB, and leaue a marke at D, and put forward the crosse one point more, and going backe vpon the line DE, vntill you may direct your visuel lines by the extreamities of the crosse againe in A and B, then measure the distance between DE, and that will be halfe the distance betweene AB, and so may you operate going backe, and putting forward the crosse.
PROPOSITION IV. Another manner how to take a distance inaccessible. SVppose the distance AB to bee taken, and that B is the neerest place that may be required, then there must be set a marke, and with∣drawing backward in a straight line towards C, and there againe plant another marke at C, then going right towards one side, as towards F, counting your places equall to the number which you haue alreadie found B and C, and there direct
your visuel lines in BGC, as in this figure at D, leauing there a mark, goe straight along towards F, not moo∣uing the crosse of your instrument, and going along make trial where your visuel lines may be directed a∣gain in A and in C, which will be in the point E, and not else-where,
then leaue there a marke, and measure the distance betweene DE, and that shall bee the distance which you require, which is AB, the demonstration of this pro∣position is grounded vpon the se∣cond and fourth propositions of 6 of Euclide.
PROP. V. How to take a distance onely vpon a line parallell to it. LEt the distance AB bee required, the which may neither bee seene, nor come neere vnto, but onelie vpon the line or banke CK, then vpon that banke draw out a straight line with markes, as the line CK, paralell to the wall AB, and set a marke in K, then goe backe to∣wards D, and direct your visuel lines in B and in K, by the extreamities of the crosse GH, then leauing the crosse
in the same state and a marke at D, withdraw your selfe further back to∣wards C, vntill you may direct your visuel lines to A and K, which will happen in C, and not elsewhere, and leaue there another marke, then mea∣sure the distance betweene CD, and the same shall bee the breach AB, e∣quall
to CD, and the demonstration of this proposition is grounded in the 29. and 33. propositions of the 1. of Euclide. PROP. VIII. How to take the depth of a valley. TO take the depth of a Valley, there is some∣what more difficult then in the former operations, because there are more obseruations to bee made, and to begin you must from the point B obserue in some place
opposite a ake leuell with the ho∣rison as A, the leuell whereof you may easilie take at this instrument, as is taught in the second proposi∣tion by the helpe of the plumbet: then from the point B, take the distance BC, as in the fift proposi∣tion, or else mecanikelie, which being done, direct your visuel lines from B to A, and to C, and leauing the instrument in same state, tur∣ning your selfe about, frame the same angle vpon the plaine, which will be FBH, then plan markes vp∣on the lines BF and BH, and vpo the line BH, count as many pa∣ces or fathoms as you shall haue found betweene B and C, and at the end of your paces▪  marke, which will bee at E, thi
being done, dispose your instrument to make a right angle, placing the crosse vpon the irst point of the in∣dex, for the crosse maketh alwaies a right angle when the crosse is vpon the fift point. The instrument being thus disposed, walke vpon the line BF, vntill you may direct your visu∣ell
lines (by the extreamities of the crosse) to B and E, or els to FE, which will happen in D, and no where else, then measure the line DE, and it will be equall to the depth required GC, the demonstration of this proposition is grounded in the 26, of the 1. of Euclide, or vpon the equalite of the two triangles BGC, and BDE, which are both equall and equall angles. Although this o∣peration be somewhat more obscure then the others, yet I thinke that it is sufficiently explained, and therfore I will goe forward to the vse of the sector.
PROP. IX. The manner how to take either di∣stance or altitude with the Sector. SVppose the altitude AD were to be taken to the foot whereof you may approch open the Sector 45 adding to it the sights then going forward or backward vpon the line DI, vntill you may see the highest part of the altitude A, through the two vpper sights, the inferior branch of the Se∣ctor, being paralell to the earth or
horison, then measure the distance betweene the center of the Sector and the Tower, adding to that di∣stance the length of the leg, which supporteth your Sector, and that shal be the altitude required, as appeares in the figure following AB, and BC, are of equall distance, and adding the
length of the foot of the sector, you will find, that it will be height of BD, which doth accomplish the alti∣tude of the Tower. But to take a di∣stance in any plaine, as in the figure precedent, the same operation may be vsed, except onely the two bran∣ches of the sector shall be turned pa∣ralell to the horison or ground, ha∣uing first made a right angle at the point G, or you may operate other∣wise, first of all prolong a straight line as EGH of what length you please, then open your sector to a right angle, and set it the point G, so that you may see through two sights the point E, and where the line visuel of the other two sights strikes along, set vp a merke as in I, then goe tow∣ards it, and at your pleasure in the same line, set your sector opening it,
so that you may see the point E and G, and keeping your instrument at the same width, & in the same place place, only turne it to the other side, so that you may see the point G tho∣row the sights which before saw E, and where the other visuell line shall cut the first line EGH, set a marke which will be in H precisely, and that shall be the distance required GE, the demonstration of this proposi∣tion is grounded vpon the 4. and 26. of the 1. of Euclide.
PROP. X. How to take any distance or altitude inaccessible with the Sector. TO obtaine the altitude AB, you must first take the distance BC. as is taught by the 9. Propo∣sition precedent, and knowing the distance BC, which I suppose to be 100 fathom, set in the point C your Sector, and direct your visuell line through the two vpper sights to the top of the altitude A, and let the branch of the Sector be paralel with the ground, then leaving your
instrument at the same width, let fall a perpendicular line vpon the line of the Sector divided into equall parts, passing by the 100 number of the infe∣rior branch noted D, and note what nūber the perpendicular doth cut vp∣on the vpper branch of the Sector no∣ted H, which I suppose here to be
the 150 part or number, and then set the two points of a paire of compasses vpon the two numbers, to wit, the one point vpon 100, and the other point vpon 150. of the equall parties, then transport the points of the compasse all along one branch of the Sector vp∣on the line of equall parties, and the two points shall denote as many par∣ties vpon the line of the Sector as the Towre doth containe fathoms in al∣titude, adding the length of the foote which supporteth the Sector, the de∣monstration of this Proposition is grounded vpon the 4. Proposition of the 6. of Euclide.
PROP. XI. Of Sines, Secants▪ and Tangents. BEcause the most noble, most artificiall, and most certaine way of taking of Altitudes, Distances, or o∣ther Dimentions, is by Sines, Secants, or Tangents, I haue set downe their operations in such Pro∣positions as are vsuall in this subiect at the end of this Treatise of Practicall Geometrie, and before I enter on the method of operation, it is necessary to define what the said Sines, Secants, & Tangents are. 1. A righ Sine is halfe the Subtence of of the double Arke.
A Subtence, sometimes called a Cord, is a right line drawne from any part of the Circumference of a Circle, vnto any other part of the same Cir∣cumference, so the right line DE is the Subtence or Cord of the Ark DGH halfe of which is DF, the Sine of the Arke DG; and so is MN the Subtence of the Circumference or Arke MGN, halfe of it is MI, which is the Sine of the Arke MG; now the Arke MG is halfe of the Arke MGN, and MI is halfe of the Subtence of that double Arke, viz. MGN; hence it is accor∣ding to the definition aforesaid, that the Sine of any Arke is halfe the Sub∣tence of the double Arke; by the same reason OT is the Sine of the Arke BO and MS is the Sine of the Arke BOM and so of others. Note that the Sine of any Arke lesse
then a Quadrant is also the Sine of the complement of that Arke vnto a Se∣micircle, so the Sine of BO 20 degrees being OT the same OT is also the Sine of the Arke OGL 160 degrees, for that the Subtence of an Arke of a Circle is common both to the lesser Segment that it subtendeth, and also
to the greater, and therefore halfe of the Subtence wich is the Sine shall be common vnto halfe the lesser Segment and also vnto halfe of the greater, which two halfes put together make a Semicircle; and therefore the one is the Complement of the other. Note further that the totall Sine, the Sine of 90, or the Radius, is no∣thing else but the Semidiameter of a∣ny Circle, viz. CB, or CG. If a line be drawne touh a Cirl, it is called a Tangent, (a tango) as he line AB toucheth the Circumference of the Circle in B, and so AB is called a Tangent line, and is suated on the Terme of the Radius CB, and per∣pendicular thereto, by the 18 Propo∣sition of the 3. of Euclid. 2. The Secant of an Arke is a line contained betweene the Center and
the line Tangent, so that it passe by the given Arke, so if BO be a given Arke, CQ is the Secant thereof, and if BM be a given Arke, then is CR the Se∣cant thereof. 3. The Tangent of an Arke is a line contained betweene the tearme of the Secant, and the touch point, so BQ is the Tangent of the Arke BO, and BR is the Tangent of the Arke BM, &c.
PROPOSITION. XII. Hovv to take any altitude or distance by the Sines, Tangents and Secants. FIrst of all is to bee no∣ted that in all triangles as each side is the one to the other, even so each sine will bee one to the other: that is to say, each sine of a triangle equilaterall shall bee equall amongst themselues, or one sine, as the sides of that triangle are all equall,
and the sine of a Scalene triangle shall be all inequall and different amongst themselues, as the three sides of the triangle are different one from ano∣ther. Now for operation let it be pro∣posed to take the Altitude AB, to the base or foundation whereof you may well approach, then there begin to measure your paces or fathoms from the base B to some place in the plaine which I suppose to be C, and there set your instrument either Secor, Gra∣phometer, or anie other with which you may take the degrees of an angle, and in the point C, take that angle which is found to be of 39. degrees, & the angle B is already knowne to bee of 90 degrees, the Tower standing vpright. now rests to know the de∣grees of the angle A, which to obtaine adde 90. to 39. and it maketh 129
which you must substract from 180. nd then will rest 51. which the an∣gle A containeth, and so the three an∣gles are knowne, and the one side of he triangle BC, is also knowne to ontaine as I here suppose a hundrd athom, and to know the quantity of he other two sides AB and AC, by
the sines, tangents, or secants, you must seeke in a table of sines the sines of each angle which will be found as followeth, the sine totale, or the demi∣diameter being supposed of 100,000 parts, the angle▪ A of 51, degrees will haue for his sines, 77715, parts. B of 90. degrees will haue for his sines, 100,000. parts. C of 39. degrees will haue for his sines, 62932. parts. Then working by the rule of three, you say if the sines of A 77715. giue the side BC of 100 fathoms, how ma∣ny fathoms will the sines of C, 6.932 for the side AB, and dispose your rule of three as followeth. If 77715— 100—62932. And hauing multi∣plied the second number by the third or the third by the second, and diui∣ded
the product by the first number, and the quotient of the diuision will be for the side AB 80. fathoms, 70. in∣ches, 4. lines and 11/12 parts of a line And o find out the side AC, you must o∣perate in the same manner by the rule of three, & say if the sine A of 79715 giues the side BC of 100. fathoms, how many fathoms will the sine B giue, which is 100,000. for the side AC, and hauing multiplid the second number by the third, and diuided the product by the first, the quotient will be 128. fathoms, 48. inches, 7. lines, & 4875/77715. part of a line, which is almost one line for the side AC, and thus may you know any kind of distance with great facilitie, onely knowing the angles and one side.
PROP. XIII. How to take any altitude or di∣stance inaccessible by the sines. LEt the altitude AC bee proposed to be taken, and the neerest comming to it is B, then in that point B, take the angle ABC, as in the chapter before, which is of 61. de∣grees, then assemble 61. with 90. the right angle opposite and the whole is 151, which you must substract from 180, and then will rest 29 for the angle A, and so the three angles of the
iangle are known, but neither side; nd therefore to know one of the des, that wee may operate by the es, tangents and secants, retir rther backe or aside to D, and mea∣re your paces or fathoms from B to , which I suppose here to bee 300. aces, and in the point D, take the
angle ADB, which is 37. degrees, and then may know that the angle exterior ABD, is of a hundred and nineteene degrees, for it is equall to the two interior angles ABC and BAC by the 32. proposition of the 1. of Euclide, or otherwise it is the comple∣ment of the halfe circle, of which the angle interior ABC of 61 degrees is taken out, now you haue the know∣ledge of two angles ADB, and DAB, the which being ioyned, sub∣stract them from 180. and then the third angle will remaine DAB, then shal you know the three angles of the triangle ABD, and one of the sides by which you may come to the knowlege of the side AB of the first riangle ABC by the sine, and by the knowledge of the side AB, you may also know the side AC, by the sines,
tangents and secants, as in the prece∣dent chapter: and so in all manner of altitudes or distances, accessibles or inaccessibles, and it is to bee noted, that one is not boūd to wright back∣ward, taking the second obseruati∣on in D, but at the pleasure of the workeman to make choise of the fai∣rest place in the field, so I thinke no difficulty shal be found in these works
The manner how to take the plane of a towne, or any place out of musket-shot. SVppose you were to take the plane ABCDE; first, hauing considered that the scituation of the plane hath a crooked arke BA; those two lines must be supposed straight as EQ and BP, making an obtuse angle at the point A, and being farre off from this plane in the point P, consider that the lines PB and QE, make but one angle in the point A, thē leauing a marke at P, withdraw from thence into some other place of field
where your eye may rightly meete with the line AE, which will happen in Q where you must set another mark now consider that if a line be drawne from Q to P, it will forme a triangle APQ, whereof you may know two angles, PQA and APQ which being done with your instrument, and you find the angle APQ to bee of 45. de∣grees, and PAQ of 34. degrees, then adde 45. to 34. and commeth in the whole 79. which you must substract from 180 degrees, and there will rest 101 for the third angle PAQ by the 32. proposition, lib. 1. of Euclide, and the angle EAB is equall to the angle PAQ by the 15. proposition 1. then let vs conclude that we haue the an∣gle BAE of 101. degrees, which was vnknowne, then shall it be necessary in the place noted H, to know how
the side CD is scituated in respect of the parts of the world, and with a declinatorie we shall find it to be sea∣ted North, West & Southeast, which shall serue vs for the knowledge of all the rest: and in the former man∣ner may be taken all the other angles of the plane proposed, and to haue
the distance of each side of the plane, you must measure one onely as be∣fore taught, which I suppose it shall be BC, which shall bee found to bee 100 fathoms, and hauing found aside homologe to it or like to it, and di∣uided into an hundred parts equally, it shall serue for a scale to measure all the rest by.
CHAP. I. A treaty of fortifications as well regularly as irregularly. IT is not my intenti∣on to treate here of all manner of forti∣fications, but one∣ly of those which by the generall and common opinions are held and ap∣prooued to bee the best for the de∣fence and conseruation of deseruing places; and to begin this Treatise, I will set downe certaine rules which
are now held for maximes of the best fortifications. Let the flanked angle be open 90. degrees, or the neerest to 90. that may be it is the angle A in the next trian∣guler figure. Let the flanking angle be not aboue 150. degrees open, but the lesser, shall alwayes be the best, this angle is BLC in the same figure. Let not the line of defence be lon∣ger then musket-shot, which is 100, or 110 fathom, it is CK or BI in the same figure. The largest necke or gorge of a ba∣stion or bulwarke is alwayes the best and the longest flanke lines, specially if eares be to be built vpon them, CN or MI are nose lines Now shal follow al the denomina∣tions
of fortifications for the better intelligence of the better treating of them. CHAP. II. Denominations of the parties of Fortifications. A Flanked angle is the point of a bulwarke in the figure following, it is the angle SBN. A flanking angle is BLC, which is made by two lines of defence mee∣ting in the point L. A line of defence is the distance
from the flanke to the angle flanked, as here BI, or CK. The flanke is K or L. The line of the flanke is KN or IM. The curtine is the strait line drawne from one flanke to the other, as here KI. The shoulder of a bulwarke is N or M. The pane of a bulwarke is BN. The eare is alwayes built vpon the line of the flanke, as in the second fi∣gure following. The capital or chief line is BI or FC Bastion or bulwarke is a piece con∣tained within two lines, two panes, and two flankes. The necke or gorge of a bastion is the distance betweene the two flanks for the entrie into the bastion. A rampard is the earth raised against
the wall in the inside to strengthen it against Canon shot. The parapet is the elevation aboue the string of the wall. The counter escarp is the exteriour brim of the towne ditch. A halfe moone is a peece loose from the towne raised of earth, and inuiro∣ned with a ditch to hinder the assault of the enemies, it is sometimes made in forme trianguler, but sometimes oblong as occasion is, now shall fol∣low the Treatise of the regular forts, and first of all the trianguler.
CHAP. III. How to build a trianguler Fort. SVppose ABC to be the Triangle, where in a Fort three square is to be built. From the point C, as the center, and from the distance CB, let the arke BTA for 60. degrees be described, which shall be diuided in∣to two equall parts at the point T. And againe, the arke BT into foure other equall parts, and OB shall bee an arke of 7½ degrees, by which draw the line CO, and it shall forme the di∣minished
angle OCB of 7½ degrees. Then diuide each side of the trian∣gle in two equall parts by the points QPR, and draw the strait lines QC. PB. AR. & the center of the fort shal be D, & the intersection E, which is made by the line OC, shal be center of one bastion, and the line BE is the
Capitall line which shal be transpor∣ted into CF and AG, then draw the straight lines BF, FA. CG. and AE, which shal forme the diminished an∣gles, and become lines of defence. And to find the point for the flanke diuide the angle QCE in two equall parts by the straight lines CH, which teacheth vs the point I, for the flanke and then take the distance FI, and car∣ry it to EK, and the point K shall be a∣nother flanke, then draw the lines of the flankes KN and IM perpendicu∣larly to the courtine KI, which is drawn from the flanke K to the flank I, and the same vpon the two other sides, and you shall haue the triangu∣ler sort perfect. The flanked angle is of 45. degrees, and the flanking angle is 165. degrees
open, which is somewhat farre from the best maximes of fortifications. CHAP. IV. How to build a square Fort. LEt the square ABCD bee in which you desire to build the Fort, draw the two diagonales AD. CB, which cut E the center of the Fort from the point D as center, and from the distance DC, let the arke CGF bee drawne, which shall bee diuided in three equall parts, and from the point G draw the straight line GD, which
formeth the diminished angle GDC of 15. degrees, and the intersection of the line GD in H doth shew the line capitoll CH, which shall be transpor∣ted into IKL, and then draw the straight lines CI. DH and their fel∣lowes, and to find the point for the Flanke, diuide the angle FDG in two
equall parts by the line DM, which cutting the line CI doth shew vs the point N for the Flanke, then take the distance IN, and beare it to HO, and the point O shall be another Flanke, then draw the courtine ON, and from the points O and N draw the two straight lines OP and NQ perpendi∣cularly to the courtine ON. Doe the same vpon each other side, and you will haue perfected the square fortres The Flanked angle is of 60. and the Flanking angle is open 150. degrees.
CHAP. V. How to build the Pantagone Fort. THe five sides and five lines being drawne from the point A as center, and from the distance AB. et the rke BD of 60. degrees be de∣scribed, which shall bee diuided into oure equal parts, of which BE is one nd from the point E▪ draw the right ine AE, which cutting the line BC t the point F, doth giue the part BF or the capitall line; which distance
must be transported to the other lines AG, &c. then from the point B, draw the straight line BG, and so the others which shall bee lines of de∣fence. And to find the Flanke, diuide th
angle EAC in two equal parts by the right line HA and the intersection which it maketh vpon the line BG at the point I shall be the Flanke, then take the distance GI, and transport it into FK, and so to IG, and the point K shall be a Flanke and the point I, then draw the line KI, which shall be a courtine, and draw the lines KL. and IM, which shalbe the Flank lines being drawne perpendicularly to the courtine, and doing the same to eue∣ry other side, you shall haue the desi∣red Fort.
CHAP. VI. How to build the Fort Hexagone. HAuing diuided your circle into sixe equall parts, and drawne the sixe straight di∣agonall lines and the sixe sides. From the point B as center, & from the distance AB, let the arke ADC of 60. degrees be described, and it shall be diuided into foure equall parts, whereof AD is one. From the point D, draw the straight line DB, which cutting the line AC at the pont E, doth giue the di∣stance
AE for the capitall line, then transport that distance to BF. and so round to each angle, & draw the straight lines DB AF and the o∣thers like vnto them which shall be
hereafter the lines of defence. And to find the point for the Flank diuide the angle DBC in two equall parts by the straight line GB, which cutting the line AF at the point H doth shew that point for the Flanke, then take that distance HF, and tran∣sport it to EI, and to all the rest. From the point I, draw the straight lines IK perpendicularly to the curtin IH, and draw the other line HL per∣pendicularly also, and doe the same vpon each other side, and you shall haue the Hexagone perfect, but if you will make eares, they must bee built vpon the two third parts of the lines of the Flanke IK HL as appeares at.
CHAP. VII. How to build the Heptagone. LEt BKLMNO be the Hepta∣gone giuen, and the cen∣ter therof A from whence shall be drawn the seuen lines AN. AK. AP, &c. Then from the point K as center, and from the space KB, let the arke BCA of 60. degrees be described, which shall be diuided into foure equall parts, whereof BC shall be one of 15 degrees, from the point C draw the right line CK, the which cutting the line AN, at the
point D, giueth that part for the ca∣pitall line. Then take the distance ND, and carrie it to KI, and to al the rest likewise, then from the point N draw the right line NI, which shall be the line of defence, and all the o∣thers like vnto it.
And to find the point for the flank, diuide the angle AKC in two equall parts by the right line GK, which cutting the right line NI at the point F sheweth that intersection F, for the point of the flanke take the distance and cary it to D and E, and the point E shall be another Flanke, then draw from E to F the line (which makes the courtine) then the two perpen∣dicular lines for the Flanke lines: whereupon shall be built the eares, and doing the same vpon each side your fort shal be perfect, as required.
CHAP. VIII. How to build the Octogone. FIrst let the square AB CD be made, & then the square EFGH. And to finde the place for the Flanke, diuide the angle ADC by the strait line DI, and the intersection K shew∣eth the point for the Flanke, as in the Forts precedent, and so transport to euery side as in the other, and you shall haue the Fort finished.
CHAP. IX. The description of the heigth, depth, and thicknes of euery part of a compleat Fortification. AB The largiour or breadth of the rampard 66. foot. AC Height of the ram∣pard, 14. foot. GA the interiour heele of the ram∣pard 14. foot. EF The breadth of the parapet 20. foot. EH Height of the parapet 6. foot. BI. The exterior heele of the para∣pet 7. foot. IK. The couered walke vnder the false bray 20 foot.
KL The parapet of the false bray 20 foot. MN The breadth of the ditch 120 foot, & the depth therof ought to be 10 foot. NO The heele of the ditch 10 foot. OP The couered walk of the coun∣terescarpe. PQ The counter escarpe 6. foot of height.
CHAP. X. The manner how to fortifie places irregularly. VPon a line of 100. fa∣thoms is to be made a tenayle; vpon a line of 150. fathoms two half bastions. Vpon a line of 200. fathoms a double tenayle. Vpon a line of 250. fathoms or ther∣about is to be made one bastion, and two halfe bastions.
CHAP. XI. A Fortification irregular. SVppose the place QRSTV to bee fortified without diminishing the place, and having taken it vpon a faire sheet of paper and well considered, all the measures thereof then with∣out this plane conduct the line AB of 250. fathom, and vpon that line (according to the rules prece∣dent) build one bastion, and two halfe bastions taken from the Octogon, and then shall you bee at
the point A, and from the point A, draw the line AP of 150. fathom, or thereabout, vpon which you may build two halfe bastions; then draw the line PO, vpon which you shall as before build one bastion and two halfe bastions, and so vpon the line OX, and vpon all the others accor∣ding to the length that they shall be found. But if it should be required, that the Towne-walls should serue for the courtines, the figure follow∣ing shall be an example either for a part or for all about a towne.
CHAP. XII. Another manner of fortifying ir∣regularly. SVppose that one would fortifie the plane BAPLMNO, but in such hast, and with so lit∣tle cost that the towne walls should serue round for the courtines, the plane then being taken vpon a faire sheet of paper, and hauing drawne the line CDEF of 400. fathom, it shall be found necessary to build vp∣on the same one bastion two half ba∣stions and a tenaile, viz. the bastion
E, the two halfe bastions D and F, and the tenaile DC, & hauing drawn the lines round about the town, lea∣uing sufficient space bewene them and the walls to build bulwarkes or bastions, you may take for the length of euery line of defence, that is to say from the flanke of one bastion to the point of another, 100. or 110 fahom and so euery bastion shall bee scow∣red with musket-shot, as the forts built regularly. This may serue for an example to those who by chance, may haue occasiō to repair or streng∣then any part of a towne, wall, or the whole, and for the fortifying of the wall, the earth must be raised in the inside as a rampard.
A TREATISE OF A∣rithmetike. CHAP. I. Addition SInce that Arithmetike is abso∣lutely necessary, and required in diuers and many Geometri∣call operations, I haue added the ex∣amples following onely to renew and refresh the memorie of those who haue alreadie studied it; and not those who are quite ignorant therin, (commending them to large and ample Treatises together with ma∣sters of the sciene) but for such as by a weake memory haue let slip the
habitude which by practise they had in times past obtaind, who may easi∣ly recouer by this short Treatie suffi∣cient knowledge to performe any ordinary operation beginning with Addition, which is a collection of many numbers in one, as hee who would adde together the numbers ABC, following to haue the summe D, must begin with the first colon: And say 2 and 5, or 7 and 1 is 8, and set 8 vnder the line, as appeares by the example aboue, then in the second colon, say 3 and 4 or 7, and pose them as before; afterward say for
the 3. colon 6. are sixe, & posing or setting the numbers collected dire∣ctly vnder the figures not collected as 8 vnder 2, and 7 vnder 3, and sixe vnder sixe, but if any should bee a∣boue the number of 9, then to set 0 in the place, and set forward all the tens. The Proofe. MAy be made in casting all the 9 away, though many times fals but by substraction is the way most certaine, as thus, begin with the last collon and say 6, cut of 6, rest no∣thing, and giue the 6 vnder the line a flash, then 4 and 3, or 7 and 7, out
of 7 rest nothing, and as before giue it a flash, then 1, 5 and 2, or 8, which as before shall be made nothing, the 8 vnderneath. CHAP. II. Substraction. SVbstraction is to take away a little number from, or out of a greater, as if one would from 8 6 4 2 take away 4 3 2 1, then must the numbers bee disposed as fol∣loweth, the greater number vpper∣most, and the lesser vndermost, then draw a line:
Great number   8642. A Lesser number   4321. B   rest 4321. C And say he that of 2 in the rank pai∣eth one, rests 1, the which set vnder the line, then of 4 pay 2, rests 2, which must also bee set vnder the line, and who payes 3 out of 6. rests 3. setting them as before, then 4. out of 8 rests 4. which shall bee also set as the others in the example a∣boue.
The Proofe. IS made in adding the lesser num∣ber B with the rest C as follow∣eth. Little nummer.   4321   rest 4321 Great number.   8642 And the sum shall be the first num∣ber A, if the substraction haue beene well made.
CHAP. III. Multiplication. MVltiplication is the as∣sumption of one num∣ber, as many times as the other, containeth in it selfe vnities. As if one would multiply 6. by 3, that is, to take as oft 6 as 3 containes vnities, as in the example aboue,
where 2 taken 4 times makes 8, and 5 taken 4 times makes 20. so that the number A multiplied by the nū∣ber B multiplicator 4 times compre∣hended, make the product 2608. The Proofe. IS made onely diuiding the pro∣duct 2608 by the multiplication 4 and the quotient will be 652. if the multiplication were well made, as appeares in the example following.
CHAP. IV. Diuision. DIvision is the separation of a number into aliquot partes thereof, as to diuide 5689 by 25. the figures must be disposed, as followeth, viz. the diuisor vnder the first figures of the number, which is to be diuided, as for example. And after the last figure of the num∣ber, shall bee drawne a halfe circle to separate the quotient. The num∣bers
being thus disposed, then say 2 in 5 how many times, and it shall be found twice; then set 2 behind the halfe circle as in the first example following; and then say twice 2. are 4 of 5 rests 1, dashing out the 2 and the 5. and set the 1 ouer 5, and say a∣gaine twice 5 are 10. and strike out the 5 diuisor vnder the 6. and also the 1. ouer the 5, then set forward your divisor one figure more as in the second example, and say 2 in 6. how how many times, and it shal be found 2, and say twice 2 are 4, and 4 out of 6. rests 2. which shall be set ouer the 6, then say twie 5 are 10. and 10. out of 18. rests 8 and 1 out of 2. rests 1. then dash out the 2. and set 1. ouer it; and also dash out the 5 and 2. di∣uisors, and set more forward the di∣visors, as in the third example, and
say 2 how many times 18. and it shall be found 7. times, and having set the 7, say 7 times 2 is 14. and 14 out of 18 rests 4, and set the 4 ouer the 8; and to conclude, say 7 times 5 are 35, and 35 out of 39 rests 4, and 3 out of 4 rests 1, and so your di∣uision is ended, as appeares here fol∣lowing by three examples one of each operation.
The Proofe. Multiplie the quotient 227. by the diuisor 25, and to the product partiall, adde the numbers which rest, viz. 14. if any rest, and then adde the whole together, and the product shall be the first number if the diuision hath beene well made as in the example following.
CHAP. V. Rules of Fractions. A Fraction is a number no∣ting the partes aliquot of an entire or whole num∣ber, whereof it is said to be a fraction as a penny, the twelfth part of a shilling, one inch the foure and fortieth part of an Ell, &c.
CHAP. VI. How to reduce intiers and Fracti∣ons all into Fractions. TO reduce 8¾ and 5⅔ all in∣fractions you must mul∣tiplie 8 by 4, saying 4. times 8 is 32, and the 3 being added, makes 35, which shall be set aboue a line iust vnder the first figures, and vnder that line set 4, as in the example following, to shew that the 45 are al fourth parts, and doe in the like manner by the 5⅔, and say 3 times 5 are 15, and 2 makes 17. and so you shall haue 17. thirds, as in the example following.
To reduce 8¾ and 5⅔ all into fracti∣ons. CHAP. VI. To reduce all fractions into one de∣nomination. TO bring these two fractions to one deno. the 35 quarters numerators must bee multi∣plied by the other numerators 17. thirds, and set the product ouer a line as here following, then multiply the 4 denominator by the other 3.
denominator, and set the product of those vnder the line, and then will there be, Addition of Fractions. TO adde ⅔ to ¼ the figures, dis∣pose the figures as followeth, and say 3 times 1 is 3, and set the 3. ouer a line aboue the head of the o∣thers, and then say 4 times 2 are 8. and set them ouer a line aboue the head of the others also, then say 3 and
8 are 11, and set them ouer a line be∣tweene the first numbers and the 11, shall be numerators, and say 4 times 3 are 12, & set them vnder the mid∣dle line, and those shall bee denomi∣nators, and so you shall haue eleuen twelfth parts as followeth. But if the numerator bee greater then the denominator, then it shall bee diuided by the denominator, and the product shall be an entire or entires, and what resteth (if any rest) shall bee fraction, which ought to be abridged, as appeareth here following.
Where the numerator 38 is greater then the denominator 24. then be∣ing diuided by the denominator 24. doth yeeld 1 intire, and 14/14 the which being abridged come to 7/12, which is almost two thirds, and so of all o∣thers.
CHAP. VII. Additions of intiers and fractions. BEing proposed to 243⅔ vnto 462¼, the intiers must be added as in the first chapter of Addition and the fractions must be added as in the precedent chapter, and set product as appeares following.
CHAP. VIII. Substraction of Fractions. WHosoeuer would sub∣stract ⅔ from ¾ must dis∣pose the figures, as in the example following; and first multiply the numerators by the denominators a crosse, as 3-times 3 are 9. and 4 times 2 are 8, and set 9 and 8 ouer the lines aboue the heads of the others, and then say take 8 out of 9, and there rests 1, which must bee set ouer a line be∣tweene
both, and afterward say 3-times 4 is 12, multiplying denomi∣nators by denominators, and set them vnder the middle line, which shall bee the denominators for the rest, as appeares cleerely in the ex∣ample following. Out of 9 pay 8 rest 1
CHAP. IX. Substractions of intiers and fra∣ctions. TO substract 1831 from 267 2/ the fractions must first be mul∣tiplyed as in the example fol∣lowing; and say twice 2 are 4, and set the 4 ouer a line, then 3 times 1 are 3, and set them ouer a line, and then who payes 3 out of 4. rests 1, which must be set ouer the middle line, which done, multiply the one denominator by the other, and set the product vnder that which doth rest, as followeth.
But if the fraction of the receiued should be lesse then the fraction of the summe paid, then must there be one borrowed from the whole or intire number, and count it according to the denomination of the fraction; for if the denominator bee 4, then shall the intier be 4/4, if 5, then 5/5, if 6 then 6/6, &c.
CHAP. X. Multiplication of Fractions. LEt there bee proposed a superfi∣cies in the forme of a paralello∣gram, vulgarly cald square, the sides whereof the one is in length 7/8 of a fa∣thom, and the other in breadth ¾, and these two fractions are to bee multi∣plied together to find out how much the whole superficies doth containe the figures must be disposed as follo∣weth.
And multiplie one numerator by the other numerator, and then one denominator by the other denominator, saying 3 times seuen is 21, and set them ouer head, then foure times 8 is 32, and set them vnderneath, and the whole will bee 21/32 parts of a fathom, which certainely containeth the required superficies.
CHAP. XI. Multiplication of entiers and Fractions. TO multiply ¼ by 2½, you must first of al reduce the whole into fracti∣ons, and then as here aboue multi∣ply numerator by numerator, and de∣nominator by denominator, and the product will bee 45/8, as plainely ap∣peares by the example following.
But if it were proposed to multiply greater numbers, as 20 by 15 26/29, then multiply the 15. intiers by the deno. 29. of the fraction, & then adde the numerator 26 of the same fraction; which done will mount to 461/29, then set the 461 ouer a line, and the 29. vnder it, and afterward multiply the 20 intiers by the 461. which done, diuide the product of the whole by the denominator 29. and the num∣qer required shall bee 317 27/19, as ap∣peares:
CHAP. XII. The diuision of Fractions. TO diuide ¾ by ⅓, each numerator is to bee multiplied by each denominator oppo∣site, and set the pro∣duct ouer a line aboue them, and then diuide the greatest product by the least as followeth.
CHAP. XIII. To diuide intiers and fractions by intiers and fractions. TO diuide 12⅔ by 3⅙, they must first be reduced all into fractions as before, and then you must multi∣ply the numerators by the denomi∣nators acrosse as followeth, and then diuide the greatest product by the least, as this example doth cleerely demonstrate.
CHAP. XIV. Evaluation of fractions which may not be abridged. SVppose you were to abridge 7/9 parts of a fathom, first you must consider what are the parts of the intier or whole, as 6. foot, or 72. inches: then you must multiply the numerator 7, by the denominator 72 parts, and let the product bee di∣uided by the denominator 9, and then you will finde 56 inches for the eualuation of 7/9 parts of a fathom.
By this meanes any fraction may be abridged as well in Geometrie as as commerce, although they seeme not to be abridged. CHAP. XV. For the eualuation of measuring lands. YOu must consider that the fa∣thom of 6 foot in length, doth containe in superficies 36. and that
the 72 inches in length doth contain in superficies 5184 inches, and of o∣ther measures then to valuate a fra∣ction of 19/4 parts of a fathom, square in superficies you must multiply 5184 by 19. and diuide the product by 47, and there will be 2095 inches for the square of 29/47 of a fathom square and so of other like measures.
CHAP. XVI. Of the rule of three without fra∣ctions. MVltiply the second num∣ber 400 by the third 12. and product 4800 by the first number 4, and the quotient shall be the number re∣quired, and dispose your rule as fol∣loweth. months—pounds—months. If in 4—400—12
The probation of this Rule. IS to multtplie the first num∣ber 4 by the fourth number 1200, and to multiplie the second by the third, and the two products will bee equall if the rule bee well made.
CHAP. XVII. Of the rule of three with intiers and fractions. FIrst all the intiers must bee re∣duced into fractions as follow∣eth. yards pounds yards. If 2¼ 12½ 7½ 9/4 25/2 15/2 Which done, you must multiply the second number of fractions as by
the third number of fractions 15, & then againe multiply the product by 4 the denominator of the first num∣ber, and then say 2 times 2, or 4, and 4 times 9 is 36, which must bee set vnder the line, by which you shal di∣uide the first product 1500, and the quotient shall be the number requi∣red, as appeares, Heere followeth two examples, differing the one from the other; whereof the manner of multiplying the one, is more easier then the other the first is multiplyed as the prece∣dent, but the last is multiplied first
by all the intirres, viz. by 3, by 8 and by three, leauing the fraction  by it selfe, and after all take the thir of the intier, viz. of 50000, saying th third part of 5 is one rest 2, for the 10 which is valuated at 20, then say the third part of 20 is 6, and so rests 2 for the second 0, and so to the end, and what shall rest at last, shall be set ouer a line, and your 3 4th or 5 vnder the line, then all being added together, you shal diuide the product cutting off the figures to the quanti∣tie of the first number, saying, by ten, by a hundred, by a thousand, by ten thousand, by a hundred thousand, & the remainder is the number requi∣red, as appeareth, 191⅔.
The first example. The second number being mul∣plied by the third, doth mount to 57500000, and being diuided by the first multiplyed by 3, as before is taught, the quotient will be 191 2/0.
The second example.
CHAP. XVIII. Extraction of the square roote. FIrst dispose your num∣bers as followeth out of which you meane to draw the roote se∣parating your figures by two and two beginning at the latter end; but first strike the halfe circle 73/21/01 (and then say the root of 73 is 8, and set 8 before the half circle, & rests 9, then double the quotient 8, and say 2 times 8 are 16, and set the 6 vnder the last figure of the second part of figures, and 1 vn∣der
the first figure of the first part a in this first example. Then say how many times is 1 in 9, and it shall be 5. which you shall al∣so set vnder the 1 of the second sepa∣ration, as apppeares in this second example. And then say 5 times 1 are 5, which taken out of 9 rests 4, and 5 times 6 are 30, and 30 out of 32 rests 2, and 3 out of 4 rest 1, and then againe say 5 times 5 are 25, which out of 3
rest 6. and 3. out of 12. rest 9. and then double the quotient, and say twice 5 are 10 set 0 vnder 0 of the last sepa∣ration, and keepe  in memorie, and say twice 8 are 16, and 1 that I keepe in mind makes 17, then set downe 7 vnder the 5, and the 1 vnder the 6 of the middle separation, as appeares in this example following. And then say how many times is 1 in 9 and it shall be 5 times, which shall be set downe for quoient, and also vnder the last figure 1, and then say 5 times 1 are 5, out of 9 rets 4, and 5. times 7 are 35, which out of
36 rests 1, and 3 out of 4 rests 1, and 5 times 0 is 0, and 5. times 5 are 25. out of 31 rests 6, & 3 out of 10 rests 7, and 1 out of 1 rests 0, and so the rule is ended as appeares following. CHAP. XIX. Another example of the square root. After you haue separated your fi∣gures
by two and two, and drawne 251 the square roote, there doth yet rest 268, which must bee reduced in∣to fractions, and to begin set that rest 268 ouer a line at the end of your root, and that rest shall be numerator of the fraction; and to finde the de∣nominator only, double the root 251 if it be bigger then the rest, but if less as here, adde one to the doubling of the first figure, saying twice 1 is 2, and 1 that I adde makes 3, adde only double the rest, and set it vnder the line, and that shall be the denomina∣tor of the fraction; and to haue the root of this fraction here aboue, first take the root of the numerator, and set that root ouer a line, and it shall be numerator as appeares following.
Then draw roote of the denomina∣tor, and set it vnder the line, and that shall be a denominator, and so you shall finde 16/22, and what rests is vnsen∣sible. But because that this fraction 16/22 is not precisely perfect, and that there is a rest in each extraction, you may ope∣rate as followeth to haue it mooue exactly, adde as well to the numera∣tor as to the denominator two 00, or foure, or sixe, &c. and from each pro∣duct
or quotiēt out of one figure for euery two 00 which you shall haue added, and the more that you adde 00, the more precisely you shall haue the roote as appeares following. But if it were proposed to extract the square roote of 16/25, there would no∣thing rest, nor would it bee needfull to adde any 00, for the root of 16 is 4 and the root of 25 is 5, and so wee should haue 4/5, and the like in all such other accidents; and thus much for Arithmetike. Vale. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS. A Treatise of Fire-works for Warre, page 1. The manner how to make the Morter∣peece. pag. 5. The manner how to make Granades or mettle for the morter or hand, pag. 10. The manner how to make Granades of Canuas for the Morter. page 16 How to make fierie arrowes. pag. 20 How the Granads are to be charged into the Morter. page 24 Thn manner how to shoote the Granads, page 28 A most violent method to set a towne on fire. page 33
How to make Granads to cast with mens hands. pag. 39 How to make fierie wheeles to bee cast vvith mens hands. pag 45 How to make a ship of wild fire. pag. 48 How to make a Petard. pag 55 A Treatise of artificiall fireworkes for pleasure. page 61 A method to make moulds for rockets for the ayre. page 64 How to make flying rockets for the ayre. page 69 How to make moulds for rockets for the ground. pa. 74 How to make the composition for rockets vpon the ground page 76 The manner how to make Serpents. pa 78
How to make golden rayne. pag. 81 How to make starres, pag. 83 How to make Starres giuing great re∣ports. page 86 The manner how to make Saucissons, page 88 How to make Stoupell or preparing of your cotton-wieke. pag. 91 Thu manner hovv to assemble and set to∣gether the parts of a rocket. pag▪ 94 Hovv to represent diuers sorts of figures in the ayre with rockets. page 97 Hovv to make fierie boxes. pa. 101 How to make fierie lances. pag. 103 The manner hovv to make rockets for the vvater. page 105 Hovv to make Girondels or fiery wheeles pag. 110 The manner hovv to make Ballons. pag. 113 Hovv to make flying Saucissons. pa. 120
Hovv to make short Guns for the Sau∣cissons. page 123 The manner hovv to dispose and build a great or little fireworke. pag. 125 A most pretious vnguent for any bur∣ning. pag. 131 A Treatise of practicall Geometrie. page 136 The method hovv to make the Crosse. pag. 139 Hovv to take a height accessible. pag. 141 How to take a height inaccessible, or one height vpon another height. pag. 145 Hovv to take any distance vpon a place accessible or inaccessible. page 149 Another manner how to take a distance inaccessible. pa. 151 How to take a distance onely vpon a line paralell to it. pag. 165
Hovv to take the depth of a Vally. p. 157 The manner how to take either distance or altitude vvith the Sector. pag. 161 How to take any distance or altitude inac∣cessible with the Sector. pag. 165 Definitions of Sines, Tangents, and Se∣cants. pag. 168 Hovv to take any altitude or distance by the Sines, Tangents, & Secants. pag. 171 Hovv to take any altitude or distance in∣accessible by the Sines. pag. 176 The manner hovv to take the Plane of a towne or any place out of musket-shot. page 180 A Treatise of Fortification, as vvell regularly as irregularly. pag. 184 Denominations of the parties of Fortifi∣cation. pag. 186 Hovv to build a trianguler Fort. p. 189 Hovv to build a square Fort. pa 192
Hovv to build the Panagone Fort▪ p. 195 Hovv to build the Fort Hexagone. p. 198 Hovv to build the Heptagone. pa. 201 Hovv to build the Octogone. p. 204 The description of the height, deth, and thicknes of euery part of a compleat Forti∣cation. p. 206 The manner how to fortifie places irregu∣larly. p. 209 A Fortification irregular. p. 210 Another manner of fortifying irregular∣ly. p. 213 A Treatise of Arithmetike. Addition. p. 216 Of Substraction. pag. 219 Of multiplication. p. 222 Of diuision. p. 224 Hovv to reduce intiers and Fractions in∣to Fractions. p. 229
To reduce all fractions into one denomi∣nation. pag. 230 Aditions of intiers and fractions. p. 234 Substraction of Fractions. p. 235 Addition of Fractions. p. 231 Substractions of intiers and fractions. p. 237 Multiplication of Fractions. p. 239 Multiplication of entiers, and Fracti∣ons. p 241 The diuision of Fractions. p. 243 To diuide intiers and fractions by in∣iers and fractions. p. 44 Eualuation of fractions which may not be bridged. p 245 For the eualuation of measuring lands. p 246 Of the Rule of three without fractions. p 48 The probation of this Rule. p. 249 Of the Rule of three with intiers and fra∣ctions.
p. 250 The first Example. p. 253 The second example. p. 25 Extraction of the square roote. p. 255 Another example of the square roote. p. 258
MILITARY BOOKS PRINTED FOR T. and I. EGERTON, MILITARY LIBRARY, Whitehall. 1. MULLER's Works of Fortification, Attack and Defence, Engineering, Artillery, &c. 2. Simes's Military Guide for Young Officers, containing Parade and Field Duty, Regulations, Orders, Returns, Warrants, &c. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 3. — Military Course for the Government and Conduct of a Battalion, 20 copper-plates, coloured, 8vo. 10s. 6d. 4. — Treatise on the Military Science. Comprehend∣ing the grand Operations of War, and General Rules for conducting an Army in the Field, 4to. 15s. 5. — Regulator, to form the Officer, and complete the Soldier, 8vo. 6s. 6. — Instructor for Non-commission Officers and Pri∣vate Men, 12mo. 2s. 6d. 7. Rudiments of War; comprising the Principles of Mili∣tary Duty, 8vo. 6s. 8. Discipline for the Norfolk Militia, by Lord Townshend, &c. 52 copper-plates, 4to. 12s. 9. Regimental Book for the Use of the Major or Adjutant, beautifully engraved, with proper Heads, folio. 10. Returns for Horse, Dragoons, and Foot Muser-Rolls, Attestations, Furloughs, Discharges, &c. 11. Miller's (Capt.) Art of Self-Defence, on copper-plates, folio, 10s 6d. 12. Orders relative to the Sale of Commissions on Full and Half-Pay. 13. New Exercise by his Majesty's Order, 1s. 14. Recruiting Book for the Army, 2s. 6d. 15. New Art of War, by Captain Anderson, 8vo. 7s. 6d. 16. Jones's Artificial Fireworks. 17. Drummer's Instructor, with English and Scotch Duty, with Beatings, Marchings, Calls, &c. 18. Cadet, a Military Treatise, 8vo. 5s. 19. Phipps's Military Discipline, with copper-pl. 12mo. 4s. 20. General Essay on Tactics, 2 vol. 8vo. with 28 copper-plates, translated from the admired Essai Générale de Tactique de Guibert, 2 vols. bound, 14s. 21. Lochee's Military Mathematics, 2 vols. 8vo. many cop∣per-plates, 12s.
22. Lochee's Elements of Fortification, many copper-plates, 8vo. 6s. 23. — on Military Education, 8vo. 2s. 6d. 24. — Essay on Castrametration; or, Instructions for forming Camps, with copper-plates, 8vo. 4s. 25. Soldern's (Gen.) Tactics, translated by Landmann, 7s. 6d. 26. Lochee's Field Fortification, with copper-plates, 8vo. 5s. 27. Obrien's Naval Evolutions, with copper-plates, 4to. 10s. 6d. 28. Military Instructions for Officers detached in the Field, copper-plates, 12mo. 4s. 6d. 29. King of Prussia's Military Instructions to his Generals, cuts, 8vo. 5s. 30. — Campaigns, 12mo. 3s. 31. Dalrymple's Military Essay, cuts, 8vo. 5s. 32. Bell's Essay on Military First Principles, 8vo. 5s. 33. Donkin's Military Collections and Remarks, 8vo. 4s. 34. Cambridge's Account of the War in India, many large plates, 8vo. 6s. 35. General Review, Manoeuvres, and Exercise, cuts co∣loured, 8vo. 3s. 6d. 36. Wolfe's Instructions to Young Officers, 12mo. 2s. 6d. 37. Elementary Principles of Tactics, many copper-plates, 8vo. 6s. 38. Antoni on Gunpowder, Fire-arms, and the Service of Artillery, by Captain Thompson, 10s. 6d. 39. Elements of Military Arrangement, 2 vol. new edit. 7s. 40. Lloyd's (General) History of the War in Germany, vol. 2. 1l. 1s. 41. — Political and Military Rhapsody. 42. Treatise on Military Finance, 2s. 6d. 43. Complete Collection of Marine Treaties, subsisting be∣tween Great-Britain and the different Powers of Eu∣rope, &c. from 1546 to 1763 inclusive, 8vo. 6s. 44. Tandon's French Grammar, to learn without a Master, 8vo. 2s. 45. Beckford's Descriptive Account of the Island of Jamaica, 2 vols. 12s. 46. Theatrical Remembrancer, boards, 4s. 47. Ireland's Picturesque Scenery of the River Thames, 2 vol. 2l. 12s. 6d. 48. — Picturesque Scenery of the Medway, 1l. 11s. 6d 49. English Anthology, 6s. 50. Pieces of Ancient Popular Poetry, 4s.
