17632 99847664 12716
THE BOND-MAN: AN ANTIENT STORIE. As it hath been often Acted with good allowance, at the Cock-pit in Drury-lane: by the most Excellent Princesse, the Lady ELIZABETH her Seruants. By Phillip Massinger. LONDON, Printed by Edw: Allde, for Iohn Harison and Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at the great South dore of Pauls. 1624.
THE ACTORS NAMES. Timolion, the Generall of Corinth. Archidamus, the Pretor of Siracusa. Diphilus, a Senator of Siracusa. Cleon, a fat impotent Lord. Pisander, (disguisde) a Gentleman of Thebes. Leosthenes, a Gentleman of Siracusa enamourd of Cleora. Asotus, a foolish Louer, and the sonne of Cleon. Timagoras, the Sonne of Archidamus. Cleora, Daughter of Archidamus. Corisca, a proud wanton Lady, wife to Cleon. Olimpia, a rich Widdow. Statilia, Sister to Pisander, slaue to Cleora. Zanthia, Slaue to Corisca. Poliphron, (disguisde) friend to Pisander. Gracculo, Cimbrio. Bond-men. A Iaylor,
TO The Right Honourable, my singular good Lord, PHILIP Earle of Mountgomery, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, &c. Right Honourable, HOw euer I could neuer arriue at the happinesse to be made knowne to your Lordship, yet a desire borne with me, to make tender of all du∣ties, and seruice, to the Noble Family of the Her∣berts, descended to me as an inheritance from my dead Father, Arthur Massinger. Many yeares hee happily spent in the seruice of your Honourable House, and dyed a seruant to it; leauing his, to be euer most glad, and ready, to be at the command of al such, as deriue themselues from his most ho∣nour'd Master, your Lordships most noble Father. The consideration of this, encouraged me (hauing no other meanes to present my humblest seruice to your Honour) to shrowde this trifle, vnder the
wings of your Noble protection; and I hope out of the clemency of your Heroique disposition, it will finde, though perhaps not a welcome enter∣tainment, yet at the worst a gratious pardon. When it was first Acted, your Lordships liberall suffrage taught others to allow it for currant, it hauing receaued the vndoubted stampe of your Lordships allowance: and if in the perusall of any vacant houre, when your Honours more serious occasions shall giue you leaue to reade it, it an∣swer in your Lordships iudgement, the report and opinion it had vpon the Stage, I shall esteeme my labours not ill imployde, and while I liue continue, The humblest of those that truly honour your Lordship, Philip Massinger.
The Authors Friend to the Reader. THe PRINTERS haste calls on; I must not driue My time past Sixe, though I begin at Fiue. One houre I haue entire; and 'tis enough, Here are no Gipsie Iigges, no Drumming stuffe, Dances, or other Trumpery to delight, Or take, by common way, the common sight. The AVTHOR of this POEM, as he dares To stand th'austerest Censure; so he cares, As little what it is. His owne, Best way Is to be Iudge, and AVTHOR of his PLAY. It is his Knowledge, makes him thus secure; Nor do's he write to please, but to endure. And (Reader) if you haue disburs'd a shilling, To see this worthy STORY, and are willing To haue a large encrease; (if rul'd by me) You may a MARCHANT, and a POET be. 'Tis granted for your twelue-pence you did sit, And See, and Heare, and Vnderstand not yet. The AVTHOR (in a Christian pitty) takes Care of your good, and Prints it for your sakes. That such as will but venter Six-pence more, May Know, what they but Saw, and Heard before: 'Twill not be money lost, if you can reed, (Ther's all the doubt now,) but your gaines exceed If you can Vnderstand, and you are made Free of the freest, and the noblest Trade. And in the way of POETRY, now adayes, Of all that are call'd Workes the best are PLAYES. W. B
The Bond-man. Actus-Primi. Scaena Prima. Enter Timagorus, and Leosthenes. Timagorus. WHy should you droope Leosthenes, or dispaire My Sisters fauour? what before you purchased By Court-ship, and faire language in these Wars, (For from her soule you know she loues a Souldier) You may deserue by action: Leost. Good Timagorus When I haue said my friend; thinke all is spoken That may assure me yours; and pray you beleeue The dreadfull voice of warre that shakes the City, The thundring threates of Carthage; nor their Army Raisde to make good those threats, affright not me. If faire Cleora were confirmd his prize, That has the strongest Arme, and sharpest Sword, I would court Bellona in her Horrid-trime, As if she were a Mistrisse, and blesse Fortune That offers my young valour to the proofe, How much I dare doe for your Sisters loue. But when that I consider how auerse Your noble Father great Archidamus; Is, and hath euer beene to my desires: Reason may warrant me to doubt and feare: What seeds soeuer I sowe in this warres Of Noble courage, his determinate will
May blast, and giue my haruest to another That neuer toyld for it. Timag. Prethee doe not nourish These iealous thoughts: I am thine, (and pardon me Though I repeate it thy Timagoras) That for thy sake, when the bold Theban su'd Farre fam'd Pisander, for my sisters loue, Sent him disgrac'd, and discontented home. I wrought my Father then, and I that stopt not In the careere of my affection to thee, When that renowned Worthy that brought with him High birth, wealth, courage, as fee'd Aduocates To mediate for him, neuer will consent A foole that only has the shape of man, Asotas, though he be rich Cleons Heire Shall beare her from thee. Enter Pisander. Leos. In that trust I loue, Timag. Which neuer shall deceiue you. Pisander. Sir the Generall Timoleon by his Trumpets hath giuen warning For a remoue. Timagoras. 'Tis well, prouide my Horse. Pisander. I shall Sir. Exit Pisander. Leost. This Slaue has a strange aspect. Timag. Fit for his fortune, 'tis a strong limm'd knaue; My Father bought him for my Sisters Litter. O pride of women! Coaches are too common, They surfet in the happinesse of peace, And Ladyes thinke they keepe not state enough, If for their pompe, and ease, they are not borne In triumph on mens shoulders. Leost. Who Commands The Carthagenian Fleet? Timag. Giscos their Admirall, And tis our happinesse: a rawe young fellow, One neuer traind in Armes, but rather fashiond To tilt with Ladyes lips, then cracke a Launce, Rauish a Feather from a Mistrisse Fanne
And weare it as a Fauour; a steele Helmet Made horrid with a glorious Plume, will cracke His womans necke. Leost. No more of him, the motiue's That Corinth giues vs ayde: Timag. The common danger For Sicily being afire, she is not safe; It being apparant that ambitious Carthage, That to enlarge her Empire, striues to fasten An vniust gripe on vs (that liue free Lords Of Syracusa) will not end, till Greece Acknowledge her their Soueraigne. Leost. I am satisfied. What thinke you of our Generall? Timag. He is a man A Trumpet sounds. Of strange and reserude parts; But a great Souldier. His Trumpets call vs, I'le forbeare his Character. To morrow in the Senate house at large, He will expresse himselfe. Leost. Ile follow you. Exeunt. ACTVS I. SCAENA II. Cleon, Corisca, Gracculo. Corisca. Nay good Chucke. Cleon. I haue said it; Stay at home, I cannot brooke with gadding, you are a faire one, Beauty inuites temptation, and short heeles Are soone tripd vp. Corisca. Deny me, by my honour You take no pitty on me. I shall swoune Assoone as you are absent, aske my Man else, You know he dares not tell a lie. Gracculo. Indeed, You are no sooner out of sight, but shee Does feele strange qualmes, then sends for her young Doctor Who ministers phisicke to her, on her backe, Her Ladyship lying as she were enthranced.
(I haue peeped in at the key hole and obserud them) And sure his Potions neuer faile to worke, For she is so pleasant, in the taking them She tickles againe. Corisca. And alls to make you merry When you come home. Cleon. You flatter me, I am old, And Wisdome cries beware. Corisca. Old, Ducke to me You are young Adonis. Grac. Well said Venus, I am sure she Vulcans him. Corisc. I will not change thee For twenty boistrous young things without Beards. These bristles giue the gentlest Tittillations, And such a sweet dew flowes on them, it cures My lippes without Pomatum; heres a round belly, 'Tis a Downe pillow to my backe. I sleepe So quietly by it; and this tunable nose (Faith when you heare it not) affords such musicke, That I curse all night Fidlers. Gracc. This is grosse, Not finde she flouts him. Corisc. As I liue I am iealous. Cleon. Iealous! of me Wife? Corisc. Yes, and I haue reason, Knowing how lusty and actiue a man you are. Cleon. Hum, hum! Gracc. This is no cunning queane! slight, she will make him To thinke, that like a Stagge he has cast his homes, And is growne young againe. Corisc. You haue forgot what you did in your sleepe, And when you wakd cald for a Cawdle. Gracc. 'Twas in his sleepe, For waking I durst trust my Mother with him. Corisc. I long to see the man of warre Cleora Archadamus Daughter goes, and rich Olimpa, I will not misse the showe.
Cleon. There's no contending, For this time I am pleas'd, but I'll no more on't. Exeunt. ACTVS I. SCAENA III. Arebidamus, Cleon. Diphilus, Olimpia. Corisca, Cleora, Zanthia. Archidamus. So carelesse we haue beene, my noble Lords, In the disposing of our owne affaires, And ignorant in the Art of gouernment, That now we need a stranger to instruct vs. Yet we are happy, that our neighbour Corinth (Pittying the vniust gripe Carthage would lay On Siracusa) hath vouchsafed to lend vs Her man of men Timoleon to defend Our Country, and our Liberties. Diphilus. Tis a fauour We are vnworthy of, and we may blush, Necessity compels vs to receiue it. Archid. O shame! that we that are a populous Nation, Ingag'd to liberall nature, for all blessings An Iland can bring forth; we that haue limbs And able bodies; Shipping, Armes, and Treasure, The sinnewes of the Warre, now we are call'd To stand vpon our Guard, cannot produce One fit to be our Generall. Cleon. I am olde and fat, I could say something else. Archid. We must obey The time, and our occasions, ruinous buildings, Whose bases and foundations are infirme Must vse supporters; we are circled round With danger, o're our heads with sayle stretch'd wings, Destruction houers; and a cloud of mischiefe Ready to breake vpon vs; no hope left vs That may diuert it, but our sleeping vertue Rowsd vp by braue Timoleon. Cleon. When arriues he?
Diphil. He is expected euery houre. Archid. The braueries Of Syracusae, among whom my sonne Timagorus, Leosthenes, and Asotas (Your hopefull heire Lord Cleon) two dayes since Rode forth to meet him, and attend him to The Citie, euery minute we expect To be blessed with his presence. Cleon. What shout's this? Diphilus. Tis seconded with lowd Musique. Archid. Which confirmes His wish'd for entrance. Let vs entertaine him With all respect, solemnity, and pompe, A man may merit, that comes to redeeme vs From slauery, and oppression. Cleon. Ile locke vp My doores, and gard my gold; these Lads of Corinth Haue nimble fingers, and I feare them more Being within our walls, then those of Carthage, They are farre off. Archid. And Ladies be it your care To welcome him, and his followers with all duty: For rest resolu'd; their hands, and swords, must keepe you In that full height of happinesse you liue: A dreadfull change else followes. Exeunt Arch. Cleon. Diphilus. Olimpia. We are instructed. Corisca. Ile kisse him for the honor of my Country, With any she in Corinth. Olimpia. Were he a Courtier, I haue sweet meat in my Closet should content him Be his pallat ne're so curious. Corisca. And if neede be I haue a Couch, and a banquetting house in my Orchard, Where many a man of honour has not scorn'd To spend an afternoone. Olimpia. These men of warre As I haue heard, know not to court a Lady. They cannot praise our dressings, kisse our hands,
Vsher vs to our Litters, tell loue Stories; Commend our feet, and legs, and so search vpwards. A sweet becomming boldnesse: they are rough, Boystrous and sawcy, and at the first sight Ruffle, and towse vs, and as they finde their stomacks Fall roundly to it. Corisc. Troth I like em the better. I cannot endure to haue a perfum'd Sir Stand cringing in the hammes; licking his lips, Like a Spaniell o're a Firmenty pot, and yet Has not the boldnesse to come on, or offer What they know we expect. Olimpia. We may commend A Gentlemans modesty, manners, and fine language, His singing, dancing, riding of great horses, The wearing of his cloathes, his faire complexion, Take presents from him, and extoll his bounty, Yet, though he obserue, and waste his state vpon vs, If he be stanch and bid not for the stocke That we were borne to traffick with; the truth is We care not for his company. Corisc. Musing Cliora? Olimp. She's studying how to entertaine these Strangers, And to engrosse them to her selfe. Cleora. No surely, I will not cheapen any of their Wares, Till you haue made your Market: you will buy I know at any rate. Enter Timagor. Leosthe∣nes, Asotus, Timoleon in blacke, led in by Archid. Diphilus, Cleon. followed by Pisander, Gracculo, Cymbrio, and others. Corisc. She has giuen it you. Olimpia. No more, they come. The first kisse for this Iewell. Archid. It is your seate. Diphil. Which with a generall suffrage As to the supreame Magistrates surely tenders, And prayes Timoleon to accept. Timoleon. Such honours To one ambitious of rule or titles; Whose heauen on earth, is plac'd in his commaund,
And absolute power on others; would with ioy, And veynes swolne high with pride, be entertain'd. They take not me: for I haue euer lou'd An equall freedome: and proclaym'd all such As would vsurpe on others liberties, Rebels to nature, to whose bounteous blessings All men lay clayme as true legitimate sonnes. But such as haue made forfeit of themselues By vicious courses, and their birthright lost; Tis not iniustice they are mark'd for slaues To serue the vertuous; for my selfe, I know Honours and great imployments are great burthens, And must require an Atlas to support them. He that would gouerne others, first should be The Master of himselfe, richly indude With depth of vnderstanding, height of courage, And those remarkable graces which I dare not Ascribe vnto my selfe. Archid. Sir, empty men Are Trumpets of their owne deserts: but you That are not in opinion, but in proofe Really good, and full of glorious parts, Leaue the report of what you are to fame, Which from the ready tongues of all good men Aloud proclaimes you. Diphil. Besides you stand bound Hauing so large a field to exercise Your actiue vertues offerd you, to impart Your strengths to such as need it. Timoleon. Tis confessed. And since you'll haue it so, such as I am For you and for the liberty of Greece I am most ready to lay downe my life: But yet consider men of Syracusa, Before that you deliuer vp the power Which yet is yours to me, to whom tis giuen To an impartiall man, with whom nor threats, Not prayers shall preuaile, for I must steere
An euen course. Archid. Which is desir'd of all. Timoleon. Timophanes my brother, for whose death I am taynted in the world, and foulely taynted, In whose remembrance I haue euer worne In peace and warre, this liuory of sorrow Can witnesse for me, how much I detest Tyrannous Vsurpation: with griefe I must remember it, for when no perswasion Could winne him to desist from his bad practise, To change the Aristocracie of Corinth Into an absolute Monarchy; I chose rather To proue a pious and obedient sonne To my Country my best mother, then to lend Assistance to Timophanes, though my brother That like a Tyrant stroue to set his foote Vpon the Cities freedome. Timagoras. 'Twas a deed Deseruing rather Trophees, then reproofe. Leost. And will be still remembred to your honor If you forsake not vs. Diphilon. If you free Sicilie From barbarous Carthage yoke, it will be said, In him you slew a Tyrant. Archid. But giuing way To her inuasion, not vouchsafing vs (That flie to your protection) ayde, and comfort, Twill beleeu'd, that for your priuate ends You kild a brother. Timoleon. As I then proceed, To all posterity may that act be crownd With a deseru'd applause, or branded with The marke of infamy; Stay yet, ere I take This seat of Iustice, or ingage my selfe To fight for you abroad, or to reforme Your State at home, sweare all vpon my sword, And call the gods of Sicily to witnesse
The oath you take; that whatsoeuer I shall propound for safety of your Common-wealth, Not Circumscrib'd or bound in, shall by you Be willingly obey'd. Archid. Dip. Cleon. So may we prosper, As we obey in all things. Timag. Leost. Aso. And obserue All your commands as Oracles. Timoleon. Doe not repent it. Takes the State. Olimpia. He asked not our consent. Corisca. Hee's a clowne, I warrant him. Olimp. I offred my selfe twice, and yet the Churle Would not salute me. Corisc. Let him kisse his Drumme, Ile saue my lips, I rest on it. Olimpia. He thinkes women No part of the republique. Corisc. He shall finde We are a Common-wealth. Cleora. The lesse your honour. Timoleon. First then a word or two, but without bitternesse, (And yet mistake me not, I am no flatterer) Concerning your ill gouernment of the State, In which the greatest, noblest, and most rich, Stand in the first file guilty. Cleon. Ha! how's this? Timoleon. You haue not, as good Patriots should doe, studied The publike good, but your particuler ends. Factious among your selues, preferring such To Offices, and honours, as ne're read The Elements, of sauing policie, But deepely skild in all the principles, That vsher to destruction. Leost. Sharpe. Timagor. The better. Timoleon. Your Senate house, which vs'd not to admit A man (how euer populer) to stand At the Helme of gouernment; whose youth was not
Made glorious by action, whose experience Crown'd with gray haires, gaue warrant to her counsels Heard, and receiu'd with reuerence, is now fild With greene heads that determine of the State Ouer their Cups: or when their sated lusts Afford them leisure, or suppli'd by those Who rising from base arts, and sordid thrift Are eminent for their wealth, not for their wisdome. Which is the reason, that to hold a place In Counsell, which was once esteem'd an honour, And a reward for vertue, hath quite lost Lustre, and Reputation, and is made A mercenary purchase. Timag. Hee speakes home. Leost. And to the purpose. Timoleon. From whence it proceeds, That the treasure of the City is ingros'd By a few priuate men: the publique Coffers Hollow with want; and they that will not spare One Talent for the common good, to feed The pride and brauery of their Wiues, consume In Plate, in Iewels, and superfluous slaues, What would maintaine an Armie. Corisc. Haue at vs. Olimp. We thought we were forgot. Cleor. But it appeares, You will be treated of. Timol. Yet in this plenty, And fat of peace, your young men ne're were train'd In Martiall discipline, and your ships vnrig'd, Rot in the harbour, no defence preparde, But thought vnusefull, as if that the gods Indulgent to your sloth, had granted you A perpetuitie of pride and pleasure, No change fear'd, or expected. Now you finde That Carthage looking on your stupid sleepes, And dull securitie, was inuited to Inuade your Territories.
Arch. You haue made vs see, Sir, To our shame the Countries sicknesse: now from you As from a carefull, and a wise phisitian We doe expect the cure. Timoleon. Old festred sores Must be lanc'd to the quicke and cauteriz'd, Which borne with patience, after i'le apply Soft Vnguents: For the maintenance of the warre It is decreed all moneys in the hand, Of priuate men, shall instantly be brought To the publike Treasurie. Timag. This bites sore. Cleon. The Cure Is worse then the disease; Ile neuer yeeld to it. What could the enemy, though victorious Inflict more on vs? all that my youth hath toyld for Purchas'd with industry, and preseru'd with care Forc'd from me in a moment. Diph. This rough course Will neuer be allowd of. Timol. O blinde men! If you refuse the first meanes that is offer'd To giue you health, no hope's left to recouer Your desp'rate sicknesse. Doe you prize your mucke Aboue your liberties? and rather choose To be made Bondmen, then to part with that To which already you are slaues? or can it Be probable in your flattering apprehensions, You can capitulate with the Conquerour And keepe that yours, which they come to possesse, And while you kneele in vaine, will rauish from you? But take your owne wayes, brood vpon your gold, Sacrifice to your Idoll, and preserue The prey intire, and merit the report Of carefull Steward, yeeld a iust account To your proud Masters, who with whips of Iron Will force you to giue vp what you conceale, Or teare it from your throates, Adorne your walls
With Persian Hangings wrought of Gold and Pearle; Couer the floores on which they are to tread With costly Median silkes; perfume the roomes With Cassia, and Amber: where they are To feast and reuell, while like seruile Groomes You wayte vpon their trenchers; feed their eyes With massie Plate vntill your Cupbords cracke With the weight that they sustaine; set forth your Wiues And Daughters in as many varyed shapes As there are Nations, to prouoke their lusts, And let them be imbrac'd before your eyes, The object may content you; and to perfit Their entertainment, offer vp your Sonnes, And able men for Slaues; while you, that are Vnfit for labour, are spurn'd out to starue Vnpittied in some Desart, no friend by, Whose sorrow may spare one compassionat teare, In the remembrance of what once you were. Leost. The blood turnes. Timag. Obserue, how olde Cleon. shakes, As if in picture hee had showne him, what He was to suffer. Corisc. I am sicke, the man Speakes poniards, and diseases. Olimp. O my Doctor, I neuer shall recouer. Cleora. If a Virgin, Whose speech was euer yet vsher'd with feare, One knowing modestie, and humble silence To be the choysest ornaments of our sexe, In the presence of so many Reuerend men, Strucke dumbe with terrour and astonishment, Presume to cloath her thought in vocall sounds, Let her finde pardon. First, to you, great Sir, A bashfull Mayd's thankes, and her zealous prayers Wing'd with pure innocence, bearing them to Heauen, For all prosperitie, that the Gods can giue To one, whose pietie must exact their care,
Thus lowe I offer. Timol. Tis a happie Omen. Rise blest one, and speake boldly: on my vertue I am thy warrant; from so cleere a Spring Sweet Riuers euer flow. Cleora. Then thus to you My noble Father, and these Lords, to whom I next owe duty, no respect forgotten To you my Brother, and these bolde young men (Such I would haue them) that are, or should be The Cities Sword and Target of defence. To all of you, I speake; and if a blush Steale on my cheekes, it is showne to reproue Your palenesse; willingly I would not say Your cowardise, or feare: thinke you all treasure Hid in the bowels of the Earth, or Shipwrack'd In Neptunes watry Kingdome, can hold weight When Libertie, and Honour, fill one scale, Triumphant Iustice sitting on the beame? Or dare you but imagine that your golde is Too deare a salary for such as hazard Their blood, and liues in your defence? For me An ignorant Girle, beare witnesse heauen, so farre I prize a Souldier, that to giue him pay With such Deuotion as our Flamens Offer Their Sacrifices at the holy Altar, I doe lay downe these jewels, will make sale Of my superfluous Wardrobe to supply The meanest of their wants. Timoleon. Braue masculine spirit! Diphil. We are showne to our shame what we in honour Should haue taught others. Archid. Such a faire example Must needs be followed. Timag. Euer my deare Sister, But now our Families glory. Leost. Were she Deform'd The vertues of her minde would force a Stoicque
To sue to be her seruant. Cleon. I must yeeld, And though my heart blood part with it, I will Deliuer in my wealth. Asotas. I would say something, But the truth is, I know not what. Timol. We haue money, And men must now be thought on. Archid. We can presse Of Labourers in the countrey (men in-vr'd To colde and heate) ten thousand. Diph. Or if need be, In roll of Slaues, lustie, and able Varlets, And fit for seruice. Cleon. They shall goe for me, I will not pay and fight too. Cleora. How! your Slaues? O staine of Honour! once more, Sir, your pardon, And to their shames, let me deliuer, what I know in justice you may speake. Timol. Most gladly, I could not wish my thoughts a better organ, Then your tongue, t' expresse them. Cleora. Are you men? (For Age may qualifie, though not excuse The backwardnesse of these) able Young men? Yet now your Countries libertie's at the stake, Honour, and glorious tryumph, made the garland For such as dare deserue them; a rich Feast Prepar'd by Victory of immortall vyands, Not for base men, but such as with their Swords Dare force admittance, and will be her Guests, And can you coldly suffer such rewards To be propos'd, to Labourers and Slaues? While you that are borne Noble (to whom these Valued at their best rate, are next to Horses, Or other Beasts of carriage) cry ayme, Like idle lookers on, till their proud worth
Make them become your masters? Timol. By my hopes, There's fire and spirit enough in this to make Thersites valiant. Cleora. No; farre, farre be it from you, Let these of meaner qualitie contend, Who can indure most labour; Plough the earth, And thinke they are rewarded, when their sweat Brings home a fruitfull Haruest to their Lords; Let them proue good Artificers, and serue you For vse and ornament, but not presume To touch at what is Noble; if you thinke them Vnworthy to taste of those Cates you feed on, Or weare such costly garments; will you grant them The priuiledge and prerogatiue of great mindes, Which you were borne to? Honour, wonne in warre And to be stiled preseruers of their Countrey Are Titles fit for free and generous Spirits, And not for Bond-men: had I beene borne a man And such ne're dying glories made the prize To bolde Heroicke Courage; By Diana, I would not to my Brother, nay my Father, Be brib'd to part with the least peece of honour I should gaine in this action. Timoleon. Shee's inspir'd, Or in her speakes the Genius of your Countrey To fire your blood in her defence. I am rap'd With the imagination! Noble mayde, Timoleon is your Souldier, and will sweat Drops of his best blood, but he will bring home Triumphant conquest to you. Let me weare Your colours, Lady, and though youthfull heates That looke no further then your outward forme, Are long since buryed in me, while I liue, I am a constant louer of your minde, That does transcend all presidents. Cleora. 'Tis an honour: Giues her Scarfe. And so I doe receiue it.
Corisc. Plague vpon it, She has got the start of vs. I could e'ne burst With enuy at her fortune. Olimpia. A raw young thing, We haue too much tongue sometimes, our Husbands say, And she out-strips vs. Leost. I am for the journey. Timag. May all Diseases, sloath and lechery bring, Fall vpon him that stayes at home. Archid. Though olde, I will be there in person. Diphil. So will I. Me thinkes I am not what I was; her wordes Haue made me younger, by a score of yeares, Then I was when I came hither. Cleon. I am still Old Cleon, fat, and vnweldy, I shall neuer Make a good Souldier, and therefore desire To be excusde at home. Asotus. Tis my suite too. I am a grissell, and these Spider fingers, Will neuer hold a Sword. Let vs alone To rule the Slaues at home, I can so yerke em, But in my Conscience, I shall neuer proue Good Iustice in the warre. Timoleon. Haue your desires: You would be burthens to vs, no way aydes. Lead, fairest, to the Temple, first we'le pay A Sacrifice to the Gods for good successe. For, all great actions the wish'd course doe run, That are, with their allowance, well begun. Exeunt all but the Slaues. Pisander. Stay Cymbrio, and Gracculo. Cymbrio. The businesse? Pisander. Meet me to morrow night, neere to the Groue Neighbouring the East part of the Citie. Gracc. Well. Pisander. And bring the rest of our Condition with you, I haue something to impart, may breake our fetters,
If you dare second me. Cymbrio. Wee'l not fayle. Gracc. A Cart-rope Shall not binde me at home. Pisander. Thinke on't, and prosper. Exeunt. ACTVS II. SCAENA I. Archidamus, Timagoras, Leosthenes with Gorgits, Pisander. Archid. So, so, 'tis well, how doe I looke? Pisander. Most sprightfully. Archid. I shrinke not in the shoulders, though I am olde, I am tough, steele to the backe, I haue not wasted My stocke of strength in Feather-beds: heer's an arme too, There's stuffe in't, and I hope will vse a Sword As well as any beardlesse Boy of you all. Timag. I am glad to see you, Sir, so well prepar'd, To indure the trauaile of the warre. Archid. Goe too sirra, I shall indure, when some of you keepe your Cabins, For all your flaunting Feathers, nay Leosthenes You are welcome too, all friends, and fellowes now. Leost. Your seruant Sir. Archid. Pish, leaue these Complements, They stincke in a Souldiers mouth, I could be merry, For now my Gowne's off, farewell Grauitie, And must be bolde to put a question to you, Without offence, I hope. Leost. Sir, what you please. Archid. And you will answer truely? Timagor. On our words, Sir. Archid. Goe too, then, I presume you will confesse, That you are two notorious Whore-maisters. Nay spare your blushing, I haue beene wilde my selfe, A snatch, or so, for Physicke, does no harme; Nay, it is physicke, if vs'd moderately, But to lye at racke, and manger,
Leost. Say we grant this, For if we should deny it, you'l not beleeue vs, What will you inferre vpon it? Archid. What you'l groane for, I feare, when you come to the test. Old Stories tell vs There is a Moneth cal'd October; which brings in Colde weather, there are trenches too, 'tis rumor'd In which to stand all night to the knees in water, In Gallants breeds the tooth-ach, there's a sport too Nam'd lying Perdi, (doe you marke me) tis a game, Which you must learne to play at: now in these seasons, And choyse varietie of Exercises, (Nay I come to you) and fasts not for Deuotion, Your rambling hunt-smocke, feeles strange altorations, And in a Frosty morning, lookes as if He could with ease creepe in a pottle Pot In stead of his Mistris placket, then he Curses The time he spent in midnight visitations; And findes what he superfluously parted with, To be reported good, at length, and well breath'd, But if retriu'd into his backe againe, Enter Diphilus, and Cleora. Would keepe him warmer then a Scarlet wast-coate, Or an Armour linde with Furre. O welcome, welcome, You haue cut off my discourse, but I will perfit My lecture in the Campe. Diphil. Come, we are stay'd for, The General's a fire for a remoue, And longs to be in action. Archid. Tis my wish too, We must part, nay to teares, my best Cleora, I shall melt too, and that were ominous. Millions of blessings on thee, all that's mine, I giue vp to thy charge, and sirra, looke You, with that care and reuerence obserue her Which you would pay to me, a kisse, farewell Girle. Diphil. Peace wayte vpon you, faire one. Exeunt Archid. Diphil. Pisander. Timag. Twere impertinence To wish you to be carefull of your Honour,
That euer keepe in pay a Guard about you Of faithfull vertues: Farewell friend, I leaue you To wipe our kisses off, I know that Louers Part with more circumstance and ceremony, Which I giue way to. Exit Timagoras. Leost. Tis a noble fauour, For which, I euer owe you, we are alone, But how I should begin, or in what language Speake the vnwilling word, of parting from you, I am yet to learne. Cleora. And still continue ignorant, For I must be most cruell to my selfe, If I should teach you. Leost. Yet it must be spoken, Or you will chide my slacknesse, you haue fir'd me With the heate of noble action, to deserue you, And the least sparke of honour, that tooke life From your sweet breath, still fam'd by it, and cherish'd, Must Mount vp in a glorious flame, or I Am much vnworthy. Cleora. May it not burne heere, And as a Sea-marke, serue to guide true Louers, (Toss'd on the Ocean of luxurious wishes) Safe from the rockes of Lust into the harbour, Of pure affection? rising vp an example, Which after-times shall witnesse, to our glory, First tooke from vs beginning. Leost. Tis a happinesse, My duty to my Countrey, and mine Honour Cannot consent too, besides, adde to these, It was your pleasure, fortifide by perswasion, And strength of reason, for the generall good, That I should goe. Cleora. Alas, I then was wittie To pleade against my selfe, and mine eye fix'd, Vpon the hill of Honour, ne're descended To looke into the vayle of certaine dangers, Through which, you were to cut your passage to it. Leost. Ile stay at home then.
Cleora. No, that must not be, For so to serue my own ends, and to gaine A petty wreath my selfe; I rob you of A certaine triumph, which must fall vpon you, Or Vertue's turn'd a hand-maide to blinde Fortune: How is my soule deuided! to confirme you, In the opinion of the world, most worthy To be belou'd, (with me you are at the heigth, And can aduance no further) I must send you To Court the Goddesse of sterne Warre, who if Shee see you with my eies, will ne're returne you, But grow enamour'd of you. Leost. Sweet, take comfort, And what I offer you, you must vouchsafe me, Or I am wretched; all the dangers, that I can incounter in the War, and trifles; My enemies abroad to be contemn'd; The dreadfull foes, that haue the power to hurt me, I leaue at home with you. Cleor. With mee? Leost. Nay, in you, On euery part about you, they are arm'd To fight against me. Cleora. Where? Leost. Ther's no perfection That you are Mistris of, but musters vp A Legion against me, and all sworne To my destruction. Cleora. This is strange! Leost. But true, sweet, Excesse of loue can worke such miracles. Vpon this Iuory fore-head are intrench'd Ten thousand riuals, and these Sunnes command, Supplies from all the world, on paine to forfeit Their comfortable beames; these Rubie lips, A rich Exchecquer to assure their pay; This hand, Sibillas golden bough to guard them Through Hell, and horror, to the Elizian Springs;
Which who'll not venter for? and should I name Such as the vertues of your minde inuite, Their numbers would be infinite. Cleora. Can you thinke, I may be tempted? Leost. You were neuer prou'd. For me I haue conuers'd with you no farther, Then would become a Brother. I ne're tun'd Loose Notes to your chaste eares; or brought rich Presents For my Artillery, to batter downe, The fortresse of your honour, nor endeuour'd To make your blood runne high at solemne Feasts With Viands, that prouoke; (the speeding Philtres) I work'd no Baudes to tempt you; neuer practis'd The cunning, and corrupting Arts they studie, That wander in the wilde Maze of desire; Honest simplicitie, and Truth were all The Agents I imployd, and when I came To see you, it was with that reuerence, As I beheld the Altars of the gods; And loue, that came along with me, was taught To leaue his Arrowes, and his Torch behinde, Quench'd in my feare to giue offence. Cleora. And 'twas That modesty that tooke me, and preserues me, Like a fresh Rose, in mine owne naturall sweetnesse; Which sulli'd with the touch of impute hands, Loose both sent and beauty. Leost. But, Cleora, When I am absent, as I must goe from you, (such is the cruelty of my fate) and leaue you Vnguarded, to the violent assaults Of loose temptations; when the memory Of my so many yeares of Loue, and seruice, Is lost in other obiects; when you are courted By such as keepe a Catalogue of their Conquests, Wonne vpon credulous Virgins; when nor Father Is here to owe you; Brother to aduise you;
Nor your poore seruant by, to keepe such off, By lust instructed how to vndermine, And blow your chastity vp; when your weake senses At once assaulted, shall conspire against you; And play the traytors to your soule, your vertue: How can you stand? 'faith though you fall, and I The iudge, before whom you then stood accus'd, I should acquit you. Cleora. Will you then confirme, That loue, and iealousie, though of different natures, Must of necessity be twins? the younger, Created onely to defeate the elder, And spoyle him of his Birth-right: 'tis not well. But being to part, I will not chide, I will not, Nor with one sillable, or teare expresse, How deeply I am wounded with the arrowes Of your distrust: but when that you shall heare At your returne, how I haue borne my selfe, And what an auftere penance I take on me, To satisfie your doubts: when like a Vestall I shew you to your shame, the fire still burning, Committed to my charge by true affection, The people ioyning with you in the wonder. When by the glorious splendor of my suffrings, The prying eies of iealousie are strucke blinde, The Monster too that feeds on feares, eu'n staru'd For want of seeming matter to accuse me, Expect Leosthenes, a sharpe reproofe From my iust anger. Leost. What will you doe? Cleora. Obey mee, Or from this minute you are a stranger to me. And doe it without reply: all seeing Sunne, Thou witnesse of my innocence, thus I close Mine eies against thy comfortable light, Till the returne of this distrustfull man. Now binde 'em sure, nay doo't, if vncompeld. I loose this knot, vntill the hands that made it
Be pleas'd to vntie it, may consuming plagues Fall heauy on me, pray you guide me to your lips, This kisse, when you come backe shall be a Virgin To bid you welcome: Nay, I haue not done yet. I will continue dumbe, and you once gone, No Accent shall come from me: now to my chamber, My Tombe, if you miscarry: there I'le spend My houres in silent mourning, and thus much Shall be reported of me to my glory, And you confesse it, whither I liue or die, My Chastity triumphs ouer your iealousie. ACTVS II. SCAENA II. Asotus, Gracculo. Asot. You slaue, you Dogge, downe Curre. Gracc. Hold, good young Master, For pitties sake. Asot. Now am I in my kingdome. Who saies I am not valiant? I begin To frowne againe, quake villaine. Grac. So I doe, Sir, Your lookes are Agues to me. Asot. Are they so Sir, 'Slight, if I had them at this bey, that flout me, And say I looke like a sheepe, and an Asse, I would make 'em Feele, that I am a Lyon. Gracc. Doe not rore, Sir, As you are a valiant beast: but doe you know Why you vse me thus? Asot. I'le beat thee a little more, Then study for a reason, O I haue it, One brake a iest on me, and then I swore Because I durst not strike him, when I came home That I would breake thy head. Grac. Plague on his mirth, I am sure I mourne for't. Asot. Remember too, I charge you
To teach my Horse good manners; yet this morning, As I rode to take the ayre, th'untutor'd Iade Threw me, and kic'kd me. Grac. I thanke him for't. Asot. What's that? Grac. I say, Sir, I'le teach him to hold his heeles, If you will rule your fingers. Asot. I'le thinke vpon't. Grac. I am bruisde to ielly; better be a dogge, Then slaue to a Foole or Coward. Asot. Heere's my Mother, Enter Corisca and Zanthia. Shee is chastising too: How braue we liue! That haue our slaues to beat, to keepe vs in breath, When we want exercise. Corisca. Carelesse Harlotrie, Striking her. Looke too't, if a Curle fall, or winde, or Sunne, Take my Complexion off, I will not leaue One haire vpon thine head. Grac. Here's a second show Of the Family of pride. Corisca. Fie on these warres, I am staru'd for want of action, not a gamester left To keepe a woman play; if this world last A little longer with vs, Ladyes must studie Some new found Mistery, to coole one another, Wee shall burne to Cinders else; I haue heard there haue beene Such Arts in a long vacation; would they were Reueal'd to mee: they haue made my Doctor too Phisitian to the Army, he was vs'de To serue the turne at a pinch: but I am now Quite vnprouided. Asot. My Mother in law is sure At her deuotion. Corisc. There are none but our slaues left, Nor are they to be trusted; some great women (Which I could name) in a dearth of Visitants, Rather then be idle, haue beene glad to play At small game, but I am so queasie stomack't,
And from my youth haue beene so vsde to Dainties, I cannot taste such grosse meate; some that are hungrie Draw on their shoomakers, and take a fall From such as mend Mats in their Galleries; Or when a Taylor settles a Petticoate on, Take measure of his Bodkin: fie vpon't, 'Tis base; for my part, I could rather lie with A Gallants breeches, and conceaue vpon 'em, Then stoope so low. Asot. Faire Madam, and my Mother. Corisca. Leaue the last out, it smells rancke of the Countrie, And shewes course breeding, your true Courtier knowes not His Neece, or Sister from another woman, If she be apt and cunning. I could tempt now This foole, but he will be so long a working. Then hee's my Husbands Sonne; the fitter to Supply his wants, I haue the way already. I'le trie, if it will take; when were you with Your Mistris, faire Cleora. Asot. Two daies sithence, But shee's so coy forsooth, that ere I can Speake a pen'd speech I haue bought, and studied for her, Her woman calls her away. Corisc. Here's a dull thing, But better taught I hope, send of your man. Asot. Sirra, be gone. Grac. This is the first good turne, She euer did me. Exit Gracculo. Corisc. We'le haue a Scaene of mirth, I must not haue you sham'd for want of practise. I stand here for Cleora, and doe you heare Minion, (That you may tell her, what her woman should do) Repeat the lesson ouer, that I taught you, When my young Lord came to visit me, if you misse In a Syllable or posture! Zant. I am perfect. Asot. Would I were so: I feare I shall be out. Corisc. If you are, I'le helpe you in. Thus I walke musing:
You are to enter, and as you passe by, Salute my woman, be but bold enough, You'le speed I warrant you; begin. Asot. Haue at it. 'Saue thee sweet heart. A kisse. Zant. Venus forbid, Sir, I should presume to taste your honours lips Before my Lady. Corisc. This is well on both parts. Asot. How does thy Lady? Zant. Happy in your Lordship, As oft as she thinkes on you. Corisc. Very good, This Wench will learne in time. Asot. Does she thinke of me? Zant. O Sir, and speakes the best of you, admires Your wit, your clothes, discourse; and sweares, but that You are not forward enough for a Lord, you were The most compleat, and absolute man: I'le shew Your Lordship a Secret. Asot. Not of thine owne? Zant. O no, Sir, 'Tis of my Lady, but vpon your honour, You must conceale it. Asot. By all meanes. Zanthia. Some times I lie with my Ladie, as the lastnight I did, Shee could not say her prayers, for thinking of you, Nay, she talked of you in her sleepe, and sigh'd out, O sweet Asotus, sure thou art so backward, That I must rauish thee, and in that feruor She tooke me in her armes, threw me vpon her, Kis'd me, and hug'd me, and then wak'd, and wept; Because 'twas but a dreame. Corisc. This will bring him on, Or hee's a blocke. A good Girle! Asot. I am mad, Till I am at it.
Zant. Be not put off, Sir, With away, I dare not; fie you are immodest, My Brother's vp, my Father will heare, shoot home, Sir, You cannot misse the marke. Asot. There's for thy counsaile. This is the fairest interlude, if it proue earnest, I shall wish I were a Player. Corisc. Now my turne comes. I am exceeding sicke, pray you send my Page For young Asotus, I cannot liue without him, Pray him to visit me, yet when hee's present, I must be strange to him. Asot. Not so: you are caught. Loe whom you wish, behold Asotus here! Corisc. You wait well, Minion, shortly I shall not speake My thoughts in my priuate Chamber, but they must Lie open to discouery. Asot. 'Slid shee's angry. Zant. No, no, Sir, she but seemes so. To her againe. Asot. Lady, I would descend to kisse your hand, But that 'tis glou'd, and Ciuit makes me sicke; And to presume to taste your lipps not safe, Your woman by: Corisc. I hope shee's no obseruer, Of whom I grace. Zant. Lookes on a Booke, kisses her. Asot. She's at her booke, O rare! Corisc. A kisse for entertainement is sufficient: Too much of one dish cloyes me. Asotus. I would serue in The second course, but still I feare your woman. Corisc. You are very cautelous. Zanthia seemes to sleepe. Asotus. 'Slight shee's asleepe! 'Tis pitty, these instructions are not printed: They would sell well to Chamber-maides, 'tis no time now To play with my good fortune, and your fauour, Yet to be taken, as they say: a scout To giue the signall when the enemie comes, Exit Zanthia. Were now worth gold: Shee's gone to watch.
A wayter so trayn'd vp were worth a million, To a wanton Citie Madam. Corisc. You are growne conceited. Asotas. You teach me; Lady, now your Cabinet. Corisc. You speake, as it were yours. Asotas. When we are there, Ile show you my best euidence. Corisc. Holde, you forget, I onely play Cleora's part. Asotas. No matter, Now we haue begun, let's end the act. Corisc. Forbeare, Sir, Your Fathers wife? Asotas. Why, being his Heyre, I am bound, Since he can make no satisfaction to you, To see his debts payd. Enter Zanthia running. Zanthia. Madame, my Lord. Corisc. Fall off, I must trifle with the time too; Hell confound it. Asotas. Plague on his toothlesse chaps, he cannot do't Himselfe, yet hinders such as haue good stomacks. Enter Cleon. Cleon. Where are you, Wife? I faine would goe abroad, But cannot finde my Slaues, that beare my Litter: I am tyr'd, your shoulder, Sonne; nay sweet, thy hand too, A turne or two in the Garden, and then to Supper, And so to Bed. Asotas. Neuer to rise, I hope, more. Exeunt. ACTVS II. SCAENA III. Pisander, Poliphron, bringing forth a Table. Pisander. 'Twill take, I warrant thee. Poliphron. You may doe your pleasure: But, in my judgement, better to make vse of The present opportunitie. Pisander. No more. Enter Cimbrio, Gracculo, and Slaues. Poliphron. I am silenc'd. Pisander. More wine, pray thee drinke hard, friend,
And when we are hot, what euer I propound, Second with vehemency: men of your wordes, all welcome, Slaues vse no ceremonie, sit downe, heer's a health, Poliphron. Let it runne round, fill euery man his Glasse. Gracc. We looke for no wayters; this is Wine. Pisander. The better, Strong, lusty wine: drinke deepe, this juyce will make vs As free as our Lords. Drinkes. Gracc. But if they finde, we taste it, We are all damn'd to the quarry, during life, Without hope of redemption. Pisander. Pish, for that Wee'l talke anon: another rowse, we loose time, Drinkes. When our lowe blood's wound vp a little higher, Ile offer my designe; nay, we are colde yet, These Glasses containe nothing; doe me right, Takes the Bottle. As e're you hope for liberty. 'Tis done brauely, How doe you feele your selues now? Cimbrio. I begin To haue strange Conundrums in my head. Gracc. And I, To loath base water: I would be hang'd in peace now, For one moneth of such Holy-dayes. Pisander. An age, Boyes, And yet defie the Whip, if you are men, Or dare belieue, you haue soules. Cimbrio. We are no Broakers: Gracc. Nor Whores, whose markes are out of their mouthes, they haue none, They hardly can get salt enough to keep 'em From stinking aboue ground. Pisander. Our Lords are no Gods? Gracc. They are Diuels to vs, I am sure. Pisander. But subject to Colde, hunger, and diseases. Gracc. In abundance. Your Lord, that feeles no ach in his chine at twentie, Forfeits his priuiledge, how should their Chyrurgion build else, Or ride on their Foot-cloathes?
Pisander. Equall nature fashion'd vs All in one molde: The Beare serues not the Beare, Nor the Wolfe, the Wolfe; 'twas ods of strength in tyrants, That pluck'd the first linke from the Golden chayne With which that thing of things bound in the world. Why then, since we are taught, by their examples, To loue our Libertie, if not Command, Should the strong serue the weake, the faire deform'd ones? Or such as know the cause of thinges, pay tribute To ignorant fooles? All's but the outward glosse And politicke forme, that does distinguish vs. Cymbrio, thou art a strong man; if in place Of carrying burthens, thou hadst beene trayn'd vp In Martiall discipline, thou mightst haue prou'd A Generall, fit to lead and fight for Sicilie, As fortunate as Timolcon. Cymbrio. A little fighting Will serue a Generals turne. Pisander. Thou, Gracculo, Hast fluencie of Language, quicke conceite, And I thinke, couer'd with a Senators robe, Formally set on the Bench, thou wouldst appeare As braue a Senator. Gracc. Would I had Lands, Or money to buy a place; and if I did not Sleepe on the Bench, with the drowsiest of'em, play with my Chayne, Looke on my Watch, when my guts chym'd twelue, and weare A state Beard, with my Barbers helpe, rancke with 'em, In their most choyce peculiar guifts; degrade me And put me to drinke Water againe, which (now I haue tasted Wine) were poyson. Pisander. 'Tis spoke nobly, And like a Gown-man, none of these, I thinke too, But would proue good Burgers. Gracc. Hum: the fooles are modest, I know their insides: Here's an ill-fac'd fellow, (But that will not be seene in a darke Shop,) If he did not in a moneth, learne to out-sweare,
In the selling of his Wares, the cunningest Tradesman In Syracusa, I haue no skill; Here's another, Obserue but what a cousening looke he has, (Hold vp thy head, man) if for drawing Gallants Into mortgages for Commodities, cheating Heyres With your new counterfeit Gold thred, and gumm'd Veluets, He does not transcend all that went before him, Call in his patent; passe the rest, they'l all make Sufficient Becos, and with their brow-antlets Beare vp the Cap of maintenance. Pisander. Is 't not pitty then, Men of such eminent vertues, should be Slaues? Cimbrio. Our fortune. Pisander. Tis your folly, daring men Commaund, and make their fates. Say, at this instant, I mark'd you out a way to Libertie; Possest you of those blessings, our proud Lords So long haue surfetted in; and what is sweetest, Arme you with power, by strong hand to reuenge Your stripes, your vnregarded toyle, the pride, The insolencie, of such as tread vpon Your patient suffrings; fill your famish'd mouthes, With the fat and plentie of the Land; redeeme you From the darke vale of Seruitude, and seate you Vpon a hill of happinesse; what would you doe To purchase this and more? Gracc. Doe any thing, To burne a Church or two, and dance by the light on't Were but a May-game. Poliphron. I haue a Father liuing, But if the cutting of his throat could worke this, He should excuse me. Cimbrio. 'Slight, I would cut mine owne, Rather then misse it, so I might but haue A taste on't, ere I dye. Pisander. Be resolute men, You shall runne no such hazard, nor groane vnder The burthen of such crying sinnes.
Cimbrio. The meanes? Gracculo. I feele a womans longing. Poliphron. Doe not torment vs With expectation. Pisander. Thus then, our proud Masters; And all the able Freemen of the Citie Are gone vnto the warres, Poliphron. Obserue but that. Pisander, Old men, and such as can make no resistance, Are onely left at home. Gracculo. And the proud young foole My Master: If this take, I'le hamper him. Pisander. Their Arsenall, their Treasure's in our power, If we haue hearts to sease 'em, if our Lords fall In the present action, the whole countrie's ours; Say they returne victorious, we haue meanes To keepe the Towne against them: at the worst To make our owne conditions: now if you dare fall on their Daughters, and their wiues, break vp Their Iron Chests, banquet on their rich Beds, And carue your selues of all delights and pleasures You haue beene barr'd from, with one voyce cry with me, Libertie, Libertie. All. Libertie, Libertie. Pisander. Goe then, and take possession; vse all freedome, But shed no blood: so this is well begun, But not to be commended, til't be done. Exeunt omnes. ACTVS III. SCAENA I. Pisander. Timandra. Pisander. Why, thinke you, that I plot against my selfe? Feare nothing, you are safe, these thick-skinn'd slaues, (I vse as instruments to serue my ends) Pierce not my deepe designes: nor shall they dare To lift an arme against you. Timandra. With your will. But turbulent spirits rais'd beyond themselues
With case, are not so soone layd: they oft proue Dangerous to him that call'd them vp. Pisander. Tis true, In what is rashly vndertooke. Long since I haue considered seriously their natures Proceeded with mature aduise, and know I hold their will, and faculties in more awe Then I can doe my owne. Now for their Licence, And ryot in the Citie, I can make A iust defence, and vse: it may appeare too A polliticke preuention of such ills As might with greater violence, and danger hereafter be attempted; though some smart for't, It matters not: how euer, I am resolu'd; And sleepe you with security. Holds Cleora Constant to her rash vow? Timandra, Beyond beleefe; To me, that see her hourely, it seemes a fable. By signes I ghesse at her commands, and serue 'em With silence, such her pleasure is, made knowne By holding her faire hand thus; she eates little, Sleepes lesse, as I imagine; once a day I leade her to this Gallery, where she walkes Some halfe a dozen turnes, and hauing offred To her absent Saint a sacrifice of sighes, She points backe to her prison. Pisander. Guide her hither, And make her vnderstand the slaues reuolt. And with your vtmost eloquence enlarge Their insolence, and Rapes done in the Citie, Forget not to, I am their chiefe, and tell her You strongly thinke my extreame dotage on her, As I am Marullo, caus'd this sodaine vprore, To make way to enioy her. Timandra. Punctually I will discharge my part. Exit Timandra. Enter Poliphron. Poliphron. O Sir, I sought you. You haue mis'd the best sport. Hell, I thinke is broke loose,
There's such varietie of all disorders, As leaping, shooting, drinking, dancing, whoring Among the slaues; answer'd with crying, howling, By the Citizens and their wiues: such a confusion, (In a word, not to tyre you) as I thinke The like was neuer reade of. Pisander. I share in The pleasure, though I am absent. This is some Reuenge for my disgrace. Poliphron. But Sir; I feare, If your authority restraine them not, They'le fire the Citie, or kill one another, They are so apt to outrage; neither know I Whether you wish it, and came therefore to Acquaint you with so much. Pisander. I will among 'em, But must not long be absent. Poliphron. At your pleasure. ACTVS III. SCAENA II. Cleora, Timandra, a Chaire, a shout within. Timandra. They are at our gates, my heart! affrights & horrors Increase each minute: No way left to saue vs; No flattering hope to comfort vs, or meanes By miracle to redeeme vs from base lust, And lawlesse rapine. Are there Gods, yet suffer Such innocent sweetnesse to be made the spoile Of brutish appetite? Or, since they decree To ruine Natures master-peece (of which they haue not left one patterne) must they choose, To set their tyrannie of, slaues to pollute The spring of chastitie, and poyson it With their most loath'd embraces? and of those He that should offer vp his life to guard it? Marullo, curs'd Marullo, your owne Bond-man Purchas'd to serue you, and fed by your fauours. Nay, start not; it is he, hee the grand Captaine Cleora starts,
Of these libidinous beasts, that haue not left One cruell act vndone, that Barbarous conquest, Yet euer practis'd in a captiue Citie. He doting on your beauty, and to haue fellowes In his foule sinne, hath rais'd these mutinous slaues, Who haue begun the game by violent Rapes, Vpon the Wiues and Daughters of their Lords: And he to quench the fire of his base lust, By force comes to enioy you: doe not wring Cleora wrings her hands. Your innocent hands, 'tis bootlesse; vse the meanes That may preserue you. 'Tis no crime to breake A vow, when you are forc'd to it; shew your face, And with the maiestie of commanding beautie, Strike dead his loose affections; if that faile, Giue libertie to your tongue, and vse entreaties, There cannot be a breast of flesh, and bloud, Or heart so made of flint, but must receiue Impression from your words; or eies so sterne, But from the cleere reflection of your teares Must melt, and beare them company: will you not Doe these good offices to your selfe? poore I then, Can onely weepe your fortune; here he comes. Pisander. He that aduances Enter Pisander speaking at the doore. A foot beyond this, comes vpon my sword You haue had your wayes, disturbe not mine. Timandra. Speake gently, Her feares may kill her else. Pisander. Now loue inspire me! Still shall this Canopie of enuious night Obscure my Suns of comfort? and those dainties Of purest white and red, which I take in at My greedy eyes, deny'd my famish'd senses? The Organs of your hearing yet are open; And you infringe no vow, though you vouchsafe, To giue them warrant, to conuey vnto Your vnderstanding parts the story of A tortur'd and dispairing Louer, whom Cleora shakes. Not Fortune but affection markes your slaue.
Shake not, best Lady; for (belee't) you are As farre from danger as I am from force. All violence I'le offer, tendes no farther Then to relate my suffrings, which I dare not Presume to doe, till by some gratious signe You shew, you are pleas'd to heare me. Timandra. If you are, Hold forth your right hand. Cleora holdes forth her right hand. Pisandra. So, 'tis done, and I With my glad lips seale humbly on your foot, My soules thankes for the fauour: I forbeare To tell you who I am, what wealth, what honours I made exchange of to become your seruant: And though I knew, worthy Leosthenes (For sure he must be worthy, for whose loue You haue endur'd so much) to be my riuall, When rage, and iealousie counsail'd me to kill him, (Which then I could haue done with much more ease, Then now, in feare to grieue you, I dare speake it) Loue seconded with duty boldly told me, The man I hated, faire Cleora fauour'd, And that was his protection. Cleora bowes. Timandra. See, she bowes Her head in signe of thankfulnesse. Pisander. He remou'd, By th'occasion of the war (my fires increasing By being clos'd, and stop'd vp) franticke affection prompted me to doe something in his absence, That might deliuer you into my power, Which you see is effected, and euen now, When my rebellious passions chide my dulnesse, And tell me how much I abuse my fortunes; Now 'tis in my power to beare you hence, Cleora starts. Or take my wishes here, (nay, feare not Madam True loue's a seruant, brutish lust a Tyrant) I dare not touch those viands, that ne're taste well, But when they are freely offred: only thus much, Be pleas'd I may speake in my owne deare cause,
And thinke it worthy your consideration. I haue lou'd truly, (cannot say deseru'd, Since duty must not take the name of merit) That I so farre prise your content, before All blessings, that my hopes can fashion to mee, That willingly I entertaine despayre, And for your sake embrace it. For I know, This opportunity lost, by no endeauour The like can be recouer'd. To conclude, Forget not, that I lose my selfe, to saue you. For what can I expect, but death and torture The warre being ended? and, what is a taske Would trouble Hercules to vndertake, I doe deny you to my selfe, to giue you A pure vnspotted present to my riuall. I haue said, if it distaste not, best of Virgins, Reward my temperance with some lawfull fauour, Though you contemne my person. Cleora kneeles, then puls off her Gloue, and offers her hand to Pisander. Timandra. See, she kneeles And seemes to call vpon the gods to pay The debt she owes your vertue. To performe which As a sure pledge of friendship, she vouchsafes you Her faire right hand. Makes a lowe curtsie, as she goes off. Pisander. I am payd for all my suffrings. Now when you please, passe to your priuate Chamber: My loue, and dutie, faithfull guards, shall keepe you From all disturbance; and when you are sated With thinking of Leosthenes, as a fee Due to my seruice, spare one sigh for me. Exeunt. ACTVS III, SCAENA III. Gracculo leading Asotus in an Apes habit, with a chaine about his necke. Zanthia, in Coriscaes Cloathes, she bearing vp her traine. Gracculo. Come on, Sir. Asotus. Oh. Grac. Doe you grumble? you were euer
A brainelesse Asse, but if this hold, I'le teach 'you To come aloft, and doe tricks like an Ape Your mornings lesson: if you misse — Asotus. O no, Sir. Asotus makes moppes. Grac. What for the Carthaginians? a good beast. What for our selfe your Lord? exceeding well. Dances. There's your reward. Not kisse your pawe? So, so, so. Zanthia. Was euer Lady the first daie of her honour So waited on by a wrinkled crone? she lookes now Without her painting, curling, and perfumes Like the last day of Ianuary; and stinkes worse Then a hot brach in the dogge daies. Further of, So stand there like an image; if you stirre, Till with a quarter of a looke I call you, You know what followes. Corisca. O what am I falne to! But 'tis a punishment for my lust and pride, Iustly return'd vpon me. Gracculo. How doo'st thou like Thy Ladiship Zanthia? Zanthia. Very well, and beare it With as much state as your Lordship. Gracculo. Giue me thy hand; Let vs like conquering Romans walke in triumph, Our captiues following. Then mount our Tribunals, And make the slaues our footstooles. Zanthia. Fine by Ioue, Are your hands cleane minion? Corisca. Yes forsooth. Zanthia. Fall off then. So now come on: and hauing made your three duties, Downe I say, (are you stiffe in the hams?) now kneele, And tie our shooe. Now kisse it and be happy. Gracculo. This is state indeed. Zanthia. It is such as she taught me, A tickling itch of greatnesse, your proud Ladyes Expect from their poore Waiters, we haue chang'd parts; Shee does what she forc'd me to doe in her raigne, And I must practise it in mine.
Gracculo. 'Tis iustice; O heere come more. Enter Cymbrio, Cleon, Poliphron, Olympia. Cymbrio. Discouer to a Drachma, Or I will famish thee. Cleon. O I am pin'de already. Cymbrio. Hunger shall force thee to cut off the brawnes From thy armes and thighes, then broile them on the coles For Carbonadoes. Poliphron. Spare the olde Iade, he's foundred. Gracculo. Cutt his throat then, And hang him out for a scarre-Crowe. Poliphron. You haue all your wishes In your reuenge, and I haue mine. You see I vse no tyrannie: When I was her slaue, She kept me as a sinner to lie at her backe In frostie nights, and fed me high with dainties, Which still she had in her belly againe e're morning, And in requitall of those curtesies Hauing made one another free, we are marryed, And if you wish vs ioy, ioyne with vs in A Dance at our Wedding. Gracculo. Agreed, for I haue thought of A most triumphant one, which shall expresse, wee are Lords, and these our slaues. Poliphron. But we shall want A woman. Gracculo. No, here's Iane of Apes shall serue; Carry your body swimming: where's the Musicke? Poliph. I haue plac'd it in yon Window. The dance at the end. Enter Pisander. Gracculo. Begin then sprightly. Poliphron. Well done on all sides. I haue prepar'd a Banquet; Let's drinke, and coole vs. Gracculo. A good motion, Cymbrio. Wait heere, You haue beene tyr'd with feasting, learne to fast now. Grac. Ile haue an Apple for Iacke, and may be some scrapps May fall to your share Exeunt Gracculo, Zanthia, Cymbrio, Poliphron, Olympia. Corisca. Whom can we accuse But our selues for what we suffer? thou art iust
Thou all-creating power. And miserie Instructs me now, that yesterday acknowledg'd, No Deitie beyond my lust and pride. There is a heauen aboue vs, that lookes downe With the eyes of Iustice, vpon such as number Those blessings freely giuen, in the accompt Of their poore merits: Else it could not be Now miserable I, to please whose pallat The Elements were ransack'd, yet complain'd Of Nature, as not liberall enough In her prouision of rarities To soothe my taste, and pamper my proud flesh: Now wish in vaine for bread: Cleon. Yes, I doe wishe too, For what I fed my dogges with. Corisca. I that forgot I was made of flesh and blood, and thought the silke Spunne by the diligent worme, out of their intrals, Too course to cloathe mee; and the softest Downe Too hard to sleepe on; that disdain'd to looke On vertue being in ragges; that stop'd my nose At those that did not vse adulterate arts To better nature; that from those, that seru'd me, Expected adoration, am made iustly The scorne of my owne Bond-woman. Asotus. I am punish'd, For seeking to Cuckold mine owne naturall Father. Had I beene gelded then, or vs'd my selfe Like a man: I had not beene transform'd, and forc'd To play an ore-growne Ape. Cleon. I know I cannot Last long, that's all my comfort: come, I forgiue both, It is in vaine to be angry, let vs therefore Lament together like friends. Pisander. What a true mirror Were this sad spectacle for secure greatnesse! Heere they that neuer see themselues, but in The Glasse of seruile flattery, might behold
The weake foundation vpon which they build, That trust in humane frailtie. Happie are those, That knowing in their births, they are subiect to Vncertaine change, are still prepar'd, and arm'd For either fortune: A rare principle, And with much labour, learn'd in wisdomes schoole! For as these Bond-men by their actions shew, That their prosperitie, like too too large a Sayle For their small barke of iudgement; sinkes them with A fore-right gale of libertie, e're they reach The Port they long to touch at: So these wretches Swolne with the false opinion of their worth, And proud of blessings left them, not acquir'd, That did beleeue they could with Gyant-armes Fathome the earth, and were aboue their fates. Those borrow'd helpes that did support them, vanish'd: Fall of themselues, and by vnmanly suffring, Betray their proper weaknesse, and make knowne Their boasted greatnesse was lent, not their owne. Cleon. O for some meate, they sit long. Corisc. We forgot, When we drew out intemperate feasts till midnight: Their hunger was not thought on, nor their watchings; Nor did we hold our selues seru'd to the height, But when we did exact, and force their duties Beyond their strength and power. Asotus. We pay for't now, I now could be content to haue my head Broke with a ribbe of Beefe, or for a Coffin Be buried in the dripping Pan. Cymbrio. Doe not hold me, Enter Poliphron, Cymbrio, Gracculo, Zanthia, Olimpia, drunke and quarrelling. Not kisse the Bride? Poliphron. No Sir. Cimbrio. She's common good, And so wee'll vse her. Gracculo. Wee'le haue nothing priuate. Olympia. Hold: Zanthia. Heere, Marullo.
Olympia. Hee's your chiefe. Cymbrio. We are equals, I will know no obedience. Gracculo. Nor superior, Nay, if you are Lyon-drunke, I will make one, For lightly euer he that parts the fray, Goes away with the blowes. Pisander. Art thou madde too? No more, as you respect me. Poliphron. I obey, Sir, Pisander. Quarrell among your selues? Cymbrio. Yes, in our Wine, Sir, And for our Wenches. Gracculo. How could we be Lords else? Pisan. Take heed, I haue news will coole this heat, & make you Remember, what you were. Cymbrio. How? Pisander. Send off these, And then I'le tell you. Zanthia beating Corisca. Olympia. This is tyrannie, Now she offends not. Zanthia. 'Tis for exercise, And to helpe digestion, what is she good for else? To me it was her language. Pisander. Leaue her off, And take heed Madam minx, the Wheele may turne. Goe to your meate, and rest, and from this houre Remember, he that is a Lord to day, Exeunt Cleon, Asotus, Zan∣thia, Olympia, Corisca. May be a Slaue to morrow. Cleon. good morallity. Cymbrio. But what would you impart? Pisander. What must inuite you To stand vpon your guard, and leaue your feasting, Or but imagine, what it is to be Most miserable, and rest assur'd you are so. Our Masters are victorious: All. How? Pisander. Within
A dayes march of the Citie, flesh'd with spoyle, And proud of conquest, the Armado sunke, The Carthaginian Admirall hand to hand, Slaine by Leosthenes. Cymbrio. I feele the whippe Vpon my backe already. Gracculo. Euery man Seeke a conuenient Tree, and hang himselfe. Poliphron. Better die once, then liue an age to suffer New tortures euery houre. Cimbrio. Say, we submit, And yeeld vs to their mercy. Pisander. Can you flatter Your selues with such false hopes? or dare you thinke That you imperious Lords, that neuer fail'd To punish with seuerity petty slipps, In your neglect of labour, may be wonne To pardon those licentious outrages, Which noble enemies forbeare to practise Vpon the conquer'd? What haue you omitted, That may call on their iust reuenge with horror, And studied cruelty? We haue gone too farre To thinke now of retyring; in our courage, And during, lies our safetie; if you are not Slaues in your abiect mindes, as in your fortunes Since to die is the worst, better expose Our naked breasts to their keene Swords, and sell Our liues with the most aduantage, then to trust In a forestal'd remission, or yeeld vp Our bodies to the furnace of their furie, Thrice heated with reuenge. Gracculo. You led vs on. Cimb. And 'tis but iustice, you should bring vs off. Gracculo. And we expect it. Pisander. Heare then, and obey me, And I will either saue you, or fall with you; Man the Walls strongly, and make good the Ports Boldly deny their entrance, and rippe vp
Your grieuances, and what compel'd you to This desperate course: if they disdaine to heare Of composition, we haue in our powers Their aged Fathers, Children, and their Wiues, Who to preserue themselues, must willingly Make intercession for vs. 'Tis not time now To talke, but doe. A glorious end or freedome Is now propos'd vs; stand resolu'd for either, And like good fellowes, liue, or die togeather. Exeunt. ACTVS III. SCAENA IIII. Leosthenes, Timagorus. Timagoras. I am so farre from enuie, I am proud You haue outstrip'd me in the race of honour. O 'twas a glorious day, and brauely wonne! Your bold performance gaue such lustre to Timoleons wise directions, as the Armie Rests doubtfull, to whom they stand most ingag'de For their so great successe. Leosthenes. The Gods first honour'd, The glory be the Generalls; 'tis farre from mee To be his riuall. Timagoras. You abuse your fortune, To entertaine her choyce, and gratious fauours, With a contracted browe; Plum'd victorie Is truly painted with a cheerefull looke, Equally distant from proud insolence, And base deiection. Leosthenes. O Timagoras, You onely are acquainted with the cause, That loades my sad heart with a hill of lead. Whose ponderous waight, neither my new got honour, Assisted by the generall applause The souldier crownes it with: nor all warres glories Can lessen, or remoue; and would you please, With fit consideraton to remember, How much I wrong Cleoras innocence,
With my rash doubts; and what a grieuous pennance, Shee did impose vpon her tender sweetnesse, To plucke away the Vulture iealousie, That fed vpon my Liuer: you cannot blame me, But call it a fit iustice on my selfe, Though I resolue to be a stranger to The thought of mirth, or pleasure. Timandra. You haue redeem'd The forfeit of your fault, with such a ransome Of honourable action, as my Sister Must of necessitie confesse her suffrings Weigh'd downe by your faire merits; and when she views you Like a triumphant Conquerour, carried through The Streets of Syracusa, the glad people Pressing to meet you, and the Senators Contending who shall heape most honours on you; The Oxen crown'd with Girlands led before you Appointed for the Sacrifice; and the Altars Smoaking with thankfull Incense to the gods: The Souldiers chaunting loud hymnes to your praise: The windowes fill'd with Matrons, and with Virgins, Throwing vpon your head, as you passe by, The choycest Flowers; and silently inuoking The Queene of Loue, with their particular vowes, To be thought worthy of you; can Cleora, (Though, in the glasse of selfe-loue, shee behold Her best deserts) but with all ioy acknowledge, What she indur'd, was but a noble tryall You made of her affection? and her anger Rising from your too amorous eares, soone drench'd In Lethe, and forgotten. Leosthenes. If those glories You so set forth were mine, they might plead for mee; But I can laye no claime to the least honour, Which you with foule iniustice rauish from her; Her beauty, in me wrought a myracle, Taught me to ayme at things beyond my power, Which her perfections purchas'd, and gaue to me
From her free bounties; she inspir'd me with That vallour, which I dare not call mine owne: And from the faire reflexion of her minde, My soule receau'd the sparckling beames of courage. Shee from the magazine of her proper goodnesse, Stock'd me with vertuous purposes; sent me forth To trade for honour; and she being the owner Of the barke of my aduentures, I must yeeld her A iust accompt of all, as fits a Factor: And howsoeuer others thinke me happy, And cry aloud, I haue made a prosperous voyage: One frowne of her dislike at my returne, (Which, as a punishment for my fault, I looke for) Strikes dead all comfort. Timagoras. Tush, these feares are needlesse, Shee cannot, must not, shall not be so cruell. A free confession of a fault winnes pardon; But being seconded by desert, commands it. The Generall is your owne, and sure; my Father Repents his harshnesse: for my selfe, I am Euer your creature, one day shall be happy In your triumph, and your Mariage. Leosthenes. May it proue so, With her consent, and pardon. Timagoras. Euer touching On that harsh string? she is your owne, and you Without disturbance seaze on what's your due. Exeunt. ACTVS IIII. SCAENA I. Pisander, Timandra. Pisander. She has her health then: Timandra. Yes, Sir, and as often As I speake of you, lends attentiue eare To all that I deliuer; nor seemes tyr'de, Though I dwell long on the relation of Your suffrings for her, heaping praise on praise, On your vnequal'd temperance, and command,
You hold o're your affections. Pisander. To my wish: Haue you acquainted her with the defeature Of the Carthaginians, and with what honours Leosthenes comes Crown'd home with? Timandra. With all care. Pisander. And how does she receaue it? Timandra. As I ghesse With a seeming kinde of ioy, but yet appeares not Transported, or proud of his happy fortune. But when I tell her of the certaine ruine, You must encounter with at their arriuall In Syracusa, and that death with torments Must fall vpon you, which you yet repent not; Esteeming it a glorious martyrdome, And a reward of pure, vnspotted loue, Preseru'd in the white robe of Innocence: Though she were in your power, and still spurr'd on By insolent lust; you rather chose to suffer The fruit vntasted, for whose glad possession, You haue call'd on the furie of your Lord, Then that she should be grieu'd, or tainted in Her Reputation. Pisander. Doth it worke compunction? Pitties she my misfortune? Timandra. Shee express'd All signes of sorrow, (which) her vow obseru'd, Could witnesse a grieu'd heart. At the first hearing Shee fell vpon her face, rent her faire haire, Her hands held vp to heauen, and vented sighes, In which shee silently seem'd to complaine, Of heauens iniustice. Pisander, 'Tis enough: waite carefully, And vpon all watch'd occasions, continue Speech, and discourse of me: 'tis time, must worke her. Timandra. I'le not be wanting, but still striue to serue you. Pisander. Now, Poliphron, the newes: Exit Timandra. Enter Poliphron. Poliphron. The conquering Army
Is within ken. Pisander. How brooke the slaues the obiect? Poliph. Cheerefully yet; they do refuse no labour, And seeme to scoffe at danger; 'tis your presence That must confirme them; with a full consent, You are chosen to relate the tyranny Of our proud Masters; and what you subscribe too, They gladly will allow of, or hold out To the last man. Pisander. I'le instantly among them: If we prooue constant to our selues, good fortune Will not, I hope, forsake vs. Poliphron. 'Tis our best refuge. Exeunt. ACTVS IIII. SCAENA II. Timoleon, Archidamus, Diphilus, Leosthenes, Timagoras, others. Timoleon. Thus farre we are return'd victorious, crown'd With Wreathes triumphant, (famine, blood, and dearth, Banisht your peacefull confines,) and bring home Securitie, and peace. 'Tis therefore fit That such as boldly stood the shocke of warre, And with the deere expence of sweat and blood Haue purchas'd Honour, should with pleasure reape The haruest of their toyle; and wee stand bound Out of the first file of the best deseruers, (Though all must be consider'd to their merits) To thinke of you Leosthenes, that stand, And worthily, most deere in our esteeme, For your heroique valour. Archidamus. When I looke on (The labour of so many men, and ages) This well-built Citie, not long since design'd To spoyle and rapine; by the fauour of The gods, and you their ministers preseru'd; I cannot in my height of ioy, but offer These teares for a glad sacrifice.
Diphilus. Sleepe the Citizens? Or are they ouerwhelm'd with the excesse Of comfort, that flowes to them? Leosthenes. Wee receaue A silent entertainment. Timagoras. I long since Expected, that the virgins, and the Matrons, The old men striuing with their age, the Priests Carrying the Images of their gods before 'em Should haue met vs with Procession: Ha! the gates Are shut against vs! Archid. And vpon the Walls Enter aboue, Pisander, Poli∣phron, Cimbrio, Gracculo, & the rest. Arm'd men seeme to defie vs! Diphilus. I should know These faces; they are our slaues. Timagoras. The misterie, Rascalls? Open the ports, and play not with an anger, That will consume you. Timoleon. This is aboue wonder. Archid. Our Bond-men stand against vs! Gracculo. Some such things We were in mans remembrance; the slaues are turn'd Lords of the Towne, or so; nay, be not angry: Perhaps on good tearmes, giuing security, You will be quiet men, we may allow you Some lodgings in our Garrets, or out-houses; Your great lookes cannot carry it. Cymbrio. The truth is, We haue beene bold with your wiues, toy'd with your daughters. Leosthenes. O my prophetique soule! Gracculo. Rifled your Chests, Beene busie with your Wardrobes. Timagoras. Can we indure this? Leosthenes. O my Cleora! Gracculo. A Caudle, for the Gentleman, Hee'll die athe pip else. Timagoras. Scorn'd too! are you turn'd stone? Hold parley with our Bond-men? force our entrance,
Then Villaines, expect. Timoleon. Hold: you weare mens shapes And if like men you haue reason, shew a cause That leads you to this desperate course, which must end In your destruction? Gracculo. That, as please the Fates, But we vouchsafe; speake Captaine. Timagoras. Hell, and Furies! Archid. Bay'd by our owne curres? Cimbrio. Take heed, you be not wurried. Poliphron. We are sharpe set. Cymbrio. And sodaine. Pisander. Briefly thus then, Since I must speake for all; your tyranny Drew vs from our obedience. Happy those times, When Lords were styl'd fathers of Families, And not imperious Masters; when they numbred Their seruants almost equall with their Sonnes, Or one degree beneath them; when their labours Were cherish'd, and rewarded, and a period Set to their suffrings; when they did not presse Their duties, or their wills beyond the power And strength of their performance; all things order'd With such decorum, as wise Law-makers, From each well-gouern'd priuate house deriu'd The perfect modell of a Common-wealth; Humanity then lodg'd in the hearts of men, And thankfull Masters carefully prouided For Creatures wanting reason. The noble horse That in his fiery youth from his wide nostrells, Neigh'd courage to his Rider, and brake through Groues of opposed Pikes, bearing his Lord Safe to triumphant victory, old or wounded, Was set at libertie, and freed from seruice. The Athenian Mules, that from the Quarrie drew Marble, hew'd for the Temples of the gods, The great worke ended, were dismis'd, and fed At the publique cost; nay, faithfull dogs haue found
Their Sepulchres; but man to man, more cruell, Appoints no end to the suffrings of his slaue; Since pride stept in and ryot, and o'return'd This goodly frame of Concord, teaching Masters To glory in the abuse of such, as are Brought vnder their cōmand; who grown vnusefull, Are lesse esteem'd than beasts; this you haue practis'd, Practis'd on vs with rigor; this hath forc'd vs, To shake our heauy yokes off; and if redresse Of these iust grieuances be not granted vs, Wee'le right our selues, and by strong hand defend, What we are now possess'd of. Gracculo. And not leaue One house vnfir'd. Cimbrio. Or throat vncut of those We haue in our power. Poliphron. Nor will we fall alone, You shall buy vs dearely. Timagoras. O, the gods! Vnheard of insolence! Timoleon. What are your demaunds? Pisander. A generall pardon, first, for all offences Committed in your absence. Libertie, To all such, as desire to make returne Into their countries; and to those that stay, A competence of land freely allotted To each mans proper vse; no Lord acknowledg'd. Lastly, with your consent, to choose them wiues Out of your Families. Timagoras. Let the Citie sinke first. Leosthenes. And ruine sease on all, e're we subscribe To such conditions. Archidamus. Carthage, though victorious, Could not haue forc'd more from vs: Leosthenes. Scale the Walls, Capitulate after. Timoleon. He that winnes the toppe first, Shall weare a murall wreath. Exeunt.
Pisander. Flourish, & alarmes. Each to his place. Or death or victory; charge them home, & feare not. Enter Timoleon and Senators. Timol. We wrong our selues, and we are iustly punish'd, To deale with Bond-men, as if we encountred An equall enemy. Archidamus. They fight like deuills: And runne vpon our Swords, as if their breasts Were proofe beyond their Armour. Enter Leothenes, and Timagoras. Timagoras. Make a firme stand: The slaues not satisfied, they haue beat vs off, Prepare to sally forth. Timoleon. They are wilde beasts, And to be tam'd by pollicie; each man take A tough whippe in his hand: such as you vs'd To punish them with, as masters; in your lookes carry seuerity, and awe; 'twill fright them More then your weapons; sauage Lyons flye from The sight of fire; and these that haue forgot That duty, your n'ere taught them with your swords, When vnexpected, they behold those terrors Aduanc'd aloft, that they were made to shake at, 'Twill force them to remember what they are, And stoope to due obedience. Enter Cimbrio, Gracculo, & other slaues. Archidamus. Heere they come. Cymbrio. Leaue not a man aliue; a wound is but a fleabyting, To what we suffred being slaues. Gracculo. O my heart! Cimbrio what doe we see? the whippe! our Masters! Timag. Dare you rebell, slaues? Senators shake their whips, and they throw away theis weapons, and runne off. Cimbrio. Mercy, mercy; where Shall we hide vs from their furie? Gracculo. Fly, they follow; O, we shall be tormented: Timoleon. Enter with them, But yet forbeare to kill them; still remember They are part of your wealth, and being disarm'd, There is no danger. Archidamus. Let vs first deliuer
Such as they haue in Fetters, and at leasure Determine of their punishment. Leosthenes. Friend, to you I leaue the disposition of what's mine: I cannot thinke I am safe without your Sister, Shee's only worth my thought; and till I see What she has suffred, I am on the racke, And furye's my tormentors. Exeunt. ACTVS IIII. SCAENA III. Pisander, Timandra. Pisander. I know, I am pursu'd, nor would I flye, Although the Ports were open, and a Conuoy Ready to bring me off: the basenesse of These villaines, from the pride of all my hopes, Haue throwne me to the bottomlesse Abisse Of horror, and despayre; had they stood firme, I could haue bought Cleoras free consent, With the safetie of her Fathers life, and Brothers: And forc'd Leosthenes to quit his claime, And kneele a Suitor for mee. Timandra. You must not thinke, What might haue beene, but what must now be practic'd, And suddenly resolue. Pisander. All my poore fortunes Are at the stake, and I must runne the hazard. Vnseene, conuey me to Cleora's Chamber, For in her sight, if it were possible, I would be apprehended: doe not inquire The reason why, but helpe me. Timandra. Make haste, one knockes, Exit Pisander. Enter Leosthenes. Ioue turne all to the best: you are welcome Sir. Leosthenes. Thou giu'st it in a heauy tone. Timandra. Alas, Sir, Wee haue so long fed on the bread of sorrow, Drinking the bitter water of afflictions, Made loathsome to, by our continued feares,
Comfort's a stranger to vs. Leosthenes. Feare's! your suffrings, For which I am so ouergone with griefe, I dare not aske without compassionate teares, The villaines name, that rob'd thee of thy honour; For being train'd vp in chastities cold Schoole, And taught by such a Mistresse as Cleora, 'Twere impious in me, to thinke Timandra Fell with her owne consent. Timandra. How meane you, fell, Sir? I vnderstand you not. Leosthenes. I would, thou didst not, Or that I could not reade vpon thy face, In blushing caracters, the story of Libidinous Rape; confesse it, for you stand not Accomptable for a sinne, against whose strength Your o're-match'd innocence could make no resistance; Vnder which odds, I know Cleora fell too, Heau'ns helpe in vaine inuok'd; rhe amazed Sunne, Hiding his face behinde a maske of cloudes, Not daring, to looke on it, in her suffrings All sorrowe's comprehended; what Timandra, Or the Citie has indur'd, her losse consider'd, Deserues not to be nam'd. Timandra. Pray you doe not bring, Sir, In the chymeraes of your iealous feares, New monsters to affright vs. Leosthenes. O Timandra. That I had faith enough but to beleeue thee, I should receaue it with a ioy beyond Assurance of Elizian shades hereafter, Or all the blessings in this life, a Mother Could wish her children crown'd with: but I must not Credit impossibilities, yet I striue To finde out that, whose knowledge is a curse, And ignorance a blessing. Come, discouer What kinde of looke he had, that forc'd thy Lady, (Thy rauisher, I will enquire at leasure,)
That when hereafter I behold a stranger But neere him in aspect, I may conclude, (Though men and Angels should proclaime him honest,) Hee is a Hell-bred villaine. Timandra. You are vnworthy To know she is preseru'd, preseru'd vntainted. Sorrow (but ill bestow'd) hath only made A rape vpon her comforts, in your absence. Come forth, deare Madam. Leads in Cleora. Leost. Ha! Kneeles. Tima. Nay, she dserues The bending of your heart; that to content you, Has kept a vow, the breach of which a vestall (Though the infringing it had call'd vpon her A liuing funerall,) must of force haue shrunke at; No danger could compell her, to dispence with Her cruell Penance; though hot lust came arm'd To seaze vpon her, when one looke, or accent Might haue redeem'd her. Leosthenes. Might? O doe not show me A beame of comfort, and straight take it from me; The meanes, by which she was freed? Speake, O speake quickly, Each minute of delay's, an age of Torment: O speake, Timandra. Timandra. Free her from her oath, Her selfe can best deliuer it. Takes off the Scarfe. Leost. O blest office! Neuer did Gally-slaue shake off his chaines, Or look'd on his redemption from the Oare, With such true feeling of delight, as now I finde my selfe possess'd of; now I behold True light indeed; For since these fairest starres, (Couer'd with cloudes of your determinate will) Denyde their influence to my optique sense, The Splendor of the Sunne appear'd to me, But as some little glimpse of his bright beames Couey'd into a Dungeon; to remember The darke inhabitants there, how much they wanted.
Open these long-shut lips, and strike mine eares With Musicke more harmonious, then the Spheares Yeeld in their heauenly motions; And if euer A true submission, for a crime acknowledg'd, May finde a gratious hearing, teach your tongue In the first sweet, articulate sounds, it vtters To signe my wish'd-for pardon. Cleo. I forgiue you. Leost. How greedily I receiue this? Stay, best Lady, And let me by degrees ascend the height Of humane happinesse; All at once deliuer'd, The torrent of my ioyes will ouerwhelme me; So, now a little more; And pray excuse me, If like a wanton Epicure I desire, The pleasant taste these cates of comfort yeild me, should not too soone be swallow'd. Haue you not (By your vnspotted truth, I doe coniure you To answer truly) suffer'd in your honour: (By force, I meane, for in your will I free you) Since I left Syracusa? Cleo. I restore This kisse, (so help me goodnesse,) which I borrow'd, When I last saw you. Leost. Miracle of vertue! One pawse more, I beseech you, I am like A man, whose vitall spirits consum'd, and wasted With a long and tedious Feuer, vnto whom Too much of a strong Cordiall at once taken Brings death, and not restores him. Yet I cannot Fixe here: but must enquire the man, to whom I stand indebted for a benefit, Which to requite at full, though in this hand I grasp'd all Scepters the worlds Empire bow to, Would leaue me a poore Bank'rout; name him, Lady; If of a meane estate, I'le gladly part with My vtmost fortunes to him; but if noble, In thankfull duty studie how to serue him; Or if of higher rancke, erect him Altars,
And (as a god) adore him. Cleo. If that goodnesse, And noble temperance (the Queene of vertues) Bridling rebellous passions (to whose sway, Such as haue conquer'd Nations haue liu'd slaues) Did euer wing great mindes to flye to heauen; He that preseru'd mine honour, may hope boldly To fill a seat among the gods, and shake of Our fraile corruption. Leosthenes. Forward. Cleo. Or if euer, The powers aboue did masque in humane shapes, To teach mortality, not by cold precepts Forgot as soone as told, but by examples, To imitate their purenesse, and draw neere To their Coelestiall Natures; I belieue Hee's more then man. Leost. You doe describe a wonder. Cleo. Which will increase, when you shall vnderstand, He was a louer. Leost. Not yours, Lady? Cleo. Yes, Lou'd me, Leosthenes; Nay more, so doted, (If cleere affections scorning grosse desires May without wrong be stil'd so) that he durst not With an immodest syllable, or looke, In feare it might take from me, whom he made The obiect of his better part, discouer, I was the Saint, he su'de too. Leost. A rare tempter! Cleo. I cannot speake it to the worth: All praise I can bestow vpon it, will appeare Enuious detraction. Not to racke you farther, Yet make the miracle full; though of all men He hated you Leosthenes, as his riuall: So high yet he priz'd my content, that knowing You were a man I fauour'd, he disdain'd not Against himselfe to serue you.
Leost. You conceale, still, The owner of these excellencies. Cleo. 'Tis Marullo, My Fathers Bond-man. Leost. Ha, ha, ha! Cleo. Why doe you laugh? Leost. To heare the labouring mountaine of your praise Deliuer'd of a Mouse. Cleo. The man deserues not This scorne, I can assure you. Leost. Doe you call, What was his dutie, merit? Cleo. Yes, and place it, As high in my esteeme, as all the honours Descended from your Auncestors, or the glory, Which you may call your owne, got in this action; In which I must confesse you haue done nobly, And I could adde; As I desir'd; but that I feare, 'twould make you proud. Leost. Why Lady, can you Be wonne to giue allowance, that your slaue Should dare to loue you? Cleo. The Immortall gods Accept the meanest Altars, that are rais'd By pure deuotions; and sometimes preferre An ounce of Frankinsence, hony, or milke, Before whole Hecatombes, or Sabaean Gums Offer'd in ostentation. Are you sicke Aside. Of your old disease? I'le fit you. Leost. You seeme mou'd. Cleo. Zealous, I grant, in the defence of vertue. Why, good Leosthenes, though I endur'd, A penance for you sake, aboue example, I haue not so farre sold my selfe, I take it, To be at your deuotion, but I may Cherish desert in others, where I finde it. How would you tyranize, if you stood possess'd of That, which is only yours in expectation?
That now prescribe such hard conditions to me? Leost. One kisse, and I am silenc'd. Cleo. I vouchsafe it; Yet, I must tell you, 'tis a fauour, that Marullo, when I was his, not mine owne, Durst not presume to aske; No, when the Citie Bow'd humbly to licentious Rapes, and lust. And when I was of men and gods forsaken, Deliuer'd to his power, he did not presse me To grace him with one looke or sillable. Or vrg'd the dispensation of an oath Made for your satisfaction; The poore wretch Hauing related only his owne suffrings, And kiss'd my hand, which I could not denie him, Defending me from others, neuer since Solicited my fauours. Leost. Pray you, end, The story does not please me. Cleo. Well, take heed Of doubts, and feares; For know, Leosthenes, A greater iniury cannot be offer'd To innocent chastity, then vniust suspition. I loue Marulloes faire minde, not his person, Let that secure you. And I here command you, If I haue any power in you, to stand Betweene him and all punishment, and oppose His temperance to his folly; If you faile — No more, I will not threaten. Exit. Leost. What a bridge Of glasse I walke vpon, ouer a Riuer Of certaine ruine: mine owne waightie feares Cracking what should support me: And those helpes, Which confidence lends to others, are from me Rauish'd by doubts, and wilfull Iealousie.
ACTVS IIII. SCAENA Vltima. Timagoras, Cleon, Asotus, Corisca, Olimpia. Cleon. But are you sure we are safe? Tima. You need not feare, They are all vnder guard, their fangs par'd off: The wounds their insolence gaue you, to be cur'd, With the blame of your reuenge. Asotus. And shall I be The thing I was borne, my Lord? Timagoras. The same wise thing; 'Slight, what a beast they haue made thee! Affricke neuer Produc'd the like. Aso. I thinke so: Nor the land Where Apes, and Monkies, grow, like Crabs, and Wall-nuts On the same tree. Not all the Catalogue Of Coniurers, or wise women, bound together Could haue so soone transform'd me, as my Raskall Did with his whip; Not in outside only, But in my owne beliefe, I thought my selfe As perfect a Baboone. Tima. An Asse, thou wert euer. Aso. And would haue giuen one legge with all my heart For good securitie to haue beene a man After three liues, or one and twenty yeares, Though I had dy'de on Crouches. Cleon. Neuer varlets So triumph'd o're an old fat man: I was famish'd. Tima. In deed you are falne away. Aso. Three yeeres of feeding On Cullises and ielly, though his Cookes Lard all he eates with marrow, or his Doctors Powre in his mouth Restoratiues, as he sleepes, Will not recouer him. Tima. But your Ladiship lookes Sad on the matter, as if you had mis'd Your ten-crowne Amber Possets, good to smoothe
The Cutis, as you call it, and prepare you Actiue, and high for an afternoones incounter, With a rough gamester, on your couch; fie on't, You are growne thriftie, smell like other women; The Colledge of Phisitians haue not sate, As they were vs'd, in councell how to fill The cranies in your cheekes, or raise a rampire, With Mummy, Ceruses, or Infants fat, To keepe off age, and time. Cori. Pray you, forbeare; I am an alter'd woman. Tima. So it seemes; A part of your honours ruffe stands out of rancke too. Cori. No matter, I haue other thoughts. Tima. O strange! Not ten dayes since it would haue vex'd you more, Then th'losse of your good name; Pitty, this cure For your proud itch came no sooner! Marry, Olympia seemes to beare vp still. Olimp. I complaine not, Sir, I haue borne my fortune patiently. Tima. Thou wer't euer An excellent bearer; so is all your tribe, If you may choose your carriage: How now, friend, Lookes our Cleora louely? Enter Leosthenes. and Diphilus with a Guard. Leost. In my thoughts, Sir. Tima. But why this guard? Diphi. It is Timoleons pleasure; The slaues haue beene examin'd, and confesse, Their ryot tooke beginning from your house: And the first moouer of them to rebellion, Your slaue Marullo. Leost. Ha! I more, then feare. Tima. They may search boldly. Timand. You are vnmanner'd Groomes, Enter Timandra To prie into my Ladyes priuate lodgings; There's no Marulloe's, there. Enter Diphilus With Pisander. Timag. Now I suspect too;
Where found you him? Diphi. Close hid in your Sisters Chamber. Timag. Is that the villaines sanctuary? Leost. This confirmes All she deliuer'd, false. Timag. But that I scorne, To rust my good Sword in thy slauish blood, Thou now wert dead. Pisander. Hee's more a slaue, then Fortune, Or Miserie can make me, that insults Vpon vnweapon'd Innocence. Tima. Prate, you dogge? Pisander. Curres snap at Lyons in the toyle, whose lookes Frighted them being free. Tima. As a wilde beast, Driue him before you. Pisander. O Diuine Cleora! Leost. Dar'st thou presume to name her? Pisander. Yes, and loue her: And may say, haue deseru'd her. Timandra. Stoppe his mouth: Exit Guard with Pisander. Load him with Irons too. Cleon. I am deadly sicke, To looke on him. Asotus. If he get loose, I know it, I caper, like an Ape, againe: I feele The whip already. Timan. This goes to my Lady. Timag. Come, cheere you, Sir, wee'll vrge his punishment To the full satisfaction of your anger. Leost. Hee is not worth my thoughts; No corner left In all the spatious roomes of my vex'd heart, But is fill'd with Cleora: And the Rape Shee has done vpon her honour, with my wrong, The heauy burthen of my sorrowes song. Exeunt.
ACTVS V. SCAENA I. Archidamus, Cleor. Archida. Thou art thine owne disposer. Were his honours And glories centupled, (as I must confesse, Leosthenes is most worthy) yet I will not, How euer I may counsaile, force affection. Cleora. It needs not, Sir, I prize him to his worth, Nay, loue him truly, yet would not liue slau'd To his iealous humours. Since by the hopes of heauen, As I am free from violence, in a thought I am not guilty. Archida. 'Tis beleeu'd Cleora, And much the rather, (our great gods be prais'd for't) In that I finde beyond my hopes, no signe Of ryot in my house, but all things order'd, As if I had beene present. Cleora. May that moue you To pitty poore Marullo. Archida. 'Tis my purpose To doe him all the good I can, Cleora; But his offence being against the State, Must haue a publique triall. In the meane time Be carefull of your selfe, and stand ingag'd No farther to Leosthenes, then you may Come off with honour: For, being once his wife, You are no more your owne, nor mine, but must Resolue to serue, and suffer his commands, And not dispute'em; e're it be to late, Consider it duly. I must to the Senate. Exit Archida. Cleora. I am much distracted; in Leosthenes I can finde nothing iustly to accuse, But his excesse of loue, which I haue studied To cure with more then common meanes, yet still It growes vpon him. And if I may call My suffrings merit, I stand bound to thinke on Marullos dangers; though I saue his life,
His loue is vnrewarded: I confesse, Both haue deseru'd me, yet of force must be Vniust to one; such is my destiny. Enter Timandra. How now? whence flowe these teares? Timandra. I haue met, Madam, An obiect of such crueltie, as would force A Sauage to compassion. Cleora. Speake, what is it? Timan. Men pitty beasts of rapine, if o're-match'd, Though bayted for their pleasure: but these monsters vpon a man, that can make no resistance, Are sensllesse in their tyranny. Let it be granted, Marullo is a slaue, hee's still a man; A capitall offender, yet in iustice Not to be tortur'd, till the Iudge pronounce His punishment. Cleora. Where is he? Timand. Drag'd to prison With more then barbarous violence, spurn'd and spit on By the insulting officers, his hands Pynion'd behinde his backe: loaden with fetters; Yet, with a Saint-like patience, he still offers His face to their rude buffets. Cleora. O my grieu'd soule! By whose command? Timandra. It seemes, my Lord your brothers; For hee's a looker on: and it takes from Honour'd Leosthenes to suffer it, For his respect to you, whose name in vaine The grieu'd wretch loudly calls on. Cleo. By Diana, 'Tis base in both, and to their teeth I'll tell 'em That I am wrong'd in't. As going forth. Timan. What will you doe? Cleo. In person Visit, and comfort him. Timan. That will bring fewell To the iealous fires, which burne too hot already
In Lord Leosthenes. Cleora. Let them consume him; I am Mistrisse of my selfe. Where crueltie raignes, There dwels nor loue, nor honour. Exit Cleora. Timandra. So, it workes. Though hetherto I haue ranne a desperate course To serue my brothers purposes, now 'tis fit, Enter Leosthenes & Timagoras. I study mine owne ends. They come. Assist me In these my vndertakings, loues great Patron, As my intents are honest. Leosthenes. 'Tis my fault. Distrust from others springs, Timagoras, From diffidence in our selues. But I will striue, With the assurance of my worth, and merits, To kill this monster, iealousie. Timagoras. 'Tis a ghest In wisdome neuer to be entertain'd On triuiall probabilities; but when Hee does appeare in pregnant proofes, not fashion'd By idle doubts and feares, to be receiu'd, They make their owne hornes, that are too secure, As well as such as giue them grouth, and being From meere imagination. Though I prize Cleora's honour equall with mine owne; And know what large additions of power This match brings to our family; I preferre Our friendship, and your peace of minde so farre Aboue my owne respects, or hers, that if Shee hold not her true value in the test, 'Tis farre from my ambition for her cure, That you should wound your selfe. Timandra. This argues for me. Timago. Why she should be so passionate for a Bond-man, Falls not in compasse of my vnderstanding, But for some neerer interest; or hee raise This mutiny, if he lou'd her (as you say, Shee does confesse, he did) but to enioy By faire or foule play, what he venter'd for,
To mee's a Riddle. Leosthenes. 'Pray you, no more; already I haue answer'd that obiection in my strong Assurance of her vertue. Timagoras. 'Tis vnfit then, That I should presse it further. Timand. Now I must Timandra steps out distractedly. Make in, or all is lost. Timagoras. What would Timandra? Leosthenes. How wilde she lookes? How is it with thy Lady? Timagoras. Collect thy selfe, and speake. Timand. As you are noble, Haue pitty, or loue pietie. Oh! Leosthenes. Take breath. Timago. Out with it boldly. Timag. O, the best of Ladyes, I feare, is gone for euer. Leosthenes. Who, Cleora? Timag. Deliuer, how. 'Sdeath, be a man, Sir, speake. Timand. Take it then in as many sighes, as words My Lady. Timag. What of her? Timand. No sooner heard, Marullo was imprison'd, but she fell Into a deadly swoune. Timago. But shee recouer'd. Say so, or he will sinke too, hold, Sir, fie, This is vnmanly. Timand. Brought againe to life, But with much labour; she awhile stood silent, Yet in that interim vented sighes, as if They labour'd from the prison of her flesh, To giue her grieu'd soule freedome. On the sodaine Transported on the wings of rage, and sorrow, Shee flew out of the house, and vnattended Enter'd the common prison. Leosthenes. This confirmes What but before I fear'd.
Timand. There you may finde her, And if you loue her, as a Sister — Timago. Damme her. Timand. Or you respect her safetie, as a louer, Procure Marullos libertie. Timag. Impudence Beyond expression. Leost. Shall I be a Bawd To her lust, and my dishonour? Timand. Shee'll runne mad else, Or doe some violent act vpon her selfe. My Lord her Father, sensible of her suffrings. Labours to gaine his freedome, Leost. O, the Diuell! Has she bewitch'd him too? Timago. I'le heare no more. Come, Sir, wee'll follow her, and if no perswasion Can make her take againe her naturall forme, Which by lusts powerfull spell she has cast off, This Sword shall dis-inchant her. Leost. O my heart-strings! Exeunt Leost. and Timagoras. Timandra. I knew, 'twould take. Pardon me, faire Cleora. Though I appeare a traytresse, which thou wilt doe In pitty of my woes, when I make knowne My lawfull claime, and onely seeke mine owne. Exit. ACTVS V. SCAENA II. Cleora, Iaylor, Pisander. Cleo. There's for your priuacy. Stay, vnbinde his hands. Iaylor. I dare not, Madam. Cleora. I will buy thy danger. Take more gold, doe not trouble me with thankes; I doe suppose it done. Exit Iaylor. Pisander. My better Angell Assumes this shape to comfort me, and wisely; Since from the choyce of all coelestiall figures, Hee could not take a visible forme so full
Of glorious sweetnesse. Kneeles. Cleora. Rise. I am flesh and blood, And doe partake thy tortures. Pisander. Can it bee? That charity should perswade you to discend So farre from your owne height, as to vouchsafe To looke vpon my suffrings? How I blesse My fetters now, and stand ingag'd to Fortune For my captiuity, no, my freedome rather! For who dares thinke that place a Prison, which You sanctifie with your presence? or belieue, Sorrow has power to vse her sting on him, That is in your compassion arm'd, and made Impregnable? though tyranny raise at once All engines to assault him. Cleora. Indeed vertue, With which you haue made euident proofes, that you Are strongly fortified, cannot fall, though shaken With the shocke of fierce temptations, but still triumphs In spight of opposition. For my selfe I may endeauour to confirme your goodnesse, (A sure retreate which neuer will deceaue you) And with vnfayned teares expresse my sorrow, For what I cannot helpe. Pisander. Doe you weepe for mee? O saue that pretious balme for nobler vses, I am vnworthy of the smallest drop, Which in your prodigalitie of pitty You throw away on me. Tenne of these pearles Were a large ransome to redeeme a kingdome From a consuming plague, or stop heauens vengeance Call'd downe by crying sinnes, though at that instant In dreadfull flashes falling on the roofes Of bold blasphemers. I am iustly punish'd For my intent of violence to such purenesse; And all the torments flesh is sensible of A soft and gentle pennance. Cleora. Which is ended
In this your free confession. Enter Leosthenes and Timagoras. Leost. What an obiect Haue I encounter'd? Timago. I am blasted too: Yet heare a little further. Pisander. Could I expire now, These white and innocent hands closing my eyes thus, 'Twere not to die, but in a heauenly dreame To be transported, without the helpe of Charon To the Elizian shades. You make mee bold: And but to wish such happinesse, I feare, May giue offence. Cleora. No, for, beleeu't, Marullo, You haue wonne so much vpon me, that I know not That happinesse in my gift, but you may challenge. Leosthenes. Are you yet satisfied? Cleor. Nor can you wish, But what my vowes will second, though it were Your freedome first, and then in me full power To make a second tender of my selfe, And you receiue the present. By this kisse (From me a virgin bounty) I will practise All arts for your deliuerance; and that purchas'd In what concernes your father aymes, I speake it, Doe not despaire, but hope. Timag. To haue the Hangman, When he is married to the crosse, in scorne, To say, gods giue you ioy. Leost. But looke on me, And be not too indulgent to your folly, And then (but that griefe stops my speech) imagine, What language I should vse. Cleora. Against thy selfe. Thy malice cannot reach me. Timag. How? Cleora. So, brother; Though you ioyne in the Dialogue to accuse me, What I haue done, I'le iustifie; and these fauours,
Which you presume will taint me in my honour; Though iealousie vse all her eyes to spie out One stayne in my behauiour; or Enuy As many tongues to wound it, shall appeare My best perfections. For to the world I can in my defence alleage such reasons, As my accusers shall stand dumbe to heare 'em, When in his Fetters this mans worth and vertues But truly told shall shame your boasted glories, Which fortune claimes a share in. Timag. The base villaine Shall neuer liue to heare it. Enter Archid: Diphilus, and Officers. Cleora. Murther, helpe, Through me you shall passe to him. Archid. What's the matter? On whom is your Sword drawne? are you a iudge? Or else ambitious of the hangmans office Before it be design'd you? you are bold too, Vnhand my daughter. Leost. Shee's my valours prize. Archid. With her consent, not otherwise. You may vrge Your title in the Court; if it proue good, Possesse her freely: Guard him safely off too. Timago. You'll heare me, Sir? Archid. If you haue ought to say, Deliuer it in publike; all shall finde A iust Iudge of Timoleon. Diphilus. You must Of force now vse your patience. Exeunt omnes praeter Leost and Timag. Timag. Vengeance rather Whirle-windes of rage possesse mee; you are wrong'd Beyound a Stoicque sufferance, yet you stand, As you were rooted. Leost. I feele something here, That boldly tells mee, all the loue and seruice, I pay Cleora, is anothers due, And therefore cannot prosper. Timag. Melancholy,
Which now you must not yeeld to. Leosthenes. 'Tis apparent, In fact your Sisters innocent, howeuer Chang'd by her violent will. Timagoras. If you belieue so, Follow the chase still: And in open court Plead your owne interest; we shall finde the Iudge Our friend I feare not. Leosthenes. Some thing I shall say, But what — Timag. Collect your selfe, as we walke thither. Exeunt. ACTVS V. SCAENA Vltima. Timoleon, Archidamus, Cleon, Officers. Timoleon. Tis wondrous strange! nor can it fall within The reach of my beliefe, a slaue should be The owner of a temperance, which this age Can hardly paralell in free-borne Lords, Or Kings proud of their purple. Archid. 'Tis most true. And though at first it did appeare a fable, All circumstances meet to giue it credit; Which work so on me, that I am compel'd To be a Sutor, not be deni'de, Hee may haue aequall hearing. Cleora. Sir, you grac'd mee With the title of your Mistrisse, but my fortune Is so farre distant from command, that I Lay by the power you gaue me, and plead humbly For the preseruer of my fame and honour. And pray you, Sir, in charity beleeue, That since I had ability of speach, My tongue has so much beene enur'd to truth, I know not, how to lye, Timoleon. I'll rather doubt The Oracles of the gods, then question, what Your innocence deliuers: and as farre
As iustice with mine honour can giue way, He shall haue fauour. Bring him in, vnbound: Exeunt Officers. And though Leosthenes may challenge from me, For his late worthy seruice, credit to All things he can alleage in his owne cause, Marullo (so I thinke you call his name) Shall finde, I doe reserue one eare for him, To let in mercy. Sit and take your places; Enter Cleon, Asotus, Diphilus, Olimpia, Corisca. The right of this faire virgin first determin'd, Your Bond-men shall be censur'd. Cleon. With all rigour, We doe expect. Corisca. Temper'd, I say, with mercie. Enter at one dore Leosthenes Ti∣magoras at the other Officers with Pisander and Timandra. Timol. Your hand Leosthenes: I cannot doubt You that haue bin victorious in the war, should in a combat fought with words come off, But with assured triumph. Leosthenes. My deserts, Sir, (If without arrogance I may stile them such) Arme me from doubt, and feare. Timoleon. 'Tis nobly spoken, Nor be thou daunted (howsoe're the fortune Has mark'd thee out a slaue) to speake thy merits; For vertue though in raggs may challenge more, Then vice set off with all the trimme of greatnesse. Pisander. I had rather fall vnder so iust a iudge, Then be acquitted by a man corrupt And partiall in his censure. Archida. Note his language, It relishes of better breeding then His present state dares promise. Timoleon. I obserue it. Place the faire Lady in the midst, that both Looking with couetous eies vpon the prize They are to plead for, may from the faire obiect, Teach Hermes eloquence. Leosthenes. Am I fall'n so lowe My birth, my honour, and what's dearest to me,
My loue, and witnesse of my loue, my seruice, So vnder-valewd, that I must contend With one, where my excesse of glory must Make his o'rethrow a conquest? shall my fulnesse supply defects in such a thing, that neuer Knew any thing but want and emptinesse? Giue him a name, and keepe it such from this Vnequall competition? if my pride Or any bold assurance of my worth, Has pluck'd this mountaine of disgrace vpon me, I am iustly punish'd, and submit; but if I haue beene modest, and esteem'd my selfe More iniur'd in the tribute of the praise, Which no desert of mine priz'd by selfe-loue Euer exacted; may this cause, and minute For euer be forgotten. I dwell long Vpon mine anger, and now turne to you Ingratefull faire one; and since you are such, 'Tis lawfull for me to proclaime my selfe, And what I haue deseru'd. Cleora. Neglect, and scorne From me for this proud vaunt. Leosthenes. You nourish, Lady Your owne dishonour in this harsh replie, And almost proue what some hold of your sex. You are all made vp of passion. For if reason Or iudgement could finde entertainment with you, Or that you would distinguish of the obiects You looke on in a true glasse, not feduc'd By the false light of your too violent will, I should not need to plead for that, which you With ioy should offer. Is my high birth a blemish? Or does my wealth, which all the vaine expence Of women cannot waste, breed loathing in you? The honours I can call mine owne thought scandals? Am I deform'd, or for my Fathers sinnes Mulcted by nature? if you interpret these As crimes, 'tis fit I should yeeld vp my selfe
Most miserably guiltie. But perhaps (Which yet I would not credit) you haue seene This gallant, pitch the barre, or beare a burthen Would cracke the shoulders of a weaker bond-man; Or any other boistrous exercise, Assuring a strong backe to satisfie Your loose desires, insatiate as the graue. Cleora. You are foule mouth'd. Archid. Ill manner'd too. Leost. I speake In the way of supposition, and intreate you With all the feruor of a constant louer, That you would free your selfe from these aspersions, Or any imputation blacke tongu'd Slaunder Could throwe on your vnspotted virgin-whitenesse; To which there is no easier way, then by Vouchsafing him your fauour; him, to whom Next to the Generall, and the gods, and fautors, The countrie owes her safetie. Timagoras. Are you stupid? 'Slight leape into his armes, and there aske pardon. O, you expect your slaues reply, no doubt We shall haue a fine oration; I will teach My Spaniell to howle in sweeter language, And keepe a better method. Archid. You forget The dignitie of the place. Diphi. Silence. Timo. Speake boldly. Pisander. 'Tis your authority giues me a tongue, I should be dumbe else; and I am secure, I cannot cloathe my thoughts, and iust defence In such an abiect phrase, but 'twill appeare Equall, if not aboue my lowe condition. I need no bombast language, stolne from such, As make Nobilitie from prodigious termes The hearers vnderstand not; I bring with me No wealth to boast of, neither can I number
Vncertaine fortunes fauours, with my merits; I dare not force affection, or presume To censure her discretion, that lookes on mee As a weake man, and not her fancies Idoll. How I haue lou'd, and how much I haue suffer'd, And with what pleasure vndergone the burthen Of my ambitious hopes (in ayming at The glad possession of a happinesse, The abstract of all goodnesse in mankinde Can at no part deserue) with my confession Of mine owne wants, is all that can plead for me. But if that pure desires, not blended with Foule thoughts, that like a Riuer keepes his course, Retaining still the cleerenesse of the spring, From whence it tooke beginning, may be thought Worthy acceptance; then I dare rise vp And tell this gay man to his teeth, I neuer Durst doubt her constancie, that like a rocke Beats off temptations, as that mocks the fury Of the proud waues; nor from my iealous feares Question that goodnesse, to which as an Altar Of all perfection, he that truly lou'd, Should rather bring a sacrifice of seruice, Then raze it with the engines of suspition; Of which when he can wash an AEthiope white, Leosthenes may hope to free himselfe; But till then neuer. Timago. Bold presumptuous villaine. Pisan. I will go farther, and make good vpon him In the pride of all his honours, birth, and fortunes, Hee's more vnworthy, then my selfe. Leosthenes. Thou lyest. Timago. Confute him with a whippe, and the doubt decided, Punish him with a halter. Pisander. O the gods! My ribs, though made of Brasse can not containe My heart swolne big with rage. The lye! Whippe? Plucks off his disguise. Let fury then disperse these clouds, in which
I long haue mask'd disguis'd; that when they know, Whom they haue iniur'd, they may faint with horror Of my reuenge, which wretched men expect, As sure as fate to suffer. Leosthenes. Ha! Pisander! Timagoras. 'Tis the bold Theban! Asotus. There's no hope for me then: I thought I should haue put in for a share, And borne Cleora from them both; but now This stranger lookes so terrible, that I dare not So much as looke on her. Pisander. Now as my selfe, Thy equall, at thy best, Leosthenes. For you, Timagoras; praise heau'n, you were borne Cleora's brother, 'tis your safest armour. But I loose time. The base lie cast vpon me, I thus returne: thou art a periur'd man, False and perfidious: And hast made a tender Of loue, and seruice to this Lady; when Thy soule (if thou hast any) can beare witnesse, That thou wert not thine owne. For proofe of this, Looke better on this virgin, and consider This Persian shape laid by, and she appearing In a Greekish dresse, such as when first you saw her, If she resemble not Pisanders sister, One, call'd Statilia? Leosthenes. 'Tis the same! my guilt So chokes my spirits, I can not denie My falshood, nor excuse it. Pisander. This is shee To whom thou wert contracted: this the Lady, That when thou wert my prisoner fairely taken In the Spartan warre, that beg'd thy libertie, And with it gaue her selfe to thee vngratefull. Timand. No more, Sir, I intreate you; I perceiue True sorrow in his lookes, and a consent To make me reparation in mine honour, And then I am most happy.
Pisander. The wrong done her, Drew mee from Thebes with a full intent to kill thee: But this faire obiect, met me in my furie And quite disarm'd mo, being deni'd to haue her By you my Lord Archidamus, and not able To liue farre from her, loue (the Mistrisse of All quaint deuices, prompted me to treat With a friend of mine, who as a Pirate sold me For a slaue to you my Lord, and gaue my Sister As a present to Cleora. Timoleon. Strange Meanders! Pisan. There how I bare my selfe needs no relation. But if so farre descending from the height Of my then flourishing fortunes, to the lowest Condition of a man, to haue meanes only To feed my eye, with the sight of what I honour'd, The dangers to I vnderwent; the suffrings; The cleerenesse of my interest may deserue A noble recompence in your lawfull fauour. Now 'tis apparent that Leosthenes Can claime no interest in you, you may please To thinke vpon my seruice. Cleora. Sir, my want Of power to satisfie so great a debt, Makes me accuse my fortune - but if that Out of the bountie of your minde, you thinke, A free surrender of my selfe full payment, I gladly tender it. Archidamus. With my consent to All iniuries forgotten. Timagoras. I will studie In my future seruice to descerue your fauour And good opinion. Leosthenes. Thus I gladly fee Kissing Statilia. This Aduocate to plead for me. Pisander. You will finde me An easie iudge, when I haue yeelded reasons Of your Bond-mens falling off from their obedience,
And after, as you please, determine of me. I found their natures apt to mutinie From your too cruell vsage; and made triall How farre they might be wrought on; to instruct you To looke with more preuention, and care To what they may hereafter vndertake Vpon the like occasions. The hurt's little They haue committed, nor was euer cuer But with some paine effected. I confesse In hope to force a grant of faire Cleora I vrg'd them to defend the Towne against you; Nor had the terror of your whips, but that I was preparing of defence else-where So soone got entrance; in this I am guiltie, Now as you please, your censure. Timoleon. Bring them in, And though you haue giu'n me power, I doe intreate Such as haue vndergone their insolence, It may not be offensiue though I studie Pitty more then reuenge. Corisca. 'Twill best become you. Cleon. I must consent. Asotus. For me I'le finde a time To be reueng'd hereafter. Gracculo, Cimbrio, Poliphron, Zanthia, and the rest with Halters. Gracculo. Giue me leaue, I'le speake for all. Timoleon. What canst thou say to hinder The course of iustice? Gracculo. Nothing. You may see Wee are prepar'd for hanging, and confesse We haue deseru'd it. Our most humble suite is We may not twice be executed. Timoleon. 'Twice? how meanest thou! At the Gallowes first, and after in a Ballad
Sung to some villanous tune. There are ten-grot-Rimers About the Towne growne fat on these occasions. Let but a Chappell fall, or a street be fir'd, A foolish louer hang himselfe for pure loue, Or any such like accident, and before They are cold in their graues, some damn'd Dittie's made Which makes their ghosts walke. Let the State take order For the redresse of this abuse, recording 'Twas done by my aduice, and for my part I'le cut as cleane a caper from the Ladder, As euer merry Greeke did. Timoleon. Yet I thinke You would shew more actiuity to delight Your Master for a pardon. Gracculo. O, I would dance Capers. As I were all ayre, and fire. Timoleon. And euer be Obedient and humble? Gracculo. As his Spaniell, Though he kickt me for exercise, and the like I promise for all the rest. Timoleon. Rise then, you haue it. All slaues. Timoleon, Timoleon! Timoleon. Cease these clamors. And now the warre being ended to our wishes, And such as went the pilgrimage of loue, Happy in full fruition of their hopes, 'Tis lawfull thankes paid to the powers diuine, To drowne our cares in honest mirth, and Wine. Exeunt. FINIS.
