19063 99855998 21511
THE TRVE REPORT OF THE LAMENTABLE DEATH, OF VVILLIAM of Nassawe Prince of Orange: who was trayterouslie slayne with a Dagge in his owne Courte, by Balthazar Serack a Burgunian, the first of Iuly 1584. Heerein is expressed the Murtherers confession, and in what manner he was executed, vpon the tenth of the same month. Whose death was not of suffici∣ent sharpnes for such a caytife, and yet too sowre for any Christian. Printed at Middleborowgh, by Derick van Respeawe▪ Anno. 1584.
G. P. His Proheme to the inhabitaunts of Flaunders. WHo so considereth the state of Princes (although they are as Gods vpon earth, beeing an∣noynted of God, hauing theyr authoritye from God, and sitting in Gods seate to rule the sword with the Law, may perceaue that they liue in more care and greater daun∣ger, then the simplest subiect. Lamenta∣ble therefore is their late example of the Prince of Orange, slayne (by a treache∣rous villain) in his owne Courte: his death and the manner thereof, may fore∣warne other Princes to be carefull, whome they retaine into the presence of theyr per∣son. Great is thy losse, and greater wil be thy mysery (O Flaunders,) for the want of thy Prince, who did guide thee and go∣uerned thy people, with wisedome, loue, policie and continuall care for thy quiet∣nes: he was thy comfort and the stay of thy state in all extremities. The cheefest states of thy Countrey shall
misse him: the widdowe, the sucking Babe and the fatherlesse childe shall haue cause to bewayle his death. Yea rich and poore, altogether may lament his mis∣hap, and cry woe vpon that man that be∣reaued him of life, whose noblenesse de∣serued fame, and whose woorthy acts and enterprises, beeing honourable, are meete to be registred among the most lawdable reportes of learned Historiographers. If the Romaines did bemone the death of Caesar, the Troyans the losse of Hector and the Lacedemonians the want of Alexander, then hast thou (O Flaun∣ders) more cause to lament the losse of thy good Prince, who with wisedome, force, and great care, (ayded by the power and prouidence of God himselfe) did keepe thy country, from the handes of him that woulde make a Monarchie of Realmes in his ownehandes: to the vtter spoile of thee and thine, & to draw other Realmes vnder his subiection. O most accursed wretch that he was, so subiect to the sub∣tilties of sathan, to worke the vntimelye death of so gracious a Prince, that hether
to hath defended your liberties, & main∣tayned your right these many yeeres, to the great glory of God, the aduauncement of your wealth, and the mayntenaunce of true Religion. It were too tedious to set downe in what subiection all the Lowe Countreys of Flaunders, hath beene ma∣ny yeeres yoked in by their enemies: the effect whereof is so notorious & apparant to all the world & the same so truely layd open by many, that it is heere needelesse to touche it: as also to handle the great care of this Prince from time to tyme, who continually sought to maintaine your liberties and to defend your Country frō extreame misery: which doubtles hath sharply pinched you: and now hauing lost him who was the principal prop of the Low countryes, it is like to fall out to the vtter ouerthrowe, ruine, and destruction of that poore cominaltye, (a matter most lamentable) except God (the onelie defender of those that truste in him) doo speedely procure and stirre vp, a carefull and godly Prince to bee the defendor of that people and Countrey, that there by
the Townes and Villages there about may become populous & thorowly replenished (nowe greeuously impouerished through ciuill discention) to the quietnes, wealth, and peace of the same. And considering it is most necessary to publish a true discourse of this late lamen¦table mishappe, I haue thought it good breefely and plainely to set downe the true circumstaunce thereof: and that for one speciall cause, which is, that considering the vntrue imaginations and fayned re∣portes, of this Princes death, now blased a broade, as well to his freendes as to hys enemies▪ the trueth being layd open, and made manifest to all men, that then those reports may be accounted fryuolus and to be troden vnder foote. I therefore ad∣monish you, O yee people of Flaunders, that hauing lost the stay and staffe of your countrey, that you yet vouchsafe with pa∣tience to remaine content with GODS workes, who prouideth wonderfully for you. It is your sinnes that is the cause of al your care: wherefore call vpon God in this
your time of affliction: and with prayer and hearty repentance, to turne vnto the Lorde, who no doubt will deliuer you from danger: as he did the children of Israell, and assure your selues, that he will so esta∣blish your countrey in short time, powring thereon peace and plenty, that the remem¦braunce of your great extremety now fal∣len vpon you, shall in short time grow out of memory and be made a florishing com∣mon wealth which God the father withall speede graunt to confirme. Amen. The dyscourse of the Trea∣son wrought against VVilliam of Nassawe, Prince of Orange, by Balthazar Serack, a base borne Gent. of Burguni, of the age of 25. yeeres. VPon the 12. day of Iune last past 1584. there came to the Prince of Orange) a base borne Gent. of Burguni, who brought certain Let∣ters from the States of Fraunce, conser∣ning matters of newes, touching the
death of the Frenche kinges brother, who died a little before: which Let∣ters, the Prince in most thankful man∣ner did receiue, and gaue the messenger such freendly entertainement in his owne Courte, as became a Prince in such causes. The Prince liking well of this messenger, would sundry times vse conference with him, touching the garison of the Prince of Parma; whose souldiers greatly impouerished the countries round about. This messen∣ger (in whom there remained nothing but subtilty and secret mischiefe) dyd show vnto the Prince, howe he coulde at any time bring him or his souldrers into the Prince of Parmaes garison, whereby he might take the aduantage of the Prince of Parmaes power, for that this messenger beeing a cunning pen man, coulde finely counterfet the Prince of Parmaes owne hand, so neere that the one should not be known frō the other. The Prince notwithstāding woulde not so deale by his deuise, but yet he would enquire of him how al
things stood, aswel in the Prince of Par¦maes garison, as of the Princes pretence towards the Low countries, who conti¦nually certefied vnto the Prince of O∣rang the truth, which caused the Prince to repose a greater trust and confidence in him, so that he remaind in the court without suspitiō of any treachery. But behold what folowed, on the 1. day of Iuly last past, which by the newe com∣putation of the Romish Churche, was the tenth day of the same mo∣neth, this Traytot thus harbored and lodged in the Courte of this good Prince, seeing a small Pistoll or Dag in the handes of one of the Princes seruaunts, did demaund what it might cost him, saying: I haue occasion to ryde a iourney shortly, and that dagge would be a good defence for me vpon the high way side, wherefore he reque∣sted the Princes seruant that he might bye it of him, who thinkīg nothing of that which hapned afterward, did sel it to him for the some of 10. shillings of English mony. The Prince then be∣ing
in his Court at Delph, (a town of great strength, where the cheefest States doo inhabite,) who beeing gon to din∣ner, and the Garde atendant about his person, this Traytor seeing it a meete time to compasse his pretended mis∣chief (which was, to bereaue the Prince of his life, as he did) went into hys Chamber, & charged the Pystol with powder, and put three bullets in the same: that doone he placed it priuelye in his pocket, and went downe to din∣ner: who after he had dyned, hearing that the Prince would anon goe vp in∣to his priuie chamber, deuised in his minde where he might best plant him∣selfe, for the finishing of his wicked en∣tent, who finding a priuie corner vpon the stayres, wher he might be shadow∣ed and not be seene, placed himselfe vn¦tyll the Princes comming. The Prince, so soone as he had dy∣ned, (which was betweene one & two of the clocke in the afternoone) came forth of the great chamber, with hys
Lady and Gentlewomen attendaunt, his Lady purposing to walke abroade, tooke her leaue of the Prince, who go∣ing towardes the stayres which did leade to the priuie chamber, and seeing an Italian named Ma. Carinson, who had stayed to speake with the Prince, to whome the Prince verye freendly spake, saying: Carinson welcome, and tooke him by the hand, willing thys Italian that he should goe vp with him into his priuie chamber, purposing there to vse some conference with the Italian Gentleman: and before the Prince entred the stayres, there came an English Captaine, called Captaine VVilliams, who dooing reuerence vnto the Prince, was entertained in moste freendly manner, laying his hande vp∣on Captaine VVilliams head, wyllyng him also to come vppe with him. The Gard then attendant vppon the Prince: Maister Carinson and Cap∣tayne VVilliams followed: But the Prince going vp the stayres, not think∣ing
of any such matter as happened, no sooner came directly against this ville∣nous traytor, but he presently dischar∣ged his Pistoll, (wherein as before men¦tioned) he hauing put 3. bullets, two of those bullets went through the Princes body, and the third remained in his bel¦lie, through which wicked stroke, the Prince fell downe suddainly, crying out, saying▪ Lord haue mercy vpon me, and remember thy little flocke. VVherewith he changed this life, to the great griefe of his Lady, who great¦ly lamented his death, as also to the great sorrowe of the whole countrey. The Garde pursued the murtherer and sought to slaye him, but he ouerscaped the first Garde, and was staied by the second watch Garde, which was vvith∣in the Princes court. VVhen hee was taken, they de∣maunded of him what hee had doone, who verye obstinatly aunswered, that he had doone that thinge, which hee would willingly doo if it were to doo
againe. Then they demaunded of him for what cause he did it, hee answered, for the cause of his Prince and coun∣try: more confession at that time they could not get of him. Forthwith they committed him to pryson, where he remained aliue to the pleasure of the Estates of the country, who shortly after deuised a torment (by death) for this murderer, which vvas reasonable sharpe, yet not so terrible as he deser∣ued. Greeuous was the cry of the peo∣ple that came flocking to the Princes gates, to heare the report and trueth of what had happened, which knowne, euery houshold was filled with sorow, who povvred forth theyr plaintes, and did shedde teares, for the losse of so good a Christian, and so carefull a Prince. The murtherer while he remayned in prison, was sundry times examined by the chiefe Estates of the country, vp
whose procurement he committed the said fact, who answered: at the Prince of Parmaes request, and other Princes, at whose hands he shoulde receiue for dooing the same 25000. Crownes. The order of the torment, & death of the murtherer, was as followeth, which was foure dayes. He had the 1. day the Strappado, openly in the Market. The second day whipped and salted, and his right hand cut off. The third day, his breastes cut out and salte throwne in, and then his left hand cut off. The last day of his torment, which was the 10. of Iuly, he was bound to 2. stakes, standing vpright, in such order that he could not shrinke downe nor stirre any way. Thus standing naked, there was a great fire placed some small distaunce from him, wherein was hea∣ted pincers of Iron, with which pin∣cers, two men appointed for the same, did pinch and put his flesh in smal pee∣ces from his bones, throughout moste partes of his body. Then was hee vn∣bound
from the stakes, and layd vppon the earth, and againe fastened to fowre postes, namely by his feete and armes: then they ripped vp his belly at which time he had life and perfect memorye, he had his bowels burned before his face, and his bodie cutt in foure seueral quarters. During the whole time of his execution, hee remained impe∣nitent and obstinate, reioycing that he had slaine the Prince. Vpon the 16. day of Iuly, the Prince was very royally buryed, in the newe Church at Delph, being lapped in seare cloth and Leade, according to the man∣ner of other Princes in time past. The Cittizenes of Antwerp, are ma∣ny times driuen to shut vp their gates, by reason of theyr enemies, who wold gladly take the Citty at some aduaun∣tage: The enemie hath built a Forte vpon the Banke, betweene Antwarp and Lullo, so that they doo what they may to stop the passage of the Riuer from them.
There is not as yet any Gouernour chosen for the Lowe countries: but they are in hope that some order will be taken for them very shortly. God for his mercy sake sende quiet∣nes in those partes, that the people may enioy theyr owne, to the health, wealth, and comfort of them all now distressed. Amen.
