19191 99836684 968
THE Method of Curing Wounds made by Gun-shot. Also by Arrowes and Darts, with their Accidents. Written by AMBROSE PARIE of Laual, Counsellor and chiefe Chi∣rurgean to the French King. Faithfully done into English out of the French Copie, by Walter Hamond Chirurgean. London printed by Isaac Iaggard, and are to be sold in Barbican. 1617.
TO THE RIGHT Honourable, Gene∣rall CECILL. MY LORD, THE Common-wealth hath beene compared by many (and that verie fitly) to a goodly and well-composed Idifice, which consisteth of manie parts, different both in vse and sub∣stance; whereof some serue to su∣staine the waight of the Building, as Pillars, and such are the Nobility: Others, to containe or keepe the same in an vniformity, as Beames; and such may bee compared to the Magistracy: Others to defend and couer the frame, from the violence of outward iniuries, as Rafters and Postes, which may be referred to the Comminalty. Now, we doe ob∣serue, that as in all priuate Buildings that consisteth onely of these three parts, they cannot bee saide to bee perfect without other things for their finishings; whereof some are Ornaments, and serue but to beautifi; O∣thers for vse and necssity. Euen so, in the Publike Weale, besides the three aforesaide principall parts, there are required other seuerall Ad¦iuncts, which are to be eteemd and respected according to thr formall or necessary vses. Amogst the which (Right Honourable) this follow∣ing Treatise may hold one chiefe ranke (esecilly in these times) to con∣tinue it for occasion. It receyued birth from the lamentable experience
of the French Ciuill Warres, by that famous and renowned Chirurgean AMBROSE PARIE, cherished by diuers Kings of France: and ha∣uing bene gratefully accepted in most part of our Christian World, it doth now giue it selfe vnder your Lordshippes protection: put not into fine and Rhetoricall phrases, but into our home-spun English; such as best sui∣teth with this rough and boysterous subiect. Cncerning the worthinesse of the Author, or woorth of the worke, my testimony would rather de∣tract then adde. Onely thus much, that as amongst all humane sciences Physicke is the most excellent; and in Physicke, Chirurgerie is the most Authenticke and ancient; so this operation is of Chirurgery the most vr∣gent and necessary, or rather an Abstract of the whole Art of Chirur∣gerie. Against Obiection, I haue your Lordshippes patronage for my defence, and therein I shall thinke my selfe as safe as in an Armour of proofe; knowing that it is a point of Greatnesse, as well to defend the weake, as to resist the strong. By your Lordships truly deuoted, Walter Hamond, Chirurgian.
To his louing Brethren, the yong Students and Apprentises in Chirur∣gery: More especially, those that doe thir Country seruice o the Seas. WALTER HAMOND One of their society, wisheth all encrease of Knowledge. LOuing Brethren, and my kind Com∣panions and fellow-Trauellors, you haue heere presented vnto your fa∣uourable acceptance, a Treatise of the cure of Wounds made by Gunne-shot: the worthinesse whereof, I cannot better expresse, then to say Parie wrote it; a Man experienced with forty yeeres practise, at that time when France did most groane vnder the burthen of the vnciuill Ciuill Factions, bred by her home∣bred Enemies; wherein there was not any nota∣ble assault, siege, nor battel fought, but Ambrose Parie was chiefely imployed about the cure of wounded souldiers, as hee himselfe testifieth in his owne Booke of voyages and trauels. Accept it therfore thankfully, as a gift from the Author, as it was first intended. And although it may be obiected, that in these peaceable times this Treatise is of little vse, and therefore vnprofita∣ble: true it is, and with thankfulnesse to be ac∣knowledged,
we liue in a calme and quiet age, but is therefore this so necessary and worthy a Document to be neglected? Because it hapneth but sildome, wee are the more vnacquainted with the cure: And as amongest all the Engies that the malice of Man could euer inuent for the ruine of man, Artillery is the cruellest and most dangerous, because that neither strength or policy are able to preuent the fury therof: there∣fore the Method that reacheth vs to cure those wounds after so easie and excellent a way as is here described, must needs be accounted most needfull and beneficiall. But howsoeuer, I doe not doubt, but that you my kinde friends, who with Galen trauell to benefit your Country, and enrich your experienccs, that you (I say) doe know the vse and necessitie of this subiect. And although there are diuers extant at this time; yet neuerthelesse, this doeth deserue the best place in your good opinions, because that the translation heereof, was first vnderta∣ken for your sakes onely. Farewell. VValter Hamond Chirurgean.
To his most Worthy, and euer to be respected Master, Arthur Doughton, Chirurgean. His seruant, Walter Hamond, humblie com∣mendeth and committeth this Treatise of Gun∣shot, vnto his most iudicious censure. SONET. NOt for you were my Master (though that Name Shall sway me more then any other can) Nor out of any priuate hope, or aime, More then my duty, I engaged am: But onely for you are a Chirurgean; And one whose Practise and Experience (Two things that Crownes the Artists excellence) Time and the VVarres, by Sea and Land began. Then since you are most worthy this respect, I should be too Ingratefull to neglect Your wel-tride Iudgement (though the enuious grudge) Yet if with mildest cnsure you suruay This following Treatise, I dare boldly say, PARIE will haue a fauourable Iudge. Your Seruant W. H.
The Preface. BEfore I enter into the Descripti∣on of Wounds made by Gun-shot, and the Curation of them,Intention of the Author. it seemeth vnto mee to bee very conuenient, (to bring the Reader into an appetite, before I place him at this Table, serued forth in so many seuerall dishes, seasoned with Salt-peter) to discourse heere briefly of the first In∣uentors of this so pernicious & dangerous an Instrument of Warre: And into how many kindes it hath beene di∣uersified and varied, euery kinde thereof hauing a name imposed theron, according to his vse and hurtful quality towards Mankind. Polydorus Virgill in his second Booke of the Inuentors of things, Chap. 2. saith, that Artillery was first inuented by an Alleman of base condition: and that by a sudden and vnexpected Accident. This man borne for the ruine and destruction of Mankind, hauing kept in a Morter for some certaine intention of the a∣foresaid Powder (which since by reason of the principall vse thereof hath beene called Gunpowder) the which hee couered with a stone: it happened, that in striking of fire with his Steele and Tinder, a small sparke fell into this Morter, and presently the Powder hauing taken fire, the force thereof did beare away the stone with violence; the which did both astonish and amaze him, and also taught
the force of that comixture not knowne before: so that making a little hollow Instrument or Pipe of yron, and composing of the aforesaid Powder, he made tryall of that Engine, and seeing the effect fall out according to his desire,The Veneti∣ans had the first vse of Ar∣tillery. he first taught vnto the Venetians the vse of this deuillish inuention, in the Warre which they had against the Genowaies in the yeere of our redemption 1380. in a place heretofore called the Clodian Valley, but now Chiog∣gia.Diuers opini∣ons touching the time when Artillery be∣gan. Neuerthelesse, according to the opinion of Petrus Massa, in the eight Chapter of the first part of his diuers Lessons, this inuention should be more ancient, because that in the Chronicle of Alphonsus the eleuenth King of Castile, who Conquered the Argezirian Iles, It is re∣corded that in those warres, which was in the yeere 1343. the besieged Moores shot at their enemies out of cer∣taine Mortors of yron the seuerall reports whereof, cau∣sed an exceeding horrible sound in the ayre, equall vnto that of Thunder. The Lord Don Pedro, Bishop of Leon, in the Chronicle of King Alphonsus hee that Conquered Toledo, writeth, that in a battell by sea, which was be∣twixt the king of Tunis, and the King of Seuill, a Moore, (it being foure hundred yeeres agoe and more) whose part the King Alphonsus fauoured: those of Tunis had in their ships certaine Engines of yron or Bombards, with the which they shot against their enemies. By this it ap∣peares that Artillery hath beene heretofore in vse, al∣though it neuer came to perfection till this present. The inuenter of this engine hath had but little recompence, for his name and profession are altogether vnknowen to the world, as being not vnworthy of any memory for such a wicked and damnable inuention. Howbeit An∣drew Theet in his Cosmographie speaking of the Sweuians, a people neere about the Low-Countries, writeth out of
the authority of an old written Booke, that the afore∣said German had been in former time a Monke,The Author of Artillery and his name. Philo∣sopher or Alcumist by profession, of the Countrey of Fribourg: his name Constantine Anelzen. Yet howsoeuer this engine was first called Bombard, by reason of the sound that it causeth: which the Latines conformably doe call Bombus. Since the time of the first inuention thereof, being before rude and imperfect: The time; Art,What things hath snce bin added to the Artillery. but aboue all, the malice of men haue added much vnto it. For first of all, for the matter it selfe, it being first of yron, they haue since beene cast of Brasse or Copper, Mettals more forcible, and tractable: besides lesse subiect vnto rust. Secondly, at the first they were but simply formed, and as it were but a rude masse of yron; but since they haue beene diuersified into an hundred fashi∣ons, yea vnto the mounting of them on wheeles, to the end that they might be caried with the more swiftnesse; and as it were run to the ruine and destruction of men; The first Mortor pieces not being sufficient or cruell enough to vomit forth fire and shot. From thence haue proceeded these horrible monsters, as Cannons, doubles Cannons, Bastards, Muskets,Diners names of the Artille∣ry: & whence they are taken Fow∣lers, and Morter Pieces, &c. These furious beasts of Cul∣uerings, Serpentines, Basilisks, Sakers, Falcons, Falcon∣nets, Chambers, Murderers, and infinite other kindes, all of diuers names, not onely drawne and taken from their figure and qualitie, but also from their effects and cruel∣ty. Wherein truely they shewed themselues wise and vnderstood well the thing they vndertooke. I meane those that first imposed such names which are not onely taken from the most rauenous animals, as from Sakers, & Falcons: but also from the most dangerous enemies of Mankind, as from Serpents, Snakes, and Basiliskes, to
shew, that such Engines haue no other vse; and were not inuented for any other end or intention, but onely to de∣stroy suddenly and crully the life of man: and that hea∣ring them onely named, we should haue them in horrour and detestation. I omit to speake of other Pieces lesse in body and substance, but in force and cruelty more dan∣gerous. For so much as they can take away our liues neere at hand, and may surprise vs by treason, being with∣out all meanes of preuention: such are the Pistols, Dags, and such like, which easily may be hidden in a mans poc∣ket. Betwixt these two kindes before spoken of, the Harquebuz of Crocke holds a meane, the which cannot be shot off vnlesse it be first bound or fixed in some peece of wood: the Caliuer which cannot be discharged at the cheeke, by reason of their thicke and short stocks, but are helde against the breast. Also the common Muskets all: which haue beene inuented for the commoditie of foot∣men for shot and bullets. The generall word imposed by the Latines is Sclopus, through the imitation of the sound, & by the Italians Sclopoterre, by the Frenchmen, Harque∣buze, a word also taken from the Italians, by reason of the touch-hole, by which the fire first entreth into the Piece: for the Italians call a hole Buzio▪ and it is called Arc from the word Arcus a bow, because they are vsed at this pre∣sent instead of bowes formerly vsed in the time of warre. For in former time the Archers held the same Front in the battell,From wce the word Ar∣quebuz is t∣ken. which the Muskettiers doe at this present. From this miserable shop and Magazin of cruelty haue sprong these Mines, Countermines, Fire bals, Fire pots, burning arrowes, Lances, and Crossebowes, murderers, wilde Fires, and other hellish inuentions, Bags, Traines, Torches, Circles, Oranges, Grenados, Crossebowes, Chaineshot, Winged shot, and such like. A most mise∣rable
inuention, by the which we sometimes see thou∣sands of poore men in a Mine pressed to death, and buri∣ed quicke in the bowels of the earth;Diuers Arif∣cers of Fi. others in the heat of battel, being surprised with one of the aforesaid Engines, doth burne them so cruelly in their Armour, insomuch that the water it selfe cannot restraine and extinguish the fury of that fire. Thus are both the yron and fire armed against vs, to take away our liues through the malice of men, for the conseruation whereof they were at the first created. Truely when I heare the engines spoken of, vsed by our Ancients, either in their warres or assaults:A comparison of the Engines vsed by our Ancients, with those of ous. as their Bowes, Darts, Crossebowes; or to force and beat downe walles, as their Rammes, Horses, and such like: Me thinks I doe heare spoken of children play-games, in compari∣son of those now in vse. The which, to speake properly and truely, doe surpasse in figure and crueltie the dread∣fullest and cruellest thing that can be thought on.The Thuner is not so cruell as the Artille∣ry. What can be imagined in this world to be more dreadfull and furious then the Thunder? And yet neuerthelesse, the ordinary and naturall Thunder is nothing in a maner to these infernall engines: which may easily be comprehen∣ded by comparing the effects of the one with the other. Nature would herein-honour and priuiledge man in this aboue all other creatures; for man onely dyeth not al∣wayes being strooke with Thunder: but to the contrary,How man may be prese∣ed from Thunder. other animals that are subiect to the Thunder, being tou∣ched therewith, doe die suddenly. For all Animalls be∣ing strooke with Thunder, do fall on the contrary side: Man only dieth not vnlesse he fall on the side stricken,Plin. lib.  cap. 5. or by not being presently turned by force from that side: but the Artillery spareth man no more then beasts, with∣out discretion on what side soeuer it hapned or strooke,
on what side soeuer it doth reuerse them, it carieth away life and all. There are many remedies to preserue a man from the violence of Thunder.Pliny lib. 2 cap. 55. For besides those charmes wherein the ancient Romanes put much confidence, be∣leeuing that thereby the force of Thunder might be con∣iured or diuerted. The Thunder-bolts are neuer seene to descend lower then fiue foot into the earth; from thence it commeth that those that are fearefull of Thunder doe make themselues Caues or hollow Vaults in the earth, therein to retire themselues as in a place of saftie. It is said also that the Bay tree is neuer strooke with Thunder,What things are preserued from the force of Thunder. and therefore in times past, and is at this day taken for a victorie. Wherefore the Emperour Tiberius fearing Thunder exceedingly aboue all other things, caused him∣selfe to be crowned with a wreath of Bayes, at the least sound he heared in the Ayre.Sueto. in Tib. I haue reade also that o∣thers for the like occasion haue made themselues Tents of the skinnes of Sea-calues, because that this Animall hath this gift in particular, neuer to be touched by Thun∣der. The Eagle is said also to haue this priuiledge aboue all other foules, neuer to be touched by Thunder, and therefore he is called Iupiters bird, as saith Pliny lib. 2. cap. 54. & 55. But against the Artillery, Charmes, and Incan∣tations preuaile nothing: neither the victorious Bayes, nor the Sea Calfe, nor any thing whatsoeuer: no not an opposed Wall it selfe, of ten foot in thicknesse. Briefly, this sheweth the inuincible fury of Artillery, in respect of Thunder in this. For the Thunder may be dissipated by the ringing of Bels,Artillery dri∣ueth away Thunder. the sound of Basons, or by the dis∣charging of Ordinance: For the concussion of the clouds meeting together violently, causeth the Thunder: and by the aforesaid agitation of the Ayre; they are discipated and dispersed. But the fury and pride of Artillery will
not be appeased by any thing whatsoeuer. There are some Times and Regions which are exempt and freed from Thunder;The times which ae without Thun∣der. for Thunder was neuer seene in the hart of Winter, nor in the midst of Summer, the which happe∣neth by two contrary reasons. For in Winter the Aire is very thicke, as also the cloudes; and therefore those exha∣lations of the earth are easily dispersed and distinguished, being of themselues but cold and glaciall. From thence it commeth to passe that the country of Scithia, and other cold countries thereabouts, as Tartary, Liuonia, Musco∣uia, Russia, & other neighbor countries are exempt from Thunder, as to the contrary, Egypt is seldom endamaged by Thunder, by reason of the great heat in those part. For the exhalations and vapours of the earth, which are hot and drie: are conuerted through their vehement heat in∣to small cloudes, which haue no force, as saith Pliny. But as the inuention,Lib. 2. cap. 50. so is the tempest and damage of Artil∣lery, dispersed as a contagious pestilence ouer all the earth, and at all times the heauens are sencible of the complaining cryes of those that feele the furious effects thereof. Thunder for the most part hath but one blow, but one bolt, and neuer killeth but one man at a time. But Artillery at one blow will massacre an hundred men. The Thunderbolt oftentimes, as being a naturall thing, falleth as it happeneth, sometimes on a rocke, sometimes on a mountaine, sometimes on a Tower, seldome on a man. But the Artillery,Designe and end of Artille∣ry. being guided by the wicked dex∣teritie of man, coueteth nothing but man, hath quarrell to none but man, him alone hee slayeth, him alone hee chooseth among a thousand other things. The Thunder∣bolt doth a good space of time giue vs warning by the voyce of Thunder, the forerunner thereof; to aduertise vs of the ensuing tempest: but the Artillery it striketh in
Thunder, and Thundereth in striking; sending assoone his mortall bullet into the bowels, as he doth his sound into the eares. This is the reason why we do, & that iustly detest the Author of such a hurtfull and pernicious inuention: as to the cotrary, we ought to esteeme those worthy of great praises, who either by words haue studied to reuoke all Kings and Princes from the practise of such a misera∣ble inuention, or by effects and writings haue stvdied to ordaine and prescribe remedies to those that haue beene wounded thereby: the consideration whereof hath been a principall motiue to me to write of this matter and sub∣iect. But before my pen shall run in this carriere, I will for the easier vnderstanding of the ensuing Treatise, which I intend to publish,The reason that moued the Authour to write of Gunshot. place two discourses in the beginning of the Booke; to extirpate certaine ancient opinions out of the fantasies of many, which seeme vnto me to be al∣together false. VVhich errors vnlesse they are first con∣uicted; it is impossible to vnderstand any thing of the es∣sence of this euill, or to doe any profitable action in the cure therof.The sum con∣tained in the 1. discourse. The first discourse is addressed vnto the Rea∣der, condemning by manifest reasons, the errors of Vigo, who teacheth to cauterize and burne the wounds made by Gunshot, thinking that they did participate of a certaine venenosity, to the contrary approuing, that those that cure those wounds by suppuratiues, is as salubrious and health∣full at that of Vigo is cruell and dangerous.The sum con∣tained in the 2 discourse. The second discourse is addressed to King Charles the ninth; vp∣on speciall command from his Maiestie: shewing that the same wounds doe not participate of any venenosity, but that their malignant effects depend wholly on the cor∣ruption of the Ayre, and the cacochymie or euil qualitie of the wounded bodies.
The first Discourse vpon Wounds made by Gun-shot, and other fierie Engines. IN the yeere of our Lord, 1536. the victorious King Frances sent a great Army vnto Piedmont to vi∣ctual Thurin, and to recouer those Townes and Castles which had bene taken by the Marquesse Du Guast, Lieutenant Generall of the Emperor, where Mounsieur the Constable, then Great Master, was Lieutenant generall of the Army, and Mounsieur de Monte-jan captaine generall of the Foote-men (of whom I was then Chirurgian.) A great part of the army arriued at the Pas of Suze,Pas of Suze. wher we found the enemie keeping the passage, and had made vn∣to themselues certain Forts and Trenches; in such sort, that before they could be raised from thence, we entred into battell: in which conflict there was many hurt and slaine, as well on the one side as on the other. But they were inforced to quit that pas∣sage, and to recouer the Castle; which they helde not long, but were compelled to giue it vp; mar∣ching away in their shirts onely, hauing each of
them a white wand in their hands: of whom, the most part went to the Castle de Villane,The Castle de Villane besieed & taken. where there was about some two hundred Spaniards. To this castle my Lord the Constable drew his forces, bee∣cause he would make his way cleere before him. It is situate vpon a little Mountaine, which giueth great assurance to those within, that there can bee no Ordinance planted against it to batter it down. They were summoned to restore it vp, or else were threatned to haue it battered in pieces; which they flatly refused: answering withal, that they were as good and faithfull seruants to the Emperour, as Mounsieur the Constable was to the King his Ma∣ster. Their answere being vnderstoode, the same night there was mounted two great Cannons, by the force of armes with ropes and cordes, by the Switzers, where (as mis-fortune would) those can∣nons being planted, a Gunner by indiscretion fired a barrell of Gun-pouder, wherewith hee himselfe was extreamely burned, together with tenne or twelue souldiers. Moreouer, the flame of the pou∣der was the cause of the discouery of the Ordi∣nance, whereby those of the castle the night fol∣lowing discharged their Ordinance at that place where they discouered our cannons; in so much, that we had many of our men hurt and slaine. The morrow after, very early we began the bat∣tery, and in few houres after the breach was made; which those of the castle perceiuing, desired a par∣ley, but it was too late; for in the mean time some of our footmen perceiuing them to be astonished,
mounted the Breach, and entred the castle, put∣ting euery man to the sword, except onely a cer∣taine beautifull Piedmontese, which a great Lorde entertained into his seruice. The Captaine and Ancient were taken aliue, but were presently after hanged on the gate of the Towne, to terrifie the rest of the Emperors souldiers, not to be so foole-hardy to hold such places against so great an Ar∣mie. Now the soldiers of the castle seeing our men rushing in vpon them in such great furie, made all the resistance they could to defend themselues, in killing and wounding a great number of our soul∣diers with their Pikes and Muskets; where the Chi∣rurgians had a great deale of work cut out to their hands. I was at that time but a yong Chirurgian,The Author entereth in∣to the mat∣ter. and but little experienced in the Art, because I neuer (as yet) had seene the curation of any Woundes made by Gunne-shot. True it is, that I had read Iohn de Vigo his first booke of woundes in generall, chap. 8. where he saith, That those woundes made by fiery Engines, do participate of venenosity, be∣cause of the Pouder; and for their curation, hee commandeth to cauterize them with the Oyle of Elders mixed with a little Treacle: yet neuerthe∣lesse, because I would not be deceiued, before I would vse of the aforesaid boyling oyle, knowing that it brought with it extreame paine to the Pati∣ent, I obserued the method of the other Chirurgi∣ans in the first dressing of such wounds; which was by the application and infusion of the aforesaide
Oyle as hot as possibly they could suffer it, vvith Tents and Setons: wherefore, I became embold∣ned to do as they did. But in the end my oyle fay∣led mee,A remedie found by accident. so that I was constrained to vse in steede thereof, a digestiue made of the yolke of an Egge, Oyle of Roses and Terebinth. The night follow∣ing, I could hardly sleepe at mine ease, fearing lest that for want of cauterizing, I should find my Pa∣tients on whom I had not vsed of the aforesayde Oyle, dead and impoysoned; which made mee to rise earely in the morning to visit them: where be∣yond my expectation, I found those on whom I had vsed the digestiue Medicine, to feele but lit∣tle paine, and their wounds without inflammation or tumor, hauing rested well all that night. The rest, on whom the aforesaide Oyle was applyed, I found them inclining to Feauers, with great pain, tumor, and inflammation about their Woundes: then I resolued with my selfe, neuer to burn so cru∣elly the wounded Patients by Gunshot any more. When we entred Thurin, I was told of a Chi∣rurgian who was exceeding famous, especially for his curing wounds made by Gun-shot, with whom I found the meanes to acquaint my selfe: yet it was neere two yeeres and a halfe before hee would ac∣quaint me with his Medicine which hee called his Balme. In the meane time, Mounsieur the Mar∣shall of Monte-jan, who was Lieutenant Gene∣rall of the King in Piedmont died: then I tolde this Chirurgian, that I had a desire to returne to Paris, withall requesting him, that he would perform his
promise; which was, to giue me the receipt of his Balme, which he willingly did, seeing that I was to leaue that country. He sent me to fetch him two yong whelpes, one pound of earth-wormes, two pounds of the oyle of Lillies, six ounces of the Te∣rebinth of Venice, and one ounce of Aqua-vitae: and in my presence he boiled the whelpes aliue in the saide Oyle, vntill the flesh departed from the bones. Afterward, he tooke the wormes (hauing before killed and puified them in white wine, to purge themselues of the earth which they haue al∣wayes in their bodies:) being so prepared, he boy∣led them also in the said Oyle till they became dry, this he strained thorough a Napkin, without anie great expression; that done, hee added thereto the Terebinth, and lastly, the Aqua-vitae; and called God to witnesse, that this was his Balme which he vsed in all wound made by Gun-shot, and in o∣thers which required suppuration; withall praying me not to divulge his secret. From thence I returned to Paris, where shortly after Mounsieur Siluius Lecturer of the King in Physicke, a man greatly esteemed among learned mē, requested me one day to dine with him, which I did willingly; where hee asked me many Questi∣ons, and among the rest, of the essence of wounds made by Gun-shot, and of the combustions made by Gun-pouder. Whereupon, I presently proued vnto him, that the powder was not any thing ve∣nomous at all;Gunpouder not veno∣mous. because that no Simple that entreth therein is any way venomous, much lesse the com∣position.
Also I haue seene by experience, that some souldiers being hurt, will take of the sayde powder in Wine, saying; That powder so taken, doth preserue the body from the ensuing accidēts, the which I approue not. Also others hauing vl∣cers on their bodies, do commonly vse of the saide powder dry, and heale them without any danger at all. And as for the Bullets they cannot containe any such heate that they should haue the faculty of burning: for a bullet beeing shot against a stone∣wall, it may presently be held in the naked hande, although the collission made against the Stones,Woundes made by gushot are without combustion should in reason heate it the more: & as for com∣bustions or burnings made by Gun-powder, I ne∣uer found any particular accident in it, whereby the cure ough to bee diuersified from the cure of other combustions. Whereupon, I related this Historie.Historie. A certaine boy of the Kitchin, of Moun∣sieur the Marshall de Monte-jan, fell into a Cal∣dron full of Oyle almost boyling hotte; to dresse whom being sent for, I went presently to an Apo∣thecarie, demanding of him such cooling Medi∣cines which are commonly applied vnto burnings: an ancient country-woman being by, hearing mee speake of this burning, counselled me to apply for the first dressing (to preuent the rising of Pustules or bladders) of raw Onions, bruised with a little salt. I demanded of this woman whether shee had euer made experience of that Medicine before: she presently sware vnto me in her language,Yea Sir, by the Faith of God. Si messé, à lafe de dé; which did incite mee to make experi∣ence
hereof on this Scullion of the kitchin, where truely I found the morrow after, that in those parts where the Onions had touched, to bee altogether free from vessickes or blisters, and the other parts where the Onions were not applied, to bee much blistered. Not long after, a certaine Dutch-man, one of the Guard of the saide Lord de Monte-jan,Histoie. hauing drunke hard, by indiscretion set his Flaske afire, which caused a great disaster both to his hands and face; and being called to dresse him, I applyed of the saide Onions on the one halfe of his face; and on the other side, of other common remedies. At the second dressing, I founde that part vvhere I had applyed the Onions to be altogether without blisters or any excorlation, and the other altoge∣ther blistred: then I first purposed to write of the effect of the saide Onions. Moreouer, I tolde vnto the saide Syluius,How the pa∣tient ough to be stuate in the ex∣traction of Bullets. that for the better extraction of bullets which are hid∣den in anie part of the bodie, it is requisite the pa∣tient should be placed in the same situation that he was in at that time when he was wounded. Manie other things I discouered vnto him, which are contained in this Booke following. My discourse ended, he prayed mee verie earnestly that I would publish it by writing; to the end, that that false o∣pinion of Vigo might be altogether abollished the which I willingly consented vnto, and caused ma∣nie instruments to be cut, such as had not bene di∣vulged, for the extraction of bullets, & other vn∣natural
things out of the bodie. And it was first imprinted in the yeare 1545. and well receiued, which caused me to renew it againe, and publish it the second time, in the yeare 1552. and lastly, in the yeare 1564. where I haue enriched it with ma∣nie other things, because I haue since followed the warres, haue bene in many battels, and besiedged Townes, as in Metz and Hedin. Also I haue beene entertained into the seruice of fiue Kings, where I haue alwayes discoursed with the most excellent Physitians & Chirurgians of those times, to learne and discouer if there were any other Method or way to cure those wounds made by Gunne-shot; whereof the most part (especially those that haue followed the warres, and are guided by reason and experience) are of my opinion, which is to vse Suppuratiues in the beginning, and not boyling oyles. And I did protest moreouer to the said Syl∣uius, that I haue found those woundes as easie to cure (being in fleshy parts) as all other great con∣tused wounds are. But where the bullet meeteth with the bones and neruous parts, it teareth, dila∣cerateth, breaketh,The cause that maketh woundes by Gunne shot hard to bee cured. breaketh, and shiuereth in peeces, not only where it toucheth, but also the circumiacent parts, without any mercy; causing great accidents which happen specialy in the iounctures or ioynts, and in bodies of euill constitution, and in times subiect to corruption; that is to say, where the ayre is hot and moist, then is the cure most difficult, & oftentimes impossible; not only of wounds made by Gun-shot, but also of those which are made by
other instruments, yea, though they were but in fleshy parts. Therefore, the aforesaide accidents doe not proeeede from the venenosity which is in the powder, or by the combustion or burning of the Bullet. For proofe whereof,History. I will alledge this obseruation which I haue experimented not long since on the person of the Earle of Courdon, Lord of Achindon, a Scottishman, whome I cured by the commandement of the Queene-mother, who was hurt with the shot of a Pistoll cleane through both the Thighes, without fracture of the bones; he standing so neere the mouth of the Pistoll, that the fire tooke hold of his breeches; neuerthelesse, hee was perfectly cured in two and thirty dayes, without a Feauer or any other euill accident. I drest him at Sir Iohn de Latran, in the house of the Arch-byshoppe of Glasco, then Ambassador for Scotland, who came euerie day to see him drest. Moreouer for testimony, I could produce Moun∣sieur Brigard, Doctor Regent in the Facultie of Physicke, who was an assistant with me: together with Iames Guillemean Chirurgian to the King, & sworne at Paris, who was with mee vntill his per∣fect curation. The same likewise Mounsieur Han∣ti, Doctor Regent in the faculty of Physicke can testifie, who sometimes came to see him. Also Giles Buzet, Scotchman and Chirurgian, euerie of them meruailing how he became so soone cu∣red without the application of hot and sharp Me∣dicines. Now the reasons wherfore I haue made
this little Discourse, is to demonstrate that it is a∣boue thirty yeares ago, since I first found out this manner of curing wounds made by Gunne-shot, without the vse of boyling Oyles, or anie other sharpe or burning Medicines, vnlesse I was con∣strain'd to vse them for such accidents which hap∣pened in Cacochymed bodies, or through the euill disposition and malignancie of the ayre, as I will shew more amply in this Discourse fol∣lowing, which I made vnto the deceased King, after the taking of Roan.
Another Discourse, be∣ing an Answere vnto a certaine De∣mand propounded by the victo∣rious Prince Charles the ninth, as touching the quality and Essence of Woundes made by Gun-shot at his Maiesties returne from the siedge, and taking of the Towne of Roan. IT one day pleased your Maiesty,Occasion of this dis∣course. together with the Queene Mo∣ther, my Lorde the Prince of La Roche-sur Yon, and many other Princes and great Lords, to de∣mand of me how it came to passe that in these last Warres, the most part of such Gentlemen and Souldiers, who were wounded by Gun-shot, and other instruments of warre di∣ed, or were very hardly recouered from their di∣seases, although the wounds which they receiued were but of small apparance, and the Chirurgi∣ans which were employed for their cures, did per∣forme their duties according to Art; I haue bene
the bolder to publish this discourse, to satisfie in some measure the duty of my Ar, and that my profession might not be spoted with the least dis∣honor, and that your Maiesty might vnderstand the reasons which might haue beene the cause of the death of so many valiant men; the most part of whom I haue seene (to my great greefe) to fi∣nish their daies pittifully, without any possibility in mee, or any other more experienced then my selfe to giue them remedy. sinuation into the good accep∣tnce of those who are of the contrary o∣piion.I know that this following discourse will asto∣nish some, who reposing themselues vppon their owne particular opinions, and not examining the matter deepely, will finde the first front of my dis∣putation very strange, because that the contrarie hath beene so long imprinted in their fantasies. For I do hold, that the cause of the malignancy of wounds by Gun-shot, not to proceed from anie poison or venomous quality in the powder (as they imagine) or from the bullet it selfe, beeing rubbed or infused in any venomous mixture. Ne∣uerthelesse, if their meekenesse and patience will extend so far, as first to waigh the motiues which first mooued me to vndertake this subiect, which was a zeal of the publike good; towards the which the Law of Nature bindeth mee to shew the vt∣most of my power in such things which the singu∣lar prouidence of God hath reuealed vnto mee. And secondly, that they will examine with iudge∣ment the reasons which I shall vse in this present Treatise, then I shall bee sure, they will both ac∣cept
my labours thankefully, and free it from all future calumny; otherwise they will shew them∣selues to be so uill affectioned towards me, as if I should present my selfe before them, enriched with all the treasures of the ancient Philosophers, and they should place mee in the number of the poorest and ignorantest men in the worlde. To preuent therefore all the arguments of venome and poisoning, which the aduersaries here aboue mentioned may alledge, I will make it plaine vn∣to your Maiesty, that such as are wounded by gun-shot,The Author proposeth two points, whih he wold refute. viz. the poy∣son of the powder and the Fire of the Bullet. I say the malignancie of such wounds not to proceed from the venom of the Powder, being of it selfe simply considered: and much lesse from the combustion or cauterization which the Bullet so heated by the fire of the powder can make in those parts, which it rendeth & dilacerateth tho∣rough the violence thereof: although neuerthe∣lesse some do striue to maintaine; alledging for all reasons, that a certaine Tower full of powder hath heeretofore bene seene ruinated in an instant, one∣ly by the meanes of a Cannon shotte. Also of a Thatcht house set on fire with a Musket shot. Moreouer, because that such woundes which are made by Gun-shot, we commonly beholde their Orifices and other circumiacent parts so black, as if an actuall Cauter had passed thereon. As also the fall of a certaine escarre, as they say. Al which arguments are so ill framed, that they deserue no authority being built on so slender a foundation: much lesse that the resolution of your demaund
should be taken from them, as I trust to giue you plainely to vnderstand in the disputation follow∣ing. The which (after I had seene a great num∣ber of those woundes, and diligently obserued them, handling them according to the Method) I haue collected from the ancient Philosophers, Physitians,The preset disputation is taken frō Philoso∣phers, Phy∣sitians, and Chirurgians and Chirurgians to present vnto your Maiesty, and to with-draw your minde from the admiration of the lamentable deaths of so manie braue Gentlemen and Soldiers. Now to enter into the matter proposed, and to answer the arguments before alledged, we are first to examine whether there be any poison inclosed in the powder, or no: And if there be, whether it may infect by meanes of the pretended poyson thereof. Which that it may appeare plainly, wee must search into the composition of the said pou∣der; considering that it is not of substance simple, but compound: and so by examining the nature of such Simple which enter into the composition thereof; I meane their qualities, effects, and ope∣rations, wee shall the sooner attaine to the scope and intention pretended. As for the Simples, it is a most assured thing that there are but three in al which make the com∣position thereof,The com∣position of the powder. that is to say, Coales of Wil∣low or Birch, Sulphure, and Salt-peter, & some∣times Aqua-vitae: the which ingredients seueral∣ly considered, are altogether exempt & free from poison, or any venomous quality. And first for the coales, there is not any thing considerable in
them, vnlesse it be a drying quality, of subtle sub∣stance, by meanes whereof it is apt to take fire, e∣uen as a Linnen cloth burnt into Tinder doth the sparkes that fall from a Flint stone. Sulphure is hot and dry, neuerthelesse not excessiue, and of a more oyly and viscuous substance, yet not so easie to inflame as coales, although it doth retaine the fire more forcibly when it is once inflamed, & is very hardly extinguished. As for the Salt-peter, it is such,Salt-peter is salt of stones. that many make vse thereof insteede of salt. Now let vs examine whether there be any ve∣nenosity in the nature of these Simples, namely, in that of Sulphure, which is the most suspected. Dioscorides in his fift Booke, chap. 37. prescribeth it to be taken in an Egge, in the astmaticke passi∣on, coughes, and to such which spit matter, and those that haue the Iaundise. And Galen in the 9. Book of his Simples, Cap. 36. ordaineth it as a to∣picall remedy, vnto such who are bitten with ve∣nomous beasts; and in all malignant practises or itchings; as for the Aquavitae, it is a thing so sub∣tle, that it will euaporate if it be set in the aire, be∣sides it is vsed by most Chirurgians inwardlie in drinkes, and outwardly in embrocations as a most singular Medicines. These thinges considered, makes me to affirme, that the whole composition of pouder is altogether free from venome or poi∣son, seeing that the ingredients are altogether cleere from the least touch in that kinde. Moreo∣uer, I haue obserued it to bee the practise of the Hollanders being wounded by Gun-shot, to dis∣solue
two charges of pouder in wine, and to drink it off, hoping by that meanes to be freed from all future accidents which might happen vnto theyr wounds (although I do not approue thereof, be∣cause it is a most insufficient remedy.) Also, such Vlcers which are made through the combustion of powder, are of no other nature then those that are made by fire, or scalding water. But where∣fore should I alledge any forraigne example? Do we not see among our owne souldiers, I doe not know on what occasion, but onely to shew them∣selues braue fellowes, to emptie their charges of powder into their cups, and drinke it without any inconuenience at all; and others likewise beeing hurt on any part of their bodies, will apply of the same on their Vlcers to dry them, and finde much profit by it.Refutation of those that affirme the Bullet to be impoisoned. As for those which do affirme that it is not in the powder, but the Bullet, which being subtilly pierced in many places, or filled vp with venome, or steeped, rubbed, or mixed with anie poyson, causeth the aforesaide dangerous acci∣dents? To such I answer without further trouble, that the fire set to the powder, is sufficient to pu∣rifie the poyson of the Bullet, if any there were▪ the which cānot be done by impoysoned swords, Pikes, Arrowes, and such like, because they passe not through the action of the fire. Briefly to con∣firme my opinion to be true, there is not anie one of those that were in your Maiesties Camp at Roan, that doeth not assuredly know, that those Bullets which were shot against those of the town
to be altogether free from poison. Neuerthelesse, the besiedged Townesmen affirmed, that all those Bullets were poysoned. Also the Souldiours of your Maiesties Campe had the same opinion of such Bullets which were shot at them out of the Towne, that they were all impoysoned by them; rather beleeuing and iudging of the quality of the wounds by their ill successe; then by the Causes whereby they were made. True it is, that as in Physicke according to the sentence of Hippocrates in the Epidemies; as Ga∣le noteth on the 20. sentence, and the 71. of the 3 Sect. of the 3. Book, all diseases are cald Pestilenti∣all and venomous, being excited from common and generall causes of what kinde soeuer they be, and such kill many persons: so in the like manner, we may cal such wounds which are made by gun∣shot venomous, which are more difficult to heale then others; not because they do participate of a∣ny venonosity, but from some generall cause de∣pending either from the Cacochimie of the bo∣dy, putrification of the aire, or the corruption of the victuals, whereby those Vlcers are brought to be more malignant Cacoëthes, and rebellious to al Medicines. To affirme that it is only the combustion of the Bullet which causeth the aforesaide danger,Refutation of those that affirme that the Bullet causeth cō∣bustion. I can∣not conceiue their reasons, seeing that the Bullet is for the most part made but of Lead, and there∣fore vnable to indure any great heate, without be∣ing altogether dissolued, the which we neuerthe∣lesse
see to passe through a coate Armour, and to penetrate the body through and through, and yet to remaine whole. Moreouer, we doe obserue, that if a Bullet be shot against a stone, or against any solid matter, it may in the same instant bee handled of vs in our hands, without feeling anie notable heate, although the violent striking and collision made against the stone, should in reason encrease the heae, if any there were. And which is more, if a Bullet be shot against a bagge full of powder, the fire will not endanger it. This I dare bee bolde to say and affirme moreouer, that if a quantity of powder should take fire being kepte in a Tower, or any other place, by the meanes of a Bullet shot, it was not the heate of the Bullet, but rather the violent striking of the Bullet against the stones of the saide Tower, which might cause sparkes of fire to fall among the powder, euen as the smiting of a steele against a flint stone. The like we may iudge of such Thatcht houses which haue bene set on fire by a Musket shot, to haue ra∣ther proceeded from some wad either of Tow or Paper, ram'd in with the powder, and so fired with it. But that which doth most confirme me in the assurance of my opinion, is, that if a bal of wax be shot out of a Muske,An example of a ball of wax. it feeleth no force of fire at all, for then it would melt; neuerthelesse it wil pierce an inch boord. An argument of sufficient weight to proue that the Bullet cannot be so ex∣treamely heated by the force of the Powder, that they should cauterize and burne, as many haue e∣steemed.
And as for that blacknesse, which is or∣dinarily found to bee about the Orifices of such wounds, and other adacent parts. I say that this accident doeth not proceede from any qualitie of fire accompanying the Bullet, but because of the great contusion which it maketh.Whence it poedeth▪ that woud mde by Gunshot are dina∣rily blacke. For it cannot enter into the body otherwise then by an extreme and incredible force, because it is of a rounde fi∣gure. Vpon this point, if the wounded persons themselues be demanded, I beleeue they will te∣stifie the truth of my saying; because they are no sooner strooke with the bullet, but they feel in the same instant, as if a club or some heauie burthen were fallen vpon the offended part, in the which they feele a heauy paine, with a benummed stupi∣faction of the part; which dissipateth and some∣times extinguisheth the naturall heate, together with the spirits contained therein: from whence there followeth oftentimes a Gangrene and mor∣tification of the part, yea sometimes of the whole body. And as for the Escarre which they affirme there to be, and fall away as they say, they doe a∣buse themselues: for it is onely some certain por∣tion of the Membranes and contused flesh, dila∣cerated by the Bullet, which becommeth corrup∣ted, and so separateth it selfe from the sound parts which are greatly contused. Although that these Reasons do make it mani∣fest enough,Reasons of those of con¦tray opiniō that there is no venomous quality in the powder, nor action of fire carried with the Bullet, neuerthelesse many building their opini∣ons
vpon naturall Philosophy, doe maintaine the contrary, affirming that Cannon shot is like vnto the claps of Thunder which burst foorth of the clouds in the middle Region of the aire▪ and so fall violently on the earth. From the which similitude they would infer and conclude, that there is both fire, and a venomous quality in the Bullet, as it proceedeth out of the mouth of the Cannon. I know (I thanke God) that Thunder being ingen∣dered from a grosse and viscuous exhalation, by meanes of vapour conioyned with it, doth neuer breake foorth of the clouds to penetrate heere be∣low, but it draweth and bringeth immediatly with it a certaine fire, sometimes more subtle, some∣times more grosse, according to the diuersitie of the matter, whereof the exhalation is composed. For Seneca writeth in the second booke of his na∣turall questions,Seneca. 3. kindes of Thunders. chapter 49. that there are three kinds of Thunders all differing the one from the other, according to the quantity and manner of their inflammation. The first, by reason of the matter thereof, it being most thinne and subtle, it doth pierce and penetrate suddenly the Obiectes which it toucheth. The second kinde, by reason of the violence thereof, breaketh and dissipateth the same thinges because that the matter thereof is more violent, and compact as a Tempest. The third sort being composed of a more earthy mat∣ter, burneth with manifest tokens of the heat ther∣of. I also know, that the Thunder is of nature Pe∣stilentiall and faetide, because of the grosse and sli∣mie
matter thereof; which being burned, leaueth behinde it such a stinking sauour, that all animals do so much auoide it, that if it do happen to fall into their dens, or other places of haunt, they wil vtterly abandon and forsake such places; so much do they hate the infectious stinke of that poyson. The same is noted by Olaus Magus, in his Sep∣tentrionall History, that in certaine places where Thunder hath falne, presently after the fall there∣of, the fields haue beene found afterwards to bee couered and strewed ouer with sulphure, neuer∣thelesse vnprofitable, and almost extinguished. For all these reasons, I must not confesse that the blowes of Gun-shot are accompanied with poy∣son and fire, as the claps of Thunder ae.Answere to the contra∣ry Reasons. For al∣though they doe agree the one with the other, in some similitude, it is not therefore in theyr sub∣stance and matter, but rather in the maner which they haue to batter, tere, and dissipate the ob∣iects which they meere with, that is to say, the claps of Thunder through the force of fire; & of the bolt or stone sometimes engendred therein: and the blowes of Gun-shot by the meanes of the aire forced away by impetuosity, and so conduc∣ting the Bullet causeth the like disaster. What if I should be conuicted by stronger arguments, so that I were inforced to anouch that▪ Thunder and the Cannon to be of like substance; yet I shoulde neuer be forced to say, that the shot of Cannons and Muskets do participate of a fiery quality. Pli∣ny saith in the second Book of his History, and the
51. chapter, that among Thunder one kinde is composed of a meruailous dry matter, dissipating all such thinges it meeteth withall, neuerthelesse without any signe of burning: others, of a more humid nature, which in like manner burneth not: but blacketh and discoloureth much more then the first. And others are composed of a very cleere and subtle matter: the nature wherof is most mer∣uailous, forsomuch that it is not to bee doubted (as Seneca hath well saide) that there is therein a certaine divine vertue:A meruai∣lous effet of Thunder. and it is in melting Golde or Siluer in a mans purse, the purse it selfe not be∣ing so much as touched therewith. Also in mel∣ting a sworde, the scabberd thereof remayning whole. Also in dissoluing into droppes the Iron head of a Pike, without burning, or so much as heating the woode. In shedding the wine out of a vessell, without burning or breaking of the caske. According to the aforesaid testimony I can assure you, and that without any preiudice, that those Thunders which onely breake and dissipate with∣out any burning; and such which leaue effects ful of great admiration, not to be much vnlike in sub∣stance to the Cannon shot, and not those which carry immediately with them the action of fire. To proue my saying, this one example shall suf∣fice.Example. A certaine souldier receiued a wound in his Thigh with a Musket shot, from when I extracted a bullet; the which being wrapped in the Taffatie of his breeches, made a very deepe wound. Ne∣uerthelesse I drew it forth of the wound with the
same Taffatie, it being without any signe of bur∣ning. And which is more, I haue seene many men, who not being shot, nor any thing touched there∣with, vnlesse it were in their apparrell onely, haue receiued such an astonishment by a Cannon shot that onely past neere them, that their members thereby haue become blacke and liuid; and short∣ly after haue falne into a Gangrene and mortifica∣tion, whereof in the end they haue died. These effects are like vnto those of the thunder before spoken of. Neuerthelesse, there is not in them any fire or poison: which maketh mee con∣clude, that there is no poison in the common and ordinary pouder. Seeing therefore that this disa∣ster was common to all those which were hurt in these last warres, and yet neither by fire or poyson that so many valiant men died. To what cause may we impute this euill? I am so confident of the true cause my Liege, that I hope presently to make your Maiesty vnderstand the same, to the end that your demand may be fully satisfied. Those which haue consumed their age and stu∣die in the secrets of naturall Philosophie, haue left vs this among other things for authentick and ap∣proued of all times. Which is, that the Elements do symbolize in such sort the one with the other, tht they doe sometimes transforme and change themselues the one into the other in such sorte, that not onely their first qualities, which are heat, coldnesse, dinesse and moisture: but also theyr
substances are chaunged by rarification or con∣densation of themselues; so the fire doth conuert it selfe ordinarily into aire, the aire into water, the water into earth; and contrarywise the earth into water, the water into aire, and the aie into fire. The which we may dayly behold and proue it by those bellowes of Copper which the Dutchman brings vs, being composed in the form of a Boll, the which being filled with water, and hauing but one hole in the midst of the Sphericall forme thereof, receiueth the transmutation of the water within it into aire through the action of the Fire, neere vnto the which the Boll must be placed; and so thrusteth the aire forth of it with violence, ma∣king a continuall noise or sound vntill all the ayre be gone forth of it. The like may bee knowne by Egges or Chestnuts: for either of them being put into the fire before they are crackt, or the Rindes broken, presently the watery humidity contained in them doth conuert it selfe into ayre, thorough the action of the fire: and the aire in making his passage bursteth the shell, beecause it occupyeth more place being in the forme of aire, into the which it was chaunged by rarification caused by the fire, then it did vnder the forme of water; and not finding passage is constrained to make one by violence, according to the proposition helde for most certaine among all Physitians; that is to say, of that one part of Earth is made tenne of water: and of one part of water is made ten of aire, as of one part of aire ten of fire. I do say and affirme so
much of the matters contained in the saide Gun-powder, which by meanes of the fire is conuerted into a great quantity of aire; the which because it cannot be contained in the place where the mat∣ter was before the tranmutation thereof, is com∣pelled to yssue forth with an incredible violence: by meanes wherof, the Bullet breaketh, shiuereth and rendeth all that euer it meeteth with, yet doth not the fire accompany it. Euen as we see a Bow, or a Sling shoote forth an arrow or stone, without any aire at all. But the bullet driueth be∣fore it such a subtle winde, and so swiftly agitated that sometimes the very wind it selfe without the action of the bullet causeth strange and wonder∣full effects. For sometimes I haue known it make a fracture in the bones without any diuision of the flesh.The effect f Artillerie like to the Thunder. And heerein it may be compared as we saide before vnto the effect of Thunder: euen so we see, that if the saide powder bee inclosed in Mines and Vaults of the earth, and being conuer∣ted into aire through the action of the fire set vn∣to it, how it doth ruinate and reuerse huge masses of earth almost as bigge as Mountaines. Also in this yeare, in your Maiesties Town of Paris, a cer∣taine quantity of powder, bur newly mae in the Arcenall, by taking fire caused such a great Tem∣pest, that the whole Town shooke at it: for with an horrible fury it leuelled with the Earth all the houses neere vnto that place, and discouered and battered downe the windowes of all those houses that stood within the fury of it. And to bee briefe
(euen as a lap of Thuder) it did reuerse here & there many men halfe slaine; taing way fom some heir eyes▪ from ohers thei hearing, and left others no lesse torne and mangled in their members, then if foure horses had drawne them in peeces: and all this by the only agitation of the aire, into which substance the powder was con∣uerted. The which, according to the quantity and quality of the matter thereof, and according to his motion, either moe or lesse violent, hath cau∣sed so many wonerfull accidents in our Prouin∣ces; altogether like vnto those which are caused through the inclosing of winds in the bowels and cauities of the earth not bein perspirable. The which stuing to haue vent, bloweth with such a strong and violent agitation, that they make the earh to tremble and quake thereat: thereby de∣bolishing Cities, and ruinating buildinges, and transporting them from one place to another. As the Townes of Megara & Egina, anciently much celebrated in the Countrey of Greece, perishing by Earth-quakes can witnes vnto vs. I omit to discouer (as but little seruing to our purpose) how the wind inclosed in the Entrailes of the Earth, maketh a noise of duers sounds, & very strange according to the diuers forms of the conduits and passages through the which it yssu∣eth by, euen afer the manner of Musicall Instru∣ments; the which being large, do giue a great and base sound, and being narrow do make high and sharpe notes, and being crooked or replied mak
diuers sounds; as wee see by experience in the Huntsmans horne, and in Trumpets, the which also being moystened with water, do make a hol∣low gurguling sound. In like manner, these noises, murmurings, and clamors are sundry wayes diuersified, according to the places whence they proceede▪ in such sort, that sometimes hath bene hard a clamorous crie, representing (as it seemed) the assault of a Citty, the cries and lowings of Buls, or the neighing of Horses, roaring of Lyons, sound of Trumpets re∣ports of Artillery & many other dreadful things; yea sometimes humane voices. As it is reported by one, who had heard a voice (as it were) of a woman a beating,Diuers sounds yssu∣ing out of the veins of the earth. which made (as he imagined) such a wofull and greeuous lamentation, where∣by he became so greatly affrighted, that hee had scarsely breath sufficient to make this report. But when he had well vnderstoode the cause of this plaintiue voice, he was presently deliuered from that fear, which otherwise might haue killed him. But some perhappes will say, that these things haue alwayes bene, and no lesse ordinarie in the times past, then they are at this present: and ther∣fore it is a great folly in mee to alledge them, for efficient causes of the death of so many men. The which imputation I should freely confesse, if I should present them for such: but seeing that by them I would oely paralel and compare the im∣petuosity of Artillery with that of Thunder, and
the motions of the earth; which beeing so, it will appear that it maketh nothing against my first in∣tention, as I hope to demonstrate cleerely, that I am slandered without a cause, if you please to giue care to the deduction following. In the which, I will plainly and briefely describe the true causes of the late mortality which happened among your Highnesse Soldiers. Amongest the things necessary for our liues, there is nothing that can more alter our bodyes then the Aire;The true ex∣plicauo of the questiō. the which continually (willing or vnwilling) we inspire by those Condites which Nature hath apointed for that end; as the mouth, the nose, and generally through all the pores of the skin and Arteries therein infixed, whether we eae, drinke, watch, or sleepe, or doe any other action, whether Naturall, Vitall, or Animal. From thence it commeth, that the aire inspird into the Lungs, the Hart, and the Braine, and vniuersally in all the parts of the body to refresh and in some measure to nourish the same, is the cause that a man cannot liue one minute without inspiration; according to the which wonderfull benefite, the excellent Physitian Hippocrates hath pronounced and that truly,Hyp in the Prefae of is Prognest that the Aire hath a kinde of Diui∣nity in it; because that in breathing and blowing ouer all parts of the world vniuersally, it doth cir∣cumuolue all things therein contained; nourish∣ing them myraculously, strengthning them firm∣ly, and maintaining them in an amiable Vnion, altogether symbolizing with the stars & Planets;
into the which the diuine prouidence is infused; which changeth the aire at his pleasure, & giueth it power not onely ouer the mutation of times & seasons, but also of the alteration of naturall bo∣dies. And therefore the Philosophers and Physi∣tians haue expresly commanded, that wee should haue a principall regarde vnto the situation and motions of the heauenly bodies, and constituti∣ons of the aire, when the preseruation of health, or the curation of diseases are in question: but especially the course and mutation of the Aire is of great power, as we may easily iudge by the 4. seasons of the yeare. For the Aire being hot and dry in Sommer,Hyp. in the beginning of his booke de Aere locis et aquis. our bodies in like manner doeth thereby become heated and dried: and in winter the humidity and coldnesse of the aire doeth like∣wise fil our bodies with the samequailities; in such order neuerthelesse, and in so good a disposition of nature, that although our temperatures seeme to be changed according to the foure seasons of the yeere, wee neuerthelesse receyue no harme thereby, if those times do keepe their seasons and qualities fee from excesse. But to the contrarie, if the seasons be so peruerted that the Sommer is cold, and the Winter hot, and the other seaons in the like distemperature, this discord bringeth with it a great perturbation both in our bodyes, and in our spirits, constrained neuerthelesse to re∣ceiue the danger, by reason that the causes are ex∣treame, and do on euery side encopasse vs; so that we are constrained to lodge it in vs by hose
Organes and Conuits appointed by nature to that end;The aliena∣tin of  cause of diseases. as parly, to expell the superfluous excre∣ments of our nourishment, and partly to receiue the saide externall causes, which is the ayre or wie, producing in vs diuers effects, according to those parts of the world from whence they do proceed. For it being so that the Southerly winds are ot and moyst; that of the North cold & drie; the Easterly winds for the most part are clere and pure; and the Westerly cloudy, and subiect vnto raie; yet it is a most assured thing, that the Ayre which we do inspire continually, holdeth in all, and through all the quality that is most predomi∣nant. And therefore we should of necessity consi∣der in all diseases, and the inconueniences which happen therein, the quality of the windes and the power which they haue ouer our bodies; as Hip∣pocrates hath learnedly left vs by writing, in the 3. Booke of his Aphorismes, Chap. 5. and 17. say∣ing, That our bodies do receiue a great alteration through the vissitude of the times and seasons of the yeere. As by the South-wind our bodies are subiect to all diseases, because that moisture is their primitiue cause▪ it also weakeneth our natu∣rall heate, the which in the opposite case is much fortified through a cold and dry wind, which also maketh our spirits more quicke and subtill. The verity of which sentence, the inhabitantes of the territory of Narbonne doe too much experiment to their dammage. For being themselues between the lustiest and healthfullest people of all France;
yet neuerthelesse they themselues are very sickely for the most part, their bodies leane, their coun∣tenances sad and heauy; their faces tawny, or of an Oliue colour, do manifestly shew the same. Al∣so among other diseases, they are almost all sub∣iect to the white Leprosie; and he least Vlcers which they haue, which wee make no account of at Poictiers or Paris, do ordinarily continue with them a whole yeere together. Not for any other cause, as they themselues confesse, and as al stran∣gers kow that haue liued in their Country▪ but onely because they are for the most part, blasted and breathed vppon with a Southerly VVinde, which in their language they call Atan, and ma∣keth the aire to be grosse and cloudy; causing in their bodies al the effects which are attributed by Hippocrates to the Southerly windes, in his thirde Booke and 5. Aphorisme, that is to say, when it reigneth it dulleth the hearing, immeth the sight, swelleth and aggrauateth the head, weakneth and abateth all the forces of the body. Also,Lib. 3. Apor 15. when Hippocrates compareth the tempe∣ratures of the one quality with the other, he resol∣ueth vpon this point; That the dry seasons are far more healthfull then the humid hat haue conti∣nued for a long succession of time, because exces∣siue humidity is the true matter of putrifaction, as experience telleth vs: For wee see, that in those places where the Marine or Sea-winds haue blo∣wed long, all kinds of flesh (though neuer so new & fresh) will corrupt in lesse then an houre. These
hings being considered, that it is most necessary for the conseruation of our bodies in health; that the seasons should follow their naturall tempera∣tures, without any excesse or contrarietie, there is no doubt to be made but that our bodyes will fall into many vnnaturall diseases, when the natu∣ral qualities of the seasons are peruerted through the euil disposition of the aire, and wind that pre∣dominateth therein. It being so that for these 3. yeares space heere in France, the seasons of euerie yeare haue not kept their ordinary qualities. In the Sommer we haue had but little heate, in the Winter a little or no cold at all. Also the other seasons haue bene continually distempered with raine and moysture, together with much South∣erly windes, whose nature wee hau declared be∣fore; and this throughout all France. I know no man so little seene in naturall Philo∣sophy, or in Astrologie, which will not finde the aire to bee the efficient cause of so many euilles, which for these three yeeres space haue happened in the kingdome of France. For from whence should proceede those contagious Pestilences, which happened indifferently to olde and young; to rich and poore, & in so many places, but from the corruption of the aire? From whence should proceede so many kinds of Feauers, Plerisies, A∣posthumes, Catarres, defluctions of smal Pox & Meazels? So many kinds of venomous Beasts, as Frogges, Toades, Grashoppers, Caterpillers, Spiders, Flies, Waspes, Snailes, Srpents, Vi∣pers,
Snakes, Lizards, Scorpions, and Aspickes; but onely from a purrifaction resulting from the humidity of the aire, accompanied with a langui∣shing heate. This is it (I say) that hath engende∣red in vs, and in al the Countrey of France, so many strange and vnknowne accidents. Beholde therefore how our naturall heate hath bene weak∣ned, how our blood and humors haue bene cor∣rupted through the malignity of the aire, which these Southerly winds hath caused thorough the hot and moist quality thereof. Thus much I haue obserued, that where there hath bene neede of Phlebotomizing, there hath beene but little blood drawne from any, whether they were yong, or olde, wounded, or not of so good or euill temperature; but it hath bene cor∣rupted, & appeared of white or greenish colours. This I haue alwaies obserued in these last warres, and in other places where I haue beene called to cure the wounded: such as haue beene phleboto∣mized by the prescription of the Physitian, either for the preuention of accidents, or the furtherāce of the cre. In all which, I say indifferently, I haue found the bloode putrified and corrupted. This being so, it must needs folow that the fleshy parts of our bodies cannot bee otherwise then e∣uilly disposed: and all our bodies Cacochymate, seeing that their nourishment which is the blood is putrified, and the aire altogether corrupted. From whence it followeth, that those bodyes which were wounded in the fleshy parts were dif∣ficult
to cure, considering that there was in them a perdition of substance; the which hauing neede of the regeneration of the flesh, could not be ac∣complished neiher by Medicines, nor ay Art of the Chirurgian, such and so great was the Caco∣chimy or euill constitution of their bodies. Euen as in an Hydropticke person there can no flesh be regenerated,A similitude because the blood is too colde and watery: and in the Elephanticke or leaprous Di∣sease, the flesh and other parts do abide in putri∣faction, because of the corrupted bloode where∣by they are nourished. In like manner, in wounds of Cacochymed bodies, there can be no regene∣ration made of any good substance, because that to restore a lawdable flesh in the wounded part, it is required that the bloode should not offend neither in quantity nor quality, and that the of∣fended part be in its naturall temperature. All these things wer wanting in the times of these last warres: and therefore it is not to be wondred at, if the wounds which were then receiued (althogh they were but small and of little consequence in the noble or ignoble partes) haue brought with them so many tedious accidents, and in the end death; because that the air which doeth incom∣passe vs, maketh the wounds to bee corrupt and purified, by reason of the inspiration and trans∣piration thereof, especially when it selfe is cor∣rupt and putrified by altering and corrupting the humors. Of this point I haue had the experience of ma∣ny
woundes which I haue beene called to dresse that haue rendred amost insupportable stinking fauour,Intollerable stinke pro∣ceedig frō the woun∣ded parts of men. as a certaine witnesse of corruption and infection, insomuch that the assistants coulde hardly endure to be present at their dressings. It neede not bee heere alledged, that this was for want of being cleanly kept, or often dressing, or for not administering vnto them things necessa∣ry: for this corruption was as common to Prin∣ces and great Lords, as vnto poore Souldiours; whose woundes (if by chance one day escaped wherin they were not drest, so great was the num∣ber of the hurt souldiers) you should find in them the morrow after, a great quantity of Wormes,Venomous. Wounds. with a meruailous stinking sauour. And more∣ouer there happened vnto them many Apost∣humes in diuers parts of their bodies opposite to their hurtes. For, if they were shot in the right shoulder, they should haue an Apostume on the left knee; and if the wound were in the right leg, the Apostume would arise in the left arme. As it hapned to the late King of Nauar, to Mounsieur de Neuers, and to Mounsieur de Rendn, and al∣most to all others. So it seemeth, that Nature be∣ing so much oppressed with corrupted Humors, could not be sufficiently purged and discharged of them by woundes onely, but sent some part of the corruption to some other part either hidden or apparent. For if the Apostumes appeared not outwardly, they should be found in the inwarde parts, as in the Liuer, Lungs, or Spleene. From
those putrifactions were stirred vp certain vapors, which through their commination with the Har csh continuall eauers; with the Liuer a let ad hinderance of the generation of good blood; and with the Braine, swoonings, faintings, con∣vulsions, and consequently death. Now because of those aforesaide accidents, it is vnpossible for any Chirurgian (were he neuer so expert) to correct the malignity of the aforesaid wounds: neuerthelesse hose that are emploed therein ought not to be reprehended, because it is impossible for them to war against God, nor a∣gainst the aire, wherein oftentimes are hidden the rods of his Diuine Iustice. If therefore according to the sentence of ancient Hippocrates, who saith; That all contused wounds ought to bee bought to suppuration, theeby to bee perfectly cured; which method we are sometimes constrained to change, because of the putrifactions Gangrenacs and Mortifications which doe accompane such wounds, through the corruption of the aire; and can any blame or accuse vs, because wee are con∣strained through necessity to change & alter that manner of curation, and instead of suppuratiue Medicines to vse other remedies, to resist such ac∣cidents which not onely happen in wounds made by Gun-shot, but also by swords or staues: which remedies shall bee described in this present Dis∣course. Besides humane causes, that man is ill n∣structed in the knowledge of Celestiall things, which doeth not beleeue for certaine, that the
wrath of GOD hangeth ouer vs to punnish the faultes which ordinarily we commit against his Maiesty; his scourges are prepared readie, his rods and weapons haue their ministers alwaies at hand to execute the commandement of his Di∣uine Iustice, into whose secrets I dare enter no further; but will conclude with the opinion of the best aduised Practioners, that the principall occa∣sion of the aforesaid mortality, did proceed from the ure and determinate will of God, who by the temperature which he hath giuen to the ayre and winds (as the Heralds of his diuine Iustice) hath made vs apt to receiue the afore∣said inconueniences, which we haue incurred by our iniquities.
THE Method of curing Wounds made by Gun-shot, and other fiery Engines. Also by Arrowes, and Darts, and their accidents. CHAP. I. The diuision of woundes, according to the diuersitie both of the offended parts, & the Bullets where∣by they were made. ALl Wounds made by Gunshot on the body of man, whether they be simple, or compounded with dilaceration, contusion, distemperature, and tumor, are made some in the noble parts, others in the ignoble parts; some in the fleshie parts, and others in the Neruous and bony parts; sometimes with ruption and dilaceration of the great vessels, as of the Veines and Arteries, and sometimes without ruption of them. Such kinde
of wounds are also sometimes superficiall, but most commonly profound and deepe, yea,Differencs taken from the matter of Bullets. euen to the penetrating through the body & members of them that receiue them. Another diuersity is taken according to the differences of the Bullets: amongest the which, some are great, some in a meane substance, and some are small as Haile shot: whereof the matter (which is ordinarily but of Lead) is somtimes tur∣ned into Steele, Iron, or Tin, rarely into Siluer, but neuer into Gold. According to the which differences, the Chirurgian ought to take diuers Indications to operate, and according to them to diuersifie the remedies. Now we ought not to iudge those great accidents which happen in these wounds to proceede from the combustion of the Bullet, nor from the venonosity or other ill qua∣lity of the ponder, because of the aforesaide Rea∣sons alledged in the precedent Discourses, but because of the contusion, dilaceration, and fracti∣on which is made thorough the violence of the Bullet in the neruous and bony parts. For when it hapneth that the Bullet toucheth onely but the fleshy parts, and in bodies of good temperature,Fomwhēce proceedeth the malig∣nity of woundes made by Gunshot. I haue found those Woundes heeretofore to bee as little rebellious in their curations, and as easie to handle as those which are made by anie Instru∣ment of that kinde; I meane such which make a round and contused wound, or of such a figure which the shot maketh: and therefore it is most necessary that there bee a greater regard had to
the symptomes or accidents of the contusion, di∣laceration, fracture of the bones and euill quali∣ty of the incompassing aire, then to the combu∣stion which is thought to proceed from the Bul∣let, or venenosity of the powder, because of the reasons aoresaide. This I thought good to pub∣lish to the world to ayde yong and new Practiti∣oners in Chirurgery, in the same manner & Me∣thod which I haue my selfe experimented in fol∣lowing the warres, hauing therein continued for the space of forty yeares. Wherein I protest I haue followed the counsel of Physitians and peo∣ple of my profession, such as were most renowned and approoued both by their doctrine and long experience: concerning whom I doe assure my selfe, that they do know more then my writinges can containe. And therefore I write not for them, but for the yong Prentises in this Art, & for such as want better meanes to helpe them in vrgent ca∣ses proceeding from these saide wounds, whome neuerthelesse I aduise to take the counsell of the Chirurgian, if his owne reason and experience do not guide him in his operations. CHAP. II. Of the signes of wounds made by Gunshot. IN the beginning of the Curation, you ought first to know whether the wounds was made by Gun-shot or no; which is easie to be seene if the figure of the wound be round and uid in colour,
and the naturall colour of the part is chaunged, that is to say, yellow, azure, liuid, or blacke. Al∣so at the same instant that the patient receyued the blow, if he say that he felt an agrauating pain, as if he had beene strooke with a great stone, or with a club, or as if a great burthen had falne vp∣on the wounded part. In like manner, if the wound hapned not vppon any great vessell, if there haue issued but little blood from the wounded partes, which happeneth because they are contused, and greatly crushed, and therefore they tumifie pre∣sently after the blowe receyued; insomuch, that sometimes the passage is so stopt, that there can hardly be conueyed in either tent or Seon; and thereby it cometh to passe, that the flux of blood is suppressed, which otherwise would flow at their Orifices. Also the Patient therein feeleth a great heate, which hapneth because of the impetuositie proceeding both from the violent motion of the Bullet, and the vehment impulsion of the ayre, with the ruption of the flesh and neruous partes. Sometimes also because of the fractured Bones, which depresse and pricke the sayde parts; from whence ensueth fluxion and inflammation. Also because of the great contusion which the Bullet maketh; which by no meanes can enter into anie part of our body but by great force, by reason of the round figure thereof, whereby the place be∣commeth blacke, and the neighboring partes li∣uid: and from thence there followeth many great accidents; as Paine, Fluxion, Inflammation, A∣postume,
Sspasme, Faintings, Palsie, Gangrena, Mortification, and finally deah. They oftentimes send forth a Sanies virulent, & very fetide which proceedeth from the great abundance of humors which flow to the wounded part, because of the vehement crushing, contusion, and dilaceration of the parts, and for want of natural heat to com∣fort and gouerne them. Also by reason of the Ca∣cochimy of the body, and the neruous partes, as the ioynts: also such wounds are founde for the most part greater then such which are made by the punction of a Buckes horne, or the Wound made by a stone or any other such like Contusi∣ons, because that the thing it selfe was round, anb doth therfore require a greater and more violent impetuosity to make it penetrate into the inward parts of the body, wherein it seemeth to equal∣lize the blowes of thunder. CHAP. III. The manner how to handle the aforesaide woundes at the first dressing. FIrst, it is conuenient that the Chirurgian shold amplifie the wound (if the part offended doe permit the same) for these causes: that is, both to giue free ssue vnto the Sanies, as also to giue am∣ple passage vnto all such straunge bodyes which might haue bene conueyed in with the shot, and to draw them forth (if any there be) as any porti∣on of the apparrell, wad, paper, peeces of Har∣nesse,
Maile, Bullets, Shot, Splinters of bones, dilacerated flesh, and other things that shall bee found therein; and this to bee done at the first dressing if it be possible. For the accidents of pain and sensibility are not so great in the beginning, as they are afterwards. Now for the better extraction of the aforesaid things,The stuati∣on of the Patient to extact vn∣naurall things. you ought to place the Patient in the same situation that he was at the time when he was first shot, because that the Muscles and other parts be∣ing otherwaies situate, may stop and hinder the way; and for the better finding of the saide Bul∣lets, and other things, it is fitting that search bee made with the finger (if it be possible) rather then with any Instrument, because that the sense of fee∣ling is more certaine then any Probe, or other insensible thing. But if the bullet haue pierced farre into the body, there it may be reached with a Probe, round in the end thereof, for feare of causing paine: neuerthelesse it hapneth somtimes that the Bullet cannot be found by the Probe, as it hapned in the campe of Parpignan, to my Lord the Marshall of Brissac, who was wounded with a Musket shot neere to the right Omople or shoul∣der-blade, where many Chirurgians because they could not finde the saide Bullet, affirmed that it was entered into the capacity of the body, but I ot hauing that opinion, came to seeke for the Bullet, where first without vsing any Probe, I cau∣sed him to be placed in the same gesture of bodie as he was at that time when he was Wounded:
then I began wih my fingers gently to compresse about the neighbouring parts of the wound; in doing whreof, I found a tumor and hardnesse in he flesh, with the sense of paine, and liuiditie of colour in the place where the Bullet was, which was betwixt the lower part of the Omoplate, and the seuenth and eight Vertebre or turning ioynt of the backe. In which place, incision was made to draw forth the shot, whereby he was shortly after cured. Wherefore it is very conuenient to search for the Bullet not onely with the Probe, but (as I saide before) with the fingers, by handling and feeling the part and places about the same where you may coniecture the Bullet to haue penetrated Chap. 4. A Description of such Instruments which are proper to extract Bullets, and other strang Bodyes. AS for the strange bodies which may be infix∣ed in the wound, they may bee extracted by such Instruments heereafter described, which are different both in figure and greatnesse according as neede shall require; whereof some are toothed, & others not. And it is fit the Chirurgian should haue of many and diuers fashions: some greater, and some saller of euery kind to accommodate them to the bodies and wounds, and not the bo∣dies and wounds to his Instruments.
The Crowes Bill toothed. A Cranes Bill brought into the forme of an Elbow, Cubite, or bowed arme.
This following is called the Cranes bill, because of the similitude it hath thereunto; the which in like manner ought to bee toothed; and it is proper to extract any thing from the bottom of the wound both shot, maile, splin∣ters of fractured bones, & other things. The Cranes bill straight. This Instrument is cal∣led te Duckes Bill, ha∣uing a Cauity in the ex∣treamity or end thereof large and round, & too∣thed, the better to holde the Bullet; and it is pro∣per principally when the Bllet hapneth in the fle∣sty parts. The Duckes Bill.
Another Fashion of draw-Bullet. Another fashion of Draw Bullet, called the Lizards head to draw the Bullet, marked with the same Letters as the former. A. sheweth the Pipe, or the hollow body of the instrument B. The Rod, which openeh & shutteth the head of the In∣strument. C. The ioynt.
Another Instrument called the Parrats Bill, and it is proper to draw foorth any peeces of Harnesse which may be inserted into the ottome of the Member, or also into the bones. A. sheweth the stalke of the Vice. B. The Scrue. C. The runner, which by the meanes of a Vice, is scrued higher or lo∣wer. DD The other part which is fixed with a Cauitie in the middest thereof, wherein the Runner is placed.
Another Instru∣ment which is call∣led the Swans bil, which opneth wih a Vice, accompany∣ed with a payre of Foceps, which heere before wee haue called the Cranes bill, and it serueth to drawe foorth any strange body, after that the wound is dilated with the saide Swans Bill. If the strange bodyes, especially the Bullet or shot, be not ve∣ry deepe, they may be drawne forth by Eleuatories.
An Instrument called the Tire-fond. Another Instrument called the Tirefond, the which is turned by a Scrue within a pipe or hol∣low Instrument; ad it is very conuenient to ex∣tract forth the aforesaid Bullets when they are pe∣netrated or are infixed in the bones; for the point thereof is to be serued into the Bullet, prouided that it be of Lead or Tin (for it cannot enter ino a harder body) and by that meanes it may be ea∣sily drawne forth.
A Dilatorie. This Instrument is named a Dilatory, which may be vsed to open and dilate the wounds, to the end that the strange bodyes may the easier bee found and extracted, for by compressing together the two ends thereof, the other two do open, it may also serue in many places, as the nostrils, funda∣ment; and other parts. The Instruments which follow are Needles for the Seton, and are very conuenient when as you would passe in a Seton to keepe the wound & the way of the Bullet open, vntill you haue drawne forth all the straunge bodies which might yet re∣maine therein; besides, they may serue to explo∣rae or search into deepe wounds to find the Bul∣let▪ not causing any paine, because they are round and pollished towards their extremities. You must vnderstand that those Probes which are vsed to serch the bullet ought to be of a mean greatnsse,Of what bignes the Probes ought to be. pollished and round on their extrea∣mities, because that the edges of the wound, and
the way whereby the Bullet hath passed, doeth in∣continently ioyne together, and touch the one side against the other. In such maner that the sayd wound or way of the Bullet, will appeare in sight to be much smaller then it is: and for that cause those Probes which are slender and sharp, are no∣thing so commodious; for they will stop and stay on euery part of the reioyned wound, and cannot so easily be conducted to the place where the bul∣let is, as those which are somewhat greater. Also those which are small and slender▪ doe pricke and offend the flesh of the wound whereby the Pati∣ent is much mollested, and is oftentimes a cause that the Bullet cannot be found. Also you ought in like manner to haue those which are greater & longer to passe through the thigh when necessity shall require. Which length of them ought to be changed and diuersified according to the great∣nesse of the wounded member. For I am of this opinion, that one should not striue too much to make them passe alwayes thorough the wounded parts for feare of induring paine and other acci∣dents. For the Patient may be cured as well al∣though the Seton be not passed thorough, as by experience it hath beene seene, that a Bullet hath bene shot through the body, and yet without the passing through of a Seton, they haue neuerthe∣lesse bene cured.
Probes which may serue for Setons.
CHAP. V. The manner how to handle those woundes at the first dressing, after that the strange bodyes are extra∣cted. AFter you haue drawne forth the strange Bo∣dies by the aforesaide meanes, the principall intention shall be to combate against the contusi∣on and alteration of the aire,he prini∣pall intenti∣on of the Chiugian. if it be hot & moist, and disposed to putrifaction; which shall be done both by remedies taken inwardly, as by others ap∣plyed outwardly; and also put or infused within the wound. For those which are to bee taken in∣wardly ought to be administred by the counsel & ordinance of the learned Physitian, to whose do∣ctrine I leaue all that may appertaine both to the manner of liuing, and the purgation of the Pati∣ent. But as for the topical medicines, the Chirur∣gian (accrding to the things aforesaid) ought to consider of the constitution of the times, and of the aire. For if there bee no danger of the part to fall into a Gangrena, he shall vse suppuratiues, as in contused wounds, which are Oleum Catellorum or of a digestiue, hauing a regard to the nature of the part, because that the neruous parts doe re∣quire Medicines more drying, then the fleshye parts do. For in the ioynts and neruous parts, you may vse of the Terebinth of Venice, or the Oyle of waxe, of Masticke, the yolkes of Egges, ad∣ding thereto a little Aqua-vitae rectified. Such
like things haue power to disiccate and consume the watrish humidity which issueth from the ner∣uous parts, and aso easeth the paine. Ionbertus Physitian in ordinary to the King, and Chancel∣lour of the vniuersity of Montpellier, who hath most learnedly written of the Woundes made by Gunshot, because he hath seene many wounded when he followed the wars, in the Treatise which he hath made, he saith; that in the simple wounds made by shot, there ought not to be vsed any Me∣dicine Escharoticke, or that causeth an escharre, either actuall or potentiall, because they doe en∣dure paine, Inflammation, Gangrena, Feauer,Why no es∣chaaticke Medicine ought to be vsed. & other pernicious accidents. Also because that the Eschar or crust hinereth the suppuration which ought presently to bee indured, to separate the contused flesh, together with the Sanies, lest that all should degenerate into putrifaction, as easilie it may when the superfluous humour putrifieth long in one place, not hauing free passage; not so much as for the exhalatiō of the putrified vapors, because that they are enclosed and couered in with the eschar: which being inclosed doe multi∣ply, insomuch that they do require a greater place then is permitted them; then they passe and enter from the small vessels into the greater; and from thence into the noble parts, from whence most commonly ensueth dath: neuerhelesse, if there bee any suspition of putrifaction, then in such a case you ought to passe from suppuratiues, vnto remedies that do resist putrifaction, leauing the
proper care o come vnto the accidents. Where∣fore at the first dressing in the case aforesaide, in the wound may bee vsed this following vnguent. ℞. puluer. alumin. rochae, viidis aeris, vitrioli romani, mellis rosat. an. ℥ ij. aceti boni quantum sufficit,Dscription of ou gvp aum pro¦per f the aoesaide wounds bulliant omnia simul secundum artem, & fiat medicamentum ad formam mellis. The Ver∣tues of this vnguent is, that because of the heat & tenuity thereof, it inciseth and attenuteth the hu∣mors, reuoketh the naturall heate which was re∣pelled by the vehement impulsion of the blow, & the violent agitation of the aire conducted by the Bullet. Moeouer it correcteth the putrifaction of the virulent humor, which presently cleaueth vnto, and so disposeth the contused flesh in such manner, that it maketh an escharre. This vnguent when and as often as it shall be needfull may bee applyed with Tents or Setons, beeing first dissol∣ued with a little wine or Aqua-vitae: The which tents ought to be both great and long for the first dressing, thereby to inlarge and dilate the wound that the Medicines may therby the better be con∣veyed in. But afterwards they ought not to be ap∣plyed so long or great. Also that the Medicine may the better be conueyed into the bottome of the wounds, it may bee incited in with a Syringe. Moreouer the vertue and strength thereof shalbe diminished according to the temperature of the body, and sensibility of the hurt. As if the wound be in the neruous parts, it shall be mixed with the Oyles of Terebinth, or of Hypericon, in such quan∣tity
as the expert Chirurgian shall know to bee needfull. But the Egyptiacum is not to bee vsed at all, vnlesse it bee in such times which are Pesti∣lentiall and dangerous for those saide wounds, & that they do decline to putrifaction. After the vse of Egyptiacum you may separate & make the escharre fall, with remollitiue and lenitiue things, as the following Oyle in vsing thereof a litle hot∣ter then luke-warme. ℞ Olei violati lb iiij. in quibus coquantur ca∣telli duo nuper nati, vsque ad dissolutionem ossi∣um, addendo vermium terrestrium praeparato∣rum lb j. coquantur simul lento igne, deinde fiat expressio ad vsum, addendo Terebinthinae Vene∣tae ℥ iij. aquae vitae ℥ j. The said Oyle is of great & meruellous efficacy, both to appease the paine, as also to suppurate the wound, and to make the es∣charre fall. But for want thereof this which follo∣weth may be applied which is easier to be had. ℞ Olei semin. lini, & liliorum an. ℥ iij. vnguent. basilic. ℥ j. liquefiant simul, & fiat medicamentū, de quo vulneri indatur quantum sufficit. I haue knowne that the saide Oyles being applied in the beginning of the hurt reasonable warme to ap∣pease the paine, to lubrifie, relaxe, and moysten the edges of the wound, disposing it to suppurati∣on, which is the true way to cure those woundes, as Galen himselfe reciteth from Hippocrates, say∣ing; That if the flesh bee contused, crushed, or battered with any Dart, or in any other manner, that it ought so to be handled that it bee brought
to suppuration as soone as may bee: For by this meanes the wound shall bee the lesse mollested with Phlegmon (or inflammation.) Also it is ne∣cessary that the contused flesh be putrified, lique∣fied, and conuerted into pus, that new flesh may afterwards be regenerated. Ioubertus doth very much approoue this reme∣dy, which I neuer yet did experiment, and it this. Take of the pouder of Mercury twice calcined ℥ j fresh Hogs greace, or sweete Butter, ℥ viij. Cam∣phire dissolued in Aqua vitae, ʒ ij. mixe them to∣gether, adding thereto a little of the oyle of Lil∣lies or Linseed. Experience doeth shew that this remedy is excellent, and reason doth also confirm it. For the powder of Mercury accompanyed with vnctious and moistning things, causeth the contused flesh to suppurate easily, & in short time without induring any great paine. As for the Camphire, whether it bee hot or cold, it serueth greatly because of the excellent tenuitie of the parts thereof. By reason wherof, euery Medicine of what quality soeuer it be, doth penetrate, and disperse the Vertues thereof the better. Moreo∣uer,The vertue of Campher the saide Camphire doth resist all putrifacti∣on. Some do instill into the wound Aqua vitae, in the which they dissolue calcined Vitrioll; which medicine is not suppuratiue, but i resisteth putri∣faction; of the which you may vse in times & sea∣sons that are hot and moyst. Another ℞. Olei Terebinth. ℥ iij. Aqua vitae. ℥ss miscae. Now, if the wound were giuen neere at hand,
then of a certaine the wound may bee with bur∣ning, by reason of the flaming powder,Combusti∣on ioyned to woundes made by Gunshot. and shall be applyed medicines proper vnto the combusti∣on thereof, neuerthelesse not leauing the contu∣sion: and as for the parts about the wound, there you shall not apply Medicines which are refrige∣ratiue and astringent, but remollitiues and sup∣puratiues, for they cānot be vsed at the first dres∣sing, because they do coole and weaken the pat, and hinder suppuration. Also they do constipate the skin, which is a hinderance to the transpirati∣on of the fuliginous vapors: from whence ensueth Gangrena and mortification, thorough the vnfit application of such like medicines. VVhere the contusion shall bee great, there you may make many scarifications, therby to discharge the part of the bruised bones which is subiect to putrifie: but in the neighbouring parts, and about the con∣tusion farre off from the wound, you ought to ap∣ply cooling & corroborating medicines to pro∣hibite and hinder the defluxion of Humours as is this. ℞. Puluer. boli armenis sanguin. Dracon. pul∣uer. myrrh. an ℥ j. succi solan. semperuiui, Portu∣lac. an. ℥ j. ss album ouorum iiij. oxyrrh. quantum sufficit, fiat linimen. vt decet. Or other such like: whereof it is conuenient you should vse, vntill you are assured of the perfect preuention of the accidents. In like manner, great care ought to be taken in the apt cooling of the member, situating it in a figure proper, and without pain if it be pos∣sible
at the beginning,Time to ob∣serue to drsse the patient. vntill that the wounde be∣ginneth to suppurate, you neede not dresse the patient but from 24. houres to 24. houres: and when the suppuration beginneth, and by conse∣quence the paine, feauer, and disquietnesse shall augment, the Patient ought then to be dressed e∣uery twelue houres. But when there shal be great quantity of matter which doth molest the patient then it is needfull that he be drest euery 8. houres: & when the pu beginneth naturally to diminish, the once euery twelue houres shall suffice. Final∣ly, when the Vlcer beginneth to be filld with flesh and sendeth not forth much matter, then to bee dressed once a day shall be sufficient, as in the be∣ginning. CHAP. VI. How the saide wounds ought to be handled after the first dressing. AT the second dressing, and in the rest follow∣ing, if there be no danger of putrifaction and Gangrena, you may vse one of the aforesaid oiles adding thereunto of the Egges, with a little Saf∣fron, which shall bee continued vntill the excre∣ment of the wound bee digested and brought to suppuration. Heerein it is to be noted, that in wounds made by Gunne-shot,Pu is not so made by Gunshot, as in all other wounds. it is longer before they bee brought to suppuration then other wounds made by other instruments, because that the bullet and the aire which it thrusteth before
it, dissipateth (by reason of the great Contusion thereof) the naturall heate, and the spirites from the part, which causeth that the concoction is neither so soone, nor so well made, for want of naturall heate, from whence there followeth an exceeding foetide or stinking sauour of the Sanies and other accidents very dangerous. Neuerthe∣lesse it is for the most part made in three or foure dayes, sometimes also sooner or later according to the temperature of the body, and of the part, & the quality of the aire hot or cold. These thinges done, it shall be needfull to begin to mundify by little and little the wound, by adding to the afore∣saide Medicine, of Terebinth washed in Rose wa∣ter or Barly water, or such like, thereby to take a∣way the heate and mordacity thereof. If the dis∣position of the time be very cold, then you may adde vnto it of Aquavitae, according to the coun∣sell of Galen, who teacheth that in winter ought to be applied hotter medicines then in sommer. Afterwards you may vse of this Mundificatiue, ℞. Aquae decoct. hordei quantum sufficit, suc∣ci plantaginis, Appij, Agrimoniae, Centauri mi∣noris, an. ℥ j. bulliant omnia simul, in fine deco∣ctionis adde Terebinth. venet. ℥ iij. mellis Rosati. ℥ ij. far. hord. ʒ iij. Croci ℈ j. miseantur omnia simul bene agitando fiat mundificatum mediocris cosistentiae. Another. ℞. Succi clymeni, plantag. absinth, appij, an ℥. ij. Terebinth. venet. ℥ iiij. syrrup. absinth. & mellis Ros. an. ℥ ij. bulliant omnia secundum artem, po∣stea
colentur, in colatura adde puluer. Aloes, Mo∣stich, ies, florent. far. hord. an ʒ j fiat mundifi∣cat. ad vsm dictum. Or this; ℞. Terebinth. venet. lotae in Aqua Ros. ℥ v. olei Ros. ℥ j. mellis ros. ℥ iij. myrh, aloes, mastich, a∣ristooch. rotundae, an ʒ j ss far. hord. ʒ iij misce, fi∣at mundificatiuum. The which shall bee applyed in the wound with Tents and setons, neyther too long, nor too great; because that then they may hinder the euacuation of the Sanies or matter, & of the vapors eleuated from the wounds; which if they should be retained, it is most certaine that they will heat the part, and acquire to themselues an acrimony, which afterwards will eate into the edges and other parts of the wound; from whence insueth dolour, fluxion, inflammation, fluxe of blood, Apostume, and putrifaction, which are ea∣sily communicated to the noble parts, and cause afterwards many pernitious accidents. And ther∣fore the Chirurgian need not to feare any thing at all,Aduertise∣ment to the young Chi∣rurgian. of the closing or conglutinating of the a∣foresaide wounds, because that the flesh being so greatly contused and dilacerated, cannot conso∣lidate vntill the contusion be first suppurated and mundified. And therefore I aduise him not to vse any Tents or Setons but those that are very small and slender, to the end that they may not hinder the issue of the matter contained, and that the pa∣tient may indure them easily, thereby to auoyde the aforesaid accidnts. The vse of Tents and Se∣tons is to carry the medicine vnto the bottom of
the wounds, and to keepe them open, especially in their Orifices, vntill that the strange and vnna∣turall things be expelled: but if the wound bee si∣nuous and deep in such maner that the medicines cannot be conueyed vnto all the offended parts, then you may make iniection with the decoction following. ℞. Aquae hordei lb iiij. agrimon. centauris, mi∣noris, Pimpinellae, Absinth. Plantag. an. m ss. Rad. Aristoloch. rotun. ʒ ss. fiat decoctio ad lb j. in colatura expressa dissolue aloes hepaticae ʒ iij. mellis rosat. ℥ ij. bulliant modicum. With this there shall be inuection made three or four times together, every time that the patient is dressed. And if this remedy be not sufficient to clense the matter, and to consume the spongy and putrified flesh, you may then mixe with the said decoction of Egyptiacum, dissolued in such a quantity as necessity shall require; as for a pound of the sayd decoction, an ounce of the said vnguent more or lesse, the which is of most great efficacy to cor∣rect the spongeous flesh from the bottome of the said wounds: the like also doth the saide Egyptia∣cum, being applyed aboue on the excresence of the spongeous flesh. I haue in like manner expe∣rimented the powder of Mercury and Alom bur∣ned, mixed together in equall portions,A Cath∣icke pow∣der. to haue in that case the like vertue vnto sublimate or Ars∣nick (but in working it is nothing so painfull) and it maketh also a very great eschar, whereat some∣times I haue much wondred. Some practitioners
doe vse oftentimes to leaue a great quantitie of their iniections in the bottome of such sinewous wounds, the which I approoue not. For besies the putrifaction and corruption which thereby it geteth, it holdeth the parts extended, and doeth humid or moysten them: wherby it commeth to passe, that Nature cannot do her duty to regene∣rate the flesh, considering that for the curation of all Vlcers (that being an Vlcer, as saith Hippo∣crates) the scope or intention ought to be to dissi∣cate them, and not moisten them. Many doe erre also in the too frequent vse of Setons, in this; That not applying themselues to reason, they do vse to renew them alwaies, wher∣by they rub and fret away the tender flesh on the edges of the woun; the which rubbing and cha∣fing doth not onely cause paie, but also bringeth with it many euill accidents. And therefore I doe very much commend the vse of the hollow tent, which are made either of Golde, Siluer, or Lead, such as are described in the wounds of Thorax: I meane to be vsed in such places which haue lapa∣sity sufficient, and where there shalbe great quan∣tity of Sanies. Compresses or Boulstes.Also it is most needfull that there should bee ap∣plyed Compresses or Boulsters iust vpon the bot∣tome of the sinus, thereby to comprimate those parts which are distant from the Orifice, & to ex∣pell the Sanies. To which end, it is fitting that the boulster be perforated iust vpon the orifice of the sinuous vlcer, and vpon the hollow tents; & that
therein there bee placed a sponge to receiue the Sanies: for by this meanes the expulsion, euacua∣tion, and absumption thereof, shall be much bet∣ter. In rolling, the Ligature ought to bee first be∣gun on the bottom of the sinus, with a mean com∣bustion, to the end that the matter bee not retay∣ned within the Cauity thereof. The Rollers and Boulsters proper to this operation, shall bee first moistned in Oxycrat, or soure Wine, or in any other astringent liquor, to roborate and strengthē the part, and to hinder the defluxion. But great heed ought to be taken, that ther be not too great an astriction made vppon the part, because that thorough the astriction or straight binding, ex∣treame paine may be produced by meanes of the exhalation of the fuliginous excrements which therby are prohibited. Also it may cause the mem∣ber to become Atrophied or withered thorough the too long continuation of the said Rollers. CHAP. VII. Of the meanes to draw foorth such strange bodyes, which shall yet remaine to be extracted. AND where there shall remaine any splinters of bones, which at the beginning were not extracted by the aforesaid Instruments: then you ought to apply this medicine, which is of great power to draw them foorth, and all other strange bodies. ℞. Radicis, ireos, florent. panac. & Cappar.
an. ʒ iij. aristolochiae, rotundae, mannae, thuris, an. ʒ i. in pollinem redecta concorporentur mell. rosar. & terebinth. venetae. ana ℥ ij. Another remedy to take away the saide Splin∣ters, and corrupted bones. ℞. Resina pini siccae, ℥ iij, Pumicis combusti & extincti in vin albo, radic. ireos, aristolochiae, ana ʒ ss thuris ʒ j. squamae aeris ss ij. in pollinem rediganter diligenter, incorporentur cum melle rosato, & fiat medicamentum. Besides these remedies which haue in them, & from their nature, such power to attract foorth strange bodies, there are of others which haue the like effect and vrtue by putrifaction, Vt omnia stercor Animalium. Also Leauen and such like, as Galen writeth. CHAP. VIII. Of the Indications which ought to bee obserued in the saide wounds. THE mundification and the extraction of the saide strange bodies being done, it followeth then to aide Nature; both to regenerate flesh, & also to cicatrice it, as wel by things taken inward∣ly, as by outward Medicines hereunto conueni∣ent, and to proceede therein by certaine Indica∣tions, which are taken first from the essence of the disease, and from the cause thereof. If it bee pre∣sent although that from the primitiue caue (ac∣cording to Galen in the third of his Method) here
ought no Indication to bee taken, no more then from the time wherein hee meaneth from the ab∣sent cause, and from the time past. In like manner Indication ought to be taken from the foure vni∣uersall times of the cureable disease, that is to say, from the beginning, increasing, state, and decli∣nation: according to the which times, the reme∣dies ought to be diuersied. Another Indication is takē from the temperature of the Paient, which also changeth the curation.Indication taken fom the tempe∣rature of the bodye. For euery rationall and Methodicke Chirurgian knoweth well, that other remedies are required in a Chollericke bo∣dy, then in a Flegmatick; and so of the other tem∣peratures both simple and compound. Vnder the which Indication of the temperature, shall bee comprehended that of the Age, which receyueth not all remedies alike, but demaundeth some for the yong persons, and others for the old. Moreouer, Indication is to bee taken from the custome or manner of liuing of the Patient; as whether hee hath beene accustomed to eate and drink much, and at all houres: for then you ought not to ordaine him such an exquisite dyet as vnto him that is accustomed to eate and drinke but lit∣tle, and at certaine houres: and therefore the di∣et of Panades are not so proper vnto vs as vnto the Italians, because our bodies require more leni∣tiue things: which effect it woorketh with them, because of Custome, which is a second Nature. Vnder this accustomed manner of liuing, ought to be vnderstood the condition of the life, and the
exercise of the Patient, forasmuch as you ought to vse stronger remedies vnto the robusticke & men of labour, such as haue their flesh hard, then you ought to vse vpon the delicate, and such which la∣bour but little, and exercise lesse. Some there bee that had rather comprehend this Indication vnder that of the temperature. For my part I wil not dis∣pute of it, but will leaue the resolution thereof wholly to the Doctors. The Indica∣tio taken from the vertue of the patient.The Indication taken from the vertue of the patient, is aboue all other things to be respected, because that it failing or being very weake, all o∣ther things ought necessarily to bee best to come vnto it. As when we are inforced through neces∣sity to take off a member, or to make any great in∣cisions, or such like things, if the patient haue not vertue sufficient to indure the paine; it is necessa∣ry to deferre such operations (if it possible) vntill that Nature be restored, and hath recouered her vertues both by good nourishment and rest. Another Indication may bee taken from the Ayre which doth encompasse vs: vnder the which are comprehended the seasons of the yeere, the region, the place of our abiding, and the constitu∣tion of the time. For accordig to the heat, cold∣nesse, drinesse, and moysture of the aire, also ac∣cording to the continuation of these qualties, the Medicines ought to be prepared. And therefore (as sayth Guido) the wounds in the head are more difficult to heale at Paris then at Auignon;Sentence of Guido. and the wounds in the legges are more tedious at Auig∣non
then in Paris; by reason that in Paris the ayre is more cold and moyst then at Auignon, which is a contrary thing, especially to all woundes in the head. Contrarywise, in Auignon, the heate of the incompassing aire doeth melt and subtillize the humors; whereby such humours more easily and in greater abundance do fall downe into the legs: from whence it commeth that the wounds in the legges are more difficult to cure at Auignon then at Paris. But if any one doe alledge experience to the contrary, that the woundes in the head, do more often become lethall or mortal in hotte Re∣gions then in colde. To him I answer, that that proceedeth not by reason of the aire, inasmuch as it is hot and dry, but because of some superflu∣ous humidity or euill vapour communicated with the aire; as in those partes of Prouence and Italy, which are neere to the Mediterranean sea. The Indication of curation may also bee taken from the temperature of the wounded partes:Indication taken from the woun∣ded part. for the fleshy parts doe require other remedies then the Bones or the Neruous partes, and so others. The like ought to bee obserued concerning the sensibility of the saide parts, which in like manner altereth the manner of curation: for it is not sit∣ting to apply such sharpe and violent medicines to the Nerues and Tendons, as to the Ligaments and other insensible parts. The dignity and action of the wounded parts hath no lesse priuiledge in the act of curation then the former. For, if the wound be in the Braine, or in any other of the vi∣tall
or naturall parts, it behooueth that their Me∣dicines diuersified and applied according to their dignity and action, because that from the con∣templation of these wounds, is oftentimes gathe∣red a certain iudgement of the insuing accidents. For such woundes which doe penetrate into the ventricle of the Braine, the Heart, or in the great vessels,Aphris. 18. Boo 1. in the Chest, in the Neruous part of Dia∣phragma, in the Liuer, in the stomack, in the smal guts, and in the bladder, if the wound bee great, they are necessarily mortall. Also such which are in the ioynts, or neere thereunto, and in bodies Cacochymed or of an ill habitude are oftentimes mortall, as hath beene sayde heere before. In like manner, the Indications which are taken from the position and colligance of the affected part ought not to bee forgotten, neither the figure thereof, as Galan hath sufficiently explained in the 7. of his Method, and in the second to Glaucus. CHAP. IX. How Diseases become compounded. MOreouer in taking the aforesaid Indication, you ought to consider whether there bee a complication of the disease, or not: For, euen as the simple disease proposeth a simple Indication, so the complications of the indispositions against Nature, do propose mixd or compounded Indi∣cations. Now the aforesaide complications are made after three manner of wayes that is to say,
disease with disease; as a Wound with an Apo∣stume or fracture of the bones. Disease with cause, as an Vlcer with defluxion. Disease with symp∣tome, as a wound with paine, or with a Fluxe of blood. Or all things against Nature together, as disease, cause, and symptome. Now that you might know how to handle arti∣ficially all these complications, you must followe the Doctrine of Galen, in the 7. of his Method, who exhorteth vs to consider the complicated af∣fections, as that which is the most vrgent,The Vrgent the cause, & the necessity the cause; and that wthout the which the disease can∣not be taken away. And these are things of great importnce in the curation of all diseases; & here∣in the Empericke becommeth wauering and vn∣certaine, without counsell or resolution, not knowing with which of the affections hee ought first to begin withall for the cure. Bu the idici∣ous Physitian to the contrary is directed by those three golden word: from the which depend both the order and method in all such complicated dispositions and affections. The symptomes inas∣much as they are symptomes, do not giue any In∣dication at all, neyther do they charge or alter the order of the curation. For in taking away the di∣sease, which is the cause of the symptome, they are remooued, because they depend thereon, as the shadow doth the body: although oftentimes we are constrained to leaue the disease in an irre∣gular care, to come vnto the accidents of the Di∣sease; the which if they are vrgent, doe holde the
place of the cause, and not properly of the symp∣tomes. To conclude, all the sayde Indications are but to attaine to two endes,The vs of Indatn. that is to say, to restore the part in its naturall temperature, and that the blood offend not neyther in quantity nor quality. That being done (as saith Galen) nothing will hin∣der neyther the regeneration of the flesh, nor the vnion of the vlcer. Bu sometimes it is not possi∣ble to put the aforesayde Indications in executi∣on, either because of the greatnesse of the wound, or the excesse and disobedience of the Patient; or because of some other indisposition which hath happened through the ignorance of the Chirur∣gian, or from the ill or disordered application of the Medicines. And therefore by meanes of these things, there followeth great paines, Feauers, A∣postumes, Gangrenaes (vulgarly and abusiuely called Estiomenes) Mortifications, and oftentimes death it selfe. Moreouer those that receyue wounds by Gunshot, do eyther dye, or else remaine maymed and defectiue all their life after.
CHAP. X. How the Chirurgian shall proceede in the handling of the saide wounds. IN the beginning therefore, great regard ought to bee taken to mittigate the payne as much as may be, by repercussing the defluxion, by orday∣ning a dyet according to the six vnnatural things, and they annexed, by anoyding all hot and sharp things, and by diminishing or altogether prohi∣biting wine, lest it should heat, subtillize, & make the humors flow to the part. His maner of liuing, ought in the beginning to be very slender, there∣by to make revulsion. For when the stomacke is not filled sufficiently, it attracteth from all partes vnto it: by meanes whereof, the externe parts ha∣uing affinity therewith, do remaine empty. And this is the reason wherefore the patient ought to keepe a slender dyet in the first dayes of his hurt. Venus is altogether contrary vnto them, inasmuch as it enflameth the humors and spirits more then any other motion: and for this cause it maketh the wound to bee much enflamed and subiect to de∣fluxion. And it wil not be amisse in the beginning if there be a sluxe of bloode, to let it moderately flow, thereby to discharge the body and the part: and where it hath not sufficiently flowed, you ought the day following to vse revulsiue Phlebo∣tomy,Phlboto∣my necessa∣ry i woūds made by Guneiho. and to take away according to the fulnesse and vertue of the patient. You neede not feare of
making of auersion of the blood toward the No∣ble part. For (as we haue saide) there is no veno∣mous quality threin; neuerthelesse it is general∣ly bserued, that such wounds at that istant doe send forth bt little bloode,Cases why th hp∣nth  al∣way anle mothg. because of the great conusion made by the Bulet and te vehemence of the agitated aire, which doth repulse and driue back the spirits into the inwrd parts, and into the circumiacent parts of the wound, as we haue sayd before. This is ordinarily knowne in those who haue had a member carried away with a great shot: for at the instant of their hurts, there issueh but little blood forth of their wounds, although that there be many great Veines and Arteries broken & di∣lacerated. But a certaine time afterwards, as in the fourth, fift, or sixt day, and sometimes later, the blood will yssue foorth in great abundance: by meanes of the returning of the spirits, and natural heate into the affected pats. As for the purga∣tiue Medicines. I leaue them to the Doctors. Ne∣uerthelesse in their absenc, it is necessarie to re∣laxe and moue the belly of the patient at the least once a day, either by at or by Nature, which shal be done rther by Custers then Purgations, espe∣cially in the fist dayes, because that the agitation of the humors in that case is to be suspected, least they shold mae a greater defluxion to the woun∣ded part. Nuerthelesse Galen in the fourth booke of his Method. Cap 6. speaking of the Indicati∣ons of bleeding and purging, where he saith; That
bleeding and purging are necessary, according to the greatnesse of the disease, althogh that the pa∣tint be without repletion or cacochymy, or euill constitution. Paine ought to be appeased, according to the intention and remission thereof, which to do if it happen that there is an inflammatin, you may apply thereto as a locall medicine Vnguentum nu∣tritum, composed with the iyce of Plantane, Housleeke, and Night-shade, and such like. Also the Emplaister Diachalciteos describd by Galen in his first Booke of the Composition of Medicines according to their kinds, chap. 6. dissolued vvith the oyle of Poppy, of roses, and a little Vinegar, and it is of no little efficacy for that purpose. Also vng. de bolo, and many others of that facultie, if they be not properly anodins (for all Anodins are hot in the first degree, or at the least agreeing in heate with our bodies, as saieth Galen in his first Booke and 19. chap. of Simples) nd the aforesaid medicines are cold, yet not so much as that there∣by they should become Naucotick, the which are cold in the fourth degree. But to bee short, the a∣boue-mentioned in the aforesaid case, do appease the paine very commdiously,Hot humors are aper to slowe then cold. because they are contrary vnto hot distmperatures, and doe pro∣hibit the defluxions of humors, which oftentimes are sharpe and chollericke, which are more apte to flow then the cold, and do cause a greater pain. After the vsage of repercussiues, I do meruellous∣ly approue this Cataplasme.
℞. Micae panis infusae in lacte vaccino lb j. ss. bul∣liant parum addendo olei violacei & ros. an. ℥ iij vitellos ouorum numer quatuor. pul. rosar. rubr. florum chamemel. & melior an. ℥ ij. far. fabar. & hord. ana ℥ j. misce, & fiat cataplasma secundum artem. Or for a Medicine sooner prepared, thou must take of the crummes of bread, and so let it be a little boyled with Oxycrat, and the Oyle of Ro∣ses. As concerning the curation of such Apostumes which happen in these Wounes, it is expedient that their Medicines should bee diuersied accor∣ding to their times. For some medicines are pro∣per in the beginning, others in the augmentation, and others in other times; as hath beene suffici∣ently declared by Galen in his thirde Booke and ninth chapter of the faculty of Medicines. And by Guido in the curation of Apostumes; and by those that haue written thereof. And where Na∣ture shall incline to suppuration, it is most need∣ful to attend her,Apho. 31. Boke 2. as sayth Hippocrates: for the Phy∣sitian and Chirurgean, are but the ministers and helpers of Nature, to ayde her in those thinges whereunto commodiously she enclineth.
CHAP. XI. Of such Bulets which haue remained in certain parts a long time after the Curation of the wounds. SOmetimes the Bullets of Lead haue remayned a long time within the members, as for the space of seuen or eight yeeres and more,An aduer∣tisment. there fol∣lowing neuerthelesse not any euill accident, nor hinderance of the consolidation of the wound: & they haue continued there so long, till they haue bene thrust forth by the expulsiue vertue, discen∣ding downe by meanes of their grauity and hea∣uinesse into the inferiour parts, in the which they will manifest themselues, and then ought to bee drawne forth by the operation of the Chirurge∣an. Now this continuation of them so long in the body, without any corruption or euill accident (in my opinion) doth proceede from no other thing but from the matter of the Lead, whereof the sayd Bullets were composed. For so it is, that Lead hath a certain familiarity and agreement with na∣ture, especially of the fleshy parts: euen as we see by ordinary experience, which teacheth vs, that Lead being outwardly applyed, hath the vertue to close and cicatrise old vlcers: but if the bullet were of stone, of Iron, or of any other mettal, it is a most assured thing, that they coud not abide long in the body, because that the Iron Bullet would rust, and thereby corrode the part where it lyeth; from whence would ensue many pernitious accidents.
But if the bullet be in the neruous or noble parts, although it were but of Lead, it could not conti∣nue there long, wihout bringing with it manie great inconueniences: therefore when it cometh to passe that it remaineth a log tie in the bo∣dy, it is in the fley parts, and in bodyes of good temperature and habitude, otherwise it cannot sty there, without inducing pain and many other accidents, as hath bne sayd. CHAP. XII. Of the great Contusions and dacerations made by the Bullts of great shot. MOreouer if the Bullet of a great peece of Or∣dinance do strike against any member▪ it (for the most part) doeth eiher carry it away, or else breake and batter it in such a fashion, through the great vehemecy theref, that it shiuereth and breaketh the bones, not onely of those which it toucheth, but also of those that are farther off, be∣cause that the bonebeing hard doth in some sort make a litle resistance, by which meanes the Bul∣let hath the greater force against it. That this is true, wee see ordinarily that he saide Ordinance hath much more action & effect against a strong wall, then against a rampire of earth, or a Wool∣sacke, and other soft things, as we haue said here before. Therefore, it is no meruaile if after such wounds made by Gun-shot, there follow dolor, inflammation, feauer, spasme, Apostume, Gan∣grena,
Mortification, and oftentimes death.Causes of petillous ac∣cidents in woundes mad by Gunshot. For those great contusions of the Neruous parts, the breakings or vehement concussions of the bones made by the saide Bullets, do cause greeuous ac∣cidents, and not the combuston and venenositie of the powder, as many doe thinke, not conside∣ring the matter of the sayd owder: the which (as I haue said) it is not venomous; for if the wounde bee made in a fley part, without touching the Neruous parts, it onely requirech such remedies for their curatin, a al other contused wondes do, without they degenerate (as I haue saide here before) into an euill quality, through the corrup∣tion of the aie; the which cause (not many yeeres since) the wounds that were then receiued to bee much altered and corrupted, with a great putrifaction in the fleshy and bony partes. From the which (as I saide before) were eleuated many vapors into the Braine, the Heart, and the Liuer: from whence proceeded many euill accidents, & death to the most part. CHAP. XIII. Of the meanes which ought to bee obserued to rectifie the ayre, to rborate the noble parts, and to fortifie the whole body. AND therefore the Chirurgian ought to haue a great care to administer all thinges which haue power to rectifie the aire, and to roborate and strengthen the noble parts: also to fortify the
whole body, which shall be done by the ensuing things; which are to be administred both inward∣ly and outwardly. For the Patient shall take in∣wardly in the morning, three houres before hee ate any thing, of the Tabul. Diarrhodon abatis, or de aroi. ros. de triasant. diamoschi, de Laetificans Ga∣lnt, and other of the like vertue. Outwardly shall be vsed Epithemes vppon the Region of the heart and Liuer, a little more then luke-warme, applied with a peece of Scarlet, or Sponge, Felt, or a fine linnen cloth. This following may serue for a form vnto euery Chirurgian. ℞. Aquae rosarum ℥ iiij. Aquae buglo. aceti bo∣ni, an. ℥ ij. Coriand. praeparat. ʒ iiij. Garyophyl∣lor, Corticum citri, an. ʒ j. santali rub. ʒ ss. corall, vtriusque ʒ j. camph. ℈ j. croci ℈ ss pul. diarrho. ab∣batis ʒ ij. theria. & mithridat. an. ℥ ss. pulu. florum camomillae, melilio ana ℥ j. misce & fiat Epithe∣ma. Moreouer, you ought to giue the patient odo∣rifferous and refrigerant things to smell to often, to roborate the animall faculty, as this which fol∣loweth. R Aqua rosaceae, aceti boni, ana ℥ iij. ga∣ryophyl. nucis mosca. cinamoni conquatassorum, therica Galeni ana ʒ j. And therein let a Hand∣kercher or sponge bee dipped, which the Patient shall aiwayes hold to his nose. He may vse also an aromaticke Apple or Pomander for the same in∣tention, as is this. ℞. Rosar. rubrar. violar. ana ʒ iij. baccarum myrrhi & Iuniperi, santali rubr. ana ʒ ij ss. benioin
ʒ i. camph. ℈ ij. fiat puluis. Postea ℞ Olei Ros. & nenuph. ana ℥ ss styracis calamitae, ʒ ij. aquae rosa∣rum quantum satis est, liquefiant simul cum cera alba quantum suffic. fiat Ceratum ad comprehen∣dendos supra dictos pulueres cum pistillo calido, & fiat pomum. Another. ℞ Radic. ireos florent. maioranae, calami ario∣matici, ladani, benoin, rad. cyp. garyoph. ana ℥ ij. mosci g. iiij. fiat puluis, et cum gummi tragach∣an. quantum sufficit, fiat pomum. Another. ℞ Ladani puri ℥ ij. benioin ℥ ss. styrac. calam ʒ vi. ireos Florentiae ℥ ss garyophil. ʒ iij maiora, ro∣sarum rubrarum calami aromat ana ʒ ss. pulueri∣sentur omnia, et bulliant cum aqua rosarum quan∣tum sufficit, et colentur, et colata liquefiant cum cer. alb. quantū sufficit, styracis liquidae, ℥ j. fiat ad modum Cerati, comprehendantur per pistillum, addendo moschi ʒ j. fiat pomum. In like manner you may apply of your Fron∣tals to roborate the animall faculty, to prouoke sleepe, and to mitigate and ease the paine of the head, as this following. ℞ aqua rosaceae ℥ ij. Olei rosar. et papaueris, ana ℥ j ss. aceti boni, trochisco∣rum de Camphora ʒ ss. fiat Frontale. The way to apply it is thus. Take a linnen cloth, and folde it vp fiue or six times double; that done, dip it in the a∣foresaid commixtion, and so apply it on the Tem∣ples a little warme, which being dry ought to bee renewed againe. Herein note, that in this case the head ought not to be bound hard, lest that therby
the free pulsation of the arteries of the temples be hindred, whereby the paine of the head might bee augmentrd. There are many other exteriour re∣medies whereby the aire might be corrected; as to make a good fire in the Chamber of the patient with the wood of Iuniper,Hyp. lib. de vnla. Cap. of Bayes, vine braches Rosemary, of Floure de Luce roots: also by things sprinkled in the chamber, as water and vinegar; if the patient be rich, Damaske water heerein is ve∣ry proper. Or this which followeth; ℞ Maiorauae, menthae, radicis cyperi, calami aromatici, saluiae, lauandule, foeniculi, thymi, stoe∣chados, florum camo. melil. satureiae, baccarum lauri et Iuniperi an. m. iij. pulu. garyoph. et Nucis moscatae an. ℥ j. aquae ros. et vitae lb ij. vini albi bo∣ni et odoriferi lb x. bulliant omnia in balneo Ma∣riae ad vsum dictum. Moreouer perfumes may be made to perfume the saide Chamber, as these fol∣lowing. ℞ Carbonis salicis ℥ viii-labdani puri ℥ ii. thuris masculi, lini et baccarum Iuniperi ana ℥ j. xylaloes, benioin, styracis calamitae an. ℥ss. Nucis moscatae, santali lutei ana ʒ iij. garyoph. styracis li∣quidae ana ʒ ij. zedoariae, calami aromatici ana ʒ i gummi tragach. aqua rosac. soluti, quod sit satis: fi∣ant auiculae Cyprinae, seu suffitis, qua forma libebit. As for the putrifaction and cor∣ruption of the bones, wee will speake thereof hereafter more amplie.
CHAP. XIIII. Memorable Histories. OFtentimes the aforesaide wounds are accom∣panied with many indispositions, as oedema∣teus tumors, fracture of the bones, and the like,Historie. as (for the yong Chirurgians sake) I will relate this historie for an example, of the hurt of the Earle of Mansfelt, Gouernour of the Dutchy of Luxem∣bourg, Knight of the order of the King of Spaine, who was hurt at the battell of Moncontour, with a Pistoll shot vpon the ioynt of his right arme or el∣bow, which fractured the bones; whereof there were many that were fractured in such small pee∣ces as if they had bene broken with a Mallet, be∣cause he receiued the blow so neere at hand, and through the violence and force of the blow, there hapned vnto him many accidents; as extreme do∣lors, inflammation, feauer, an oedemateous Tu∣mor; a flateous or windy tumor all the arm ouer, yea euen to the ends of the fingers, together with a preparation vnto a Gangrena. Which to pre∣uent, and also the totall mortification therof, M. Nicholas Lambert, and M. Richard Hubert, Chi∣rurgeons in ordinary to the King, had made ma∣ny and deepe scarifications. Now by the Com∣mandement of the King, I was sent for to come vnto the aforesaide patient to dresse him: where being arriued, seeing the aforesaide accidents to be accompanied with a most faetide putrifaction, we were resolued to apply on the saide scarifyed
parts, of Aegyptiacum fortified and dissolued in vineger and Aqua-vitae and such remedieswhich are proper for the cure of Gangrenaes. Ouer and besides these accidents, the saide Lord had a flux of the belly, by the which he expelled of the fanie quitture which came from the Vlcers of his arme. This many will not beleeue, forasmuch (as they say) that if it should descend by the belly, it follo∣weth of necessitie that the saide matter should be mixed with the blood. Also that in passing neere vnto the heart, and through the Liuer, it woulde cause many accidents, yea death it selfe. Neuer∣thelesse I doubt not but that I haue sufficiently answered all these Obiections, how and in what manner it is done in my booke Of the suppression of the vrine; wherefore, if any desire to know the reason thereof, he may haue recourse to the saide Booke. In like manner, the said Lord fel ofentimes in∣to a Syncope, by reason of the putrified vapours which ascended vp from the vlcers, which vapors by the Nerues, Veines, and Arteries, were com∣municated to the stomack,Aqua-vitae with a little Treale re∣call  pre∣senthe the spirites, and comforteth the vital fa¦culty. and other noble parts. For which cause I gaue him sometimes a spoone∣full of Aqua vitae to drinke, wherein I dissolued a little Treacle. Mounsieur Bellanger, Physitian in ordinary to the King, and Mounsieur le Bon Phy∣sitian to my Lord the Cardinall of Guize, men of vnderstanding, and expert in Physicke and Chi∣rurgerie, imployed all their skill (as much as was possible) to resist his Feauer, and other accidents
which hapned to him. As for the Oedemateous and flatulent tumor which wholy occupied al the arme, I applied thereon staples wet in Oxycrat, with salt, and a little Aqua-vitae, and other reme∣dies, which shortly shall bee shewed. Then with double clothes I ewed them vp as strong & han∣somly as I could possible, that is to say, as much as the said Lord could indure it. This compressi∣on serueth both to containe the fractured Bones in their places, and also to expell the sanies from the vlcers, and to repel the humors towardes the center of the bodie. And when the binding and rolling of his arme was omitted, the tumour did increase in such manner, that I verie much feared the natural heate of his arme would be suffocated and extinguished. Now for to make anie other manner of Ligature it was altogether impossible, because of the extreame paine that hee felt, if his arme had bene remoued neuer so little. There hapned vnto him also many Apostumes about the ioynt of his elbow, and in other partes of his arme: wherefore to giue issue to the Sanies, I made him manie incisions; all which the saide Lorde indured willingly, telling me that if two would not serue, make three, yea foure; such was the desire that he had to be out of his paine, and to be cured. Then (smiling to my selfe) I told him that he deserued to be hurt, and not these tender and delicate persons, who wil rather suffer them∣selues to rot, yea to indure the paines of death, then to indure anie necessary incision to be made
for the restoring of their healths. Now, to shorten his cure, he vsed of a Vulna∣rie potion, and somtimes there was incerted with a Syringe into his vlcers of Aegyptiacum dissol∣ued in wine, or else in the saide Potion, or rather Mel Rosarum insteed of the Egyptiacum to mun∣difie them, and to correct their putrifaction; and other remedies which would be too tedious here to recite: and among others, of the powder of A∣lome combusted, to dry vp and consume the high and spongeous flesh. Also for the mundification of the said vlcers, I vsed a long time nothing but dry Lint, which was as much in quantity euerie dressing, as a Mans fist. And on a day, seeing that he was without paine, and that the flesh began to regenerate, I told him that now he began to bee wel: then he saide to me laughing, I know it ve∣ry wel, for now I see you doe not vse the fourth part of the Lint you did before. In the time of his curation, I protest that I tooke from him more then threescore peeces of bones. Of the which, some were as great as my finger broken in a verie strange figure, yet notwithstanding the said Lord (thankes be to God) was perfectly cured: onely it remaineth that he cannot, nor neuer will, bow or stretch forth his arme. Historie.Mounsier de Bassompierre, Collonel of two hundred horse, the day of the aforesaide battaile, was hurt with such another shot, and had a great part of the aforesaid accidents: whom also I drest vntill his perfect curation, which (thankes bee to
God) he attained. True it is, that hee continueth impotent as the other Lord is. After that I had cured the aforesaid Lords, the Earle of Mansfelt, and Bassompierre,Another hi∣story. I was com∣manded by the King to imploy all my diligence in the curation of Charles Phillippes de Croy, Lord of Hauret, Brother to my Lord the Duke of Ascot, nere to Mons in Haynault, who had alreadie kept his bed seauen months and more, by reason of a wound that he receiued by a Musket-shot, three fingers aboue the knee, whom I found with these accidents following; namely, extreame paynes, a continuall Feauer, cold sweatings, losse of sleep, that part situate vpon Os Cauda,Meruellous accidents. vlcerate in com∣passe as much as the palme of my hand (because he had lyen so long time on his backe) hee tooke not any rest day nor night, with losse of appetite of meate, but dranke inough. Hee was somtimes surprized in his bed with the fits of the Epilepsie, & had oftentimes a desire to vomit, with a conti∣nuall shaking, insomuch that he could not bring his hand to his mouth without the helpe of ano∣ther; he fel oftentimes into a Syncope or fainting of the heart, because of the putrified vapors that were communicated to the stomacke and the no∣ble parts, by the Veines, Arteries, and Nerues: the which we eleuated from his vlcers, and from the corruption of the bones. For the Thigh-bone was fractured and shiuered both long wise and o∣uerthwart, with diuers splinters; whereofsome were already separated, others not. Hee also had
an hollow vlcer neere vnto the groine, which en∣ded about the middle of the thigh. Moreouer hee had other sinuous and caniculous Vlcers about the Knee. All the Muscles both of the thigh and legge were extremely tumified and imbued with a flegmaticke, cold, moyst, and flatulent humor, in such sort, that the natural heate was verie neere suffocated and extinguished. Seeing al these accidents, and the strength and vertue of the pati∣ent greatly decayed and abated, I was stroke with an exceeding sorrow, because that I was sent vn∣to him, and seeing little hope of recouery, for I feared greatly that he would die vnder my hands. Neuerthelesse,God & Na∣ture effect meruailous things. considering his youth, I had some small hope, for God and Nature bringeth some∣times such things to passe, which seemeth vnpos∣sible to the Chirurgian. I then demanded of the saide Lord, if hee had a good courage: and told him likewise, that if hee would indure the making of certaine incisions, the which for his curation were very necessary, by that meanes his paines and his other accidents would cease. He answered, that he would willing∣ly indure whatsoeuer I thought conuenient, yea, to the amputation of his legge, if I thought it ne∣cessary. Then I was verie ioyful, and presently af∣ter I made two Orifices to giue issue to the Mat∣ter that lay about the bone, and in the substance of the Muscles, wherby there yssued forth a great quantity. Afterwards, iniection was made with wine, and a little Aqua-vitae, wherein there was
dissolued a good quantity of Egyptiacum, to cor∣rect the putrifaction, and to dissicate the loose & spongeous flesh, and to resolue and consume the ordemateous and flatulent tumor, and to ease his paines, to refocillate and fortifie the natural heat which was greatly prepared to be altogether suf∣focated, because the parts could not concoct nor assimilate the nourishment necessary for them, by reason of the great quantity of matter therein contained. His Chirurgan, named M. Anthony Maucler, an honest man, of great experience in Chirurgery, dwelling at Mons in Haynault, and my selfe, we concluded to make him fomentations, with the decoctions of Sage, Rosemarie, Time, Lauander, Camomile flowers, Melilot, and red Roses boyled in white wine: and so a lexiue made with the ashes of oake, a little portion of vinegar, and an handfull of salt. This decoction so made, hath vertue and power to subtilize, attenuate, in∣cise, resolue and to dissicate the colde, grosse, and legmaticke humor, and to roborate the woun∣ded parts. The said fomentations were vsed a long time together, to the end that the resolution may thereby be made the greater. For being applyed long together, it resolued more, by liquifying of the humour which was in the profound partes: whereas otherwise it would haue but rarifyed the skin, or the fleshy parts of the Muscles. And for this intention we made him many fri∣cations with hot Kerchiefes in all manners,Galen in the 6 of the Method. that is, from the higher parts downewards, and from
the left side to the right: also circular wise, and this a long space together. For the breefe Frications, I meane those that are made in short time, maketh attraction, but resolueth nothing at all. In like manner euery other day, there was applied all a∣bout his Thigh and legges, euen to the sole of his foot, of Brickes heated and sprinkled with vineger and white wine, with a little portion of aqua vitae; and through this euaporation, you shoulde per∣ceiue many Aquosities to proceed foorth of the pores of the skin by sweating, whereby the tumor diminished, and the naturall heate was reuoked. Also there was applyed compresses or Boulsters on the tumified parts, dipped and infused in a le∣vine made of the ashes of oake; with the which, was boyled Sage, Rosemary, Lauander, Salte, A∣qua vitae and Cloues; and Ligature was made with such dexterity as the patient could well en∣dure it: and to so good purpose, that if it had bin but one day omitted, wee might easily perceiue the tumor. Also there was applyed good big Bol∣sters on the bottome of the sinus of the vlcers, to depresse and expell away the Sanies. And some∣times for the better accomplishing thereof, the orifices of the vlcers were kept oen with hollow Tents. Somtimes also to resolue the tumor, there was applyed a Cataplasine thereon made thus: ℞. Far. hord. fabar. orobi an. ℥ vj. Mellis com. Terebinth. an. ℥ ij. pul. flor. Camomel. Mellioliti, rosar. rubrar. an. ℥ss. pul. radic. ireos, florent. Cype∣ri Mast. an. ʒ ij. oxymellis simplic, quantum suffi∣ciat
fiat cataplas. ad formam pultis satis liquidiae. In like manner,The Empla∣ster of Vigo is resolutiue. wee made vse of the Emplaisters of Vigo sine mercurio, which helped greatly to ease his paines, and to resolue the saide Tumor. Ne∣uerthelesse it was not applyed vntil the parts were first heated, by the meanes of fomentations, Fri∣cations, and euaporations, or otherwise that Em∣plaster could neuer haue wrought that effect tho∣rough the cold distemperature of the parts. Now for the Mundification of the vlcers there was ap∣plyed remedies proper thereunto, chaunging and alteting them according as wee found occasion. Also the Catagmaticke powders to separate the bones, and to correct their putrifaction were not spared him: hee vsed also for the space of fifteene dayes of vulnary potion. I may not here omit to speake of the Frications which hee suffered euery Morning vniuersally o∣uer the whole body, which was greatly extenua∣ted and weakned both by reason of his dolors, & other accidents (as we haue saide) and also for the want of exercise.The benefit of vniuersal Frications. The said Frications did reuoke and attract the spirits and the blood, and resolued such fuligenous humors which were detained be∣tweene the skin and the flesh. And therefore the parts were afterwardes better nourished and re∣freshed; so that so soone as his paines beganne to passe away, as also the Feauer, he began to sleepe well, and to haue a good appetite, and therefore we caused him to vse good Meates, and to drinke good wine and good ber; & we brake our fasts
together, hee and my selfe euery Morning, with good nourishing Brthes: and by this meanes he became fat and lasly, and perfectly cured. Onely it remaineth that he cannot wel bend his knee. Now the reasons that mooued mee to recite these Histories, is onely to instruct the yong Chi∣rurgian to the practise thereof, and not that anie glory of praise might be attributed to me: but to restore them to God, knowing that all goodnesse proceedeth from him as from an euerlasting foun¦taine, and nothing of our selues. And therfore we ought to giue thankes vnto him for all our good workes; humbly beseeching him to continue and augment them more and more in vs, through his infinite goodnesse. CHAP. XV. An Apologie touching wounds made by Gun-shot. THere hapned into my hands not many dayes past,A iust occa∣sio of the Author for his Apology a certaine Book written by a Physitian; wherin he very openly contradicteth that which I haue written heretofore, as concerning wounds made by Gunshot and their curations. I protest that if there were no other cause, or that there were no other interest heerein then the contem∣ning of me and my Book, I would let these things alone, and passe them away vnder silence; know∣ing well, that all answers and replies whereby we striue to stop the Mouths of euill speakers, do of∣tentimes
rather giue them a further occasion of speaking then otherwise; and that there is no bet∣ter way to stay such Controuersies, then by not answering one word. Euen as we see that the fire is extinguished when the combustible matter ceaseth, by taking away the wood. But when I did consider the euident danger that many wold fall into, if they came to follow those rules and instru∣ctions that the saide Physitian setteth downe for the cure of the saide wounds, I therefore thought it my duty to preuent this euill, and to hinder it as much as lieth in mee, in regard of my professi∣on. The which beyond that common affection which all men owe to the publike weale, doeth binde me particularly to this, in such manner, that I could not with a good conscience become deaf and dumbe, when both my particular and gene∣rall duties, do binde and constraineime to speake. This therefore was the true cause that did solicite me to make this Apologie, rather then any passi∣onate or boyling desire in me, to haue my reuēge of him who hath truly assaulted me. Now in this booke, he pretendeth to despise & contemne the application of suppuratiue Medi∣cines, as Bassilicon, and others of that nature.Basilicon li∣quefied into an oyle, is proper in al woundsthat equire sup∣puration. Al∣so of those that are sharpe, as Egyptiacum, and such like. For (saith he) such remedies haue beene the cause of the deathes of an infinite number of men, whereunto they haue beene applyed; yea, although that their wounds were but superficiall, and in fleshy parts. And that heerein the counsell
of Hippocrates ought not to be followed,Hyp. in his ke of vl∣es. who sai∣eth, that all contused wounds ought to be broght to suppuration, because (sayth he) this is a new di∣sease, and vnknowne to the Ancients, and there∣fore it requireth new remedies. Also that thunder and the violent effect thereof, ought not to bee compared to the reports of Artillery. Now seeing that he striueth to contradict all that I haue written before in my book of wounds made by Gunne-shot, Arrowes▪ and Dartes, I am constrained for my defence, to repeate somewhat of that which I haue heeretofore divulged, to re∣proue all these points (as I hope) one after ano∣ther. First of all, that suppuratiue Medicines are not proper in such wounds, it is against reason, autho∣rity, and experience: for euery one knoweth that the Bullet being round and massiue, cannot make any entrance into our bodies, without great con∣tusion and bruising; the which cannot bee cured without suppuration, according to the authority not onely of Hippocrates, but also of Galen, and all other Authors both Ancient and Moderne. And what doth it serue him to call such new woundes, to derogate from the saying of Hippocrates whom we hold to be the Father, Author, and Founder of the Lawes of sacred Medicine, which are wor∣thy of all esteeme and praise aboue all others, be∣cause they are not subiect to change, as all others that are established by Kings and Princes, ney∣ther are they tied to the prescription of times, nor
the customes of Regions. Therfore if I haue here∣in followed the Hippocratick Doctrine, which is alwayes found true and stble, I perswade my self to haue done well. And therein I haue not bene in that conceit alone; for Mounsieur Botall, Phy∣sitian in ordinary to the King, and Mounsieur Iou∣bert Physitian to the King also, and his Lecturer in ordinary in the vniuersity of Mont-pellier, men well experimented both in Physicke and Chirur∣gery, haue lately written of this matter. Com∣mending, and commanding the application of Bassiicn & other suppuratiues in the beginning of such wounds. These men, because they haue followed the warres, haue seene more wounded by shot, then our Physitian hath done all his life time. As for experience, there is an infinite number of other good Chirurgians, and greatly experimented, who haue and do vse of these remedies in the be∣ginning, to bring those wounds to suppuration, if there be no Indication that doth contradict it. I know moreouer that an Empericall Chirurgean, a neighbour of his called Doublet,Doubles an Empirick. hath many and sundry times done meruailous cures, by applying onely in those woundes a suppuratiue Medicine, composed of melted Bacon, the yolke of an Egge, terebinthinae, with a little Saffron, and this he held for a great secret. There was also another at Thurin in the yeere 1538. (I being then in the seruice of the late Mar∣shall of Monte-ian, Lieutenant Generall of the
King at Piedmont) who had the report aboue all the Chirurgeans in those partes, for his excellent curng of those woundes with Oleu Catellorum; the description whereof, I procured of him tho∣rough my earnest intreaty. This oyle is of power to lenisie and appease the paine, and to suppurate those woundes beeing applied a little more then luke-warme, and not boyling hote, as manie will. This an infinite number of Chirurgeans haue v∣sed, after that I had described it in my Booke of wounds made by Gun-shot with good and hap∣py successe. As for that which he writeth against the Vnguent Egyptiacum, certainely I beleeue that he abideth in that opinion and heresie alone,Answer t th  of I∣gyptiaum. because there hath not bin yet discouered a more singular remedie to correct and preuent the pu∣trifaction which happeneth most commonly in those wounds, the which doe degenerate often∣times into virulent, corrosiue, ambulatiue, and malignant Vlcers, casting forth a stinking Sanies, whereby the part salleth into a Gangrena, vnlesse it be preuented by Egyptiacum, and other sharpe medicines. And for this cause they haue bene ve∣ry much approued by the saide Botal and Ioubert, and of all good Chirurgeans; yet neuertheles our Physitian maintaineth that they are venomous, because (saith he) that being applyed in woundes by Gunne shot, they haue beene the cause of the death of many persons; which is a thing so absurd and against reason, that I will leaue the resolution thereof to the Towne-Barbers, who I am sure are
of skill sufficient to confute the grossenes of that imputation; or if their want of iudgement be such that they cannot, yet the consideration of euerie one of the ingredients of the sayde Aegyptiacum would suffice to shew, that it is so free from anie venomous quality, that it doth resist, & is directly contrary to all sorts of poisons and putrifactions which may happen in the fleshy partes, by reason of any wound or vlcer. He saith moreouer, that the disposition of the aire cānot be the cause to infect or restore wounds more daungerous at one time then at another. Herein also he is of this opinion alone. But if hee had well read and vnderstood Hippocrates, he had not so lightly contemned the constitution of the seasons, and the infection proceeding from the aire not simple and Elementary (for being simple, it neuer acquireth any putrifaction) but by additi∣on and commixtionwith other corrupted vapors, as I haue written in my treatise of the Pestilence: For inasmuch as the aire that doth incompasse & inclose vs, is perpetually necessary vnto our liues; it followeth therefore, that according to the indis∣position thereof, our bodies also altered in manie and sundry manners, because we do draw it con∣tinually by meanes of the Lungs and other partes, seruing vnto respiration; and also by the pores & euery little inuisible hole throughout the bodye, and by the Arteries dispersed in the skinne. And this is done both for the generation of the spirite of life, and also to refresh and foment our naturall
heate. For this cause, if it be immoderately hotte, cold, moist, or dry, or otherwise distempered, it altereth and changeth the temperature of our bo∣dies vnto its owne quality. This is cleerely seene: for when it is infected by the putrified and Cada∣ueruous vapors produced from a great multitude of dead bodies that haue not bene buried soone e∣nough; as of men, of hoses, and other beasts. As it happeneth after any battell, or when many men haue perished by shipwracke, and haue bene cast ashore through the violence of the waues. As for example, the memory is yet fesh, of the corrup∣tion of the aire which proceeded from deade bo∣dies at the castle of Pene, situate vpon the riuer of Lot, in which place, in the yeare 1562. in the mo∣neth of September, whiles the first troubles hap∣ned about Religion, there was a great number of dead bodies fell into a pit of an hundred fathome deepe, or thereabouts: from whence, two mo∣neths after, there was eleuated such a stinking and venomous vapor, which dispersed it selfe ouer all the countries of Agenois, and the neighbouring places within the compasse of thirty miles round, that thereby many were infected with the pesti∣lence, whereof we need not wonder; for the wind blowing▪ and driuing the exhalations and corrup∣ted vapors from one countrey to another, doeth infect them with the saide pestilence. In like manner, the euill constitution of the aire, whether the cause be manifest or hidden, may make wounds to become putrified, alter the spirits
and the humors, and cause death. This therefore ought not to be attributed vnto the woundes, be∣cause that they which are hurt, and those that are not, are both equally infected, and fall into the same inconueniences. Mounsir d' Alechamps in his French Chirur∣gery speang o these thinges which hinder the cton of Vlcers, hath not omitted, that when either the peslence, or any Epidemicall Disease reigneth in any Prouice through the corruption of the Aire, it math Vlcers become incureable, or of most fficult curation. The good old man Guido, in his Treatise of Vl∣cers hath also writ, hat the wounds of the heade were more hrer to cure at Paris then at Auignō, and that the Vlcers of the legges were more diffi∣cult at Auignon then at Paris, forsomuch as at Pa∣ris the aire is cold and moist, which is a contrarie thing, especially to wounds in the head. Likewise in Auignon, the heare of the aire doe liquefie and subtilize the humors: and therefore, more easilie and in greater abundance do the humors fall into the Legges, whereby the curation of the Vlcers in those partes, is more difficult at Auignon then at Paris. But if any one alledging experience shall say the contrary, that the wounds in the head are for the most part mortall in hot countreyes: To him I answere, that that proceedeth not from the aire, as it is more hot and dry, but rather because of some superfluous humidity and euil vapor com∣municated with the aire, as in the places about
Prouence, and of Italy neere vnto the Mediterrene∣an sea. Now, there is not a Chirurgean of so little vnderstanding, that knoweth not but if the aire be hot and moyst, the wounds doe easily degenerate into a Gangrena and putrifaction. As for experi∣ence, I wil giue him a familiar example. Wee see that in hot and moyst weather, and when the Sou∣therly winds blow, that flesh doth putrifie in lesse then two houres, though it were neuer so lately killed, in such fort that Butchers in those times do kill no meate but euen as they sell it. Also there is no doubt to be made but that humane bodies doe fall into affections against Nature, when the qua∣lities of the seasons are peruerted through the euil disposition of the aire: as hath bene seene, that in some yeres, wounded persons haue bin most hard to cure, and oftentimes dyed of very smal wounds, what diligence soeuer the Physitians and Chirur∣gians could vse. The which I noted well at the siedge which was planted before Roan: for the cor∣ruption of the aire did alter and corrupt the blood and humors in such sort, by the meanes of inspi∣ration and transpiration, that the wounds became so putrid and faetide, that they sent forth a Cada∣uerueous smell: and if it hapned that one day had bene omitted wherein they had not beene drest, you shall finde the next day a great companie of wormes in them, with a meruellous stench; from whence were eleuated many putrified vapours, which by their communication with the hart cau∣sed a continual Fuer, with the Liuer hinderance
of the generation of good bloode, and with the Braine they produce alienation of the spirits, fain∣ting, convulsion, vomitings, and by consequence death: and when their bodies were opened, you should finde Apostumes in many partes of theyr bodies full of a greene stinking Sanies, in such sort that those that were within the Town seeing these things, that their wounded persons coulde not be cured, saide that those without had poiso∣ned their bullets: and they without saide the like of those within: and then perceyuing that those wounds did rather turne to putrifaction then vn∣to any good suppuration, I was constrayned, and with mee the most part of all the Chirurgeas to leaue suppuratiues, and insted of them to vse the Vnguent Aegyptiacum, and other such like reme∣dies, to preuent the said putrifaction & Gangre∣na, and other of the aforesaide accidents. Moreouer, if the diuers courses of the heauens haue power and force to imprint a pestilence in vs thorough the influence thereof, why is it not possible that the like may be done in a wound, to infect it after many wayes? Experience it self gi∣ueth vs a good and sufficient testimony, not one∣ly in hot weather, but also in winter. For we see that euery patient whether he be wounded, or o∣therwise disposed against Nature, are tormented more of their greefes when the weather is subiect to raine, then when it is faire weather. And the reason is, because the vapour and moyst aire, and southerne winds, do inwardly mooue and agitate
the humors which afterwards do discharge them∣selues vpon the afflicted parts, & thereby increase their paines. Our Physitian hath also written, that in the bat∣tels of Dreux and of S. Denis, which were fought in the winter time, there dyed a great number of men, that I confesse too; but I deny that it was by the application of suppuratiue medicines, or of Corrosiues, but thorough the vehemencie of their wounds, and the disorder that the Bullets made in their members, whereunto the nature of the wounded parts helped greatly, and the tempe∣rature of the patient, but aboue all the cold. For the cold causeth wounds to bee of most difficult curation; yea, sometimes it causeth a Gangrena and totall mortification, as witnesseth Hippocra∣tes. And if he had beene with me at the siedge of Metz, he should haue seen many soldiers hauing their legges eschiomened by reason of the colde, and an infinit company of others that died of the colde, although they were not wounded at all. If he will not beleeue this, I will but send him to the top of the Mount Senis in the winter time, where many haue lost their liues, and were benummed and frozen in a moment; witnesse the chappell of Transis, which from thence had that Name gi∣uen it. He hath in like maner calumnied me, because I compared thunder with Artillery. Truly it may be saide that they haue like effectes: for this Dia∣bolical1 Similitude gun-powder doth such merueilous things
that it is easie to proue a great similitude the one with the other. And first of all, we may compare the fire that we behold to issue forth of the Can∣non to the lightning in this, because it is seen be∣fore the Thunder is heard, so is it with the other: and this happeneth, because the eare is not so quicke as the eye to receiue their obiects. Wee may also compare the dreadfulnes of the reports of great Ordinance to that of Thunder.2 similitude For when there is made any notable battery with great Or∣dinance, their reports are heard sometimes twen∣ty leagues off, more or lesse, according as the windes carrieth the eccho of their noise. The first reports are not heard so plaine, as those that fol∣low; and the cause is, for that the multiplication of the reports following and succeeding one ano∣ther, that which is nerest doth driue or thrust for∣ward that which is next him, and that in like man∣ner thrusteth forwards the other, and that other the other, vntill it commeth to our eares. In like manner the Bullets are carried by the force of the powder, with such an inestimable swiftnesse, that they breake and batter all that they meete with;3 similitude yea, they haue more force against hard and vnre∣sistable things then against soft things: therein al∣so they do resemble Thunder, which shiuereth the sword in the scabberd, and yet the scabberd remaining whole, melting Siluer in a purse, the purse vnburnt. In like manner (as I haue said here before) hath bene seene many whom the Bullet hath neuer touched, yet neuerthelesse thorough
the impetuosity of the aire caused by the violence of the powder issuing out of the mouth of the ca∣non; hath broke and shiuered the bones, without any manifest apparance of solution of continuitie in the flesh; yea, to haue battered and killed them out right, as if it had beene with a thunder-clap. Gunpowder also hath a stinking smell,4 imiitude senting of Brimstone; imitating therin that odour that con∣tinueth in that place where a Thunder-bolt hath lately falne; which smell, is not onely abhorred of men, but also all Animalles are therefore con∣strained to abandon and forsake their dennes and caues when it hath fallen nere thereunto: so great is that sulphurous stinke that it leaueth bhind it. But yet their similitudes is more manifested by the effects of the saide powder;5 similitude the which beeing enclosed in a Mine, and conuerted into winde or aire by meanes of the fire that is put thereunto, it ouer-whelmeth peeces of earth as great as moun∣taines▪ breaketh and demollisheth strong towers, reuerseth mountaines vpside downe. This I haue already manifested by that history which I haue elsewhere written, which was that at Paris; there was seene not long since a sodaine disaster by rea∣son of the powder in the Arcenall, which taking fire, it caused such a great tempest, that it made the whole Towne to shake, ouer whelming those houses that were neere thereunto,Horible ef∣fects of gun-powder. vncouering & vnglasing those that were further from the furie thereof. To be breefe, euen as the thunder doth massa∣cre
and reuerse men halfe dead here and there; ta∣king from some their sight, from others their hea¦ring, and leaueth others so torne in their mem∣bers, as if foure horses had drawne them to pee∣ces: and all this through the agitation of the aire into whose substance the saide powder was con∣uerted. The like acte happened in the Towne of Malignes, in the yeere 1546. by the fall of a thun∣derbolt, within a great and strong Tower, where∣in there was a great quantity of Gunpouder, the which did ouerthrow and reuerse almost the one halfe of the Towne, and killed a great number of persons, whereof I sawe a while since many re∣markable tokens. These examples in my opinion are sufficient to content our Physitian, and to shew him that there is a great similitude betweene the effects of Gun-powder and Thunder. Neuerthelesse, I will not for all that confesse that Gunshot is accom∣panied with poyson and fire as the claps of Thun∣der: for although they do agree the one with the other, as doth appeare by the former similitudes, it is not in the substance and matter, but in theyr manner of breaking, battering, and dissipating of the obiects which they meete, that is to say, the thunder-claps by the meanes of the fire, and the stone engendred therein, and Gunne-shot by the ayre impetuously agitated, which guiding the bullet, causeth the like tempestuous disaster, that the thunder doth. These things considered, may wee not therefore confesse, that those who haue
written that the Cannon shot and Thunder to haue a great similitude together, haue had reason so to do? Finally, this Physitian hath not taken much paines to prooue that Gun-pouder was not venomous, and that the bullets are without anie burning at all. Neither in like manner to inuent and name the Instruments proper for the extra∣ction of all strange bodies, because he hath found them already digested in my booke, with manie other things which he hath written, as euerie one may know by comparing his book with mine. He hath also inriched his Book with many sentences and reasons which he hath collected from an Ita∣lian Author, named Bartholomaeus Magius, Phy∣sitian of Bolognia, who hath written sufficiently thereof in a Treatise called De Vulnerum sclopeto∣rum curatione, although he doth not acknowledg him for his guide. But hauing traduced him al∣most word for word, hath made it neuerthelesse his owne, and of a Translator, would bee called Author. Now let vs come to his goodly practise and new method to cure wounds made by Gun-shot.A new kind of suppura∣tiue. First of all, hee would haue applyed suppuratiue Medicines, the which neuerthelesse he doeth not vnderstand to be hot and moist, nor of an empla∣sticke substance; but to the contrary, he ordaineth them to be hot and dry, because (saith hee) that this is not of the nature of an Apostume, where∣in there is required no other cure but only to sup∣purate them. But heere where the woundes are
with contusion, many and diuers Indications a∣rise from thence; for so much as the contusion would be concocted and digested, and the wound desiccated. To answer to this, I would send him to learne the nature and quality of suppuratiues in Galen in the 5. of Simples, and to take all in his way, vntill hee come to the tenth of his Method, which will teach him, that in complicated disea∣ses he ought to consider the cause, the order, and the vigent. Moreouer, I would willingly aske of him if hee can heale that wound made by gunshot, vnlesse th Contusion be first suppurate? I think not: and herein I refer my selfe to the iudgment of al good practitioners; and therefore our Basiicon and Ole∣um Catellorum, and other such suppuratiue medi∣cines, are proper to suppurate such woundes as are made by Gun-shot. Secondly, he would haue Oxycratum put into the wound to stanch the fluxe of blood: and if by that means it cannot be stop∣ped, to apply thereon a medicine made of the white of an Egge, Bole Armoniacke, Rose-vine∣gar and Salt. I leaue you to consider whither such like remedies haue power to stay the flux of bloud or no, they being put with in the wound. Truely they will rather make it flow more, because that the vinegar is of a gnawing and subtle qualitie, causing paine, defluxion, inflammation, & other euill accidents, as I haue knowne by experience: and I know no Chirurgean that hath beene exer∣cised in his Art, will follow such a kinde of pra∣ctise,
least he finde himselfe deceiued in the end. To this purpose I do remember that I had a Moor in cure, who belonged to Mounsieur the Earle of Roissy, who was hurt before Bologne by an English man, who gaue him a wound with a Lance tho∣row the backe: whereuppon, to stay the Fluxe of blood, I put into the wound a restrictiue, wherein there was Vinegar insted of another, but present∣ly after he came to me againe, telling me that he thought he had had fire in his arme, which caused me to dresse him anew, and to change the medi∣cine of his wound, and to apply the saide restric∣tiue vppon it. I beleeue that this Physitian knew not so much, otherwise I esteeme him so honest a man that I thinke he would not haue put it in his Booke for a good restrictiue. Moreouer, hee commendeth aboue all other things his Balme made of the oile of wax & myrth beaten together with the yolke of an Egge, or ra∣ther the naturall Balsome which is brought from Peru, and saith, that they do consume the super∣fluous humidity of those wounds, whereby they preuent the happening of any perillous accident. Neuerthelesse, he saith, that they do vnite & con∣solidate those kinde of wounds, as they do which are incised. Truly it seemeth very strange to mee, to see that any would go about to dresse and cure contused wounds, as simple woundes which de∣mand nothing but vnion. Ouer and besides, these Balmes cānot be proper in wounds made by gun∣shot, because that by reason of their siccitie they
doe hinder suppuration, without the vvhich they cannot be cured. And if they be needfull at all, it is onely after that the contusion is suppurated, & the wound mundified: and then I know not wher we should finde so many extractors of quintessen∣ces to extract and prepare so many Balmes as shal be needfull to dresse those souldiers which shalbe hurt in the assault of a Town,A pleasant answer, and to the pur∣pose. or a skirmish in bat∣tell? Neither vvhere they shall get mony suffici∣ent to counteruaile the charge thereof. Let vs come to the rest. He ordaineth that these Balmes should be instilled into the vvounds with∣out Tents, yet afterwards remembring himselfe, he saith, that it would be very good to put within them a little short one, onely to keepe the Orifice of the wound open. How is it possible that these Balmes and Vnguents should bee conueyed into the bottome of the wound without Tents or Se∣tons, whose vse is principally to carry medicines vnto the bottome of wounds, and to keepe them open to giue issue vnto all strange bodies? All good practisers will neuer agree with him in this point, nor those which know what it is to handle such wounds. Now there is yet another thing worthy to bee well noted, and that is this: After that he had re∣proued the Vnguent of Egyptiacum, hee neuer∣thelesse forgetting himselfe, commandeth it to be applyed from the beginning vntill the wound bee altogether suppurated, and to be thus vsed. Take (saith he) of Egyptiacum dissolued in a decocti∣on
on made of the tops of VVormwood, and of Hy∣pericon, and of the lesser Centaury and Plantan, and this to be iniected into the wound. H descri∣beth after that another, made of Plantane water, and hony of Roses boiled togither vnto the thick∣nesse of hony, and then scumming of it wel, there∣wihall mixe Egyptiacum in equall parts: & (saith he) this vnguent doth suppurate those VVoundes which are made by Gun-shot, I leaue the experi∣mented Chirurgicall Readers to iudge whether such remedies be suppuratiue or not. As for me I do esteeme them to bee proper to mundifie and clense, and not to suppurate. He finally writeth, that the wound ought not to be dressed but once in foure dayes, and where there shall bee fracture of the bones once in eight dayes. He saith more∣ouer in another place, that it is conuenient to in∣still euery day ten or twelue drops of balme into the wound. Truely this doctrine serueth rather to confound the yong Chirurgean, as not knowing what manner of practise hee should followe:Euill pacti∣sers do open both the heaue and the eath. for whosoeuer should follow his, I am well assured he will open often both the heauens and the earth; the heauens to receiue their soules, and the earth their bodies. But wee haue spoken enough of this matter for this time, inasmuch as I am well assured, that these small cauilations shall nothing at all diminish the reputation of my Booke, which is by strangers so much esteemed, that they haue translated it into their owne mother tongues, therby to haue com∣munication
therewith. Therefore now we wil bid our Physitian farewell, but first would pray him to re∣view and correct his Booke as soone as he could, to the end that the yong Chirurgean bee no lon∣ger retained in those errours which they may ap∣prehend by reading therein: for the shortest fol∣lioes are the best. CHAP. XVI. Another Discourse about the question of the veneno∣sity of wounds made by Gunshot. NOt many moneths since, I chanced to bee in the company of many learned Physitians and expert Chirurgeans, who by way of discourse be∣gan to put the venenosity of woundes made by Gun-shot; they principally striuing by fiue Rea∣sons to proue that venenosity may bee conioined with those woundes, not because of the powder, which they confesse with mee to be free from ve∣nome or poison both in the composition and es∣sence thereof, but by reason of the bullet, within the which poyson may be infused, mixed, and in∣corporated. The first reason is,1 Reason. because that Leade is verie rare and spongeous, as the facility of the dissol∣uing and softnesse thereof do shew, and therfore by consequence very easie to receiue the imbibi∣tion or infusion of any venomous liquor. I answer that that consequence seemeth to me to bee but of small assurance: for in all artificiall mixtions,Answer. as
is that whereof we speake, there are two things to be considered; the matter of the bodies which en∣ter into the commixtion; and the forme accor∣ding to the matter. Such bodies ought eyther to be liquid, or soft, or brittle, and easie to bee diui∣ded into small portions; to the end, that altogither and on euery part, they may meete, ioye, and v∣nite. According to the forme they ought to be al∣liable and computible th'one with the other. This is euidently knowne by the water, which though it be easie to mix with an infinit number of other things, yet neuerthelesse they cannot bee mixed together, by the reason of the antipathy of their formes. So Golde and Siluer are so amorous of Lead, that when they are to bee dissolued, they are mingled therewith; but Brasse doth flye from Lead as much as gold and siluer do fly from Tin. If therefore Lead and Brasse be melted together, they can by no meanes be mixed together, thogh both are contained vnder Metallicke kinds. How then can there be incorporated with Lead any ve∣nomous thing, being different both in forme and kinde? Let vs come to the second reason. Iron (they say) which is more hard,2 Reason. solid and compact, may neuerthelesse receiue a certaine venomous qua∣lity, as we see by impoysoned Arrowes, whereof our Ancestors haue heeretofore vsed; and there∣fore Lead (by more reason) may receiue the like venomous quality.Answer. To answere to that, I confesse that the poyson may well bee receiued on the su∣perficies
of the Iron, but not in the inwarde sub∣stance thereof, by way of commixtion. Now here the question is of incorporation, and not of a sim∣ple infusion or Vnction. Let vs heare the third reason.3 Reason Although that Lead (say they) when it is melted, doeth leaue be∣hinde it a kinde of grosse excrement: neuerthe∣lesse, it is not therfore made vnapt to receiue the infusion of any straunge substance. For, euen as steele a mettall amongst all others the most solid, doeth receiue in the woorking thereof, a temper which doeth harden it of a cleane contrarie sub∣stance. For answer (I say) that when the temper is giuen to steele, it is not receiued within the in∣wrd substance thereof; for,Answer if such a thing were necessary for the hardning thereof, it might bee easier done at that time when it is first drawn and melted, then to giue it the Temper, it would bet∣ter incorporate therewith then afterwards when it is taken and consolidate into a barre. This an∣swer shall likewise serue to confute the fourth rea∣son,4 Reason by the which (say they) that the iuice of Na∣pellus and Rhododendron of Apium risus, and such like, who of their whole substance, do hurt & cor∣rupt ours beeing mingled with Lead, there may thereby be made such a venomous commixtion; that those wounds which it maketh, must of ne∣cssity become venomous. I say to the contrarie,Answer that the mixture is only of things which may not onely be applyed, but also fixed, incorporated, & vnited the one to the other. Now how can water
or any other liquid iuyce only be made to adhere and cleaue to Lead which is hard & solid, I meane in that fashion that they may be vnited: the varie∣ty heereof may bee iudged better by experience, then by reason. Cause Lead to be melted within the iuices heretofore recited, or any other that you will choose (hauing first weighed them seue∣rally) and you shall finde the iust measure of the iuices, and the true waight of the Lead, as they were before: a most euident signe, that no part of the Lead is incorporated with the iuyces, nor the iuyces to haue lost any of their substance. The first reason is this; The Bullet shot out of a Musket against a stone or any bodye of the like hardnesse,5 Rason. is not thereby so much heated, but that it may neuerthelesse be handled in the bare hand though it be taken presently after it was shot: and therefore it is false to affirme, that the poyson in∣fused in the Bullet, may be consumed by the fire of the flaming powder. I answer, you must note that when I said that although the Bullet may be hand∣led, neuerthelesse, the fire would consume the force of the poyson; my meaning was, not the fire of the flaming powder,Answer. when the Musket is shot off, but that fire which is vsed to incorporate the molten Lead with the sayde poyson, the which immediately working vpon the poyson, being not yet wholly enwrapped and couered in any strāge body▪ and hauing time and leysure to worke that effect, and not at an instant and altogither, it may if not consume, yet at the least greatly abate the
forces of the said poyson. Those that wil not con∣tent themselues with these reasons, let them read Matthiolus vppon the Preface of his sixt Booke of Discorides. There are (sayth he) of late men so ignorant and foolsh,A great A∣notation. that they do cause to cast a∣mongst their Gold and Siluer when it is melted, wherewith they intend to make any drinking ves∣sells of Treacle, Methridate, and other Anti∣dotes, to the end these mettals hauing acquired e∣uen at the beginning the vertues of the aforesaid Antidotes may resist all poisons. But howe ridi∣culous and foolish this opinion is, they thēselues may iudge, if they haue but any mean knowledge of naturall things, and principally of Mettals. And therefore, there shall not neede a more euident refutaton. Behold the reasons, behold the autho∣rity, which haue retained in my first opinion, that wounds made by Gunne-shot are not conioyned with any venenosity. Heere let not the Reader builde too much on the opinion of Ambrose Parie; for I thinke there is not any Chirurgean that will deny but that a bul∣let may bee poysoned, notwithstanding the for∣mer reasons, which I leaue to be conside∣red by the iudicious and experi∣mented Chirur∣gean.
CHAP. XVII. The differences betweene such wounds which are made by arrowes, and those made by Gunshot. THese wounds which are made by Arrowes, Crosse-bow shot, or such like Instruments, do differ in two things from those which are made by Gunshot and other fierie Engines. For somtimes they are found without Contusion, which neuer hapneth to wounds made by Gunne-shot. Often∣times also they are empoysoned, and according to these two differences, their curations ought to be diuersified. Now let vs consider the differen∣ces of Arrowes and Darts, because that conside∣ration serueth greatly vnto the knowledge and curation of the said wounds. CHAP. XVIII. Of the differences of arrowes and Darts. A Rrowes and Dartes doe differ in matter, in forme or figure, in magnitude, in number, in manner, and faculty or vertue. Their differences in matter is, some of them are of Wood, others of Canes or Reeds: some of them haue their ex∣tremities or heads garnished with Iron, Tinne, Lead, Brasse, Horne, Glasse, or of bone, and o∣thers not. Their differences in forme are, some of them are round, others angular, others sharpe, o∣thers
barbed; some of them hauing their pointes turned backwardes, and some haue it diuided in∣to two parts: some are made broad in their heads and cutting like a knife, and in many other forms and fashions inumerable. As for their magnitude, some of their heads are of three fingers in length; others of a smaller size. Their number causeth a difference herein; because that some are simple, hauing but one point onely; others are compo∣sed into two or many. Also in them their manner is to be confidered; for some of them haue the I∣ron or head inserted within the woode of the Ar∣row, and of others the Arrow is inserted into the head. Some heades are sixed and nayled vnto the shaft, and others not; but haue so little hold, that in drawing them foorth, their heads remayne be∣hinde in the wounds, whereby they become more daungerous. Their faculty maketh them also to differ in this, because that some are (as hath bene saide) empoysoned and others not. Such are the speciall and proper differences of Arrowes and Darts: according to the which, the dispositions which they leaue behinde them, doeth diuersifie their curation. Thou mayst behold by this follow∣ing figure the aforesaid differences.
CHAP. XIX. Of the differences of the wounded partes. THese dfferences exposed. Now wee must consequently speak of the diuersity of the af∣fected parts, which are either fleshy or bony; som of them are neere the ioynts, others within them. Some with a great Flux of bloode, and fracture of the bones, others not. Some of them in the prin∣call members, or in parts seruing them; some are deepe,Neessarie iudgment to auoyde scandall. others but superficiall. And if in anie of these woundes there appeare any manifest signes of death, you ouht to make a true & sure iudge∣ment thereof, before you meddle there-with, to the end that there be no occasion giuen vnto the ignorant people to speake euill of our Art. Now, to leaue the Arrow in the body, would cause vn∣euitable death, and the Chirurgean would be e∣steemed vnpittiful and inhumane, and by draw∣ing it forth the Patient may peraduenture escape. For, as wee haue saide▪ it is better to attempt a doubtful remedy, then to let the Pa∣tient dye, without any suc∣cour at all.
CHAP. XX. Of the extraction of Arrowes. AS touching the extraction of Arrowes, you ought to auoyde the incising, dila∣cerating, and breaking of the Veines, and Arteries, Nerues and Tendons, if it be possible. For it would be an ignominious thing and against Art, to offend Nature more then the Arrow. The manner to draw them foorth is two-fold; the one of them is by extraction, and the other by thrusting it through the member. Therefore, euen at the beginning, and at the first dressing, it is fittest to take foorth all strange bodyes (if anie there be) as the heads of the Arrowes, the shafte or wood, and other such like things, as hath alrea∣dy beene saide of wounds made by Gunne shot, and by the same meanes. And for their better ex∣traction, it is conuenient that the Patient bee si∣tuate in the same figure and posture, as at that time when he was hurt, because of the Resons a∣foresaide (if it be possible) and then to vse instru∣ments proper to that effect. as principally this following, which hath an hollow quill or pipe di∣uided in the middle, the outware par toothed; into the which is inserted a rod, like vnto the Tire∣fond
of Gun-shot, as hath beene figured heere be∣fore, excepting onely that this is not made with a Scrue in the extreamity or end thereof. Also it is made greater, to dilate the hollow pipe, ther∣by to fill the cauity of the Iron head. This other Instrument also is very proper, which dilateth by compressing the two extremities together, being toothed also on the outward part; as you may see by these following Figures on the other side the leafe.
The first Instrument is opened by meanes of a Vice, which is inserted within the hollowe Pipe thereof. The second Instrument doeth dilate, by com∣pressing the two ends together. The signes whereby you may know where the Iron head is, that if you feele with your hande on that part where it is, you shall perceiue an asperi∣ty and inequality. Also the flesh wil appeare con∣tused, liuid, and blacke, and the Patient will feele an heauinesse and continuall paine in the woun∣ded part. The other two Instruments are called Tena∣cles, with a Vice, together with a Crowes bill: and is very commodious to draw forth the heads of Arrowes, and to extract foorth Maile and o∣ther smaller bodies. This Instrument vnderneath, is another small Hooke to draw forth Maile, or any other strange body, that it cannot meete with: which also may serue thy turne for the same effect, in the woundes of Gun-shor.
But if it come to passe that the head bee barbed, whether it be of an Arrow, Pike, Dart, or Lance, and shall abide in any part of the bodye. As for example, in the Thighe or Legge, together with some portion of the wood broken therein, in that case the Chirurgean shall cut away the woode or shaft as close as hee can, with incising or cutting Tenacles. Afterwardes he may draw foorth the head with Tenacles that are toothed, as you may see by the figure before going. Hippocrates in the fifte of his Epidemies saith, That he hath drawne forth the head of an Arrow sixe yeares after it was shot, it being lodged nere vnto the Groine.
CHAP. XXI. How you ought to proceede in drawing forth broken Arrowes. BVT if it come to passe, that the head is broken, in such sort that it cannot by any meanes bee apprehended by the aforesaide Tenacles, let it be ex∣tracted then (if it be possible) with the Cranes bill, or Crowes bill, or other Instru∣ments, that haue beene described heere before: but if the shaft be broken off so neere the heade, that there can bee taken no holde, neyther of the head thereof, nor of the shaft, with the Cranes bill, then let it be drawne foorth with the Tirefond of Gun-shot, for if it will insert it selfe into Lead, by a greater reason it may easily enter into wood. In like manner, if the head bee barbed, as most commonly your English mens Arrowes are, then if it be possible, thrust it thorough the member, with an Instrument proper thereunto. For, by that meanes you shall auoyde greater danger, be∣cause that in drawing it foorth, the Barbils may rend both the Nerues, Veines, Arteries, and the other parts, the which you ought to auoide care∣fully. And therefore it is better to make a coun∣ter Orifice on the other part, iust oueragainst the wound, and so to thrust it cleane through. For, it may be supposed, that there is but a little thicke∣nesse to incise; so by this meanes, and with lesse
danger the wounde will haue a double yssue; the one on the former part, and the other on the hin∣der part; and will therefore heale sooner, because you may apply your medicines both on the one side, and on the other, and it will also mundifie better. To the contrary, if the barbed head hap∣pen vpon a bone, or be inserted therein, which of∣tentimes commeth to passe in the bottome of the Muscles of the Thigh, of the Arme, or Legge, or other parts of great distance, there it is not con∣uenient to thrust them through, but rather to di∣late the wound, auoiding the Nerues and great vessels, as the good and expert Anatomical Chi∣rurgean ought to do, and then gently and orderly to apply therein a Dilatory hollow in the inward part thereof, and so to place it, that it may appre∣hend the two Barbils of the Iron head: then with the Cranes bill it may be held steddy, and so draw them forth all three together, as this figure follo∣wing sheweth thee.
A ilatory which hath a certaine cauity in the in∣ward pat thereof, with the Cranes ill holding a barbed head. CHAP. XXII. What ought to be done when the Arrow is inser∣ted into the bone. NOw, if it happen that the Arrow is so inserted and fixed in the Bone, that it cannot be taken soorth by thrusting it thorough the member, but by draw∣ing it foorth by the same way that it entered in, you ought then to mooue and stirre it too & fro discreetly if it sticke fast in the bone, wherein an especially care ought to be taken that you breake not the Arrowe, and so leaue some part thereof sticking in the bone; from whence might ensue many dangerous accidents. This operation may be done by the Instrument named the Crowes∣bill, or by others heere before figured presently
afer the extraction of the Arrowe. Suffer the wound to bleed sufficiently, taking your Indica∣tion from the strength or vertue of the Patient, to the end that the part may thereby bee dischar∣ged, and lesse mollested with inflammation, pu∣trifaction, and other euil accidents. The extracti∣on being done, at the first dressing, if the wound be simple, thou shalt handle it as a simple wound: but if it bee with complication, thou shalt then cure them according as you shall finde the dispo∣tions complicated, to appease the paine, thou mayest to thy great profite apply Oleum Catello∣rum of our description heere before declared, & to ouercome other accidents which may happen in thy cure, thou shalt haue recourse vnto our former Bookes of woundes in gene∣nerall, and of those made by Gun-shot.
CHAP. XXIII. Of venomous or empoysoned wounds. NOw there remaineth to vnderstand and con∣sider, that these woundes are sometimes em∣poysoned (as we haue saide) and that it proceed∣eth from the primitiue cause of the Arrowes so prepared by the enemy. This may easily be known both by the report of the hurt person, saying, that he feeleth a great and pricking paine as if hee had bene stung with Bees (especially if the poison wer hot, which is most vsed in that case) and also by the flesh of the wounded part, which presently af∣ter becommeth pale and liuide, with a certaine appearance of mortification: wherunto also there doth happen many other goefes, and greater ac∣cidents, which are not accustomed to happen in all other wounds, wherein there is not any vene∣nosity. Wherefore at the beginning (after that you haue extracted foorth all the strange bodies, if any there be) you ought to make diuers deepe scarifications all about the wound, and to set ven∣toses thereon with a great flame, thereby to make attraction and euacuation of the virulent matter. In like manner, the sayd attraction may be done, by causing the wound to bee sucked by another man, hauing in the meane time a little Oyle in his mouth, wherein you must haue a care that hee haue not any Vlcer therein, for feare left that the poyson so sucked and attracted cleaue not there∣unto.
Also attraction may bee made by the ap∣plication of Vnguents, Cataplasmes, Emplay∣sters, Vesiccatories, Cauteries, and other things, which shall be declared heereafter in our particu∣lar Booke intreating of the bitings and stingings of venomous Beasts. FINIS. Faults escaped. Page 9. line 17. for Sir, read Saint. p. 15. l. 20. for practises r. prurities. p. 2. l. 22. for induring, read inducing. p.  5. l. 11. for Escharotick, r. Escharco∣tick. p. ibid. l. 16. for indured, r. induced. p. 59. l. 30. for cooling r. rowling. pag. 60. l. 21. r. the yolke of Egges p. 75. l. 23. for naucotick r. narcotick. p. 85. l. 3. for staples r. Stuphes. p. 90. l. 15. for Lerine, r. lexiue. p. 104▪ l. 19. for eschiomened r. estiomened.
A Table of all the Chap∣ters contained in this follow∣ing Treatise. THe diusion of wounds according to the diuersitie of the parts offened, and the Bullets where-with they were made. Chap. 1. Of the signes of the wounds made by Gunshot. Chap. 2. The manner of handling those wounds at the first dressing. Chap. 3. A description of such Instruments which are pro∣per to extract Bullets, and other vnnaturall thinges of the body. Chap. 4. The maner to handle those wounds at the first dres∣sing after the vnnaturall things are forth. Chap. 6. The maner to extract such vnnaturall things which shall be left in the body after the first extraction. Ch. 7 Indications which ought to be obserued in the saide wounds. Chap. 8 How and in what manner diseases are complicated Chap. 9. How the Chirurgean ought to prosecute the hand∣ling of the aforesaid wounds. Chap. 10 Of Bullets which do remaine in the certaine parts of the bodye, a long time after the curation of the
wounds. Chap. 11 Of the great Contusions and dilacerations made by the aforesaid Bullets of Artillery. Chap. 12 Of the meanes which should be obserued n rectify∣ing of the aire, and corrobating the noble parts, and to fortifie the whole body. Chap. 13 Memorable Histories. Chap. 14 An Apologie touching the woundes made by Gun∣shot. Chap. 15 Another Discourse vppon that question of the ve∣nenosity of wounds made by Gun-shot. Chap. 16. The differences betweene wounds made by arrowes and those made by Gunshot. Chap. 17. The difference betweene Arrowes and Darts. 18 Of the difference of the wounded parts. Chap. 19 Of the extraction of Arrowes. Chap. 20 How you ought to proceede in drawing foorth bro∣ken Arrowes. Chap. 21 What ought to be done then when the Arrow is infix∣ed in the bone. Chap. 22 Of venomous or empoysoned wounds. Chap. 23
