19262 99854586 20013
A Paire of Turtle Doves, Or, A dainty new Scotch Dialogue between a Yong-man and his Mistresse, both correspondent in affection, &c. To a pretty pleasant tune, called the absence of my Mistresse, or I live not where I love. Yong-man. MVst the absence of my Mistresse gar me be thus discontent, As thus to leaue me in distresse, and with languor to lament: Nothing earthly shall diuorce me from my déerest, but disdaine, Nor no fortune shall enforce me, from my fairest to refraine. O my deerest, My heart neerest: When shall I so happy bee To embrace thee, And to place thee, Where thou neré maist part from me. Maide. Since my absence doth so gréeue thée, it doth wound me to the heart: If my presence could reléeue thée, I would play a loyall part: But I prethée be contented, sith the Fates will haue it so, Though our méeting be preuented, thou my constancy shalt know. O my sweetest, The compleatest Man alive in my conceite, Lady Fortune Ile importune, Soone to make our Ioyes compleate. Yong-man. Since thy absence doth conjure me with perplexity and paine, What would thy presence then allure me, for to see thée once againe: As thy absence sends such sadnesse that it scarcely can be told: So thy presence yéeldeth gladnesse, to all eyes that thee behold. O my deerest, &c. Maide. What reward then shall I render, to him that me doth so respect, But my constancy to tender, With like fauour to effect: And since thy loue to me is feruent, so my heart shall be to thee, And as thou prou'st my loyall seruant, thy true Mistresse I will be, O my sweetest, The compleatest Man alive in my conceite, Lady Fortune Ile importune, Soone to make our Ioyes complate. Yong-man. Then my Loue, my Doue, my fairest, sith I may repose such trust, In my heart thou only sharest, none else craue a portion must: Thou hast setled thy affection vpon me and none beside, And I of thée haue made election, thou alone shalt be my Bride. Come my deerest, My heart neerest, When shall I so happy bee, To embrace thee, And to place thee, Where thou nere maist part from me. Maide. My hearts Ioy, more swéet than honey, or the odoriferous rose, I haue laid such hold vpon thée, as the world can nere vnlose The Gordian knot, which though as yet is not by Hymen tyed fast, Yet Heauen knowes my heart is set on thee my choice, while breath doth last. Come my sweetest, &c.
The second part To the same tune. Young-man. When Hyperion doth for euer from the Skye obscure his rayes, When bright Luna (constant neuer) leaues to seuer nights from dayes: When the Sea doth cease from running, when all thus change preposterously, Then that firme vow which I once made, (and not till then) Ile breake with thée. Come my deerest, My heart neerest, When shall I so happy be, To embrace thee, And to place thee, Where thou nere maist part from me. Maide. When rich mizers throw their mony in the stréetes, and hoord vp stones, When my Fathers Nagge so bonny, leaues good hay to picke dry bones: And when the dogge conforme to that, doth change his food for Oates and hay, Then shall my oath be out of dale, or else last till my dying day. Come my sweetest, The compleatest Man alive in my conceite, Lady Fortune, Ile importune, Soone to make our joyes compleate. Young-man. When the Bucke, the Hare, or Cony doe pursue the Dogge to death, When a rocke so hard and stony, can dissolu'd be with man's breath: When furtles make a second chusing, then will I a new Loue séeke, Till then all but thée refusing, though I might change euery wéeke. Come my deerest, &c. Maide. When both toads, with snakes and adders, bréed vpon the Irish ground, When men scale the Skie with Ladders, when two Phoenixes are found: When the Goose the For doth follow, or séeke to hunt him forth his den, Or swine in dirt refuse to wallow, Ile not forsake my loue till then. Come my sweetest, &c. Young-man. Then swéet Loue sith both agrée thus, hauing hearts reciprocall, Long I hope we shall not be thus barred from the principall Of all our joy, which is blest marriage, Hymen haste to knit the knot, I'th meane time our constant carriage, will i'th world nere be forgot. Come my deerest, My heart neerest, When shall I so happy be, To embrace thee▪ And to place thee, Where thou nere maist part from me. Martin Parker. FINIS. Printed at London for Thomas Lam∣bert, at the signe of the Horse- shooe in Smithfield.
