19467 99848884 14005
The Testaments of the Patriarches, the Sonnes Iacob: translated out of Greeke Latine by Robert Grosthed, Byshop of Lyncolne, and out of his copye into French and Dutch by others: Now englished by A. G. To the credit whereof an auncient Greeke copye written in parchment, is kept in the Uniuer∣sitie Librarye of Cambridge. AT LONDON Printed by Iohn Day, dwelling ouer Aldersgate. 1576. Cum gratia & priuilegio Regi Maiestates per dicennium.
To the Christian Reader. ALbeit these our happy dayes in some respect, good Chri∣stian, haue and enioy diuers and sundry workes, tēdyng to the subuersiō of Belial, and the erection of godlines: yet considering that as earthly, so we spirituall souldiors seldome rūne to the watch with∣out a larum: I thought it conuenient to cal vpon you wyth this graue & godly booke, of long tyme hid in Hebrue, now come to light in English. The malice of the Iewishe people in concealing it, by reason of Christ the righteous, so often prefigured, was in∣tollerable, but the singular prouidence of God in preseruing it vnspeakeable, & now at the last, though chargeable, yet fruitfull is the expressing and printing in our natu∣rall language of this, so worthy, so goldē a writte: being of it selfe, without the accessa∣ry painting of eloquent speach, a Mirror for Princes, a Preacher for al Christians, a beutiful Glasse for Women: for Children, Seruauntes, and such like, a wise, plausible, and most ready Scholemaister. For, to apply to euery particular estate hys peculiar propertie: art thou a Prince, a Magistrate, a Ruler, let Iuda rule thee: If thou thinkest vpon māly cou∣rage, he teacheth thee valiauntnesse, if thou seekest to gouerne aright, he willeth thee to flee tyranny: if thou thirst after manners of life, he soundeth it out, that Uaineglorye
nication and Discorde, blemishe, wea∣en, and at length vtterly cōsume Nobilitie. Let me proceede farther, and aske a questiō: Art thou a Byshop, a Minister, a Preacher of Christ his byrth, lyfe and death? behold Leuy as a lantere.euy. Thou cāst teach thy selfe, but he can teach thee better: thou speakest to o∣ther, harken to him that talketh to thee: of thy office, how Holy it is, how Honorable, the contemners thereof how miserable, by whom begon, continued, and confirmed: of thy state of lyfe, what, and how it should be, Nunquam sine Sale, sine Sle: to be shorte, of thy blessednes if thou art godly, wise, and learned: of thine and their plagues where thou lyuest, if wicked and ignoraunt. What should I say more? Looke vpon Iacob,Iacob. O you Parētes, peruse these 12. godly Fathers in yme and order: learne of hym & hys, to pray to God in Christ his name for your Childrē, haue a regard to their instruction: the want of the former your Chldren shall misse, the neglect of the latter, you your selues shall bewayle. For the harty prayer of a Father to the Almighty for his Children, is a right singular benefite: but he that for foolyshe pitie geueth to thē the bridle is before God accounted a giltie partaker of their sinfull race. Uewe this booke therfore, harkē how to teach your selues & your Children. You haue already handled a Sicke mans salue, en∣ioy now at length a Sicke mās tounge, to n∣ruct them when you leaue them, and what
to leaue them when you dye: els their ende wyll be lamentation, but yours lamētable miserie. And come you hether you Childrē of the earth:Ruben. reade, see, and say that olde Fa∣ther Ruben with his good Bretheren redely and rightly describe the blessed path of righ∣teousnes, & the  way of Belial, the one to flee, the other to follow. Wylt thou beginne with the eldest, for that olde age seemeth wysest? stop not then the cares of thy hart and body to so wyse and sweete a Charmer. O the number, O the ouglesome portraiture of those deadly spirites, that e hath so orderly numbrd, and cunningly coloured. Lechery, Enuy, Glotony, Brauery, Pride, Vaineglory, Vnrighteousnes, Wilfull Ignoraunce. All these as they seeme, are in deede per∣nicious: but the former is most detestable, the ende wherof is consumption of thys earthly bodye, and destruction of the soule▪ which welspring and puddle of euil, if thou wilt haue dried vp, cease from drunkenes: if not see it, haue not a narrow and greedy eye vpon a beutifull face: if not drinke, stop thy mouth from busy questiōs with wan∣ton women: to conclude, if not therein be ducked and drowned, vse labour, ame youthfulnes. For in this I ouershooting my elfe, (sayth Rubn to his Childrē) defiled my Fathers bed. Therefore looke not vpon the
beautie of women, muse not vpon theyr do∣inges, but keepe your selues occupied, either in learning or some worke: charge your wiues and daughters that they  not their heads, will them to chasten their lookes, for euery womā that dealeth deceitfully in these things, is reserued to the punishment of the world to come. Which trade of lyfe to eschew, seeing it is difficult without the fulfilling of the lawe, and the lawe, partly cōsisteth in mu∣tuall loue: striue with SymeonSymeon. the secōd Bro∣ther to auoyd strife, which blindeth y• mind, pineth the body, prouoketh murder. The remedye whereof, is both forgeuing & for∣getting. Take vnto thee Ioseph his chere∣full countenaunce, a perfect platforme of a quiet mynde, yet set before thine eyes Sime∣ons wythered haud, a ight plague for such . All which disquietnes & mischiefe, safely to set aside, let not Iuda be set apart. ather by him experience, that for a man to glory in his owne workes is sinfull, and which vpbraydeth an other mā his vice, standeth slippery. Iuda choked Ruben his el∣dest Brother wyth his fornication: marke, who med immediatly but enuious and aylyng Iuda? Did he not offēd after y• flesh in the Chananites house? Did he not take a wie without consent of Parentes? two great sinnes, and alas in these our dayes to much vsed, yet punished, the one with wāt, losse, or at the least, smal ioy of Childrē, saith Father Iuda, the Patriarch: but the other
vntollerable damage of body & soule, sayth S. Paule the Apostle. Wherefore abstaie frō wine, abhore drokennesse, for such a one slaūdereth not, rehearseth not another mās sinnes, breedeth no sedition, but embraceth loue & charitie with a single hart as good Father Isachar,Isachar. who neuer rayled, neuer was hurtfull or spitefull to his neighbour, neuer cate his meat aloe but gaue part to the poore, neuer remoued the bondes and markes of other mens ground, but loued all men as his naturall Children. O that as we read this, so we might expresse the same in lyfe and conuersation. Mercy and loue is a precious iuell, the maintainers wherof being iointly cōnexed prosper, once disseue∣red come to nought: for the waters (sayth Zabulon)Zabulon. washe away the sand, when the stones & timber are dissolued. Whose mercy and singular compassion was rewarded singularly. Sit his Testament, resem∣ble his rare charitie in clothing the naked, and feeding the hungry, knowne and vn∣knowne, as well straungers as his coun∣trey men.Dn. Let not the spirite of Dan possesse your minde:Gad. Suffer not the wrath of Gad to settle in your hart, for such work with . pe∣rilous instruments, bitter speach, trechery, and violent hands, yelding fruit not much vnlyke as you may read, as you may see. Wylt thou be taught the ready  to that that thou doost seeke? two wayes ther (sayth Aser) Vice the one, the other: Vertu,
NeptalimsNeptalim. race▪ Embrace the latter, eschew the former. But he that walketh in them both, blyndeth men, becemeth himselfe, and mocketh God, whose double faced dealyng shalbe double punished. Such are the coe∣tous, such are they, y• are merciful, in naugh∣tines, such are they sayth Aser that fast from meates but not frō fornication. Haue ther∣fore a simple hart with simple & righteous IosephIoseph. the blessed of the Lord, the right fi∣gure of Iesus Christ: for hatred he shewed loue: beyng cursed, he blessed: beyng shot throgh, he did not so much as bend hys bow: albeit his brethren would haue slaine hym, albeit they cast him into a wel, though they solde hym as a bond slae, & y• to straū∣gers & such as hated shepheards to y• death, of whom he was whipped & tormented: yet he, when they stoode in feare, gaue them cō∣fort: when they were well nye famished, gaue them foode: when by his authoritye myght destroy, by his authoritie did pre∣serue: beyng their Lord, vsing them as his betters: being their Brother, acceptyng them as his Children, their vnkindnes not spo∣ken of, their conspiracies forgotten, theyr cruel dealing most louingly, most mercifully forgeuen. You haue heard his loue to∣ward his neighbour, harken his obedience toward God. When he was miserably af∣flicted, did he rage and swell? When he was made a bondue of a free mans sonne, did he cry out of heauen? beyng almost vtterly
forsaken, did he vnpatiently accuse Gods iustice? no, expectans Expectauit Dominum. And at the last, the Lord whiche hid his face did shew his countenaunce, of a caitie, in re∣spect, makyng him free, of a freeman weal∣thy, of a wealthy subiect an honorable per∣sonage, Lord President of Pharaos land. Whom the Egyptians being alyue loued, be∣yng dead loued, beyng otten loued. Whom yuing, neyther wealth nor woe coulde make to swell: neither promise or threats of the Egyptian strumpet could make slyde: and therfore, beyng dead, neither world, Deuil, nor mans pollicy could make forgotten. O that our mortall race might thus begynne, thus perseuere, might thus, thus O Lord, most happely finishe: The spirit is willing but the flesh is weake.Beniamin. Learne therefore of Beniamin to inflame thy hart, that thou maist be ready both in body & soule, Let vs, ayth Ecclesiasticus cōmende, and so say I, Let vs behold the noble famous men, and the gene∣ration of our fore elders.Eccle. 44. For many glorious actes hath the Lord done in them, and sne∣wed his great power euer since the begyn∣nyng. Upon the consideration wherof and especially for that I would haue nothyng wāting in this booke that might serue thy contetation, I thought if as well perti∣nent to deale with the righteous Father, as with the godly childrē. For to shadow a face onely without a body hath his deser∣ued commendation: but who so painteth a
legge without a body, or a bodye without a head, it shall not be amisse, as I suppose, as well to terme him a foolishe painter, as to iudge the thing vdiscreetely paynted. Wherefore as well to see the head as the legge, and to heare the Father as the chil∣drē, I haue faythfully drawne out of scrip∣ture, (& not according to my fancy fashio∣ned) the death and Testament of Iacob that blessed & right happy Father added to this auncient monument of the children. Ther∣fore to recompence my payes, reade them but read them diligently, neither read one∣ly, but cōtēd to follow. For the imitation of good and godly men is the direct way & course to godlines. So may we accompt of Iacobs blessing: so may we throughly cha∣lendge to be his Children, I meane, not by fleshe, but spirite. The lord which made heauē & earth, y• Lord which gaue his sonne to shed his hart bloud for vs, god which disposeth thinges to his pleasure, preserue our Queene, encrease our fayth▪ and make vs thankeful for his beneites. Amen. Richard Daye. FINIS.
¶The Testament of Iacob, that he made at his death, to his xij. Sonnes the Patriarches, concerning what should beide them in the last dayes: gathered out of Genesis .48 .49. and added to this booke. Com, harke my Sonnes, two thinges I geue, my blessing and my ban: The first to them that godly lyue, the last to wicked man.
IAcob the sonne of Isa∣ac,Gene. 25. borne of Rebecca, the yeare of the world 2108. his Father be∣ing three score yeares of age,Simple or . was a perfect man & righ∣teous, dwelling † in tentes, not ge∣uen to pleasure & hunting, as hys elder brother, elder by nature, not by grace:Rom. 9. for the elder shal serue the younger, sayth the Lord.Iacob be∣loued not of erite but  Grace. Why? not for that Iacob had so deserued, but because God had so appointed. Wherefore whē he thus by the de∣terminate will of God, and hea∣uenly disposition, which ordereth thinges whatsoeuer,Gene. 25. had got hys Brothers byrthright and his Fa∣thers blessing,Gene. 26. his Parentes, cons∣dering that the slippery dayes of carnall copulation did approach,Gene. 27. and warely fearing his brother Esaw,The wic∣ked euer resist gods gemēts. for y• † he conceaued murder in his hart, and instituted a byrth
day of his deuilishe purpose, sent hym from Berseba to Mesopota∣mia to Laban his mothers brother,Gene. 2. there honestly to take a wyfe and uietly to liue. For Matrimony without consent of Parentes,A  for mary∣age. and due consideration of either partie cōtracted, as it breedeth their dis∣quietnesse, so it prouoketh Gods displeasure.Gene. 29. Iacob therefore after long trauile, being placed with his Uncle Laban and seruing hym xiiii. yeares in labour & payue (al∣beit he was the childe of promise,Trouble & payne are destined to the elect. the blessed of the Lord, Borne of a free woman, and y• which is more, his Vncles bone & flesh, and Lord of Chanaā: not arguing with hym∣selfe as the worldly childrē of this earth,An exam∣ple for chil∣dren. saying: shall I which am a free and wealthy mns sonne be made a seruaunt? shall I be a drudge in my kinsmans house, be∣yng sent to marry & not to serue) had † geuen him by Laban to wife
for his good seruice (by whiche God blessed that little that Laban had before) his two daughters Lea first, godly note for seruauntes. then Rachell with their handmaydes Bilha and Zilpha: of whome, according to the promise made vnto hym of God in Bethell, that his seede shou be multiply∣ed: he begat xii. sonnes .xii. godly Fathers of the earth: Ruben. Simeon. Leui. Iuda. Dan. Neptalin. Gad. Aser. Isachar. Zabulon. Ioseph. Bēiamin. Thus he byg blessed of the Lord,Mans lyfe is but a pilgrimage. as well in Children as in substaūce, returned agayne to his natiue countrye, he and his Chil∣drē: there to lyue & there to dy. But beholde, the diuine prouidence of God. After three & thirty yeares expired, he was remoued frō Cha∣naan to Gosen in Egipt by meanes of his sonne Ioseph chiefe steward of Pharao his land, whome his bre∣thren
heretofore had sould. Where when he had lyued 17. yeares, and seene his family encreased excee∣dingly, to his great ioy and com∣fort no doubt, especially all the o∣ther countries about being pla∣gued with a great famine,God alw prouideth for the righteous. and by Gods mercy not greatly feeling y• same, perceauyng also his trouble∣some pilgrimage draing to an ende: called his sonne Ioseph, vnto him & sayd: If I haue found grace in thy sight, oh put thy hand vnder my thighe (for in this order they tooke an othe in Iacobs tyme) deale mer∣cifully with me and truely, bury me not in Egipt, but let me sleepe with my Fathers. Where notinge his sure fayth in the promise of God made to his fathers, willed hym to looke for Canaan his hoped in∣heritaūce, and not to trust to Pha∣raos, land. To which his request, whē Ioseph his louing sonne obe∣diently did condescend: Iacob ta∣king
a little more strength vnto hym, and sitting vp, desirous also to shew forth the great goodnesse of the Lord in preseruing him and hys,Parentes ought to tel their chil∣dren Gods blessinges. sayd: God almightye appeared vnto me at Luz in the land of Cana∣an, and blessed me saying: Beholde I will make thee fruitfull, and cause thee to multiplye, and will make a great number of People of thee, and will geue this land to thy seede for an † euerlasting possessiō.Uerified in  carnall Israel to Christ his cmming, in the spiri∣tuall for euer. Thy sonnes Manasses and Ephraim I take as mine owne, their other brethren shall be called †That is  be vn∣r their . after their names. As I came from Mesopotamia, Rachell dyed in the lande of Canaan, and was buryed by the way to Ephratha, the same is Betheleem. Then Ia∣cob, albeit somewhat dimme for age, beholding Iosephes ii. sonnes, sayd: what are these? to whome Io∣seph aunswered: they are my sonns which God hath geuē me. O bryng them to me (sayd Iacob) and let me
blesse them. I had not thought to haue seene thy face Ioseph▪ yet loe, God hath shewed mee thy seede. God in whose sight my fathers A∣braham and Isaac dyd walke: God, whiche hath fed me all my lyfe long vntll this day:Christ. and the * Angel, which hath deliuered me from all e∣uill blesse these lade, and let my * name▪Comped as one of his children not that they should pray vnto him bng dead as  gathe∣red. be named in thē, & the name of my Fathers, Abraham and Isaac, & that they may growe into a mul∣titude in the middes of the earth. Then as Ioseph lifted his Fathers hand from Ephram to Manases the Elder, Iacob sayd: Let it be, I knowe it well my Sonne,God hath mercye on  he will. he shall also be a great people, but his younger brother shalbe greaer, in thee let Is∣rael blesse & say, God make thee as Ephraim & Manasses.  he fainting sayd:By ayth Iacob  the lād as yet but, hoped . Behold Ioseph I dye. God shal be with you, and bing you agayne to the land of your Fathers. Moreouer I * geue vnto thee a portiō
of land aboue thy brethren, which I cōquered by sword and bow of the Amorites. And come you hether also, O my Children, that I may tell you what shall come on you in the last dayes. Gather ye together, and heare ye sonnes of Iacob, harken vn∣to Israell your Father. Ruben my first borne, my † might,Begotten in my youth. my strēgth, excellent in dignitie and power, vnconstāt as water, thou shalt not excell because thou didst defile my couch. Symeon and Leuy, brethren in e∣uil, who in your wrath slewe a man, and in your selfe will digged downe a wall:Leuy had no tribe & Simeon was vnder Iuda. Cursed be your wrath, for it was shamelesse, and your fearcenesse for it was cruell. I † wil diuide you in Iacob,Iudg. Cap. 1. and scatter you in Israel.Blessinges of Iuda. Iuda Thy.A wor∣thy cap∣ayne. hand shall be on the necke of thine enemies: Thy Bre∣thren shall stoope vnto thee: as a Ly∣ons whelpe shalt thou come vp from the spoyle: Thou shalt couch as a
Lyon, and as a Lyonesse. Who shall stirre thee vp▪A  Prince. The Scepter shall not depart from thee, nor a law∣geuer from betwene thy feete, vntill Shiloh come, all nations shall seeke after him.A  land. Thou shalt binde thy Asse sole to the vine, and the Asses colt to the best vine: thou shalt wash thy garment in wine, and thy cloke in the bloud of grapes: thy eyes shal be red with wine, & thy teeth white with milke. Zabulon, thou shalt dwell by the sea side, and thou shalt be an hauē for ships: thy border shalbe vnto Zidō. Isachar, thou shalt be a strong Asse, couching downe betwene two bur∣dens: And thou shalt see that rest is good, and that the land is pleasaunt, and shalt bow thy shoulder to beare and shalt be subiect vnto tribute. Dan,Iudg. 13. ▪ 15. 16. thou shalt iudge thy people, as one of the tribes of Israell. Dan thou shalt be a Serpent by the way, an adder by the path▪ byting the
Horse heeles, so that his rider shall fall backwarde. Then Iacob forese∣yng in his minde the greate cala∣mity,The Phi∣listines. that should betide his poste∣ritye, cōsorting him selfe & resting in Gods promise, tryed out with harte and minde: O Lorde I haue wayted for thy saluation. Gad,Iosua. 1. 21. an host of men shall ouer∣come thee, but thou shalt ouercome at the last. And what shall I say to Aser?Num. 32. his bread shalbe far, and he shal giue pleasures for a king. Nephthalim is a hinde sent for a present geuing goodly wordes.Iudg. 45. Ioseph is a florishing bough by a well side,The bles∣sing of Io∣seph. the small boughesEncrease of familie. shall run vppon the wall. The Archers shot agaynst him and hated him: but his bow was made strong, and hys armes. strengthned by the hāds of the almighty God of Iacob. Out of him shall come an Heardmā a stone in Israell. All these thinges come frō
thy fathers god which hath helped thee,All thinges come of God. & blessed thee with blessinges▪ of the heauē, with blessinges of the deepe benea, wyth blessinges of breastes and wombe. The blissinges of (me) thy Father (that I geeue thee,) are stronger then the blessings (that I had) of mine elders. Vntill the ende of the hilles of the world they shall be on thy head. Beniamin shall rauen, as a wolfe, In the Morning he shall deuour the pray, and at night diuide the spoyle. And now when I shal be gathered to my people bury me with my father in the caue that is, in the field of E∣phrō the Hethite, in the caue that is in the field of Machpelath which is before Mamre in the land of Canaā which Abra.Not for the holines of y• place, but for memory of Gds promise. bought with the field of Ephrō the Hethite, for a possessiō to bury in, where as were buryed A∣braham and Sara his wife, and Isaac with Rebecca, and there I buryed Lea. The field and the caue that is
therin, was bought of the Children of Heth. When Iacob had made an ende of cōmaunding all that he woulde vnto his Sonnes, hauyng liued a hundreth forty and seuen yeares hee plucked vp his feete into the bed, A token of a good conscience. and quietly dyed, Then Io∣seph falling vpon his fathers face, and kissing him with teares, cau∣sed, him to be enbawmed by Phi∣sitions to the space of forty dayes, and mourned for him threescore and ten dayes. Who departing from Egipt into Canaā with noblemen of the land in Charets & horsemen buryed him in y• place which Iacob had appointed.
¶The Testament of Ruben made to his Children at his death, concerning the thinges that he had in his minde, by the suggestion of the spirite of foreknowledg▪ Behold the pot, the heare, the bed, doe note the strength, the lust: Of Ruben and vnconstant head, who therefore was accurst.
THys is the copye of Rubens Testament, con∣cerninge all the thynges whiche hee gaue in charge to hys children, before hee dyed, in the hundred & fiue and twenty yeare of his life. Two yeares after the decease of Ioseph: his children & childrens children came to visite him in his sicknes and he sayd vnto them. My children I dye, and goe the way of my fathers. And saying there his brethren, Iuda, Gad and Aser, he sayd vnto them: Lift me vp my brethren, that I may tell you and my children the thinges that I haue hidden in my hart, for I am hence∣forth drawing to my long home.Death i our lon home. Thē stāding vp he kissed thē, and weeping sayde: Harken my brethren, and you my childrē geue care to the word of your father Ru∣ben, mark what I giue in charge to you: Behold, I cōmaund you this day before y• God of heauē, that ye walke not in the ig∣noraunce of youthfulnesse and fornicatiō,Fornicati∣on laned. Gene. 35. 49. whereint I ouershot my selfe, and deed the bed of my father Iacob.1. Cor. 5. For I assure you that the Lord did therfore  me with a sore plague in my flankes by the
space of seuen monthes, and ‡ I had perished if my fatherPrayer & repen∣taunce stayeth God his wrath. Iacob had not prayed to the Lorde for me,The blessing and prayer of a father to God for his children of what benefite. because he was minded to haue slayne mee. I was thirtye yeares old when I did this euill in the sight of the Lorde, & seuen monethes was I sick to y• death,In repentance the hart is to be conside∣red not externall ac∣tion. and ‡ with a free hart did I seuen yeare penance before the Lord, I dranke no wine, nor stronge drinke: no fleshe came within my mouth: I tasted not any fine bred: but I mourned for my sinne, for it was great, & there shall none such be done in Israell.The eight instuments whereby man wor∣keth and the effect of them. And nowe my sonnes heare me, that I may shewe you what I sawe concerninge the seuen spy∣rites of error in my repentaunce. Bely∣all geueth seuen spirites agaynst a man, whiche are the welspringes of youthfull workes, and seuen spirites are géuen man in his creation,Life. whereby all hys works are done. The first is the spirit of life, wherewith is created hys béeing. The second is the spirite of séeing,Seeing. wher∣with cometh lusting. TheHearing. y• spirite of hearing, wherewt cometh learning. The Smel∣ling. is y• spirit of smelling, wherwt cometh
delight by drawing in of y• ayre, & by brea¦thing of it out agayn. TheSpech. is the spirit of speech, wherwith knowledge is made. TheTasting. is y• spirit of tascing wherof com∣meth y• feedyng vpon thinges y• are to be eaten & drunke, & through them is ingen∣dred strength,Sde and of what propertie. because the substaunce of strength is in meate. The seuenth is the spirit of séede and generation, wherwith entreth sinne through y• lust of pleasure. For this cause it is the last of creation, & the first of youth, because it is full of ig∣noraunce,Sleepe. and of what propertie. and ignoraunce leadeth the yonger sort as a blynd body into the ditch and as an Oxe to the stal. Amōg all these is the eight spirit, which is of sléep, with whō is created the wasting away of na∣ture and the image of death.Eight spi∣rites of error and of what pro∣pertie. With these spirites are mingled the spirites of error. Wherof the first is the spirite of Lechery who lyeth within in the nature and sen∣ses of man.Rechery. The second spirit vnsatiable∣nesse lyeth in the belly.Gluttony The third spirite of strife lyeth in the lyuer and in choler.Enuy. The fourth spirite is of brauery and ga∣lantnesse,Brauery that the partie may seeme co∣ly by excesse. The fistbe is the spirte of pride,Pride of  pro∣pertie. which moueth a man to minde o∣uer
great thinges, or to thinke well of himselfe.Vaine glory in what it cō∣sisteth. The rth is the spirit of Lying or vayne gloriousnes in boasting a mans selfe and in desire to ile his talke concer∣ning his owne kined and acquaintaūce. The seuenth is the spirit o vnrighteous∣nes whiche stirreth vp the affections that a man should performe the lustfull plea∣sures of his harte.Unrigh∣ousne. For vnrighteousnes worketh with all the other spirits, by ta∣king guile vnto him.Wilfull gnorance. Unto all these spi∣rites is matched the vii. spirit, which is the spirite of sléepe or sluggishnes, in er∣ror and imagination, and so the soules of young folkes perishe,Discom∣modities of ignorance. because their min∣des are darkned from the truth, and vn∣derstand not the law of the Lord, neither obey the doctrine of their fathers as beel to me in my youth. But now my childrē loue the truth, and that shall preserue you.Ringlea∣ders to for∣nication Harken to your father Ruben, and let not your eyes gredy eye. runne gazing after women, neither be yeClose cō∣pany with women. alone with a woman that is maried, neither seeke you aboutBusie questions. what women are a doing. For if I had not sene Billa bathing of her selfe in a secret place, I hadde not fallen into that great wickednes. But my mind ran
so vpon the naked woman, that it suffe∣red me not to sleepe till I had committed abhomination. For while my father Ia∣cob was away at his Father Isaackes,Gen. 35. & I in Gader hard by Ephrata a house of Bethleem, Billa fellDrunk∣nesse. drunken, & as shee lay a sleepe vncouered in her cham∣ber, I went in and seeyng her nakednes wrought wickednesse with her: and lea∣uing her a sléepe went my way.Nothing so secretly don but it shall be open By and by an Angell of God besrayed my wic∣kednes to my Father Iacob, who com∣ming home mourned for me, & touched not▪A godly couat. Billa any more Therefore looke not vppon the beutye of women, neyther muse you vpon theyr denges, but walke ye with a single harte in the feare of the Lorde, businge your selues about some worke,Labour a preseruatiue from forni∣cation. and keeping your selues occupy∣ed either in ▪ or aboute your flockes, till God geue you such wiues as he lifteth, leaste  suffer as I haue bone. I durst not looke my father in the face to hys dying day,A gilty cō∣science is a great bur∣den. nor speake to any of my brethren for shaine. My conscience byteth me euē yet still for my sinne. But my father comforted me, and prayed for me to the Lorde, that his wrath myght
passe away from me, as the Lorde him∣selfe shewed vnto me. Therefore from that time forth,norse of conscience slayeth sin. I was kept from sinning any more. And you my children likewise keepe ye all that I shall tell you, and you shal not sinne.The fruite of fornicati∣on. For fornication is y•Destruc∣tion of the soule. de∣struction of the soule, separating it from God, 4 making i to draw vntoIdolatry Idols, because it leadeth the minde and vnder∣standing into error, and bringth men to theirShort∣ness of life. grae before their time. For whorom hath vndone many men. And although a man be auncient or noble, yet doth it shae him & make hym a laugh∣ingstock both before Belial,Igno∣minious shame. & the sonnes of mē.Iosephes chastitie rewarded. But Ioseph because he kept him∣selfe from all women, and cleansed, hys thoughtes from all fornication, found fa∣uour both before the Lord and men.Gene 9. The Egiptian woman did much to him by v∣sing the helpe of witches, and by offering him slaversawees: but the purpose of his minde admitted no noysome desire.Looke pa. & 5. For this cause the God of my father deliue∣red him from al death bt séene and vn∣séene: for if fornicatiō ouerrule not your minde, neyther shall Belial preuayle a∣gainst you, women are hurtfull thinges
my sonnes,Properties of vchast women. because that when they wāt power and strength against a man, they worke guilfully to draw him to them by traines: & whom they cannot ouermatch in strēgth, hym they ouercome by deceit. For the Angel of the Lord which taught me, folde mee of them, that they be ouer∣maistred by the spirit of fornicatiō more then men be, and that they be euer prac∣tising in their harts agaynst mē, first ma∣king their mindes to erre by decking of them selues, thē sheadyng their poison in to them by sight, & finally catching them prisoners by their doynges: for a woman is not able to inforce a man.A note for garish at∣tire & wan∣ton lookes. Therfore my sonnes, flee fornication, charge your wiues and daughters that they trim not their heades, & will them to chasten their lookes, for euery woman that dealeth de∣ceitfullye in these things, is reserued to y• punishmēt of the world to come.An exāple of this  chief. For by such meanes were y• Watchers deceiued before the floud: as soone as they saw thē they fell in loue one with another,Gen. 6. & con∣ceiued a workng in their mindes, and turned them selues into the shape of mē, and appeared to them in their company∣ing with their husbandes: and the womē
by conceiuing the desire of them in the i∣magination of their mynd, brought forth Giants.eachers. For, the  Wathere appeared to them of heigth vnto heauen. Therefore keepe your selues from fornication,Infectious  corrupteth the inde. & if ye intend to haue a cleane mynde, keepe your senses from all women, and forbid them likewise the company of men, that they may haue also cleane mindes. For although cōtinuall companyings do not alwres worke wickednesse, yet breede they incurble stinges to them, and to vs euerlasting shame before Belial, because that fornication hath neither vnderstan∣dyng nor godlynes in it, and all enuious∣nes dwelleth in the desire therof, and for that cause shall ye enuy the childrē of Le∣y, and seeke to be exalted aboue thē, but ye shall not be able to compasse it for, god will duenge them, and you shall dye a daungerfull death:Gen. 49. for vnto I cuy & Ida hatl, the Lord geuen the souereinty, and vnto me and Dan, and Ioseph, hath he graunted to be princes with thē. Wher∣fore I charge you,He prophe∣sieth of Christ. heare Leuy: for he shal know the law of the lord, and deal forth udgement, and offer sacrifices, for all Is∣rael, til the full time of Christ, the chief
priest, because the Lorde hath spoken it. I charge you by the GOD of heauen,Faithfull dealing with neighbours. that euery of you deale faithefully with his neighbour, and sticke vnto Leuy in hum∣blenesse of hart, that ye maie receiue bles∣syng at his mouthe; for he shall blesse Is∣raell and Iuda.Gene. . God hath chosen Iuda to be the kyng of all people, wherefore wor∣ship you his seede, for he shall dye for you in battailes, bothe visible and inuisible, and shall raigne ouer you worlde without ende, Ruben hauyng geuen his children the foresaied charge, and blessed them, died: Then thei put him in a coffin, and ca∣ried him out of Egipte, buried hym at Hebron, in the double caue, where his fathers slepte. Finis.
¶The Testament of Simeon, made to his Children at his death concernyng . The harte in womns mouthe, the face, the sworde, the Wolfe, the cap: All these paint out the cauious race, that runne to their mishap.
THe copie of Simeons wor∣des, whiche he spake to his Sonnes at his death, in the hundred and twenteth yere of his life, in the whiche Io∣seph died. For they came to visite hym v∣pon his death bed, and he sittyng vp, kis∣sed them, saiyng. Harken my children, heare me your fa∣ther Simeon, whatsoeuer I haue in my hart. I am my father Iacobs second sōne, and my Mother Lea named me Simeon, because the Lorde heard her praier.Genes. 29. I be∣came very mightie, I went through with my doynges, and was not afraied of any thyng.Hardines of whom it is. For my harte was stout, my minde vnmoueable, and my stomack discourage∣able: for hardinesse is giuen of the highest ino mennes soules and bodies.Genes. 37. In those daies I enuied Ioseph, because my father loued hym, I hardened my harte againste hym, to kill hym, because the Prince of er∣rour sendyng forthe the spirite of enuie, blynded my mynde, that I could not take heede to spare my Father Iacob. But his God,Man pur∣poseth, God disposeth. & the God of his fathers, sēdyng his Angel, did rid hym out of my handes. For while I wēt into Sychem, to crary tarre
for our flockes, and Ruben into Dotai where all our necessaries were laied vp in store:Gene. 37. our brother Iuda solde hym to the Ismalits, and therefore when my brother was come againe, he was sorie, for he in∣tended to haue conueyed hym safe againe to our father. But I was angrie with Iu∣da, for lettyng hym go aliue, and bare him grudge fiue monthes after:Chst after bloud pla∣gue. howbeit God etted me, and restrained the woorkyng of my handes, for my right hande was halfe withered vp for vii. daies together. Then did I perceiue (my Sonnes) that that be∣fell me for Iosephes sake, whereupon I repented sone after, and besought the lord to restore my hande, and I would abstaine from all rancour, enuie, and follye. For I knewe I had conceiued a wicked thought against the Lorde, and against my Father Iacob, for my brother Iosephes sake whō I enuied. Now therefore my children,Enuy descri∣bed. kepe your selues frō the spirites of error and enuie. For enuie ouerruleth the.Blindeth the minde. mynde of eue∣ry mane, sufferyng.Hindereth  susteuaunce. hm not to eate or drinke in rest▪ or to doe any good thyng, & is alwaies eggyng him to. prouoketh . slaie the par∣tie whom he enuieth, and inyng.Pineth at away
at his prosperitie.mens pro∣speritie. Twoo yeres together I punished my soule with fastyng in the feare of the Lorde. For I knewe,A remedie a∣gainst enuie. that the waie to deliuer me from enuie, was the feare of the lorde. If a mā flee to the lorde, the wicked spirit fleeth frō hym, so as his mynde becommeth meke, and of spitefull, he becōmeth pitifull, bearyng no grudge towardes suche as loue hym, & so his en∣uie ceaseth. And because my father sawe me sadde, he asked me the cause of it. To whom I lied, saiyng: I haue a paine in my stomacke: for I was foriest of all my bro∣thers, for that I had been the cause of Io∣sephes sellyng into Egipte.Gene. . And when I came into Egipt, and was put in ward by hym as a spie: Then perceiued I that I was iustly punished, and I was not sorie for it.Ioseph mer∣cifull to his brethren. But Ioseph beyng a good man, and hauyng Gods spirite in hym, & beyng ful of pitie and mercie,Gene. 50. mynded not to doe me any harme,Looke page 71. but loued me as well as there∣sidue of my brethren. Therefore my chil∣dren, keepe your selues from all spite and enuie, and walke in singlenesse of mynde, and good conscience, after the example of your fathers brother, that God may giue you grace, glorie, and blessednesse vppon
your heades,I sure to∣kē of a good nature. as you see in hym. Of all the daies of his life, he did neuer caste vs in the tth with it, but loued vs as his owne soule, and more then his owne Children, honoryng vs, and geuyng vs riches, Cat∣tell, and Corne aboundantly. You there∣fore my childrē, loue ye one an other with a good harte, and put from you the spirite of Enuie:Properties of enuie. for, it maketh a mannes soule to.Coruptiō of life. growe sauage,Distempe∣rature of bo∣dy. marreth his bodye, bredeth wrathe, and warre in his though∣tes, setteth his bloud on fire, driueth hym out of his wittes, and suffereth not reasō to beare any swaie. Moreouer,Smale sleepe. it taketh awaie his slepe, disquieteth his mynd, and maketh his body to tremble: For euen in slepe some spice of imagined malice gua∣weth hym, combryng his soule with Spi∣rites of mischief, makyng his bodie gast∣ly, and his mynde afrighted with trouble, and appearyng vnto men, as it were with a pernicious spirite, and pouryng out of poyson.Genes. 39. Therefore was Ioseph faire of face, token of a quiet mynde. beautifull, and comely to beholde, be∣cause no wicked thyng dwelte in hym. For he had a count enance cleare from combe∣raunce of mynde. And now my childrē, let your hartes be meke before the lorde, and
walke right before mā: so shall ye finde fa∣uor bothe with God and man: and beware, that ye fal not to whoredome.Effectes of whoedome. For whore∣dome is the mother of all naughtinesse, se∣paratyng a man from God, & sending him to Beliall.Genes. 49. For I haue seen in Enockes writynges, that you and your childrē shal∣be corrupted with whoredome, and do Le∣uy wrong by the sworde. But thei shal not preuaile againste Leuy, because he shall ight the lordes battailes, & take all your tentes, and verie fewe shall bee deuided in Leuy and Iuda,Genes. 49. for he shall be your Capi∣taie, and my father Iacob prophesied in his blessinges. Behold,Parentes teachyng not their childr̄ are giltie. Commodi∣ties of con∣corde. I tell you al thin∣ges aforehande, that I maie be cleare frō the synne of your soules, Now, if you put from you all enuiousnesse, and all stifnec∣kednesse, all my bones shall florishe as a Rose in Israel, and my fleshe as a Lillie in Iacob, & my sauor shalbe as the sent of Li∣banus, & my holy ones shalbee multiplied as the Ceders for euer, & their boughes shall spreade out in length for euermore. Then shall thee seede of Chanaan perishe together,Exod. 17. with the remenaunte of Ama∣lecke. All the Capadocians shall perishe, and all the Schithians shall be destroied.
Then shall the lande of Cham faile, and al the people go to wrecke. Then shall al the earth rest from trouble, and all men vn∣der Heauen from warre. Then shall Sem bee glorified, when the greate Lorde God of Israel appeareth vpō yearth as a man, to saue Adam in hym. Then shall the spi∣rites of errour be troden vnder foote, and men shal raigne ouer hurtfull siēdes.. Thē shall I rise againe in ioye, and blesse the highest in his wōderfull workes: for God takyng a body vpon him, and eatyng with men, shall saue men. And now my children obey Leu nd you shall bee deliuered by Iuda and uauce not your selues aboue thes twoo Tribes,The fruit of dience. for of them twoo shall the sauyng health of God spring vnto vs.Gene. 49. For the Lorde shall sette vp, of Leuy the Prince of Priestes, and of Iuda the kyng of kynges, God and man. So shall he saue all the Gentiles, & the offpryng of Israel. For these thynges sakes I charge you to commaunde your children, for . to keepe these thynges throughout al their generatiōs. And Simeon making an ende of these his saiynges, and commaundementes to his children, slept with his Fathers, whē he was of the age of a hundred and twen∣tie
yeares. And they laide hym in a Cof∣fin of woodde that rotteth not, that they might carry his bones againe into He∣bron, and they conueied him priuily in the warre of the Egiptians. For the Egipti∣ans kept the bones of Ioseph in the Kyn∣ges treasury. For, their Ichaters tolde them, that, whensoeuer Iosephes bones were caried awaye, there should be suche a plague of miste and darkenes among the Egiptians, as one Brother should not know an other, no not euen by torch light. And Symeons Children bewayled their Father accordyng to the Lawe of mournyng, and continued in Egipt, till the day of their departyng thence vn∣der the hand of Moyses.
¶The Testament of Leuy hys Children at hys death con∣cenyng Priesthoode. The sinne, be iust, rage not geue lyght, Ye Preachers of Gods worde: For what thing els sheweth Sun and Moone, Dame Venus, Wolfe and sword.
THe Copye of Leuyes wordes, namely, which he spake to his childrē, cōcerning all the thin∣ges, which they should doe, and whiche should happen to them vnto the day of iudgement. He was in health when he called thē vnto hym, for he knew before▪ when he should dye. Therfore, whē they were come together, he said vnto thē: I Leuy was bred and borne in Carram,Leuy his byrth and countrey. and afterwarde came with my father into Sichem.Genes. 14. I was at y• time but yong, about xx. yeares olde, when I helped my brother Simeō to reuēge our sister Dina against Hemor. Now as wee were feedyng of our flocks in Abenaul, the spirit of y• vnder∣standing of the Lord came vpon me, and I sawe all menne vnderminyng their owne waies, & how vnrighteousnes had builded her selfe a fortresse, and wickednesse sat v∣pon the towers thereof.Loue of a true Pasor. And I was sorye for mankind, & besought the Lord to saue them. Then fell there a sleepe vpon mee, and I saw a high mountaine: It was the mountaine of Aspis in Abelmaull.The visson of Leuy. And behold, the heauens opened, and the An∣gell
of God sayd vnto mee:Christ. Leuy, com he∣ther: and I went from the first heauen to the second, and there sawe the water han∣ging betwene the one and the other. And I saw the third heauen much brighter thē them both: or▪ the height therof was infi∣nite. And I sayd to the Angell, what mea∣neth this:Christ. And the Angell aunswered me, maruell not at these things; for thou shalt see fower heauens yet brighter, and with∣out comparison, when thou commest vp to them.Ministers wha they are▪ and their oice. For thou shalt stand by the Lord, and be his minister, and vtter his secrets vnto men, and preach of the deliuerer of Israel which is to come. By thee and by Iuda the Lord will appeare to men, to saue al man∣kinde in them.The liuyng of the mini∣stery from whence. Thy life shall depend vpon the Lorde, by hym shalt thou haue thy fiel∣des, vineyardes, fruites, gold, and siluer. Therefore harken as touching the seuen Heauens.The descri∣ption 1. of the seuē hea∣uens, his vi∣sion. The lowest is most lowring, be∣cause it is nerest to al the vnrighteousnes of men. The second, hath fire, Snow, and Ise, prepared by the Lords appointment, against the daye of Gods rightfull iudge∣mēt. In it are al the spirites of vēgeance, for the punishyng of the wicked. In the third are the powers of hostes, ordeined a∣gainst
the day of iudgement, to take ven∣geance vppon the spirites of error and of Belial. In the fourth aboue these are the Saints, for in the higher places dwelleth great glory in the holy of all holyes aboue all holinesse. In the nexte vnto this, are the Angels, that doe seruice in Gods pe∣sence, and seeke his fauour in all the igo∣raunces of the righteous. They offer vn∣to the Lord the swete fauour of reasoable seruice a Sacrifice without bloud. In the other that is vnder this, are the Angells that bring aunsweres from the Angels in Gods presence. In that which is aboue it, are the Thrones and Potestates, wherein is cōtinuall offeryng vp of Hymnes vnto God. Therefore whensoeuer the Lord lo∣keth vpon vs, all of vs are mouth▪ ya and uch heauen, earth, & the bottomles deepe are moued at the sight of his greatnesse▪ but, the Children of men beyng witlesse, shall synne and prouoke the highest vnto wrath. Now therfore vnderstand, that the Lorde will execute iudgement vppon the children of men. Because that men will cōtinue in vnbelefe and vnrighteousnesse. euen when the stones shal cleaue a sunder, the Sunne be darkened, the waters dried
vp, the fire quake, and al creatures bro∣bled at the faintyng of the inuisible Spi∣rites, and at the spoiling of hell in the pas∣sion of the Highest: therefore shall they be condemned to punishement. The highest then hath hearde thy prayer, to separate the from vnrighteousnesse, and to make thee his sonne and seruaunt and a Mini∣ster in his presence,A minister what he ould be: of hym selfe not righteous. a Lanterne of know∣ledge to lighten Iacob throughly, and to be as a day Sunne among the children of Israell, and vnto thee and thy seede shall he power of blessyng bee geuen,Math. v. Ende of the Priesthode prophesed. Christ his assion pro∣hesed. till God visite al nations in the bowels of the mer∣cye of his sonne for euer. Neuerthelesse thy Sonnes shall lay their handes vppon hym to crucifie hym, and for this cause is wisedome and vnderstandyng geuen thee, to giue thy children knowledge of hym, because that if they blesse hym, they shal be blessed, and they, that cursse hym, shall pe∣rishe in his sight.Christ. And the Angell opened me the gates of heauen, and I saw the ho∣lie temple, and the highest sittyng on the throne of glory, and he saied to mee: Leuy, I haue geuen thee the blessynges of the priesthoode, till I come my selfe to dwell in the middes of Israell. Then the Angel
brought me downe to the earth, and gaue mee a shield and a sworde, saiyng: execute vengeaunce in Sichem for Dina, & I wil be with thee, for God hath sent me. And at that tyme I slewe the Sonnes of Hemor,enes. 34▪ as it is written in the tables of Heauen. And I said vnto hym, lord I pray thee tell me thy name, that I may call vpon thee in the tyme of my trouble. And he answered, I am an * Angell which excuseth Israell,Christ . that he might not bee striken for euer, be∣cause all wicked spirites lye in waite for hym. Afterward, beyng waked, as it were out of sleepe, I blessed the most highest, and the Angell that excuseth the ofspring of Israell, and all righteous men. And when I came to my Father, I ounde an Asp of brasse, whereupon the hill tooke the name of Asps, whiche is harde by Gebat on the right side of Abyla. And I layd vp these saiynges in my hart. I counselled my fa∣ther and my Brother Ruben to perswade the sonns of Hemor to be circumcised,The zeal a minister Genes. 34. be∣cause I was zelously greued for the abho∣mination, whiche they had wrought in Is∣raell. For first of al I killed Sichem, and then Simeon killed Hemor, and after vs came our brethren, who smote the Citie
the edge of the sworde.Genes. 34. When my Father heard of it▪ he was angry,Genes. 49. because they had receiued circumcision, and were killed af∣terward, and therefore he delt otherwise with vs in blessing. For we nned inThe man∣ner not the doyng rebu∣ked. do∣yng it against his wil, and he fell sicke the same day.The Snne of the Siche∣mites. But I knewe that the Lorde in∣tended euil vnto the Sychemites, because thei had heretofore purposed to haue done the like vnto Sara, as they did to our si∣sterRaped Dina. Dina. But GOD letted them. And they persecuted our fatherPersecu∣ted straun∣gers. Abraham as then a straunger, and caried away his cat∣tell, and furdermore did beat Ieblae verie sore, who was borne in his house. After the same maner delte they with all other strangers,Genes. 12. takingRauished their wiues. away their wiues frō them by force, and driuyng the men them∣selues out of their countrye. For whiche cause the wrath of the lord came vpō them in the end. And I said to my Father: Sy be not offended, for GOD will bring the Chananites to nothyng before thee, and geue their land vnto thee, & vnto thy holy one after thee. For frō hēceforth Sichem shall be called the Citie of fooles, because that as men doe scorne fooles, so haue we scorned them for their workyng of foly in
Israel, in takyng awaie our sister to de∣file her. Then came we into Bethell, and there when I had Sacrificed three score and ten daies together,Gene .xxx I sawe he thyng again, as I had seen it before. Ad I sawe euen menne in white raiment, saiyng vn∣to me:The Min∣sterie descrbed. Up, putte on the Stole of Prieste∣hoode, the Crowne of righteousnesse, the Reasonall of vnderstandyng, the Robe of truth,xod .xxvii Leuit .viii. the Breastplate of faithe, the Mitre of holinesse, and the Ephod of Prophesie. And so euery of thē bryngyng somethyng with hym, did put them vpon me, saiyng: Be thou henceforthe the Lordes Prieste, thou and thy seede for euermore. The irste annointed me with holie Oyle, and gaue me the Scepter of iudgement. The seconde washed me with cleane water, and edde me with breade and wine, that is to wit, with the holye of holies, and clothed me with a holie and glorious Robe doune to the grounde. The third did put vpō me a Silken garmente, like an Ephod. The fourth girded me with a girde like to purple. The fifth gaue me an oliue bough full of fatnesse. The sixth did set the Mitre of Priesthode vpon my head. The seuenth filled my handes with Incense, to the en∣tent
I should execute the office of Prieste vnto the Lorde. And he saied vnto me: Le∣uy, vnto three principall thynges is thy seede appointed of GOD,The the blessyng es of the famely of Ly. namely to be a signe of the glorious lord that is to come▪ and he, that beleueth, shalbe the firste. The greate lot shall not fall vpon hym. The se∣conde shalbe in priesthoode.Christ Pro∣phesed. And the third shal haue a newe name, because a king shal rise vp in Iuda, and rene my Priesthood, accordyng to the figure of the Gentiles, among all nations. But the commyng of hym is vnvtterable, as who shall bee the Pophet of the highest, borne of the seede of our Father Abraham. All the pleasant thynges of Israell shall be geuen to thee, and to thy seede,A distribu∣tyng exclu∣deth a sole receiuyng of the Sacra∣mentes. and ye shall eate all that is fare to see to, and thy seede shall distri∣bute the Lordes Table, and of them shall be high Priestes, Iudges, and Scribes: for in their mouthe shall the holie thinges be kept. Whē I awooke, I perceiued, that this vision was like the other, and I laied it vp in my harte, and shewed it not to any man liuyng vpon yearth. The firste twoo daies I and Iuda wente to our Grandfa∣ther Isaac, and he blessed me, according to all the saiynges of the visions that I had
seen, but he would not goe with vs vnto Bethel. But when we came to Bethel, my father Iacob sawe in a vision concerning me, that I should bee their Prieste before the Lorde. And he rose in the Mornyng, and tithed all thynges to the lorde by me. Then came we to Hebron to dwell there, and by and by Isaac called me, to expound the lawe of the lorde, accordyng as Gods Aungell had shewed it me,Exod .xxix. Leuit. . and he taught me the Lawe of Priesthoode, Sacrifices, Burnt offerynges, Firstlynges, Freewill offerynges, and offerynges for health. E∣uery daie he taught me vnderstādyng, and called vpō me continually before the lord, saiyng:n exhorta∣tion for Mi∣nisters. my sonne, geue no eare to the spi∣rite of fornication, for he will folowe thee and defile the holie thynges by thy seede.A Minister maie bee ma∣ed. Therefore take thee a wife in thy youth, suche a one as hath not any blemishe nor vncleannesse,Leuit .xxi. nor is of the kindred of the Allophites,He muste come with a pure mynde to execute his office. or of the Gentiles. And before thou enter into the holies, wash, did like∣wise ere thou sacrificest, and also whē thou hast doen, Offer vnto the lorde the fruites of the twelue trees that are euer grene,Leu. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. as my father Abraham taught me to do: and the fruite of all cleane beastes, & of cleane
foules offer thou in Sacrifice. Likewise offer vp the first borne of all thynges, and the firste fruites of the vine, and sprinckle all thy Sacrifices with salte. Now there∣fore my sonnes, keepe ye all the thynges that I commaunde you: for▪ whatsoeuer I haue heard of my fathers, that haue I told vnto you.A comforte for godly pa∣rentes. I am cleare from al the wicked∣nesse and synne, whiche you shall commit to the ende of the worlde.Prophese of the destructi∣on of Israel. Ye shall woorke wickednesse againste the Sauiour of the worlde,The  plagued, whose mini∣sterie is wic∣ked. and ye shall seduce Israel, stirring vp muche euill against him from the lorde and dealyng wickedly with hym, so that Hierusalem shall not continue, by reason of your naughtinesse. The Ueile of the Temple shalbe rente asunder, to discouer▪ your foulenesse, and ye shall bee scattered as prisoners among the Heathen, and bee scorned, curssed, and troden vnder foote. Neuerthelesse, the house whiche the lorde shall chuse, shall bee called Hierusalem, as the booke of Enoch the righteous contei∣neth. .xxxvi. Leuy his rogenie. Therefore when I was .xxviii. ye∣res olde, I tooke a wife, whose name was Melcha, and she conceiued and bare me a Sonne, and called his name Gershon, be∣cause we were but straūgers in our lande:
For Gershon signified banishement. Now I knewe of hym, that he should not bee of the chief degree. The seconde was Caath, who was borne the xxxv. yeare. I sawe a vision Eastwarde, how all the Congrega∣tion stoode vp a lofte, and therefore I cal∣led his name Caath, whiche signifieth the beginnyng of greatnesse, and learnyng. The third was Merari, who was borne in the fiue and fifteth yeare of my life: And because his mother was hardely deliue∣red of hym, she called hym Merari, whiche is as muche to say,Exod .vi. as my bitternesse. And in the three score and fourth yeare of my life, was my daughter Iochebed borne in Aegipt: and so was I honorable among my brethren. Also my soonne Gershon tooke a wife, whiche bare him Libny and Schimi. The sonnes of Caath were Amram, Ysh∣ar, Hebron, and Vziel: and the Soonnes of Merari were Mahaly and Mushi. In the fower score and fowerteenth yeare of my life, Amram tooke to wife my daughter Iochebed, because that he and she were borne bothe on one day.Leuy made Priest at .18. yeres. I was eight yere old, when I entered into the land of Cha∣naan: and eighteene yere olde, when I en∣tered the office of Priesthoode. At eight
and twentie yeres I tooke a wife, and at fourtie yeres olde I entered into Egipt. And beholde,Maried at xxviii. ye bee nowe my Childrens children in the thirde generation. Ioseph died in the hundred and tenth yeare. And now my Children,A note for Paentes. I warne you, feare the Lorde your GOD with all your harte, and walke plainely in all thynges, accor∣dyng to his Lawe. Moreouer, bryng vp your children in learnyng, that they maye haue vnderstandyng by readyng the lawe of God, without ceasyng all their life lōg. For whosoeuer knoweth Gods lawe shal∣be honoured,B eynges of the lear∣n minister. and goe wheresoeuer he wil, he shall be no straunger. Also he shall haue moe freindes then his forefathers hadde, and many shall bee glad to serue hym, and to heare the lawe at his mouthe. My son∣nes, deale rightfully vpon yearth, that ye maie finde heauen, and sowe good thinges in your myndes, that ye maye finde them in your life. For if ye sowe euill thynges, ye shall finde and reape all maner of com∣braunce and trouble.Wsedome a prectous Iewell. Get ye wisedome in the feare of God: For if captiuitie come, and Cities and Countreis bee destroyed: golde and siluer, and al possessions perish, but none can take awaie the wise mannes
wisedome,Synne bin∣deth widō. saue onely the blindnesse of vn∣godlinesse and synne. For, his wisedome shall become a shield to hym among his e∣nemies,Cōmodites of wisedome. and make a straunge countrey to bee as his owne home, and cause hym to finde frendship in the middest of his foes. If he teach and doe suche thynges, he shal sitte with kynges, as did our brother Io∣seph. And truely my children,Christe his death, & spit∣fulnes of the Iewes Pro∣phesled. I knowe by the writynges of Enoch, that in the ende ye shall doe wickedly, laiyng your handes moste spitefully vpon the lorde, & through you your brethren shalbe confounded,Math .xxii. and made a scornyng stocke to all Nations. Howbeeit our Father Israell is cleare frō the wickednesse of the high Priestes, whiche shall saye hande vpon the Sauior of the worlde. The heauē aboue the yearth is cleane, & you be the lightes of the Hea∣then, as the Sūne and the Moone. What shall al the HeathēMinisters what the are do, if you be ouerdarck∣ned with wickednesse, and bryng cursed∣nesse vpon your countrey folke, for whose sakes the lighte of the worlde is put into you, to inlighten al men withal; this light of the worlde shall you wilfully ste, and teache commaundementes cōtrary to the righteousnesse of God. He shall purloine yn
Lordes offerynges, and suche awaie pee∣ces of it.The wicked Priesthoode and their mi∣serie desci∣bed. Before ye doe your Sacriices to the Lorde, ye shall steale awaie the choi∣ceste thynges, and eate them disdainfullie with Harlottes, amuel. . teachyng Commaunde∣mentes of coueteousnesse. Ye shall defile Maried women, and enforce Maidens in Hierusalem. Ye shall matche your sel∣ues with Whores and Harlottes, ye shal take the Daughters of the Heathen to wife▪ purifiyng them with vnrighteous purifiyng, and youre minglyng shall bee as Sodome and Gomorrha, and ye shall be swolne with wickednesse in the Priest∣hoode, in so muche that ye shall disdaine∣fully laughe the hlie thynges to scorne, not onely vauntyng your selues againste menne, but also beeyng puffed vp with Pride againste the Commaundementes of GOD.A prophesle of their de∣struion. For this caus shall the Tem∣ple, whiche the Lorde shall haue chosen▪ be vndoubtedly lefte desolate in vnlean∣nesse, and you your selues become capti∣ues to all Nations, and bee lothed and abhored▪ among them, and receiue ende∣lesse shame and confusion, through God rightfull iudgement: and all, that see you; shall shunne you. And were it not for our
fathers Abraham,A Prophese of Christes persecution. Isaac and Iacob: there should not one of my seede bee left vppon earth. Furdermore, I know by the booke of Enoch, that you shall goe astray by the space of threescore and tenne wekes, and defile the Priesthoode,Marke the right portra∣ture of the shuelyng generation. stayn the sacrifi∣ces, destroie the Law, despise the saiynges of the Prophetes, frowardlie persecute righteous folke, hate the godly, abhorre the saiynges of soothfae men, & call hym Hereticke, that goeth about to reue the Lawe by the power of the Highest: and in the ende ye shall kill * hym out of as you thinke,Christ and his mēbers. not knowyng that he shall rise againe, and so shall ye receaue his in∣ocent bloud wilfullye vppon your owne heades. For his sake shall your holy pla∣ces be left desolate, whiche you shall ha defiled, euen by vtter forswearyng▪ and your dwelling shall not be cleae▪ but you shalbe accursed among the Heathen, and despaire shall vexe you, till he visite you , and mercifully receaue you thgh faith & water. And forasmuche as y haue earde of the three score and ten weekes,Ergo faith and the holy Ghost iusti∣fieth, and not merites. eare ye also of the Priesthoode. For in eery Iubiley shall be Priesthood. In the first Iubiley the firste annointed intothe
Priesthoode shall bee greate, and talke to God, as to his father, and his Priesthoode shall be full of the feare of the Lord, and in the daye of hys gladnesse hee shall ryse vp to the saluation of the worlde. In the se∣conde Iubiley, the annointed shall be con∣ceiued in the heauinesse of the beloued sorte, and his Priesthoode shall bee honou∣rable, and he shall bee glorified among all men. The thirde Priest shall bee taken vp in sorrowe, and the fourth shall bee in griefe, because the multitude of iniqui∣ties shall be layd vpon hym, and through∣out all Israell euerye man shall hate hys neighboure. The fifth shall bee helde faste in darkenesse, and likewise the sixth and the seauenth. And in the seauenth shall bee suche abhomination before God and man as I cannot expresse, howbeit that the doers thereof shall be knowne. For thys cause shall they bee in captiuitie and cor∣ruption, and their Lande and Substaunce shall  destroyed: but in the fifth weeke they shal returne into their desolate coun∣trey, and renue the Lordes house. In the seauenth weeke, shall come Idolatrous Priestes, coueitous warriours, vnrigh∣teous Scribes, and filthy abusers of men,
children, and beastes. After that the Lorde hath sent vengeaunce vppon them in the priesthoode,Christ and his true mi∣nistery de∣scribed. then will God raise vp a new priest, to whom all the Lordes worde shal∣be opened: and he shall execute true iudge∣mente vppon earth manye daies, and hys starre shall rise in heauen. As a kyng shall he shead forthe the light of knowledge in the open sunshine of the daye, and hee shal∣be magnified ouer all the worlde, and bee receaued and shine as the sunne vppon the earth,Christ ligh∣teneth the world. and driue awaye all darkenesse, and there shall be peace vpon all the earth. In his dayes the heauens shall reioyce, the earth shall be glad, the cloudes shal be me∣rie, the knowledge of the Lorde shall bee poured out vpon the earth as the waters of the Seas, and the Angels of glory that are in the Lordes presence, shall reioice in hym.Baptisme of Christ pr∣phesed. The heauens shal be opened, and out of the temple of glorie shall sanctification come vpon him with the fathers voice, as from Abraham the Father of Isaac, and the glory of the highest shall be spread out vpon hym, and the Spirite of vnderstan∣ding and sanctification shal rest vpon him, whereof hee shall geue aboundantlye and mightely to hys childrē in truth for euer∣more,
Priest∣hoode shall succeed Christ. and there shall none succeede hym from generation to generation, worlde without end. In his Priesthoode all sinne shall come to ende,Priesthoode of Christ how benefi∣ciall. and the vnrighteous shal cease from their naughtinesse, but the righteous shall reste in hym, and hee shall vpon the gates of Paradise, and staye the threatnyng sworde againste Adam,Christ is our propitia∣tour. and feede the Lambes with the fruite of life, and the spirite of holines shall be in them. Hee shall bynde vp Beliall,Christ g∣neth power to his to to tread downe spirites. and geue his owne children power, to tread down hurt∣full spirites, and the Lorde shall reioice in his children and accept them as his belo∣ued for euermore. Then shall Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob bee glad, and then shall I and all Saintes reiyce. How my chil∣dren ye haue heard all. Therefore chuse vnto you either light or darkenes, either the law of the Lord, or the workes of Be∣liall, and wee aunswered our Father, say∣ing: We will walke before the Lorde ac∣cordyng to his law. And our father sayde, the Lorde is witnesse, and his Angels are witsses, and I am a witnesse, and you your selues are witnesses of the woordes of my mouth: And when wee had aunswe∣red, wer will her witnesses, Leuy rested
with this charge geuen vnto his Chil∣dren. And he stretched out his feete, and was put to his Fathers, when hee had liued hundreth and seuen and thirty yeares, an they layd hym in a Coffin, and buried hym afterwarde in Hebron, be∣sides Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. Finis.
¶The Testament of Iuda made to his children, at his death concernyng valiauntnesse, couetousnes and fonication. Loe here the blessed Princely state. Of Iuda▪ suffering not hys mate: The Seepter, Lyon, Pursse and Crowne, Betoken glory and renowne.
THe copy of al the saiyn∣ges of Iuda, whiche he spake to his childrē, at the tyme of his death, when they were come together before hym, he said vnto them. I was my fathers fourth sonne and my mother called mee Iuda saiyng:Iuda his exhort. I thanke thee Lorde for that hee hath geuen mee a fourth sonne.Gnes 9. The  of children. I was swifte of foote and painfull in my youth, and obeied my Fa∣ther in all thinges, and blessed my mother and my mothers sisters. And when I came to mans estate my Father Iacob prayed ouer mee saying: thou shalt be a Kyng and prosperous in all thinges. of Iuda by the gift of God. Beholde, God gaue mee grace in all my workes both a∣broad and at home. Upon a tyme I sawe a inde and ran after her and caught her,Genes. . and made meate of her for my Father. Al∣so I utran the Roes, and ouertooke all thinges that were in the fields, in so much that I caught a wilde Mare and tamed her, I plucked a Kid out of the mouth of a Beare,The mn∣hood Iuda. and takyng hym by the paw ouer∣threwe hym, and rente asunder all wilde beastes that turned vpon me, as if I had
been a dogge. I encountred with a wil be Boare, and ouerrunning hym tare hym in peeces. In Hebron a Bastardlyon leapte vpon a dogge, and I catchyng him by the taile flung hym awaie by and by, and hee asunder. In the borders of Gare a wild Bull was feedyng in the fieldes, and I tooke hym by the hornes, and swinged hym about, and finally killed hym. There came twoo Kinges of the Chananites ar∣med vppon our flocke, and muche people with them, and I alone runnyng to the flocke, stept to king Sur, and strikyng vp his legs ouerthrew hym, and so flew hym. Also I killed an other kyng named Tha∣phes, sittyng on his horse, and so scattered all their people. I ouertooke king Achor, a Giant on horsebacke, shootyng forward and backewarde: and throwyng a stone of threescore pound weight vpon his horse I ouerthrew him and killed hym, and fight∣yng twoo houres with Achor, at length I clae his shield, and maimed his feete, and finally lew him. As I was pullyng of his brstp, beholde eight of his frendes a∣ailed ee, whereupon I filled my handes with stones, & flinging them at them with a fling, flew fower of them, and put the o∣ther
fower to flight. Also our Father Ia∣cob slew the Giant Beelisa king of all the Kynges,The vali∣antnesse of Iacob. who was mightie and houge of the stature of twelue cubites. By reason whereof, feare fell vppon them, and they lefte their fightyng against vs. For thys cause my father was carefull of mee when I was in any battell with my Brethren. He sawe in a vision concernyng mee, that the Angell of strength followed me euery where, to the intent I should not be ouer∣come. The second handsell was a greater battell to vs than that whiche wee had at Sichem, in so much that in fightyng vali∣antly with by Brethren, I chased a thou∣sand men, and flewe of them two hundreth persons, and fower of their Kynges, and followyng after them scaled the Wall of their Citie, and there slew two kings m, and so we deliuered Hebron, and led them all away as prisoners. The next daye wee went to a strong walled and vnapproche∣able Citie called Areca, whiche threatned to kill vs. Therefore I and Gad went to the eastside of the Citie, and Ruben and Leuy to the West and Southside. They that stoode vppon the walles, supposyng there had been no mo but Gad and I, did
set sircely vppon vs, while in the mean tyme my Brothers that lay in stale, brake but vpon the other two sides, and scalyng the wall with Ladders, entred the Citie re our enemies wist it, and so we wonne it by the sword, and set fire vpō the tower, and burnt it vp with such as were fled vn∣to it. As we returned, the men of Thaffie lay in wait for our pray, and tooke it with our children. But wee followed them to Taffie and slew them, and burned the Ci∣tie, spoyling all that was in it. And while I was at the Waters of Gureba, wee fell vpon the men of Iobell that came against vs in battell, and slewe and spoyled bothe them and also their complyees that came to their ayde from Selon, so as wee gaue them no respit to returne again vpon vs. The fifth day after there came men from Machir to fetch away our prisoners, whō wee met in battell, notwithstandyng that they were a might it hoste, and slewe them before they could get vp to the place that they came from. And when wee came to their Citie, their women tumbled downe stones vpon vs from the toppe of the Hill whereon their Citie stoode: But I and Simon coastyng to the backeside of the
towne, got to the higher places, and de∣stroyed the whole Citie. The next daye it was told vs that the Cities of two kings came againste vs with a houge Hoste. I therfore and Dan, feigning our selues to be Amortheans and fellowes with them, went into their Citie, and takyng the en∣terances in the dead time of the night, did set the Gates wide open to our Brethren that came after vs, by meanes wherof we destroyed them and all that they had, and when we had sacked the City one did caste downe the three Walles thereof. Then went we to Thamua, whiche was the re∣fuge of all the Kinges for their Warres. Where being angry for a hurt y• I tooke, I charged vppon those that stoode aboue me: but they threwe downe stones out of linges vpon me, and shot arrowes at me, & had killed me, but that my brother Dan reskued me. Therefore we came runnyng vpon them in a rage, and put them all to flight, and they passyng by an other waye, went and sued humbly to my Father, who made a couenaunt with them, so as wee did them not any more harme, but recea∣ued them into league with vs, and redeli∣uered them al their prisoners. Then buil∣ded
I Chamma, and my Father builded Rambahel. Twentie yeares olde was I when thys Warre was made, and the Chananies were afraide of mee and my brethren. I had muche cattel, and my chief Herdman was Yran of Odellam, in whose company I saw Barsa King of Odellam, who made vs a feaste, and with muche in∣treatance gaue me his daughter Bethsue to wife, whiche brought mee forthe Er, Anan, and Sylon, of which three GOD slewe two childlesse. For Sylon lyued of whom some of you be the children. My fa∣ther and wee made eightene yeares peace with his brother Esau and hys Children. When the eighteene yeares were past, af∣ter our comming out of Mesopotamia, in the forteth yeare of my life, Esau our Fa∣thers brother came vpon vs with a great and strong host, and was slaine by the bow of Iacob, and conueied awaye dead vnto mount Seir. We also followed vpon the children of Esau, but his city was strong with high walles and gates of Yrn and Brasse, so as wee coulde not enter into it, howbeit wee did shut them vp within it, and besieged it. Nowe when they shewed not themselues abroad in twentie dayes
together, I put my helmet vpon my head and in sight of them all set vp a ladder, and scaling the wall slew fower of their noble men with a Stone of the weight of three talentes. The next day Ruben and Gad went in and slewe three score other. Then they offered peace, and we by our fathers aduice receaued them to tribute. And they gaue vs two hundred quarters of Corne, fiue hundred Bates of Oyle, and a thou∣sande and fiue hundred measures of wine, vntill we wente downe into Egipt. After this my Sonne Her maried Thamar of Mesopotamia the Daughter of Aram.Her and A∣nan slaine, for not vsing the benefite of lawfull mariage. Nowe Her was a wicked I my and doub∣ted of Thamar, because she was not of the land of Chanaan. Therefore the Angell of the Lorde slewe hym the third night af∣ter his mariage, when he had not yet com∣panied with her by reason of his mothers subtiltie, and so dyed in his naughtinesse, for she was loth that hee shoulde haue had any children by he. When Anan was mariageable; I gaue Thamar vnto him, and hee also of a spite companyed not with her, notwith∣standyng that hee liued a full yeare with her. And when I threatned hym, then hee
companied with her, but yet by hys mo∣thers commaundement he let his feed fall vpon the ground, and so he also died in his wickednes. I minded to haue geuen her vnto Silon also, but my wyfe Bethsue would not suffer mee. For she spited Tha∣mar because she was not of the daughters of Canaan, as her self was, now I knewe that the ofspring of Chanaā, was mischie∣uous, but yet did youthfull fancie blynde my hart, and as I beheld her pouring out wine I was deceiued by dronkennes and fell in loue with her.Fornication  of runkennes. Upon a tyme whyle I was away, she maried Silon to a Wo∣man of Chanaan, which her deede when I vnderstoode I cursed her in the bitternes of my soule▪ and so she dyed in the wicked∣nes of her sōnes. A two yeares after these things as I went to there my sheep,Genes . Tha∣mar deckyg her selfe like a Bride, sate her downe at a gate of the Citie.In intolle∣rable cu∣stome of the Ammorues. For it was the custome of the Amorites that their Brides doe set them selues forth at the gates of their Cities, by the space of seuen dayes together,Apparell, beutie nd wie prou∣keth whore∣dom. to be abused in for∣nication. I therefore being dronken with the waters of Hor, knew her not by rea∣son of wine, in so muche that her beautye
together with the attire in decking of her selfe deceiued me, and thereupon turnyng aside vnto her, I sayd, shall I come in vnto thee?Fornication to chargea∣ble. and she aunswered, what wilt thou geue mee? and I gaue her my Staffe, and my Girdle, and the Croune of my Kyng∣dome. Upon my companiyng with her, she conceiued afterward, I not knowyng my selfe to haue bene the doer thereof, would haue put her to death for it. But she ha∣uing kept my pledges in store, shamed me with them, and when I had heard myne owne wordes of her in secret which I had spoken to her when I laye with her in my dronkennesse, I could not put her to death because it was of the Lordes doyng,Happy are they that can cease from doyng ill. but I touched her not any more to my diyng day. For, when I had done thys abhomi∣nation▪ Israell, leste she might worke wi∣les with mee, I sayde I would fetche my pledges againe of her. But when I inqui∣red for her, the townsmen sayd there was no Bride in their Citie, because she came from another place, and had sit there but a little while, and she deemed, that no man knewe of my goyng in vnto her. After∣warde we came into Egypt to Ioseph, be∣cause of the dearth. Sir and fortie yeares
old was I when we came hether and thre score and thirteene yeares haue I liued here. And now my sonnes heare mee your Father, in all thinges, that I charge you withall, and keepe ye all my saiynges, in doyng all maner of righteousnes before the Lord, and in obeiyng the commaunde∣ments of the Lord God, and walke not af∣ter your owne lustes, nor after the concei∣tes of your owne mindes, in the pride of your hartes,It is sinfull for any man to glory in his . nether glory you in the wor∣kes of the strength of your youth, because it is sinfull in the sight of the Lord. For, in asmuche as I gloried in my battels, and vpbrayded my brother Ruben with Billamy Fathers wife,See what it is to vpbraid men their  because no face of any beutifull woman, had yet deceiued mee, therefore the spirite of fondnes and forni∣cation fell vpon mee, so as I was ouerta∣ken both in Bethsue the Chananite, and in Thamar the wife of mine own sonnes. And I saide to my father in lawe, I haue made my father priuie to the matter, and therefore I will take thy daughter to my wife. Hereupon he shewed mee an infinite masse of Gold in his daughters behalfe, (for he was a king) and decking her with Golde and Pearle, willed her to pour out
wine to vs at the Supper. The beautie of the woman and the Wine together, daze∣led mine eyes, and voluptuousnes did so darken myne vnderstandyng, that I fell in loue with her and brake the commaun∣dement of GOD and of my Fathers, and tooke her to wife.Childrē that marry with∣out consent of parentes plagued. According to the intent of my hart, the Lord payd me home for it: for I had no ioy of the children, that I had by her. Now therefore my children, be not dronken with Wine;Discommo∣dities of wine. for Wine turneth a mans vnderstandyng away frō the truth, and kindleth in hym the fire of luste, lea∣dyng his eyes into error,Blindeth vnderstan∣ding. in so muche that wine is a seruaunt to the spirite of leche∣ry, to further the sedyng of the mind with voluptuousnes,Seruaunt of echery. and so those twain bereue a man of all power. For▪ if a man drinke wine till hee bee dronken, he traineth hys mind into the filthy thoughtes of lecheric and kindleth the body to carnall copula∣tion.Fruite of dronkennes. And if desired occasion serue, sinne is wrought without shame.A dronken mā is shame∣les. Suche a thyng is wine my sonnes; for a dronken man is ashamed of nothyng. Beholde, it made both me and Thamar to do amisse,Example. so as I blushed not at y• multitude in the City but went aside vnto her in the fight of al men,
and committed a greate sinne in discoue∣ryng the vncleane priuities of my owne sonnes. Through drinking of wine I was not ashamed to breake Gods commaun∣dement in takyng a woman of Chananie to Wife.Who ought to drinke Wine. Wherefore my sonnes, hee that drinketh wine, had neede of discretion, and the discreciō, that euery man ought to vse in drinking of wine, is, that he be ashamed to ouer drinke hym selfe. For, if hee passe that bon, he forgoeth his vnderstandyng, and cleaueth to the spirite of error,Properties of a dronken man is filthy talke, and wicked deed, Discommo∣dities of whordom. which causeth the dronken man, to talke filthely and to doe wickedly, and not to bee asha∣med, but to host of his lewdnes, thinkyng it to be good. He that committeth whore∣dome▪ is berest of his libertie, and becom∣meth a ondslaue, of , and cannot get out of it againe, after the same maner that I was made naked. For I gaue ouer my Staffe, that is to saie, the staye of my tribe: and my girdle, that is, my power: & my crowne, that is, the glory of my kyng∣dome. Howbeit repentyng these thinges, I forbare all wine and flesh vnto mine old age, I was vtterly vnacquainted with all rth, And the Angell of GOD shewed me that women should from tyme to tyme
ouermaster all menne, as well Kynges as Kaitifes, and bereaue greate men of their glory. For, the pouertie of a poore man is a greater fence to hym, thā is the strength of a mightie man.Fower noy∣some spirits folow dron∣kennes. Therfore my children, keepe measure in drinkyng, for there are in it fower noysom spirits,Concupis∣cence. that is to wit: of concupiscence,Hartbur∣nyng. of hartrnyng, of le∣chery, and of filthy ga▪ If ye drinke wine merily in the fear of  Lord with ∣fastnes,Lechery. ye shal liue.Couetous∣nes. But if ye drinke with∣out regard of shame,Abstinence from wine what com∣moditie it hath. and feare of GOD, then turneth it to drankennesse, and disho∣nestie stealethin. And if ye drinke none at all, then shall ye no sinne, neith in slaunderous wordes▪It slaun∣dereth not. nor in quarelyng, nor in railyng,It quarel∣leth not nor rayleth. nor in breache of Gods Commaundementes, neither shall ye pe∣risho before your tynie. For Wine disc∣seth the secretes of GOD and man vnto straigers,It brea∣keth not the Commau∣dments. like as I bewrayed the secrets of God aud of my Father Iacob to Beth∣sue the Chananite,It peri∣sheth not be∣fore y• tyme. whiche God hath for∣biddē to be disclosed. Also wine is a cause of warre and seditiō. Moreouer, I charge you my sonnes, that you loue not Money, e looke vppon the beutie of women: for money and womanly beauty made mee to
ouershoote my selfe in Bethsue the Cha∣nanite. And I am sure, that these twoo thinges shall corrupt mine ofspryng, and marre the wise men of my linage, and hurt the kyngdome of Iuda, whiche God hath geuen mee for obeyng my Father;Obedience to parentes how profi∣table. for I neuer repined at my Father Iacobs com∣maundement, but did whatsoeuer hee bad mee. And Abraham the Father of my Fa∣thers blessed me to fight for Israel, and so did Isaac blesse mee likewise: and I know that the kingdome shall stand by me. But I haue read in the bookes of Enoche the righteous, that ye shall woorke wickedly in the latter daies.The discom∣modities of couetousnes therfore my children keepe your selues from lechery and coue∣tousnes, and geue eare to your father Iu∣da, for those thinges withdraw men from Gods law, and blynde the vnderstandyng of their mindes, and teache them.Full of pride. pryde, neither suffer they any man to shewe mer∣cy Merciles. to his neighbour. They bereue hys Disquie∣teth the soule Soule of alt good thinges, and hold it downe in paines and sorowes. Also they disapoint hym of hys sleepe,Cōsumeth the body. and eon∣sume his fleshe. Finally.Contemne Gods holy word. they hinder Gods Sacrifices, neglect his blessinges, disobey the speakyng of hys Prophetes,
and are offended at the woorde of godly∣nesse: for these two passions are contrary to the commaundementes of GOD.The coue∣tous and le∣cherous can not feare God. Hee that serueth them cannot obey GOD, be∣cause they dazell mens mindes, and walke abroad as well a nightes as of daies. My children, couetousnes leadeth men to ido∣latry. For,Idolatrie the fruite of couetous∣nes. through dotyng vppon money, it calleth them Gods, which are not, and compelleth the infected partye to growe most vilely out of kinde. For moneyes sake I loste my children, and had not the penaunce of my fleshe, and the humblyng of my soule, and the prayers of my father Iacob beene: I had dyed as now without children. But the God of my Fathers be∣yng mercifull and full of cōpassion, knew that I sinned through ignoraunce. For the Prince of errour had blynded me, and I ouershot my selfe as a fleshely man, and beyng corrupted with synne, knewe not mine owne infirmitie, but thought my selfe to be inuincible.Two spiri∣tes waite v∣pon a man. Know ye therefore my sonnes, that two spirites do waite vp∣on a man: that is to wit, the Spirite of trueth and the Spirite of errour, and in the middes betwene them is set the Spi∣rite of vnderstandyng of the mynd, whose
propertie is to incline whiche waye it li∣steth. The thynges that belong both to truth and vntruth are written in the brest of man, and God knoweth euerye whit of it, and none of al mens workes can be hid∣den at any tyme from hym, because all the priuities of mens hartes are written be∣fore the Lord, and the spirite of truth bea∣reth witnesse of all thinges and accuseth all, and he that sinneth hath a burnyng in his hart, and can not lift vp his face to his iudge. And now my children, loue ye Le∣uy, that ye may abyde, and exalte not your selues aboue hym, leaste ye perishe. The Lorde hath geuen vnto me the kingdome, and vnto hym the Priesthoode, and hath put the kingdomeIn respect that heauen∣ly things are better then arthly, not in externall rule and go∣uernment. vnder the Priesthood. Unto Leuy is geuen the Priesthoode, and vnto Iuda the kingdome,, the Pope can chalenge no earthly po∣wer. and GOD hath put the kingdome vnder the Priest∣hoode. Unto mee he hath geuen the thin∣ges that are vpon the earth, and vntoNot in po∣wer & rule, but in the ex∣cellencie of the office ap∣pertainyng to God. him the thinges that are in heauen. As farre as the Heauen surmounteth the Earth, so farre doth theNot in po∣wer & rule, but in the ex∣cellencie of the office ap∣pertainyng to God. Priesthoode surmount the kingdome that is vpon the earth. For, the Lord hath chosen hym aboue thee, to ap∣proach vnto him, and to eate of his Table,
and to take the firstlinges of the children of Israell, and thou shalt bee as a Sea to hym. For, like as in the Sea both righte∣ous and vnrighteous are in daunger, and the one sorte are caught Prisoner's, and the other sorte are inriched: euen so shall all kinde of men be hazarded in thee, some sinkyng in misery,Tyante and wicked men descri∣bed and pro∣phesied. and other some flotyng in prosperitie. For, in thee shall raygne great Whales, whiche shall swallowe vp men as fishes, and bryng free mens Son∣nes and Daughters into bondage. They shall take awaye mens Houses, Landes, cattell, and Money by force, and wrong∣fully feede Rauens and other greedy fow∣les with many folkes fleshe, and they shall prosper in naughtinesse, and bee exalted through couetousnesse, and there shall be false Prophetes like stormes, which shall perfecute all righteous men. But y• Lord shall set them together by the eares amōg themselues,Mutual dis∣corde is a plague for Tyrauntes. and there shall bee continuall warres in Israell, and my kingdome shall vp in Straungers, tyll the Sa∣uiour of Israell come,Christ pro∣phested. euen till the com∣myng of the God of righteousnesse, that Iacob and all Nations may rest in peace, and hee shall maintaine my kyngdome in
peace for euer. For, the Lord hath sworne to me that the kingdome of me and of my seede shall neuer faile world without end. But I am very sory, my Children, for the filthines and trechery, and idolatry, which ye shall worke against the kingdome,Note thys ye that seeke after wit∣ches for lost goodes. by followyng Witches and Coniurers, by vowyng your daughters to deceitfull de∣uils,The miserie of Ierusa∣lem. by makyng them inchaunters, char∣mers and strumpets, and by interme∣lyng your selues with the abominations of the heathen, for the whiche thinges the Lord shall bring vpon you.Famine. fa∣mine.Pestilence. and pestilēce, death and Death and Sword. sworde, wrathfull.Bescegement. besiege∣ment and.Deuouryng Dogges. deuouryng dogs, reproch of.Dayly reproche. freinds and foes, losse and.Losse and paine of eyes. pain of eyes, slaugh∣ter. Slaughter of children. of your children, rauishing Rauishing of wiues. of your Wiues, spoyle of your goods, the burning.Burning of the tem∣ple. of your temple, the desolation.Desolation of the countrey. of your countrey, and the.Captiuitie. cap∣tiuitie of your selues amōg all nations, whiche shall gelde some of you to make Eunukes for their Wiues.A remedy for all these But if ye retourne to the Lorde with hartie.Repen∣taunce. repentaunce and humanitie, and walke in
all theObediēce. Commaundementes of God: He will visite you with mercie, and louyngly deliuer you from the bondage of your e∣nemies. After this shall rise among you a Starre out of Iacob, and a manne shall spring out of my seede, whiche shall walke as the daysunne of righteousnesse, among the children of menne, in peace and meke∣nesse, and righteousnesse, and no sinne shal bee founde in hym. The heauens shall o∣pen vpon hym, to poure out the spirite of blessednesse vppon hym from the Father, and he shall sheade out the spirite of grace vpon you, and you shall bee his children in truthe, walkyng in his first and last Com∣maundementes. This is the ofspryng of the moste high God, and the welspryng of life to all fleshe. Then shall the Scepter of my Kyngdome shine brighte, and out of your roote shall spryng the vessell of plan∣tyng, in whom shall growe vp the rod of righteousnesse to the Gentiles,The moste heauenly benefite of Christ his seconde com∣myng. to iudge and saue all suche as call vpon hym. After this shall Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob rise vp againe to life, and I and the Princes my brethren, shall be your Spter in Is∣raell. Leuy firste, I next, Ioseph the third, Beniamin the fourth, Symeon the fifth,
Isachar the sixth, and so all the reste. And the Lorde hath blessed vs: Leuy shall bee the Messenger of my presence, Symeon the Power of my glorie, Ruben Heauen, Isachar the Hearth, Zabulō the Sea, Io∣seph the Mountaines, Beniamin the Ta∣bernacle, Dan the lightes, Heptalim the , God the Daysunne, and After an Oliue tree. And there shall be one peo∣ple of the lorde, and one tongue, and there shall bee no more the false Spiritie of Be∣▪ because he shall bee cast into endlesse fire.A sweete cō∣forte for the godly . They that are buried in sorrowe, shal : and they that were poore for the Lordes sake, shall be made riche. Thei that suffered penurie, shall haue plentie, and they that were weake, shall bee made strong.The blessed estate of the  after death. They that died for the lordes sake, shall wake vp vnto life, and runne in Ia∣cob, yea they shall runne skipping, and lea∣pyng, and they shal flie as Eagles for iov. But the vngodlie shall be sorrowfull, and the synners shall mourne, and all the people shall glorifie the Lorde for euer. There∣fore my children, keepe all the lawe of the Lorde, for there is hope for all suche as walke aright. A hundreth and nineteene yeares olde doe I dye in your fight. Lette
none of you burie me costly clothes,Iuda would no sumptu∣ous buria. nor rippe my beallie, for so will Rulers doe: But cary me backe into Hebron with you. With these woordes Iuda died: and his children do∣yng in all thynges as he com∣maunded them, buried hym with his fa∣thers in Hebron. Finis.
¶The Testament of Isachar, made to his Children at his death concenyng a single harte. Lre here a simple life, Not voide of paine but strife: The Sythe, the Spade the Asse, S forthe what man he was.
THe copie of Isachars woor∣des.The exhor∣tation. He callyng his children about hym, saied vnto them: Ye childrē of Isachar heare your Father, and harken to the woordes of the beloued of the Lorde. I am Iacobs fifth sonne, in the reward of Mandrake.Gene .xxx. For Iacob broughte Man∣drakes out of the fielde, and Rachell mee∣tyng hym, tooke them of hym. Thereat Ruben wept, and at his noise my mother Lea came out. Now the Mandrakes were sweete sented apples, whiche the lande of Aran bryngeth forthe in high countreis, by the waterualleis. And Rachell saied, I will not geue thee these Apples, because they shal helpe me to children. Now there were twoo of these Apples. And Lea said, doth it not suffice thee, that thou hast got∣ten awaie the housbande of virginitie, but that thou wilte haue this also: She aun∣swered, let Iacob lye with thee to night, for thy sonnes Mandragoras. Lea saied vnto her, do not boste nor brag, for Iacob is myne, and I am the wife of his youth. And Rachell aunswered, howe so, was he not first handfasted vnto me, and serued he not our Father, fowerteene yeres for me?
What shall I doe to thee? For many are the wiles and policies of menne, and gile goes forward vpon yearth. If it had been otherwise, thou shouldest not haue sen Ia∣cob in the face at this daie. For thou arte not his wife, but werte guilfully putte to hym in my steade. My father deceiued me, and conueiyng me awaie that nighte, suf∣fered me not to see hym. For had I been there, this had not come to passe. Where∣fore take thee one Mandrake, and in lewe of the other, I graunte thee hym for one nighte. And Iacob knewe Lea, who con∣ceiuyng bare me, and called my name Isa∣char, because of the hire. Then an Angell of the lorde appeared vnto Iacob, and said that Rachel should beare but two sonnes, because she had forsaken the companie of her housebande, and chosen continencie: And if my mother Lea had not geuen thee twoo Apples for his companie, she should haue borne eighte children, whereas by reason of that, she bare but sixe, and Ra∣chell twoo, because GOD visited her in the Mandrakes. For he knewe that she desired to company with Iacob for issues sake, and not for luste of pleasure. For she ned vp the Mandrake, and deliuered it
to Iacob the next daie, and therefore God heard Rachell in the Mandrakes, because that although she had a mynde to them, yet she eate them not, but offered them to the Prieste of the moste highest, whiche was in those daies, and laied them vp in the Lordes house.The godlie life of Isa∣char and his  deayng. Therefore my children when I came to mannes state, I walked with an vprighe harte, and became Bay∣liff of Housebandrie to my Fathers,An example for godlie children. and broughte them the fruites of their Lan∣des in their due seasons, and my Father blessed me, when he sawe, how I walked plainly and mplie.A ntterne of a vertu∣ous life. I was no busie bodie in my dooynges, I was not hurtfull nor spitefull to my neighbour, I raied not v∣pon any manne, neither dispraised I the life of any, that walked in singlenesse of mynde. By reason hereof, when I was thirtie yeres olde▪ I tooke a wife, beause labour had cōsumed my strength. I neuer knewe the pleasure of a woman through wantonnesse, but my laboure made me to sleepe soundlie, and my Father did al∣waies reioice of my simplicity. For what∣soeuer paines I tooke, first of al I offered al the first fruites, and the first ingendered cattle to the Lorde by the Priest, and then
gaue my Father the reste, and the Lorde doubled his benefites in my handes. Yea, and Iacob hym self perceiued well, that GOD wrought with my plain dealyng. For vnto euery poore man, and to euery man in aduersitie, gaue I of the frutes of the yearth with a single harte. And nowe my children harken, and walke in single∣nesse of mynde, for I knowe, that the lorde is verie well pleased with it.with a plaine dealyng man the Lorde is pleased. The single∣harted manne coueteth not golde, vnder∣mineth not his neighbour, lusteth not af∣ter diuersitie of meates, destreth not shifte of apparell, nor behighteth hym self long tyme, but onely hath an eye to Gods will, and the spirites of error can doe nothyng against hym.I ngle har∣ted man de∣bed, who and what he is. For he can no skill to enter∣taine a faire woman, least he should destie his owne mynde: wrathe ouermaistereth not his witte, enuie melteth not his soule neither doeth his mynde run coueteously vpon gain. For he leadeth an vpright life, and beholdeth all thynges with a single eye, excludyng all hurtfulnesse of worldly errour, leaste he should ouersee any of the Commaundementes of God, Therefore my children keepe Gods Lawe, and holde faste plainnesse, walke on in nocencie,
and bee not to inquisitiue in Gods secre∣tes,Learne you children of the yearth. or of your neighbours doynges: but loue God and your neighboure, pitie the poore and weake, bowe doune your backs to Housbandrie, and labour in tillyng of the yearth, in all maner of Housbandrie, offering presentes to the lorde with than∣kesgeuyng, who blesseth the yearth with encrease, and newe spryng of fruites, as he blessed all holy men, from Abell to this daie: for there is none other portion geuē thee, then of the fatnesse of the yearth▪ whose fruites come by painestakyng; for our Father Iacob blessed me with the be∣nefites of the yearth, and the firstelynges of fruites. Leuy and Iuda are glorified of the lorde among the children of Iacob. For, God hath planted hym self in them, geuyng to the one the Priesthoode, and to the other the kyngdome.Obedience and plaine deaing com∣mended. Therefore obey ye them, and walke plainly as our Father Iacob did. For, vnto Gd it is geuen to destroye the temptations of Israell. My Children, I knowe, that in the laste daies, your children shall forsake plainnesse, and cleaue to coueteousnesse, let goe innocen∣cie, and followe lewdnesse: Leaue Gods commaundementes, and sticke vnto Be∣liall,
geue ouer Housbandrie,A plague for disobediēce. and gadde after wicked deuices, and therefore shall they be scattered among the Heathen, and become bondeslaues to their enemies. Wherefore warne your children of it, that if they synne, they maie retourne quickly to the Lorde; for he is mercifull, and will deliuer them, and bryng thē home againe into their owne lande. I am now an hun∣dreth and twoo and twentie yeares olde, and I knowe not any deadly lynne vppon me.The inno∣cencie of I∣sachar. I haue not knowen any woman but my wife, neither haue I committed whor∣dome in the luste of mneeyes. I haue not drnke Wine vnto droukeunelie, neither haue I coueted any pleasant thyng of my neighbours.dly pat∣o fol There hath been no guile in my hart, nither hath there any liyng gon out of my lippes. I haue been fori with euery man that was in heaunesse, and gi∣uen my bread to the poore. I haue not a∣ten my ineate alone, nor remoued the boū∣des and buttels of landes.Harlien you Lando des, learne you wealthie of the yearth. I haue been pi∣tifull all the daies of my life, and deate truely in all cases. I haue loued the lorde with all my strength, and all men as myne owne children. My sonnes, if you also doe the like, all the spirites of Belial will flie
from you, and nothyng, that mischieuous menne can doe against you, shall haue po∣wer ouer you. You shall bryng all wilde beastes in subiection to you, because y haue the Lorde of heauen with you, if y walke with menne in singlenesse of harte. And he willed them, to carie his bodie in∣to Hebron, and to burie hym there in the Caue, with his Fathers. Thus he stretched out his feete, and died in a good age, hauyng all his limmes strong and founde, and septe the sleep of all the worlde.
¶The Testament of Zabulō, made to his Children at his death, concer∣ning compassion and mercie. The poore man at home, Zabulon fed, The straungers vnknowen also clothed: When Ship did saile, God did not faile: But gaue his wit, To gouerne it.
THe charge that Zabulon gaue to his children,His exhoria∣tion when it was geuen. in the hundreth and fourteenth yere of his life, twoo and thirtie yeares after the decease of Ioseph. And he saied vnto them, heare ye me ye Sonnes of Zabulon, a good gifte to my Father and Mother. For when I was begotten,Gene .xxx. my Father was greatly encreased in Shepe and cat∣tell, by reason of the good lucke that he had, through the straked roddes. I wiste not my Children, I wiste not that I syn∣ned in those daies. For I considered not that I dealt wickedly through ignorance in Iosephes case, and moreouer concealed it with my Brothers from our Father, howbeeit, that I wepte muche for it in se∣cret, for I was afraied of my Brothers, because they had all conspired together, to kill hym with the Sworde, that should beaie that secrete, Neuerthelesse, when they would haue killed hym:The loue of Zabulon to∣ward Io∣seph. I besought them moste earnestly with teares, that they would not dooe suche wickednesse. For Symeon and God, came vpō Ioseph to haue killed hym, and Ioseph fallyng v∣pon his knees, saied vnto them: haue pi∣tie
vppon me my Brethren, haue pitie vp∣pon the bowelles of our Father Iacob. Laye not your handes vppon me to shead innocente bloude, for I haue not synned againste you.A good con∣science refu∣seth no trial. If I haue doen amisse, nur∣ture me with chastisemente, but laye not your handes vpon me for our Father Ia∣cobs sake. Upon his saiyng of these wor∣des, I beyng moued with compassiōLoue be∣tweene bre∣thren is as a precious oyntment. came and wepte, and my harte melted within me, and all the substaunce of my bowels were loosened vppon my soule. Also Io∣seph wepte, and I with hym, and my harte trembled, and the ioyntes of my bodye quaked, and I was not able to stande. And when he sawe me weepyng with hym, and them commyng towardes hym, to kille hym, he fledde behinde me, and besoughte them to pitie hym.Mutuall oue is mu∣tuall safetie. Then Ruben stepping in, saied: My brethren, lette vs not kille hym, nt lette vs caste hym into the drye pitte, that our fathers digged, and founde no water in it. For GOD suffred no wa∣ter to spryng vp in it, because it should bee a sauegarde for Ioseph. And so God did, til they sold him to the I smaelites. Thus gaue I no consente to the synne againste Ioseph, but Symeon, Gd, and the other
of my Brothers takyng money for Io∣seph,A gure of the trecheri and coute∣ousesse of Iuda, read Math .xxvii. bought Shoes with it, for them sel∣ues, their Wiues, and their Children▪ sai∣yng: Lette vs not eate it, because it is the price of our Brothers bloud, but lette vs treade it vnder our feete, because he saied he should raigne ouer v and wee shall see what his deames will come vnto. There∣fore in the Spter of Cnoches Lawe, it is written of hym that would not raise vp eede to his brother, I haue loosed Iosephes Shoe. For when wee came into Egipte, the younge menne vnbuckeled Iosephes Shooes at the gate, and so wee worship∣ped Ioseph as it had been Pharao, and not onely worshipped hm, but also knee∣led downe before hym with blushyng, and so were putte to shame before the E∣giptians, fr afterwarde the Egiptians heard of all the ill that wee had doen vnto Ioseph. After the laiyng of him in the pit, my Brothers sette meate vppon the Ta∣ble to eate.Iuda care∣full so: his brother. But I mournyng for Ioseph did  no meate by the space of two daies and two nightes together, neither would Iu ente with them, but had an eye to the Pitte, because he feared leaste Symon and Gad should step there and kille hym:
When they sawe that I eate nothyng, they set me to keepe hym till he was sold. He was in the pitte three daies and three nightes without repast ere he was solde.Ruben his loue toward Ioseph. Ruben hearyng that he was solde in his absence, rente his garmentes, and wepte, saiyng: how shall I looke my Father Ia∣cob in the face? And therewith all takyng money, he ran after the Marchauntmen, but he could not finde them: For they had left the kynges high waie, and were gone awai eapace by bye Lanes, and Ruben eate no meate that daie.Marke the wicked poli∣cie of the vn∣godlie. Dan therefore commyng vnto hym, saied: weepe not, nei∣ther bee sad for the boye, for I wote what wee maie saie to our Father Iacob. Wee will kill a Kid, and staine Iosephes coate with the bloud of it, and saie to hym: See if this be thy sonnes coate or no. For whē they entended to sell Ioseph, they stripped hym out of our fathers coate, and put vp∣pon hym an old coate of a bondseruaunte. Simeon had gotten his coate, and would not deliuer it vs, but was mynded to haue cutte it in peeces with his sworde, and he was angry that he was yet aliue, and that be had not slain hym. Then all my brethrē risyng vp together, saied vnto hym: why
shouldest thou not geue it vs, seeyng that thou onely art the worker of this mischief in Israell? Hereupon he gaue it them, and they did as Dan had counselled. And now my children, I warne you kepe the Lords Commaundementes,Zabulon his exhortation. be mercifull to your neighbours,Compassion is to be she∣wed as well to beastes as to men. and haue inward compassion towardes all, not onely men but also bea∣stes. For in that respect the Lorde blessed me, insomuche that when all my brothers were sicke, I scaped without sicknes. For God knoweth euery mans intent. There∣fore my children haue compassion in your bowels, because that as any man dealeth with his neighbor,The vnmer∣cifull puni∣shed, both they & their children. so will God deale with hym. For the children of my brothers fell sicke also and dyed for Iosephes sake, bee∣cause their fathers pitied hym not, but my children were preserued without sicknes as you know. And while I was vpon the Sea coast of Chanaan, I fell to fishing for my Father Iacob, and whereas many o∣thers were drowned in the Sea, I abode vnhurt,Fishers boates firste inuented by Zabulō, but God gaue the wisedom. I was the firste that made a fisher boate to float on the sea, for God gaue me vnderstandyng and wisedome therein, so that I did set vp a Mast in the boate, and fastned a sayle to the middes of the wood,Genes. 49.
and castyng along the shore in it, I fished for my fathers houshold till we came into Egypt: and for pities sake I gaue of my fishyng to euery stranger that I met with. If there were any forrner borne,The singu∣ar compassi∣on of Zabu∣lon. or any sicke bodie, or anie aged person, I boyled my fish and dressed it well accordyng to e∣uery mans neede, and caried it to them, comfortyng them and hauing compassion with them. And therfore God made me to catch muche fishe in the Sea.Note. For he that geueth his neighbour, receiueth the thin∣ges multiplied of the Lorde.Zabulon his ercie in ge∣uyng foode. Fiue yeares did I fish, geuing to euery man that I saw and seruing all my fathers house sufficiēt∣ly. In haruest time I fished, and in winter∣tye I fed sheep with my brothers. Now will I tell you what I did,A mercifull deed to cloth the ked. I saw a misera∣ble man in the depe of winter, and hauyng compassion vppon hym, I stale a garment priuily out of my House, and gaue it the naked man. You therefore my Children, take pity indifferētly of all men, and shew mercy with the thinges whiche the Lorde geueth you, and deale them abroad to all men with a good hart. Aud if ye haue not wherewith to succour the needie out of hand: yet haue compassion on him with in∣ward
mercy.Inward cō∣passion wan∣tyng, habill∣tie serueth. I know that my hand forlo∣wed not to geue to hym that wanted, and to spēd that time with him, insomuch that I haue walked aboue seuen furlōgs with such a one weeping,A rare ex∣ample of a mercifull hart. and my hart yirned v∣pon hym for compassion. You therfore my children, haue earnest and inwarde mercy towardes all that are in misery, that God hauyng pitie vppon you may be mercifull to you likewise.God dwel∣leth in mer∣ciful hartes. For in the last dayes God will sende his mercy vppon the earth, and wheresoeuer he findeth inward and hartie mercy, there will he dwell. For looke how muche mercie man sheweth to hys neigh∣bour, so much wil God shew to him again. Now when wee came downe into Egipt, Ioseph minded not our euill dealing with him,Ioseph re∣wardeth good for euill. but when he saw me, it made hys hart yirne. Whom looke ye vpou, my children and learne to forget y• harme that is done to you. Loue ye one another, & doe not one of you thinke vppon anothers ill dealyng, for that breaketh vnitie, and displaceth all kinred, and troubleth the mynde. For hee that is mindful of harme past, hath not the bowells of mercie.He that is mindfull of inuries is not merci∣full. Marke the water and see how it washeth away the Sande when the stones and timber are remoued asun∣der
And if a brooke be drawe into many streames,Apt simili∣tudes. the earth sucketh it vp and it commeth to nothyng: and so shall you, if you be deuided among your selues.In exhorta∣tion to con∣corde. Ther∣fore deuide not your selues into two hea∣des: for all thinges that God hath created haue but one head a peece. He hath geuen a man two shoulders, two handes and two feete: but yet do all the members obey one head. I know by the writinges of my Fa∣thers, that in the last dayes ye shall depart from the Lord, and be deuided in Israell, folowyng two kynges,The end of discord is misery. workyng all abho∣mination, and worshippyng all maner of Idols, and your enemies shall take you prisoners, and you shall fit among the hea∣then in all misery, tribulation and sorowe of mynd. And afterward you shall remem∣ber the Lord, and repent, and he shal turne you againe: for he is mercifull and full of compassion, and thinketh not vppon the ewdnes of the Children of men, because they be flesh, and the spirites of errour be∣guile them in all their doyngs. After this shall GOD himself ryse vp vnto you, the light of righteousnes, and holsonnes, and mercy are in his punishments. He shall re∣deeme all men from the bondage of Beli∣all,
and all the spirites of error shalbe tro∣den downe, and he shall turne all nations to the folowyng of hym, & ye shall see God in the shape of man, for God hath chosen Ierusalem, and God is his name. Neuer∣thelesse, by the wickednes of your words, you shall prouoke hym to wrathe, and ye shall be caste of, till the tyme of full finish∣ing And now my children,The hope of the resurre∣ction a pre∣sent comfort at the death of our fren∣des. bee not sad for my death, neither be ye out of hart because I leaue you. For I shall rise vp againe a∣mong you, as a captaiue in the middes of his childrē. And I shal reioyce in the mid∣dest of my tribe, among as many as haue kept the lawe of the Lorde, aud the com∣maundementes of their Father Zabulon. But as for the wicked,The state of the wicked at the latter day. God shall bring e∣uerlastyng fire vpō them, and destroy them for euer. I returne to my reste, as my Fa∣thers haue don: now feare you the Lorde your GOD, with al your strength all the dayes of your life. As he had spoken these wordes he fell a sleepe to hys singular be∣neite: and his sonnes said hym in a coffin, and cariyng hym backe againe vnto Hebron, buryed hym there with his Fa∣thers.
¶The Testament of Dan, made to his Children at his death, concer∣nyng anger and liyng. The Serpent With weapon, And Dan declare: The intent Of those men, That wrathfull are.
THe Copy of Dan hys words which he spake to them in hys laste dayes. In the hundred and fiue and twenteth yeare of his life he cal∣led hys Tribe vnto hym and sayd: Ye children of Dan, heare my saiynges,Hart & ou∣ward profes∣sion must be consociat. and geue heede to the words of your Fathers mouth. I lyked in my hart, and shewed in my whole lyfe the thing that is good: for truth iyned with right dealyng pleaseth God well.Lies and an∣ger, schole∣masters of e∣uill life. I haue hated hurtfull thinges, as liyng and an∣ger, because they teache a man all maner of naughtinesse. I confesse vnto you my children thys day, that I was glad in my hart at the death of Ioseph that true and good man, and reioyced at the sellyng of hym, because our Father loued hym more than vs.Selfe loue thinketh him self as good as other. For the spirite of spitefulnes and pryde said vnto me: Thou art his Soune too as well as he. And one of the spirites of Belial wrought with me saiyng:Deser of prerogatiue entiseth to murther. Take this sworde and slea Ioseph with it, and when he is dead thy father shall loue thee. This was the spirit of spitefulnes which counseled nice to deuour Ioseph, as the
Leopard deuoureth a Ryd.Man pur∣peth but God dispo∣seth. But the God of our Father Iacob did not put hym into my handes, nor suffer me to find him alone that I might dispatch twoo Scepters in Israell by committyng that wickednesse, And now my childrē I tell you of a truth, that vnlesse ye keepe your selues frō this spirite of lying and wrath, and loue truth and long sufferance, ye shal perish. Wrath is blynde my Children,A wrathfull man Iiuely described. and no wrathfull man looketh truth in the face, because that although they wereHe accom∣eth his Pa∣entes as e∣nemies. his Father and Mo∣ther, yet doth he beholde them as his ene∣mies. Though he be hys brother▪ yet he.He know∣eth not hys brother. knoweth hym not, though he be the Lords He obeieth not the Mi∣nister. Prophet, yet obeieth he him not: though he bee a.He regar∣deth not the righteous. righteous man, yet he regar∣deth hym not, and though hee bee his.He cōssde∣r.  not his inde. frcinde, yet he considereth it not. For the spirite of wrathe besetteth hym with the Snares of errour, blindyng hys naturall eyes, and dimmyng the eyes of his mynde by falsehoode, and geuyng to hym a sight of hys owne makyng. And wherein blea∣reth he his eyes? In hatred of hart. For he geueth hym a self willed hart against hys Brother, to spite hym and enuy hym. My Sounes, wrath is mischevous, for it be∣commeth
a soule to the soule,The pro∣peries of wrath. and subdueth the body to it selfe by ouer masteryng the soule, and geueth power to the bodye to worke all wickednes. And when the soule hath wrought, it iustifieth the thyng done because it seeth not. Therefore he that is wrathfull, wrathfull mā worketh three waies. if he be a man of might, hath treble power in hys angerBy Ser∣uauntes. One through the healpe and fur∣theraunce of his seruauntes.By riches. Another of hys riches,By hym selfe. wherethrough he perswadeth and ouercommeth in vnrighteousnes: and third of the nature of his own body which of it self worketh euil. And though he that is angry bee a poore man, yet hath he his naturall power doubled. For the said spi∣rite doth alwayes further his wickednes, by causing his deedes to be matched with liyng. Wherefore consider the power of wrath how vaine it is. Fo hee is bitter in speeche, and walketh at Sathans right hand,Instru∣mentes of wrath. that his deedes may be wrought in vntrustinesse and liyng, for Sathan doth first of all styng hym by speeche,Bitter speach. and when he hath once pricked hym forewarde, hee strengthneth hym by dedes,Uiolent handes. and troubleth his vnderstanding with bitter nippes and losses, and so prouoketh his mynde to ex∣cessiue
wrath.Mdy a∣gainst wrath is forbea∣ring of wor∣des. Therefore when any man speaketh against you, be not moued to an∣ger: and if he praise ye as good men, bee not puffed vp, nor chaunged into volup∣tuousues and sternnesse of countenaunce. For when a man heareth a thing that mis∣liketh hym, first it ticleth him and stingeth his minde, so that he thinkes he hath iuste cause to be angry. Now therfore my chil∣dren, if ye fall into any losse & hinderance, be not out of patience, for the spirit of im∣patience maketh men to lust for the thyng that is forgone,The effect of impatience. & to be angry for the want of it. Beare you losses willingly, and bee not out of quiet for it: for vnquietnes in∣gendreth anger and vntrueth: and it is e∣uill to haue a double face. Anger and vn∣truth talke one to another, to trouble the vnderstandyng. And when the mynde is combred with disdeine, the Lorde depar∣teth from it, and Belial getteth the domi∣nion of it. Therefore my Children, keepe the Lords commaundementes and lawes, eschew vntruth and hate it, that the Lord may dwel in you, and Belial flee from you. Speake euerie of you the trueth to hys neighbour, that ye fall not willingly into incomberaunce, and so shall ye be in quiet,
and ye shal haue the God of peace, & warxe shall not preuaile against you. Loue the Lord all your life long, and loue ye one a∣nother with a sothfast hart. For I am sure that in the latter daies ye shall depart frō the Lord &He eth. dne▪ walke in all naughtines, wor∣king the abhominations of the Gentiles, and huntyng wicked women in all leud∣nes, through the workyng of deceitfull spirits in you. For I haue read in Enoch that Sathan is your prince, and that all y• spirites of fornication and pride, shall plie themselues in laiyng snares for the Chil∣dren of Dan, to make them sinne before the Lord. But my children, sticke ye vnto Leuy, and looke vpon hym in all thinges. The children of Iuda shall snatch away o∣ther mens goods like Lyons through co∣uetousnesse.A note for couetousnes. For this cause shall ye be led away with them into captiuitie, and there receiue all the plagues of Egipt, and all the malice of the Heathen:Repentance obtaineth mercy. whereupon ye shall returne to the Lord & obteine mercy, and he shall bring you into his holy place, and proclaime peace to you.A propeste of Christ his humanitie. The Lordes sauing health shall spring vp vnto you out of the Tribes of Iuda and Leuy, He shall make warre against Belial, and geue our
young men the victorye in reuengement.Medy a∣gainst wrath is forbea∣ring of wor∣des. Hee shall deliuer the imprisoned soules of the sainces from Beliall, and turne your vnbeleuyng hartes to the Lorde, and geue euerlastyng peace to suche as call vppon hym. The Sainctes shall rest in hym, and the righteous shall reioyce in the newe Hierusalem, whiche shall glorifie God for euer. Hiernsalem shall no more be wasted, nor Israell led into captiuitie, because the Lord shalbe conuersant among men in the middest of it, and the holy one of Israell, shall reigne ouer them in lowlinesse and pouertie, and he that beleueth in him, shall certainly reigne in heauen. Now my chil∣dren feare the Lord and beware of Satan and hys spirites: And drawe neare vnto God, and to the angell that excuseth you, for he is the mediator betweene God and man to set peace in Israell.Christe is our media∣tour. He shall stand against the kingdome of the enemie, and therefore will the enemie labour to ouer∣throw all that call vpon the Lords:Christ assi∣steth his in all tempta∣tions. for he knoweth that whensoeuer Israell decay∣eth▪ then shall his enemies kingdome come to an end. But the said angell shall streng¦then Israell, that hee come not to an euill end. At that tyme shall Israel depart from
iniquitie, and the Lorde shall visite suche as do his will. In all places of Israel and among the heathen his name shall bee the sauiour. Therfore my children keepe your selues from all noome dealings, and put from you wrathe, and all vntruthe. Loue truth and mildnes, and looke what, you haue heard of your Father, deliuer it ouer to your Children, that the Father of na∣tions may receaue you. For he was sooth∣fast, long suffering, meeke, lowly, and a her of Gods lawe by his owne woorkes. Therefore depart from all vnrightous∣nes that ye may sticke to the righteousns of the Lordes law, and bury ye mee by my Father. In saiyng these thinges be kissed them and slept the sleepe of the world▪ And his sonnes buried hym, laiyng his bones by Abraham, Issac, and Iacob. And like as Dan had prophesied to them, that the should one day neglect Gods law and estrange them selues from the offpryns, and natiue countrey of Israell, so came it to passe.
¶The Testament of Neptalim, made to his Children at his death, concernyng goodnes. Runne Neptalims race, but runne apace, Embrace his goodnes, and trustinesse, If your state you see, seruauntes to bee: Then God will you blesse, and geue successe.
THe Copie of Heptalims Testament, concernyng the thynges which he dis∣coursed at the ende of his tyme, in the hundred and two and thirtie yeare of hys life. At the commyng of hys children, together in the seuenth moneth, the forth daie of the moneth, hee beyng yet in good health, commaunded a sumptuous feaste, and greate cheere to be prepared. When we wooke in the mornyng from sleepe, be∣cause hee was euen at deathes doore, he praised the Lorde that had strengthned hym, and began to speake to his children, in this wife. My Children, geue eare to Neptalim, barken to your Fathers wordes.His birth. I was borne of Bilha, and because Rachell dealt craftely in puttyng Bilha to Iacob, in her owne steade, and Bilha was deli∣uered of mee in Rachels lappe, therefore was I called Neptalim.Why he was called Neptalim. And Rachell lo∣ued me because I was borne on her lappe, and she kissed mee when I was a little one saiyng: God let mee see a brother of thyne out of myne owne wombe after thee. By reason whereof, Ioseph was like mee in
all things accordyng to Rachels request.Why Ioseph was like Neptalim. Now my Mother Billa was the daugh∣ter of Rotheus, the Brother of Debora Rebeccas nurse, and was borne the selfe∣same day that Rachell was borne, for Ro∣theus was a Cadean,His familie. of Abrahames kin∣dred, a worshipper of GOD, free borne, and a noble man. Now bee it for asmuche as he was taken Prisoner, Laban bought hym, and maried hym to a bondwoman of hys called Eue, who brought hym forth a Sonne, whom he named Zeliphas, after the name of the Castle wherein he was ta∣ken. Afterwarde she bare Billa callyng her her newe hasty daughter, because she was fond of the Dug as soone as she was borne.The swift∣nes of Nep∣talim. And because I was as swift of foot as a Stagge, my father Iacob appointed me to runne of all mesuages and errands,Genes. 49. and blessed me by the name of a Stagge. For as the Potter knoweth what his bes∣sell shall conteine, and tempereth hys quanitie of clay thereafter:GOD his wisedome in c. eatyng vs luey let foth. so the Lorde maketh a mans bodye proportionable to the spirite that he will put into it, and ∣teth the spirite to the abilitie of the bodie, o as there is no inequalitie or oddes be∣twixt them: for all the Lordes creatures
are made in Weight, Measure, and Rule. And as the Potter knoweth the vse of e∣uery of them to what thynges thei be me∣test: so the Lorde knoweth the bodie: how farre for the it is fit for goodnesse, and whē it beginneth in euill, for there is not any Creature reasonable, nor vnreasonable, whiche the lorde knoweth not, for he hath created all menne after his owne Image. And as mans strength is, so is his worke∣as is his will, so is his woorke: as is his forecast▪ so is his doyng: as is his harte, so is his mouth: as is his eye, so is his slepe∣and as is his minde, so is his talke: either of the lawe of the Lorde, or of the lawe of Beliall. And loke what diuersitie is be∣twene lighte and darckenesse, or betwene sight and hearyng, the same diuersitie is there in man and woman. Neither is it to be saied that there is any betternesse in a∣ny thing, either of the face or of other like thynges. For God hath made all thynges good in their order or degree, he hath sett the fiue wittes in the heade, and knitte the head to the necke, & couered it with heare for his glorie. Moreouer, he hath assigned the harte to wisedome, the bealie to the a∣uoidaunce of the stomacke, the breaste to
healthe, the liuer to anger, the gall to bit∣ternesse the spleene to laughter,All thynges must be doen in tyme and order. the kid∣neis to craftinesse, the loynes to strength, the ribbes to comelinesse, the seede to lu∣stinesse, and so forthe. So my children doe all thynges in order, and in the feare of God, neither doe ye any thyng disorderly, in scorne,The reason. or out of due season. For thou caust not commaide the eye to heare, nei∣ther caust thou doe the workes of light in darknesse. Therefore hast ye not to marre your doynges through coueteousnesse, or beguile your owne soules with fonde talke. For by holdyng your peace with a cleane harte, ye shalbe able to kepe the wil of God, and to caste awaie the wi of the deuell. The Sūne, Moone, and Starres, breake not their order: neither break you Gods lawe in the order of your doyges. The Gētiles by goyng astray, and by for∣sakyng the lorde, haue chaunged their or∣der, and followed stockes and stones, and spirites of errour.They that breake the order of the Lorde shall be plagued. But doe you not so (my children:) knowe ye that your onely one God is lorde in the skies, on the yearth, in the Sea, and of all creatures, for he is the maker of them. And be not like Sodome, whiche altered y• order of her nature: like∣wise
wise * the Watchers altered the order of their Nature,Preachers. and they whom God cursed in the floud, makyng the yearth desolate, and fruitlesse for their sakes. My children I saie these thynges,Neptalim prophesteth the miserie of his children. because I haue read in the holy writynges of Enoch, that you also shall depart frō the Lorde, and walke in all the wickednesse of Sodome, and the lorde shall bring thraldome vpō you, so as ye shal serue your enemies, and be pinched with all maner of tribulation and pain, til God consume you euerichone.He Prophe∣seeh also their repen∣taunce. And when ye bee made fewe and small, ye shall turne again, and knowe the lorde your God, and he shall bryng you againe into your owne lande, accordyng to his manifold mercie. And it shall come to passe, that when they shalbe come into the countrey of their fa∣thers, they shall forget the Lorde againe, and deale wickedly, so as the Lorde shall scatter them all ouer the face of the whole earth, til the mercy of the lorde come,A Prophese of the com∣myng of Christe. a mā that poureth out mercy and righteousnes vpon all men, bothe farre and nere. For in the xl. yere of my life vpon mount Oliuet towardes the East side of Ierusalē. I saw the Sunne &A vision. moone stand stil, & behold I∣saac my fathers father said vnto vs, come
hether apace, and euery one of you take holde, accordyng to his strengthe, for the Sunne and Moone maie be caught. And we came runnyng all together, and Leuy caughte holde of the Sunne, and Iudas iumpyng vp, caught holde of the Moone, and were bothe of them lifted vp with thē. And whē as Leuy became as the Sunne, a certain yong man deliuered hym twelue Boughes of Palme tree, and Iuda shined as the Moone, & twelue beames or raies were vnder his feete. And Leuy and Iuda runnyng together, vphelde one an other. And beholde there was a Bull vpō yearth that had greate hornes, and Eagles vin∣ges vppon his backe, and we would haue caught hym but wee could not, for Ioseph steppyng before vs caught hym, and moū∣ted alofte vppon hym. And beholde, there appeared-vnto vs an holie writyng, sai∣yng: the Assirians, Medes, Elamites, Ge∣lathites, Caldes, and Sirians, shall holde the Scepter of Israell in thraldome. And again a seuen monethes after, I sawe our Father Iacob standyng in the sea of I am∣ma, and vs his sonnes with hym. And be∣holde, there came a ship sailyng by, full of dried fleshe, without Marriner or Pilote.
Upō the ship was written Iacob, and our father saied to vs, let vs goe into our ship, when wee were within it, there rose a sore tempest and a mightie gale of winde, and our Father who helde the sterne, flewe a∣waie from vs, and wee beyng tossed with the storme, were caried into the Sea, and our ship was filled with Water, and wea∣ther beaten, & torne on all sides. Then Io∣seph fled out in the boate, and we all were deuided vpō twelue bordes, and Leuy and Iuda were amōg vs, so were we scattered on all costes, and Leuy being clad in sack∣clothe, praied to the Lorde for vs all. As sone as the tempest was laied, the Shippe came quietly to lande, and behold, our Fa∣ther Iacob came, and wee reioyced all to∣gether with one minde. I told my Father these twoo dreames, & he saied to me, these thynges muste bee fulfilled in their tyme, and Israell muste endure many thynges. Then said he further to me, I beleue that Ioseph is aliue: For I see that the Lorde doeth alwaies number hym with vs.Reinorse of conscience moueth open cōfession, but shae or fear hindereth. And he saied, thou liuest my sonne Ioseph, but yet I se thee not, neither seest thou Iacob that begat thee, truly he made vs to wepe at these woordes of his, and my bowelles
glowed within me, to bewraye to hym that Ioseph was solde, but I was afraied of my brothers. Beholde my Sonnes I haue shewed you the last times, and all the thynges that shall be doen in Israell. You therefore, commaunde your children to be helpfull vnto Leuy and Iuda. For by Iu∣da shall health and welfare spryng vp vn∣to Israell, and in hym shall Iacob bee blessed. For by his Sccpter shall God ap∣peare, and dwell among men vpon yearth to saue the stacke of Israel, and to gather the righteous from among the Heathen. My children,By dooyng well, God to glorified. if you doe well, bothe menne and Angelles shall blesse you, and GOD shall bee glorified by you among the Gen∣tiles, the Deuell shall slee from you,And menne blessed. th beastes shall stande in awe of you,The deuill vanquished. and the Angelles shall receiue you. For like as if a man bryng vp his childe well, the childe endeuoureth alwaies to bee mindfull and thankfull: So of good workes, there is a good remembraunce with GOD.By dooyng euill▪ God is dishonoured. But as for hym that doeth not good, hym shall mē and Angels curse,Men cursed and God shall be disho∣nored through hym among the Gentiles,The deuill possesseth. and the Deuell shall possesse hym, as a pe∣culiar vessell and instrument, and all bea∣stes
shall ouermaster hym, and the Lorde shall hate hym. For the Commaundemen∣tes of the lawe are of twoo sortes, and are fulfilled in woorke. For there is a tyme for a man to companie with his wife, and a tyme to forbeare her, that he maye geue hymself to praier. There are twoo Com∣maundementes whiche breede synne, ex∣cepte they be doen in their due order. And so is it in the rest of the commaundemen∣tes. Therefore bee ye wise and skilfull in the Lorde, knowyng the order of his com∣maundementes, and the lawes of all thin∣ges, that God maie loue ye. Hauyng com∣maunded them many other suche thinges he praied them to conueigh his bones to Hebron, and to burie hym by his fathers. And so eatyng and drinkyng with a mery harte, he couered his face and died. And Neptalims Children, did all thynges accordyng as their Father had commaunded them. Finis.
¶The Testamente of Gad, made to his Children at his death, concernyng hatred. You that excell in marciall feates, Loe Gad, but God obeye: Least in Gads wrathe you God offende, And lose your hoped praie.
THe copie of Gads Testament, and of y• thynges that he spake to his Children, in the .C.vii. yere of his life saiyng: I was Iacobs seuenth sonne,Gad a good and bacant shephearde. and skilfull & strōg in kepyng of sheepe. I kept the flockes by night, and when there came any Lion, Li∣bard, Wolue, Beare, or other wilde beaste vpon our cattell, I ran to it and killed it. Ioseph also did feede shepe with vs about a thirtie daies: who being tender, fel sicke by reason of ouermuche heate, and wente home to Hebron to his Father, whom he lodged by hym self, because he loued hym. And Ioseph told our father,Gene .xxxvii. that y• sonnes of Billa wasted his goods at Zelpha, and made hauock of them, without the know∣ledge of Iuda and Ruben. For he kuewe that I had rescued a lābe out of a Beares mouthe, and killed the Beare, and that be∣cause the Lambe could not liue (whiche thyng greeued me) we killed it also & eate it. He told our father of it, & our brothers were greatly discontēted with his doyng, euen to the daie that he was solde into E∣gipte, and the spirite of hatred was in me, in so muche that I could not finde in my harte to heare Ioseph speake, or to se him
because he had rebuked vs openly,Gad hated Ioseph. for ea∣ting the laibe without Iuda.For his cō∣plainyng to his Father. To beshore he made our Father beleue whatsoeuer he tolde hym. But nowe I acknowledge my synne my Children, that I was often in minde to haue killed hym, for I hated him from my hart, and I was vtterly without cōpassion towardes hym, and the cause of this my great hatred towardes hym, was his dreames:For his goodly drea∣mes. Therefore I would haue de∣uoured him, as an oxe eateth vp grasse frō the yearth. And for that cause I and Iuda sold hym to the I smalites for 30. gildrēs: of the whith we kept awaisx. priuely, and showed the other x. to our brethren. And so coueteonsnesse perswaded me to wishe his death. But the God of our fathers de∣liuered hym out of my handes, to the en∣tent I should not do suche wickednesse in Israell.The hatefull described. He misliketh an other mās doynges. And now my Children, geue eare to the wordes of truthe, that ye maie liue righteously, & kepe the law of the highest, and not goe astraie through the spirite of hatred, for what is euill in at a mannes do∣ynges. Whatsoeuer an other man doeth, that doth the hater mislike and abhorre. If one kepeHe pratseth no thē that feare y• lorde. the lawe of the lorde, he prai∣seth it not: if one feare the lorde, and deale
rightcouslie, hym he loueth not, but dis∣praiseth the truthe, he enuieth hym that ordereth his waies aright, he embraceth backbityng, he loueth scornefulnesse: and because y• hatred hath blinded his mynde, heHe seeketh to destroy his neighbour. doeth to his neighbor as he did to Io∣seph, therefore my children, kepe your sel∣ues frō hatred, bicause it committeth wic∣kednesse euen against the lorde, for it will not heare the wordes of Gods commaun∣dement, concerning the louyng of a mans neighbour, but synneth spitfully againste God. If a brother offende, byHe blaseth abroad other mennesfaul∣tes. & by it bla∣seth hym abroad, and is hastie to haue him condemned and killed, or punished for his offence.Hastie to haue the par∣tie condēned. And if the offenderMaketh a little matter greate. be a seruaunt or a bondman, it accuseth hym to his mai∣ster, and deuiseth all meanes that maie be to persecute hym, and to put hym to death if it be possible, for hatred woorketh with spitfulnesse,Enuieth the prospe∣rous doyng of his neigh∣bour. and is alwaies forie to heare or see men goe forward, or prosper in well doyng. For like as loue beareth good wil euen to the deade, and wisheth them aliue, and would (if it were ossible) staye them from death, whiche are condemned to die: So hatred seeketh to flea the liuyng,A cōparison. and demeth thē vnworthie of life, whiche haue
offended neuer so lightly▪ For the spirite of hatred doeth through cankred froward¦nes of harte, worke iointly with Sathan in all thynges, euen to the death, and de∣struction of men. But the spirite of loue doth through long sufferance worke with Gods lawe,The proper∣ties of hate∣red. to the welfare of men. Hatred is euil because it abideth with liyng, spea∣kyng continually against the truthe, ma∣kyng a great adoe of small matters, ouer∣shadowing the light with darknes, comp∣tyng swete to be sower, teachyng slaunde∣rousnesse, warre, wrong, and aboundance of all mischief, and finally filling the harte wt deuelishe poison.A remedie a∣gainst hatred A righteous mā described. My children, I▪ speake these thynges vpon experience, to the en∣tent ye should eschew hatred, and sticke to godly loue. Righteousnes driueth out ha∣tred, and lowlinesse killeth it: for a righte∣ous and a lowly persons is ashamed to doe 1.He forsaketh synne for cō∣science, not for feare. wronge, not for feare of rebuke, but for conscience sake, because God feeth his en∣tent. He backbi∣teth no man. He backbiteth no man, because the feare of the highest ouercommeth hatred▪ for the feare of the lorde offēdeth not, nei∣ther will do any man wrōg, no not euen in He thinketh no manne hme. thought. At length I came to the know∣ledge of these thynges, when I had repen∣ted
me of my dealinges towardes Ioseph.The fruites of true repē∣taunce. For the true repentaunce that is accor∣dyng to Gods will, mortifeth a man to o∣bedience, chaseth awaie darknesse, enligh∣teneth the eyes, geueth knowledge to the minde, and leadeth the soule to saluation. And whatsoeuer men knowe not of them∣selues, that doeth repentance teache thē.O how deare are y• praiers of the paren∣tes for their children. For it brought vppon me the paine of the hart, and if my father Iacobs praiers had not been, surely I had died out of hande. For looke wherein a man synneth, by the same is he punished. For as muche there∣fore as my hart was mercilesse towardes Ioseph.God his ri∣gorous iu∣stice, due to the merciles. I suffered Gods rigorous iustice in my harte by the space of a .xi. monethes that the tyme of my punishemente might fall out, euen with the tyme that I vrged the ellyng of Ioseph. Now therefore my childrē, eche of you loue his brothers, and put awaie hatred frō your hartes,Loue consi∣steth in deede in worde, and in mynde. louyng one an other in deede, worde, and thought of mynde. For before my Fathers face I spake mildely of Ioseph, but behinde his backe the spirite of hatred darckened my vnderstandyng, and tempted my mynde to kill hym. Wherefore loue ye one an other hartely, and if any of you offende other▪ tel
him of it gently, driuyng out the poison of hatred, and fosteryng no deceipt in harte. And if the offender confesse it, and be sorie for it, forgeue it hym: & if he deny it, striue not with hym, least he fal to swearyng, and so synne double. Lette no straunger heare you vtteryng one an others secretes in variaunce, least he turne to be your ilwil∣ler, & worke some greate mischief against you. For he will talke gilefully with thee, and vndermine thee to doe thee a shrewde tourne, takyng his poison at thyne owne hande. Therfore if he deny it, and be asha∣med of it, and hold his peace whē he is re∣buked, drawe hym not out, for in deniyng he repenteth him, so as he will no more of∣fende thee, but honour thee, and feare thee and be in quiet. But if he be vnshamefaste, and abide by his naughtinesse, then refer the reuengement of it to God with all thy harte.Enuie no mannes pro∣speritie. If an other man prosper more then you, bee not agreeued at it, but praye for hym, that he maie haue perfecte prosperi∣tie. For peraduentureIt maie be perchance to your profite. it maie be to your owne benefite. And if he bee exalted more and more, enuie hym not, butRemember that all fleshe is grss. remember that all fleshe shall dye and praise God for it, who geueth good and profitable thy a∣ges
to all men. Seeke the Lordes iudge∣mentes, and so thy mynde shall let hym a∣lone, and be in quiet. Now if a man be en∣riched by euill meanes, as Csau my Fa∣thers brother was, enuie him not, for in so doyng yeLeast you seem to con∣trol the lorde. controll the Lorde, who either taketh awaie his benefites from the wic∣ked, or leaueth them still to the repentant, or els reserueth thē in the vnrepentant, to their endlesse punishement.A poore mā howe he is riche. For the pooreman, hauyng sufficient of all thynges, ge∣ueth thankes vnto the Lorde, and is enri∣ched of all men, because men wishe him no harme. Therefore (my childrē) away with hatred out of your harts, and loue one an other with a right meanyng mynde. Also will you your children to honor Leuy and Iuda, for out of them shall the lorde make the Sauiour of Israel to come.A Prophese of Christe. I knowe that in the ende your children shall depart from them, and walke in all manner of mis∣chief, naughtinesse, and corruption before the lorde. And after a litle pausyng he said againe: my sonnes, heare me your father▪ burie me by my fathers. And so pluckyng vp his fete, he slept in peace: and after iue yeres they caried him thence, and laied hym with his Fathers in Hebron.
¶The Testament of Aser, made to his children at his death, concer∣nyng twoo faces, of Vice and Vetue. Twoo waies saieth Aser are preparde For men: the one for ioye, The laste for death: the firste is beste. But this breedeth sore annoye.
THe copie of Aser his Testa∣mente, and of the thynges that he spake to his childrē. In the hundred and twentie yere of his life, beyng still in healthe, he saied vnto them. Ye children of Aser harken to your Father, and I will shewe you all thynges that are righte be∣fore the Lorde.Two . The Lorde hath geuen twoo waies to the sonnes of menne: twoo myndes, twoo doynges, twoo places, and twoo endes: and therfore all twooes may bee one▪ yea, though they bee contraries. as are the waies of good and euill.Twoo mn∣des in man▪ of good and of euill. Also there are twoo myndes in oure breastes▪ whiche moue vs either to honestie, or dis∣honestie. Therefore if a manne bee ledde to goodnesse, all his doinges are occupied about righteousnesse: and if he dooe any thyng amisse, by and by he repenteth him: for in as muche as his minde is bent vnto righteousnesse, he putteth awaie naughti∣nesse, and out of hande amendeth his miss∣deedes, and correcteth the corruptnesse of his mynde. But if his mynde encline to e∣uill, all his doynges tende to naughtines▪ in somuche that he thrusteth awaye the good, and taketh to hym the bad, because
he is vnder the dominion of Beliall: and if he dooe any good thing, he tourneth the same vnto euill. For if he beginne to dooe any good, he bringeth the ende of his doo∣ynges to an euill worke, because the trea∣sure of his harte is infected with the ve∣nime of a deuellishe and mischeuous Spi∣rite, and therfore the euill ouermastereth the god in his mynde, and bryngeth the ende of the thyng to naughtinesse.Diners for∣tes of dou∣ble faces. Some man sheweth compassion vppon hym that serueth his tourne in naughtinesse, that manne hath twoo faces, and that deede of his is starke lewdenesse. An other man lo∣ueth vngratiousnesse, and he is leude like∣wise: and althoughe he could finde in his harte to dye for the compassyng of his e∣uill: yet it is manieste that he is double-faced, and his doyng is altogether starke naught. For his loue beyng but leudnesse dooeth as it were cloke his euill with a good name, whereas the dist of his doyn∣ges, tendeth to a wicked ende. An other stealeth,The couete∣us mannes wickednesse described. doeth open wrōg, pilleth and pol∣leth, is coueteous. & pitieth not the poore. He also hath a double face, and all this is starke naughte, for in byng nigardly to∣wardes his neightbor, he prouoketh gods
wrathe, and denieth the highest, in not pi∣tiyng the poore. He despiseth and spiteth the Lorde, whiche is the commaunder of the lawe, he suffereth not the poore to rest, he defileth his owne soule to make his bo∣die gaie, he killeth many, and pitieth few, this is the part of a double faced persone. Another committeth whoredome and for∣nication, or vexeth many menne piteously with his power and riches, and yet abstei∣neth from meates His faste is naught, for he doeth the commaundementes with an euil conscience, and that is a double faced dealyng, whiche is all together naughte. Suche maner of folke are like swine, and Hares, for they seeme to bee halfe cleane, but in very deede they be vtterly vnclean. You therefore my childrē, become not like them, neither beare ye in one hoode twoo faces, the one of goodnesse, and the other of naughtinesse, but sticke alonely vnto goodnes.God abideth with y• plain-dealer. For in goodnes doeth God rest, and men like well of it. Shū naughtines, and kill the deuell in your good workes: for they y• are double faced serue not God. but their owne lustes, because they seeke to please Belial, and suche as are like thē selues. Now although plaindealing men,
and suche as pretende but one face,The prepo∣sterous iud∣gement of the wore, make not good or bodde. are ta∣ken for offenders, at the handes of suche as beare twoo faces, yet are they righte∣ous before GOD. For many in killyng wicked persones, dooe twoo woorkes at once, namely good by euill, but in deede the whole worke is good, because that he whiche hath rooted out the euill, hath de∣stroyed it.Other kin∣des of dou∣ble faced mē. Some man hatyng his neigh∣bour mercifully, blameth hym for his ad∣uoutrie, or thefte: suche a one is double fa∣ced, but yet is the whole woorke good, be∣cause he followeth the Lordes example not respectyng what seemeth good, when it is euill in deede. An other wil not make merrie with riotters, leaste he should bee stained by them, and deile his owne soule. This manne also is double faced, but yet is al his doyng good, and he is like a Ro or a Stagge, whiche in common wilde herde, some to bee vncleane, and yet are al∣together cleane, because he walked in the zeale of the Lorde, shunnyng and hatyng those▪ whom God willeth to bee shunned in his commaundementes, and so killeth he euill with weldoyng. Se therefore my Sonnes, how there are twoo in all thyn∣ges one against the other, and the one hid∣den
vnder the other. Death succedeth to fe, shame to glorie, night to daie, and dar∣kenesse to lighte. All righteous thynges are vnder light and life: & therefore doeth eternall life ouermaister death. It is not to be aied, that truthe is vntruth, righte∣ousnesse vnrighteousnesse, or right wrōg, because that as al thinges are vnder God so all truthe is vnder light,Aser his righteous liuyng. I haue practi∣zed all these thynges in my life, and not straied from the truthe of the Lorde, but sought out the commaundementes of the highest, to the vttermost of my power, and walked with one face in goodnesse. Take heede therefore my Children to the Lor∣des Commaundementes, and followe the truthe with one face in goodnesse. Take heede therefore my Children to the Lor∣des Commaundementes, and followe the truthe with one single face:Double fa∣ced, double punished. For they that are double faced, shall be double punished. The spirite of errour hateth the man that sighteth against it. Keepe the lawe of the Lorde, and regarde not euill that seemeth good, but haue an eye to the thyng that is good in deede, and keepe the same, retour∣nyng to the lorde in all his Commaunde∣mentes, and restyng vpon hym, for the en∣des where at menne doe ame, dooe shewe their righteousnesse. And knowe the An∣gelles of the Lorde, from the Angelles of
Sathan. For if ye cleaue to wicked spiri∣tes, your soules shall bee tormented of the wicked spirite whom ye serue, in wicked lustes and woorkes. But if ye quietly and cherefully acquainte your selues with the Aungell of peace, he shall comforte you in your life tyme. My Children become not like the Sodomites. whiche knewe not the Aungell, and perished for euer. For I am sure that you shall synne, and bee deli∣uered into the handes of youre enemies, your ande shall bee laied waste, and your selues shalbe scattered into the fower cor∣ners of the yearth,. and bee despised as vn∣profitable Water in youre dispersyng a∣broade, vntill he highest dooe visite the yearth, eatyng and drinkyng as a manne, with menne, and breakyng the Serpen∣tes head in peeces without noice. He shall saue Israel and all the Heathen by water, eyng GOD hidden in manne. There∣fore tell your children these thynges, that they neglecte not Gods Lawe written in the Tables of heauen: For the tyme will come, that thei shall geue no credite to the Lawe of the Lorde. And you fallyng to naughtinesse, shall deale wickedly against GOD, geuing no heede to his Lawe, but
to mennes commaundementes. For this cause shall ye bee scattered abroade, as my brothers Gad and Dan, whiche were not acquainted with their owne Countrey tribe, and tongue. Neuerthelesse the lorde shall gather you together again in *Note this of faithe and mercie. faith, for the hope of his mercie, for Abraham, Isaac, and Iacobs sake. When he had so saied, he commaunded them to burie hym in Hebron. And he died slepyng a good slepe, and afterward his sonnes do∣yng as he had willed them, caried hym backe, and buried hym with his fathers.
¶The Testamente of Ioseph, made to his brethren & children at his death, concernyng chastie and pacience. Let Ioseph teache thee▪ Loe and Chasitie, So shalte thou haue: A blessed long life, Voyde of all firise. Euen to thy graue.
MN sonnes and dry thren, beardye Ioseph the welbeloued of Is∣raell. My Children, heare your haue knowen in my life Enuie and death; with the whiche my brethren would haue bestoyed me.Iosephes affictions. Locke pa? For they hated me; and God loued me, they would haue killed me, and the GOD of my Fathers kepte me: they put. me into a pitte, and the moste highest brought me out againe. I was folde as a maner, and the Lorde made me free, and his stronge hande helped me.God  his in di∣stresse. I was kepte in hunger, and the Lorde hym self nourished me: I was lefte alone, and the Lorde comforted me: I was sickr, and the Lorde visited me: I was in prison and the Sauiour made me glad: I was fassned in cheynes, and the Lorde vabaunde me: He pleaded my cause in the accusations of the Egiptians, and not onely deliuered me from eunie and dereipte, but also exal∣ded me in so muche that Putipher. Chiefe Stewarde of Pharaes house. did lende me lodgyng, where I was in ieapardie of
my life, by reason of a shamelesse woman, whiche entised me to do naughtines with her, through the slame of volupteousnesse burnyug about her breaste. I was caste in prison for her: I was beaten and mocked for her: yet the Lorde caused the keeper of the prison to bee moued with mercie to∣wardes me.God neuer forsaketh his He forsaketh not them that feare him, neither in darcknesse, neither in bondes, neither in tribulations or neces∣sities. God is not ashamed as manne, nei∣ther dreadeth he as men, neither shaketh or shrinketh he for feare as yearthly men. He is presente in all places, and in their moste greuous sorrowes he comforteth his. con∣ount in ten temptations. He goeth awaie for a reason, to try the thoughtes of their mynde. He founde me trustie in tenne temptations. And in eue∣ry one I was constant and preserued. For sufferaunce is a greate medicen, and cau∣seth muche goodnesse. Howe often did the Egiptian threaten my death?Sufferance what it is. Howe often was I punished, and yet the woman called me againe? how often did she threaten me to dye, because I would not haue to dooe with her? She saied vnto me, thou shalte haue gouernaunce of me, and all that bee myne, if thou wilte geue thy self vnto me.
and obeye my desire, and thou shalte bee lorde ouer vs.A presente medicene in temptation. But I remembred the wor∣des of my Father Iacob, and enteryng in to my Chamber, made my praier to the Lorde, and *Not from mte, but from wa∣ton fre. fasted seuen yeares, yet I ap∣peared vnto the Egiptian, in that state of bodie, as I had liued in pleasures or de∣lightes. For they that faste for GOD, receiue▪ autie of face. When I had wine geuen vnto me, I dronke none: and Fa∣styng three daies, I tooke my meate daie∣ly, and gaue it to the sicke and needie, and earely I waked vnto the lorde, and wepte for Memphetica the Egiptiā, because she was euermore troublyng of me.A craftie practise of a wom She cam vnto me in the night, as though she would haue visited me. And firste, truely because she had neuer a soonne, she fained to take me as her sonne. And I praied vnto God, to sende her a sonne: vntill whiche tyme she embraced me, as thoughe I had been her sonne, And I perceiued not the cause. And for a conclusion, she drew me to haue doen fornication with her, & I remembe∣ryng my self, was sorowfull vnto y• death. And when she was gone out, I came to my self, and sorrowed many daies: For I perceiued her deceipte and errour. And I
spake vnto her the woordes of the moste highest GOD, if by chaunce she mighte bee tourned awaie from her pernitious concupiscence.Flatterie the Deuelles sweete baite. Many tymes as to a holie man, she spake flatteryng woordes to me, not without deceipte, laudyng my chasti∣tie before her housebande, whiche would vtterly haue destroied me: Bothe manife∣stly and secretely she saied vnto me, feare not my housbande, for he is perswaded of thy chastitie. For if so bee that any manne shewed hym of thee and me, he would not beleue it.A token of a ious harte. For because of this thyng, I co∣uered me with Sackclothe, and laied me flatte vpon the yearth, and praied vnto al∣mightie GOD, that he would deliuer me from this woman of Egipte. When she could doe nothyng this waie, she came a∣gain armed with other reasons,ipocrites re of all  for ucre. that is to saie, that she would faine learne the worde of God of me, and began to speake after this maner. If thou wilte haue me to for∣sake myne Idolles, followe my desire▪ and I will perswade my housbande the Egip∣tian to goe frō his Idolat, and we shall walke in the lawe of thy God. I made an∣swere to these thynges: GOD will haue oe to worship hym with vncleannesse,
neither hath he any pleasure in Adulte∣res. And she helde her peace, desiryng to fulfill her concupiscence. And I fasted and praied, that God mighte deliuer me from her. Againe at an other tyme, she saied vn∣to me:Note the fruit of luste. If thou wilt not doe adulterie with me, I will kille my Prince, and so by the Lawe I shall take thee to my housbande. When I heard that, I rent my garmente and saied: Woman▪ I praie thee bee asha∣med of these thynges before GOD, and feare GOD, and dooe thou not suche an abhominable thyng: Neither dispaire vt∣terly that thou droune not thy self in thine owne euill, for if thou goe aboue it, I shall vtter and declare the thoughtes of thyne iniquitie. She fearyng these thynges, praied me that I should not bewraie her naughtinesse, and so departed. Yet againe, she went about to begile me with giftes, senoyng vnto me all thynges that menne haue neede of, and she sent me meate, stre∣wed about with inchantment. And as the Cunuke brought it in, I beheld and saw a terrible fellowe, geuyng me a sword with the dishe, and I perceiued that she went a∣bout to deceiue me. And whē he was gon, I wept, and touched not that meate, nor a∣ny
other of her sendyng for a good while after. A daie after that, she came to me and saied, what is the matter that thou haste not eaten of the meate? And I saied vn∣to her, because thou haste poysoned it. Therefore thou shalte knowe that I will not come vnto Idolles, but onely vnto GOD.Ioseph did first monishe nd not pro- Now vnderstande therefore, that the GOD of my Father by his Aungell, hath shewed thy mischiefe vnto me, and I haue kepte the meate to thy shame, if per∣chaunce thou mightest repente, or learne that the malice of wicked dooers preuai∣leth not againste them that worshippe the Lorde in Chastitie. And I tooke and did cate before her, saiyng: the GOD of my Fathers, and the Angell of Abraham shal bee with me, and then she fell doune at my feete and wepte.The name of God, & feare of , pricketh the conscience. Then liftyng her vp, I exhorted her many waies, and she promi∣sed me, that she would neuer doe suche i∣quitie after that daie. Yet because her harte was mournyng, and did burne to∣warde me in adulterie with sighes, com∣myng from the depth of her stomacke, she cast boune her countenaunce.Note this. The Egip∣tian her housbande perceiuyng her, faied: wherefore holdest thou doune thy face? she
aunswered, I am euen sorrowfull at the harte: And he comforted her that was not sicke: yet againe she entered into me (her housbande beeyng without) and saied▪ I am strangeled or choked: Either I will breake my necke, or els droune my selfe, without thou wilt obeye me. And I per∣ceiuyng that the spirit of Belial troubled her, praed vnto the Lorde, and saied thus: Wherefore arte thou vexed or troubled, all blinde in synne? Remember thy selfe▪ for if thou dooe kille thy self: the Concu∣bine of thy housbande called Sechon, en∣uiyng thee, shall beate thy Children, and destroye the memorie of thee from the yearth, And she saied vnto me. Haue doen▪ haue doen▪ I perceiue that yet thou haste some care for me: I haue euē enough that thou defendest my life, and my Children. I haue good hope in tyme to come, that I shall obtaine my desire. And she percei∣ued not that for the loue of my Lorde GOD I saied so, and not for her sake. Whatsoeuer he be that foloweth the con∣cupiscence of his pernicious desire, is made seruaunt vnto the same, as this wo∣man was. And if he heare any good thyng in the passion wherein he is ouercome: he
draweth the same to his pernicious or fil∣thy desire. I saie vnto you my sonnes, that it was aboute fire of the Clocke when she went from me, and I fell vppon my knees praiyng to GOD all that dae,A remedie a∣gainst temp∣tation. with the night following Ad about the breake of the day, I rose weping, that I might once be deliuered from this woman Egiptian. Finally, she caughte me faste by the gar∣ment, drawyng me to haue gone to bedde with her. Then perceiuing that she waxed madde, and that violently, & with strength she helde my clothes, I let my clothes from me, and fled awaie. Then she complained to her housbande of me▪ whiche put me in prison in the kinges house. The daie followyng after, I was fore beaten and cast into prison. And when I laie bound in Fetters: this Egip∣tian woman waed sicke for sorrowe, and harkened how I lauded GOD, beyng in a house of darckenesse. For I reioysyng with a glad voice, glorified my God onely that by suche occasion I was deliuered frō the Egiptian woman. Yet she left not to stande harkenyng,Note a sub∣tile woman. and saied: haue doen, and take the offer whiche I put vnto thee, and fulfill my desire, & I will deliuer thee
from thy bonde and bryng thee out from the darkenes: but all that could perswade me nothing,Iosephs sin∣gular chasti∣tie. in so much that in thought I was not inclined to any desire of her. For God loueth hym better whiche fasteth in chastitie,God respec∣teth the ver∣tuous not the wealthy. beyng in a Prison of darkenesse, then him whiche taketh his pleasure with voluptuousnes in a chamber of honor and riches. For if a man liue in chastitie, and desire glory, (if God perceiue it to be ex∣pedient for hym) hee geueth vnto hym as hee hath done vnto mee. Many tymes as though she had beene sicke, she descended vnto me vnlooked for, and heard the voice of me praiyng, and stoode the more still. But when I heard her sighe I helde my peace,A propertie of a harlo. for in her house, she stripped her self naked, breastes, legges and armes where∣by she might haue kindeled mee into the loue of her. For she was verie faire, and gloriously adourned to haue deceaued me but God kept me from her workes. Ther∣fore my sonnes,The commo∣ditie of pray∣er and suffe∣raunce. beholde what sufferaunce with prayer and fastyng doth. And there∣fore if you loue soberes and chastitie in sufferaunce and humility of the harte, the Lorde shall dwell in you, for he loueth so∣brietie: and when the most highest doth
dwell in a man although he chance to fast into enuy or into bondage or slander, the Lode which dwelleth in hym will for hy not onely deliuer hym, but also alt him, and glorie him as he hath done me, for he is alwaies with hym in word, in deede and thought. My brethren, ye knowe howe well my father did loue mee, and yet was I neuer the prouder therof in my hart. For though I was a Childe, I had euer the feare of God in my minde, When I grewe to age I moderated my selfe, and honoured my brethren whō I feared. I heald my peace when I was solde, because I woulde not haue the Ismaelites to knowe my stocke and kindred howe I was the sonne of Ia∣cob a man of greate strength and power. Therefore haue you in your deedes the teare of God, and honour your brethren, for all men that obserue the lawe of God, are  of hym. Then I came with the Ismaelites to a certaine place called In∣doculpe▪ and they demaunded of mee what I was, and I sayd (because I would not reproue my brethren) that I was one of their housholde aues. Then sayde the chiefe of them, thou art no slaue, for thy
at a windowe, and sent vnto her husband, saiyng: thy iudgement is vniust, for thou doest punish wrongfully the young man y• is stolen.A token of mercy if it were not for an ill end. But because I did not chage my words, yet again was I beaten, & com∣maunded to bee kept at his commaunde∣mēt, vntill such tyme as my masters came. And his wife said vnto hym: wherefore doe ye keepe in captiuitie the noble child? It were more almose to let hym goe, and to beate you.Note a flat∣teryng wo∣man. She would fayne haue spied me in desire of sinne, and I knew nothing of this. He sayde againe to Memphetica, it is not honest among the Egiptians, to take awaie an other mans goods before he shew hym of it. He said that of the Mer∣chaunt and of mee, when I should be im∣prisoned. After that xxiiii. dayes, the Is∣malites came, and they hearyng that Ia∣cob my Father was heauy for mee, sayde vnto me. Wherfore is it that thou saidest thou wast a bondman, and now we knowe that thou art the sonne of a greate man in the land of Chanaan, and thy father soro∣weth for thee in sackcloth.A good na∣ture. Then I would faine haue wept: yet I retrained my selfe for shamyng of my Brethren, and sayd, I know it not, for I am a bondman. Then
they tooke counsell among them selues, whether or to whom they might sell mee, least I should be ound in their hands. For eared Iacob, least he would be reuen∣ged of them: for they had heard that hee was mightie both to God and man. Then said y• Marchant to them, redeeme hym now frō the iudgement of Putiphar. They hearyng this went & asked for mee, sayng y• they had bought me for money, & he deliuered me. Memphitica spake to her husband to buy me, for she said, I heare say they would ell him. And they sent an Eu∣nuch to the ismaelites and desired to buy me, and when he could not bargaine with them, he returned & shewed his Lady that they asked a great price for the childe, she sent againe an other Eunuch saiyng, al∣though they aske two besauntes of golde see that thou spare not for money, but buy the child and bring him to me. He paid 80. goldē crownes for me, & said vnto his La∣dy that he paid an 100. And I periuyng this, heald my peace east y• Eunuch should haue beene searched. Beholde my sonnes, what I haue sustained. Loue one of you a∣nother, & with continuaunce cast out from among you deceitfull mindes, for God de∣liteth
in the concord of brethren, and hath pleasure also in y• loue & choise of a proued harte.Loue be∣twene bre∣thren plea∣seth God. For when my brethren came out of Egipt & knew me, I gaue thē again their money, & I neuer gaue reproch vnto them but comforted them. And after y• death of Iacob I loued them more aboundantly,Iosephes mercifull hart decla∣red: & all that euer he commaunded me I did ve∣ry gladly, & they marueled because I suf∣fered not them to bee troubled for a smale cause for all that was in my power I gaue to them. Their children were reputed to me as mine own, and mine owne children as their seruants. Their life was my life, and their sorow was my sorow, & all their infirmitie or disease was mine, my lande was their land, my counsell was y• counsel of thē. And I neuer exalted my selfe aboue thē in pride for mine owne worldly glory. But was amongest them as one of y• least. Therefore my Sonnes, if ye walke in the commaundementes of my Lorde,A promise for them that praye for their ene∣mies. the Lorde shall exalt you and blesse you in ri∣ches perpetuall. And if any man will doe euill to you, with meekenes looke that ye pray for hym, and GOD shall deliuer you from all euill. Nowe beholde and see that for my long sufferaunce the daughter of
my Lord was geuen me to wife, and there was geuen to mee with her an hundreth talentes of Gold. For God made them to serue me & gaue mee beauty that I should be as a flower aboue them that were faire in Israell, and he kept me vnto mine age both in strength and beauty, because I was like to Iacob in al things. And what dreames I haue seene, my children nowe heare. There were 12. Hartes feeding ad 9. were deuided abroad in the earth. Also I sawe, howe that of Iuda was a virgin borne hauyng a white silkin Robe, and of her came forthe an immaculate Lambe. And on the left hand of the saide Lambe, was as it were a Lyon, and all beastes▪ made against hym, and the Lambe ouer∣came them, and troad them vnder his feet and in hym ioyed the Angels, the men, and all the earth. These thinges shall come to passe in their tyme, that is to say in the la∣ter dayes.Christ . Therfore my sonnes, keepe the commaundement of the Lord and honour Iuda and Leuy. For of them, to you shall springe the lambe of God, whiche by hys grace shall preserue all Gentiles and Is∣raell. The kingdome of hym is a king∣dome eternall which shal neuer passe. For
my kingdome shall bee ended in yo, as the keepyng of an Orchard, for after the haruest it shall appeare no more. I knowe right well that after my death the Egip∣tians shall trouble you. But God shall re∣uenge you and bryng you to the promised land whiche he sware to Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob. But cary my bones with you, for in so doing, the Lord shalbe in the light with you against the Egiptians, & Belial shall be in darknes with the Egiptians. Also cary with you your mother Zilpha, & nigh vnto the valley, nere vnto Rachell, bury her. When he had said these wordes he stretched forthe hys feete and slept the sleep of all y• world. Then they enbaumed him with spices, putting hym in a chest in Egipt after he had liued 110. yeares who saw Ephraims Children vnto the 3. gene∣ratiō. For vnto Machir the sonne of Ma∣nasses, were children borne on Iosephes knees. After this all they of Israell be∣wailed hym and all the Egiptians with great mournyng. For he had compassion of Egypt as of hys owne proper mem∣bers, and assisted them bothe with his labour and counsell, and did them good at all ty∣mes and seasons.
¶The Testamēt of Beniamin, made to his Children at his death, concer∣nyng a clne mynde. Lo what true faitfull loue doth mean, All you that louers be: It is in hart and not in Lust, As here you plainly see.
THe Copie of Bensa∣mins wordes, whiche he vttered to his chil∣dren, beyng of the age of a hūdred and twen∣tie yeares. Hee kissed them and saied: As I∣saac was borne in the hundreth yeare of Abraham, so was I in the hundreth year of Iacob: and because Rachell died at my birth, I sucked her bondwoman Bill. For after that Rachell had borne Ioseph, she was barren xii. yeares. And when she had praied to the Lord in those xii. yeares, she conceiued and bare me. For my father loued Rachell excedingly, and wished to see 2. sonnes by her, and therefore I was called Beniamin,Beiamin what it si∣gnifieth. that is to say, the sonne of my daies, or the sonne of my sorrow, be∣cause my mother died in the birth of mee. When I came first into Egypt, and that my brother Ioseph knewe mee, hee sayde to mee: what saide they to my Father, when they had solde mee? I aunswered: They staied thy coate with bloud, and bringyng it to hym, sayde: See if this bee thy sonnes coate or no. And my Brother also saide vnto mee: Truely when the
Ismalites tooke me, one of thē stripping mee out of my coat, gaue me a thinne shirt to put on, and lashyng me with a Whyp, bad mee runne.Ioseph . And as hee went aside to hide my garment, a Lyon met hym, and slew him, and so his partners being afraid sold mee to their fellowes. You therefore my children, loue the God of heauen, and obey hys commaundementes, followyng that good and hle man Ioseph, and let your mynde bee set vppon goodnes, as ye know that mine hath beene. He that hath a good mynde looketh rightly vppon all thinges. Fare God and loue your neigh∣bours, shall not o∣uercome them that feare the Lord. and then although the spirit of Be∣lial tempt you to all naughtinesse to trou∣ble you, yet shall it not get the vpper hand of you, no more then it did of my Brother Ioseph. How many folke would haue kil∣led hym, and yet GOD deended hym? For he that feareth God, and loueth hys neighbour, cannot be wounded of the ayry spirit Beliall: and he that is shielded with the feare of the Lord, is safe from harme both of man and beast, and cannot be ouer∣come because hee is helped by the loue of God whiche he hath towardes hys neigh∣bour. For Ioseph be sought our father Ia∣cob
to pray for my Brethren to the Lorde, that he would not lay to their charges▪ the mischiefe that they had deuised againste hym. Wherat Iacob cryed out, O sonne Ioseph, thou hast ouercome my hart. And ther withall imbracyng him, he kissed him twoo houres together,Ioseph a right figure of Iesus Christ. and sayde: In thee shall the prophesie of heauen be resembled to the full, concernyng the lambe of God and Sauiour of the worlde, that the vn∣spotted shall bee deliuered for the wicked doers, and hee that is without sinne, shall dye for the Sinners in the bloud of hys Testament, to the saluation bothe of the Gentiles and of Israell, and he shall dashe Beliall and his seruauntes. My children looke vpon the ende of that good man and follow his mercifulnes with a good mind that you also may haue a crowne of glory vpon your heades.A good man A good man hath not a darcke eye, for he is mercifull to all men, yea though they bee sinners and haue de∣uised mischiefe agaynst hym, and he that doth good, ouercommeth euill.Ouercom∣th euill. by the defence of goodnesse, and loueth.Loueth the righteous. the righteous as his owne Soule. If ano∣ther. Enuieth not. man bee honoured, hee enuieth it not: if a man be enriched, it greeueth hym
not. If a man be strong.Praiseth the valiant. or valiaunt, he praiseth hym, and beleuyng him also to be chaste, he defendeth.Defendeth hym that eareth God. hym that hath the feare of God. He worketh together with hym that oueth God, and if a man forsake theAdmoni∣sheth the sin∣ner. almightie, hee warneth hym to re∣turne againe. Whosoeuer hath the grace of the good spirite, him doth he loue as his owne life. HePittieth the poore. pitieth the poore, succou∣reth the weake, and praiseth and honou∣reth God.The exam∣ple of a . My children, if ye haue a good minde, euill men shall stande in awe of you, and vnthriftes shall for very shame be conuerted to goodnesse. So that coue∣tous men shall not only depart from their nigardlines, but also geue of their aboun∣daunce to the needy. If ye be good doers, both vncleane spirites shall flee from you, and shrewd beastes shall shun for feare of you. For where the regard of good works is in the minde, there darkenesse flyeth away. For if hee doe wrong to any holye man, hee is sorye for it: and if a holy man receiue wronge, he pittieth the doer, and putteth it vp with silence. And if any man betray a righteous soule, and the righte∣ous pray for his betrayer, the betrayer is not a little disgraced, and the righteous
becommeth muche more notable after∣warde, as did my Brother Ioseph. The guilefull spirite of Beliall hath no power ouer a good mans minde: For the Angell of peace guideth his soule.The proper∣ties of a righteous man. He looketh not affectionatly vppon corruptible thinges, ne raketh together riches in the desire of voluptuousnesse. Hee is not delighted with pleasures: Hee greeueth not hys neighbour, hee stuffeth not hymselfe with meate, neither wandreth he in the pryde of hys eyes: for the Lorde is his portion. He taketh no glory for geuyng good coū∣sell, hee passeth not how men dishonoure hym, neither can he skill of anye guile, vn∣trueth, strife, or slaunderousnes. For the Lorde dwelleth in hym, and inlighteneth hys mynde, and hee reioyceth before all men in a good tyme. A good mynde hath not twoo tongues: one to blesse with, and another to curse with: one to slaunder with, and another to honour with: one of sorow, and an other of oy: one of quiet∣nes, & an other of trouble: one of dimu∣lation & an other of truth: one of pouerty, & an other of riches: but it hath one onely disposition pure & vncorrupt towards all. It hath no doble sight nor doble hearyng.
For in all thinges that he doth, speaketh or seeth, he knoweth that the Lorde behol∣deth his hart, and therfore he clenseth hys mynde that hee may not bee ound faultie before God and man. But all the workes of Beliall are double, and vtterly voyde of simplicitie, Wherefore my children, shun the naughtinesse of Beliall, for at the first he delighteth those that obey hym,Disobediēce the father of seuen mis∣chiefes. but in the ende he is a sworde, and the Father of seuen mischiefes. For when the mynde hath once cōceiued by Beliall, it bringeth forthe, firste enuy,Enuy. secondly desperatnesseDespera∣tion. thirdly sorrowe,Sorrow. fourthly bondage,Bondage. fiftly needinesse,edines. sixty troublesomnesse,rouble. and se∣uenthly desolation:esolatiō. and for that cause was Cain tormented with seuen punishments by God, for in seuen yeare together God brought euery yeare a new plague vppon Ca. example of Ca. Twoo hundred yeares hee suffered, and in the nine hundreth yeare the earth was made desolate with the floud for hys righteous brother Abels sake. In seuen hundred yeares is Cain iudged, and La∣mech in seuentie tymes seuen: for they that are like Cain in spitefulnes and ha∣tred towardes their brethren, shalbe pu∣nished with the same punishment for e∣uer
as he was. You therfore my Childrē eschew malice, enuy, & hatred towardes your brethrē, & cleue to goodness & louing¦nes. He y• hath a minde cleane in loue, looketh not vpō a womā in way of leche∣ry. For he hath no desyling in his hart, because y• spirit of y• Lord resteth in him.An apt litude to a mind resist∣ing sinne. For as the Sunne is not defiled by shy∣ning vpon a puddle or dunghill, but doth rather dry vp and driue away the stinch: euen so a pure mind stryueth agaynst y• vncleanesse of the earth, and ouercōmeth it, but is not defiled it selfe. And I per∣ceiue by the sayings of the righteous Enoch, that there shalbe euill deedes a∣mōg you. For ye shal defile your selues with the fornication of Sodonie, and pe¦rishe all saue a few, and multiply mord∣nate lustes in women, and the reigne of the Lord shall not be among you, for he shal take it away sodenly. Neuerthelesse the Lordes temples shalbe made in our portion, & it shalbe glorious among you. For the Lord himselfe shal take the king¦dome vpon him, Christ▪ and the twelue tribes shalbe gathered together there, and all nations shall▪ resort thether, vntill the highest send his saluation in the vi∣sitation
of his onely . And he shal into the first temple, and there the Lord shall suffer wrong, and he despised and be  vp vpon a peece of timber. And the veyle of the temple shallbe rent , and the spirit of the Lord shall come downe vpon the Gentiles poured out as fire. And rising vp frō the grane, he shall ascend from earth to . He shall remēber how  hath bin vp∣on earth, and ow glorious he is in hea∣uen. When Ioseph was in Egipt, I longed to see his person, and the form of his coūtenaunce. And through the pray∣ers of my Father Iacob I sawe him a∣wake in the daye of his full and perfecte shape. Nowe therefore my Children, knowe ye that I shall dye. Wherefore deale euery of you truely and rightfully with his neighbour, worke ye iustly & faithfully, and kéepe ye the lawe and commaundementes of the Lord: for that do I teach you in stead of al inheritaūce. And gue you the same to your Childrē for an euerlasting possession. For so dyd Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob: they gaue vs all these thinges for an inheritaunce, saying: kéepe the Lordes commaunde∣mentes,
til he reueale his sauing health to all nations.A proph∣sy of to last comming of Christ. Then shall ye see Enoch, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, and Ia∣cob, rising at his right hande with ioy∣fulnesse. Then shal we rise also euery of vs to his owne scepter,The resur∣rection ad iudgement described. worshipping the king of heauen which appeared on earth in the base shape of mā. As many as be∣leue in him shall reioice with him at that time. And all these shall rise agayne to glorye, and the residue . And the Lord shall first of all iudge Israel for the vnrighteousnes  agaynst him, because they beleued not in God y•▪ came in the  to deliuer, Then shall he iudge all natiōs, as many as beleued not in him when he appealed vpō earth, and he shall reproue Israell among the chosen of the Gentiles, as he reproued Esau in the Madianits that seduced his brethren by fornication & Idolatry, who were estraunged from God, and fell a∣way from the inheritance of the Childrē because they feared not God. But if you walke in holinesse before the Lorde, ye shall dwell in hope againe in me. And all Israell shall be gathered to the Lord and I shall no more be called a
Wolfe for your robberies sakes, but I shall be called the Lordes workeman, whiche geueth foode to such as doc good. And in my sede shal be raysed vp the be∣loued of the Lorde, whose voyce shall be heard vpon the earth, and he shall geue ewe knowledge, & inlighten all nati∣ons with the light of vnderstanding, and shall come vp to saue Israell. Hee shall take from them as a Wolfe, and geue to of the Gentiles, and conti∣nue in the  of the Gentiles vnto the , He shall be amonge their Princes as musicall melodie in the mouthes of al men, and his doinges and sayinges shall be written in holy bookes. He shal be the Lordes dearling for euer∣more: And as concerning hym, my Fa∣ther Iacob taught me, saying: He shall amend the defaultes of thy Trybe, And when he had ended these sayinges, hee cmmaunded his Children to carye hys bones out of Egipt, and to burye them in Hebron by his Fathers. So Benia∣ dyed a hundred and fiue and twenty yeare olde in a good age, and they put , and in the foure score before the departure
of the Israelites out of Egypt, they and their Brethren conueyed their Fathers bones priuely agayne into the land of Chanaan, and buryed him in Hebron at the feete of hys Fathers, and retur∣ned agayne out of the land of Cha∣naan, and dwelt in Egipt, till the day of their departure thence all together. FINIS.
¶How these Testaments of the twelu Patriarches, wre first founde, and by whose meanes they were translated out of Greeke into Latine. THese Testamentes were hidden and concealed a longe time, so as our tea∣chers and the auncient coulde not find them. Which thing happened through the spitefulnes of the Iewes, who by reason of the most euidēt manifest, and often prophesies of Christ that are written in them, did hide them a lōg while. At  the Greekes being very narrow  out of auncient writinges, ought these Testamentes warel, & got them more , & tran∣slated thē faythfully out of Hebrew into Greeke. Neuerthelee, this writing cō∣tinued yet stil , because there was not any man to be foūd, y• was skil∣ful both in y• Greeke and Latine, nor any interpe that might procure the tran∣slation of this noble work, vntill the tyme of Robert the second, surnamed Grosthead  Lincolne, who sēt
diligent searchers as farre as Greece, to fetch him a copie of the sayd wryting wt∣out respect of their charges whiche he bare most liberally. Therfore to cōtinue the remembraunce of those most lightsō prophesies to y• strengthning of the chri∣stian faith, that reuerend Byshop did in the yeare of our lord 1242. translate thē plainely and faithfully, worde for worde out of Gréeke into Latin, (in which two tounges he was coūted very skilfull,) by the helpe of M. Nicholas Greeke, Parson of the Church of Dachet, and Albōs to y• intent that by that meaes the eui∣dēt prophesies which▪ shine more brigh∣ter thē the day light, might the more glo∣ryously come abroad to y• greater confusi∣on of the Iewes, and of al heretickes and enemies of the Churche of Christ, to whom e praise and glory for euer, Amen.
AT LONDON Printed by Iohn Daye, dwellyng ouer Aldersgate. ¶Cum Gratia & Priuilegio Regne Maiestate.
