21237 99847334 12367
AN HISTORICAL DIALOGVE TOV∣ching Antichrist and Poperie, DRAWEN AND PVB∣lished for the common benefit and comfort of our Church in these dange∣rous daies, & against the desperate attemptes of the vowed aduersaries of Iesus Christ, his Gospell, and this flo∣rishing State. by Thomas Rogers. Allowed by auctoritie. Reuel. 18. 6 Reward her euen as shee hath rewarded you, and giue her double according to her workes: and in the cup that she hath filled to you, fill her the double. AT LONDON, Printed by Iohn Windet for Andrewe Maunsell, and are to be solde at the signe of the Brasen Serpent in Paules Church-yard. 1589.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR CHRI∣stopher Hatton, Knight, Lord high Chancelar of England, Knight of the most Honorable order of the Garter, and worthie Chancelar of the most famous Vni∣uersitie of Oxenford, his singular good Lord and Patron. ∴ THAT Whore of Ba∣bylon in the holie boke of Reuelations decy∣phered by Saint Iohn, Reuel. 17. hath bin long since, & through the good∣nes of Th'almightie, is manie waies, and by sundrie meanes in this last age of the world most notablie prooued to bee the church of Rome. Notwithstanding as common strompets of∣ten-times put vpon them both the faces and the persons of most honest women: so this
whore, filthie though she be and vncleane, yet would she appeare in the eies of man to be pure and chast, as the spouse of Christ. And as har∣lots haue brazen faces, and dare compare, yea and for pure behauiour some-while praefer themselues to vnspotted virgins, & right so∣ber matrons: so this filth albeit she know her selfe guiltie of all manner pollutions, yet, such is her impudencie, she blusheth not both to compare he selfe for honestie with the best, & make the world beleeue that it is not she, but euen the lambes wifeReuel. 19. v. 7. 21. v. 9., that is naught and vncleane.Demonstr. 2. But, praised be God for the same, vaunt she neuer so much of her holines,Test. Rhem. annot. Iohn. 16. v. 13. 17. vers. 17. Ephes. 5. v. 24. 29. and speake shee neuer so blasphemouslie against the spouse of Christ, her loose & lecherous life is well knowen, and her abominations blazoned to th'uniuersall world:1. Tim. 3. v. 13. so that she which giueth out that she is cleane, is knowen to be nought els but meere pollution; that saith she neuer went astrayeN. Sād. de vi∣ib. Monar. lib. 8., neither can erreCatech Tri∣den▪ in exposit. Symb., is well knowen to be euen the verie scūme of an∣cient and newe errorsWhitak. a∣gainst W. Rei∣noldes. c. 5., the sinke or draughte of heathenish idolatrieTheol. Wir∣temb. contra Bellar. p 254., to haue erred in an hundredFla. Illyricus contra mend. Papist., yea, in sixe hūdred points of religionHeshusius de 600. erroribus pontif., to haue ad∣ulterated
euerie principal head of Chri∣stian doctrineTheod. Beza epist. 1., and to haue quite re∣uolted from our Sauiour ChristCaluinus e∣pist. S regi Po∣loniae. f. 169.. This being so, great should the detestation of her be in al our mindes; and if any natural af∣fection we carie toward our deere mother, the Church of Christ, we gladlie will imploy all our giftes both of bodie, and of soule, & what els soeuer graces we haue for the defense of our mothers good behauiour, & for the bringing of this bold huswife and most impudent har∣lot, so much as in vs lieth, into a common ha∣tred of all sortes, that if possible it were euen the verie boies & moathers in the streete may neuer heare Poperie named but they may hisse at it, as they do at the sight of knowen bawdes and naughtie-packes. For my part Right Honorable, some-what in this booke, as heretofore in other treatises I haue done, and by Gods assistance and the lawfull fauour of my Superiours, will pro∣ceede to the displaying of her filthines more and more to the world. For wel I see, which that most Reuerend Father and blessed mar∣tyr, Maister Latimer did long since obserue, that th'impudencie of this whore is excce∣ding great and intolerable, and therefore,
where occasion shall be giuen she is to be gauled and spurgauled tooM Latimer his last wordes in his confer. with B. Ridley bout the Lords Supper., seeing no better she will prooue. That which I looke for at her handes, is but mortal hatred, for my labour. For so do harlots requite such as of good-wil, laie open vnto them their vngodli∣nes, that they may amend. And surely as in some thinges aboue men∣tioned, so otherwise me-thinkes she doth nota∣blie resemble the brothels and harlots of the world, & therfore diuinelie by Gods spirite is entituled the whore of Babylon. For harlots, if they loue you, and you will not with like loue answere them againe, they will hate you as Putiphars wife did IosephGen. 39. v. 7. 8. &c., and those wicked Iudges SusannaHist. of Su∣sanna.; Loue them and they will abuse you, as Delilah did Samson Iud. 16. v. 6. 17. &c., & that filth Apame Esd. 4. v. 29. 30., which proudlie sitting on the right hand of the king, with her right hand tooke the crowne of the kings head and put it on her owne, and strooke the King with her left hand; Leaue them once, & giue your selfe to lead an honest life, either solelie or in holie wedlocke, and they will pursue you with malice euen vnto the death, as the late murther of Abel Bourne is memorableViewe of ex∣pmples., to this purpose.
So this whore of Babylon, if you loue her not againe, she louing you, she wil hate you euen vnto the death; If you loue her, she will abuse you, & that too shamefully; If you praeferring a Godlie life agreeable to Gods holy word be∣fore her wicked companie, and cast her of, no∣thing will pacifie her till she see your blood. Of England this whore would be loued, but England will bee chaste still with Ioseph, and Susanna: and therefore England is extremely hated. Spaine loueth this whore, and Spaine is abused, shee sitteth on the Kinges right hand, shee taketh his Crowne with her right hand, & puts it on her owne hed, and with her left hand she strikes him on the face; hee gapeth and gazeth on her, poore soule; if shee laugh at him, hee laugh∣eth, and if shee be angrie with him, he flat∣tereth till shee bee reconciled: yea hee will not spare his owne bloud to enioy her loueApologie of the Pr. of O∣range.. France leaft her companie, what say I, leaft? he onely cast a friendlie countenance towardes the lambes wife, and her faithful seruantes, & she was inflamed with iealousie forthwith, she could not be pleased, she feared he would cast her of, or not feed her malicious humor, and therefore a brother of that brothel house
gratiouslie admitted vnto familiar speech in his owne chamberLetter of H∣rie 4. K. Fr. and Nauarre. vnder colour of confes∣sion De caede. &c. Gal. Regis Hē∣rici 3. epigrā∣mata. must be his priest, and cut his throat. Honorable, there is no ioie, but in a godlie conuersation; there is no setled comfort but with the spouse of Christ. Th'end of harlots & following thē, besides discredit in this world, & consumption both of bodie and goodesProu. 6. v. 26., it is vtter condemnation both of soule and bodie in the world to comeGal. 5. v. 19. 21. Reuel. 22. v. 15.. Th' end of this whore is euerlasting condemnation in hell fireReuel. 18. v. 8., and besides their excessiue charges and expenses Taxa. paenité. Duarenus de S. eccles. mi∣nist. ac benefi∣cus li. 1. c. 4., their end is th'utter wrath of God which haue to do with her. To such I say from the Lord, goe out of her good people, that yee be not partakers in her sinnes, and that yee re∣ceiue not of her plaguesReuel. 18. v. 4.. To your honor I wish perseuerance euen vntill th'end in that good religion which you do professe, to th'end you may at length ouercome, & so eate of that tree of life, which is in the middes of the para∣dise of GodReuel. 2. v. 7. 17. and receiue the white stone, & bee clothed in white araieReuel. 3. v. 5. 21., & sit with Christ in his throne, euen as Christ sitteth with his father in his throane. And thus presuming of your wonted fauour (wherof to my great comfort and encourage∣ment
I haue tasted) and nothing doubting of your gratious accepting of this treatise, small and simple though it be, I humblie take my leaue of your Honor at this time; commen∣ding your Lordship with al your good ende∣uors for the welfare of the church, our Prince, and Common-weale to the blessing of Th'al∣mightie. From Horninger, neere S. Ed. Burie in Suff. the 19. of September. Anno 1589. Your Honors at com∣maundement, Tho. Rogers.
AN HISTORI∣CAL DIALOGVE OF ANTICHRIST AND POPERIE. Chap. 1. 1 Of th'office of our Sauiour Christ ascribed vnto o∣thers besides him; 2 and first of S. Francis Deified, and by sundrie Types and Shadowes proper onely to the Maiestie of God and his sonne Iesus Christ praefigured. The speakers. Timothie, Zelotes. Two professors of the Gospell. TIMOTHIE. I now see, is you haueThis hath relation to an other dialogue of the authors, intituled, A Catechisme for Catho∣liques. said, the worde of GOD confirminge your wordes, that our Aduersaries the Papistes do but storie out Christ, in Christ they do not beleeue. ZELOTES. Though you see much alreadie, yet you haue not all. T. What remaineth. Z. It is bruted of Pope Paul the third, (in whose time as in some of his prede∣cessorsLeo. 10. Adrian. 6. Clemens 7. also that excellent Organ of God,Beza. epist 81., Martin Luther, opposed himselfe
against the most detestable enormities of the Romish ChurchSleidanus de Statu Relig. & Reip. lib. 1. that he should say; being somewhat moued against Car∣dinal Bēbie for alledging a place against him out of the Gospel cōcerning Christ what tellest thou me that same fable of Christ? T. Counted hee the Storie of Christ but a fable? And all which is said and written of our Sauiour for a meere fable? yet what is the blasphemie of that wretched Pope to the common faith of all Papistes? take they the Gospell of Christ for a fable? Z The foole hath said in his hart there is no God, saith the Prophet DauidPsal. 13. 1. Psal. 53. 1.; hee said it, but not in plaine termes with mouth, that were too horrible, yet said the foole in his hart there is no God. So the Papistes do say in their hartes, Christ is not the Christ, and that which is writ∣ten in the Gospell concerning Iesus Christ, it is but a fable; they say it, but not in those termes with mouth, as did that cursed Pope, that they knowe were too too blasphemous, yet say they in hart, and by their deedes and wordes of like signification, they say as did Pope Leo of our S. Christ.
T. May this be credited? Z. Heare and then beleeue, as God shall moue your harte. I graunt they confesse a sonne of God, which was cō∣ceiued by the holie ghost, borne of the virgin Marie &c. yet when they beleeue not that which the Scripture doth deli∣uer cōcerning him, or ascribe that vnto others which is due alwaies, and pro∣perlie vnto him, and vnto none besides in respect of his office, do they not take, which the Scripture ascribeth vnto him for a toy or fable? T. Ascribe they his office vnto any others besides him? Z. That do they vnto diuers and sun∣drie persons that I say not thinges be∣sides. T. Can you name anie? Z. That can I a great sort. T. Who is one? Z. S. Francis: which is like vnto Christ Confor. Frǎ. lib. 1. fol. 10., Yea whom Christ hath made like vnto himselfeIbid fol. 4., and that in al respectesIbid. f. 18. 5.. Hence is it that they ascribe vnto the said Francis the same titles, the same na∣tures, the same properties, the same po∣wer,
and the verie same office due vnto our S. Christ. T Proue that which you haue said, that I may credite you. Z. Concerning the titles, called is our Sauiour, as you knowe, the Son of GodMatth. 16. 16., so is Saint FrancisMath. 3. 17. Confor. Fr. L. 1 Fol. 14.; the good ShepherdIohn. 10. 11., so is S. FrancisConfor. Fr. L. 1. fol. 157., the Rocke,1 Cor. 10 4. so is Saint FrancisConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 11., the light of the worldIohn 8. 12., so is Saint FrancisConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 17., the grace of GodTitus. 2. 11., S. Francis is so tooConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 5. lib. 2. fol. 14. Iesus of Nazareth, the King of the IewesIohn. 19. 19., they say of Saint Francis also, that he is Iesus of Nazareth the king of the IewesCofor. Fr. lib. 1. 229.. T. Who that hath anie benefite, and loo∣keth for moe, and more excellent from Iesus Christ; would euer thinke that anie receiuing his name from him, would attribute these ti∣tles vnto any but vnto Christ? Z. True, but these are but names & ti∣tles. T. Yet names oftentimes expresse the na∣ture of thinges. Z. And so do these titles giuen vnto S. Francis. T. But these names point both vnto a di∣uine, and also vnto an humane Nature in our Sauiour Christ?
Z. So was S. Francis verie God, and verie man. T. Say they S. Francis was verie God as well as Christ? Z. In such tearmes they say it not, yet as Christ said, I and my father are oneIohn 10. 30., so they say, that S. Francis is made one Spirite with God.Confor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 3.. And as the Scrip∣ture euerie where maketh it a thing pe∣culiar alwaies, and onely vnto God, to behold the heart: so they write of Saint Francis, that he onelie of all Saintes, and none els, but by his illumination, behol∣deth the consciences of mankindeConfor. Fr. lib. 1. fol, 162.. And he saw the verie secrets of heartes Ibid. lib. 1. fol 201. & lib. 2. Fol. 27. which is to say, that S. Francis was ve∣rie God. And when they say, that God hath put all thinges vnder S. Francis his feeteHebr. 2. 7. 8., and set him aboue the workes of his handes; and hee deseruedly may sayMatth. 11. 27., All thinges are geuen vnto mee of my father; and which more is, when they say (as they do all these thinges in one and the same placeConfor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 149.) that it hath pleased the Lord God, that all thinges should be obedient and pliant vnto S. Francis will, make they not S. Francis
a verie God? T. O Sunne, and canst thou comfort these! O earth, and canst thou indure these! O God and wilt thou not be reuenged on these Ca∣tholiques so irreligious! Z. You wil be moued I perceiue when you heare all. T. End they not here? Z. Nay it were an infinite thing to re∣herse the most horrible blasphemies which these poure out against God, to bring glorie vnto their S. Francis, ano∣ther Christ. But for breuitie sake this knowe for all that before he was borne they fetch types of S. Francis out of the holie Scriptures from sundrie darke say∣inges and persons, as well as of Christ; being come into the world, they make him euerie waie to answere vnto our Sa∣uiour Christ, and som-waie his superior; and when hee was dead, they gaue as much glorie vnto him euen as vnto Christ: as if either that Christ were not the true Christ, as the Iewes do yet thinke, or besides him there should be another Christ & sauiour of the world, which is their S. Francis.
T. Is this true that you say, or do you so i∣magine? Z. I deliuer nothing but what them∣selues haue writ. For cōcerning the first point, they say, that S. Francis aswell as Christ, was declared by darke sayinges, and speaches of the prophetsConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 5.. T What may those Types of S. Francis be? Z. They tell of many, I onelie will re∣cite a verie few, omitting to mention the rest, both for breuitie sake, and t'auoide offence. You know, at the commaunde∣ment of the Lord, Moses made a fierie Serpent, and set it vp as a signe, that so many as were bitten might looke vpon that Serpent of brasse and liue.Numb. 21. 8. 9.. T. I know the place verie wel, what of that? Z. That Serpent was a figure of this S. Francis.Confor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 9.. T. Of this S. Francis! Not of S. Francis but of Christ, I trowe, for so Christ him selfe did sayIohn. 3. 14.. Z. But they say it was a figure of Saint Francis. It must therefore necessarilie ensue, either that Christ was not the Messiah, or that S. Francis was the Mes∣siah & Sauiour of mankinde, so well as
Christ. T. Who euer so wickedly hath abused the holy Scriptures of God? Z You shal heare another Tipe of this new Christ Saint Francis. When Nebu∣chad-nezzer had cast the three Noble-men into the burning ouen, at length he spied in the middest of the fire a fourth, whose forme was like the Sonne of GodDan. 3. 25.. Know you whom that fourth did sig∣nifie? T. Whō he did signifie? I wot what I thinke, But I pray you tell whom he did signifie? Z. I will tell you: he was a figure of S. Francis, if you will credite the Fran∣ciscanesConfor Fr. lib. 2. fol. 10.. T. No more of this, I pray you hartelie. I canne no longer endure to heare such blasphe∣ming of God, and horrible abusing of his ho∣ly word. Z. How then would you abide to heare them say, that the worde of the Sera∣phins, Holy, Holy, Holy, in the 6. of EsaieEsa. 6. 2. 3., were spoken figuratiuelie, and are to be vnderstood of S. FrancisConfor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 9.? How would you abide that the noise of the great rushing behinde the Prophet Ezechiel
vttering these wordesEzech. 3. 12., Blessed be the glo∣rie of the Lord, should point vnto Saint FrancisConfor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 9.? what woulde you thinke if you heard them say, which they writeIbid. lib. 1. fol. 10, that the Angel hauing the seale of the liuing God, mentioned in the 7. of the ReuelationApoc. 7. 2., was verie Saint Francis? T. That is as much, as if they saide, that Christ is not Christ, but S. Francis is Christ. Z. And that is to make the Gospell of Christ euen a verie fable. Chap▪ 2. Of S. Francis againe, who is in many equal, in some respectes made Superior to Iesus Christ. TYMOTHIE. But to leaue these shadowes and come vnto the substance, dare they compare S. Francis with Christ, as you said they doo? ZELOTES. They do both com∣pare, and in many respectes preferre him before Christ. T. That would better be knowne. Z. You haue alreadie heard how they are made like for names, like for nature,
a like prefigured, yea sometimes by one and the same Types and Shadowes. But more-ouer they are made equall in ma∣ny other thinges, in so much as they haue written a booke on purpose to shewe the conformitie betweene Saint Francis and Christ. T. What resemblance is there betweene Christ & S. Francis? Z. As much in truth as betweene God and Belial: Yet that the world may see how farre they haue waded in impietie, you cā name almost nothing of Christ, wherein they make not S. Francis to re∣semble him. T. When Christ was borne, a multitude of heauenlie soldiors with Th'angel praised God and said, Glorie be to God &c.Luke 2. 13. 14.. What such thing at the birth of S. Francis? Z. Yes, it must religiouslie be belee∣ued, say theyConfor. Fr. li. 3. fol. 24., that the like was done at the natiuitie of S. Francis. And which more is, Hell was so mooued at this mans birth, as th'infernall feendes did thinke either that the day of Iudgement was then come, or one was borne that should shake, yea ouerthrow the force
of helConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 14., was euer the like read? or could any thing be said more in disgrace and dishonor of our Sauiour Christ? T. Christ being a childe of eight daies old, and presented in the temple, Simeon that iust man fearing God, and waiting for the con∣solation of Israel, tooke him in his armes, & praised God &c.Luke. 21. 25. 28. &c.. Z. That is verie true, so did Simeon a iust man, yet a man; but saint Francis being a child, an Angel in shape of a pil∣gryme, tooke him in his armes, as Sime∣on did Christ, and blessed himConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 28.. T. Christ was so holy, as albeit he was temp∣ted, yet was he without sinHebr 4. 15., and neuer did sinne1. Pet. 2. 22., nor knew any sinne2. Cor. 5. 21., nor had in him anie sinne at all1. Iohn. 3. 5.. Z. In integritie of life also saint Francis doth resemble ChristConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 4.. For he perfor∣med euen according to the letter, not o∣mitting so much as one iote or title, euē all the holye GospellIbid. fol. 2. 39., and kept euerie commaundement of GodIbid. fol. 149., in so much as he is an example of all perfectionIbid. fol. 5.. T. If he were such a one, maruell it is hee had no Ionn Baptist to prepare away for him, as Christ hadMath. 3. 1. &c.!
Z. You maruel that he had none such, but he had such a forerunner, as Christ had, and that is merueilousConfor. Fr. li. . fol. 110.. T Christ had his twelue Disciples, and the names of them all are knowenMath. 10. 1. 2. &c.. Z Saint Francis had so manie for num∣ber, & as wel knowen by their namesConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 46. lib. 2. fol. 46.. And as one of Christ his Apostles cal∣led IudasMath. 10. 4., was wicked, and hung him selfeMath. 27. 5.; so had saint Francis a disciple cal∣led Iohannes de CapellaConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 46., which for lewd∣nes hung him selfe. And as the Apos∣tles of the Lord were wonderfull for their holines and miracles; so the com∣panies of saint Francis were glorious for conuersation and miracles, in life and in death: And as the holie Apostles follo∣wed with all indeuour the life and do∣ctrine of Christ; so these companies with saint Francis obserued the holie Gospell: And as the Lord Iesus had o∣ther Disciples besides the 12 Apostles; so also saint Francis besides the fore∣named companions and disciples had manie mo that were singular for life, holines, and perfection: And as by Christ & his Apostles the whole world
was changed; so by saint Francis and his bretheren the world is altered to the following of Christ his life, and exerci∣sing of penanceConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 46.. T. Christ was tempted of the deuillMath. 4. 1., was saint Francis so too? Z. Yea, hee was tempted likewise of sathan, that therin he might be founde like vnto ChristConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 41.. T. Christ was so virtuous, as some being sicke, thought that if they might but touch his garment only, they should be wholeMath. 9. 21.. Z. Saint Francis was therein not inferi∣or vnto Christ: for he thought him self happie that might touche the hem of saint Francis garmentConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 52.. T. Christ was of that power, that he healed euerie sicknes, and euerie disease among the peopleMath 4. 23. Matth. 9. 35.? Z. So did saint FrancisConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 29.. T. Christ raised the dead vnto lifeIohn 11. 43. 44.. Z. Saint Francis did the sameConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 29.. T. Christ at a Marriage made Wine of waterIohn 2. 6. 7. &c.. Z. S. Francis also turned not onelie water, yea a fountaine of waterConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 147., but also vinegar into wineIbidem..
T. With seauen loaues and two litle fishes Christ he fedde 4000. menMar. 8. 9., besides women and childrenMath. 15. 34. 38.. Z. In the miracle of feeding of so ma∣nie thousandes of persons, S. Frācis was made like, and did resemble ChristConfor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 106.. T. We reade of Christ that he was transfi∣gured, and his face did shine as the Sunne, and his clothes were as bright as the lightMath. 17. 2.. Z. So we reade indeede, yet but once, & saint Francis was transfigured as well as heConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 110., and that often times. T. Christ hee was wounded for our trans∣gressions, as EsayEsa. 53. 5., and as Dauid prophe∣siedPsal. 22. 16.: his handes and feete were pearsed▪Luke. 24. 39. Iohn. 20. 25.. Z. In Francis, mans nature was digni∣fied, and adorned with the markes of Christ his passionConfor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 5., his side was ope∣ned, as was the side of ChristIbid. fol. 232.; and in him the passion of Christ was againe renu∣edIbid. fol. 194.: yea he was so wonderfully conioy∣ned to the Crucified, & transformed in∣to Christ, that God is minded through him to saue mankindeIbid. fol. 159.. T. And is not this to make S. Francis ano∣ther Christ? and either to make a fable, as I. haue said, of the Gospell, or none accompt of
Christ his passion? But I see enough, and but too much in deede of this comparison. No more therefore of the same, it is too odious. Z. I could and would too, but I see you offended, and that iustly, proceede, and shew vnto you saint Francis, death approching vpon him, would needes strip him selfe naked, and so lie vpon the bare ground, because he would be like Christ, which hung naked on the crosse Confor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 240.; how being dead he went downeinto purgatorieIbid. fol. 241., as Christ descended into hell; how after his death he appeared vnto diuers and sundrieIbid. fol. 244., as Christ did after his resurrection1. Cor. 15. 5. 6. &c., how compassed about with many soules whom hee had brought with him out of Purgatorie, he ascended into heauenConfor. Fr. li. 1. 241. in imitation of th'ascension of ChristMar. 16. 19. Act. 11. 9.; and how S. Francis, as ChristPhil. 2. 9., is highly exalted vn∣to the glorie of God the FatherConfor. Fr▪ li. 1. fol. 5., and hath a garlād as a conquerour; a crown as a sainct, and a marke as one aboue all belouedIbid. fol. 246.; But this may suffice, which doth shewe that saint Francis is like, and euerie way likened vnto Iesus Christ, & made another sauiour.
Chap. 3. Againe of S. Francis and of the confidence reposed in him as in Iesus Christ. TIMOTHIE. You haue de∣clared nowe the conformitie be∣tweene S. Francis and Christ. ZELOT. So haue I, yet nothing of myne owne fiction, but all is of their owne publishing. T. Find you also that anie do repose the like confidence in Francis, as Christians do in Christ? Z. I will prooue that some, and they a great some doo: and first by the Do∣ctrine, then by examples of the Fran∣ciscanes. T. What is their doctrine? Z. You know that the scripture saithIohn. 3. 16. 18▪: God so loued the world that he gaue his onely begotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him should not perish, but haue euerlasting life. Againe, He that beleeueth in him shal not be condemned; but he that beleeueth not is condemned alreadie. And againeMar. 16. 16., Hee that shall beleeue and be baptized, shall be sa∣ued:
but hee that will not beleeue, shall bee damned. T. That is the summe of the Gospell: teach they not the same? Z. They do not. For this is their do∣ctrineConfor. Fr. lib. 1. fol. 105.. They which obserue not the rule of saint Francis, shal bee damned; and they which keepe the same, shal be saued. AgaineConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 103., Hee that purposelie doth persecute the order shall not liue long, But he he that loueth the order of saint Francis, be he neuer so notorious a malefactor shall obtaine mercieIn breuiario Francisci. & Confor. Fr. li. 2 fol. 203.. T. Is that the Gospel of saint Francis? And is any so destitute of vnderstanding as to beleeue the same? Z. I will tell you; it is too horrible which is deliuered touching them that to-fore haue bin, are at this present, and hereafter shall be of this order of saint Frācis: as if they onely were the church, they onely the elect people of God, & they onely should be saued. For in res∣pect of the time passed, they say that in Christendome there is almost not a no∣ble house, but of the same some one or other hath bine a Frier minor, or of
th'order of saint FrancisConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 73.. And as of the most noble; so infinite of the most holy callinges of Patriarches, Prophets, Apo∣stles, Martyrs, Bishops, Confessors &c. By the merits of S. Francis, and through the preaching, life, and example of his brethren haue come vnto saluationConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 86.. T. And is not this to giue S. Peter the lie, which saidAct. 4. 12., Neither is there saluation in a∣nie other (but onely in the name of Christ). But it is well, the more they say men are saued by the merits of saint Francis, the more they testifie vnto the world in what estimation they haue the merites of Christ; and con∣firme me in this, that they take not Christ to be the Sauiour of mankinde. Z. Howsoeuer you are confirmed in your opinion, sure I am that this Do∣ctrine of theirs hath bin so confirmed e∣uē by the Popes of Rome,Platina. that of them some haue liued and died of this order, & afterward bin buried in à saint Fran∣cis coule and habitConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 82.; some haue giuen countenance & allowance to the same by their Buls from RomeIbid. fol. 234. Bathol. Car∣ranza summa omniū Concil. p. 331. b.; some haue graunted à day or solemne feast for the worship of the markes and Printes in S.
Francis bodieConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 3.; and some haue canoni∣zed for à sainct this Antichriste saint FrancisBarthol. Car∣ranza. summa omnium Con∣cil. p. 331. b.. T. Then this is so true, that it cannot bee denied, though peraduenture it bee so horrible as manie, I doubt not, euen of the verie papistes them selues are ashamed of the same. Z. Then may they be ashamed also for condemning them for heretikes which wil not acknowledge for the verie truth these blasphemies of saint Francis. T. Count they such for heretikes? Z. That do they. For Pope Gregorie the 9. enioyned the faithfull to holde, and firmelie to beleeue the same, and that hee should be punished as an here∣tike that would thinke the contrarieConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 3.. T. Is that à lawe of the Church of Rome? Z. It is the Popes decree (which the Church of Rome that neuer (as they vaunt) swarued from the steps of the ApostlesDist. 24. q. 1.; whereunto in doubtfull & hard matters men are to make recourse Dist. 11, c. pa∣lā. Dist. 22. prae∣ceptis. 2. q. 1. c. quoris., which must iudge all men, but may be iudged of noneDist. 11. q. 3.) doth ratifie as an article of the Creede.
T. Who euer would haue thought, that this church so damnably had erred! Z. They which seeke shall finde; and they that reade shal perceiue, not onely this that I haue said, but also à great deal more, and all confirmed by th'autoritie both of the church of Rome, and aswel by the Pope which now is called Sixtus Quintus,Sixtus quintus as by diuers Popes his prede∣cessors. T Fauoreth this Pope also these Francis∣cane impieties? Z. He so fauoreth them, as at this pre∣sent himselfe is à Franciscane, and for à long while afore he was Pope, was pre∣sident likewise of this order of sainct FrancisBrutum ful∣men. p. 27.. T. Then no doubt this Frier raigning & raging ouer the church of God, men are to addresse themselues either to vnder-goe the punishments appointed for heretikes which is burning fier in this world, or to embrace, as Heauenlie Oracles, these franciscane fa∣bles. Z. It is wonderfull as a thing may bee, which they publish of the successe they shal haue, & of the swarmes of Fran∣ciscanes
that are to be in the world. T. What successe shall they haue? Z. Such as passeth, For alreadie (and this was written of them no few yeares agoe) the verie places of the Friers mi∣nors dispersed through the world, do mount vnto the number of a thousand and sixe hundred, besides them which day by day are newlie erectedConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 85.. For as it is in the PsalmePsal. 80. 11.. Shee stretched out her branches vnto the sea, not onelie Mediterrane and Ocean, but euen vnto the Indian also, and from the riuer vnto th'endes of the world. For euen in In∣dia this order now hath, & à long while hath had manie places of abodeConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 85. T. If the places be so manie, what and how manie may the persons be which supplie those roumes! Z. For Nations the French come, the Spanish hasten, the Dutch and English run, and the greatest multitude of diuers other languages do speede them selues to bee of this orderConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 83.. And for numder Iohn Th'euāgelist hauing in the 7. chap. of the Reuelat. described both the time whē, which was at the opening of the 6.
seale; and the manner how saint Francis should be sent, to wit as that Angel ha∣uing the seale of the liuing God, he ad∣ioyneth next of the multitude that by the preaching, life & example of sainct Francis and his companions shall bee conuerted vnto ChristIbidem.. T. What are the wordes of Sainct Iohn? Z. His wordes be theseApoc. 7. 4.. And I heard the number of them which were sealed, and there were sealed an hundred and foure and forty thousand, of al the tribes of the children of Israel. T. Expounde they those wordes of the Franciscanes? Z. Yea verily, or, this may be expoun∣ded, say theyConfor. Fr. li. 2. fol. 83. on this wise, that there shall be so manie friers, or men to bee conuerted in this order, the people be∣ing brought vnto the Lord, either in processe of time, or in the verie daies of Antichrist, when as this order, all other orders being destroied, shall preache a∣gainst Antichrist. T. Of the Franciscanes one hundred fortie and foure thousande! Z. Yea, or which more is, say theyIbidem.,
it may bee said, that according to the phrase of scripture, by à certaine hee meaneth an vncertaine nomber, as if there should be sealed, and in the habit of Frācis, & that of the crucified, not on∣ly an hundred fortie & foure thousand, but infinite besides. And this Iohn see∣meth to meane, they say, when hee ad∣deth, that hee beheld à great multitude which no man could nomber of all na∣tions, kinreds, people and tongues, &c. T. Then I see full plainlie that they make not onelie sainct Francis another Christ, but also them of his order to bee the onely people of God, and that none either haue bin, or shalbe saued but onely they of sainct Francis order. Z. You haue gone to the verie point, for hence they both terme their compa∣nie the family of GodIbidem., & they sayConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 101., If thou wilt be saued, be a Frāciscane; For not only they which liue, but they also that submit them selues vnto the rule of this Francis, though at the verie point of death, euen all of them are sauedIbid. fol. 78.. No maruell therefore though hee bee ado∣red
the world throughoutIbidem. fo. 30., euen as ve∣rie God; and made an aduocate with the FatherIbidem. fol. 7. like another Christ1 Iohn. 2, 1.. Chap. 4. Of the Virgin Mary, whom the Papistes make another Christ by ascribing vnto her the offices and honor due alwaies, and onely vnto the Sauiour of man∣kinde. TIMOTHIE. Now do I see, which before I knew not, the most sacrilegious impietie, and popish blasphemies about saint Francis. ZELOTES. Heare againe what their faith is cōcerning the blessed Vir∣gine, as they say, our Ladie. T. Take they her also for the Sauiour of mankinde, as they do sainct Francis, and as wee do Christ? Z. That do they. T. If one should say so vnto them, would they not denie it, and say we slander them? Z. Say they what them list, their owne bookes penned aduisedlie, and publi∣shed by them selues shal beare continu∣all testimonie to that which I haue said.
T. What write they of hir? Z. They describe her nature by her name. T. As how? Z. Marie in Latine is Maria. T. And what then? Z. Maria consisteth of fiue letters. T. Then what? Z. Those fiue letters do import the fiue offices to be exercised by her to vs∣wardViguerius in∣stitut. ad cath. theol▪ c. 20. sec. 9. fol. 21. 4 b.. T. What are those her fiue offices? Z. The first is Maternitatis, of Mother∣hood, signified by the letter M.M. Mater. For shee is à mercifull Mother, euen the mother of mercie, being the Mother of God, through whom (she making intercessi∣on and oblation) wee attaine mercie. Therfore the church calleth her, the mo∣ther of grace and mercie. T. What is her second office? Z. That is Conseruationis, of conseruing the treasure of God, signified by the let∣ter A.A. Arc▪ which representeth, Arcam the sauri, the Christ of treasury. And therfore called is she the treasurer. This is taken from poore men, whose manner is to
runne vnto the treasurers. Therefore we which are poore in this vale of miserie, &c. (must repaire vnto her) because in hir, say they, wee shall finde an infinite treasure of the wisedome and grace of God. T. Her third, what? Z. That is Directionis & Gubernatio∣nis, of direction and gouerning by ex∣amples of her life. This imported is by the letter R:R. Regina. and therefore is she named Regina, the Queene. T. And what is her fourth office? Z. That is Iaculationis & repulsionis ini∣micorum, of flinging and repelling backe of enemies,I. Iaculum. signified by the letter I; for which cause shee is termed Iaculum ini∣micorum infernalium, the dart of infernal enemies, which at the inuocating of this name yeeld and flee away. For she is as terrible vnto them as an armie of men set in battel raie. Ideo Ecclesia frequenter orat, &c. This causeth the church often to pray, saying. Tu nos ab hoste protege, & hora mortis suscipe, protect thou from th'enemie, and receaue vs at the houre of death.
T. Her last office what is that? Z. That is Aduocationis of Aduocati∣on, imported by the letter A.A. Aduocata. whence the Church Eya aduocata nostra, Eih our aduocate, turne those thy merciful eies vnto vs. T. What moueth you now to vse those La∣tine wordes? Z. That do I in two respectes, first for that I would haue their more then chil∣dish toies obserued, who at their plea∣sure can make letters to signifie, as some haue made Bels to sound, euen what pleaseth their phantasticall braine, and as best may feede their superstitious hu∣mors. Hence is it that M. is to signifie Mater, and nothing els; & A. in the first place must needes bee Arca, and in the second Aduocata, &c. and other tongues must yeeld and giue place, as not to bee regarded, for the better setting out of this Latine Maria: the Greeke word consisting of sixe, the English of foure▪ ., and neither the Greek,Maria. 5. nor the English,Mary. 4. nor yet indeede the Latine letters (but that they so imagin) importing any such matter as here they set downe concer∣ning
the offices of saint Mary: But this do I cheeflie, that it may appeare what their owne wordes be, and that I forge nothing of mine owne braine. For what I haue deliuered they are the verie wordes of Frier Iohn Viguerius (one for his knowledge (as they count him,Frier Iohn Vi∣guerius. most learned; a doctor, yea, and a publique professor of Diuinitie among them) in his Institutions vnto the Catholique TheologieCap. 20. sec. 9. fol. 214. b.. T. Then whatsoeuer the letters may import, the matter ascribed to those letters is Catho∣lique, agreeing to th'analogie of the faith pro∣fessed in the church of Rome; which is, that through th'intercession of sainct Marie, by Christ we obtaine mercie at th'andes of God; in hir is an infinite treasure of wisedome and grace for them that will seeke and sue for the same vnto hir; Shee is of soueraigne glorie and maiestie with God; shee the conquerour and ouer-commer of th'infernall enemies; & shee our Aduocate, to make request, and to pleade for mercie on the behalfe of mankind. And what is this els, than to say that shee is our Sauiour? for these offices, and euerie of them are due onelie and alwaies to the Sa∣uiour
of man. Z. If this be not euident enough, you shall by other Testimonies taken from their owne works, perceaue, that their drift is to make the Virgin Mary, I say not equal with Christ, but manie waies aboue, yea vtterlie to exclude him from the office of mans saluation. T. That is to denye him to bee Christ, and to make but à verie fable of the holye Gospell. Z. To proue that onely thing I alleadge this example. T. Confirme that nowe which you haue saide. Z. If to say that sainct Marie is th'origi∣nall of our saluationLudolphus Carthus. vit Iesu Christi par. 2. ora. 80., the recouerer of grace and forgiuenesFlores Gra∣na. par. 4. p. 156 a.; our hopeDionys. Car∣thus. de vita christiana, li. 1 ar. 8. reg. 2., our saluation, our resurrectionConfor. Fr. i Conclus li. 1., be to make her, and not Christ the sauiour of man∣kinde: the Papistes make her, and not Christ, our Sauiour. For those bee their wordes of the Virgin Mary. T. O Antichristian impietie! Z. If to say, that to her it is giuen to bruise the serpentes headViguerius instit. ad Cathotheol c. 20. sec▪ 9. fol. 214. b., and she shall bruise the serpents headCatech. Tden. in Symbverba &. inle sum Christum▪, & shee hath
bruised the serpentes headConfor. B. Fr. in conclus. lib. 1., and pro∣cured that peace betweene God & mā, which no man could procureViguerius in∣stit. ad cathol. Theol. c. 20 sec 9. fol. 215. a., bee (as it is) to compare her, yea to praefer her aboue Christ, yea to make her, and not Christ the Sauiour of mankinde; the Papistes compare her with him, praefer her aboue him, yea make her, and not Christ our Sauiour, for that is their do∣ctrine of the Virgin Mary. T. O most damnable sacrilege! Z. If to say, O blessed Virgin what shal becom of me, if that be not restored by thy clemencie which I haue lost by my sinnesFlores Grana. par. 4. de ora. p. 154. b., Shew thy merie ô Virgin in sa∣uing me: If thou forsake me, who shall vphold mee? If thou forget mee, who will remember me? If thou Ladie, do not inlighten, whither shall I goe? O Ladie turne not thine eies from mee à sinner, but clense me that am vncleane; make mee of a sinner, righteous; of slouthfull, diligent; of lukewarme and drie, zealous and deuouteIbid. p. 157. b., Heale mee and I shall be whole; salue mee, and I shall be sauedIbidem.. O Ladie protect thou from th' enemie, and receaue vs at the
houre of deathOfficiū bea∣tae Mariae à Pio 5. Papa refor∣matum.: I say, if to vse these wordes vnto the Virgin Marie, bee (as it is) to make her and not Christ our Sa∣uiour: the Papistes make not Christ but her the sauiour of mankind. For thus do they pray vnto the Virgin Mary. T. O blasphemie most horrible! Z. If to change the whole Psalter of Dauid, and to attribute all praises, all praiers, all supplications, all intercessi∣ons therein conteined from God & his sonne Iesus Christ vnto the Virgin Ma∣ry, be to make her (not as some write, of that excellencie, as nothing is aboue her saue GodAnselmus de concep. virgi∣nis., and the three persons in the GodheadDidacus Stel∣la in cap. 1. Lu∣cae fol. 51. a., but) of that diuine maiestie, as that she is worthie to haue all thankes for all benefites, aswell spiri∣tuall as corporall; temporall as eternall; and all praiers made vnto her for what∣soeuer thing we stand in neede of: and if to giue this vnto her, be (as it is) to rob God, and his sonne Iesus Christ of their glorie, & that in the most sacrilegi∣ous manner that can be; then are the Papistes guiltie of this so horrible sacri∣lege. For they haue turned the whole
Psalter, and all either praises ascribed vnto God, or praiers made vnto his ma∣iestie, they applie euen all of them vnto the Virgin MaryIoannes de Ales, Psalteriū Mariae & Ve∣netus & Parisi∣is excusum. T. Is this to be à Papist? To depriue Christ of his office, and God of his glorie: is this to be a Papist? Z. To make euen à toie of the Gospel, and à iest of the holy word of God, and of all Christianitie, euen that is to bee à Papist, and nothing else. Chap. 5. Of the Pope of Rome placed in the roome of Christ. TIMOTHIE. There is à say∣ing, as I haue hearde, that à Chri∣stian if he once fall into wicked∣nes, prooueth for impetie worser then if he were an heathen. ZELOTES. They are sainct Chri∣sostomes wordesIn Math. ho∣mil 30. and they are true, vn∣derstand them how you will, whether he proue wicked for life, or an heretike for Religion. There is no man so vn∣godlie,
as hee which of à professor be∣commeth à wicked Christian. T. I see the truth hereof, and I see it veri∣fied aboundantlie in those of whom all our speech is. No such ouerthrowers of Christia∣nitie, as they which will be counted Catho∣liques and Christians. Z. That which is alreadie sufficientlie doth, but that remaining to be spoken, will more fullie confirme this point. T. Speake not yet what may be saide, but that onely which serueth to shewe, that they haue in contempt, or in small accompt our Sauiour Christ. Z. That shall bee the marke whereat I will aime, and therefore listen. It is writ∣ten of saint Francis, that on à time rising from praier hee should, being much troubled, vnto his fellow-friers, say, would to God I had neuer bin the foū∣der of this same habiteConfor. Fr. li. 1. fol. 103. T. What moued the Frier to burst into those termes? Z. Because it was reuealed vnto him, said he, that out of his order Antichrist and his sect should arise. Whatsoeuer the meaning of this Frier might be, he
prophecied the truth, as Caiphas did a∣fore himIohn 11. 51.. For the Pope now liuing is of his habite and orderBrutum Ful∣men p 27., and is verie Antichrist. T. Why so? Z. Because he is not onely placed in the roome, but also doth vsurpe the ve∣rie office of Christ. T. Shew that the Pope is placed in the roome, and that he doth vsurpe th' office of Christ, that I may the more be setled in this perswasion, that the Pope is Antichrist? Z. They which say, that the Pope is the sunne, the Church, the mooneConfor. Fr. lib. 2. fol. 10.; the Pope the bridegroome, the church the brideIohannes de turre cremata; the Pope the headCōcil. Florē.; the church the bodie: they place the Pope in the roome of Christ. For Christ is the sunReuel. 8. 12. 10. 1., Christ the BridegroomeMath. 9. 15. 25 1. &c. Iohn. 3. 29. Reuel. 21. 2. 9., Christ the headEphes. 4. 15. 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. 2. 10. &c. of the catholique Church. To say therfore that the Pope is the Sunne, the bridegrome the head of the church, is euen to saye that the Pope is Christ. This Heauen cānot indure two sunnes, nor this wife two husbandes; nor this bodie two heads. If the Pope be, Christ is not; and if Christ be all this, the Pope
is not. T. Conceaue they so highly of the Pope? Z. Yea, and to this day whensoeuer they enstall their newly created Pope, they salute him with these words. Thou art the high priest, thou art the Arch∣bishop, thou art the heire of the Apo∣stles; in praedecession, Abel; in gouer∣ning the Arke, Noe; in Patriarkship, A∣braham; in order, Melchisedec; in dignity Aaron; in authority Moses; in iudgement SalomonSamuel.; in zeale Helias; in humilitie, Dauid; in power, Peter; and in respect of thine vnction, thou art Christ. T. So say some of our sideRainoldes Confer. ch. 6. sec. 4. p. 276., as I do re∣member. Z. That which we say, they confirme, and like well ofMaioranus Clyp. milit. eccl. c. 35. p. 137. Hardings confut. f. 240. a.. T. But how in respect of his vnction can he bee called Christ, seeing Christ was not an∣nointed by the handes of any mortall man, but by the Power of the coelestiall father, nor with earthlie ointment, but with spirituall oileCatech Trid. in Symb. verba & in Iesum Christum &c.; & the Pope is anointed not immediat∣ly from God, but by the handes of man, not with spirituall oile, but with greasie oint∣ment?
Z. In deed it is too horrible that in that respect they should intitle him with the name of ChristB. Iewel in his defense of the apologie &c. f. 494. & f. .: yet far worser is it that they dare acknowledge him, as they do, for the very Messiah, and renounce our Sauiour. T. As how? Z. In that they take not Christ for the onely King, the onely Priest, and the onely Prophet; but make the Pope, the King, the Priest, and the Prophet of the church of God as well as Christ. Chap. 6. 1 Of the Pope of Rome inuested in the roiall throne of Iesus Christ, and made the soueraigne King of the Catholique Church. 2. and of the Papall go∣uernment, and bloodie proceedinges of the same all Antichristian. TIMOTHIE. Declare nowe more fully that which you haue said; & first how the Pope vsur∣peth the place of Christ in th' exe∣cution of his kingly office? ZELOTES. You knowe what is written by sainct Iohn in his Reuelation
touching our Sauiour Christ, that hee is Lord of Lordes, and King of KingesReuel. 17. 14., yea the King of Kinges and Lord of Lordes.Reuel. 19. 16.. T. The Places are well known. Z. They now which say that the Pope is the Prince of Princes, and the King of Kinges, do they not enstall the Pope in the throne of Christ? T. That is verie true, but do they so? Z. Yea, for those be their verie wordes & iudgement of the PopeIn pro. De∣cretorium.. And which is equiualent with the same, they say, that of necessitie if men will be saued, they must come vnder the subiection of the Pope,D. Thō. in o∣pus primo cha. 66. Maioranus clyp. milit eccl. l. 3. c. 35., yea, we declare, say, define, and pronounce that it is altogether ne∣cessarie, if they will bee saued, that all creatures yeeld obedience to the Pope of Rome, saith Gregorie the eightExtrauag. de Ma. &. obed.. T. That is the voice, not of God, but of An∣tichrist himselfe. Z. So be those words; wherby it is de∣liuered, that the Pope not only hath the power of à priest, but also whatsoeuer power the Kinges and Emperours in a∣ny part of th' uniuersall world haue, it is the Popes, & they receaue it from
himAugust. de Ancon. in sum∣ma de Eccl. po∣test. q. 1. ar. 7., & for his part himselfe is exemp∣ted from all obedience to any earthly PrinceMatoranus clyp. milit. eccl l. 3. c. 35.; and is in such à state that hee neither neede, nor will do anie reuerēce at all to any mortall manCerem. curiae Rom. l. 3.. T. Christ was of an other Spirite, for he ac∣knowledged th' auctoritie of the Magistrate ouer him and his, when he paid the polle mo∣ny both for him selfe and Peter, and that to auoide offenseMath. 17. 27, and that vnto such as were no fauorers of the true Religion, but enemies. Againe of that humilitie was Christ, that he is an example to all posteritie of meeknes and lowlines in hartMath. 11. 29.. Z. And the Pope is à Patron on th' o∣ther side of most detestable pride: For hee giueth out his feete to be kissed of men, euen of Kinges and Emperours. T. Christ did neuer so lay forth his feet, but that he washed and wiped his poore dis∣ciples feete, wee do readeIohn 13. 5. 15.: And that because they should do euen as he had done to them. Z. Truth it is Christ gaue no such ex∣ample, and the Kinges of Persia & Tur∣kie, yea the most proud Calaphaes of Arabia haue alwayes abhorred such kinde of adorationBodinus meth. hist. c. b..
T. Read you euer that any Emperour was of that base minde that he would submit him selfe so seruilie to the kissing of the Pope his feet; or that any Pope would suffer such à ma∣iestie so to debase himselfe? Z. We finde, not onely that the Empe∣rour Frederick did so vnto pope Alexan∣der the thirdActs and mo∣numentes. Naucl. Vol. 3. Gen. 40., and Iustiniā vnto Syluester Ang. Steu∣chus l. 2. c. 66. p. 134., but also that it is th' office of the Empe∣rour sometime to poure the water into the basen when the pope is to wash; to carie the first dish to the table where the pope doth sit;See Fieldes caucat for. Parsons How∣let. Let. E. 5. &c. and abroad not onely to hold the stirrop while the pope moun∣teth vp, but to leade forth his horse also for some pretty spaceCerem. curiae Rom. lib. 1.: yea the pride of the pope of Rome is such, as some well acquainted with the fashion of coūtries are driuen to sayW. Thomas in his descrip. of Italie. p. 37. b, what is à King, what is an Emperor in his Maiestie, any thing to the Bishop of Rome? No surely, nor I would not wish them to be. T. That must needes bee excessiue pompe which the greatest in the world may be asha∣med to shew forth. Z. And so it must. T. What places of Scripture haue you to
condemne this ambitious arrogancie of the Pope of Rome? Z. To condemne his pride the places are manifold and pregnant, as where ambition, arrogancie, & pride is condē∣ned in generall: so where Christ saith vnto his disciples that, albeit the Kinges of the Gentiles do raigne, beare rule, & are cal∣led bountifull, yet they should not be soLuk. 22. 25. 26., where againe he saithIohn 18. 36., My kingdome is not of this world: where againe it is writtē that Christ departed into à mountaine him selfe alone, when he perceaued that the people would come and take him to make him king. Iohn 6. 15.. And where the Elders of the Church are willed not to be as Lords ouer Gods heritage, but to be ensamples to the flocke1. Pet. 5. 3.. T. Seeing the word of God is so flat against his pride, and arrogancie: how cometh it a∣bout that he is of that state and Soueraign∣tie? Z. That is by the papal constitutions, and by nothing else. For so the popes Boniface the eightExtrauag. vnam sanctam de Ma. & obed., and Clement the 5Clem. pasto∣ralis in re u∣dic.. would haue it be. T. Then are they of that auctoritie by no right and warrant from God his word.
Z. By none at all, neither yet by any law besides: the consideration whereof hath moued some, as Cyno-pistoriensis, and Duarenus, excellent Ciuilians, by publike writings to inueigh against that vsurped power, and the most part of Lawiers, saith DuarenusDuarenus & sanc. Eccle mi∣nist. ac benefi∣ciis l. 1. c. 4., that are of any accompt, are of the same iudgement: yea, saith the same Duarenus, I am per∣swaded, there is none of the sounder & learneder sort that can like of this enter∣prise of Boniface. T. Then not onely Gods word, but also the best Ciuilians in the vniuersall world do vt∣terlie condemne this soueraigntie in the Pope of Rome, as hauing no strength of reason to vphold itselfe withall, which may not à litle strengthen vs that abhorre this Antichri∣stian pride, power, and supremacie of the Pope. Z. Besides, they may worke in our mindes à great and vtter detestation of those horrible effectes proceding from th' infinite power of this papall prima∣cie. T▪ Name some of them? Z. As if Kinges and Emperours be of
à contrarie mind vnto the pope in mat∣ters of Religion that he may depriue them of their Roialties, and quite dis∣charge their subiectes from obeying thē any more. T. Publish they such thinges of the Pope? Z. That is their doctrine. For, saith Ma∣ioranusClyp. milit. eccle. l. 3. c. 35. ex Driadone de lib▪ Christ. l. 1. c. 14., The pope of Rome by that ful∣nes of power which hee hath ouer all Christian Princes, he may for the crime of haeresie depriue haereticall Kinges & Emperors of their Empires, yea and in temporal thinges quite set free the chri∣stian people from obedience and subie∣ction: with whom agree of our coun∣trie (but of à contrarie religion vnto vs) Sandersde viib. eccl. mon. l. 3. c. 7., BristowMotiue 8. & 40., with him that wrote that infamous Libel against the Christi∣an iustice executed at this praesent in this realme of England. T. This doctrine is like the doctrine neither of sainct Paul, who was so farre from putting such vngodly thoughts into the peoples mind that from God, he commaunded that suppli∣cations should be made for all men, euen for Kinges1 Tim. 2. 1., which then were idolaters: nor of sainct Peter who also said, Submit your selues
vnto all manner ordinance of man for the Lordes sake, whether it be vnto the King as vnto the superiour, or vnto gouernors, as vnto them that are sent of him &c1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15: And Kinges in those daies were as heauie aduersa∣ries to the Church, as any now liuing. And this do, saith the same Apostle, for so it is the will of God. Obedience therefore and subie∣ction vnto our gouernours are the true ef∣fectes of à true and good Religion, as it was well deliuered by à worthie CounsellerMr. Daulton in his speech. to the citizens of London the 22. of Aug. 1586. vn∣to good and most louing subiectesHer Maie∣sties owne te∣stimony of the Londiners in her letter to the L. Maior &c. the 18. of Aug. 1586.. Z. If the doctrine be so horrible, what is the practise of the same? T. That must needes bee al hellish. Z. Then from th' infernall feendes do those Buls and excommunications pro∣ceede, thundred both against the two noble Henries, th' one whereof now is, and long may he be, King of Nauarre, th' other the Prince of Condie (most vnnaturally of late through poison, sent out of this world) by which Buls those Princes for their owne partes, yea and their heirs too are disabled to gouerne; and made vncapable not onely present∣ly, but for euer hereafter of anie praee∣minence,
dominion, honor, and roial∣ty in any land, but specially in France; & their feudatories besides, vassals, liege people and subiectes are asoiled and set free from al othes of faithfulnes & sub∣iection how soeuer made vnto them, yea forbidden for their liues to obey them any moreDe postremis Galliae moti∣bus p. 245. Declaratio six∣ti papae 5. cōtra Hen. Borbō. as∣sertum Regem Nauar. & Hen. itē Borbō prae∣tensum princi∣pē Cōdensem. &c.: and also against the mightie Empresse of Great Brittaine, our most renowned Queene Elizabeth, the Lordes annointed, whereby both hir sacred Maiesty is denounced an hae∣retick, and her people, her well affected people (and still may they be) to her MaiestieHer Maiesty both in her let. to the L. Maior of Lō. & in hir speech to the states of Par. An. 1586. Sir Chr. Hat∣tons speech at Apeltrees ac∣quital., charged, and vpon paine of the great curse commaunded not to o∣bay hir any more, but as discharged from their naturall allegiance due vnto hir by many straight bondes, to take vp armes against her and rebellBulla Pii pa. 5. B. Iewel in his view of a seditious Bul. Nichols recāt. et. H. 8. Bulla papae Sixti. 5. Tyrtels recāt. p. 29. Papa confut. act. 1. p. 3. b. D. Humfr. de R. curiae praer. p. 49.. T. Though the Pope like (Antichrist) himselfe dare embolden, yet God forbid that any should bee so bad as to decline from their vowed loyaltie, by any Buls from an Italian priest. Z. I shall tell you, which yet I can nei∣ther thinke but with griefe, nor speake
without horror, the Seditions, rebelli∣ons, treasons not intended, but entered-into vpon this warrant from the Pope haue bene monstruous and abhomina∣ble. And one thing besides more hor∣rible then the rest, I will not let to vn∣fold. T. What is that? Z. Though I can vtter it neither but with griefe of hart: yet that you may se another proper note of right Antichrist indeede, this is it, There is à doctrine resolued-vponAns. to the execut. of Iu∣stice., commended, allowed, and warranted in conscience, Diuinitie and pollicieIn the declar. of Parries trea∣sons. p. 19., that for the furtherance of the Romish superstition, it is lawfull, yea meritoriousIbidem. p. 18., to God & the world, for à naturall home borne subiect by a∣ny indirect meanes to take away the life of his liege Prince the Lordes annoin∣ted. T. Now blessed be the Lord that thus layeth open the more thē diuelish cogitations of that Romish Synagogue; and thrice blessed be his aeternall maiestie for alienating our mindes from such vngodly thoughtes! Z. Dauid did but priuily cut-of the lap
which was on Sauls garment, and he was touched in heart for the same1. Sam. 24. 5. 6. 7. 8., yea, said this childe of God being coūsailed to kil his King Saul, The Lord keepe mee from doing that thing vnto my Mayster, the Lordes annointed, to lay my hand vpon him, for he is the annointed of the Lord, yea Dauid was so farre from killing Saule himselfe, or suffering them that would, to murther him, that he put that man to à shameful death, who both by the con∣sent, and by the commaundement too euen of Saul himselfe had killed him2. Sam. 1. 9. &c.. So litle desire had Dauid by any sini∣ster15. and treasonable course to maintaine his cause, and to aduaunce himselfe. T. A worthie example doubtles and proper onely and alwaies vnto them who are of that Religiō which is of God.Complaint of Eng. Let. D. But is that doctrine warranted by the Pope himselfe which you haue spoken of? Z. Himselfe hath so allowed the same as by letters written with his consent à Cardinal from RomeCard. de Co∣mos letter to Patry. It is in the de∣claration of Parries trea∣sons. hath not onely commended the fact, as that which shal merit heauen, but animated the villaine also which was to perpetrate the treason
to perseuere in those (blacke accursed which hee called) holy and honorable thoughtes, saying (by the spirit of Anti∣christ) that he was indued with à good Spirit, & promising him from (the fa∣ther of all treasons) the Pope, not only great thinges in this world, but also ple∣nary indulgence & remission of all his sinnes in the world to come. T. Was any so bewitched as to aduenture the committing of so horrible treason vpon such à warrant? Z. You are very ignorant if you knowD. Parrie. not; or verie forgetful, that I say not vnthankfull, if you do not remember, which all posteritie shall crie out vpon, that parricide intended, promised, vow∣ed, but through the almightie power of the watchman of Englād not brought, to passe by ParrieIn the declar. of Parries trea¦sons p. 14. 16. Babington, &c.. Frō this warrant af∣ter that Babingtō, & other like him-selfe traitors cōbined & confederated them∣selues by vow & oath likewiseThe copie of à letter to the &c. Earle of Lecester &c. prin. by Chr. Barker 1586. p. 5. euen to murther & shed the pretious blood of their soueraigne Queen the Lords anoin∣ted. Frō this warrāt another sort of alie∣nated & Italienated Englishmen, which
thing her Maiesties owne eies saw writ∣ten, and her Blessed mouth did vtter Ibidem. p. 17., had by oath also vowed within one moneth either to bereaue her sacred bo∣die of naturall life, or to be hanged thēselues. Vpon the like ground before all this that vile youth of Warwickshire Someruile,Someruile. in a detestable minde, and with à resolute purpose came trudging apace toward Londō to haue shortned the daies of his deere prince and most gratious soueraigneIn the exe∣cut. of Iustice. D. Storie.. T. I haue read that the guise of D. Storie, that Arch-papist and traitor, after meales, was to pray, that if our Queene, euen this our Queene Elizabeth would not speedily turne to Queene Maries religion, that shee might be ouercome with fire and sword, & all that would take hir partIn the let. sent by à gent. Stud. in the Lawes &c. cō∣cerning D. Storie.: and I thought him of all the worst man, that so wickedlye would wish vnto his Prince, euen the holye one of God. But who euer would haue thought that any durst haue dared with stained handes to touch, much lesse to kil so honorable and di∣uine à state as her Maiestie is! Z. Assure your selfe there is nothing so damnable, but if such à Doctor dare
say it, there be schollers enough, & too many of his schoole that will do it; and if the Catholique Tyran, the Pope, wil allowe it, there bee few of his vassals, as they call themselues Catholiques, I am perswaded, but easilie wil subscribe vn∣to the same as lawfullRead the war∣nīg against the dangerous pra∣ctises of Pa∣pistes &c. by Mr. Norton. Fieldes caueat for Parsons Howlet. Let. F., if not put it in execution as honorable. T. Many treasons haue bin contriued euen against most godlie Princes as we may reade in holy writ, & much oppression euen of good men by cruell tyrantes: but that any subiect professing the Religion did euer so much as in hart consent vnto, much lesse traiterouslie by word or deede conspire the deadly ruine of their soueraine Princes whether good or bad, we shall neuer read; but that they haue dis∣couered treasons, as did MordecaieEster 2. 21. 22. 6. 2., wee may read, and euen in the middest of their miseries praied for their oppressors, wee may also readBar. 1. 11. 12. See B. Iewels defense of the Apologie of the church of England. f. 18.. Z. These treasons therefore, seditious rebellions, and horrible pursuing of Christian Princes by all treacherous de∣uises euen vnto the death, do euidently demōstrate vnto the world of what spi∣rite and Religion men are of.
Chap. 7. 1 Of Gods iustice executed seuerallie vpon popish re∣bels, and other traitors from time to time; 2. and of the vse which good subiectes and others should make of the same. TIMOTHIE. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, nei∣ther curse the rich in thy bedchā∣ber: for the foule of the heauen shal cary the voice, & that which hath wings shal declare the matter, said Salomon, or God rather by Salomons mouthEccles. 10. 20.. ZELOT. Oh, though euen legions of examples of good men conceauing honorably of their gouernors in respect of their places, and liuing in good order euen vnder most cruel tyrantes cannot allure men to th' imitating of their obe∣dience, yet that the feare of those hea∣uie punishments threatned in that sen∣tence last by you mētioned, could terri∣fy the wicked from tracing the steps of rebels & traitorsRead M. Rea∣niger against treasons, re∣bellions &c. The complaint of Englād. let. D. 8. &c., which by the righte∣ous iudgement of the almighty are ac∣cursed! T. I verily do beleeue no traitors can pros∣per, but that they, yea and all which they in
disloial hartes shal enterprise, are accursed of the Lord. Z. You wil be strengthned much in this perswasion if you call into minde th' ex∣amples of God his iustice, I say not time out of minde, but within the memorie of vs both, nor in forraine landes, but within hir Maiesties dominions seuere∣ly executed vpon these furtherers of the Popes antichristian auctoritie, arrant traitors both to God and this realme. T. My memorie is not so good that I can remember, & God forgiue me that I haue no better obserued such thinges; recite therefore I pray you, those examples, or some of them, for my further confirmation. Z. You haue heard I am sure of seditiōs moued of late yeares both in Ireland & in England. But did you euer heare of any prosperous successe that traitors hetherto haue attained? T. This I know for certaine that the rebels in England were no sooner vp,Rebel∣lion. in the North. In Ire∣land. but they were as easily to th' euerlasting shame & confusion both of themselues & their houses put-downe againe; & they of Irelād, though troublesome for à season, yet by the suppressing power of
th' almightie are so rooted-out in the' nd, as, which is merueilous, yet wel knownIn the exe∣cut▪ of iustice., there is not in al that wild & wast Countrie à know en traitor remaining at this day, nor hath bin for à great time. Z. As the iudgement of God vpon those rebels in generall: so the same iudgements of the same Lord of hostes vpon the ring-leaders & heads of those rebels in particular would from hand to hand, from father to son, and from man to man euerlastingly to all posterities be deliuered. T. The particulars I haue not so well mar∣ked, make me acquainted with them: for it shall be as ioyfull for me to heare, as for you to tell of the destruction of disloiall subiectes and traitors. Z. The principal stirrers-vp of rebelli∣on from time to time in Ireland haue bin, of English Stukeley, & D. Sanders; of Irishmen; Iames the Earle of Desmond, and Iohn his brother, and Fitz-morrice; Now behold the iudgementes of God either by the handes of man, or with∣out meanes by himselfe; or by himselfe & man too vpon thē al. By the handes
of man, God in his Iustice both caused that forenamed Fitz-morrice at oneIames Fitz∣morrice. blowe by à lustie young gentleman to be slaineExecut. of iustice. Tho. Stukley. El. Exhort. cō∣cerning the state of Chri∣stendome. p. 39, & made Stukley so infamous, and so intollerablie odious among the forraine papistes, that euen the King of Spaine himselfe, otherwise à great har∣borer & praeferrer of such fire-brandes of sedition (El), banished him not on∣ly out of his Court, but quite out of his Countrie of SpaineIn the let. to Bernar. Men∣doza. p. 32. N. Sanders.. Without the meanes of man in his iustice God not onely caused that D. Sanders to wander like himselfe, à rauening wolfe among the wolues on the mountaines of Ire∣land, but also kept from him all suste∣nance of life (who had deteined the food of the soule from others), and be∣reft him of his wits (which had so abu∣sed his knowledge to the disquieting of Gods people) whereby rauing and in à phrensie hee ended his daiesExecut. of iustice., that would haue brought to distruction ma∣nie one both in body and soule. By himselfe and man too the two Des∣mondes came to fearefull endes;Iohn of Des∣mond. by man both of thē after the Irish fashion made
shorter by the head; by God both of them also, like Caine forced to range a∣bout they wist not whither,Iames Earle of Desmond. but Iames especially, à man of power was forsaken of all men, and of à mightie Earle be∣came à miserable beggerExecut. of iu∣stice.. T. Blind is he that cannot see, and far gi∣uen ouer of God that wil not confesse that God standeth for his Lieutenantes, the Kinges, Queenes and gouernors of the world, against all popish rebels whatsoeuer. Z. That to his glorie must be acknow∣ledged, marke now againe the condu∣ctors of rebels in this land, which were the two Earles of Northumberland, & of Westmerland, and vpon them also, behold the iudgementes of God either immediatly by himselfe, or by himselfe and man too showen vpon them both.Tho. Percie Earle of Nor∣thumberland. By himselfe and man he of Northum∣berland came into their handes whose ouethrow he sought, and as his deme∣rits did require, at Yorke had his head cut from his shoulders,Charles Neuil Earle of west∣merland. that would haue dismēbred this so florishing à Commō weale. By God without man th' other of Westmerland that thought to haue
made many à man and woman child∣lesse, was bereft of his children, or they of their wittes;Lady Marga∣ret a frantike roge. and he that viperlike vp∣on no iust cause would haue distroyed his deere mother his natiue Countrey by his rising-vp is eaten-vp of vlcers ri∣sing of lewde causes out of his owne bodieExecut. of Iustice.. Chap. 8. Againe of the Iustice of God himselfe executed vpon other principall promooters of Antichristes King∣dome, arrant traitors to the Realme and Crowne of England. TIMOTHIE. Happie are they whom these examples can teach to beware. ZELOTES. We may o∣therwise also behold an heauy counte∣nance of the Lord vpon other rebels & traitors. For as hee hath in the sight of man with the iron rod of his fierce dis∣pleasure euē crushed the frantike brains of open rebels into peeces: so hath hee aswel by himselfe as by man, so discoue∣red,
defeated, confounded priuy trai∣tors, as both the Godly reioice, the wic∣ked fret, and all men exceedingly do wonder at the same. T. I haue heard indeed from yeare to yeare not onely of the Detection, but also of the mi∣raculous apprehending, and iust execution of most barbarous traitors in sundrie & diuers places of this land. Z. Ascribe that vnto the prouident care which God hath of his handmaid, and of his Church the spouse of Christ. Consider yet, and especially that which the godly wise haue besides obserued. T. What is that? Z. It is not so much the necessary exe∣cution of that punishment which whol∣some lawes haue laide vpon the bodies, as the importable iudgmentes of the Lord himselfe vpō the soules & mindes of traitors. T. Make me acquainted therewith that I may grow more and more into à detestation of them whom God himselfe in such sort ab∣horreth. Z. Is it not strange, thinke you, that mē guiltie of hie treason against the state,
being by frendes (no friendes of their Prince and countrie) aduised to shift for themselues, and hauing either fit opor∣tunitie to flie, or place conuenient to es∣cape the handes of them whose lawes they had violated, should yet haue no power to embrace that counsel, tending so greatly to the preseruation of their liues. T. Whom meane you? Z. I meane Felton (that Felton in this place I meane not who lately together with Iames Clackson was executed forhie treasonThese were hanged be∣tweene Brain∣ford and Hun∣sloe neere Lō∣don the 28. of Aug. 1588., but his father Iohn Felton) à man for the space of eleauen yeares to∣gether afore his apprehension priuie to euerie treason and conspiracie against hir Maiestie, & à speciall instrument for all forraine enemies to worke withallFidelis seruî subdito infide∣li resp.; and Storie, euē that Storie which wished the persecutors had left the braunches & laid the axe to the roote of the treeActs and Mo∣numentes in Q. Marie. De Roma∣narch. contra N. Sanderum. l. 1. 2., who though they were aduised th' one of them to flie, when easily he might af∣ter hee had set-vp the popes Bull at the Bishop of Londons gate; th' other to re∣fraine to goe whither hee was allured:
yet could neither Felton run his wayFidelis serui sub infideli resp., nor Doctor Storie for his life auoide the trappe whereof he was warnedIn the declar. of the life and death of l. Sto∣rie.. T. No doubt this was the iustice of God before vpon the mindes, that afterward the iustice of man might be executed vpon their bodies, as it came to passeFelton was hāged in Lōd. at the Bishop of Lond. gate. Storie was hā∣ged on à newe triangle gal∣lowes called the Tyborne, the 1. of Iune 1571.. Z. Will you see this thing yet more euidently by other examples? T. That is my desire. Z. Then cal into mind the cursed end both of Someruile afore mentionedp. 38. Someruile. Sir Henry Per∣cie Earle of Northumber∣land., & of that other earle of Northumberland, th' one wherof, being cōdemned for hie treason praeuented the Queenes mercie by hanging himselfe in Newgate; th' o∣ther to be condemned, durst he abide the triall, forewent the Queenes Iustice by discharging vpon his owne carcase à dag charged with three bulletsThe true re∣port of the Earl of North. treasons &c. p. 15. 19.: both of them dying not like Christian men, but like him that hauing betraied our sa∣uiour Christ vnto the hie priestesLuke 22, 47. 48. Iohn. 18. 2. 3. Parrie., went and hung himselfeMath. 27. 3. 4. 5., Now whereunto may this be ascribed? T. Surely vnto nothing but vnto the same iustice of God which lay like an heauy burthēAct. 1. 16. 17. 18.
vpon their Soules: an euident demonstration that God is no abettor of Traitors, and popish conspiracies. Z. And whereunto may we also refer the trouble, euen the great trouble that Parry was in at the consideration of the manifold excellencies in hir Maiesties personThe true and plaine declar. of Par. trea∣sons. p. 16.; and the teares which the verie fight of hir Highnes, in whom to his thinking hee saw the liuely and expresse image of king Henry the seauenthIbidem. p. 35., did draw from his eies: whereunto I say may wee referre thinges but vnto the verie iustice of God vpon his soule, stroken with the horror of à guilty con∣science, and daring him for his life not so much as to touch, much lesse to dis∣patch so heroical à prince, endued with so rare partes as hir maiestie is? T. So by miserable experience he saw that it was not of all the easiest thing, as himselfe sometime phantastically did imagineIbidem. p. 9., to take away the life of our gratious Queene. Z. It is written of Iezabell that shee thought at hir pleasure she could put the holie Prophet Eliiah, to death, & there∣fore vowed by à certaine time to cut of
the daies of that man of God1. Kings. 19. 2.. But though her malice was great: yet her power was nothing, for both he liued and was carried into heauen2. Kings. 2. 11., and shee through the iustice of God for hir sins was eaten vp of dogges2. Kings. 9. 35. 36.. So this Parry vowed indeede the destruction of hir roial personParries trea∣sons. p. 14. 16. 33. 35., and thought he could at his pleasure either with dag or dagger spoile her of al lifeIbid. p. 9.; but we know that both her maiestie liueth (and long may she liue to the further aduancement of Gods glorie); and he not onely by the iustice of man vpon his bodieParrie was drawen frō the tower of Lond. to the pallace of westminster and there han∣ged the 2. of March. 1584., but al∣so by the seuere iustice of God vpon his soule, was banished out of this worlde. For hee died in finall impenitency, for ought that man could perceiue, asking no man, no not God forgiuenes for his sinnesPar. trea. p. 39.. T. O most horrible spectacle! yet often seen, that as mē liue so they die, he liued prophane∣ly, and died like an Atheist. Z. I could tell you of the impatiencie of some; of the desperat endes of other euen at the place of execution;Storie. Tichborne. Babington. &c. of the filthilie polluted bodies through Frēch
diseases of other traitors; all which do cleerelie show into what vile mindes God doth deliuer them vp in his iustice that will seeke to plucke them downe whom he doth aduaūce, or to aduaūce that he would haue destroied: But I on∣lie do wish were obserued, the vtter de∣testation generally in all sortes of sub∣iectes (raised by the verie finger of Gods holie spirit (against all Popish traitors from time to time. T. Shew that one thing. Z. It is easilie done. The outward signes and showes of exceeding ioye at the verie discouerie of treasons, and ap∣prehension of traitorsSee the letter of hir Maiestie to the L. Maior of Lond. of the 18. of Aug. 1586. it is prin∣ted by Ch. Bar.; the outcries which they haue madePar. treas. p. 38., & the speeches of the vulgar people vnto the traitors in the open streets after their arraignmētIn the life & death of D. Sto¦rie., declare the peoples minde; that so fa∣mous Act of association in loialtie and faithfulnes towardes their prince and Countrie, by so many thousandes ente∣red-into most willinglieSee the treat. intitu. The co∣pie of a letter to the Earle of Leicester. &c. p. 10. yet altogether vnwittinglie to her maiestie til à great number of handes with manie obligati∣ons were showen vnto hirIbidem p. 18., declare the
mindes of the greatest; the diuers and sundrie Statutes enacted, but speciallie that Parliament in the 28. yeare of hir Highnes raigne, and the importunate suite of both houses by the mouthes of most principal persons for the putting of them to death whom this Realme neither could nor might any longer in∣dureIbidem. p. 22., declare both à secret ioy and de∣light they haue in hir maiestie (as in à iewell of inestimable valureIbidem. p. 25., euen as in the Diamond of all ChristendomeB. Iewel in his view of à sedit. Bull. p. 73., and à common hatred in al mens hartes against them whomsoeuer that shal rise vp to th' ouerthrow either of her person, or of this gouernment. T. And this also is à verie subscription euē of God himselfe vnto that Religion for the propagation wherof hir Maiestie with à most resolute minde hath opposed hir person to all manner of perilles and dangers what-soeuer. Z. Shee knoweth and hath confessed alsoIn the copie of a letter &c.  the Earle of cicester p. 30., that he for whose sake onely shee doth all that shee doth, for power can, and of his endles mercie will defend hir stil. And all good subiects say thereto, Amen.
Chap. 9. 1 Of Gods wonderful protecting hir Maiestie from forraine enemies; 2. And of the vaine inuading of Ireland in the yeare 1580 and intended inuasion of this land from time to time. TIMOTHIE. If euer Prince had any sensible experience of Gods protection, it is hir Ma∣iestie; and if euer people by out∣ward signes were certified that the Pope is verie antichrist, euen wee of this age now in England may palpablie perceaue the same. ZELOTES. And yet are there mo thinges of great moment to confirme vs in this truth then hetherto wee haue mentioned. T. I doubt not of that, but what is the spe∣ciall thing that you haue obserued? Z. It is the miraculous praeseruation of her sacred person & gouernment from the dangerous attemptes of forraine pa∣pistes, promooters of Antichristes king∣dome. T. I haue heard indeede that among our English papistes of note and place it hath bin
agreed-vpon, that the state of all Christen∣dome hath stood vpon the stoute assailing of England.Northumb. treas. p. 3.. Z. Vpon such à conclusion it is well knowen that long agone the Duke of Alua in Flanders by Doctor StorieThe let. sent by a gent. stud. &c. concer. D. Storie.; of late yeares the duke of Guise (the Frēch Haman) in France by TT. Morgan, and ThrockmortonNorthumb. treas. p. 3. Throck. treas.; King Philip in Spaine by Sir Frācis EnglesieldIbidem.; the pope of Rome by doctor SandersExecut. of iu∣stice., and AllenNorthumb. treas. p. 3. (the new Cardinall of England) and others daily were solicited, & importunatelie vrged to make an inuasion vpon her Maiesties Dominions. T. But what of that? Z. Hereof two thinges haue insued, one wherof was an inuasion made, th' o∣ther an inuasion intended. T. What inuasion hetherto at anie time was yet made? Z. Th' inuasion was vpō Ireland in the yeare of our Lord 1580. by à companie of soldiers sent into those partes by the commaundement of the PopeGenebrard Cronograph. l. 4. & in append. and K. of SpaineDeclar. cau∣sarum quibus adducta Ang. Reg. Belgis af∣flictis &c. p. 13.; and there most proudlie vaunting themselues vnder the Pope
his banner displaide. T. Alas they were but an hand-ful in com∣parison, & though their malice was neuer so deadly; yet could they do no great hurt, their power was so small. Z. That they did none hurt impute it vnto the mercie of our God to his Church-ward. But much hurt they might haue done had either they not forsaken them who came forth as assis∣stantes with them; or they come vnto them, which were verie manie, euen the Irish rebels, or they not deceaued them that promised them aide, namelie the Pope with à new supplie of Soldiers, out of Italy, & the earle of Desmōd with his route of rebels; or they anie way bin blessed of God, being for nūber al∣most as manie as their opponentes, and much stronger in regard of the vantage of place, they being entrenched strong∣lie in à fort, and their enimies abroad in the open field. Besides the name of à band of men arriued, and armed on all sides, especially with auctoritie from the Pope, and King of Spaine, is à great imboldning of the wicked, that are wa∣uering
to reuolt. T. But they were no soner come almost on land and had fortified themselues but they were euen all of them either hanged, killed, or taken prisoners. Z. So let them perish, ô most righte∣ous God which band thēselues against thy Christ and his Church. T. Thus God showeth himselfe still to bee for hir Maiestie, and taketh hir enimies for his owne. Z. You will say so when wee haue throughlie displaied the inuasion inten∣ded. T. What haue you to say thereof? Z. Manie thinges; but for breuitie & methode sake I will reduce them all vn∣to that which concerneth th' enimies & their ouerthrow, and our selues, and our prosperous successe. T. What is to be noted touching our ene∣mies? Z. First their long and carefull praepa∣ration manie yeares, and their wonder∣full armies aswel for lād as sea in the last, and famous, and much expected yeare, 88; thē the excessiue pride of th' aduersa∣ries,
and the iust accompt they made to conquer and subdue vs all; and last of al, the miraculous defeating of al their wicked purposes, and the most famous victorye giuen of God vnto vs his weake seruants ouer his & our enimies. Chap. 10. 1 Of the long praeparation to inuade this land; 2. of the hideous Armies and Armado for the same pur∣pose; 3. and of the causes and endes of the same. TIMOTHIE. Speake nowe more fullie that which in à word you haue vttered. ZELOTES. Touching the praeparation to inuade this lande marke first of al the diuers thinges that from time to time, for the harting, or hardning rather of rebellious people haue bin bruted of the same: as that the realme for certeintie should be inuaded sometime by 20000.Northumb. teas. p. 3., sometime by 40000 menThe Let. of a¦gent. stud. &c. concer. D. Sto∣rie., sometime vnder the con∣duct of one Prestal an EnglishmāIbidem.; som∣time of strāgers, as by the duke of Alua;
M. Fleet∣woods the re∣cor. of Lon. o∣rat. to the Lon. An. 1571,, otherwhiles by Don Iohn of Au∣strich Exhort. con∣cer. the state of Christendome. p. 39., nowe by the Duke of GuizeThrock. treas. then by the King of SpaineIbidem.; and the inuasion to be sometime vpon IrelandIbidem., sometime vpon England, & there some∣while in SussexNorthumb. treas. p. 6. Throck. treas., at an other time in the North partesNorthumb. treas. p. 7. 9.. T. This declareth an horrible conspiracie and proanes in Princes and Papistes to annoy hir Maiestie, and this land. But why accor∣dīg to their desire do they not effect their wic∣ked and mischieuous purposes? Z. It was some twentie yeare agoe by F. Pais (a publique reader of diuinitie at Rome in the praesence of 300. scholars & not so few) said that the Popes goodwil (to this inuasion) is tried and knowen, and his purse readie, but either feare withdraweth, or power forbiddeth (K. Philip) that he dare not venter to bring his armie of Soldiers into EnglandNich Recant.. That which father Pais said of the Pope and King of Spaine do I say of them & the rest of our aduersaries also, their ma∣lice is well knowen, and their monie re∣die for this enterprice, but they did not hetherto inuade vs, not because they
would not, but for that they durst not, their cause being naught their courages did faile them. T. So God taketh away their stomackes ma∣nie times which band themselues to the ouer∣throw of his truth. Z. Many-times indeed hee doth so, though not alwaies, for sometimes hee giueth thē the raines to proceed at their pleasure, as he did Pharao, & the King of Spaine, to their greater ouerthrow in th' end. T. What was now his preparation at the last? Z. Most wōderful whether you respect his nauies vpon the sea, or his armies for land, his power was so exceeding great, as a mightier praeparation was neuer knowen in former times to be made a∣gainst any Turkes, or Sarasins than hee made against ChristiansLet. to Mēd. p. 6.. The nomber of his ships was great, the variety strāge; the persons not onely verie manie for multitude, but also for state of great re∣putationTrue descrip. of the Ar. p. 36. 46.: so puissant à power, and such if either the nōber of natural Spaniards, or the qualitye of the viagers be consi∣dered,
as the like came neuer out of Spaine with anye King or withoutPiement. de∣posit. p. 13.; so mightie à power, & so provided with all Martial furniture for sixe monethesTrue descr. of the Ar. p. 58. Piement depo. p. 7., as might haue amazed the greatest Mo∣narch in the world to haue incountred with the same. T. What might be the cause of this so rare an enterprise? Z. The cause praetended was religiō, or to returne vnto the pope his church à great nomber of contrite soulesD. Medinas orders for the Spanish Fleete. Northum. trea. p. 4.; as Piementellie said, it was in the King of Spaine à desire of reuenge for the sup∣posed iniuries receaued at the hands of the most valiant and thrice renowned Knight, Sir Francis DrakePiement de∣po. p. 16., (forgetting vtterlie the infinite and grieuous iniu∣ries that himself from time to time hath offered to hir Maiestie, by abusing hir subiectes, and Embassadors, and by in∣uading hir realme of Ireland, and har∣boring of arrant traitors both to God & hir crownExhor. con∣cer. the state christ. p. 39.: But the true cause indeed we shall find to be an Ambitious desire in K. Philip of Spaine to tyrannize in hir Highnes dominions as he doth ouer
the Indies, Portugals, and them of Ne∣therlandSee the ex∣hor. concer. the state of christendome.. T. If the ground was so ill, the ende could neuer be good. Z. Surely th' end was none other but to conquer the whole Realme, to re∣mooue our most gratious Soueraigne from the Crowne and regal dignitieThrock. treas.; to set vp some English (or other) Ca∣tholique for KingNorthumb. treas. p. 3.; to bring both our bodies into the Spanish thraldomeLet. to Mend. p. 4., worser then death it selfeSee the Spa. colonie. the suppl. vnto the K. of Spain made by the P. of Orāge &c. The Pr. of O∣rāges apology. The Pol. dis∣course of the, leage between Fr. and Eng. The cōplaint of England., and our soules into the hellish bondage of the Romaine AntichristMed. orders for the Spa. Fleete. Crusado from Rome, p. 10. Northumb. treas. p. 3.. Chap. 11. Of the detestable pride in the Spaniards, and iust ac∣count they made to subdue vs all. TIMOTHIE. No doubt their praeparation being so great (vn∣lesse, which is vncredible, they haue left that vice for which they are notoriouslie infamousGuicciardine in his 16. book hist. Italicae. M. Norton in his warnīg &c. The pol. disc of the league be∣tweene Fr. and Eng., the pride of the Spaniards could not be litle. ZELOTES. Their pride was so ex∣cessiue
as they termed their armie, The inuincible armieCrusado frō Rome.; and our nauie in dis∣daine, FisherboatesElz. triumph. p. 29.; They iudged their Fleete so mighty, as had there not bin so many shippes by twentie as they had, they could easily haue praeuailed ouer vsPiemē. depo.. They thought either that we durst not encounter with them, or if wee did we should presentlie be ouercomeLet. to Mend. p. 16.. T. I haue read, I well remember, foure yeeres afore the appearing of this Fleete, that Bar. Mendoza, the Spanish Embas∣sader, did say vnto Throckmorton the trai∣tor, that we should as easilie be ouerthrowen by the spanish power as assailedThrock. treas.. Z. And about 13. yeares afore that also it was deliuered by Doctor Storie, if the King of Spaine would but go about England with his Nauie, as Ioshua with his armie went about IericoIoshua 1. 6., that hee should be sure to finde as good successe heere as Ioshua did thereThe Let. of à Gent. Stud. cō∣cer. D. Storie.. T. Some said that a maid (called the holy maide of Lisborne) the yeare last immediat∣ly past afore the comming of the Fleete, did prophesie that the Spaniardes should no soner approach the coast of England, but the hartes
of Englishmen should faile them, and the Spaniardes obtaine the victorieD. Banerof ser. at Paules crosse p. 6.. Z. Some say likewise they plaid at dice for our noblemen and knightesSpa. masque.; and had after a sort quartered the whole Realme as a praie among them-seluesLet. to Mend. p. 36.. T. Others besides deliuer that in one of Don Pedro de Valdez ensignes there was fi∣gured a Sunne and a Moone with a Motto in Spanish to this effect, Yesterdaie the full, but to day the waneSpa. Masque.; not obscurelie ther∣by insinuating the good successe which they promised vnto them-selues by our vtter ouer∣ouerthrow. Z. The embroidered garmentes also with strange emblems, and the loftie verses diuulged by their fauorites at ColeinTu qui Ro∣manas voluish spernere leges, &c. manifested vnto the opē & wide world, the iust accompt that both them∣selues and their adherentes did make to preuaile, to ouer-run the whole realme, and to supplant the religion & the pre∣sent state.
Chap. 12. 1 The dreadfull doun-fall of the ambitious & proud Spaniardes; 2. Gods heauie curse vpon the whole armie and Armado of the Catholikes, 3. with the sundrie effectes ensuing thereupon in the mindes of many men. TIMOTHIE. But pride goeth afore destruction, and an hie minde, afore the fal, said Salo∣monProu. 16. 18. the wisest among prin∣ces. ZELOTES. That which that wor∣thie Prince deliuered, by our experiēce we know to haue betide that proud An∣tichristian armie of papistes; For he that ruleth in the heauens did laugh them to scorne, the God of Gods had them in derision, and brought euen in the pub∣lique view of th' uniuersall world most horrible confusion vpon them all. T. Howe, declare? Z. The whole power of Spaine cōsis∣ted of three partes; of the prince of Par∣maes forces of one hūdred sail of ships, and fortie within two thousand menPiemen. de∣po. p. 13.;
of a new supplie of fourescore shipsDisc. of the Ar. in the end.; & of the grand Armado of eight score shipsLet. to Mēd. p. 17. Disc. of the Ar. p. 36.; and thirtie and two thousand fighting menPiemen de∣po. p. 6.: In al of ships three hun∣dred & fourtie, of men not so few as an hundred thousand. T. What of that? Z. Consider now the iudgementes of the Lord our God vpon all, and euery of these armies. T. What vpon the Prince of Parma, and his forces? Z. The P. of Parma, though his strēgth aswell for sea as land, was exceeding great; yet the Lord of hostes (in whose hands are the hartes of al men) so weak∣ned his courage, as hee had none hart either to assaile vs, or to assist his com∣panions of the conspiracie beaten euen like dogges, if not in his sight, yet with∣in his hearing. Whereby the glorie of that Prince, afore so valorous, is not a litle diminished, and his credite impea∣ched among the manlie souldiers, aswel on his sydePiemen. de∣po. p. 15., as aduersaries to his causeThe discourse vpon the de∣clar. pub. by the L de la Noue. p. 9.. T. What vpon the new supplie?
Z. The supplie of fourescore well ap∣pointed ships had this iudgement laid vpon them also, that for their liues they durst neither rescue their pursued Fleet, nor vēter vpon our nauie; nor enter in∣to the land, but got them home againe, as they came forth, saue that they retur∣ned with some touch of dishonor in re∣gard of their great timiditie. T. What vpon the huge Armado? Z. The iudgements of God vpon that were most wonderfull, whether you consider them from their comming first from home til their meeting with our Nauie; or as they are met togither; or being departed from vs and fled away, they neuer prospered neither first nor last. T Before their meeting with our Fleete what ill successe had they? Z. Let this generally be obserued that frō their first setting forth til the returne of the remainder of ships into Spaine, they had not so much as one good day to their comfort & consolationLet. to Mend. p. 17.. Next they were no soner departed from the Groyne, but forthwith their Ships
wherein all their medicamentes were, perishedPiemen. de∣po. p. 7.. So that God at the begin∣ning of their voiage did discomfort, & bereft them of all meanes to heale their sicke, wounded, and diseased persons withall. After that their foure Gallies euen all of them suffered wrackeI. An. de Mon. confes., in a tempest from heauen before they came vpon the coastes of EnglandPiemen. de∣po. p. 5., And ha∣uing entered into the chanel of our lād themselues set fire vpon the Admiral of Oquendo and burned himIbidem p. 13.. T. Apparent argumentes, that God abhor∣red that enterprise of theirs; and most grati∣ous warninges vnto them of greater euils to themward, did they not desist, had they had grace so to haue taken them. Z. But they went on to their greater shame and ruine. For no sooner sawe they our Fleete and felt our bullets, but God stroke a cowardize into the hartes of the Lordes of Spaine, as into the A∣ramites2. Kings. 7. 6. 7. bending their force against Is∣rael, as these did against Englād: so that they whose hartes afore the fight were as hard as steele, being come now vnto the battel, became so soft as waxe. Hēce
was it that they stoode in feare of our English Fleete (which afore they dispi∣sed) and doubted much of boordingEm. Frem. exam., Yea had wee offered to haue boorded their ships, it is thought they would all haue yeelded to our mercieEm. Frem. confes., so fearful were they. Hence was it that the Cap∣taine generall of the whole armie, the Duke of Medine, tooke-vp his lodging in the bottom of his shipLet. to Mend. p. 18., as in a place of most securitie, and Ian Martines de Ricalde, chiefe Admirall of the Nauie, betooke him to his bed (like a knight of the pillow) and there laie from the fight afore Calice seauen weekes togither & vpwardExā. of Pier. Carre.: neither of them daring to buckle with their enimies, or to succor their distressed frendes, which hath tur∣ned much to their discrediteLet. to Mend. p. 18. Hence was it that the famous soldier, Don Pe∣dro de Valdez, in a ship of 1550. tonne, fur∣nished with 304. men of warre 118. Ma∣riners, & 50. Canons for the warDisc. of the Ar. p. 34., was taken prisoner withal his,Let. to Mend. p. 18. making litle, if any resistance, through feare. Hence was it that they flew desperatly one vp∣on an other, and slew themseluesM. Pigs me∣dita. p. 33., euē
as the Moabites, Ammonits, & they of Mount Seir did in the daies of Iehosha∣phat2. Chro. 20. verse 22. 23.. And hence finallie it was that these braue assailers hoisedvp their sails, and sailed awaye so fast as they could driueCondem. of the Spa. lies. Loke vpon the person, and you shall finde that none among them of any ac∣compt, but they were either killed by vs, as Hugo de MoncadoIbidem., & the maisters of the campes of horsemen & of footmēI. An. of Ge∣nuas; or taken prisoners as Dō Pedro de Valdez of whō I now spake, & Diego Piementel∣lie, one of the fiue maisters of the cāpePiemē. depo. p. 6. 12., and of great bloodIbid. p. 3. 4.; or drowned, or put to shamefull flight: Cōsider their ships, and you shall finde the best of them and strongest to be either sonke, or taken, or dangerouslie pearsed and bruised with our shot: Looke vpon their treasure and you shall finde that either it came into our hands by the taking of Don PedroEm. Frem., or it perished being throwen into the sea by à Frier in the Galliasse where Hu∣go de Monacado was slaine. In one day there were slaine and drow∣ned of these our enimies fiue thousand
menl. An. of Ge∣nuas.; in a short time drowned and ta∣ken 15. Spanish ships, and à thousand men and not so fewe taken prisoners, which remaine to this day in bondage partlie in Englād, & in Zealād partlieAduertis. out of Ireland.; in nine dayes al the Spanish hope vani∣shed to nothing, and the glorie of this Antichristian voiage, so earnestlie solici∣ted, so much exspected, so manie yeares in preparing, the hope of all Papistes, & as it were their last refuge and castle of comfort, became vtterlie defaced and o∣uerthrowenLet. to Mend. p. 3.. T. Now blessed be the Almightie for thus iustifying his poore seruantes, euen in the opē sight, and stage as it were of the vniuersall world. Z. Yet our God whose cause we main∣taine, staied not here but tooke the de∣fense of the same into his owne handes, sent his angel amōg thē as into the army of RabsakehIsa. 37., loosed his windes, pow∣red raging streames of vengeance from aboue, threw his stormes into the sea, Droaue his and our enimies by violent tempestes into vnquoth and cold Nor∣thren quarters (litle gratefull to those
braue Sothrē souldiers); seuered, sonk, & drowned manie of their shippes, & brought most horrible confusion vpon them allAduertis. our of Ireland.. Whereby it fell out that the Prince of Ascule, base sonne to the King of Spaine, and Don Michaell de Oquendo, general of the Fleete of Guipusque, with almost 500. men in one ship were drow∣nedI. An. de Mō. exam.; others landed in Ireland and were put to the sword, yea one man with an axe slew fourescore of these spanish Phi∣listinesAduertis. out of Irel.; others abode in their ships, & suffered perforce extreme miserieEm. Frem. exam.. Which made them both to cast their horses and mules ouer boord into the sea to saue their fresh waterCondem. of the Spa. lies p. 12. Iohn de la Co∣nidos confes., and also to die of famin most miserably, in so much as out of that ship which best was furni∣shed with victuals there died in lesse thē sixe monethes of hunger & thirst foure or fiue in a dayEm. Frem. exam.. In which flight of theirs 17. ships and 53. hundred men and vp∣ward are wel known to be either sunke, drowned, killed, or taken vpon the coastes of IrelandAduertis. out of Irel.. T. Thus to our comfort and confirmation of our faith, we do see that where Gods proui∣dence
is the watch and defense, no floods of forraine forces can ouerwhelme. Z. And praised be God, as they which bee strong in faith hereby are more strengthened, so some which afore haue staggered in Religion are now made wholie on our side, and such as were stiffe on the aduerse part, beginne now to staggerLet. to Men. p. 3.; and they which came out enimies are become our frendes, in so much as manie of them do not onely crie-out vpon the English traitors in their Countrie, as betraiers of the king of SpaineIbidem. p. 30, but also vowe no more to medle with vsEm. Frem. Exam., and will rather bee bu∣ried in the ground aliue, then come in such an other voiage against EnglandIbidem., acknowledging both our Countrie to be inuincible, otherwise than by trea∣son of some great parte within the RealmeLet. to Men. p. 31., and Christ also in all these fightes to haue showen him selfe euen à verie Lutheran,Ibid p. 17., that is an vtter enimie to the Pope and Poperie.
Chap. 13. The prosperous successe of the Gospel, and the most gratious countenance of God cast, and continued to his seruantes-ward of the Religion of Christ. TIMOTHIE. And these ef∣fectes are wrought in the mindes of manie, not so much by God his ouerthrowing his enimies, as by blessing euerie way with happie successe his deere children standing for the Gospell of Christ against Antichrist, and his parta∣kers. ZELOTES. Doubtles as the groūd of our quarrel was good: so the proce∣ding was most godlie, and the meanes and end blessed, and all prosperous. T. I ensure you I am not a litle refreshed, and euen ful as it were fraughted with vn∣speakable comfort whē either mine hart doth thinke, or my tong speake, or mine eares hear, or mine handes write of those happie dayes. Z. So is euerie sound Christian and subiect. T. And truelie he that shal cal into minde
the courage of the people, the magnanimitie of the Prince, the obedience of subiectes, the direction of the Gouernors, the diligence of the Captaines, the forwardnes of all sortes to spend their liues and goods in defense of their natiue Countrie, and maintenance of the long established, and much blessed re∣ligion among vs, will franklie acknowledge all this to come of God, if any sparkle of Gods holie spirite be within him. Z. Euerie thing was notable which you haue mentioned, but that the verie Papistes were so farre from reuolting from their due obedience to their soue∣raigne Prince, that they were prest and readie both with bodie and goods to proceede in hostile manner with vs of the ReligionLet to Mend. p 8. against all enimies what∣soeuer, that is of all most merueilous in mine eies. T. It was the worke of God, who shewed his Almightie power not onely in weakning the courage of the forreine enemies, but also in changing their hartes who are among our∣selues most dangerous, and (had he not made them of wolues, for the time lambes) might more haue perplexed vs in à day, than could
the out-enimies in a moneth. Z. Therefore the glorie thereof is to be ascribed vnto him alone to whom iustlie it doth appertaine, which is the immortal and inuisible God. T. And they for al their proffered seruice thenLet. to Mend. p. 9. are no whit the more to be fauored & trusted now; Papistes being the solicitersNorthumb. & Throck trea., Papistes the prosecutors of this warreTherefor. po∣litique p. 64., Pa∣pistes the soldiersThe descr, of the Ar. Crusado from Rome., and al attempted on the behalfe of the Pope and PapistesMedinas or∣ders for the Spa. Fleete. Northūb. trea. p. 3. 4.. Z. God giue vs grace to beware of thē, whom not onely by publique writings blazonedM. Nortons war. against the dang. prac∣tises of Papists. Execut, of Iu∣stice. M. Drants ser∣mon at the court at wind∣sor the 8. of Iā. 1569. Fields caueat for Parsons Howlet. Let. F. D. Fulkes confut. p 5 Complaint of England., but by other mischieuous practises aswel against the person of the greatest in England, as the present go∣uernment, wee know to be of all most dangerous: we are wel warned of them if we can beware. T. But notwithstanding the general con∣currence of al sortes to withstād th' inuaders, yet, had not th' almightie God bin our keper, we had for all that watched in vaine. For th' enimies if they had not to their desire pre∣uailed, yet had they surprised our Nauie on the suddaine, and landed to our great hurt. Z. But, blessed bee the Lord which in
good time discouered them to oneEliz. triump. p. 28., who cōcealed it not from them which were in best place for the Sea affaires. T. This ought to be added next in the Ca∣talogue of God his fauors to his poore church of England warde. Z. An other argument of the same fa∣uor is, his enduing our sea mē aswel ma∣rines as souldiers not onely with an in∣uincible courage (wherof our enimies, as afore was noted, were quite depri∣ued) but with all other vertues, & qua∣lities besides, necessarie for Christian warriers. Hereof it was that vpon the tydinges of the approaching enimies they dreaded not vpon the sodaine on∣lie with fiftie shippes, such as they were, which the Spaniardes counted litle Fi∣sherboatsIbidem., to set vpon that dreadfull sea-monsterThe refor. politique p. 42., and reputed inuicible Ar∣mado of Spaine consisting for nomber of eight-score shipsLet. to Mend. p. 17., so ventrous were they, and so circumspect, that they al∣waies gained the winde at their pleasure Ibidem. to their great aduantage; and so vali∣ant as some one of our ships fought at one time with three of their GaliassesCondem. of the Spa. lies. p. 3.,
as if Dauid had incountred with three Goliahs; and two of our Eng. gentlemen assaulted onlie with their naked rapiers, and seised vpon the chiefest Galiasse in all the Spanish FleeteLet. to Mend. p. 28., à thing so won∣derful as if two naked men should set vpon, and enter à mightie castle repleni∣shed with strong men and al martial fur∣niture. T. But how fortunate were they? Z. That hath alreadie bin showen. T. But strange things do they publish, clean contrarie to that by you mentioned. Z. I wot wel, neither is it à new thing among Papistes to broach abroad lies, and lowd vntruthes; we spake not long since of the inuasion of Ireland. T. We did so, what of that? Z. What à good hand wee had ouer our enimies at that time, it is vniuersal∣lie wel knowen. Yet were not the Pa∣pistes ashamed to blazon through-out Spaine, that an Angel from Heauen with à Chalice in his hand had discom∣forted manie thousandes of English∣menIn the addi∣declar. to the Bulles. &c.. Whereupon the belles were rōg, the people met together, and all sortes
from the highest to the lowest of men, al BiskaieM. Hanmers answer to a Ies. challenge. p. 26., yea al SpaineIn the addit. declar. to the, Bulles. &c. ouer reioi∣ced, triumphed, and by all outward ar∣gumentes declared the inward comfort they receiued by that tidinges. T. O merciful God that euer such vntruthes should be forged! thousandes of our men dis∣comforted; and discomforted by an Angel from heauen! when God was so on our side that wee either killed, hanged, or tooke at our pleasure euen al that Antichristian rablemēt, and but one of our men in al those fightes was slaine, nor aboue two hurt, and not so much as one man taken prisonerThis is testi∣fied by so ma∣ny as haue written of this inuading of Ireland.. Z. So haue they published that the Admiral of England in the last fight vp∣on the seas was sunkeLet. to Mend. p. 14.. T. And yet he is aliue, and, praised be God, fareth well. Z. That Sir Francis Drake was either taken or slainePacke of Spa. lies. p. 7.. T. Yet hee was neither taken or slaine, but tooke and slew a great nomber; and since by the power and goodnes of the Almighty hath slaine and taken, and stil doth both take and slaie them. Z. That we fled from comming to the
battelIbid. p. 10.. T. And yet wee chased the Spaniardes as à brace of Greyhoundes would an heard of DeereCondem. of the Spa. lies. p. 3., and whipped them as à man will whip bond-slauesThe discr. vp∣on the declar. pub. by the L. de la Noue. p. 9, and as vagabondes are whipt about à towne, so whipped we them a∣bout England and ScotlandAduertis. out of Irel. Condē. of the Spa. lies. p. 3.. Z. That of our ships 20. yea 22. were sunke, and 15. yea 26. yea 40. takenPack of Spa. lies. p. 3. 5. 12.. T. And yet so farre were wee from loosing fortie, that wee lost not one, yea so farre from loosinge à Shippe that wee lost not so much as à boateLet. to Mend. p. 17. Condem. of the Spa. lies. p. 10. nor à Ship-mast.Aduertis. out of Irel. Let. to Mēd. p. 17.. Z. That many of our men were slaine, and drownedPack of Spa. lies. p. 3. 5. 12., & à nomber taken priso∣ners.Ibid. p. 1. 3. 5. 7. 12.. T. Yet can they name, neither do we know any man of marke and reputation that was slaineCondem. of the Spa. lies. p. 12. Aduertis. out of Irel., nor any man what soeuer that came as prisoner into their handesLet. to Mend. p. 17.. For all are liuing and praest by Gods fauour to aduenture their liues as cheerfully as euer they did for hir Maiestie when shee shall commaunde themCondem. of the Spa. lies. p. 12.. Z. This of all is most wonderfull that they no way, and wee euerie way were fortunate; that their hartes shoulde
be taken from them, and new courage be put into vs; that so manie of their Shippes should be lost, and not so much as one boate, nor mast of ours from the first to the last to perish; that in one day fiue thousand of them, and not in nine daies so much as one man to count-of on our side should bee slaine; that in a few daies à thousande of theirs should be taken prisoners, and not one man of ours come into their handes; that their so famous an armie and Armado should by Heauen, by Earth, by water, by fire, perish for a great part, and ours be pre∣serued and remaine whole & sound ei∣ther to goe against them to their greater ruine, or to encounter with any forreine forces that shal assaile vs! T. He that seeth not à speciall regard of God towardes vs, as to the deere spouse of Christ ward, and an angrie countenaunce on th'o∣ther side against the Church of Rome, as vpon the whore of Babilon described by S. IohnReuel. 17. 3. 4. &c., is verie blind. Z. So is he.
Chap. 14. Of a great desolation at hand of the Papal kingdome gathered from the consideration of thinges, past and present. TIMOTHIE. And I trust the obseruation of these thinges will draw them on, who are not so wel affected to that religiō which is from aboue. ZELOTES. I hope so too, I wish it, and manie argumentes I haue indu∣cing me to thinke that some more nota∣ble ouerthrow the Pope shal againe su∣staine ere long it bee. T. May I not be priuie vnto some of them? Z. It is written that Iupiters priestes in Meroe had with superstition so bewit∣ched the peoples mindes, that when so∣euer they gaue commaundement, men would lay violent hands vpon the kings and gouernors of Aethiopia, and put them to the sword.Du arenus de sac. eccl. minis. ac benefic. l. 1. c. 4. T. Who but heareth this, and doth not ab∣horre the same, be he indued but with com∣mon
humanitie? Z. Then no doubt poperie, which both teacheth, defendeth and practiseth euen the murthering of Gods annoin∣ted, the Kinges, Princes and gouernors of Christendome, must needes vniuer∣sallie become odious. T. Hasten the same for thy names sake, O most righteous God. Z. At length those Iupiters Priestes by à Prince of an heroicall courage were themselues euen all of them put to the sword, and their auctoritie, gouernmēt, and priesthood, quite rooted out, and ouerthrowenDuarenus, ibidem.. T. Euen so declare thy iustice & iudgmētes, mightie God wee beseech thee, vpon Baals Priestes of Rome, and vpon the whole papa∣cie, no whit inferior in impietie to Th' aethio∣pian priestes. Z. That Prince that so rooted them out was hight ErganesDuarenus ibidem.. The name of him that alreadie hath giuen the deadly blow vnto the state of Poperie in Eng∣land, was one entituled euen by the pope himselfe, The defender of the Faith, Sleid. comen, de statu. el. & resp. l. 3. since for his magnanimity and power in
suppressing Gods enimies iustlie ter∣med The hāmer of Papistes euen K. Henry the eight of most famous memorie. T. O that other Countries and territories yet vnder the Papal iurisdiction had either such Erganes as Aethiopia, or such Henries as England had! Z. It is deliuered that Italie is fatall to the PoloniansTheod. Beza in vita Calui∣ni.. T. What then? Z. And it is crediblie thought also that the name of Henrie seemeth fatal to the PapacieThe refor. politique. p. 87. T. What the Henries shalbe God onelie knoweth, and man cannot define: but what aduersaries the Henries haue bin, and stil are at this houre to the Papacie al the world doth know, and the present state of France doth affoord memorable examples in their excom∣municate Henries. Z. But whosoeuer the persons shalbe for state, or name, and how vnlikelie in the iudgement of manie to distroy the Popedome, sure I am the miserable con∣dition of our euen Christians doth re∣quire, and the instant supplications of all Gods people euerie where do also
craue & call for à speedie reformation; and they cannot be in vaine. T. There is nothing impossible to God. Z. Sainct Paul some-time was an ene∣mie of the Church, and with commissi∣on was sent and went also to murther and persecute the sainctes of GodActes 9, 1. 2. &c. Phil. 3. 6.; and yet he proued à most zealous & constāt preacher of the word afterward him∣selfeAct. 9. 20., suffered much for the cause of Christ2. Cor. 11. 23. &c. Act. 9. 24., and of an hipocriticall Phari∣sie became à true professorPhil. 3. 2.. T. The example is notable. Z. We haue mo Paules than one, we praise God: For Petrus Paulus Vergerius also in his last age, à Cardinal of Rome, Sleid. comē. de statu rel. & reip. l. 21. an Embassador of the Popes, sent and sent againe, for his rare wisedome and faithfulnes in all the Popes affaires into GermanieIbidem. l. 9. and Naples vnto the Em∣peror, and that for the rooting-out of Gods people vnder the name of Luthe∣ransSleid. lib. 10.; an heauy accuser of declining pa∣pistesIbid. l. 16., and an earnest writer against such as reuolted frō the Romish faithIbid. l. 21.: himselfe in th'end all this notwithstan∣ding forsooke his professiō, left his dig∣nities,
renounced al his spiritual promo∣tions, the Pope, and ItalieBiblioth. Sim∣leri. fol. 563., and became à zealous preacher, and professor of the Gospel of our Sauiour ChristSled. Comen, de statu rel. & reip. l. 21.. T. And such, thankes be to God; we heare of now and thenM. Latimers 1. ser. vpon the L. praier in p. 125. b. M. Charkes an∣swer to a Iesuits Let. fo. 6.. Z. Litle did Martin Luther thinke whē first hee opposed him selfe against the Popes pardons to haue bin the subuer∣tor of the whole Religion of PoperieSleid comen. de statu rel. & reip. l. 1.; as litle also did King Henrie the eight, whē first he delt in that case of diuorce∣ment thinke to haue bin the banisher of the popes auctoritie out of EnglandActes and Monumentes. in K. Hen. 8.. T. So manie there be now, as man thinketh, the Popes sure frends, which may proue his enimies, and they which are his vpholders and protectors now, may throw him downe hereafter. Z. King Henrie of whom our speech hath bin, had à verie honorable title as∣cribed vnto him by the Pope; other Po∣tentates had the likeSleid. comen. de statu rel. & reip. l. 3., that which they are in name they may be in truth. Great iniuries are offered by the Pope vnto his strōgest pillars not only in FranceThe discourse of the pres. state of France, but also in SpaineThe refor. po∣litique p. 42. 47., & Princes irritated
may and wil do much. T. Those princes are in best estate euen in the eies of man which haue least dealinges with the Pope, and as the Princes are such be the people. Z. Were that well marked, Poperie could not stand, the Antichristian king∣dome must needes euen presentlie fall to the ground. Chap. 15. Of the Priestlie office of our Sauiour attributed to the Pope of Rome. TIMOTHIE. The time is now that you tel how the Pope is pla∣ced in the Priestlie office of our Sauiour Christ, & in that respect made another Sauiour. ZELOTES. That by two thinges is euident, first in that he is à Priest, then because he is à Pope. T. As a Priest how is he Christ? Z. For that as à priest he hath auctori∣tie to offer sacrifice vnto God for the quicke and the deadCatech. Trid. de ordinis Sa, which sacrifice
also, as they teach, is a propitiatorie sa∣crifice,Concil. Trid. sess. 22. can. 3. Catech. Trid. de Eucha. sa∣cra., and the same sacrifice propitia∣torie too that was offered by Christ himselfe vpō the crosseConcil. Tridē. sess. 22. cap. 2. Catech. Tridē. de Eucha. sacra, None of which thinges belong vnto anie creature, but solie vnto Iesus Christ the onely saui∣our of mankind. T. It is verie true. For as Christ himselfe is the propitiation for our sinnesRom. 3. 25. Hebr. 9. 12. &c. 1 Iohn. 2. 2. 28. 4. 10.. so that sa∣crifice propitiatorie was once offeredHebr. 9. 12. 27.; and that vpon the crosseGalat. 3. 13., & that by Iesus Christ himselfeHebr. 9. 12., both the sacrificer, & the sacrifice. Z. Therefore to whom-soeuer power is giuen to offer à propitiatorie sacrifice for the quicke and dead, which power they giue to euerie priest who is in the highest degree of holie ordersCatech. Tri∣den. de ordinis sacra.; and so belōgeth vnto the Pope as he is a priest; and they who say that the sacrament of the Altar is the same propitiatorie sa∣crifice that was offered by Christ him∣selfe vpon the crosse, they giue both vn∣to the Pope a priest, and to the Masse, the sacrifice that which of right belon∣geth solie vnto Iesus Christ. T. But our sauiour as a priest hath not onely satisfied the wrath of God by sacrificing him∣selfe
vpon the crosse, but still doth as à priest also continually vse intercession vnto his fa∣ther for his redeemed peopleRom. 8. 34. Hebr. 8. 6. 1. Iohn. 2. 1.. Z. That is manifest in the holie Scrip∣tures, notwithstanding though cleere it be that Christ is our mediator, and by intercession maketh request for vs vnto God: Yet they make euery popish priest beside à mediator so wel as ChristCatech. Tri∣den. de ordinis sacra.. T. Sainct Paul saith there is but one God, and but one mediator between God and mā, euen the Man Christ Iesus1. Tim. 2. 5.. Z. And they say (contrarying thereby Th'apostle Paul) there be manie media∣tors, euen so many as there bee priestes and popes. For euerie pope, because e∣uerie priest, is a mediator; And so euery pope, euen this Franciscane Sixtus vsur∣peth this part of Christ his office. T. Shew now againe howe euerie Pope, as Pope intrudeth himselfe into the priestlie of∣fice of Iesus Christ. Z. Their common iudgement of the pope is, that hee as pope is the high priestDurand. cat. diuini offic. l. 2. c. 1., the general pastorAns. to the execut. of lu∣stice. c. 6. p. 131, the commō father of all ChristiansIbid. c. 6. p. 121., & the hieIbid. c. 3. p. 52. pa∣stor, and moderatorCatech. Tri∣den de ordin. Sacra. of Gods vniuersal
Church, in order Melchisidech, and in dignitie AaronMaioranus clip. milit. eccl. l. 3. c. 35.. T. It is wel knowen that such titles are pro∣per onlie vnto ChristHebr. 3. 1. Hebr. 13. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 25., & those persons Mel∣chisidec and Aaron, were types and figures of our sauiour ChristPsal. 110. 4. Hebr. 5. 4. 5.. Z. Therefore to inuest the pope with such glorious titles, & to make him the person prefigured by such tipes is euē to make the pope, if not the same, yet ano∣ther Christ, as they made S. Francis. T. Sainct Gregorie did write vnto the Emperour Maurice, that whosoeuer calleth himselfe the vniuersal priest in his elation he is the fore-runner of Antichrist, because through pride he placeth himselfe afore other menGreg. Mag∣nus epist. 30. ad Mauriciū Im∣per. li. 16 & in epistolis pas∣sim.. And I may boldie in likewise affirme that whosoeuer doth either cal, or suffer him∣selfe to be called by such titles as you haue re∣cited, he is verie Antichrist. Z. But so doth the pope. T. The Pope therefore is Antichrist. Z. Then the arrogating of that power, whereby our Sauiour most soueraignly excelleth, must more fullie decipher, & notify him to bee Antichrist in verie deed.
T. Can you show that? Z. What is more soueraigne than for our Sauiour to bee the head of his church, vpon whom al other partes do dependEphes. 4. 15. 23. euen as members are linked to the head?Col. 1. 18. 2. 10. &c. T. Nothing. Z. Of this mysticall bodie the pope is made the head, and so him that giueth life and direction to all other members whatsoeuerDurand. cat. diuin offic. l. 2. c. 1.; and they say of him as Iohn said of our sauiour ChristIohn. 1. 16.. Of his fulnes we do all receaueDurand. ibid.. T. Is this Catholique diuinitie? to make the Pope of aequal excellencie with our Saui∣our Christ, is this the diuinitie of Papistes? Z. You shal hear more yet, For as they call him the head of the vniuersall church, and say that of his fulnes wee do all receaue: so as it is recorded, with patience hath he indured to heare him∣selfe called, euen The lamb of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world. For euē prostrate vpon the ground certaine Em∣bassadors of Sicilia said vnto him on this wisePaulus Ae∣mylius lib. 7., Thou which takest away the sins of the world haue mercy vpon vs; thou which
takest away the sinnes of the world, graunt vs peace. T. O gratious God, open once the eies of thine elect among them at length that they may see the most horrible condition they are in, and repent. Z. If here they staid with making the Pope in office equal with our Sauiour, it were the lesse offensiue, but when they do not onely compare, but for pit∣tie also and power by blasphemous lies, and vntruthes prefer the pope afore Christ in the redemption of mankinde, the sinne is extended euen vnto the vt∣termost. T. Do they so? Z. Do they not so when they teach & deliuer that the pope dailye of pittie freeth some one or other frō the paines of PurgatorieEras, Roter in epist. ad Tim. c. 1.? when our Sauiour did free none at al from those hellish pains? T. This shal suffice for this point,Philip Mor∣aeus tract. de eccles. p. 193. I se their blasphemies but too too wel, and I abhor them from mine hart. Z. Wee will therefore speake of that which remaineth.
Chap. 16. How the Pope of Rome is set in the prophetical office of Iesus Christ. TIMOTHIE. And is the Pope seated in the prophetical, as he is in the roial and priestlie office of Iesus Christ? ZELOTES. Heare and then de∣termine. T. First tel me where is our Sauiour enti∣tled with the name of Prophet? Z. That hee should bee so, it was by Moses long-ago fore-toldDeut. 18. 15., and that hee was so S. S. PeterActes. 7. 37., & StephanActes. 7. 37., do testi∣fie. T. Why is he so termed? Z. He is so called partlie because hee prophesied much of thinges to comeWigandus corp. doct. no∣ui Test par. 1.; but especially for that soueraigne aucto∣ritie hee had both to teach and reueale the wil of God cōcerning the redemp∣tion of man. T. What was his auctoritie? Z. Such as we are both enioined, and
that by a voice from the excellent glo∣rie2. Pet. 1. 1. to heare himMath. 17. 5., & threatned to an∣swere for the same, if we despice his do∣ctrineDeut. 18. 1.. T. What were his giftes? Z. Most diuine. For he was the bright∣nes of the glorie, and th'ingraued forme of GodHebr. 1. 3., ful of grace and truthIohn. 1. 14.; yea so full that all the fulnes of the Godhead dwelleth bodilie in himCol. 2. 9.. T. What was his doctrine? Z. As were his qualities, such was his doctrine, euen most heauenlie. For all thinges which hee hath heard from his Fa∣ther hath he made knowen vnto vsIohn. 15. 15., and they are committed vnto writing that we might beleeueIohn. 20. 31., and that through belee∣uing we might haue life through his name. T. Now tell mee how Christ is diuested of this office; and the Pope of Rome made the great Prophet of the Church of God? Z. I haue mentioned nothing from the holie Scriptures touching either th'auctoritie, or the giftes, or the do∣ctrine of Christ, but the Pope is made to match, that I say not, to surpasse our Sauiour Christ in al and euerie of these
respectes, and therefore as great for po∣wer, as Soueraigne for giftes, as diuine for doctrine as Christ him-selfe. T. I would see that confirmed. Z. Who knoweth not that God is more pleased in his sonne Christ, than they are delighted in their Father the Pope? This is my beloued sonne, heare him, saith GodMath. 17. 5.: And of the Pope, this is our welbeloued FatherCatech. Trid. de or. Sacra. in whom wee are delighted, hear him say the papistes. For whatsoeuer hee determineth is a knowen truth, and that which he con∣demneth is a knowen errorHart in his confer. c. 2. sec. 2▪ p. 79.. His lawes euen all of them are to be taken as con∣firmed by the mouth euen of God him∣selfePapa Aga∣tho apud Gra∣tian. distinct. 19. c. Sic.. And whatsoeuer hee saith it is truth, and he cannot errePighius in Hier. Eccles. Maioranus clyp milit. Ec∣cles. l. 3. c. 35.. Is not this to make the Pope of equall auctoritie with Iesus Christ? T. To denie that, is euen to gain-say an o∣pen truth. Z. Moreouer that which latelie I al∣leaged though to an other purpose doth fitlie proue also that he is takē for giftes & diuine partes to be as singular as our Sauiour Christ, when they say of him
an sainct Iohn said of ChristIohn. 1. 16., that of his fulnes wee do all receaueDurand. rat. diuin. offic. l. 2. c. 1., And that his doctrine is made equiualent with the Gospel of Iesus Christ it appeareth ma∣nie waies. T. Shew that thing. Z. He that will reade the bookes of Sentences, especially the workes of Ga∣briel BielIn 3. dist. 37▪ q. 1. art. 1. shal finde that they make four sortes, or degrees of the law of God. T. What are they? Z. The first degree be the lawes reuea∣led immediatlie from God him-selfe & be written in the holie Bible, especiallie in the Gospels penned through the wil of Christ for our better attainment of e∣uerlasting happines. T. What heare I Zelotes? Is the word of God the first degree of Gods law? & be there moe lawes, which are to be nombred among the lawes of God, besides the holy Scriptures? And among those bookes of the sacred Scrip∣tures are the workes of the Euangelistes to be reputed but for lawes? Z. That is their iudgement. T. Proceede then, and tel me what be the other lawes of God besides the holie Scrip∣tures?
Z. The next are the Phansies and dreames either taken by tradition from man to man, or deriued from the Scrip∣tures by their false, corrupt, erronious, & pharisaical interpreting of them, such are most of the Articles of the popish Creede, sometimes drawen from the written word I graunt, but rarelie agree∣ing with the sense of the holy ghost, & to th'analogie of the catholique faith. T. And be the Articles of their faith, lawes? and their expositions to be accompted for the verie lawes of God? Z. It is their opinion. T. What bee their other lawes which they say are the verie lawes euen of God himselfe? Z. They are of two sortes: of one are the Canon lawes, the Decretals, Sixtes, Clementines, Extrauagantes, and the like; of thother sort be the Reuelations, false Religions, and Rules, as of S. Brid∣get, S. Frācis, S. Dominick, and that lame Spaniard Layola, the founder of the Ie∣suitical viperous generation, either pen∣ned, or auctorized and made currant by the Popes of Rome.
T. And are men bound to take these, and euerie of them euen as the verie lawes of Iesus Christ himselfe? Z. Euen as the lawes of Christ. And how in cōparison of the Pope his lawes traditions, ordinances, and expositions they thinke of the holie Scripture it would carefullie be obserued. T. What thinke they of the holie Scrip∣tures? Z. He was a Popish Bishop, that some∣time demaunded of a reuerend Father, and afterward a blessed Martyr of Iesus ChristM. Latimer in his 2. ser. be∣fore K. Ed., whether the people might not bee ordered without the holie Scrip∣tures? And he was à Cardinal of Rome that writ how there might be a Church without the ScripturesCusanus e∣pist. 2. ad Bo∣hemos.. And another of that stampe, whose name I now re∣member not, said plainlie it had gone better with the Church, had there bin no Scripture at all. T. These are particular men, you shew not the cōmon iudgement of the Romish church? Z. It is written of the Circumcellian heretikes that they not onelie exercised most violent persecutions vpon the bo∣dies
of Sainctes, but also burned to ashes in the fire euen the most holie bookes of GodD. August. l. 2. contra lit. pe∣til. c. 27., which wee call the Scriptures. T. So did Herod afore themAmbrose in Lucam. l. 3. c. 3. and the wicked Israelites afore them alsoIer. 36, 1., but what of that? Z. Their burning of those bookes no∣tified vnto the world in what price and estimacion, they had the most pretious word of God. T. Yet this is nothing to the Papistes of whom our speech is. Z. Yes verie much. For they doing the same thing that is burning those bookes, do shew thereby in what reue∣rend accompt they haue the holie word God. T. Haue they burned the Scriptures of God as did the Circumcellian heretikes, and other impes of Satan? Z. Not onlie the Scriptures they haue burned, but also in as barberous maner as euer was heard haue they burned in∣to ashes the bodies of men onely for ha∣uing, I saie not the whole Bible, but euen a litle fragment of the same, euen
the Lordes praier in the English tong, and not allowing the same idolatrouslie to bee said vnto dead SainctesBale in his preface to I. Lāberts treat. of the L. Sup∣per.. And how that good Deane of Paules in Lō∣don, D. Colet, should haue bin condem∣ned for an heritike and burned it is no∣toriouslie wel knowen. T. But wherfore? Z. For translating the Pater Noster for∣sooth into EnglishActes & Mo∣nu. vol. 2. in K. Hen. 8.. And againe how they haue cited, tossed, threatned, and troubled of good people some for ha∣uing the Newe Testament, some the Gospel after S. Mathew, some Th'actes of the Apostles, some Th'epistles of S. Paul, some the Reuelatiō of Sainct Iohn, yea some for learning or teaching euen the verie groundes of all true Religion, as namely the ten Commaundements, the Creed, & the Lords praier, & some but for saying in English, Blessed bee they that heare the word of God and keepe it, it is worthilie recordedActes & Mo∣nu. 16., and to th'euerla∣sting shame and reproch of Poperie to be remembred. T. But the daies are now changed. For by their diuulgating the whole new Testament
into a vulgar tong, they declare themselues to haue a religious care of Gods word. Z. Cardinall Cusanus was of that mind that he thought how as the Church by time doth alter, so th' interpretacion of the Scripture also may varie, whereby that in Th' apostles time was a truth in these daies shalbe an error and contrari∣wiseCusanus e∣pist. 2. ad Bo∣hemos. our papistes in deede, though not in word, seeme to be of his minde; els would they neuer allow that in these daies for good which their fathers con∣demned as wicked and damnable, I meane the hauing the Scriptures in a vulgar tong, yet this proueth no whit that they haue in estimation the Scrip∣tures of God. T. Why not? Z. Marke I beseech you, Albeit they haue translated the New Testament in∣to English (which for all that most im∣piouslie they haue done, and sacrilegi∣ouslieSee D. Whi∣tak. against W. Reinolds. c. 15. 17. D. Buckleis ans. to the Pref. of the Rhem. Test. frō page 51. But for al. D. Fulk his cō∣fut. of the Rhe∣mish edition.: yet when they holde either as HosiusD. Fulke in his defense of Th' eng. trans∣lat. p. 4., that there is none other expresse word of God, but onely this word A∣ma, or Dilige Loue thou; or as anotherIohannes Maria Verras∣tus., that the gospel is nothing els but the
determination of the Church; or as the same HosiusContra Brē∣tium l. 4., that whatsoeuer the church of Rome teacheth that is th' ex∣presse word of God, but whatsoeuer is taught contrarie to the sence, and cō∣sent of the Romish church is th' expresse word of the deuil; or as Harding dothConfut. of the Apol. that to the interpretation which the Church of Rome giueth of the Scrip∣tures whatsoeuer it be is the od and on∣lie true sence of Gods word, it is appa∣rāt that hold what they list for the letre they make their owne imaginations, de∣terminations, senses, consent, and expo∣sitions euen the verie word of God, re∣iecting thereby in comparison thereof the most holie writinges of the blessed Prophets, and Apostles, who we know wrote not by the wil of mā but through th' instinct of the holie ghost2. Pet. 1. 21., And this being established by th' auctoritie of the Pope, doth not it seat the Pope in the propheticall Chaire not of Moses, but e∣uen of Christ himselfe. T. Vndoubtedlie. Z. And yet end they not here, but giue vnto the same Pope that auctoritie
which neither Christ would take vnto himselfe, nor yet could giue vnto anie creature beside. T. What may that be? Z. Euen an absolute auctoritie to dis∣pense against the law of God16. q. 1, Quae∣eunq. in Glos∣sa., against the law of nature15. q. 6. Au∣thoritate in Glossa.; against th' epistles of S. PaulDist. 34. Lec∣tor. & distinct. 82. presbyter.; against the whole new Testa∣mentAbbas panor. Extra. de di∣uortiis. c. fin., and against al the commaunde∣ments of GodSumma An∣gel. in dictione Papae.. For with these and a∣gainst all these, they say, the Pope at his pleasure can dispence.B. Iewel in the defense of the Apol. f. 57. Feilds caueat. &c. let. E. 7. T. But so cannot Christ himselfe do. For what soeuer his written word any where doth condemne as il, and vngodlie, by no dispen∣sation can he make it good, godlie, and allow∣able at any time? Z. It were an endles thing to mention the most horrible dispensations procee∣ding from time to time from th' infinite power of this arrogant aduersarie of Christ, I will therefore mention one of them for the horriblenes thereof, which plainlie sheweth what spirite it is that possesseth the Pope. T. Shew that I pray you? Z. The time was some thirtie yeares a∣go
when the popish preachers in their open sermons published that to kill a Lutheran, it was a worke gratefull to God and meritoriousCommen. de statu Relig. & Reipub. in reg∣no Gal. par. 1. li. 1.: But of late not yet fiue yeares ago, for à natural and of∣ten sworne Subiect and seruant to mur∣ther his liege soueraigne it was not one∣ly permitted as pardonal by a dispensa∣tion from the pope, but also iudged me∣ritorious, by a cardinals letreCardinal de Comos letter to Party. See afore in his booke. c. 6., as wher∣by he should merit much in heauen. T. An Indian great man, as I haue heardSpa. Coloni. Cōpl. of Eng., being tormented most cruellie by the barba∣rous Spaniardes grew into such a detestacion of that mercilesse Nation that he chose ra∣ther to go presentlie into Hel, then with the Spaniardes to enioy blisse in Heauen. For my part Zelotes rather would I chuse to bee for euer debarred from that ioyful paradise of e∣uerlasting happines, than to be admitted in∣to heauen by such a meritorious worke. Z. The time was and still isTest, Rhem. annot. Math. 20. v. 23., that they hold howe by doing good, man may merit heauē, which yet is erronious do∣ctrinez & much derogatorie to the me∣rits of Christ; what titles then may wee geue to them which maintaine that
murther, yea and the murther of Gods annointed, is meritorious, & deserueth a reward from God. T. I am of your minde, and I thinke euen Satan himselfe can hardlie perpetrate a more execrable sinne. But here stay we, Zelotes, I see now ful clerely, blessed be God therefore, that al poperie is most lothsome and horrible; and there is none ende of citing the most cur∣sed opinions which Papistes do maintaine, they are so manie. You haue sufficiently pro∣ued the pope to vsurpe euen all th' office of our S. Christ, and so indeed to bee reputed of our aduersaries for verie Christ, but thereby knowen of vs to be verie Antichrist. And be∣cause others also (as Sainct Francis and the Virgin Marie of whom you haue spoken) haue the same roialties, dignities and offices giuen vnto them by the Papistes which ap∣pertaine vnto Christ, and vnto none besides, the conclusion is that the Gospel of Christ in truth is but à verie toie or fable counted a∣mong the Papistes. Z. Be it therefore knowen vnto al men by these presentes that whosoeuer is a subiect to the Pope is a traitor to God, that I say not to his Countrie, and a
contemner of Christ and of all Christi∣anity so-wel as the Pope with whom he may assuredlie exspect for euer to be dā∣ned vnlesse in time through the grace of God he leaue his wicked opinions, & imbrace the sincere gospel of Iesus Christ at this houre in England profes∣sed, embraced of all States, ratified by most wholesome lawes, prospered mi∣raculously by al happie successe, & most constantlie against all manner Aduersa∣ries and deuilish attemptes defended by by the most gratious, glorious, and vi∣ctorious Prince Elizabeth, whom th' al∣mightie so preserue that she may liue & still see the prosperous successe of this truth and th' ouerthrow of all enimies of the same, to the great glorie of God, & hir owne euer∣lasting comfort. Amen.
