25082A 99854796 20240
ALBIONS England: A Continued Historie of the same Kingdome, from the Originals of the first Inhabitants thereof: And most the chiefe Alterations and Accidents there hapning: vnto, and in, the happie Raigne of our now most gracious Soueraigne Queene ELI∣ZABETH. VVith varietie of inuentiue and histo∣ricall Intermixtures. First penned and published by VVilliam VVarner: and now reuised, and newly inlarged by the same Author. BY WISDOME·PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY. printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by the Widow Orwin, for I. B. and are to be sold at her shop in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Bible. 1597.
To the right Honora∣ble, my very good Lord and Maister, Henrie Carey, Baron of Hunsdon, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter: Lord Chamberlaine of her Maiesties most Honorable Houshold: Lord Gouernour of Barwick: Lord Warden of the East Marches for and anenst Scotland: Lord Lieftenant of Suffolke and Norfolke: Captaine of her Ma∣iesties Gentlemen Pencioners: and one of her High∣nes most Honorable Priuie Counsell. THis our whole Iland, ancient∣ly called Brutaine, but more aunciently Albion, presently containing two Kingdomes, England and Scotland, is cause (right Honorable) that to di∣stinguish the former, whose only Occurrents I abridge, from the other, re∣mote from our Historie, I intitle this my Booke ALBIONS ENGLAND. A subiect, in troth, (without vaine-glory be it spokē) worthy your Honorable Patronage: had it passed frō the
Pen of a more countenaunced Author. But for great Personages gratefully to entertaine the good wils of meane workemen, is answerable to themselues, and animating to feeble Artists. I therefore secure of your Honors Clemencie, & herein not vnlike to Phaëton, who at the first did fearefully admire euē the Pallace of Phoebus, but anon feareles aduenture euen the presence of Phoebus, (hauing dedicated a former Booke to him that from your Honor deriueth his Birth) now also present the like to your Lordship, with so much the lesse doubt and so much the more duty, by how much the more I esteeme this my latter laboure of more Valew, & I owe, & your Lordship expecteth especiall dutie at the hands of your Seruant. And thus (right Honorable) hoping better than I may offend, desirous to please, desperate of praise, & destitute of a bet∣ter Present, I make Tender onely of good will, more I haue not, for your Honors good word, lesse I hope not. Your Lordships most humble and dutifull Seruant, W. Warner.
To the Reader. WEl know I, that Pearls low-pri∣sed in India are precious in Eng∣land, that euen Homer was slightly authorised in Greece, but singularly admired elswhere, and that for the most part, the best Authors find at home their worst Auditors: howbeit, whatsoeuer VVriter is most famous, the same is therefore indebted to his na∣tiue Language: Neither preferre I aboue three spee∣ches before ours, for more sententious. VVritten haue I alreadie in Proese, allowed of some: and now (friendly Reader) offer I Uerse, atten∣ding thine indifferent (ensure. In which, if grosely I faile (as not greatly I so feare) in Ueritie, Breuitie, Inuention, and Uarietie, profitable, patheticall, pi∣thie, and pleasant, so farre off shall I be from being o∣pinionate of mine owne Labours, that my selfe will also subscribe to prescribe the same for absurd and
erronious. But in Uaine is it either to intreat or feare the Courteous or Captious: the one will not cauill, nor the other be reconciled. My labour is past, and your liking to come: and things hardly founded, may easily be confounded; Ar∣rogancie is Linx-eyed into aduantages: Enuie and selfe-conceited Readers capable of the least errour. But such are good Mindes, and the Contraries of these Men in reading of Books, as were the Paganes in re∣uerencing their Gods, sacrificing as deuoutly to a woodden Iupiter, as to a golden Iupiter: to an Oxe, a (at, or vnreuerent Priapus, as to the Sunne, the Starres, or amiable Venus: deuotion and discretion being euermore senceles in detraction. Of the latter sorte therefore I craue pardon, presupposing their patience; to the former, presupposing im∣patience, I offer pardon: resting to either, and to you all, in good will such as I should. Yours. W. W.
A Table for euery of the seuerall Bookes, to find out the speciall Stories and matters: directing from their Chapters and Pages. The first Booke. OF the deuision of the World after the generall Flood: And of the confusion of Tongues. chap. 1. pag. 1 How and vnder whome the first Monarchie began. pag. 2 Of the debate betwixt Titan and Saturne, for the kingdome of Crete: and of their conditionall Attonement. pag. 2 How Iupiter at his birth, by commaundement of Saturne his Father, should haue been put to death, and how he was preserued. chap. 2. pag. 4. Of the crueltie of Lycaon: and how hee was driuen out of his king∣dome by Iupiter. chap. 3. pag. 7 How Iupiter deliuered his Parents being imprisoned by Titan. pa. 7 Of Aesculapius, and of his death. pag. 8 How Saturne, wilfully enforcing his Sonne Iupiter to Armes, was chaced out of Crete, and Ganimaedes taken prisoner. pag. 9 How Iupiter on the Sea, ouercame the cruell Gyant and Pyrat Ae∣gaeon. pag. 10 How Iuno pretending the death of Hercules and hismother (being in trauaile of him) was preuented. chap. 4. pag. 11 How Hercules, vanquishing the Gyant Philoctes, fetched a bootie out of the Isle of Hespera. pag. 12 How Hercules rescued fayre Hesione King Laomedons Daughter from death: and of Laomedons treachery towards him. pag. 13 How Hercules sacked Troy, and put Laomedon to flight. pag. 15 How dangerously Hercules ouercame three fierce Lyons in the For∣rest of Nemea. chap. 5. pag. 16 How Hercules in Agypt subdued and sacrificed the Gyant Busiris. pag. 17. How Hercules rescued Hippodame the Bride of Pirithous from the Centaures that would haue rauished her. pag. 18
How Proserpinc was rapted by Pluto: her deliuerie attempted, first by Orpheus, then by Theseus and Pirithous, and how she was at the length rescued by Hercules. chap. 6. pag. 19. How Androdamus ouercame Philoctes, spoyled Thaebes, slew King Creon. How Lycus vsurped in Thaebes, imprisoned Megara the wife of Hercules: and how hee and Megara were lastly slaine of Hercules. pag. 23 How King Laomedon was slaine by Hercules, and Troy by him the second time spoyled, &c. pag. 25 The second Booke. OF the warre and fierce Combat betwixt Hercules and Antaeus: and of King Atlas. chap. 7. pag. 26 How two Amazonian Ladies challenged the Combat of Hercules and Theseus, and of the braue performance thereof. pag. 29 Of the warre, contention, and Combat betwixt Hercules and Ache∣lous, for the loue of Deianira. pag. 30 How the Centaure Nessus would haue rauished Deianira: of his death, and malitious treacherie towards Hercules. chap. 8. pag. 32 How Hercules slew the subtile and cruell Monster Hydra. pag 34 Of Gerion subdued, and slaine by Hercules. pag. 35 How the Tyrant Cacus (driuen out of his kingdome by Hercules) liued in a Caue with three Ladies Daughters to King Pius. pag. 36 The tragicall Storie of Queene Daphles and Doracles. chap. 9 p 37 The Tale of the old woman and Battus. chap. 10. pag. 45 The Storie of Iupiter and Calisto. chap. 11. pag. 49 Of Cacus his secret Thefts and Tyrannies: and how he was lastly dis∣couered and slaine by Hercules. pag. 53 Of the honour done to Hercules in Italie: and of Queene Marica, on whom he was supposed to beget Latinus Grandfather to Brute. chap. 12. pag. 55 How Hercules vanquished King Picus, and fell in loue with Iole. p. 56 How Hercules ouercame the Tyrant Diomedes, and gaue him to be eaten of his owne horses: and how in Lycia hee betooke himselfe to ease and effeminacie. pag 57 Of the tragicall end of Hercules and Deianira. chap. 13 pag. 59
The occasion and circumstances of the third and last warre at Troy: The destruction thereof: and banishment of Aeneas. pag. 61 Brute his petigree from either Parent: his Exile from Italie, and a∣riuall in this Isle, then called Albion. pag. 62 The third Booke. HOw Brute named and manured this Iland: built Troy-nouant or London, and at his death deuided the Isse between his three Sonnes. chap. 14. pag. 63 How Locrine ouercame Humbar and his Hunnes: fell in loue with Estrild: and of Queene Guendoleine her reuenge on him, Estrild, and Sabrin. pag. 64 Of King Leir, and his three Daughters. pag. 65 Of Porrex and Ferrex, and how Queene Iden murthered her sonne Porrex. chap. 15. pag. 67 How and when the Scots and Pichts first entred Brutaine, and of their Originals. pag. 68 Of Belinus and Brennus: their Contention: Attonement: renow∣med Acts: and death of Brennus. chap. 16. pag. 69 Of the kindnes shewed by King Elidurus to his deposed Brother Archigallo. pag. 76 How Iulius Caesar, after two Repulses, made the Brutaines tributa∣rie to the Romaines. chap. 17. pag. 77 The Fable of the old man, the boy, and the Asse. pag. 80 The Birth of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. chap. 18. pag. 81 How Guiderius & his brother Aruiragus ouercame the Romaines: how Aruiragus was reconciled to the Romaines, and married the Emperours Daughter. pag. 81 How Queene Uoada vanquished the Romanes: and of hers, and her Daughters deaths. pag. 82 Of the first Christian King in Brutaine: how the Crowne thereof became Emperiall: and of the Marriage and Holiday in Hell. pag 85 Of the extreame distresse and thraldome that the Brutaines were brought vnto by the Scots and Pichts: and how they were relie∣ued by the King of little Britaine. chap. 19. pag. 87
How King Vortiger intertained Hengistus and his Saxons: how they droue▪ Uortiger and the Brutaines into Wales, and planted themselues in Britaine. pag. 88 Of King Arthur and his Chiualrie. pag. 90 How after the death of King Arthur, the Saxons altogether sub∣dued and expelled the Brutaines: and of Cadwallader their last King. pag. 91 The fourth Booke. THe Storie of Curan and Argentile. chap. 20. pag. 93 Of King Sigibert his tyrannie & miserable end. chap. 21. pa. 98 Of the amorous King Osbret slaine by the Danes, who vnder Hun∣gar and Hubba did warre and win much of England. pag. 99 Of the politick and couragious Kings Alured and Adelstone: and how they vanquished and chased the Danes. pag. 100 How Egelred by treason of his mother became king: and how all the Danes were murthered in one night. pag. 101 Of the extreame thraldome wherein the English liued vnder the Danes. How Swayne king of Denmarke and Canutus his sonne wholly subdued England to themselues. chap. 22. pag. 102 Of the precepts that King Egelred on his death-bed gaue to his son Edmond Irneside. pag. 103 Of the noble warre betwixt Edmond Irneside and Canutus: of their Combat, Attonement, and friendly partition of England betwixt them, &c. pag. 105 Of the holy king Edward, his vertuous and valiant gouernment. Of the treacherous Earle Goodwin, and of his End. How king Harold was slaine, and England Conquered by William Duke of Nor∣mandy. chap. 22. pag. 107 Of the holy king Edward, and of his sayings. pag. 111 The fift Booke. HOw king William Conqueror altered the lawes and gouernmet in England. Of Edgar, Athelstone, and of his mother and Sisters entertainement in Scotland. And of the restoring of the English royall blood. chap. 23. pag. 113
Of King Henrie the second: of Thomas Becket, and of his death. pag. 114 Of King Richard the first: his Victories: his imprisonment in Au∣strich: his reuenge therfore: and of his death. chap. 24. pag. 117 Of King Iohn: and how he was poysoned by a Monke. pag. 118 A Tale of the beginning of Friers and Cloysterers. pag. 119 Of a blunt Northerne man his speeches. pag. 120 How king Edgar wowed the Nunne: and of his pennance there∣fore. pag. 121 Of the warres betwixt King Henrie the third and his Barons. chap. 25. pag. 123 Of the vertuous and victorious Prince king Edward the first: and of his counsell giuen to his Sonne, &c. pag. 124 Of king Edward the second his euill gouernment. Of good Thomas Earle of Lancaster, & of his conference with an Hermit. pa. 125 How lecherous Turgesius the Norwegane, hauing conquered Ire∣land, was by certaine young Gentlemen in the habites of Ladies slaine, and Ireland so recouered. chap. 26. pag. 126 Of amorous king Dermot, and his Paramour the Queene of Meth in Ireland: and of Ireland conquered to England. pag. 129 Of the Hermits speeches to Earle Thomas of Lancaster. chap. 27. pag. 131 How King Edward the second for his euill gouernement was depo∣sed, and his Parasites put to death. chap. 28. 136 Of King Edward the third his Victories and noble Gouernement. pag. 137 Of the magnanimitie of a Scottish Lady Sir Alexander Seitons wife, at the besieging of Barwicke. pag. 138 Of the troublesome Raigne of king Richard the second: and how he was deposed by Henry, surnamed Henry of Bolingbroke, Duke of Hertford and Lancaster, &c. pag. 140 The sixt Booke. OF king Henry the fourth: of the Rebellions in his time: and of Richard the seconds death. chap. 29. pag. 142 Of the victorious Prince king Henry the fift. Of Queene Katherine and Owen Tuder. pag. 143
Of the wowing and wedding of Vulcan and Venus: and of the strife betwixt Venus and Phoebus. chap. 30. pag. 146 How Pan wowed, and was deceiued. chap. 31. pag. 152 Of Mercurie his successes loue. pag. 154 Of Mars his Censure of loue and women: and of Iupiters Sentence and sayings. pag. 156. and 157 Of the troublesome Raigne of King Henrie the sixt: how he was lastly deposed: And of King Edward the fourth. chap. 32. pa. 158 Of King Richard the third, and of his Tyrannies. pag. 160 How Henry Earle of Richmond ouercame and slew King Richard the third. chap. 33. pag. 161 Of the vniting of the two hous Lancaster and Yorke by interma∣riage. pag. 163. The Seauenth Booke. OF the great difficulties ouerpassed by Henrie the Seauenth heire of the Line of Lancaster, or euer he attained to the Crowne. chap. 34. pag. 164 Of the like great difficulties ouerpassed by his wife Queene Eliza∣beth heire of the Line of Yorke, or euer the same two houses by their intermariage were vnited. pag. 166 Of a great Rebellion in England, occasioned by a Priest. Of Queene Elizabeth wife to Edward the Fourth. chap. 35. pag. 168 Of Perken Warbeck and his rebellious Complottors. Of the malici∣ous Duchesse of Burgoine. Of the great Constancie of a chast La∣die wise vnto the same Perkin. pag. 169 Of a Scottish Knight distraught through his Ladies disloyaltie. Of his mad passions and speeches: of his Death: and of her euill en∣ding. chap. 36. pag. 171 A Tale of the Bat and the Moole, &c. chap. 37. pag. 179 Of the Cuckooe and the Owle, part of the former Tale. pag. 185 Of Perken Warbecks End. Of a Third rebellion. pag. 187 Of Empson and Sutton aliàs Dudley. pag. 188 The Eight Booke. OF King Henry the Eight. Of his Sister Mary the French Queen, and Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk. chap. 38. pag. 190
Of Queene Katherine Dowager. &c. pag. 191 Of King Edward the sixt his vertuous Raigne, &c. chap. 39. pag. 192 Of Edward Seimer, and Lord Protector, Duke of Somerset. chap. 40 pag. 195 Of Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberland. pag. 195 Of the Lord Gilford Dudley and Lady Iane his wife. pag. 196 Of Queene Mary. chap. 41. pag. 198 Of fayre Rosamund and King Henrie the second. pag. 199 Of a Ladie, who by patience and quiet policie reclaimed her Lord from wantonnes. chap. 42. pag. 202 A Catalogue or Epitomie of all the most valiant and famous Kings of this Land, and of their Acts, from Brute to her now Maiesties most blessed Raigne. chap. 42. pag. 206 An obseruation touching the letter H. pag. 208 The ninth Booke. A Fiction, alluded to our now most gratious Soueraigne Queene Elizabeth her Persecutors, Persecution, and her passage there∣out. chap. 44. pag. 212 More of her Maiesties Troubles, & wonderful deliuerie. pa. 212. &c. Of the vntimely Ends of most our English Dukes since the Con∣quest: by way of Caueat to Parasites, Rebels, and Conspirators. chap. 45. pag. 214 The Tale of Narcissus and Eccho. chap. 46. pag. 216 A Fiction of their Authoritie from Hell. Their present corrupting of Mankind, and wherein. pag. 218 Of the Chat passed betwixt two old Widowes, concerning new Fangles now vsed by women. chap. 47. pag. 220 More of their Chat. chap. 47. pag. 222 Of Spaynes ambitious affecting Kingdomes. chap. 48 What the Spanyards in Councell cōcluded, touching English Papists at their pretended Inuasion of England: and of the small securitie wherein Spayne standeth. pag. 225. &c. The ouerthrow of the Spanish Armada, that anno Dom. 1588. threat∣ned the Conquest of England. chap. 49. pag. 227 How Sathan by the only sinne of Pride hath euer preuailed. cap. 50. pag. 229 The Legend of S. Christofer. Of the Popes Drifts, and Infirmities. pag. 230. and 231
Of the Spanish Inquisition. chap. 51. pag. 232 Of the beginning of Iesuists. An admonition to such of them as bee our Natiues. Of chiefe poynts wherein the Papists dissent from vs in Opinion. pag. 233. and 234 Of the Combat betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit. chap. 52. pag. 235 How our Religion is autenticall. Of the chiefe poynts wherein we dissent from the Papists. pag. 236. &c. A Commendation of our prosent Gouernment. With a remem∣brance of somewhat that in some Persons faulteth. cap. 53. p. 239 Of the Hypocrites of our time. pag. 240. &c. The Tenth Booke. HOw the King of Spayne and Pope first quarrelled vs: recei∣ued, armed, & abetted our Rebels and Fugitiues. Of the Popes arrogant Bull: and of the Scottish Queene, &c. pag. 242. &c. Of the Scottish Queene he. Pretexts and intemperate affecting the Crowne of England. Her many and most daungerous Conspira∣cies: with a Catalogue of most her trayterous Complottors. &c. chap. 55. pag. 245. &c. Of her lawfull and orderly Triall. Of the most deliberate and mer∣cifull handling of her cause. &c. chap. 56. pag. 248. &c. Of her Death. &c. pag. 250. &c. Of what Councell the ciuill warres in France had Originall. chap. 57 The beginning of the same ciuill warres. By whom: and against whom. pag. 253. &c. How the Spanyard in those Tumults drifted for France. The Popes incharitable acting therein. Of our Queene her charitable and necessarie succours to the oppressed French: and the Progresse of those ciuill warres, &c. chap. 58. pag. 255 The tragicall historie of King Dauids Children applied, &c. chap. 59 pag. 256 More of the same Historie. chap. 60. pag. 263. &c. Of the warres in the Low Countries. &c. chap. 61. pag. 265. &c. The Eleuenth Booke. OF Sir Iohn Mandeuil and faire Elenors loue: his Prowesse for her sake performed: and his departure to trauell strange Coun∣tries. pag. 296. &c.
Of Sir Hugh Willough by his Voyage, and death. Of Chancelor per∣forming the same Voyage. pag. 273 Of Discoueries by Chancelor: his stately Intertainment, and succes∣full dispatch of affayres in Russia. pag. 274 More of Mandeuil and Elenor: and of his Letter sent vnto her. &c. pag. 275. &c. A description of Russia. Somewhat of their Manners, Religion, and Policie, &c. chap. 65. pag. 278 More of Chancelors laudable Actions: and of his death. pag. 279 Of Elenor her speeches to one Stafford, in answer of Mandeuils Let∣ter, &c. chap. 66. pag. 281 Of Burrough his Discoueries, &c. chap. 67. pag. 283 Of Ienkinson his Discoueries, and succesfull imployments. pag. 284 More of the same. pag. 285 Of Mandeuil offered a great Marriage in Aegypt. Of Women, and Marriage: and a Censure of Either. chap. 68. pag. 286 More of Ienkinson labouring our affaires in Persia, &c. chap. 69. pag. 289 The Twelfth Booke. OF the meanes whereby Elenor (thereof before ignorant) had notice that Mandeuil was her Knight beloued. cap. 70. p. 292 Of East, South, & Southeast Discouerers and Discoueries, &c. chap. 71. pag. 295. &c. A Woman simply deliuering the Soothe concerning her owne Sexe, &c. chap. 72. pag. 297 Of the Seuenteene Kingdomes in Tymes by-passed, whereof her Maiestie is now sole Monarch, &c. chap. 73. pag. 300. &c. Old Rome discribed in her Ruines. chap. 74. pag. 302 Of Romes politicke Gouernement from the Originals, vnto Con∣stantines Donation. &c. pag. 304 Of the Gouernors, and Gouernment of Rome, since the Papacie. chap. 75. pag. 305 Of the free-States in Italie. pag. 306. &c. A new Reuiuer of an olde Merriment, of one crossed in his amorous drifting. chap. 76 pag. 307. &c. Of Mandeuil and Stafford met at Rome, &c. pag. 309. &c. The residue of the former Merriment. chap. 77 pag. 312 Mandeuil and Elenor met, and of their loues Euent, &c. pa. 304 &c Aeneidos in Prose. pag. 317. &c. FINIS.
ALBIONS ENGLAND. THE FIRST BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. I. I Tell of things done long agoe, of many things in few: And chiefly of this Clyme of ours, the Accidents pursue. Thou high Director of the same, assist mine art∣lesse pen, To write the gests of Brutons stout, and actes of English men. When arked Noah, & seuen with him, the emptyd worlds Remaine, Had left the instrumentall meane, of landing them againe: And that both man and beast, and all, did multiplie with store, To Asia Sem, to Affrick Cham, to Europe Iapheth bore Their Families. Thus triple wise the world deuided was: One language common vnto all: vntill it came to passe, That Nembroth sonne to Chus, the sonne of Cham, Od Noah his sonne.
In Caldea (neuer seene before) an Empire had begonne. As he and his audacious crew, the Tower of Babell reare, Pretending it should check the cloudes, so to anoyd the feare Of following flouddes, the Creator of creatures beheld The climing toppes of cloud-high Towers and more to be fulfilde. To cut off which ambicious plot, and quash their proud intent Amongst a world of people there he sundry speeches sent, So that, vnable to conferre about the worke they went, The Tower was left vnfinished: and euery man withdrew Himselfe apart, to ioyne with those whose language best he knew: And thus confused tongues at first, to euery nation grew. THe Babylonian Saturne though his buildings speede was bad, Yet sound the meanes that vnder him he many Nations had, He was the first that rulde as King, or forraine landes subdude, Or went about into the right of others to intrude: Ere this aspiring mindes did sleepe, and wealth was not pursude. His sonne Ioue Belus after him, succeeded and puruaide For dreadfull warres, but awlesse death his dreadfull purpose staide. Then Ninus prosecutes the warres, preuented Belus sought, And fild the wronged worlde with armes, and to subiection brough▪ Much people, yet not capable of such his nouile fight. From Caldea to Assyria he translates the Empire quite: And caused fire on horses backes, before him euer borne, To be adorned for a God. Thus out of vse was worne In Caldea and Assyria too the honour rightly due To high Iehoua, God indeede. Idolatrie thus grevv From Ninus first: he first of all a Monarchie did frame, And bewtified Niniui, that bore the Builders name. His warlike wise Semir amis, her husband being dead, And sonne in nonage, faining him, long ruled in his stead: Delating in a males attyre, the Empire new begonne: The which, his yeares admitting it, she yeelded to her sonne,
Thus Cham his broode did borgeon first, and held the worlde in awe: But Iapheths Line to Iauans land from Assur doth vs drawe. MVch prayse is spoke of Thessalie, and Pegasus his Springs, And how the Nimphes of Meonie, in Tempe did great things, And how that Cecrops and his seede did honour Athens so, As that from thence are sayd the Springs of Sciences to flow. Not onely Artes but Cheualry, from Greece deriue we may: Whereof (omitting many things) my Muse, alonely say How Saturne, Ioue, and Hercules, did fill the world with fame Of iustice, prowesse, and how they both men and Monsters tame: And so from these deriue the meane how Brute to Albion came. In Crete did florish in those dayes (the first that florisht so) Vranos: he in wealth and witte all others did out goe. This tooke to wife (not then forbod) his Sister Vesta fayre, That crooked Titan did to him and comely Saturne bac. The elder for deformities, in making and of minde, With parents and the people too did lesser liking finde: The younger by the contraries, gaue hansell in his prime Of many vertues, honouring their Owners elder time. Away slips age: death spareth none: Vranos leaues the stage, His body (now depriu'd of pomp) interrd, the wormes doe gage. Well may a rich mans Hearse want teares, but heires he shall not ms, To whome, that he is dead at length no little ioye it is. How beit, at the least for forme, Vranos Sonnes lament: But scarce their patted fathers Ghost to heauen or hell was sent, When that his heires did fall at oddes about the vacant Raigne: And Titan chafes, disabled then the Scepter to sustaine. Each eye did follow Saturnes forme, each heart applaudes his fame, And to conclude, with whole consent, he winnes away the game. Yet, for because the Birth-right should inure to Titan still, In Mars his Church did Saturne vow his Issues males to kill. Not meanely glad was Saturne then his head possest of Crowne,
When, of his building, he was Lord of many a peopled Towne. He giueth lawes, his lawes are kept, he bids, and all obay, And equally belou'd and feard he wealds a kingly sway. He teacheth men (vntaught before) to eare the lusty land: And how to pearse the pathlesse ayre, with shaft from Bow-mans hand. God Dis did quaile to see his golde so fast couayd from hell, And fishes quakte, when men in ships amidst their flouds did dwell Who loues not him? Wherein did not the King of Crete excell. But what auaile or Townes, or Lawes, or what doe subiects moue? Sheaues, Shasts, or Ships, or Gold, or all? king Saturne is in loue. He loues, and is beloude againe: yeat so might not suffice, In former vow to Titan made his paine of pleasure lies: But no man from the Monarke Loue by wealth or weapons flies. Cybella, fayre Cybella is espoused to her brother: And as doe Venus billing Birds so loue they one another. In Coiture she doth conceiue: one sonne is borne, and slayne: And Saturne of the hansell hard, doth male-content re mayne. CHAP. II. THe Sunne had compast all the Signes, and Cybell brought to light Her second breede, a smiling boy, and Iupiter he hight: Together with the Queene of Gods (so Iunos stile we wright.) The infant smiled at his birth: but Cybell, ioy∣bereft, And Vesta, whom Vranos had an heauy widow left, Did both lament: for Saturne wild the new borne babe should die,
Both to acquite him of his vow, and frustrate Destinie. For at the Oracle he had, his wife a sonne should beare, That should eect him from his Realme: his vow therefore and feare Did hasten on (vnwillingly) the slaughter of his sonne: For which (his sorrowes granting speech) his moene he thus begonne. And wāt not stately Crowns their cares? With pompe haue princes paine? Ah, die he must, and die he shall, els may not Saturne raigne. Yeat, might a Scepters want suffice, I gladly would resigne: But sworne-by Stix and wreakfull Mars at periuries repine. Then farre be it that they repine, least I too late repent: It doubles sinne, if sinne by sinne we practise to preuent. From this time foorth, Melancholie, for Surname Saturne had: No mirth could wrest frō him a smile, ech smile would make him sad. His seruants feare his solemne fittes, when if they ought did say, He either answers not at all, or quite an other way. Vnpeopled roomes and pathlesse wayes did fit his humour best: And then he sighs and sheadeth teares when all things else did rest. Who so could cite a Tragedie was formost in his creede, For, balking pleasaunt company, on sorrowes did he feede. Death likes him that mislikes himselfe: in gesture roabes and all He shewes himselfe like to himselfe: and hence it doth befall That men to Melancholy giuen, we Saturnists doe call. His Wife and Sister kissing ost her Nephewe and her Sonne, (For she his Aunt and Mother was) with Vesta seeke to shunne The voted Fathers deadly doome: to kill so sweete a Childe Their eyes and very soules abhorre: who (nothing so vnmilde) Doe weeping kisse his laughing mouth, in minde the Babe to saue: Howbeit feare of Saturnes wroth contrary counsell gaue. But when in haste the Babe his heart was sent for by and by, So Saturne wild, so Cybell must, and Vesta not dee, It was a woe to heare their woe and death to see them die. Vnhollowed wretch, then Cybell sayd, in wombe why did I beare This double Burthen? happy Twins, saue that my Twins they are.
So that my teeming with these throwes had ending well were I: Or would I might not giue them life, that liuing foorth with die. Thy Scepter (Saturne) is not worth Perfourmance of thy vow: Thy conscience doth a scruple holde that Gods nor men allow. Frō Gods, frō men, from brutish beasts, from nature nought doth grow, But fosters what it bringeth soorth: thou onely doest not so. Thy Sonnes alone for slaughters serue, and I mean while their mother Am Saturnes Wife, lesse prowd of it then that he is my Brother. Vnhappy Cybell borne to beare, and therefore borne to woe, And fruitlesse fertill to a man that soweth not to mow. Now teares had drowned further speech, till she as one bestrought Did crie that with a knife the Babe should to her bed be brought: My selfe (quoth she) will be his death, with whome my selfe will die: For so may Sturne saue and shunne his vow and destinie. But Vesta countermaunds her charge: yeat Saturnes will must stand, For Ioue must die, or they not liue. A Damsell theare at hand Was then enforced to that charge. Thrice toucht her knife his Skin, But thrice his smiles did cause her teares: she fourthly did beginne, And fourthly ended as before. Betide me death or life, Liue still (at least for me) she sayd: and casting downe the knife, She kist that sweete and prety mouth that laughed on her lippes: And brings him back to Cybels bed. Her heart, reuiued, skippes, Reuiewing life where reckned death had wrought repentant teares. The Father fronted with a guile, at length the Damsell beares The Infant vnto Oson Towne: and in her Ladies name, Intreates Melissus Daughters twayne to nourish vp the same. Vp to a Mountaine beare they him, and in a secret Caue A Mountaine Goat did giue him milke, and so his life they saue. His Nouses, sounding Simbals once to drowne the Infants crie, A many Bees (the Muses birds) into the Caue did flie, Where making Honie, Saturnes Sonne did long time liue thereby.
CHAP. III. IT doth remayne of Iupiter, as how (but then a Lad) From Epire to Pelasgis him the Lordes Epyrote. had, To fetch their pledge Lycaon held, when times of truce had ende. Lycaon fayning to consent, that did not so in¦tend, Next day, as though he would dismisse the Legates with estate, Did make to them a solemne feast: when, hauing slaine of late The noble pledge, he brings his limmes and setteth them before His Countreymen to feede vpon in saused dishes store. The Strangers and his Subiects too abhorring such a sight, Sit gazing each in others face, bereft of speech and sprite, Vntill that lustie Iupiter, a stripling to beholde, Did take the limmes dismembred so, and with a courage bolde Did shew them throw Pelasgis streetes, declaring by the way The murther of their bloodie King: which did so much dismay The Citizens, that euen they, detesting such vnright, Did rise in armes against their King, where youthfull Ioue did fight So valiantly, that by his force Lycaon tooke his flight: And after did by Robberies, by blood, and Rapines liue: For which to him a Wooluish shape the Poets aptly giue. IN Epyre and Pelasgs thus Ioue first his honour wonne: But greater things vntouched are by this same Worthy donne. And partly, in the monstrous warre that Titan and his Crue
Did holde with Saturne, when by search of Issues males he knew The which his brother had aliue, against their couenant made: When, Titan Victor, fast in hold was vanquisht Saturne laide, Together with his wife and friends: where sorrow much they past, Till Iupiter did vnderstand his parentage at last. He therefore landing tooke in Crete, with well prouided men: And lew his Vncle Titan, and the Giant Tiphon then, With most part of the Titanoies, and sets his Father free; By meanes whereof they reconcile▪ and well a while agree. NOt brooking then Apollos fault, in that he entetainde The renaunt of the Titanoes, that after warres remainde, Apll was by Iupiter inforced for to flie His kingdome Paphos, and to liue exilde in Thessalie. There loue, but chiefly penurie, constrained him to keepe (Vntill he was restored home) the King Admetus sheepe. And for his Sonne disdainefully enuied Ioue his praise Ioue was the same Phisitions death that dead to life could raise: Whose same grew thus. As Aesculap an heardsman did espie, That did with easie fight enforce a Basiliske to flie. (Albeit naturally that Beast doth murther with the eye.) Apollos Sonne perceiuing him with Garland on his head, Imagins (as it was indeede) some hearb such vertue bred: And for a proofe, he caused him to cast the wreath away, When strait the beast her onely eyes the silly man did slay. Then Aesculap himselfe did take the wreath and puts it o, And by that meanes he ouercame the Basiliske anon. In hearbs that deeper force is hid then Science may containe I finde, sayd he, and hearb by hearb into his mouth did straine That lay for dead, an hearb at last reuiuing him agayne. Henceforth, men thought him more thē man, whē by his wondrous skill He rendred life to many like, so winning great good will. But as he waxed famous thus, he famous waxed proud,
Disdayning all, yea Ioue himselfe for Peere he disalowd: Vntill that Saturns angry Sonne reueng'd his pride by death: Correcting iustly each abuse, as Rector on the Earth. THe Sonnes renoune thus added grace, vnto the Fathers name, But shadowes waite on substances, and enuie followes fame. Euen Saturne, pompous Saturne, ridde by Iupiter of Foes And feare of Titan, did renewe his supersticious woes, As touching former Oracle: and hastie sommons sent Throughout his Realme to muster men, in purpose to preuent By death of Ioue his destinie. The men of Crete repinde To put on armour to his ill whom they had found so kinde: But will they, nill they, so they must, for so their King assignd. And Saturne with his armed troupes into Arcadia went, Where Iupiter, forewarned of his Fathers ill intent, Intreated peace, to him denide, so that perforce he must Defend him from his froward Sire, or rather foe vniust. Theare might ye see King Saturne fight like to a Lion wood, Whilest Iupiter did beare his blowes and spares his Fathers blood: And him that foe-like would him sley, he friendly did defend, Desiring Saturne to retyre, but wordes were to no end. The wilfull man pursuing blood, Ioue ceaseth to perswade, And rushing in amongst his foes so hote a skirmish made, That euery blowe sets blood abroch, and so in little space, Euen he who late he did entreat is followed now in chace By Arcas and his company: for Ioue resraind the flight, Because against his countrey men he had no will to fight. Whilest lucklesse Saturne did escape by flight and fortune then, And wandred long in vncouth Seas, depriude of wealth and men, Victorious Iupiter was crownde with glory King of Create: And Saturne, now ariude at Troy, for succour did entreat. Ganymedes, King Troys sonne, was sent in Saturnes ayde: A worthy Knight, and valiant warre to Iupiter he made.
But he and his were chased backe euen to their Citie walles, For whoso stoode with Iupiter, by Iupiter he falles. And theare the Troyan Paragon Ganymedes was taine, Twixt whome and Iupiter thenceforth sound friendship did remaine. Then Saturne did the second time to Seas with shame retire, And neuer after durst by warre against his sonne conspire: But sayling into lower Realmes, in Italie did dwell: And hereof it is said, his sonne did chase him into hell. MEane while, lesse ioyous of his fame then ielous of his freakes, Her wrong Queene Iuno on the Truls of Iupiter she wreakes. Which was the cause that, all too late, he (purposing returne To rescue Danae (in whose loue he amorously did burne) Was cast by stormes into the Seas, that forthwith tooke the name Of him whom for his Piracies Ioue vanquisht in the same. Ye might haue seene Aegeon theare, with wreakfull wrath inflamde At sight of Ioue, at whose decay he long in vaine had aimd. And how that Ioue had now the worst, and in a trise againe The Gyant with his twise three Barkes in hazard to be aine. The Centaures shew them valerous, so did Ixeon stout, And braue Ganymaedes did deale his balefull dole about: But when couragious Iupiter had beaten to the ground Aaegeon, and in the selfesame Chaynes wherein he often bound The harmelesse soules that crost those Seas, himselfe in fetters lay, Ye might haue sayd, and truly sayd, that then did end the fray. So many were his high exploits, whereof such wonder bread, That for the same the Heathen folke doe deifie him dead. Which since they are so manifold, I many ouerpasse: And though Amphitrio blush to heare how he deceiued was, And that Alcmena pinch my tongue, possest with bashfull shame, Yea though that Iupiter himselfe my lauish tongue shall blame, Yeat since that iealous Iuno knowes already of the same, I dare to tell how Iupiter so cunningly beguilde
His loue Alcmena, that by him she traueled with childe Of Hercules: whose famous Acts we orderly shall tell, Whereof the first, but not the least, in Cradle-time befell. CHAP. IIII. QVeene Iuno, not a little wroth against her hus∣bands crime, By whome shee was a Cockqueane made, did therefore at the time In which Alcmena cride for helpe to bring her fruit to light, Three nights and dayes inchaunt her throwes▪ and (of a Diuelish spight) Intended both the Ladies death and that wherewith she went: Till Galinthis vnwitching her did Iunos spels preuent. Howbeit cankered Iuno, still pursuing her intent, Two poysoned Serpents, got by charmes, into the chamber brought Where Hercules in cradle lay, and thinking to haue wrought A Tragedie, did let them loose: who smelling out their pray, Skaerd Hercules his brother that in selfe same cradle lay: But Hercules, as Children vse with little whelpes to play, Did dallie childishly with them, and no whit did dismay: Vntill at last his tender flesh did fecle their smarting stings, And then displeasd, betwixt his hands the Snakes to death he wrings. Amphitrio and the Thebanes all of this same wonder tell: And, yeeres permitting, Hercules did with Euristeus dwell. This King, by spitefull Iunos meanes, did set him taske on taske, But Hercules perfourmed more then both of them could aske.
Yea, yet a Lad, for Actiuenes the world did lack his like, To Wrestle, Ride, Run, Cast, or Shoote, to Swim, to Shift, or Strike, As witnes (his inuention first) those solemne actiue Plaies, That were on Mount Olimpus tride, where he had prick and praise. For which his Nouell, and himselfe (in those not hauing Peeres) The Graecians by th'Olimpides kept reckning of their yeeres. KIng Atlas daughters in the Isles of Hesperae did holde A many Sheepe: and Poets faine their fleeces were of Golde: (For rarenes then of Sheepe and Wooll in figures so they faine) Euristeus pricks his Puple on this nouile Prize to gaine. The Greekes applie their sweating Oares, and sailing doe persist Vntill they reach the wished shoare: where ready to resist Their entrance to the closed Isles an armed Giant stayd, Whose grim aspects at first approch made Hercules afraide. Now buckle they, and boysterous bloes they giue and take among: A cruell fight: But Hercules had victorie ere long. The Giant slaine, Philoctes tooke the vanquisher in hand: An harder taske had Hercules then pausing now to stand, Most dreadfull was their doubtfull fight, both lay about them round, Philoctes held the harder fight by keeping higher ground. The Sonne of Ioue perceauing well that prowesse not auail'd, Did faine to faint: the other thought that he in deed had quaild, And left th'aduantage of his ground, and fiercely smites his Foe: But Hercules, whose policie was to contriue it so, Renewing fight most eagerly, so strikes and strikes againe, That to endure the doubled force his valiant Foe had paine. Who, yeelding to his Victors will, did finde in him such grace, As Hercules did thenceforth vse his friendship in each place. Hesperides, the goodly Nimphs, their Keepers chaunce lament: But Hercules did comfort them, and cure their discontent: And shipping then of Rammes and Ewes a parcell thence he went.
IN coasting back by new-built Troy, he saw a monefull sort Of people, clustering round about their yet vnconquered Port. He musing much, and striking Saile, did boldlie aske wherefore They made such dole: Laomedon, then standing on the Shoare, Did tell the cause: the cause was thus. Laomedon ere than To reare the statelie walles of Troy (a costly worke) began, And wanting pay to finish vp the worke he had begunne, Of Neptunes and of Phoebus Priests (the Godes of Sea and Sunne) He borrowed money, promising repaiment of the same By certaine time which thereunto he did expresly name. The walles are built, the time is come, the Priests their money craue, Laomedon forsweares the debt, and naughtie language gaue. Forthwith the Sea (the Diuell then did many wonders showe) Began to swell, and much of Troy with violence ouerflowe: And thereupon the swealtie Sunne (the wastfull Sea retierd) So vehementlie did shine vpon the Oosie plashes myerd, That thereof noisome vapours rose, and of those vapours spread Such plagues, as scarce the liuing might giue buriall to the dead. Repentant then, their wretched king to diuell-god Delphos goes Where at the Oracle he knew his wrongs to cause such woes: And how the Gods of Sun and Seas, offended, doe require Each month a Virgin, to appease a seaish Monsters ire. Wherefore to saue their common weale, the Troyans did agree, One Virgin, as her Lot did light, should pay that monthlie fee. Now after many murdred Maids (for monthlie at one day, The fearefull Monster at the Port expects his wonted pray) The lot fell to Hesione the daughter of the King, Whom to the Port to be deuourd with teares the Troyans bring. When Hercules thus vnderstoode the hard occasion why The guiltles Lady should haue died, he purposing to trie His valiantnesse, (for what was it that Hercules would flie?) Did aske the King what gift should grow to him that should both free
His Daughter and his kingdome of that bloody monthly fee. The king, whom now a doubted hope of profered helpe made glad, Made promise of two milk-white Steedes as chiefest gemmes he had. Braue Hercules, whose ventrous heart did onely hunt for fame, Accepts th'assumpsit, and prepares the fiend-like fish to tame. Anone the dreadfull Diuell driues the Sea before his brest, And spitting mighty waues abrode, disgorgde from monstrous chest, Lifts vp his vgly head aboue the troubled waues to catch The trembling Lady, for which pray his yawning iawes did watch. But he, whose strength exceeded sense, with yron Club in fist, Did bootlesse long with brusing waight the boistrous Whale resist. The greater strokes, the fiercer was the monsters awlesse fight: So that the Greekes and Troyans all misdoubt their dreadlesse knight. Still Hercules did lay on load, and held the fight so long, That in the end the Sea retirde, and left the fish among The bared sands: and so for want of water, not of strength, Good fortune honours Hercules with victorie at length. Now when the King, his Troyans, and the Grecians had behild The substance of the vgly shape, euen dreadfull being kild, They bring the Champion to the towne with triumphs, gifts, & praise: And who but he belou'd in Troy, whiles that in Troy he stayes? Alone the King (a man no doubt predesinate to ill) Obseruing how his Subiects bore to Hercules good will, And fearing least their loue to him might turne himselfe to hate, And seeing now himselfe and land in prosperous estate, Vnfriendly did exclude his friend from out his City strong, Whilest with his Greekes he hunts abroad, mistrustlesse of such wrōg, And when the Champion and his men did from their sporte returne, Not onely did gain say in Troy that longer they soiourne, But also (impudent in guiles) withheld the Corsers twaine, Which Hercules so dearly wonne, in hazard to be slayne. Alemenas Sonne abashed then to finde so lewd a meede,
In lieu of well deserued loue was chollerick indeed: And made a vow (if life gaue leaue) he would such vengeance take On Troy, that euen the stones thereof for dread of him should quake, And that the liuing Troyans then should say, and iustly say, That they were happie whom the plague and Monster made away. And threatning so the trothlesse King did leaue the hated Port, And shortly did ariue at Thaebes, and feasts in Creons Court. THence brought he war and wrack to Troy, and in his armie Kings, And by the way Larnessus walles vnto the ground he flings, And setteth Tenedos on fire, whose fearefull flames espide, Gaue Sommons vnto carelesse Troy for worser to prouide. Before the Greekes had reached Troy, the Troyans by the way Did bid them battaile: many men on either part decay. The sounding armours crack with blows, whilest piercing arrows flie, This lyeth dead, that same is maimde, and more at poynt to die. Heads, armes, and armour flie about, and bodies swimme in blood, And fresh supplies did fall with them on whom they fighting stood. But Hercules, aboue the rest, bestird himselfe so well, That still before his balefull Club by Shocks the Troyans fell. Who, fainting now, seeke to retire into their fensiue towne: Where Hercules their Porter was, and rudely knockes them downe, Thus wonne he Troy, and sacked Troy, and Chanels flowed blood, Nor did he breath whilest any part of all the Citie stood, Saue stately Ileon. In the same a many Ladies weare, Whose piteous teares wrought Hercules that onely place to spare, As for the false Laomedon he secretly was fled And valiant Pryamus his sonne to Greece was captiue led.
CHAP. V. AT home returne, Queene Iuno craues his compa∣nie at Creat, Whom, there arriud, with hartlesse ioy his step∣dame did intreat. What? Hearest thou not my sonne (quoth she) how Argiue folke complaine Of Lions three, that in their fieldes both men and heardes haue slaine? All this she said, as knowing him to seeke such hard affaires: To win him to which desperate fight no Course nor cost she spares. When this was said, enough was said, and halfe was yet behinde When Hercules did vow redresse, and Iuno had her minde. He ioyes to heare of that exploit, such was his ventrous hart, And thanking Iuno for her newes, did so from thence depart. Philoctes now and Hercules in Nemea Forrest be, Long seeking what they could not finde, till, crying from a tree, An Heards-man said, friends shift away, or else come vp to me: Least that those cruell Lions three now ranging in this wood, Which haue deuourd those Heards I had, and with my Manies bloud Imbrud their fierce deuouring chappes, and forced me to clime This Tree, where I (vnhappie man) on leaues haue fed long time, May, all too soone, with tearing teeth destroy you in like case. The quaking Heards-man scarce had said thus much, when as a pace From out a Thick the Lions three on Hercules did run. Philoctes trustlesse of his Prowse, by climing did them shun, And now the Rampant Lions great, whose onely view would quaile
An hundred Knights, though armed well, did Hercules assaile, And sometimes with their churlish teeth and pinching pawes againe So grieuously indanger him, that neere he faints with paine. How beit (glorie checking griefe) he twaine had now dispatcht: The third, and dreadfulst of the three, though many a blow he catcht, Yet neither Club nor Sword had force to harme his hardned Hide, Vntill that (weapons laid apart) by strangling hands he dide. Not Hercules himselfe conceaud more ioy of this successe Then did Philoctes, who ere while did hope of nothing lesse. The Herds-man, poore Melorcus, like as Hercules him wild, Vncaest the Lions, fearing long to touch them being kild: And in his Cottage to the Knights a Countrey feast he hild. The Argiues, hearing of this deed, with Triumphs him intreate, And offer all: but leauing all he doth returne to Create: Whom glozing Iuno, gainst her minde, with cost did intertaine, And with a tongue repugnant quite to her malicious vaine Commends his deeds, whē rather she did wish he had been slaine. And therefore with an harder taske his labour did renew: But what was it that manhood might, and he would not pursue? IN Aegypt was a grieuous drought, the cause thereof vnknowen: Which to redresse, their Diuelish Gods and Oracle had showen. Doo offer vp strange bloud, they bid, and so auert our ire: Busiris, prone before to bloud, had now his hearts desire. No sooner Stranger toucht the shoare, but them the barbarous King To frie in flames before his Gods for Sactifice doth bring. Yea custome added worse to ill, his Subiect and his friend (When Strangers misse) supplie the flames, his murthers had no end. Howbeit, with these Butcheries the drought did still remaine: For in Busiris was the bloud that should redeeme the raine. The Gods did meane (which they not minde) that lewd Busiris he An Alien borne, that Stranger was, who dead, no drought should be. A Noble man of Iunos kin Busiris late had slaine,
For losse of whome the craftie Queene did often sorrowes faine. Cease (Madame) saieth Hercules, not long the time shall be, But I his tyrannie shall end, else it giue end to me. Her sorrowes did not tith her ioy, when he had giuen consent To vndertake that deathfull taske: for death was it she ment. Now Hercules in Aegypt meetes Busiris and his Crew, When sodainelie with maine assault on him the Giant flew: Supposing to haue dealt with him, as he had done before With other Strangers. Hercules alonely, and no more To take his part, with skathfull stroakes bestird his Club so well, In battering of the Tyrants bones, that strengthlesse downe he fell. Then did he kill and chase away his lewd and cruell traine, Till hearing of no further foe, he commeth backe againe, And taketh vp the wretched King, that cryeth out for ayde: And on the Altar, where himselfe had Strangers often layde, Himselfe was made a Sacrifice: and as his blood did staine The Altar, euen at that same time there fell a ioyfull raine. With ended drought, and Tyrants death, a common ioy befell, And all in Memphis entertaine the vnknowen Champion well: From thence returning back to Thaebes he there a while did dwell, KIng Creons Daughter Megara, at Thaebes he did espouse: To coūtenāce their wedding feast did wāt nor knights, nor prowse. Which triumphs ended, whē the knights should thence depart away, Pirithous to his wedding bids them all, and names the day Wherein to meete at Thessalie: to which did all consent, And at the time concluded of at Thessalie conuent. Amidst their cheere, the solemne feast the Centaures did disqueat: Whom by no meanes the Nobles there to patience might intreat. For they an hundred Gyants strong, with drinking whitled well, Amongst their cups, from words to blowes, and worser dealings fell: And (too outragious at the last, (fierce Eurytis their Guide) Vnreuerently they rauish thence Hippodame the Bride.
But Hercules not brooking it, to arme himselfe begunne, And all alone in rescue of the rapted Bride did runne. By this time did Ixeons Seede stand still in battell ray, When he, but one against them all, began a bloodie fray. Ech arrow that with ayming hand from sturdy Bow he sent, Did answere by the death of one the Sender his intent. Whilest Hercules with deadly bow had store of Centaures slaine, And, wanting arrowes, with their blood his valiant Club did staine, The Bridegroome and the other knights came to the ceasing fight, When all were soyld, excepting twelue that sau'd their liues by flight. Alonely Lycus yeelded him a prisoner, and liues, And liuing vnto Hercules much after-sorrow giues: But Nessus, that escaped then, in time him worser grieues. CHAP. VI. THe glory of this high attempt and sauing of the Bride They all ascribe to Hercules: and whilst they heere abide To exercise his Piracies, as Pluto King of Hell, (Such was the lewdnes of his life, and place where he did dwell, That hee and it were titled so) lay houering neere the shore, And saw the folke of Cicilie their Gods with rights adore, This rouing King, with armed Guardes of his disordered Crew Did come a land to make their Pray: but for, to outward view, They faine deuotion, none suspect the ill that did ensue,
Anon, a wreathing Garlands sweet hard at her mothers side, King Pluto sawe Proserpine, and liking whom he spide, Concluding with his companie how to conuay her thence, Betwixt his boistrous armes he tooke the faire and fearefull wench, And doo what the Cicilians might, he setteth her aboord: And to his giltie Sailes the Aire did gentle Gales afoord. A number eyes in Cicilie for her did weepe, in vaine: For her her Mother Ceres and her Loues mate did complaine, Her selfe (sweet Lady) of her moane did finde no meane, God wot, Though Dis to please did say and giue what might be said or got. Imbarked then, with him his Harpe did wofull Orpheus take, And to Molessa Plutos Realme with speedie Sailes did make: Where he, vnknowne, at gate of Hell did harp such Musick sweete, As lumpish Cerberus could not but shake his monstrous feete. His foule and warpt ill-fauoured face, ore-hung with cole-black haires, His horslike teeth, his lolling lips, his Doglike hanging eares, His hooked nose, his skowling eyes, his filthie knotted Beard, And what not in his vgly shape? but presently appeard More milder than his common moode, and lesser to be feard. This hellish Porter, deeming that such musick would delight His weeping Mistris, did conuay the Harper to her sight: Where Pluto swore by dreadfull Stix, if Orpheus did by play But make her laugh, what so he askt he should receiue for pay. Anon such Heauenly Harmonie on skilfull Harpe he plaid, That she her husbands musick knew, and ioyfull was she made. Now Orpheus did a watch-word giue, and she to laugh began: And for reward to haue from thence his wife he asked than. Although it gawled Plutoes soule his sweet-heart to forgo, Yeat for to quit him of his oath, he yeelds it shall be so, With this condition, that before they fully passed Hell, He should not backwards looke on her, what chance so ere befell. Now as they passe through blinde by-waies, he fearing least perchance She erre or lag, returnes a looke: and who should marke that glance
But Cerberus, that purposely for such aduantage waites: Who still detaining her, did shut her Husband out the gates. When Ceres heard of this mischance, she Cicill leaues anon, And knowing all the Knights of Greece to Thessalie were gone, She thether goes in hope of helpe: where presently she meetes With Thaeseus and Pirithous, whose salutings she regrectes. They wondring what the noble Queene of Cicill there should make: Become inquisitiue thereof: to whom sad Ceres spake First of Proserpine her greefe, and then of Plutoes guile: For her she weepes, on him she railes, and mooueth them meane while. The mother of false Dis his rape had more behinde vnsaid, When Aegeus and Ixions Sonnes did ioyntly offer aide. About the desert parts of Greece there is a valley lowe, To which the roaring waters fall that from the Mountaines flowe: So Rockes doe ouershadow it that scarce a man may vewe The open ayre: no Sun shines there: Amidst this darksome Mewe Doth stand a Citie, to the same belongs one onely Gate, But one at once may come thereto the entrance is so straite, Cut out the rough maine stonie Rocke: This Citie did belong To Pluto, and because that he was euer doing wrong, And kept a theeuish Rable that in mischiefes did excell, His Citizens were Diuels said, and Citie named Hell. When to this Cities ruthlesse gate were come the friendly Knights, Fierce Cerberus did rouse himselfe, and scarcely barking bites. He thought the world had lackt the man that thether durst repaire: And troth to say, not one till then to doo the like did dare. Now fiery sparks from thundering strokes in darke did giue thē light, And Ceres Champions valiantly maintaine their ventrous fight, When stout Pirithous, too too bold, a deadly wound he catcht, And Thaeseus, though Combattan-like he long the Helhound matcht, Yeat with his fellowe had he falne, and flying feares to cope, Expecting nothing lesse then life, but hap exceeded hope:
For Hercules at Thessalic did feare so hard euent: Whence lanching out, he made in showe as ifto Thaebes he went, But with Philoctes all his traine and Lycus home he sent: And he himselfe to aide his friends did to Molossa goe, Wheare, like as did his minde presage, he found it very so. For euen as currish Cerberus with gorie bloes did chace The wounded and the wearie Knight, came Hercules in place. An vnexpected happie sight to Theseus at that tide: Whom Cerberus forsaking then at Hercules he flide, Vpbraiding him with threatning words, and like himselfe did raue, And reacht him many a crabbed rap with his presumptious Glaue. The Danter then of Trespassers perceauing Theseus drie His grieuous wounds, and at his feete Pirithous dead to lie, Desirous to reuenge them both, laies lustie lode about, And with his still victorious Club did Cerberus so cloute, That, quite dismaid at such a match, he reeling to the ground, Did send from out his Doggish throat a loud and diuelish sound. But when the victor sure enough the vanquished had bound, He leauing Theseus weake without into the Cittie went: Whereas he found the wicked King and Citizens, that spent Their frutelesse time in vices foule, and dealings most vniust, As those that in their Porters strength reposed all their trust. With these did Hercules play Rex, and leauing Dis for dead, Not one escapes his deadly hand that dares to shewe his head. Whole thousands thē did breath their last, & who had seene the sight, Might well haue said it Hell indeede: for euerie thing out-right, Besides that sullen Mew it selfe, did giue a figure plaine Of selfe same Hell where damned Soules abide in endlesse paine. Saue howlings out & shuddering feare came nought to eare or sight, With grieuous grones of dying Ghosts: & so much more their spight, By how much more he found them then in pleasures and delight. This horror hanging, Hercules in buskling vp and downe
In Plutoes Pallace, to her ioy, Proserpine he found, And tolde her of enlargement thence: And then in harrowed Hell (Pyrithous buried) he, nor she, nor Theseus longer dwell: But, waying Anker with the Queene of Cicils Daughter went To Thessalie: where present greefes pretended ioyes preuent, For, hearing of Pyrithous death, not one but did lament. Hippodame (a Widowe now) especially bewailes Her ouer-hardie Husbands death: But weeping lesse preuailes Then did Reuenge: for Hercules vnto her doome commits Her greefes-Contriuer, Cerberus, almost besides his wits For feare of death his due desert: whome causing to be bound Both hands and feet, and to be dragd along the ragged ground, A knauish Skull of Boyes and Girles did pelt at him with stones, And laying on with staues and whippes did breake both flesh & bones WHen Hercules should passe to Hell, as hath before been said, And that Philoctes of his men he had Lieutenant made, And as Philoctes with his charge on Seas to Thaebes did passe, He met Androdamus, the King of Calcedon he was. Androdamus, not knowing yet his Cosen there inthralde, (For Lycus was his Cosen) to the Thaebane Pilots calde To Ken of whence and where they would. But ere the Thaebans might Giue answer, Lycus clogd with chaines on hatches stoode vpright And cride, Androdamus beholde and succour me thy friend, That shamefully, vnles thou helpe, am like my life to end. I Captiue am to Hercules, and thus to Thaebes must goe: Giue aide therefore. Androdamus deferres not dooing so, But setteth on Philoctes, that himselfe and Shippe defends, And part of Calcedons he slewe, and part to Sea he sends: But where the number tripled there for them the Battell ends. When Lycus was discharg'd of bands, and stout Philoctes bound, He tolde what skath the Centaures late in Thessalie had sound. Amongst the slaine he named some allied to the King:
For which the sauage Tyrant swore reuenge on Thaebes to bring. And sayling thence preuailed theare by comming vnawares: And putteth all to sacke and sword, nor olde nor young he spares. He slaieth Creon, and in holde faire Megara was cast: And leauing Lycus King in Thaebes, from Thaebes the Tyrant past. Whilest Lycus thus did Lord-it theare, the error of his eye Did vexe his heart: but Megara his lust did chastly flye. And Hercules by now had newes how things at Thaebes fell out, And how that Lycus theare was Lord, and none for him durst route. Disguised then he thither comes and to the Pallace went: Whom, whē the Porters would haue staide, his ragges he of did rēt, And showes himselfe like to himselfe, no bloe in vaine he spent That ses not breath or bloud abroch. This vprore Lycus heard, And thinking that some priuat Fray had falne amongst his Garde, Presuming that his presence would appease the growing heat, Did cast his haughtie armes abroad, as who would say, be queat, Or here am I that can aswell commaund it as intreat, Which Hercules so suddainelie chopt off, that (yet vnmist) He thinking to haue vsed Armes, was armeles ere he wist. Then Hercules, our Hercules is come, all Thaebes it cride, Now shake we off our seruile Yoke and follow him our guide: And so they did, till none were left to holde on Lycus side. The medly ended, Hercules did bring the Centaure bound To Prison: whereas Megara in miserie he found: (For Lycus, speedeles in his lust, against her so had frownde) Yea (more reuengefull) seeing her imbraced by his Foe, And hoping nothing lesse then life, to vexe them ere he goe He said: thou doatest ouermuch to entertaine that Whore, The falsest Ladie vnder Heauen, for let me liue no more, If Megara (I speake by proofe) imbraced so of thee, Hath not offended diuers waies, and common been to me.
Then Hercules supposing that his speeches had been true, Sweept off the lying Centaures head, and in that choller slewe (Too credulent) his guiltlesse wife: but dead her death did rue. FOr losse of her, and slaughtered friends, he vexed at the heart, Did then from Thaebes (an heaie man) to Forraine lands depart. Distressed in the Troyan Rhode he succour sought for pay: To which (his peoples triple plague) Laomedon said nay: And to prouide their second scourge saild Hercules away: For, comming back with Iasons Prize from Colchos, he complaines Of churlish King Laomedon, and so an armie gaines. At Troy the Greeksh Peeres and he did land their armed men: Whome to resist Laomedon did range his Battailes then. The Troyans they bestird them well, the Grecians stood not still, Laomedon fights valiantlie, and many a Greeke did kill: Till Hercules (disgesting ill to see his Foe pursue Such good successe) encounters him, whom easilie he slue. And hauing slaine the traiterous King he ceaseth not to die His Thaebian Club in phrigian bloud, till all began to flie. But with the Troyans, Telamon, and Hercules both twaine, And by their valour all the Greekes the gates and Citie gaine, And kill who so of Troy they caught, and rased to the ground The Citie, whilest that house by house, or stone on stone they found When ventrous Telamon, for that he entred first the gate, For Prize had faire Hesione, of Troy the latest fate: For priamus to quit her Rape, long after sent his Sonne To rauish Hellen from the Greekes: So thirdly warre begonne: Hesione the cause to Troy, and Hellen to the Greekes, And all did worke that Troyan Brute the Albian Climate seekes.
THE SECOND BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. VII. THe twise-sackt Towne the Grecians then did merrilie forsake, And Hercules for new affaires, did land in Aegypt take. There in a Porte hee did espie a Fleete of Shippes from farre, Well fraught with Men, Munition, and what else pertaines to warre. When Affer (he chiefe Captaine was of that same Fleete) did spie The Ensigns of the famous Greeke, he knew them by and by: And entertaining on his knees the Owner of the same, Reioyced to behold the man so honoured by fame. With Affer sailed Hercules to Lybia, to put downe The Gyant King Aniaeus, that had aided to the Crowne Of Aeypt, gainst th' Aegyptians willes, Busiris lately slaine By Hercules, in whose conduct the doubt not to obtaine. The taking land in Lybia now, and hauing in their sight The threatned Citie of the Foe, his Tents did Affer pght, And gits it with a sodaine Siege. The Giant then did shake His hideous head, and vow'd reuenge, yea sharpe reuenge to take. But isning out his Citie gates he ound the oe so hot,
That, notwithstanding such his bragges, the worst Antaeus got: For Hercules did canuase so his carkes, that at length He did retire himselfe and men, as trustlesse of his strength. His Libians slaine, and he not sound, Antaeus Truce did craue: For graunt whereof vnto his Foes meane time he victuals gaue: And whilest the Month of Truce did last, the Giant brused sore, Did heale his wounds, and to his part sollicits Aiders more, Meane while the Greeke to Mauritain did passe vnknowne of all, And theare in King Antaeus aide he found supplies not small: And for he looked souldier-like, they brought him to the King, Who offered pay: not so (quoth he) I meane an other thing, Discharge these Bands, or else will I discharge thee of thy breath, That all alone to thee and thine oppose me to the death. When Atlas knew him Hercules, that conquered of late The Iland which his daughters held, and brought to latest fate His Giant that defended them, and captuated than His friend Philoctes: he twixt feare and fiercenesse waxed vvan. And looke how fast the ratling haile vpon an house dooth fall, So fast they lay on Hercules, that holdeth wage gainst all. For as the Smith with Hammour beats his forged Mettall, so He dubs his Club about their pates and sleas them on a row. And whilest (not daring to looke downe) by heaps on him they flie, Some stumbling on the bodies dead are smoldred so and die: Some sliding in their slippery bloud, where with the place did swimme, Were strangled so: some others whilest disorderedly at him They freat and foyne, are crowded on by those that hindmost be, And with their weapons spoyle themselues and fellowes two or three: Some others with the wounding points of broken weapons die: And others daring with their Foe their bootles force to trie, Were in a moment slaine by him: and thus in little space, Without resistance Hercules had Lordship of the place: And, maugre swords or studied Starres, brought Atlas to the Seas, Whereas Philoctes did in time his pensiuenes appease,
And to his friend commends the Foe for bountie (which at last Himselfe did finde) and when as time his griefe had ouerpast, The same that for Astrologie the Skies support was said, In such his Science Hercules a perfect Artist made. The Month of Truce by this had end, and Hercules returnes To Affer, that incamped at the Lybian walles soiournes. A second battell then begonne: Antaeus like a Baer Bestires himselfe amongst his Foes, whilest Hercules did faer As roughly with contrarie bloes, till none to fight did daer: But humblie all submitting them subdued by his might, He gaue them grace, and staied theare to doe them law and right. Meane time Antaeus, lately fled, returnes from Mauritain, And with a mightie Troupe of Moores renewed fight againe: And all the Fields with Carcases of mangled men were filde, And numbers failed to the Moores that Hercules had kild. But when Antaeus saw his men to lessen more and more, Resoluing or to win the Spurres or lose himselfe therefore, He makes a bloudie glade vntill the Thaebane he espide, And finding him: bestowe on me thy bloes, the Giant cride, That am both able to endure and to repay the same, A Flie is not an Eagles praie, nor Mouse a Lyons game: My death might countenance thy deedes (if that it so would be) But make account that I anon will triumph ouer thee. In saying which he smites his Foe, perfourming wondrous might: And bodie vnto bodie they with equall dammage fight. But Hercules disdaining that so long Antaeus standes With him in combat, griping him betwixt his angrie handes, Did crush his Carkasse in the ayre that life did leaue him so: And thus did reape a Monarchie, and rid a mightie Foe. Then Hercules (Antaeus dead) with ease he ouercame All Lybia with Prouinces and Kingdomes of the same, And maketh ffer King of all that beares the Donees name.
IN expedition of which warre when Hercules would dwell No longer time, but purposed to bid his friends farewell, A warlike wench, an Amazon, salutes him by his name, And said: know Hercules (if it thou knowest not by same) How that the Scythian Ladies, late expeld their natiue Land By King of Aegypt, haue contriu'd amongst themselues a bande, And with the same haue conquered all Asia, Aegypt, and All Cappadocia: Now for that we, Victors, vnderstand The Africanes are our Allies, we minding to proceed In further Conquests, tendring them, haue therefore thus decreed: That you two Champions shall elect, and we will also send Two Ladies, that for victorie shall with your Knights contend: And if your Champions vanquish ours, then we will tribute pay, But if that ours doe vanquish yours, then you shall vs obay. But hope not so, more profite giues our bountie then our bloes, And vninforced tribute may procure your friendly Foes. Then Hercules, admiring much the Chalengers, did yeeld Two aduerse Knights the morrow next should meet them in the field And mounted well on Corsers twaine next light by dawne of day Into the Listes came Hercules and Theseus: Mid the way Vpon a brace of milke white Steedes the two Viragoes meete The Knights, and each the other did with ciuill Congies greete. Then either parte retiring backe began to make their race, And couching well their valiant Speares did run a wondrous pace. With Menalippe Hercules the fight did vndertake, And Theseus with Hippolite did his Encounter make. They meeting, either part both Horse and load to ground were cast, Whereat the Africanes did muse, and Scythians were agast. Vnhorsed thus, disdainefully each Knight defendant tooke it: And either Ladie so disgrac'd as scornefully did brooke it. Then settle they to handy Armes, the which was long and fierce, And with their cutting weapons did both Helms and Harnesse pierce. But Hercules, though neuer matcht so hardie in his life,
Disarmes at length his Scythian Taske, and ended was their strife. But Theseus with his Combattesse in doubtfull battell fights, Till, blushing at the Maidens blowes, he checks his mending sprights: And laid so hardlie to her charge, not able to sustaine His fresh-got force, that he also the second Prize did gaine. Antiope, a third vnto those warlike Sisters twaine, Beholding how sinisterly the double fight had past, Makes sorow, whilst the Africanes reioice for it as fast. The Scythians to the Africanes did homage then, and pray Their Ladies might be raunsomed. That sute did Theseus stay, For he through launce, his Foe through loue went victoresse away. And therefore when th' Athenian Knight and Amazon were matcht In mariage, Menalippe then from durance was dispatcht. And Hercules (then which to him no greater prize could be) Had Queene Antiope her Bealt and armour for his fee, And sets the dames of Thermodon from other raunsome free. And Theseus with Hippolite at Athens landing takes, And Hercules to Calidon a Dismall viage makes. THeare did King Oeneus bounteously receaue so great a Guest: Where scarcely had he any time from passed toiles to rest, But that proud Achelous sent Ambassadors to knowe If that King Oeneus on him his daughter would bestowe, If not, to threaten wreakfull warres: which much abasht the King, Till Hercules, who then was come about the selfe same thing, (For loue to Deianira both competitors did bring) Expelled feare by offring aide to backe him from the Foe, By meanes whereof vnsatisfide awaye the Legats goe. The Tyrant Achelous then, with all Epirus force Inuades the bounds of Calidon, and spoyls without remorse. But Hercules he leading forth his Armie got the day, And well was he amongst his foes that fastest ran away. They and their King, with hard escape, inmure themselues at length
Within a Castle neere the Sea, an Hold of wonderous strength. The Thaebane then, as resolute to spoyle both Foe and Fort, Did burne his foes forsaken shippes, left riding in the Port, And with a fewe besets the hold. When Achelous he So slender watch about the walles of Enemies did see, He scorned that so weake a siege should pen him vp so straight, Who hauing ten for one of them, did issue out the Gate Against the Greekas, that willingly his comming did awaite. Espying Hercules, he cride, lo yond same diuell is he That droue vs out of Calidon, who so of mine he be That aieth him, shalbe inricht with great rewards by me. But he that made such offers large, did offer them in vaine: For when his men saw Hercules approching them amaine With fierie eyes, and angrie lookes, and dreadfull Club in fist, They thought it needles to assaile, and booteles to resiste, And euerie man retired backe into the holde againe, Wheare many dayes, attempting flight, they cowardly remaine. From warre at length they fell to wieles. There lay vpon the shore A broken Hoy, that bad not brookt the Seas of long before, The Mast they boring full of holes, in euerie hole did sticke A burning Torch, and lancht it out in night when clouds were thick. No sooner was the fierie keele a floate vpon the waues, And that the Greekes espyed it, but ech man rashly craues The viewing of so strange a sight. But Hercules did smell The presupposed Stratagem, and raung'd his armie well, And marching neere the guilefull light, did finde ambushment theare That playing on aduantage thus (preuented though) appeare. Occasion hapning, Hercules would not omit the same, But tooke them as he found them now, and fights it out by aime. When Achelous he beheld his guile by guile to faile, Wel might he chafe, but harder chaunce his courage might not quaile: For looke how fierce and boisterouslie a chafed Bull doth fight, So Achelous lustilie on either side did smite:
And by his only prowesse then a many Knights were slaine, Whilest Hercules with like successe his Opposits did paine. And now, by chance, amidst the brunt the valiant Woers twaine Doe single, and togethers tug, and as two Lions strong Each one desiring others bloud did hold a Combate long. King Achelous minding her for whom began that broyle, To Conquer where he did contend, annexed hope to toyle: Almenas Sonne remembring too whose cause he did defend, Euen hers on whom his being and his very soule depend, So chargd his Contrarie with knocks, and vsd his Club so well, That vanquished (though valerous) King Achelous fell. Th' Epirotes when they saw their King a Captiue led away, Their hearts were doone: and Hercules subdued them ere day: And Achelous in exile did end his latter dayes: And all Aetolia was fild with Hercules his praise, To whom the King did giue to Wife faire Deianira, shee The pleasing prise of that his prowse, and dearelie earned Fee, Who after, of her owne decaye, and his, the meane should bee. The Centaure Nessus was the man that made her erre so much: Of which her error, but his sinne, the circumstance is such. CHAP. VIII. WHen ouer deepe Euenus Foord the passage did not fit, This Giant, of a Stature tall, did offer helpe to it: And Hercules, forgetting him (for at the Centaures Fray The same vnslaine, but not vnskard, escaped then a∣way) pray him to the farther shoare with Deianire to waide,
And so he did, whilst Hercules this side the Riuer staid. When Iunos Breed on farther bankes his Passenger had set, The lust and long conceaued grudge to foule reuenge did whet: Not Deianira could auoid a Rape, or little lesse: Or Hercules, disioynd by Foord, giue aide to her distresse. One while, contrarie to himselfe, full humbly he intreates, Anon, like Hercules indeede, he did commaund with threates. But first nor latter might preuaile, for Nessus halde her thence. I may not follow, nor in flight is (Centaure) thy defence Said Hercules. His deeds approue his latter saying true, For letting flie a fatall Shaft the Rauisher he slue. And though the arrow galled him euen at the very heart, Yeat for a while he did indure the not induring smart. And hauing brought his trembling Rape into a vallie, said: See Deianira how thy Loue an end of me hath made: Yeat is my death lesse griefe to me, then that thou shouldst bestow Thy selfe on such a changing Churle as Hercules: I know (Sweete Wench I know) he dooth preferre contrarie Loues to thee, Wherefore my graue (the lesse my griefe) in this thy good shall be. Take this (he gaue a folded cloth, and to the baene therein He mixed somewhat of his bloud) this same (quoth he) shall win To thee again thy Husbands loue, when he shall it estrange: For out of doubt, I know it I, he takes delight in change. When thou suspectest such a wrong, doe boyle a shirt with this: No sooner shall he weare the same (herein such vertue is) But that his nouell Loue will change and fall whence it did flie: Meane while doe not the vnction touch, least so the vertue die. In all this time betwixt his armes he did the Ladie claspe, And hild her so, as Hawke a Pray, vntill his latest gaspe. Then leauing him a liuelesse Coarse, mistrusting nought his drift, She meaning simply, tooke with her the traitours poysned gift. And Hercules by this had past the Riuer deepe and wide: Who (Deianira first imbrast) drew from the Centaures side
The fatall Shaft that should the death of braue Achilles proue, In Phoebus Church, by Paris hand, for Polixenas loue. THe Centaure left vntoombed there, Hee, Shee, and all their traine are come to Lerna, whom the King did noblie entertaine. Theare had he from their common teares the cruell hauock made By Lernan Hydra, whom in Fenne not armies durst inuade. His vpper parts had humane forme, his nether Serpentine, The whole was monstrous, yeat his wit more monstrous, but most fine (For wit is moustrous when the same from vertue doth decline.) Such were his subtill arguments, and still supplies therein, That he by often losse of heads was fained heads to winne: And wittie thus to others wrong confounded all hee found, Propounding questions, and a word vnanswered was a wound. The Scourge of Tyrants hearing this, did promise death or ayde, Whilst fearefull Deianira did the contrarie perswade. But womans speech from weapons vse might not withdraw him then, Til entring Palus, he had rousd the Monster from his Denne. Disdainfully did Hydra take the presence of his Foe, And after subtill arguments to sturdie fight they goe. Two blowes at once with Glaue and Taile made Hercules to reele: Who since he first had vsed armes the like did neuer feele. Not long he borrowed had the Loan, but Hydra had the like: So either twaine repaye their debt, and neither faintly strike. But who might stand with Hercules? By him the monster fell: Who, burning vp his vgly shape did passe his soule to hell: Which happie fate of Hydras fall left Lerna glad and well. From whence to Athens, and from thence to Lycia did he saile, Then to Hesperia Gerions Realme his outrages to quaile. HE by his triple tyrannie (for Gerion he was said three headed, in respect that him three other Giants aid) So spoild and plag'd ye neighbour Realmes with daily wrongs & war,
That all the force of Africa his furie could not barre. In Gadira when Hercules his Pillers reared had, The which (our westerne world not knowne) men farther land forbad, Then with victorious ships he sets on Gerions chased Fleet: And secondly at Megida did either armie meete. Theare Gerion with his brothers twaine the Citie did beset, And scornefullie aduance themselues as men not to be met. Prouiding therefore murall workes, they threaten hot assault: Whilest Hercules contrarie warres vnto his souldiers taught. The Gates wide opned, out he comes vnto the Giants three, Your men, he said, are well at worke, well met are also wee. This lesse then monster more than man, a Fiende in humane shape The Spanyard said, is he from whom I made so hard escape. Yet hardlier shalt thou now escape, said Hercules, and than Betweene them foure, three to one, A cruell fight began. And euery of the Giants thought himselfe an ouer-match To Hercules, who almost gaue to one a quick dispatch, The second he dispatcht in deed, who fell his latest fall. Then thousands came to rescue them yeat, one, he fights gainst all: Till Theseus with the other knights did march their Armie out, And ioyne to him, their Foes with them, and all make battaile stout. Then Gerions brother fights againe, and both did bathe in bloud, It was no fighting where they fought, or standing where they stood. King Meleus, Theseus, Hispan, and Philoctes did no lesse: But soueraignlie the sonne of Ioue bestird him in the presse. The Giant, Gerions brother, then by him did breath his last, And Gerion did retire his men into their Gallies fast, But where they land, theare Hercules wonne landing, though he past The Pikes withstanding thousand Swords, & warding thousand slings Himselfe alone, ere that his men to fight on Shore he brings. Then Gerion, cursing heauen & earth, bestirre ye friends he cride, Now is the time to liue or die, let good or bad betide,
Doe liue as men, or die as men, see tenne we are for one, What lets vs then from victorie, that victors haue beene knowne? Reuenge your selues, reuenge your friends, reuenge our cōmō mone. Nor did he shrinke from what he said, or said not as he wrought: His onely deeds were manies death: Till Hercules he sought, Whome singling, after combat long, of him his end he cought: So to subiection Hespera by Hercules was brought. NO better Spanish Cacus sped, for all his wondrous strength, Whom Hercules from out his Realme debelled at the length. A richer King or Tyrant worse liu'd not in any Land, Nor any one gainst Hercules in hardier fight did stand. Yeat chased by his Conqueror he was inforc'd to flie Vpto a Mountain in those parts: where as, at poynt to die Through famine, by his Magicke Arte he made the Mountaine flame, And by that shift escapt his Foe, long wondring at the same. Then fled the Giant night and day (for feare did lend him wings) And as about from place to place the wandring Tyrant flings, He on a Mount in Italie cal'd Auentine did light, Where laboured Cacus did repose his wearied limmes all night. In this same Hill he found a Caue, which fitting place espide, He did resolue in secrecie thenceforth himselfe to hide In that same Mount from sight of men: and being theare alone, That words at least might vent his woes he maketh thus his mone. Ah wretch (quoth he) no longer King, that title now must change, Thou late were fearfull vnto all, now fearing all must range. This ragged Caue must now suffice in stead of Royall seat, And though (alas) the place should please, yet want I what to eat. Where be my solemne banquets now? where is my stately traine? My Tributes? nay my proper Goods? or doe my friends remaine? Not one I feare: proud wealth was such, that now in time of need I knowe not where to seeke a friend in any hope to speede.
And yeat despaire not, Picus liues, indebted much to me For great good turnes: to him I will ere here I setled be. Thus droue he foorth the dismall night, and vp by peepe of day He sped him vnto Calabrie, for there King Picus lay. His daughters three of long before, and still did loue him well: And, whether with the kings consent, or not, it so befell He took them all to Auentin, and there with him they dwell. About his boisterous neck full oft their daintie armes they cast, Still plying him with kisses sweet, no sport was ouer-past That Cacus would, & they might worke: and more, their custome was By pleasant tales in order told the wearie times to passe. And once especially it was concluded on a row That each of them should tell her tale, the first beginning so. CHAP. IX. KIng Aganippus ere his death had with his Lords decreed His only daughter Daphles should in Empire him succeed. A fairer Ladie liu'd not then, and now her like doth lack, And nature, thinke I, neuer will a second She compact. The King intombed, Daphles of his Scepter was possest: And one there was, a Noble man, that could it not disgest. Who (for he was of fame and force) did bid her battaile, and In doubtfull end of victorie their ciuill quarrels stand. At length the Argiue Maiden Queene she Doracles subdued:
But (Cacus) of this Stratagem a Tragedie ensued. Now Loues, not Launces came in vre, the man that lost the day, And lies in Chaines, left her in cares: her Conquest was his pray. Full often did she blame her selfe for louing him her Foe, But oftner thought she it more blame not to haue erred so. Thus whom in Campe she loathed late, in chaines she loued now, And thought him sure, because so sure. To Princes prisoners bow Thinks she: and watching fitting time, vnto the Prison went, Where at the dore of such his Lodge a many teares she spent. But entring, when her eyes beheld the Image of her hart, To her still peerelesse, though his bands had altred him in part, She casting downe her bashfull eyes stood senceles then a space, Yeat what her tonguelesse loue adiornd was extant in her face: And now the Goaler left to her the Prisoner and the place. Then, cheering carefull Doracles, let it suffice (quoth shee) That I repent me of thy bands, and frankly set thee free. And let that Grace grace-out the rest, for more remaines behind Then, being said, may decent seeme to such as faults will find. My selfe, my Land, my Loue, my life, and all what so is mine Possesse: yet loue, and saue my life, that now haue saued thine. Then sownes She at his sullen feete, that yet abode in thrall: Which to auoid, he faintly rubs his Liuer on his gall: And with his hand, not with his heart, did reare her sinking downe, And faining to approue her Choise, had promise of the Crowne. But neither Crowne, nor Countries care, nor She (worth all the rest) Nor grace, nor dutie, reconcile whom enuie had possest. No sooner was he got at large, and wealth suppli'd his lack, But he to seeke her ouerthrow to forren aids did pack. Demaund not how the wronged Queene disgested such her wrong, But aske if she, the tidings tolde, to heare them liu'd so long. She liu'd in deede, yet sowned oft, and sowning ouerpast, From her mistempered head she teares her louely Tresses fast. And beateth on her Iuorie brests, and casts her on the ground,
And wrings her hands, and scricheth out, and flingeth vp and downe. Her Ladies pittying her distresse had got their Queene to rest: From whenceforth outward signes & sighs her inward griefe exprest, Her sparing Diet, seldome sleepe, her silence, and what not? Had framd her now right Louer-like, when thus to him she wrot. WHat fault of mine hath causd thy flight doth rest in cloudes to me, But faultles haue I heard of none, and faultie may I be. Yet not my Scepter, but my selfe, haue kingly Suters sought: Did all amisse, saue thou alone, that settest both at nought? At nought, said I? Yea well I said, because so easly cought. One crime but cite, and I for it will shead a million teares: And to be penitent of faults with it a pardon beares. Ah, Doracles, if our extreames, thy malice and my loue, The formers euer ill shall not the latters good remoue. I heare thou doest frequent the warres, and war thou wilt with mee, Forgetfull that my Argiue men impatient Warriours bee: Sweet, hassard not the same to sword that Loue doth warrant thee. Ech Speare that shal but crosse thy Helme hath force to craese my hart: But if thou bleede, of that thy blood my fainting soule hath part. With thee I liue, with thee I dye, with thee I loose or gaine, Liue safe therefore, for in thy life consists the liues of twaine. Most wisely valiant are those men that backe their armed Steeds In beaten Paths, ore boorded Tylthes to break their staffe-like Reeds: Wheare not the dint of wounding Launce, but some deuise of loue, Sans danger, hath sufficient wait their manhoods to approue. Wheare braue Aspects of louely Dames Tantara to the fight, Whose forms perhaps are weg'd in harts, whē Fauours wag in sight, Whearas the Victors Prize is praise, and Trumpets sound ech blow, Wheare all is well, that seemes but well, in courage or in show. Wheare Ladies doffe their Champions Helmes, and kisse wheare Bea∣uers hid, And parlie vnder Canapies how well or ill they did. Retire therefore, sweet heart retire: or, if thou wilt be arm'd,
Then fight as these where all things make that all escape vnharm'd. Such manhood is a merriment: things present are regarded: Not thousand drammes of bloud in warre, one drop is here rewarded. In few, the warres are full of woes, but here euen words of warre Haue brauer grace thē works thēselues, for Courts frō Campes be far. Than are the valiāt, who more vaine? Than Cowards who more wise? Not men that trauell Pegasus, but Fortunes fooles doe rise. Me thinks I see how churlish lookes estrange thy cheerefull face, Me thinks thy gestures, talke, & gate, haue changd their wonted grace: Me thinks thy sometimes nimble Limbs with armour now are lame: Me thinks I see how scars deforme where Swords before did maime: I see thee faint with Summers heat, and droup with winters cold: I see thee not the same thou art, for young thou seemest old: I see not, but my soule doth feare, in fight thou art too bold: I sorrow, lastly, to haue seene whom now I wish to see, Because I seeloues Oratresse pleads tediously to thee. If words, nor weepings, loue, nor lines, if ease, nor toyle in fight, May waine thee from a pleasing ill, yet come thou to my sight: Perchance my presence may disswade, or partnership delight. But wo am I, dead paper pleads, a senceles thing of woe: It cannot weepe, nor wring the hands, but say that she did so: And saieth so vncredited, or if, then thought of corse: Thus thus, because not passionate, to paper failes remorse. O that my griefes, my sighes, and teares, might muster to thy viewe, Thē woes, not words. thē paine, not pē, should vouch my writing true. Yeat fare thou well, whose fare-well brings such fare-ill vnto me: Thy fare-well lacks a welcome home, and welcome shalt thou be. These lines, subscribed with her name, when Doracles did viewe, He was so far from liking them, that loathing did ensue. And, least that hope should ease her heart, or he not seeme vnkinde, In written Tables he to her returned thus his minde. The Bees of Hybla beare, besides sweet hony smarting stings, And beautie doth not want a baite that to repentance brings.
Cōtent thee, Daphles, Mooles take mads, but mē know Mooles to catch, And euer wakes the Dawlian bird to ward the sloe-wormes watch. I haue perus'd, I wot not what, a scrole, forsooth, of loue, As if to Dirus in his Tent should Cupid cast his gloue. A challenge proper to such Sottes as you would make of me, But I disdaine to talke of Loue, much more in Loue to be. Nor thinke a Queene, in case of Loue, shall tie me to consent, But holde the contrarie more true, and it no consequent. For persons must in passions iumpe, els Loue it proueth lame: Nor thinke I of a Womans graunt, but as a Woers game. Your Sex withstands not place and speach: for be she baese or hie, A Womans eye doth guide her wit, and not her wit her eye. Then senceles is he, hauing speach, that bids not for the best: Euen Carters Malkings will disdaine when Gentrie will disgest. The better match the brauer Mart, and willinger is sought: And willing sute hath best euent: so Vulcan Venus cought. I argue not of her estate, but set my Rest on this. That opportunitie can win the coyest She that is. Then he that rubs her gamesome vaine, and tempers toyes with Arte, Brings loue that swimmeth at her eyes, to diue into her hart. But since the best, at best, is bad, a Shrow or els a Sheepe, Iust none at all are best of all, and I from all will keepe. Admit I come, and come I then because I come to thee? No, when I come, my comming is contrarie sights to see. My leasure serues me not to loue till fish as haggards flie, Till Sea shall flame, till Sunne shall freese, tyll mortall men not die, And Rriuers, climing vp their bankes, shall leaue their channels dry. When these shall be, and I not be, then may I chance to Loue, And then the strangest change will be that I a Louer proue. Let Beuers hide, not busses hurt, my lips, for lips vnfit: Let skarred limbes, not carefull Loues, to honor, honor get. I skorne a face effeminate, but hate his bastarde minde That, borne a man, prepostrously by Arte doth alter kinde:
With fingers, Ladie-like, with lockes, with lookes, and gauds in print, With fashions barbing formeles beards, and robes that brooke no lint, With Speare in wrest, like painted Mars, frō thought of battaile free, With gate, and grace, and euery gaude, so womanly to see, As not in nature, but in name, their manhood seemes to bee. Yea sooner then that maiden heares bud on his Boyish chinne The furie of the fierie God doth in the foole beginne. And yeat to winne, whō would be wonne, these woo with lesser speed, Then might be wun a towne of warre, the croppe not worth the seede. But let them trauaile till they tire, and then be ridde for Iaides, If Gamesters faire, if Souldiers milde, or Louers true of Maides: Who loue in sporte, or leaue in spight, or if they stoupe to luer, Their kindnes must haue kindely vse: faultes onely make them suer. Did fancie? no, did furie? yea, hang vp the Thracian Maide. The wonders seuen should then be eyght, could loue thee so perswade. But loue or hate, fare ill or well: I force not of thy fare: My welcome, which thou doest pretend, shall proue a thankelesse care. When Daphles heard him so vnkind, she held her selfe accurst: And little lacked of so well but that her heart did burst. And wheare she read the churlish scrole, she fell into a sowne, But, brought againe, vpon a bed her selfe she casteth downe, Not rising more: and so her loue and life together end: Or (if I so may gesse) in death her soule did liue his friend. The Queene enterr'd, and Obbit kept (as she in charge did giue) A Knight was shipt to Calidon, wheare Doracles did liue, To offer him, as her bequest, the Argiue Throne and Crowne. Not that we force, or feare (quoth he) thy fauour or thy frowne We moue this peace, or make thee Prince, but Daphles swore vs so, Who louing more then thou couldst hate, nor liu'd nor died thy Foe. And is she dead (quoth Doracles) that liued to my wrong? I gladly doe accept these newes, expected-for of long. The Lord and Legate were imbarkt, and Ship ran vnder saile, Vntill into the Argiue Strond the Mariners did haile.
To Daphles, by adoption, theare inthronized a King, He diuers yeares good fortune had successiue in each thing, All friends, no Foes, all wealth no want, still peace, and neuer strife, And what might seeme an earthly Heauen to Doracles was rife. A Subiect, but a Noble man, did ritchly feast the King: And after meat presented him with many a sight and thing. Theare was a chamber in the which, portraied to the quick, The Picture of Queene Daphles was: and deepely did it prick The King his conscience, and he thought her like did not remaine: So, whome her person could not pearce, her Picture now did paine. A Kissing Cupid, breathing loue into her breast, did hide Her wandring eies, whilst to her heart his hand a Death did guide: Non moerens morior, for the Mott, inchased was beside. Her curtesie and his contempt he calleth then to minde, And of her beautie in himselfe he did a Chaos finde. Recalling eke his late degree, and reckning his desart, He could not think (or faintly thought) his loue to sterne her heart: And to the Maker of the feast did such his thoughtes impart. And doubtes your Grace the Feaster said, if Daphles lou'd or no? I wish (I hope I wish no harme) she had not loued so, Or you not loathed as you did: then she had liued yet: To what her latest speach did tend I neuer shall forget. My selfe, with diuers noble men whose teares bewraid our care Was present, when her dying tongue of you did thus declare. My hap (quoth she) is simpley bad that cannot haue, nor hope: Was euer wretch (I wretch except) held to so skant a scope. I see him roue at other markes, and I vnmarkt to be: I finde my fault, but followe it, whilest death doth followe me. Ah death (my Lords) dispaire is death, and death must ransome blisse, Such Ransome pleaseth Doracles and Daphles Pliant is. Not bootlesse then (since breathles strait) sweet Loue doth flames con∣triue, The which shall burne me vp at once that now doe burne aliue.
Alas (then did she pause in teares) that Doracles were by, To take it from his eyes, not eares, that I for him doe die: At least, perhaps, he would confesse my loue to be no lie. But (Want wit I) offensiue sights to Doracles I craue: Long liue, deare Hart, not minding me, when I am laid in graue. And you (my Lords) by those same Goddes whose sight I hope anon, I coniure, that ye him inuest your King when I am gon. Alonely say I liu'd and died to him a Louer true, And that my parting Ghost did sound, sweete Doracles adue. A sigh concluding such her words, she closed vp her eye: Not one of vs, beholding it, that seemed not to die. Thus to your Grace I leaue to gesse how tragick Daphles died: In Loue, my Lord, yea louing you, that her of Loue denied. The Picture, and this same discourse afford sufficient woe To him, that maimed in his minde did to his Pallace goe. Theare Doracles did set abroach a world of things forgot: What meanest thou man? ah frantick man, how art thou ouershot (He said) to hate the substance then, and loue the shadow now, Her painted board, whose amorous hart did breake whilst I not bow? And couldst thou, churlish wretch, cōtemne the loue of such a Queene? O Gods, I graunt for such contempt I iustly bide your teene. Her onely beautie (worthy Ioue, that now on me hath power) Was worthie of farre worthier Loue, without a further dower. But gaze thou on her senceles Signe, whose selfe thou madest thy pray, And gazing perish: for thy life is debt to her decay. Time going on, greefe it grewe on, of dolour sprung dispaire, When Doracles to Daphles Tombe did secretly repaire: Theare (teares a preface to the rest) these onely words he spake: Thy Loue was losse, for losse my life in recompence doe take, Deare Daphles. So a daggers stab a Tragedie did make. Well did this Tragicke matter sort to Cacus Tragicke vaine: But merrier matter did behoue such humour to restraine.
That knew the second Sister well, who, smiling ere she spake, Began her turne, and of her Tale the next report I make. CHAP. X. A Proper Lad made Loue (quoth she) vnto a pretie Lasse: In self-same house, for-worne with age, this Mai∣dens Grandame was. Her eyes were sunck into her head, her cheekes were leane and lank, Out stood her chin, into her mouth her blood∣lesse lips they sanke, Her toothlesse chappes disgracst her tongue in telling of a Tale, And sucke she might a Teat for teeth, and spoonage too did faile, Her haire since sixtie yeares not blacke, was now or white or none, The substance of her wrinkled face was only skin and bone, Dimme were her eyes, deafe were her eares, tanke smelt it shee could sent, A Palsie made her feeling cease, downe tastlesse food it went. Sight, hearing, sent, touch, tast, and all, thus failing with her strength, She to her chamber, bed, and chaire, betooke her at the length. But gold is lou'd till graue hath lodg'd, her bags and she were one: And she must giue the Maidens Dowre, or els her Dowre is none. The young man, though he lou'd the Maid, on whom no loue was lost, Yeat did he loue to liue, and knew that marriage asketh cost. The olde wiues bags did let the Banes: with whom he smoothed so, That flattered, she fantised, her moldie braines did cro. What Diuel I wote not made her dote, she doted on the man: Her rotten trunke and rustie face she finified than: And seeth what she could not see, her senslesse Senses worke,
And vnderneath a wrinckled hide a wanton heart did lurke. Vnkindly too she kisses gaue, which he did kindly take, Supposing that her kindnes was but for the Maidens sake. Her crooked ioynts, which long ere then supported, scarcely stood, She brought vnto a wallowing pace, disiellowing so her bloud: And all for loue (surreuerence Loue) did make her chew the cudde. Young Battus from his Omphida (for they were named so) Dislodged by the Grandame long, to worke did roundly goe: Desiring both the Maiden, and to marrie her a Dower. The old-wife, netled at his words, for all her loue did lower, And drying vp what drained out in belching, thus did say: The thing (friend Battus) you demaund I gladly not denay, But well you wot that I am old, and yeat not all so old, But that the remnant of my life may spend the wealth I holde. As all are neerest to themselues, so to my selfe am I: And all shall lacke ere I will lacke: store is no sore we trie. If you doe like of Omphida, I also like the match: Loue hath no lacke, ye both are young, wealth comes to such as watch. You louing her, she to her selfe a dowrie is, if not, My money shall not sell the Maid, a sinfull sale God wot: For money shall not sell my selfe. And yeat I cannot see, But that a comfort to mine age an honest match would be. My Goods besides doe want a Guide, and often did I know Your youngers vpon elder wiues then I themselues bestow, And liued well, and loued well. But as I doe not care For mariage, so an honest match I neuer will forsweare. Well, Battus, take you Omphida: but if you money craue, My bagges must onely vent to him whome I my selfe shall haue. Yeat thinke not I mislike of you in that you haue not sped, But thinke I wish no better match, if I my selfe should wed. Thus cunningly she closde with him, and he conceaues her thought: Vnequall was the Combat then that Loue and Lucar wrought. The one was in her flowring age, the other to too old:
The first with beautie did allure, the latter with her Gold. But stormes (thought Battus) haue their stops, not long the Croen can liue, Or if my kindenes length her life, my kindenes God forgiue. Reso luing therefore on such hope, with easie sute he got Assurance to be wedded to the old deformed Trot. Medea charmed Aeson yong, Battus Medea-like, Did worke no lesse a euer vpon this vaine vnweldie Tyke. Now on the bridle played she: yeat as she laughes she lookes With ielious eyes, if Omphida be blotted out his bookes. Yea she that could not moue before, now crauleth euery wheare, To prye if Battus play not false, and cause there was to feare. But all this while no mariage was, nor witnes of their match: And well he knewe that widdowes shrinke, if men forslowe dispatch. So hasting what she hindred not, come was the wedding day: The Morning thawde the eauening frost, and slipprie was the way: Yeat hobling on her rustie ioynts, to Churchward goes the Bride: Whose feete (her harts vnequall gides) could nothing els but slide. Then Battus kindly leadeth her, and euer as she trips, God blesse thee Mouse the Bridegroome said, and smakt her on the lips. The oftner stumbled then his Beast, the oftner to be kist: And thinketh in her gentle Choyse her selfe not meanly blist. But when the Priest had done his part, and that they homeward come, The Bride, for Battus, might salute the Pauement with her bomme. She reeled oft, and looked backe: he sawe, but would not see: At length she stumbled headlong downe, hoyst vp againe, quoth hee: The second tyme she did the like, hoyst Brock, her good-man saide: And thirdly falling, kindly bad her breake her necke, olde Iade. The old-wife tooke it to the hart, and home she went and dyde: But Battus, ere his first was sicke, had owed his second Bryde. THis Iest from Cacus straynde a smyle, but quickly was it donne: When, turning to her Sisters twaine, the yongest thus begonne▪ Ye, Sisters, seuerally haue tolde how soes in loue did fall,
And age with youth: but I doe say that Loue can a ll with all. Examples we, whom Loue hath brought from Court to liue in Caue, And were there neede of further proofe, a thousand proofes I haue. Could Latmus speake, it might accuse euen Phoebe of a kis: And of a Votarie of hers to speake my purpose is. But first she cheared thus her friend (for Cacus sadly sits) Be merrie man, thy pensiuenesse out pastimes badly fits: Be as thou art, not as thou wouldst, it will be as it is: Learne then to lacke, and learne to liue, for crosses neuer mis. Thinke Fortune newly hatch is flidge, and waggeth wing to flye: All suffreth change: our selues, new borne, euen then begin to dye. Be resolute, not desperate: the Gods that made thee poore, Can, if they will (doe waite their will) thy former state restoore. At least let patience profit thee, for patience is a thing Whereby a begger gayneth of a discontented King. Know Destinie is Destinie. This Epitaph I reede, Though common-booked Poetrie, yeat not vnworthie heede: Vnborne to knowe what I should be to Gods my mother prayde: A Male quoth Phoebus, Female Mars, and Iuno neither sayde: An Hermaphrodite was I borne. My death then askt shee after: By sword quoth Iuno, Tree quoth Mars, and Phoebus saide by water. A Riuer-shadowing tree I climbd: out slipt my sword: I slidd: By feete I hung, stabd with my sword, my head in water hidd. Male, Female, neither, hanging, Sword, and drowning I abidd Thus, Cacus, howsoeuer things from likelihoods discent, In birth, life, death, the Gods are first, the middell, and Euent. And not what they can doe they will, but what they will they can: And that they doe, or doe it not, behooues not vs to skan, And saying so, and kissing too, her tale she thus began.
CHAP. XI. I Speake not of the Argiue Nimph that had the ielious Syer, To whome, shut vp in brasen Tower, Ioue pas∣sage had for hyer. Not of Europa, Semele or Maia, will I dwell: Not of your Foe his bastardie, or Laedas rape I tell: Not of King Ceus Daughters fault, or other freak of Ioue Speake I: saue of th'Arcadian Nunne, with whom he thus did roue. Calisto was as faire a Mayde, as faire as one might bee, Her father King Lycaon fled, Ioue chaunced her to see: And seeing liked, liking lou'd, and louing made it knowne To her (sweet Lasse) for fathers losse that maketh then her mone. Take patience, wench, sayd Iupiter, with thee shall al be wel, Thy fathers deeds haue their deserts, but thou in peace shalt dwell. I am his Victor, but thy selfe art Victoresse of me: Do graunt me loue, my zeale is more than fatherlie to thee. The restlesse cloudes that mantling ride vpon the racking Skie, The scouring windes that sightlesse in the sounding aire doo flie, The thriftie Earth that bringeth out and broodeth vp her breed, The shifting Seas whose swelling waues on shrinking shores do feede, Shall fall, and faile, ere I be false (Lycaons Impe) to thee: Of hartie Loue this kisse (he kist) an happie hansell bee. But haplesse termes are these, quoth she, vnfitting to a thrall:
Yeat, in respect of that I feele, I heare them not at all. A friend (ah friendlesse name I Friend?) it being as it is, A friend I say, much more a foe, and more, and worse then this, The sonne of Saturne should, and shall, that speed and hearing misse. Doe rid, ah rid mine eyes of teares, and set my heart at rest, By taking life, not making Loue: the former likes me best. Or, if that poore Calistos life shall lengthen to her wo, Graunt that among Dianas Nunnes a Votarie I go: For neither fis it now to loue, or euer shall it so. What viewed Iupiter this while, not pleasing to his sight? Or what vnuiewed did he gesse, not adding to delight? Not excellent, but exquisite, was all to minde and eye: Saue she, the hansel of this loue, did him of Loue denie. It greeues that Natures Paragon in Cloister, not in Court, Should loose the beautie of her youth, and he thereby his sport. But constant in her chast pretence, he grants that would gain-say, And seated in religion now, with Phoebe did she stay. Blame Iupiter of other Loues, of this doe set him cleere: It was his first, and first is firme, and toucheth verie neere. He might forgoe, but not forget Calisto in her Cell, When setting higher thoughts apart, the Frithes did please him well: He takes his Quiuer and his Bow, and wheare she hunts, hunts hee: And sacrificed to his eyes that daye he did her see. About the Chase, Toyles, Dogs & Bowes, the Stand, Quarrie and all Hee vseth double diligence: so often did befall, Not onely sight of her his Saint he got, but also talke, Whilst thus for his Calistos loue, he haunted Phoebes walke. But sight and talke accrew to loue, the substance must be had: And for to bring his drift about, he virgin-like is clad. His nonage kept his beard from bloome, no wench morefaire then he Whome at her Nunnerie a Nun Diana takes to be, And with his Sisters brotherly doo gesse him to agree.
Thus faines Lycaons Conquerera Maid, to winne a Maid: His hands to woll, and Arras worke, and womans Chares hee laid, That not so much as by the tongue the Boy wench was bewraid. Yeat thought is free, he sees, and smiles, and longs perhaps for more: No maruell, for that Sister-hood had goodlie Ladies store. Scarce one for birth and beautie too was theare vnworthie him, Yet chieflie to Calistos vaine he formed life and limme: And Sister-like they single oft, and chat of manye things, But that Calisto mindeth loue no likelihood he wrings. So Ioue not once durst mention Ioue, and force was sinne and shame; But loue is hardie. Thus it hap: by long pursute of game, She wearie resteth in the Thicks, wheare sitting all alone, He seeing her, is resolute or now to end his moene, Or for so sweet a bodies vse to leaue his soule in loene. He Nymph-like sits him by the Nymph, that tooke him for no man: And after smiles, with neerer signes of Loues assault began. He feeleth oft her Iuorie breasts, nor maketh coy to kisse: Yeat all was wel, a Maiden to a Maiden might doe this. Than ticks he vp her tucked Frocke, nor did Calisto blush, Or thinke abuse: he tickles too, no blab she thinks the Bush. Thus whilst she thinkes her Sister Nunne to be a merrie Lasse, The Wanton did disclose himselfe, and told her who he was. Away the Virgin would haue fled, whom he withhild by force: Thy loue (sweet Nymph) hath vrg'd this shift, wel worthy thy remorse, He said: nor scorne with me a King to ioyne thy selfe a Queene: Or doe but loue and I will liue in Phoebes Celles vnseene: And theare in beds, in bushes heere (My fainings fit so well) We may enioy what loue enioynes, and none our scapes shall tell. She would not loue, he could not leaue: she wrangleth, and he wooeth: She did resist, he did persist, and sport denied dooeth. That done, which could not be vndone, what booteth discontent? As good bee pleas'd as not be eas'd: away Calisto went To Cloyster, Iupiter to Court: nor much she did repent,
Vntill her growing wombe disclosed an ante-cedent fault, Then in the Chapter house she told of Iupiters assault. Diana, and her virgins all, admyring that escape, Did gird at her, maligning Ioue for such his subtill Rape. And who more ready to controule, then Athalanta was? Whome shortly Meleager brought vnto the selfe same pas. The Lady Abbesse did discharge Calisto from her Cell: And silly Nymph, she great with child some other wheare must dwell. Pelasgis it was Iupiters, and he her cause of blame, The King her father in exile, her selfe in this defame, What then remain'd? euen secrecie, to hyde her selfe from shame. Keepe close (quoth she) frō world ye woods mine error, Ioue his crime: And setling theare in simple Caue, did waite her childing tyme. At length was hairy Arcas borne: no sooner could he go, But that his wildnes eiked to his wretched Mothers wo. No beast so strong that he would shunne, and man he neuer sawe, Nor yeat his vexed mother could from fearcenes him withdrawe. Long time (the daughter of a King) she liued thus in Caue, Not wanting griefe, but wanting all that poorest wretches haue. And (worst of all) her sauage sonne (whose manners did agree Vnto his birth-place) howerly threats his mothers death to bee: And angrie once, pursued her so long from place to place, That euen into the Citie gates he followed her in chase. The people when they did behold so fayre a nimph in flight, A Beare-like Arcas in pursute, (for being naked quite, His skinne was swart and hairie) they did wonder at the sight. And some that would his passage, stop, he rudely casteth downe, And spares no spoyle vntill the sight was noysed through the towne. Then out came Iupiter in armes, whom when Calisto knewe, Helpe Ioue (she cryde) for loe thy sonne his mother doth pursue. He knewe his Leiman at the first, and ioyed of her sight: Then kisse they, when the Sauage boy by force did leaue to fight.
Calisto liued Ladie like, yea Iunos Riuall now: And Arcas, nobly mannaged, such vertues him indow, That (Ioue consenting) him for King Pelasgis did allow. A Sonne well worthy such a Syer: and for his prowes and fame, Pelasgis then, of Arcas, tooke Arcadia to name. BVt neither might these Ladies faire by any pleasant tale, Or dazeling toye of masking loue, (sweet Consorts to preuaile) Disswade outragious Cacus from vnpatientnes of mind: Who in his greatest tyrannies did chiefest pleasures finde. He sleas the harmles Passengers, from eldest soule to childe, He burnes and spoyles the neighbour parts, and women he defild. And to his Caue (Troponius Caue) did bring the spoiles he gaines, In which (except to doe more harme) he secretly remaynes. Whilst none did passe, that did repasse vnspoyled or vnkild (None knowing how) all Italie with feare thereof was fild. But, lo an helpe: when Hercules had slaughtered out-right Tenne Giants, of Cremona Kings, and put the leauenth' to flight, From thence the worthie did ariue with his victorious band At King Euanders Cittie, that by Auentin did stand. Amongst a many richer Spoyles, though none to him so rare, He brought a sort of Spanish kine. Euander taking care, (Because the like misfortunes oft had hapned theare before,) Least Hercules should loose his kyne, of which he made such store, Gaue counsell that within the walles they might be kept all night. And, better to approue his words, with teares he did recite The murthers, thefts, and cruelties, without compassion made Vpon his subiects, and their goods, by whom could not be said, But that the Gods (for so they gesse) for sinne them so inuade. I am resolu'd quoth Hercules, wheare Gods do vengeance craue, It is not strong or fensiue walles that any thing can saue: My Kyne shall therefore grase abroad: if mortall man it be, Then know a tyrant is my taske, his blood the Taskers fee.
The Cattell grasing then abroad (as was his vse alwaies) The Gyant left his cruell Denne, to seeke his cursed praies. The Moone not wanting of her light, the Kine he did espye: And knowing them, he also knewe his feared Foe was nye. And far much better feare had bin then malice at that tyde: But hardly shunneth policie, what destinies prouide. He might haue lurkte a while in Denne, but of a peeuish spight, Eight of the Kine with fastned cords, by pollicie and might, He dragged backward by their tailes into his diuelish nest: Then stopping vp the subtill hole, did laye him downe to rest. Now Hercules (the rather prickt by King Euanders talke) Into the fieldes to see his Kine by prime of day did walke. Where missing eight, he could not gesse which waie they shuld be gō: A many therefore had in charge, to search them out anon. The Searchers, following euery signe, great store of footings found Descending from Mount Auentine into the lower ground: But for the footings did descend, and not ascend, they thought Of no such cunning as in deed in Auentine was wrought. Alcaeus Grand-sonne searching long the Thefts he could not finde, Was much disquieted in himselfe, and angrie in his minde: And chafing, when he should depart, he twise or thrise did shake A Tree that grew on Auentine: which rooted vp did make So large a vent that one might view they hollow caue belowe, And Cacus with his Leash of wiues they were disclosed so. Whome, when the Greeke espied theare, O gracelesse King, he said, Whose Tyrannies haue made the Realmes of Hespera afraid, Whose cruelties haue been the cause of al the losse thou hast, What moueth thee in Italie to prosecute such waste? Thinkste thou, whom neither mightie Realmes, nor royal Gards of mē Could late defend, now to escape, inclosed thus in den, The iust reuengment of the Godds? no, no, the Heauens we see, Haue brought to light a wretch so lewd, euen by a senceles Tree: And since that neither wealth nor want to goodnes may thee win,
A greeuous death, condignly, shall cut off thy grounded sinne. To it did Cacus answere thus: doest thou pursue me stil? Who onely art the chiefest cause of these my doings ill: Not suffering me to liue the rest of mine vnhappie daies Among the fruitlesse Rocks, a wretch in miserie alwaies. Cease further prate; said Hercules, in troth it greeueth much, To see a King in this Distresse, but since thy life is such As neither in aduersitie, nor prosperous estate Thou canst afford one iot of good, I purpose to rebate Thy wicked dayes by worthy death, prepare therefore to dye. When Cacus sawe he must perforce so harde a combate trye, He by inchanted flames againe endeuored to flye. But Hercules deluded once by that deuise before, Had learned now for being so deceiued any more: And, casting feare aside, did leape into the flaming Caue, And theare by Arte did conquer Arte. The Gyant then to saue Himselfe did take his Axe in hand, wheare Hercules and he Couragiously bestirre themselues, vntill they did agree, To trye it out in open ayre. So doubtfull was their fight, That Lookers on could not discerne to whether best should light. The frighted Ladies did their best to helpe their fighting friend: But Hercules had victorie, and Cacus had his end. CHAP. XII. FOr Gyants of Cremona slayne, and Cacus ridded so, The Latine Princes prayse on him and presents did bestoe. Wheare Rome is now, Pallantia then, Euander hee did frame
A temple, and to Hercules did dedicate the same: And he (intreated thereunto) in Italie did stay: To honor whome did Princes come from farre and euerie waye. King Faunus had affaires abroad, when from Laurentum came His wife Marica, Facua some this louely Queene doe name. From liking did shee fall in loue with Hercules, and he More readie to haue made demaunde, then like to disagree, Conceauing her by circumstance, so coupled by contract, That, had King Faunus neuer liu'd, Latinus had not lackt: Yeat home came Faunus, fathering his late Corriuals act. But whether gotten lawfully, or thus in loue forbod, Latinus, Brute his Gran-dames Syer, was sonne vnto a God. WHilst that in loue of this same Queene, and lande of all besides, The vanquisher of Vulcans sonne in Italie abides, Of Calabries a mightie host King Picus he prouides. And, in reueng of Cacus, swore his Slayer should be slaine: But he, ere long, that so did sweare, vnsweared it againe: When, chased home into his holdes, theare sparred vp in gates, The valiant Thebane, all in vaine, a following fight awaites. Who, for dispatch, did fayne himselfe a Legate to the King, And him the Porters, as the same, before their Tyrant bring. Then shaking off his ciuil robes, his shining Armes appeare: And renting downe  ro sparre, both Prince and people feare. Some ran to Armor, other some did fight with him their last: Both court and Cittie in the end did lay vpon him fast. Theare Picus, worthely, did winne of valiantnesse a name: Yeat Hercules more valiantly by death did Picus tame. And to attend their King his ghoste he sendeth flocke by flocke: His furie was as fier to Ferne, his foes as waues to Rocke: Nor did his Lyons Spoyle giue place to darting or to knocke. Meane tyme his men assault without, whil'st he assayles within,
Wheare fighting to beate downe the Gates he so the Goale did win. Within the King his ransackt Court he Iole espyes, Whose teares, then mounting frō her hart, dismount thē frō her eyes, King Picus (now a lifeles corse) was Father of this Mayde: In vaine therefore did Hercules her pensiuenesse disswayde: Nor could he but lament her fate, and loue so sweete a face, Whose person also did containe the type of female grace. At first she was so farre from loue she rather seem'd to hate, Yeat could she not so giue the Checke, but that she tooke the Mate. Then eithers loue, was eithers life: poore Deianira she Was out of commons, yea of thought, an other had her fee. WIth this, so faire and portly wench, he sayled into Thrace: And heares how Diomedes did tyrannize in that place. No Straunger scapes vnraunsomed: but Raunsome wanting, then He casteth them, as prouender, to Horses eating men. A Garde of Tyrants, like himselfe, attending on him still, Who richly did maintaine themselues, by such their doings ill. The Scourge of such was moued, not to be remoued now By Iole, whose louing teares such labours disalow. With Diomedes and his Garde in Forrest did he meete, Who with their common Stratagem the Stranger thinke to greete. Hands of, commaunded Hercules, for Horse I am no hay, All Straungers Raunsom, once for all, my comming is to pay: Which sayd, himselfe against them all began a noble fray. The sturdie Thracians, mightie men, did hardly loose their ground But, than the King, a mightier man not any wheare was found. These all at once assayle, and strike, and thunder on his Sheeld: But number fitted to his force, vnwonted so to yeeld. For with his club he skuffles then amongst their Curets so, That speedie death was sweeter dole then to suruiue his blo. Well mounted comes the King himselfe, whom he dismounts anon,
But, reseued to his Horse againe, away he would be gon. Lesse hase, he sayd, I Harts out-runne, no shalt thou me out-ride: Out stripping so the man-feade horse, he topled ore his side The Monstrous King, that resculesse to flying people cride. Who, lying all to frushed thus, the sonne of Ioue did bring His cruell Iades, that soone deuoure their more than cruell King. The Thracians all submit themselues, and ioye their Tyrants death, And thinke some God had left the Heauens to succour men on earth, From such as what they would they will, and what they will they can, And what they can they dare and doe, and doing none withstan. Nor thought they better of the man then did his deedes approue, That neuer was a Conqueror vnto his owne behoue, But to establish vertuous men, and Tyrants to remoue. This common Soldiour of the world with Iole did land In Lycia: and, the earth in peace, discharged theare his band. Sweete busses, not sharpe battels, then did alter man and minde: Till he, as others, sorrowe in securitie did finde. From Assur went the Empire then when Tonos he had time To court his Trulles, Arbaces so espying place to clyme. Secure in Tomyris her flight, was valiant Cyrus slaine. From Capua, not from Cannas, grewe braue Hanibal his baine, The same to whose victorious Sword a second world was sought, That Macedon in court, not Campe, to traytrous end was brought. A louer, not a Soldiour, went Achilles to his graue. And Caesar not in steele, but silke, to Rome his farewel gaue. Euen so, this second vnto none, superior vnto all, To whome did sooner Causes cease then Conquests not befall, This monster-Master Hercules, this Tyrant-Tamer, hee Whose high Exploytes did leaue the earth from spoyl & spoylers free, In pleasures did he perish now, that did in perils thriue: A greeuous Taske I vndertake his dying to reuiue.
CHAP. XIII. WHen Deianira vnderstood her busbands back re∣turne, She thought it strange, that he frō her so strangely did soiorne. Explorers sent to search the cause, returne was made that he Did loyter in a Strangers Loue: and Iole was she That euer hanged at his lips, and hugged was of him, And that, his armor layd a-part, in silke he courts it trim. The daughter of th'Aetolian King did little lesse then raue: And can the churle (quoth she) preferre in loue a captiue Slaue Before his wife, whome late he faynd inferiour vnto none? Ah Hercules thou art a man, thy manhood thus is knowne. Fye, may a forren Strumpets armes so fasten on his necke, As he (the Rector of the Earth) must bowe if she doth becke? Oh how vnlike to Hercules, is Hercules in this? But, leauing men to natures fault, in her the lewdnes is, No man so chaste, but such as she may worke to doe amis. Thus whilst her ouerplus of loue to Ielousie did growe, She simply minds the spightfull gift that Nessus did bestowe. And, for he dying spake the words, she held it as her Creede That it could winne him to her selfe: of which (now hauing neede) She vseth part, and sent a Shirt so boyled as she bad To Hercules: and Hercules was of the Present glad: Confessing her his onely Wife: And whilst he did repent His breach of Loue, on Oeta Mount to sacrifice he went.
Philoctes, Paeans valiant Sonne, and Lychas, he that brought The poysned Shirt, were present theare, but of no treason thought: Not Deianiras selfe (good Soule) till tryall made it playne, When as his body and the fire gaue moysture to the bayne. His stoutnes hid such torments long, as els could none abyde, Yea till the baine his Bowels and his very Marrow fryde. But when his torments had no meane, the Altar downe he throes, And from his martred body rents the gory smoking cloathes: And striuing to strip off the Shirt he teareth flesh from bone, And left his breaking Synoees bare, his Intrailes euery one Did boyle, and burst, & shew themselues wheare lumps of flesh did lack, And still the murdrous Shirt did cleue vnto his mangled backe. Espying Deianiras Squire, that quaking stoode, he sayde, And art thou wretch the Instrument of my destruction mayde? Whome swinging then about his head, he slinged downe the hill: And so did silly Lychas dye, that purposed no il. Then running downe from hill to Playne, from Playne to hill againe, He rents vp Rockes and mightie Hils in error of his paine: Till, sadly leaning on his Club, he sighing, vowes that none Should be the death of Hercules but Hercules alone. And to his friend Philoctes tooke his Arrowes and his Bow, And gladly to the hallowed fyer, as to his bed did go. Wheare lying downe, and taking leaue with reared hands to skye, The Earths Protector so, in peace, amidst the flames did dye. Philoctes, neere o'rgone with greefe, his Ashes did conuaye To Italy, inshrined in his Temple there to stay: And wofull Deianira heares of Hercules decay. His Ghoste she voucheth and the Gods to witnes, that her minde Was giltles of a traitrous thought: nor thinke me so vnkinde (Sweet Husband) as to haue the will to ouerliue thee heer, But that my Ghoste before thy Ghoste it selfe of guile shall cleer: And now I come, ah now I come, forgiue ye gods the deed She sayd eand pearsing so her breast, a breathles Corse did bleed.
AS Greekes lament their Champions losse, so did the Phrygians ioy: And Priamus did fortifie his stately Cittie Troy. Twise Hercules had rased it, and thirdly was it reard By Pryam, strong in wealth and walles, through Asia lou'd and feard. He cald to mynde Laomedon whome Hercules had slayne, His Sister too Hesione, that Captiue did remayne In Salamis with Telamon: and well he was apayde, In that the Doer of the same liu'd not the Greekes to ayde. His Sister therefore not restorde, his Legates asking it, By stealing of the Spartane Queene did Paris crye them quit. Twelue hundred fiftie fiue war-Shippes, with mē & Armor frought, By seauentie Kings & kingly Peeres, frō Greece to Troy were brought, To winne her thence. King Priamus (besides his Empire greate) Had ayders Princes thirtie three: lesse Lords I not repeate, Not Sagitar, that in this Warre did many a valiant feate. Tenne yeres, tenne monthes, & twise sixe daies, the siege they did abide: Eight hundred sixtie thousand Greekes, by Troian weapons dyde: Sixe hundred fiftie sixe thousands of Troians fighting men, Besides the slaughtred at the sacke, by Grecians perisht then: And (if that Hector, Troilus, and Paris, so we name) Fell fortie Kings: omitting more, of little lesser fame. Mislike, and ciuill quarrels, when the Grecians homewards drewe, Did well neere waste the remnant Kings that Phrigia did subdewe, Thus secure Troy was ouer-set, when Troy was ouer stoute, And ouer rich, was ouer-runne, and tardie lookt about. The Greekish Ships, with Phrigian Spoyles, through Xant and Simoes roe, For now Antenor had betrayde Palladium to the foe, And with Palladium Priamus, Aeneas sought to hide From Pyrrhus Polyxena (she for whom Achilles dyde, Wherefore vpon Achilles Tombe her selfe was after slayne, What tyme old Hecuba discryde yong Polydor his bayne:) For which, Aeneas banished, did hoyst his sayles to winde, And, after many perils, rule in Italie did finde.
AENeas dead, Ascanius raign'd: Ascanius dead, his brother Posthumus Syluius did succeede. Lauinia was his mother, Her Syer Latinus, Faunus his, and Picus him begot, And Saturne him. From mother thus Posthumus lacked not The noblest bloud. On Fathers side his petigree was thus: Ioue had Dardanus: and the same begot Erictheus: He Troys: Troys, Assaracus: he Capys: and the same Anchises: he Aeneas had: of him Posthumus came: And he was Father vnto Brute: and thus the Brutons bring Their petigree from Iupiter, of Pagane Gods the King: And adde they may, that Brute his Syer of Venus sonne did spring. Thrise fiue degrees from Noe was Brute, and fower times sixe was he From Adam: and from Iaphets house doth fetch his petigree. Posthumus Syluius perishing in Chace amongst the brakes, Mistooke for Game by Brute his Sonne, Brute Italie forsakes: And to associate his Exile, a many Troyans mo At all aduentures put to Seas, vncertein where to go: To whom did Fortune, Fortune-like, become a friend and foe: Till Brute, with no lesse payne and praise then had his Grandsier late Achiued Latium, landng here, suppressed so the state Of all the Fiend-breed Albinests, huge Gyants fearce and strong, Or race of Albion Neptuns Sonne (els some deriue them wrong) That of this Isle (vn-Scotted yet) he Empire had ere long.
THE THIRD BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. XIIII. NOw, of the Conquerour, this Isle had Brutaine vnto name, And with his Troians Brute began manurage of the same. For rased Troy to reare a Troy fit place hee sear∣ched then, And viewes the mounting Northerne partes: These fit (quoth he) for men That trust asmuch to flight as fight: our Bulwarks are our brests, The next Arriuals heere, perchaunce, will gladlier build their nests: A Troians courage is to him a Fortres of defence: And leauing so wheare Scottes be now he South-ward maketh thence; Whereas the earth more plentie gaue, and ayre more temprature, And nothing wanted that by wealth or pleasure might allure: And more, the Lady Flood of Floods, the Ryuer Thamis, it Did seeme to Brute against the foe, and with himselfe to fit. Vpon whose fruitful bancks therefore, whose bounds are chiefly said, The want-les Counties Essex, Kent, Surrie, and wealthie Glayde Of Hartfordshire, for Citties store participating ayde, Did Brute build vp his Troy-nouant, inclosing it with wall:
Which Lud did after beautifie, and Luds-towne it did call That now is London: euermore to rightfull Princes trewe, Yea Prince and people still to it as to their Storehouse drewe, For plentie and for populous the like we no wheare vewe. Howbe-it many neighbour townes as much ere now could say, But place for people, people, place, and all for sinne decay. When Brute should dye thus to his Sonnes hee did the Isle conuay: To Camber Wales, to Albnact he Albanie did leaue, To Locrine Brutaine: whom his Queene of life did thus bereaue. THe furious Hun, that drowning theare to Humber left his name, The King did vanquish, and for spoyle vnto his Nauie came: Where Humbars Daughter, Parragon for beautie, such a Dame As Loue himselfe could not but loue, did Locrine so inflame, That Guendoleyne, the Cornish Duke his daughter, Locrins Queene, Grewe in contempt: and, Coryn dead, his Change of Choyse was seene. To Cornwall goes the wrothfull Queene to seaze her Fathers Land, Frō whence she brought, to worke reuenge, of warriours stout a band, And bids her husband battell, and in battell is he slaine: And for their Sonne in Nonage was, she to his vse did raine. The Lady Estrild Locrins Loue, and Sabrin, wondrous faire, Her husbands and his Leimans impe, she meaning not to spare, Did bring vnto the water that the wenches name doth beare: There binding both, and bobbing them, then trembling at her yre, She sayd: if Scythia could haue hild the wandring King thy Syre, Then Brittish waters had not been to him deserued bayne: But Estrild, snout-fayre Estrild, she was sparde, forsooth, to traine With whorish tricks a vicious King: But neither of you twaine, Thou stately Drab, nor this thy Brat, a bastard as thy selfe, Shall liue in triumph of my wrong: first mother and her Elfe Shall fish in Flood for Humbars soule, and bring him newes to hell, That Locrins wife on Locrins whore reuenged her so well.
They lifting vp their lillie hands, from out their louely eyes Powre teares like Pearles, & wash those Cheekes where naught saue beautie lyes▪ And seeking to excuse themselues, & mercie to obtaine, With speeches good, and praiers faire, they speake and pray in vaine. Queene Guendoleyne so bids, and they into the Flood are cast, Whereas amongst the drenching waues the Ladies breath their last. As this his Grandame, such appear'd Mempricius, Madans sonne, Whose brother Manlius traytrously by him to death was donne. And since of noble Brute his line prodigious things I tell, I skipping to the Tenth from him will shewe what then befell. ABout a thirtie yeares and fiue did Leir rule this Land, When, doting on his Daughters three, with them he fell in hand To tell how much they loued him. The Eldest did esteeme Her life inferior to her loue, so did the second deeme: The yongest sayd her loue was such as did a childe behoue, And that how much himselfe was worth, so much she him did loue. The formost two did please him well, the yongest did not so: Vpon the Prince of Albanie the First he did bestoe: The Middle on the Cornish Prince: their Dowrie was his Throne, At his decease: Cordellas part was very small or none. Yeat, for her forme, and vertuous life, a noble Gallian King Did her vn-dowed, for his Queene into his Countrie bring. Her Sisters sicke of Fathers health, their husbands by consent Did ioyne in Armes: from Leir so by force the Scepter went: Yeat, for they promise pentious large, he rather was content. In Albanie the quondam King at eldest Daughters Court Was setled scarce, when she repines, and lessens still his Port. His secōd Daughter thē, he thought, would shewe her selfe more kind: To whom, he going, for a while did franke allowance finde. Ere long abridging almost all, she keepeth him so loe, That of two bads, for betters choyse he backe againe did goe. But Gonorill at his returne, not onely did attempt
Her fathers death, but openly did hold him in contempt. His aged eyes powre out their teares, when holding vp his hands, He sayd: O God, who so thou art, that my good hap withstands, Prolong not life, deferre not death, my selfe I ouer-liue, When those that owe to me their liues, to me my death would giue. Thou Towne, whose walles rose of my welth, stand euermore to tell Thy Founders fall, and warne that none do fall as Leir fell. Bid none affie in Friends, for say, his Children wrought his wracke: Yea those, that were to him most deare, did lothe and let him lacke, Cordella, well Cordella sayd, she loued as a Child: But sweeter words we seeke than sooth, and so are men beguild. She onely rests vntryed yet: but what may I expect From her? to whom I nothing gaue, when these doe me reiect. Then dye, nay trye, the rule maye fayle, and nature may ascend: Nor are they euer surest friends, on whom we most doe spend. He ships himselfe to Gallia then: but maketh knowne before Vnto Cordella his estate, who rueth him so poore, And kept his theare ariuall close till she prouided had To furnish him in euery want. Of him her King was glad, And nobly entertayned him: the Queene with teares among, (Her duetie done) conferreth with her father of his wrong. Such duetie, bountie, kindnes, and increasing loue, he found In that his Daughter and her Lord, that sorrowes more abound For his vnkindly vsing her, then for the others crime: And King-like thus in Agamps Court did Leir dwell, till time The noble King his Sonne-in-lawe transports an Armie greate Of forcie Gawles, possessing him of dispossessed Seate: To whom Cordella did succeede, not raigning long in queate. Not how her Nephewes warre on her, and one of thē slew th'other Shall followe: but I will disclose a most tyrannous mother.
CHAP. XV. GOrbodugs double Issue now, when eighteene Kings were past, Hild ioyntly Empyre in this land: till Porrex at the last, Not tyed so by brotherhood, but that he did dis∣daine A fellowe King, (for neuer can one Kingdome brooke of twaine) Did leuie secrete bands: for dread whereof did Ferrex flye, And out of Gallia bringeth Warre, in which himselfe did dye. Then Porrex only raigned heere, and ruled all in peace: Till Iden, mother Queene to both, her furie did increase So fearcely, as she seekes reuenge euen in the highest degree. Why liueth this (quoth she) a King? in graue why lyeth he? Dye Iden, dye: nay dye thou wretch, that me a wretch hast made: His ghost, whose life stood in thy light, commaundeth me of ayde. Nor want I (Ferrex) will to ayde: for why the Gods I see Deferre reuenge, nor with a Deuill the Deuils disagree. The heauens, me thinks, with thūderbolts should presse his soule to hell, Or Earth giue passage, that at least with men he might not dwell. But I my selfe, euen I my selfe, their slacknesse will supplye, And Mothers name and Nature both to such a Sonne denye. Dead night was come, when Iden found the King her sonne a sleepe, And all was still: not then as now did Guards their Princes keepe. Admit they had, who would haue fearde such mischiefe in a mother? She whispring softly, sleepe thy last, yea sleep as doth thy brother, Did gash his throte: who starting vp, whē strength & speech were gōe,
Lifts vp his faynting hands, and knewe the Tyrannesse anone: And maketh signes, as who would say, ah mother thou hast done A deede, as neuer mother earst did practise on her Sonne. But name of Son, nor signes did serue, him still with wounds she plyes Nor (more than Monster) did it please that simplie so he dyes, But that his bodie, peecemeale tore, about the Lodging flyes. And thus from noble Brute his line the Scepter then did passe: When of his bloud for to succeede no heire suruiuing was. FOwer Dukes at once, in ciuill broyles, seiunctly after raine. Neere when, the Scottes (whō some accuse by Ante-dates to gaine) Did settle in the Northerne Isles. These people bring their line From Cecrops, and that Pharo he that euer did decline From Moses, seeking Hebers house from Aegypt to conuay. His daughter Scota Gathelus their Duke brought thence away, When Pharos sinne to Iacobs Seede did neere that Land decay. And Cecrops son brought thē frō thence (as Scottes inforce the same) The Stone that Iacob slept vpon, when Angels went and came. Of it was made their fatall Chaire: of which they beare in hand, That whearesoere ye same is found, the Scottes shall brooke yt land: At Westminster that Monument doth now, decaying, stand. In Lusitania Gathelus did first his Kingdome found: And of his race (of Scota, Scottes) when Spanish Scottes abound, Ariue in Ireland, and in it a second Empire ground. And thirdly, when their broodie Race that Isle did ouer-store, Amongst the Islands Hebredes they seek out dwellings more. These Irish, sometime Spanish Scots, of whence our now-Scots be, Within the Isles of Albion thus, whilst Brutaines disagree, Did seat themselues, & nestle too amongst the Mountaine groundes: What time a Scythian people, Pichtes, did seaze the middle bounds Twixt them and vs: & these did prooue to Brutaine double wounds. The Penthland people and the Scots, alying, friendlie liue, Vntill the Pichts, by Brittish wyles, contrarie cause did giue.
Then from their Captains fell the Scots, and chose to them a King: And Fergus out of Ireland did the Chaire of Marble bring: In which instald the first Scotch King in Albion, so he wrought That Pichts and Scots, then vp in Armes, were to attonement brought. Three valiant people thus at once in Albion Empire hold, Brutes, Scots and Pichts: the latter twaine lesse ciuil, but as bold. The Pichts were fierce and Scythian like: much like the Irish now The Scots were then: couragious both: Nor them I disallowe That write they fed on humane flesh, for so it may be well, Like of these men their bloudie mindes their natiue stories tell: But to our Brittish busines now, to shew what theare befell. Not how the tri-partited Rule vnto his quartarne Rayne Dunwallo, after fortie yeres, did Monarchize againe: Not what precedent Kings in France, and Denmarke did obtaine Speake I. From Porrex fortie Kings in silence shall remaine: Alonelie valiant Brennus, and his brother Beline, thay Vnpraised for their warres and works shall not escape away. CHAP. XVI. THese Brothers, thirsting amplier Raignes, did martiallie contend, Till Brenn his force was not of force his brothers to defend. To Norway sayles hee, wheare he got an Armie and a prize, The Prince of Norwaies Daughter, whom hee winneth in this wise. The King of Denmarke stoode with him, vntill the States decreede That both should plead before their Prince, and better Pleader speede.
And when the Norgane Prince and Peeres were seated for their strife, The King of Danes beginning first, thus pleaded for a wife. Not yet a King, King Philips son with none but Kings would cope, His reason was, inferiour strife of glorie giues no hope: I am a King, and graunt the Prize in question worthie mee, But grudge that my Competitor a banisht man should bee. Doe grant him what he hath for-gon, and neuer more shall gi, Yeat were he but a Demi-king, to challenge me vnfit: Dunwallos yonger Sonne, that hath his brother to his Foe, And worthelie, his trecheries haue well deserued soe, And yet (audacious that he is) he blusheth not to heare The troth of his vntroth, nor yeat an heere-Repulse doth feare. Would she for whom I must contend were not to me the same She is, or he that stands with me a man of better fame. But since in this vnequall Plea I must my selfe imbace, Knowe, Norwaies, that my pleaded cause cōcernes your publique cae. It is the King of Denmarke doth your Prince his daughter craue, And note, it is no little thing with vs Allie to haue. By league, or Leigure, Danske can fence, or fronte you, friend, or foe, Our neighborhood doth fit to both, your wel-fare or your woe. Combine therefore in needfull League our neere conioyned States: I may your good, nought lesse can he that thus with me debates. He is a Bruton (if Exile allow wee call him so) And farre from aiding you, that knowes himselfe not to bestoe. Admit he were receiued home, what Empire doth he sway? A sorrie Ilands Moyetie, and farre from hence away. Her Dowrie is your Diademe: what Ioynter can he make? Not anie: giue not then to him from whom you cannot take. And Ladie (She for whom they stroue was present) well I wo, My loue doth claime a greater debt than so to be forgot. I wish (mine Opposite his want) that Armes might giue the right, It is not dread, but doom'd (sweet wench) that thus with tongue I fight. Proude Bruton (frowning so on Brenn) disclaime in her my dewe,
Els thou repining shalt repent: doe make thy choyce a newe. At least amend thine Error, and mine enuie shall haue end: I neede not force so weake a Foe, seeke thou so strong a friend. Norwaies consent, and, Ladie, be no Counter-mand to this: Discent not Brenn: conclude her mine: els my Conclusion is, If not for worth, by force perforce to winne her from you all, Yea though our banisht Copes-mate could his Brittish Succours call. The King of Danes concluded thus: and after silence short, The Brutaine Heros vailed, and did answere in this sort. Most gracious Norgane Peeres, you heare the ouer-tearming taunts Of this Appelant, that himselfe and Scepter ouer-vaunts. It lesser greeueth he should grudge that I with him co-riue, Than his so peremptorie speach in your despight to wiue. It greeues, in troth: not for my selfe, but for he beardeth you, And seemes disdaineful of your aide, that doth so proudly wowe. How captiously he derogates from me, and mine estate? And Arrogates vnto himselfe, to bring me so in hate. How daintely his eyes endure so bace an Obiects view? How desperatly doth he conclude, and threatneth me and you? Well, barke he, byte he, bragges nor blowes shall dare me to defend A Challenge, wheare so braue a Prize stands for the Wagers end. Nor thinke (vaine-glorious that thou art) me lesser than a King, Or greater than by sute, or sword, to prize so rare a thing. Vpbrayd me not with banishment, nor Belyns quarrell touch, Nor yeat my petite Signorie: nor more than troth by much. These present nobles knowe the cause for which I hether come: Not as an exile, but for ayde, and they assure me some. Then knowe, the cause is honest when their Honors giue supplies: As capable are they of troth, as thou art apt for lies. My bothers Kingdome seemes, forsooth, an Ouer-match to mine, My Kingdome, Cutlake, therefore is an vnder-match to thine? Nay, giue (and so I hope ye will) the Prize to me, and than Let Cutlake with his Crowne of Danske vn-crowne me if he can.
Then he, disabling me to make a Ioynter happelie, With Denmarke such a Ioynters want (if wanting) should supplie. But neither haue I such a lacke, nor holde I such a loue, As that her Dowrie (not in quest) before her selfe doth moue. He harpeth as himselfe would haue, that maketh loue his Staile: Els would he sue in milder sort, and suing, feare to faile. For Ladie see your Louers Plea: your loue, saith he, is debt: And if not words, nor worthines, then Armor shal you get. Braue words and fit to feare, not feede, a courted Ladies vaine. But say he cannot wowe in print, but Soldior-like and plaine: Nor I, in sooth, more loues my heart than can my tongue explaine. Conclude we therefore Souldior-like, and let a combate yeeld Vnto the hardier of vs twaine the honour of the field, If not: then, if my Lords so please: or she thereto agree, Although thou should'st by force of Armes, subdue her hence to thee, Yeat from thy strongest Holde in Danske I would thy Cōquest free. Loe heer my Gage (he terr'd his Gloue) thou know'st ye Victors meed: (So did he pause, his Pledge vntoucht, and then did thus proceede) Then fret thy fill, and worke thy worst: deliuer, Lords, your willes: Ye haue experience how this same with brags, not battell, killes. He threatneth onely, I intreate, he claimeth her of dew, I wish, and hope for to deserue. The Counsel then withdrewe Themselues apart: and soone for Brenn a verdict did ensewe. The Dane inraged sayled thence, and rigged out a Fleete, And did with Brenn, resayling home, at great aduantage meete. Their Shippes did grapple, and their swords did sunder life from lim: So fought they, as their shippes did seeme in Seas of bloud to swim. But multitude oppressed Brenn, he hardlye did escape, His Ladie will he, nill hee, left the King of Denmarkes Rape. Not meanely insolent the Danes hoyst vp their home-meant Sayleae But after manye crabbed Flawes, and long contrarie Gayles, The Kings and Norgane Ladies Shippe was tossed to the Coste Of Brutaine: wheare, imprisoned, King Belyn was their Hoste:
Vntill, sufficient Pledges had that Denmarke it should pay Continuall Tribute to the Brutes, he them dismist away. Meane while King Bren (receiued now amōgst the Gawles did threate For Englands Crowne-halfe him with-held his Brothers selfe & Seate: (For Time, alaying Loue, did adde vnto domesticke hate) And with the Cenouesean Gawles, whose Prince his heire of late He had espoused, did inuade the Empire of his Brother: And almost did their Battels ioyne, when thus intreates their Mother. I dare to name ye Sonnes, because I am your Mother, yet I doubt to tearme you Brothers, that doe Brotherhood forget. These Prodigies, their wrothfull Shields, forbodden Foe to Foe, Doe ill beseeme allyed hands, euen yours allyed soe. O, how seeme Oedipus his Sonnes in you againe to striue? How seeme these words in me (aye me) Iocasta to reuiue? I would Dunwallo liued, or ere death had lost againe His Monarchie, sufficing Fower, but now too small for Twaine. Then either would you, as did he, imploy your wounds elswheare: Or for the smalnes of your Power agree, at least for feare. But pride of ritch and rome-some Thrones, that wingeth now your darts, It will (I would not as I feare) worke sorrow to your harts. My Sonnes, sweet Sonnes, attend my words, your Mothers wordes at∣tend, And for I am your Mother doe conclude I am your frend: I cannot counsell, but intreate, nor yeat I can intreate But as a Woman, and the same whose blood was once your meate. Hence had ye Milke (She baerd her Pappes) these Armes did hug ye ost: These fyled hands did wipe, did wrap, did rocke, and lay ye soft: These Lips did kisse, or Eyes did weep, if that ye were vnqueat, Thēply I did, with Song, or Sighes, with Dance, with Tung, or Teate. For these kind Causes, deere my Sonnes, disarme your selues: if not, Then for these bitter teares that now your Mothers Cheekes do spot: Oft vrge I Sonnes and Mothers Names, Names not to be forgot. Send hence these Souldiers. yee, my Sonnes, & none but ye would fight:
When none should rather be at one, if Nature had her right. What comfort, Beline, shall I speede? sweete Brenn, shall I preuaile? Say yea (sweete Youthes) ah yea, say yea: or if I needes must faile, Say noe: and then will I begin your Battell with my baile. Then then some Stranger, not my Sonnes, shall close me in the Earth, When we by Armor ouer-soone shall meet, I feare, in death. This sayd, with gushing teares eftsoones she plyes the one and other, Till both did shew themselues at length Sonnes worthy such a Mother: And with those hands, those altred hands, that lately threatned bloes, They did imbrace: becomming thus continuall frends of foes. Glad was the Queene: and Beline hild sole Empier: more, he had From Denmarke Tribute: and to this a greater honor add, His daughter Cimbra, wedded to the Almayne Prince, gaue name Vnto the Cimbrians, holding Rome so long and warlike game. Some (if no Error) giue to him for forraine Conquests fame. His Valour, Warre, & Peace ore past: now speake we of the Knight, That this side and beyond the Alpes subdewed all by fight. The stateliest Townes in Italie had Brenn their Builder, and Euen Rome, the terror of the World, did at his mercie stand. The Senate, giuing to the Earth ear-while both warre and peace, Could not themselues, their Citie, scarce their Cappitoll release. THeir Gander Feast, what Manlius and Camillus did therein, How This the Cappitol, and That from Brenn his Spoyles did win, I pretermit. The three-topt Mount Parnassus had beloe Apollos Temple, whither men for Oracles did goe. This, with the God and Goods the Gawles did put to sacke and spoyles: And whil'st, incamped here, they kept such sacreligious coyle, The God, or rather Diuell, whom th'Almightie did permit, His Deitie prophaned, to deceiue the world in it, With Tempests, Earth-quakes, Steneh, & Sights, so cryde the Spoy∣lers quit That most did perish, fewe disperse, and all were out of harte,
Yea Brenn himselfe, discouraged, did change in euery parte. He looking after and vpon the scattered and the slayne, Did seeme a second Cadmus, saue lesse patient of his payne: And, shaming to be seene to weepe, deuoured sightles teares: And, in these words, his heartie greefes did number to their Eares. Sweet Soldiours leaue me to my selfe, it likes me that ye leaue me, More takes your tarriance frō my health than can these plagues bereaue me: Each of these Masse of Corpses dead hath bin a death to me, Deliuer then mine Eyes of you, too many deathes I see. Suruiue, and tell the Westerne World what we exployted haue: How that to Rome, amidst her Roofe, the mayden Sacke we gaue. Tell of our Battels, Booties, and our Buildings: lastly tell (An honor to our Ouerthrowe) that we at Delphos fell By wounds deuine, no humane Armes. But God, who so thou be, Lesse is thy courage than Commaund, els would'st thou cope with me, As Pluto with Alcides did, and Mars sometimes with men: Do me like honor, and these Graues shall lightly greeue me then. But thou full little darest so. Nay, I doe dare too much, That with my so vnhallowed tongue thy Deitie dare touch. Ah, see these Slaughters, and reserue aliue this small Remayne, Let lastly me, and only me, eike number to the slayne. But bootlesse on a ruthles God I see my prayers spent, As haughtely doest thou reuenge as humbly I repent. Well (God of Delphos) since our teares, this Incense, nor these Graues Appease thine yre, persist to plague this flesh, that henceforth craues No pitie: to the Hebrewe God, of power exceeding thyne, (Men say) appeale I, and bequeath the Soules of me and myne: Accept my simple Legacie, O Godhood most deuyne, Sayd Brenn. And with a selfe-wrought wound did perish: and his men Departing, wonne, and left the name to Gallo-Grecia then. The righteous Gorboman might add fresh Subiect to our Muse, But skipping to his Fathers Sonnes, of them it thus ensewes.
FIue yeeres had Archigallo raign'd, when hated doing wrong, He was depriued of his Realme, and liued vagrant long, And fearing all that frended none, kept close the Woods among. Theare Elidurus hunting found his wretched Brother, and They gasing each in others face, with sighes and weepings stand. A King, as Elidurus is, once was I thinkes his Brother, A wretch, as Archigallo is, I may be thinkes the other. The lowlie King alights anon, and when they had imbrac'd, Then Archigallo secretly in Ebranks Towne was plac'd: In which, the King commaunding so, the Nobles did conuent, To whom did Elidurus thus informe of his intent. If Fortune had bin crosse (my Lords) to me, or any feare Of Armor were approching vs, I should perchaunce appeare Faint and false-hearted in my charge, but euer lackt the one, Nor hath the other likelihood, for quietler ruleth none. Yeat Kings may thinke their heads too weake their Dyademes to su∣staine, For endles cares concurre with Crownes, a bitter sweete is Raine: Howbeit, Subiects falsely iudge their Princes blessed are, When both of peace and perils they containe the common care, And yeat for this they grudgingly from Pounds a Penny spare. Not these, my Lords, make me disclaime in it which all pursue, But Iustice bidds my Brothers right I should commend to you. This one Request includes, I knowe, exceeding dangers twaine, To me, if for a priuate life I change a publique Rayne, To you, if whom ye haue depriu'd ye shall restore againe. But for I haue done right, no wrong, though Iustice wants not foes, And though vnto a Magistrate disgrading bringeth woes, Yeat gainst the bad a conscience good may safe it selfe oppoes. Nor be ye fearefull of reuenge, that did no more than right: Euen Archigallo will confesse his sinne, and cleare your spight: Whose restitution (were he wrongd) at least shall you acquite. You hassard lesse, re-kinging him, then I vn-king'd to bee, And Danger ouer-dares, if it from Iustice disagree.
Then, good my Lords, doe right his wrong, at least-wise doe him right, Whose smarte, no doubt, hath wrought in him a reconciled spright. Iust Gorboman his brotherhood succeeding in their Line, Then Archigallo should be King, to him let me resine. So much the King did vrge this Text, that Archigallo rayn'd, And Elidurus willingly in priuate life remaynde: The one restored, for his late depriuing nothing mou'd, The other (wonders tell I now) dis-crowned yeat belou'd. Tenne yeares did Archigallo raigne, beloued well, and dyed: And Elidurus once againe the Kingly Throne supplyed, Vntill his Brothers secondly depose him of his raine, But they deceasing, thirdly he was crowned King againe, And so, vntill his Dying day, with honor did remaine. A many Kings whose good or bad no Wrighter hath displaide Did follow. Lud, and Hely, for their stately buildings made Rest chiefly famous. Nor forget King Bledgrabed I shall, Whom Brutons did their Glee-god for his skill in Musicke call. The next whose dayes gaue famous deedes, Cassiuelan is sayde, Whom Caius Iulius Caesar did with Armour thus inuade. CHAP. XVII. THis Conquerour of Gallia found his Victorie pro∣long'd By Brittish Succours, and for it, pretending to bee wrong'd, Did send for Tribute: threatning els to bring the Brutons Warre. The latter going forward first, the Albinests to barre A common foe, concurre as friends: and now was come the Spring,
When Caesar out of War-wonne France victorious Trowpes did bring. But easlier wonne the Grecians land at Pargama by much, Than got the Latines footing heere, their Contraries were such. Yee might haue seene of Hectors race, then thousand Hectors heere, With pollicie on either part, the Romanes buying deere The bloodie Shore: the water yeat lesse deerer than the land To them, whom valiantlie to proofe the Ilanders withstand. Ofte battell they, the Brutons still victorious, and in vaine Their foes were valiant: onelie heere was Caesars force in waine. And as our men vnto his men were as tempesteous Thunder, So did his ankred Shippes on Seas by Tempest dash in sunder. But twice (quoth Caesar) Fortune, thou wert opposite to mine, But thirdlie heere to Caesars selfe thou (wontles) dost decline. Conuaying then his wearie men into his wasted Shippes, To Gallia, there to Winter them, he miscontented slippes. Of this same Victorie did spring securitie and strife, The Scottes and Pichtes did sunder hence, the Brutons, ouer-rise In Largesse, making frollike Cheere, a quarrell then aroes Betwixt the King and Luds false Sonne, and they dis-ioyne as foes: That Caesar slippes Aduantage such were error to suppoes. Euen of the Brutons some there were recalling backe the Foe, And Winter past, with doubled power he backe againe did roe. The Romaines more, the Brutons they farre fewer than before, Offend, defend, fight for, fence from, to winne, and warde the Shore. But Caesar landed, and ensew'd continuall cruell fight: Thrice put the fierce Cassiuelanes the Caesarines to flight, And still the King incouraging in euerie wing appeares, So giuing needlesse spurres to fight, his Souldiours brooke not feares, Nor little did the Cornish Belles offend the Romaine eares. When Caesars oft succesles fight had tyred him and his, Inringed with his mayhmed Campe, the Romane speaketh this. Are these same Bands, those selfe-same Bands that neuer fought in vaine? And ye the men that following still my Standard still did gaine?
Euen these, and ye, are verie those: nor can I discommend Your manhoodes, that with lesser work brought greater Wars to end. But not, as was my wont to wright, the Senate now shall reede, I came: I sawe: I ouer-came: such Foes forbid such speede. Nor let the Senate muse, for Troy with Troy doth here contend: This warlike people (fame is so) from whence sprong we discend. Yea, if Aeneas had not left the Phrygian Gods to vs, And Greekes Palladium Shipt to Greece, this Fortune foyling thus, I would haue thought those very Gods had followed our anoy: But them haue we, these onely haue vndanted harts from Troy. But what? shall Caesar doubt to fight against so brauea Foe? No, Caesars Tryumphes with their Spoyles shall giue the brauer shoe. Ye Gods that guide our Capitoll, Mount Palatin thou Throne Of stately Rome, ye Followers too of her affayres each one, Delay not, but depriue me quite my Triumphes now in hand, Nor let me liue, if so I leaue vnconquered this Land: This Land, the last of Westerne Isles, an Isle vnknowen ere this, Which famous now through Caesars fight and our misfortune is. Enough, my fellow friends in Armes, enough we Romaines haue To seeke reuenge: your Conquest loe a Countrie rich and braue: And (which perswadeth victorie) in Troynouant there bee, That hold that Citie to our vse: the Brutons disagree, No Scot or Pichte assisting them in these our Warres I see▪ Their ciuill strife will proue their scourge, how stout soere they seeme, And perpetuitie doth faile in euery thing extreeme. Not Fortune still is good or bad, and now let be our day: Too long we liue, if that so long we shall on trifles stay, Said Caesar. And with such his words did so inflame his men, That with lesse patience did they liue, than linger battell then. The Romaines bid the Bace, and then did cruell Warre begin: And little wanted that the Brutes the better did not win. But Caesar so foresawe Supplies, and Succors here and theare, Perswading this, disswading that, controuling flight and feare,
That, after many Romaines slaine, the Brutons tooke their flight, To Southerne Shores: whereas to proofe Cassiuelan did fight With oft Eruptions out of Woods, vntill the traiterous Knight, The Earle of London yeelds his Charge and Citie to the Foe, Through which disloyall president did other Cities soe: And then with hard-won Tribute hence the Conquerour did goe. BVt he, that wonne in euery Warre, at Rome in ciuill Robe Was stab'd to death: no certaintie is vnderneath the Globe. The good are enuied of the bad, and glorie finds disdaine, And people are in constancie as Aprill is in raine: Whereof, amidst our serious penne, this Fable intertaine. An Asse, an Old-man, and a Boye, did through a Citie passe, And whil'st the wanton Boye did ride the Old-man led the Asse: See yonder doting foole, said Folke, that crauleth scarce for age, Doth set the Boye vpon his Asse and makes himselfe his Page. Anon the blamed Boy alightes, and lets the Old-man ride, And, as the Old-man did before, the Boye the Asse did gide: But, passing so, the people thē did much the Old-man blame, And told him, Churle, thy limbes bee tough, the Boye should ride for shame. The fault thus found, both Man and Boye did backe the Asse and ride, Then that the Asse was ouer-charg'd each man that met them cride. Now both a-light, and goe on foote, and leade the emptie Beast, But then the people laugh, and say, that one might ride at least. With it they both did vndershore the Asse on either side, But then the wondring people did that witles pranke deride. The Old-man seeing by no waies he could the people please, Not blameles then, did driue the Asse and drowne him in the Seas. Thus whil'st we be, it will not be, that any pleaseth all: Els had bin wanting, worthely, the noble Caesars fall.
CHAP. XVIII. AVgustus quayling Anthonie was Emperour alōe: In whose vn-focd Monarchie our cōmon health was knowne. The Brooser of the Serpents head, the Womans promisd Seede, The Second in the Trinitie, the Foode our soules to feede, The Vine, the Light, the Doore, the Way, the Shepheard of vs al: Whose Manhood ioynd to Deitie did Raunsome vs from thrall, That was, and is, and euermore will be the same to his, That sleepes to none that wake to him, that turns our Cursse to blisse, Whom, yet vnseene, the Patriarkes saw, the Prophets haue foretold, Th'apossles preacht, the Saints adore, and Martyres doe behold, The same (Augustus Emperour) in Palestine was borne, Amongst his owne, and yeat his owne did crosse their Blisse in skorne: Bi-formed Ianus then in Mewe: so would this Prince of Peace, That Caesars Edict euerie wheare should Mars his enuie ceace. THen raigned here King Cymbelyn, King Theomantius sonne: Next him Guiderius, that with-held the Tribute Caesar wonne. The Romaines that, in our respect, neglected Misia, Spaine, Armenia, France, and Siria, then Recusants of their Raine, Not by their Captaines, but himselfe the Emperour of Rome, Into relapsed Brutaine with imperiall Ensignes come.
Then hotter than the Punike Warres to Romaines did begin: And Claudius looseth valiantlie all that the Brutons win, But Romish Hamo, from whose death Southhampton had that name, In Brittish Armes salutes the King, and slewe by guile the same. Duke Aruiragus vsing then the Armor of the King, Maintained fight, and wonne the field ere Brutons knewe the thing. This hardie Knight, his Brother slaine, was Crowned in his place: And with his winnings, also wonne the Emperour to grace: Who sending for his daughter, faire Genissa, so did ende The Warres in Wedding: and away did Claudius Caesar wende. But Aruiragus after this reuolted, and to stay The hauocke made of Romaines here came succors euery day. His Queene Genissa childing died, when his Reuolt she knew: And Voada, deuorsed late, became his Queene of new. Then he that at Ierusalem the fatall siege begonne, Was sent from Rome, and warring here, the wonted Tribute wonne: And through his gentle Victorie, bound Aruiragus still A friend to Caesar, whome the King adopted heire by will. I here omit the dismall Warre in Isle of Mona made Against the Romaines, whome the Priests the Druides inuade With banning words, and women, with their haire vntrussed, stand With brands of fire in furious wise about their desperat Band. The King deceased, Voada and her two daughters, they Abused by the Romaine Lords, doe hotter warres assay. THe noble Scot King Corbred he confedrates with the King of Pichts: and they and Brittish Peeres to field their Armies bring To aide the Queene of Brutes, that like the Amazonian Dame That beating downe the bloodie Greekes in Priams succour came, Had pight her Iauelin at her feete, when entred in among The fearce confedrates, thus she spake amidst the silent throng: My state and sex, not hand or heart, most valiant friends, with-hild
Me, wretched Cause of your repaire by wicked Romans ild, From that reuenge which I do wish, and ye haue cause to worke: In which suppose not Voda in female feares to lurke. For Loe my selfe, vnlike my selfe, and these same Ladies faire In Armor, not to shrinke an ynch wheare hottest doings are. Euen we do dare to bid the Base, and you your selues shall see Your selues to come behind in Armes: the Romaines too that bee Such Conquerors, and valiantly can womankind oppresse, Shall know that Brittish women can the Romish wrongs redresse. Then Arme ye with like courages as Ladies shall present, Whom ye, nor wounds, nor death, the praise of Onset shall preuent. Nor enuie that our Martiall rage exceeds your manly ire, For by how much more we endure, so much more we desire Reuenge on those in whose default we are vnhallowed thus, Whilst they forget themselues for men, or to be borne of vs. Ye yeeld them Tribute, and from vs their Legions haue their pay: Thus were too much, but more then thus the haughtie Tirants sway. That I am Queene from being wrong'd doth nothing me protect: Their Rapes against my daughters both I also might obiect: They maydes deflower, they wiues enforce, and vse their wils in all, And yeat wee liue deferring fight, inferring so our fall. But valiant Brutons, ventrous Scots, and warlike Pichts I erre, Exhorting, whom I should dehort your fiearcenes to deferre. Lesse courage more considerate would make your foes to quake: My heart hath ioy'd to see your hands the Romaine Standards take, But when as force and Fortune faild, that you with teeth should fight, And in the faces of their Foes your women in despight Should fling their sucking Babes, I hild such valiantnes but vaine: Inforced flight is no disgrace, such Flyers fight againe. Here are ye, Scots, that with the King my valiant brother dead The Latines, wondring at your prowes, through Rome in triumph lead. Ye Mars-stard Pichtes of Scythian breed are here Colleagues: & more,
Ye Dardane Brutes, last named, but in valour meant before: I your conduct, most knightly friends, I superseade the rest: Ye come to fight, and we in fight to hope and helpe our best. Scarce did this braue Bellona end, when as the Battailes ioyne, And life and death was bought & sould with courage, not with coine. Aboue the rest the Queen of Brutes through blood did cut her way, Sixe thousand Ladies Lyons-like exployting like Afray: Till Cattus with his Romaine Armes, subdewed, fled away. Of Romains seuentie thousand died, of Brutons then were slaine Twise fifteene thousand, and the rest their ceased freedome gaine. When valiant Plancius, President in Gallia, heard such newes, He waffes an Armie out of Fraunce, and Voada pursues. The Albiness to aid the Queene assemble at her call, And then began a second Warre, nor was the slaughter small. The Brutons, barring flight, had clos'd themselues with waines about, In which the awles women stood suruaying who was stout, Controuling Cowards, and among did fill the aire with dinne: But, valiant though the Brutones were, the day the Romaines winne. In vaine the furious women then on Sonnes and Husbands call, Themselues with Sonnes and Husbands did by aduerse weapons fall. Queene Voada past helpe, and hope, betooke her selfe to flight: Till looking backe, vnfollowed then, and hauing in her fight The senseles Tronkes of slaughtred friends, shee leaning on her Lance Did power forth teares, and grew at length impacient of the chance, And said: my selfe, my trustie friends, wil with my dearest blood Keepe Obite to your happie Ghostes, that for your Countries good Be as you be, and I will be: no Romaine sword shall boast Of my dispatch. So on her Lance she yeelded vp the Ghoste. Her Daughter then, for to reuenge her friends vpon her foes, Assisted by the vanquished against the Victors roes, And slaughtring through the Romaine Tentes the braue Virago goes, Till Plancius, euer prouident of perils, brought supplies, What time Vodicia, vrging wounds, with constant courage dies.
SVch busines hanging, Lucius, here the first baptized King, Died issulesse: and for the Crowne did long contention spring. At length Constantius Caesar (for the Brutons yeelded so) Did Helin, Colis daughter wed. Of her doe praises go For finding of the holie Crosse: and for deuotion rare. From these proceeded Constantine, the most vndoubted heire Both to the Romaine Monarchie and this his Parents Reame. He turn'd the Empires ebbing pompe into her flowing streame, And was a Prince Religious: yeat (with reuerence be it said) If lesse religious, then not he the Empire had decaide, By largesse to a pompeous Priest, Apostolique ere then, But now intruding euen on God, insulting ouer men. Nor sparest thou his natiue Realme that seazed thee of Rome. Admit his franknesse were a fault (as is their common doome, That say he made a Paule a Saule that made a Priest a Prince, And in that grace the Empires grace disgraced euer since) Find thou no fault with such a fault wherby he fitted thee: But, if thou wilt vngrateful prooue, vngracious cease to be, A Traytors Tutor is a. K. nor force we such a. T. Let such a Prelate blesse or banne, with Candle, Booke and Bell, He cannot raise himselfe to heauen, nor rid a knaue from hell. Vaine are his Bulles engendring Calues, sent hither from his Stals, To feede (mad Sots) the Foule that by his name the Sendor cals. Nor thinke he dreamed this in vaine that dreamed thus of late: One seemed to haue passed Stix, and entring Plutos gate, Saw Hecat new canonized the Sourantisse of hell, And Pluto bad it holliday for all which theare did dwell. Sterne Minos and grimme Radimant descend their duskie roomes: The Docke was also cleare of Ghosts, adiorn'd to after-doomes: The Furies and the deadly Sinnes, with their inuectiue Scroles Depart the Barre: the Feends rake vp their euer-burning Coles: The Elues, and Fairies, taking fists, did hop a merrie Round:
And Cerberus had lap enough: and Charon leasure found: The airy Sprights the walking Flames, and Goblins great and small, Had theare good cheere, and company, and sport the diuell and all: To Tantalus the shrinking flood, nor starting fruit were such: Nor Titius his bowels did the hungrie Vultur touch: Vpon his Stone sat Cisaphus: Ixeon on his Wheele: The Belides vpon their Tubs: no wonted toile they feele. Till, in this anticke Festiuall, these last recited fiue Of dignities for dueties theare they earnestly did striue: And then the quarrell grew so hot that hell was hell againe, And flocking Ghosts did seuerally their Fauctors part maintaine. With Cisaphus tooke part the Ghosts of minds that did aspire, And by ambitious climing fell, desarts vnlike desire. With Tantalus hild starued Ghosts, whose pleasure was their paine, Whose euer Hords had neuer vse, and gettings had no gaine. To Besides assisted Soules of Vnthrifts, whose supplies Did passe from them as Sea through Cieues, whose wastes no wealthes suffise. Vnto Ixeon stood their Sprights that had their lusts for law, Rebellants to a common good, and sinning without awe. To Titius lastly ioyned Ghosts, whose hearts did emptie hate As Todes their poyson, growing when it seemeth to abate. About flie Apples, Stones, and Tubs, the wheele was tumbled downe, The Vultur girds, no Ghoste but had at least a broken crowne. This skufling and confedracie in hell made such a reare, That (wontles of such braules and blowes) Proserpine did feare. But Pluto, laughing, told his Bride to Ela it was Fa, To morrowes dinne should prooue that same to be a ciuill day: In peace these were their practises on earth, and here in hell (Saue that their Soules haue neuer peace) we finde them as they fell. They worke to me, each of these fiue, though dailie count I aske, Doe newlie number Million Soules, whose torments is their taske. The Queene of such, not free of fear, replied thus againe,
And yeat, me thinks, that Pluto should haue pittie on their paine. He lowers, and Feast with Fray had end, and drinke did euery soule Of Lethe: who, their ioyes forgot, euen yet in torments houle: Nay Pluto must be Pluto still, and so I will (quoth he,) For this same onely day the Ghosts indebted are to thee: For as the like shall neuer come, so neuer like befell, But henceforth all, yea Prince, and Pope, shall euer find it hell. So dreamed one: but ouer-long on fantazies I dwell. CHAP. XIX. THe Cosen of great Constantine, in Rome and here succeeds: Betwixt the Brutes, the Scots, and Pichtes conti∣nuall trouble breeds: And long the reg'ment of this Land the Romanes did inioy, Transmitting Captaines euermore as Foes did here anoy. But Rome it selfe declined now, and Brutaine was opprest, No longer were the Scottish Spoyles by Romaine Swords redrest. Then ends the Tribute, then began new troubles, worser farre Then Tribute: for the Scots and Pichtes inferre consuming warre. The Brutons, vnder Rome secure, as men that did relie On others, were disabled now by Martiall meanes to trie The fame of fight: but Captainelesse, confusedly they deale, And giue a wretched instant of an headles Common-weale. And whom so many Romaine Peers, grand-Captaines of such might,
Of whome nine Emperors themselues in persons here did fight, Could hardly foyle, were fronted now euen of a barbarous Foe: And at the point (a wondrous change) their Country to forgoe. Such fruit hath ease such pollicie did serue the Romaines turne, Who, waining Martiall minds, themselues the quietlier here soiorn. The Brutons thus dispoy'ld of Armes, and courage in effect, Of Prince, of Captaines, and aduise, their busines to direct: Dispatch their Legate to the Land Diminutiue in name To Brutaine: where the Legate thus his Ambassie did frame: The back-slide of our helplesse friends, the down-fall of our flate, Our lacke of Prince, of people, and our wealth, not now as late, The sauage dealing of our Foes, consuming outs and vs, Is cause (right mightie King) that we approach thy presence thus. Not for we are in blood allied, or that whil'st Fortune smil'd, Your Ancestors had rule from vs, not for the Dames defil'd At Cullin, who withstanding lust for it did loose their liues, That els to Conon and his Knights had liued noble wiues, We are emboldned in our suit: though all of these might mooue: But for our former wants, O King, and for thine owne behooue, Great Brutaine doth submit it selfe thy Subiect (if thou please.) Or els dispose it at thy will. Prouided we haue ease Against such Foes, as would not saue our liues to haue our Land: Whom to conclude (except thou helpe) we neuer may withstand. The King Aldroen pittying much the cause of his Allies, Arm'd thence his brother Constantine, a Captaine stout and wise. He chasing hence the Scottes & Pichtes, with glory wore the Crowne, And through his vertue stayed vp a Kingdome sinking downe. WIthin a while did Vortiger the Duke of Cornewalle raigne, When Constans Sonne of Constantine he traitrously had slaine. The Scotts did ruffle then anew, nor did the King affye In Brutones, for they hated him, and reason had they why:
And Saxon Fleetes from Germanie in Armor here arriue, Through whose support the King in wars against the Scots did thriue. The Foe by Hengest foyled thus, he and his brother git The chiefest credit with the King, but few gaine-saying it, Necessitie of Souldiers here so well for them did fit. And Hengests Daughter intertain'd King Vortiger so well, That to misliking of his wife and liking her he fell: And sotted thus in forren Loue, did wed the Saxon Wench: Which wrought vnto the Saxons weale, but to the Brutes offence▪ For whatsoere the Queene did aske, the King would not deny, Vntill his Subiects ran to Armes, and made the Saxons flie. They putting downe the Father, then did set vp Vortimer, He poisoned by his Stepdame, they restored Vortiger, With this condition, that he should no Saxons intertaine. But Hengest (hearing from the Queene that Vortimer was slaine, And Vortiger his Sonne-in-lawe re-kinged) did resaile With Saxon forces: though with fraud, not force he did preuaile, For thus by pollicy he did the Brutons circumuent: He craued Parlie, as a man that were to quietnes bent, The place appoynted, Parlantes him in simple meaning meet Farre from their Armie all vnarm'd, whom Saxon Traitors greet With deadly wounds by hidden kniues, & held the King with them, Confounding so the Brittish Oste. Nor cease they to contemne Both Christian rights, and ciuill Rule, subuerting either twaine: And what they would of Vortiger through feareull threats they gaine: And plant themselues in Southfolke, Kent, and elsewhere at their will: And ruffling runne throughout the Land oppressing Brutons still. The King and Brutons fled to Wales: and Feend-got Marlin theare Bewraied more then I beleeue, or credit seemes to beare: As shewing how the Castell worke, rear'd daily, fell by night By shaking of two Dragons great that vnderneath it fight, With other wonders, tedious if not trothlesse to resight.
Aurelius Ambrose, brother to King Constans murdred late, From either Bruton hauing aid, wonne so the kingly state: And, ere that Hengest or his Sonne stout Octa he subdew'd, First to reuenge his Brothers death he Vortiger pursew'd, In vaine the Welsh wild Mountaines fence the Flier from his Foe, Or Gerneth Castell, when as flames throughout the buildings goe: In midst whereof the wretched King did end his dayes in woe. THe Brutons thus had peace a while, till Vortigerus Sonne, And Gutllamour the Irish King, in new Conflicts begonne: Whom, whil'st that Vter valiantly in VVales to wracke did bring, His Brother Ambrose did decease, and Vter then was King. What Vter did by Marlins Art, in compassing his will Vpon the Wife of Garolus, transfigured by skill Into the likenesse of her Lord, on whom he got a Sonne, Renowmed Arthur: or to name the Acts by Vter donne, Were much and needlesse: onely note he was a valiant Prince, But such as was his noble Sonne, was not before or since. Yeat blazing Arthur, as haue some, I might be ouer-seene: He was victorious, making one amongst the Worthies neene: But (with his pardon) if I vouch his world of Kingdomes wonne, I am no Poet, and for lacke of pardon were vndonne. His Scottish, Irish, Almaine, French, and Saxone Battelles got, Yeeld fame sufficient: these seeme true, the rest I credite not. But Bruton is my taske, and to my taske I will retire: Twelue times the Saxon Princes here against him did conspire, And Arthur in twelue Battles great went vanquishor away: Howbeit Saxon forces still amongst the Brutons stay. This King to entertaine discourse, and so to vnderstand What Accidents in after-times should happen in this Land, He with the Brutish Prophet then of Sequelles fell in hand. Of sixe long after-Kings the man, not borne of humane seede,
Did Prophesie, and many things that came to passe in deede. Now Arthur, chiefe of Chiualrie, had set his Crowne at stay, And to his Nephew Mordred did commit thereof the sway, When with his Knights, the wonders of the world for Martiall deeds, Beyond the Scas in forren fights he luckely proceedes: Till faithlesse Mordred cal'd him backe that forward went with fame, For at his Vncles Diadem he traiterously did aime. Twise Arthur wonne of him the field, and thirdly slewe his Foe, When, deadly wounded, he himselfe, victorious, died so. INterred then with publique plaints, and issules, ensewes A drouping of the Brittish state: the Saxon still subdewes, Howbeit worthy Kings succeed: but destiny withstood The auncient Scepter to iniure in Brutes succeeding blood. Vnlou'd Careticus was he that lost the Goale at length: Whenceforth, in vaine, to win their losse the Brutons vse their strēgth, Yea God, that as it pleaseth him, doth place or dispossesse, When foes, nor foiles, nor any force, their courage might suppresse, Seem'd partiall in the Saxon Cause, and with a Plague did crosse The Brutons, that had els at least rebated from their losse: For Cadwane, and Cadwallyn, and Cadwallader, the last, But not the least for valorous of Brittish Princes past, Brought out of VVales such knightly wars as made their foes agast. The Plague (worse spoyler then the Wars) left Cambre almost waste, Which to auoid, the remnant Brutes into their Ships did haste. Cadwallader, in leauing thus his natiue Shore, he fixt His eyes from whence his bodie should, and with his sighes he mixt His royall teares, which giuing place, he speaketh thus betwixt. Sweet Brutaine (for I yet must vse that sweet, and ceasing name) Adew, thy King bids thee adew, whose flight no weapons frame: But God cōmaunds, his wrath commandes, al counter-maund is vaine, Els, for thy loue, to die in thee were life to thy Remaine.
Thus tymes haue turnes, thus Fortune still is flying to and fro: What was not, is: what is, shall cease: some come, and others goe: So, Brutaine thou of Nation and of name endurest change, Now balking vs whome thou hast bread, and brooking people strange. Yeat (if I shoot not past mine aime) a world of time from me, Part of our blood, in highest pompe, shall Englands glorie be: And chieflie, when vnto a first succeeds a second She. But, leauing speeches ominous, Cadwallader is woe, That seeing death determines griefe, he dies not on his foe. Ah, Fortune fayleth mightie ones, and meaner doth aduance: The mightiest Empier Rome hath change, then Brutaine brooke thy chance: Let it suffice thou wert before and after Rome in fame: And to indure what God intends were sinne to count a shame. Nor vaunt, ye Saxons, of our flight: but if ye needs will vaunt, Then vaunt of this, that God displac'd whom you could neuer daunt. This said, the teares cōtrould his tong, & sailes wrought land frō sight When (saue a Remnant small) the Isle was rid of Brutons quight.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. XX. THe Brutons thus departed hence, Seauen King∣domes here begonne: Where diuerslie in diuers broyles the Saxons lost and wonne. King Edel and King Adelbright in Diria iointly raigne: In loyall concorde during life these Kingly friends remaine. When A delbright should leaue his life, to Edel thus he sayes: By those same bondes of happie loue, that held vs friends alwaies, By our by-parted Crowne, of which the Moyetie is mine, By God, to whome my soule must passe, and so in time may thine, I pray thee, nay I coniure thee, to nourish as thine owne Thy Neece my Daughter Argentile, till she to age be growne, And then, as thou receiuest it, resigne to her my Throne. A promise had for this Bequest, the Testator he dies: But all that Edel vndertooke, he afterward denies. Yeat well he fosters for a time the Damsiell, that was growne The fairest Lady vnder Heauen: whose beautie being knowne,
A many Princes seeke her loue, but none might her obtaine: For grippell del to himselfe her Kingdome sought to gaine, And for that cause from sight of such he did his Ward restraine. By chance one Curan, Sonne vnto a Prince in Danske did see The Maid, with whom he fell in loue as much as one might bee. Vnhappie Youth, what should he doe? his Saint was kept in Mewe: Nor he, nor any Noble-man admitted to her vewe. One while in Melancholy fits he pines himselfe away, Anon he thought by force of Armes to win her, if he may, And still against the Kings restraint did secretly inuay. At length the high Controller Loue, whom none may disobay, Imbased him from Lordlines, vnto a Kitchin Drudge: That so at least of life or death she might become his Iudge. Accesse so had to see, and speake, he did his loue bewray, And tells his bearth: her answer was she husbandles would stay. Meane while the King did beat his braines his booty to atchieue, Nor caring what became of her, so he by her might thriue: At last his resolution was some Pessant should her wiue. And (which was working to his wish) he did obserue with ioye How Curan, whom he thought a drudge, scapt many an amorous toy. The King, perceiuing such his vaine, promotes his Vassall still, Least that the baseuesse of the man should let, perhaps, his will: Assured therefore of his loue, but not suspecting who The Louer was, the King himselfe in his behalfe did wowe. The Lady, resolute from Loue, vnkindly takes that he Should barre the Noble, and vnto so base a Match agree: And therefore shifting out of doores, departed thence by stealth, Preferring pouertie before a dangerous life in wealth. When Curan heard of her escape, the anguish in his hart Was more then much, and after her from Court he did depart: Forgetfull of himselfe, his bearth, his Country, friends, and all, And onely minding (whom he mist) the Foundresse of his thrall.
Nor meanes he after to frequent or Court or stately Townes, But solitarily to liue amongst the Country grownes. A brace of yeeres he liued thus, well pleased so to liue, And Shepherd-like to feede a flocke himselfe did wholly giue. So wasting loue, by worke, and want, grewe almost to the Waene: But then began a second Loue, the worser of the twaene. A Country wench, a Neatheards maid, where Curan kept his Sheep, Did feed her Droue: and now on her was all the Shepheards keepe, He borrowed on the working daies his holie russets oft: And of the Bacons fat, to make his Startops blacke and soft: And least his Tarbox should offend he left it at the Folde: Sweete Growte, or Whig, his Bottle had as much as it might hold: A Sheeue of bread as browne as Nut, and Cheese as white as snowe, And Wildings, or the Seasons fruite, he did in Scrip bestow: And whil'st his py-bald Curre did sleepe, and Sheep-hooke lay him by, On hollow Quilles of Oten strawe he piped melody: But when he spied her his Saint, he wipte his greasie shooes, And clear'd the driuell from his beard and thus the Shepheard wooes. I haue sweet Wench a peece of Cheese, as good as tooth may chaw, And bread, and Wildings souling-well (and therewithall did drawe His Lardrie) and, in eating, see you Crumpled Ewe (quoth he) Did twinne this fall, and twin shouldst thou if I might up with thee. Thou art too eluish, faith thou art too eluish, and too coy: Am I (I pray thee) beggerly, that such a Flocke enioy? I wis I am not: yeat that thou doest holde me in disdaine Is brimme abroad, and made a gybe to all that keepe this Plaine. There be as quaint (at least that think themselues as quaint) that craue The Match, that thou (I wot not why) maist, but mislik'st to haue. How wouldst thou match? (for well I wot, thou art a Female) I, I know not her that willingly with Maiden-head would die. The Plowmans labour hath no end, and he a Churle will prooue: The Craftsman hath more worke in hand then fitteth vnto loue:
The Marchant traffiquing abroad, suspects his Wife at home: A Youth will play the Wanton, and an olde-man prooue a Mome. Then Chuse a Shepheard. With the Sun he doth his Flocke vnfold, And all the day on Hill or Plaine he merrie chat can hold: And with the Sun doth folde againe: then iogging home betime, He turnes a Crab, or tunes a round, or sings some merrie ryme: Nor lackes he gleefull tales to tell, whil'st round the Bole doth trot: And sitteth singing care-away, till he to bed hath got. Theare sleepes he soundly all the night, forgetting Morrow cares, Nor feares he blasting of his Corne nor vttering of his wares, Or stormes by Seas, or stirres on Land, or cracke of credite lost, Not spending franklier then his Flocke shall still defray the cost. Wel wot I, sooth they say that say: more quiet nightes and daies The Shepheard sleeps & wakes than he whose Cattel he doth graize. Beleeue me Lasse, a King is but a man, and so am I: Content is worth a Monarchie, and mischiefes hit the hie: As late it did a King and his, not dwelling far from hence, Who left a Daughter, (saue thy selfe) for faire a matchlesse wench: (Here did he pause, as if his tongue had done his heart offence.) The Nearesse, longing for the rest, did egge him on to tell How faire she was, and who she was. She bore (quoth he) the bell For Beautie: though I clownish am, I know what Beautie is, Or did I not, yeat seeing thee, I senceles were to mis. Suppose her Beautie Hellens-like, or Hellens somewhat lesse, And euery Starre consorting to a puer Complexion gesse. Her Stature comely tall, her gate well graced, and her wit To maruell at, not meddle with, as matchles I omit. A Globe-like head, a Gold-like haire, a Forhead smooth and hie, An euen Nose, on either side did shine a graish Eie: Two rosie Checkes, round ruddy Lips, white iust-set Teeth within: A mouth in meane, and vnderneath a round and dimpled Chin: Her Snowish necke with blewish Vaines stood bolt vpright vpon
Her portly shoulders: beating Balles, her vained Breasts, anon Adde more to Beautie: wand-like was her middle, falling still, And rising whereas women rise: but ouer-skippe I will, What Males in Females ouer-skippe: imagine nothing ill. And more, her long and limber Armes had white and azure Wrists: And slender Fingers aunswere to her smooth and lillie Fists: A Legge in print, a pretie Foot: coniecture of the rest, For amorous Eies, obseruing forme, thinke parts obscured best. With these (O thing deuine) with these, her tong of speech was spae; But speaking, Venus seem'd to speake the Balle from Ide to baer. With Phoebe, Iuno, and with both her selfe contends in face: Wheare equall mixture did not want of milde and stately grace. Her smiles were sober, and her lookes were chearefull vnto all: And such as neither wanton seeme, nor waiward, mell, nor gall. A quiet mind, a patient mood, and not disdaining any: Not gybing, gadding, gawdie, and her faculties were many. A Nimph, no tong, no heart, no Eie, might praise, might wish, might see For life, for loue, for forme, more good, more worth, more fire, thē she: Yea such an one, as such was none, saue onely she was such: Of Argentile to say the most, were to be silent much. I knewe the Ladie very well, but worthles of such praies, The Neatresse sayd: and muse I do, a Shepheard thus should blaze The Coote of beautie. Credit me, thy latter speech bewraies Thy clownish shape a coined shew. But wherefore doest thou weepe? (The Shepheard wept, and she was woe, and both doth silence keepe.) In troth, quoth hee, I am not such as seeming I professe: But then for her, and now for thee, I from my selfe digresse. Her loued I, (wretch that I am a Recreant to be) I loued her, that hated loue: but now I die for thee. At Kirkland is my Fathers Court, and Curan is my name, In Edels Court somtimes in pompe, till Loue contrould the same: But now. What now? deare heart how now? what ailest thou to weep? (The Damsell wept, and he was woe, and both did silence keepe.)
I graunt quoth she, it was too much, that you did loue so much: But whom your former could not moue, your second loue doth touch. Thy twise beloued Argentile submitteth her to thee: And for thy double loue presents herselfe a single fee: In passion, not in person chaung'd, and I my Lord, am she: They sweetly surfeiting in ioy, and silent for a space, When as the Extasie had end did tenderly imbrace, And for their wedding, and their wish got fitting time and place. Not England (for of Hengest then was named so this Land) Then Curan had an hardier Knight, his force could none withstand: Whose Sheep-hooke laid apart, he then had higher things in hand. First, making knowne his lawfull claime in Argentile her right, He war'd in Diria, and he wonne Bretia too in fight: And so from trecherous Edel tooke at once his life and Crowne, And of Northumberland was King, long ragning in renowne. CHAP. XXI. THe Saxons that, in these discents, deriue from Gods and men, oue, Minos Get a, Flokwald, Flyn, Fredwlfe, Fraeloffe, VVoden, Each as here placed others son, not onely Con∣quer here, But with their wandring Armies spoyle the World through-out welnere. The English Saxon Kings oppresse the mightier ones the weake: Each trifling cause sufficing here their loue and leagues to breake. One seazeth of his Neighbours Realme, and is disseaz'd ere-long: For Empire some, for Enuie some, and some to right their wrong
Contend vnto their common losse, and some like Monsters rain: As Sigert, who for tyrannie did banishment sustaine. He wandred vnbewailed long, a man whom men exempt From house and helpe, pursuing him with capitall contempt. Forlorne therefore, with drouping lims, and dropping eies, in vaine, He frendles walks the fruitles Woods, and foodles did complaine. A Swineheard meeting him by chaunce, and pitying his estate, Imploy'd the Westerne King, vnknowne, on his affaires to wait. Nor did the needie King disdaine such roome, for such reliefe: An vnder-Swineheardship did serue, he sought not to be chiefe. But when by speech and circumstance, his Maister vnderstood, His seruant was the somtimes King: blood cries (quoth he) for blood: My giltles Master in thy pompe, thou Tyrant, diddest slay, Nor vnreuenged of his death thou shalt escape away. With that he tooke a Libbat vp, and beateth out his braines: And dead (so odious Tyrants be) not one for him complaines. NOt all so ill, yeat cause of worse vnto the English state Was Osbert of Northumberland: his loue did winne him hate. Enamored on Lord Buerns wife, as tired in the Chace, He left the Hounds, and with a fewe dismounts at Buerns Place. Her husband absent, heartely his Lady entertaines The King, and feasts him Royally, not sparing cost or paines. But he that fed on Fansies food, and hungred whil'st he eates, Thought Venus sparer in her loues then Ceres in her meates. The Trayne and table voyded, then he taking her apart, Directs her by his tongue and teares vnto his louing heart. Delay he sayth, breedeth doubts, but sharpe deniall death, Or do not long surcharge my blisse, or soone discharge my breath: For if my praiers adde no edge vnto thy begged doome, The vintage of my thriftlesse loe is blasted in the bloome. Be fauorable to my fire: for thy sweete sake, be bolde, I durst attempt euen Hell (if hell so sweete a thing might holde.)
Doe thinke her coie, or think her chaste, my Censure I suspend▪ Some Women yeeld not at the first, yeat yeeld they in the ende. She gaue repulses to his lust, and he replies of Loue: Not all the Writs Diana had might Cupids Plaint remoue. She countermaunding his demaund, he ceased Courting now, And did with her by violence what vertues disalow: And then departed, leauing her in selfe-conceit disgraste: More trespassed then some would thinke, and yeat perhaps as chaste. Home came her Lord, whose browes had buds, and found his wife in tears, And (foolish thing) she told a troth, for which reuēge he swears. But so the man did proue a beast: he better might haue hid it, Some such are mistically domme, yeat domly doe forbid it. His Wiues escapes done secretly, if by the man detected, Shewes hilled būps (supposed būps) meerehornes, not hornes suspected. At Denmarke in his Cosins Court, he telleth of his wrong: And gaines against his soueraigne Lord of Danes an Armie strong: Hungar and Hubba, and himselfe, Conductors of this Hoast, Did with their forren forces land, and spoyle the Northerne Coaste. The vicious valiant Osbret, that had vanquished ere then The King and Kingdome of the Scots, though wanting armes & men, Thought skorne his foes should beard him so & bar him vp in walles, And therefore, issuing out of Yorke, vpon the Danes he falles. A Bloodie Bargaine then begonne, no fight might fearcer be, And of the Danish part were slaine for euery English three. But manhood lost, and number wonne, the Danes they got the fielde: And Osbret dyed valiantly, that not to liue would yeeld. MEane while the Danes with fresh supplies ariue at euerie Shore, And warre almost in euery shire infesting England sore: With whome couragious Etheldred contended long in vaine, By them was he, King Ella, and the holy Edmund slaine. Nothing was done, but all vndone, till King Alured hee In daunger of his Royall selfe did set his subiects free:
For euery day, in euery place, the Danes did so increase, That he nor any English King enioy one day of peace. Nor mightier men at Armes than they, might any wheare be found, Who in their diuers Wars els-where did diuers Realmes confound: For as the Gothes, the Vandales, Hunnes, and Saxons earst did range, So now the Danes did plague the world, as sent by interchange. This Westerne and victorious king, and greatest Monarke heere, Perceiuing of this spoyled Isle a toward Ruine neere, Disguised like a Minstrill poore, did haunt the Danish Tents, And with his feats and melodie the Enemie presents: And of their sloth, their gluttonie, and Counsels priuie so, He tooke aduantage, giuing them a sodaine ouerthrow. And sayeth Hubba, Hungar, and the Cause of their repayr, And putteth all to sword and Seas that vnbaptized wair. Yeat to Northumberland return'd fearce Gurmond with the Danes, Meane time did king Alured die, the Hatchet of their Tranes. But Adelstane (one king betwixt) not onely clear'd the Land Of Danes, but of all England had sole Empire in his hand. Thus of this long dismembred Realme was he the onely King: In which, till Egelred, his raigne did prosper euerie thing. He raigning, much of England then the Lordly Danes did hold, Exacting Tributes euery yeare, and selling Peace for Gold. And (which no doubt did hatch those Plagues) the King a wicked one, Did enter by his Brothers blood, extorting thus his Throne: King Edgar that subdu'd the Scots, and slaughtered the Danes, And of the VVelch had tribute Wolffs, of whom it more remaines That, as it were in Triumph-wise, Eight Vnder kings did roe Him, Sterns-man, on the Riuer Dee, with diuers honors moe, This Edgar by a former wife had Edward, by an other This Egelred, a Sonne vnto a kind and cruell Mother: For as she labors to preferre her owne by well and ill, So to destroy her Son-in-law she wanted meanes, not wil.
And meanes did hit. King Edward hunts, and hunting lost his Traine, Whom, man-les, at her Castle Corfe the Queene did entertaine. He hauing seene to whom he came in curtesie to see, Made haste away, in Quest of them that still a hunting be: And when he, mounted, should depart, to him his Stepdame drinkes. Whom, pledging, him an Hierling stab'd, & life-les downe he sinkes. Thus Egelred obtain'd the Crowne, but for his crwing so His Subiects grudge, and he became a Preface to their woe. For when this proud and vitious king, was neither lou'd of his, Nor liued safely for the Danes, his secret Edict is, That sodainely in one selfe hower, throughout the Land should passe charge A common Massaker of Danes, which so performed was: Hartfordia VVelwyn (VVealth-wyn then, for promptnesse in that Beginning, other Townes as it themselues from Danes inlarge. CHAP. XXI. THis common mu her of the Danes was com∣mon mirth to all The English, whom they did oppresse with slaueries not small, Compelling mē by grieuous Draught as Beasts to plough their Land, Of whom the English as of Gods, or Feends, in terror stand. The Husband durst not vse his Wife if liked of a Dane, Nor House nor Goods, nor ought he had, for who resists was slaine: That frankes and feedeth daintily, This pines and fareth ill, And of his sweat that hath the sweete, and is imperious still. Each house maintained such a Dane, that so they might preuent
Conspiracies, if any were, and grope how mindes were bent: Lord Dane the same was called then, to them a pleasing name, Now odiously Lur-dane say we, when idle Mates we blame. When Swaine the Daciā King did hear his Danes were murther dso. With bitter vowes he shipt his men for Englands ouerthroe: And landing, spar'd no shrine, nor Saint, nor Sex, nor any State, Not wanting Aiders English-men, that held their King in hate. Especially false Edricus the Admirall deceiues His King and Countrey oftentimes, and Bribes of Swaine receiues: And Egelred his cowardisse incouraged the Foe, Till Swaine at length, for Masses great, was bribed hence to goe. But making short returne, the Peeres of England that disdaine Th'indignities of such a King, that did so feebly raigne, Submit them Subiects vnto Swaine: and Egelred did flie Vnto the Father of his Queene, the Duke of Normandie: And Swaine, possessed of the land, did shortly after die. His sonne Canutus, present here, had Seazon of the Crowne, Till Egelred, returning back by Armor puts him downe: Who scarcely giueth breathing time, but that he back resailes From Denmarke, and by force, by friends, and fortune here preuailes: For in this Warre King Egelred did sicken and decease: And then the broiles (Canutus king) did for a time decrease, Till Edmund, sonne of Egelred, did interrupt that peace. COnferring Armes, to Edmonds age when Egelred did lie On death-bed, to his sonne he said: not quite forlorne am I, Whose life hath had so much of griefe, thus gratiously to dye. Ad more, thy vertues glad my death, yeat two things greeue among, To leaue my Kingdom so in Warres, and thee for Warres too young, So may these troubles weare to none as thou doest waxe I pray, And so possesse thy Fathers Seate that all approoue thy sway. Not to be made a King (my Sonne) is so to make thee proude, For Mildenes fitteth maiestie, high mindes are disaloude.
See me thy Father, now a King, and by and by but earth, Nor thinke that euerie King hath hap to die a happie death. Let nature for perfection molde a Paragon each way, Yeat death at last on finest lumps of liuing flesh will pray: For nature neuer framed it, that neuer shall decay. The brauest are as blossomes, and the longest Liuer dies, And dead, the louelest Creature as the lothsom'st Carrion lies. Then thinke not but that kings are men, and as the rest miscarrie, Saue that their fame or infamie continually doth tarry. Deeme past Examples Sentences, and (which did fayle in me) Make vse of those not now in vse, for now will cease to be. Attempt not things beyond thy reach, ioyne fortune to thy will: Least Phoebus Chaire doe else surcharge rash Phaeton his skill. If Fortune helpe whom thou would'st hurt, fret not at it the more: When Aiax stormed, then from him the Prize Vlysses bore. Try friends by touch, a feeble friend may prooue thy strōgest Foe: Great Pompes head to Caesars hand it was betrayed so. Admit thou hadst Pactolion waues, to land thee Golde at will, Know Craesus did to yrus kneele, and thou maist speed as ill. Abandon lust, if not for sinne, yeat to auoyd the shame: So Hogges of Ithacus his men the Latian Witch did frame. Be not too moody in thy wrath, but pause though fist be bent: Oft Philips Sonne did rashly strike, and leisurely repent. Content thee with vnthreatned Meane, and play not Aesops Dogge: The Golde that gentle Bacchus gaue did greedy Mydas clogge. Be valiant, not too venterous, but fight to sight againe: Euen Hercules did hold it ods for one to striue with twaine. Be not ambitiously a King, nor grudgingly decline: One God did root out Cis his stock, and rayse vp Iesses line. Iest nor with edge tooles, suffer Saints, let mightie Fooles be mad: Note, Seneca by Neroes doome for Precepts pennance had. Haue care to whom, of whō, & what to speak, though speech be trew, That Misse made Poeus contrary his Rauens Swan-like hew.
He frameth torments to himselfe that feeds a Tyrants vaine: Perillus was by Phalaris adiudg'd to self-taught paine. Prayse not the beautie of thy Wife, though she of forme be sped: For Gyges, moued so, did graft on Candaules his head. Shunne Ielousie that heart-breake loue, if Cat will goe to kind, Be sure that Io hath a meanes that Argus shall be blind. Commit not Treasure with thy Child to greedy minded men: Thou leauest Polidor a spoyle to Polymnestor then. Occurrants giue occasions still of like, in which be sure To serue thy God, to saue thy selfe, and well to all procure. Be vertuous, and assure thy selfe thou canst not then but thriue: In onely vertue it is sayd, that men themselues suruiue. As for the vicious, such they are, as is the heedlesse Flye, That killes it selfe, and hurts his sight that hath her in his eye. Farewell my Sonne, England farewell, thy neuer happy Prince Doth take his leaue, an happy leaue, if taken so long since. And, Edmond (burying not with me thy vertues, nor my speech) I blesse thee in his blessed Name whome I of blesse beseech, Said Egelred: and shortly gaue a quiet gaspe or twaine, And being dead, his noble Sonne succeeded him in Raigne. THis like himselfe, euen Knight-like and an English-man indeede, Did quickē Englands quailing Prowes, & Mars-like did proceed. A brauer Captaine than was he not any band might haue: And yeat a Mars did match this Mars, Canutus was as braue. These wonders of that age for Armes, and Dirii of those dayes, Did often battell, equally to eithers losse and praies, Now after many bloody Fieldes, when none might estimate The better or the worser part, a Knight that saw the state Then present, and by likelyhoods presaged what might fall, Said (hearing it the differing Kings and Souldiers almost all:) We euer warre, and neuer winne, Edmund hath Fortitude, Canutus Fortune, neither thus of other is subdude,
Death feares not vs, nor for their liues our Contraries doe care: It followes then, that all must die wheare all so despret are. If all be slayne, then who shall serue our Princes that suruiue? Or fence out Forrens? better one, then none of both should thriue. To thriue therefore, were not a-misse, that seeing one of twaine Will Owner all, that onely they the quarrell doe maintaine. Or if Combattensie not please, the Land is rich and large, And they Copernicers may liue, and vs of death discharge. If Combat nor Partition be, then will his Warre reuiue, Till one, suruiuing all of vs, wants one with whome to striue. This sayd, the Kings did marke and make a profit of the same, And did conclude by Combacy to winne or loose the Game. Within a little Island neare (round which the Armies stand) The Kingly Champions trie their Force, by fighting hand to hand. They spur their Horses, breake their Speares, & beat at Barriars long And then, dismounting, did renew a Battell braue and strong. Whil'st eyther King thus Martially defends, and did offend, They breathing, King Canutus said: we both I see shall end, Ee Empire shall begin to one: then be it at thy choyce To fight, or part. With it their Knights crie out with common voyce, Deuide, most valiant Kings deuide, enough ye haue of Fight: And so the Champions did embrace, forgetting malice quite. Partition equally was made betwixt these Princes twaine, And Brother-like they liue and loue: till by a deu'lish traine, Earle Edricus, a Traytor to the Father and the Sonne, Did murther Edmund: and his head (supposing to haue wonne The fauour of Canutus so) presenting sayd (O King) For loue of thee I thus haue done. Amazed at the thing, Canutus sayd, and for that thou hast headed him for me, Thy head aboue all English heads exalted it shall be: The Earle was headed, and his head poold vp for all to see. Of England, Danske, & Norway, then Canut was perfect Lord, And in this triple Regiment all with vertue did accord.
Harold, & Hardi-knought his sonnes each th'other did succeede: Of either which small certaine Fame of well or ill we reede, Saue by their Raigns to Englsh-men did grieuous thraldō breede. But after Hardt-knought his death the Danes were chased hence, Not intermedling with the state of England euersince. CHAP. XXII. OF foresaid Egelred his Sonnes, Alured, and his brother, Was Edward King: (for Goodwins guile had made away that other.) Religious, chaste, wise, fortunate, stout, francke, and milde was hee: And from all Taxes, wrongs, and Foes, did set his Kingdome free. By ouer-ruling of his Lords, intreating long the same, Least, dying Issuelesse, he leaue succession out of frame, He tooke to Queene a Damsell faire: howbeit, by consent, In vowes of secret chastitie their louing liues they spent. The Father of this maiden-wife, he sitting by the King, And seeing one that stumbled, but not falling, vp to spring, Did laughing say, the brother theare the brother well hath eas'd, (His meaning was the Stumblers feete.) And haddest thou so pleas'd, So had my Brother, quoth the King, bin easing vnto me. The traitrous Earle tooke bread and sayd, so this digested be As I am guiltlesse of his death: these words he scarcely spoke, But that in presence of the King the bread did Goodwyn choke. His sonne Harold, by Hardi-knoghts late daughter, him suruiues, He, crossed by contrary winds, in Normandie ariues,
Where Goodwins sonne did take an oth, Duke VVilliam vrging so, To keepe vnto the Duke his vse, when Edward hence should go, The Crowne of England (claimed by Adoption, and by blood.) But Harold, after Edwards death, not to his promise stood. And for he was in wealth, in friends, in blood, and Armor strong, And title had his Mothers right, he forced not the wrong: But arming him against the Duke, so vrged vnto wroth, Did seaze the Crowne vnto himselfe, contrary to his oth. Whil'st VVilliam therfore works for war, King Harold had not rest, For Harold Hare-foote, King of Danes and Norwaies, much opprest The English with his puissant Bands. But Harold him assailes, And after fearce and doubtfull fight most valiantly preuailes: And with the Norgaine Prince he slew his people almost all: When, for deuision of the spoyle, did much contention fall Betwixt the King and English-men: and many a noble Knight Not onely murmur and maligne, but did forsake him quight. Such malice growing, VVilliam with his Normanes taking land, Found hot hot▪ spur Harold prest in Armes, his puissance to withstand: And either Battell Marshalled, as either Captaine wild, The King of England eagerly the Normane Oste behild, And with his cheerefull speeches thus his men with courage fild. See valiant (War-friends) yonder be the first, the last, and all The Agentes of our Enemies: they hencefoorth cannot call Supplies: for weedes at Normandie by this in Porches groe: Then Conquer these would Conquer you, and dread no further Foe, They are no stouter than the Brutes, whom we did hence exile: Nor stronger than the sturdy Danes, or victory er while: Not Saxoe could once containe, or scarce the world beside Our Fathers, who did sway by sword where listed them to bide. Then doe not ye degenerate, take courage by discent, And by their burialles, not abode, their force and flight preuent. Ye haue in hand your Countries cause, a Conquest they pretend, Which (were ye not the same ye be) euen Cowards would defend.
I graunt that part of vs are fled and linked to the Foe, And glad I am our Armie is of Traytours cleered so: Yea pardon hath he to depart that stayeth Mal-content: I prize the minde aboue the man, like zeale hath like euent. Yeat troth it is, no well or ill this Iland euer had, But through the well or ill Support of Subiects good or bad. Not Caesar, Hengest, Swayn, or now (which neretheles shall fayle) The Normane Bastard (Albion true) did, could, or can preuaile. But to be selfe-false in this Isle a selfe-Foe euer is, Yeat wot I, neuer Traytour did his Treasons Sipend mis. Shrinke who wil shrinke, let Armor's wayte presse downe the burdned earth, My Foes, with wondring eyes, shal see I ouer prize my death. But since ye all (for all, I hope, a like affected bee, Your Wiues, your Children, liues, and Land from suitude to free) Are Armed both in shew and zeale, then gloriously contend, To winne and weare the home brought Spoyles, of Victorie the end. Let not the Skinners daughters Sonne possesse what he pretends, He liues to die a noble death that life for freedome spendes. As Harold hartned thus his men, so did the Normane his: And looking wishly on the earth, Duke William speaketh this. To liue vpon, or lie within, this is my Ground or Graue, (My louing Souldiers) one of twaine your Duke resolues to haue. Nor be ye Normanes now to seeke in what you should be stout, Ye come amidst the English Pikes to hewe your honors out, Ye come to winne the same by Launce, that is your owne by law, Ye come, I say, in righteous warre reuenging swords to draw. Howbeit of more hardie Foes no passed Fight hath spead ye, Since Rollo to your now-Abode with Bands victorious lead ye Or Turchus, Sonne of Troylus, in Scythian Fazo bread ye. Then worthy your Progenitors ye Seede of Pryams sonne Exployt this businesse: Rollons do that which ye wish be done. Three People haue as many times got and forgone this shore, It resteth now ye Conquer it not to be Conqured more:
Fot Normane and the Saxon Blood conioyning, as it may, From that consorted Seede the Crowne shall neuer passe away. efore vs are our armed Foes, behind vs are the Seas, On either side the Foe hath Holdes of succour, and for ease. But that Aduantage shall returne their Disaduantage thus, If ye obserue no shore is left the which may shelter vs, And so hold out amidst the Rough, whil'st they hale in for Lee, Whereas, whil'st men securely sayle, not seldome shipwracks bee. What should I cite your passed Acts, or tediously incence To present Armes? your faces shewe your hearts conceiue offence: Yea euen your courages deuine a Conquest not to faile▪ Hope then your Duke doth prophecie, and in that hope preuaile. A People braue, a terren Heauen, both Obiects wroth your warres, Shall be the Prizes of your Prow's, and mount your fame to Starres. Let not a Traytors periur'd Sonne exrude vs from our right: He dyes to liue a famous life, that doth for Conquest fight. By this the furious Battels ioyne, a bloody day to eyther, And long they fight, the victory inclining vnto neyther: At length the English had the ods, who keeping close aray, Vnto the Duchie Forces gaue no entraunce any way: Who fayning feare, and Martially retyring as opprest, The English so became secure, and follow on disperst. To which aduantage, furiously the Normanes did returne, And got a bloody victorie. In vayne the English spurne Amidst the Pikes against the pricke: King Harold then was slayne: From whom began the Normanes sole, but soone conioyned rayne: For second Henry, Mawd her Sonne, freed Englands blood agayne. Since when (and euer may they so) that Of-spring ruled vs: Of whose Coniunction in the Crowne, the Genalogue is thus. King Edmund Irn-side Issue had Edward the Out-law: he Had Margaret: Mawd by Malcolme (thē the King of Scots) had she: Mawd to the Conqueror his Sonne first Henry, Mawd did beie: This second Mawd the Angeos wife, had second Henry heire.
EDward, King Harolds Preregnant, of the same Change foretold, Who present and succeeding times thus, dying, did vnfold: It is a world, to note (quoth he) the wayes that men adore, And how Hypocrisie hath bred of Godlike Deuils store, That speake to seeme, that seeme to shift, that shift to spoyle by guile, That smooth, & sooth, & yeat deceiue with Scriptum est meane while. But let them heaue their hands to Heauen, they haue their hier in Hell, That seeme deuout to cloake deceit, and say, but doe not well. The Rich are retchles in their willes, their liking is for law: The Poore repine, and Goods, not theirs, by idle shiftings claw. The Lords and Landed ouer-rent, and cunningly the same The Parasite doth ouer-reach, and beares away the game. One riseth by anothers fall, and some doe clime so fast, That in the Clowdes they doe forget what Climates they haue past. But Eagle-winged mindes that fly to nestle in the Sunne, Their lofty heads haue leaden heeles, and end where they begun. It is a common point on which the aged grossely ronne, Once to haue dared, sayd, and seene, more then was euer done. The Youth are foolish-hardie, or lesse hardie then they ought, Effeminate, phantasticall, in few, not few are nought. At Cyprus not the wanton Saint, nor yeat her wylie Sonne, Did want her Orgies: nor at Rome did Vesta lacke her Nonne: The Lampsacens gaue Pryapus his filthie Rites, and Create To Ioue his Bulles: and Siilie to Ceres tithed Wheat: The Thracians with their Bacchanales did Lybers Temple fill: And Italie did blood of Babes on Saturnes Altars spill: And fatall wreathes of Myrill boughes were sacred vnto Dys: In fewe, there was no Pagane God his Sacrifice did mis. But English-men, nay Christian men, not onely seeme prophane, But Man to Man, as Beast to Beast, holds ciuill dueties vayne. Yea Pulpits some, like Pedlers packs, yeeld forth as men affect, And what a Synode shall conclude, a Sowter will correct. The rude thus boasting Litrature, one Schisme begets another,
And grossely though a Sehise, yeat hath cach Schismatike his Soother. Meane while the learned want their Meed, & none with profit heares The tedious Doult, whose artles tongue doth preach to weary eares. Here could I enter in a Field of matter more than much: But gesse that all is out of frame, and long time hath bin such: And what shall be let time disclose. This onely will I touch: A Greene Tree cut from withered Stock, deuided Furlongs three From proper Roote, it shall reioyne, and after fruitfull bee: Thus sayd the King. And thus doe some expound that Prophesee: The Tree this Land, the Stock and Roote the thralled English line: King Harld, and the VVilliams twaine, the Furlongs some define: Henry the Normane that begot on Mawde his English Queene Mawde, second Henries Mother, was the Trees Returne to greene. King Stephen first, though not so firme, did in this Turne proceede: But second Henrie perfectly restalled VVodens Seede.
THE FIFTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. XXIII. ASsisted by the former Bowne persist, my Muse, and tell How by the Normane Conquest here an other world befell. New lawes (not Labyrinths as now through wrested Quirkes) came in: New Lords also, at whom, for most, our aunci∣ent Crests begin. The English sinke, the Normanes swimme, all topsie turute was, Vntill the Conquerour had brought his whole command to pas. Then was one Edgar, sonne vnto the out-law Edward, he To holy Edward had been heire, had not King Harold be: And VVilliam pleading too by sword admits no milder law: So Edgar in his soonest flight his safest issue saw: Who with his mother (daughter to the King of Hungarie) And Sisters, did attempt into his Grandsiers Realme to flie. Thus Englands hope with Englands heir in one same Barke did sayl: When desprate from their villanage was English blood of baile. God, that to the hopeles is not helples, if he please, Did driue the storm-beate English ship into the Scottish seas: Wheare, cast a shore, King Malcolme soone had notice of the wracke,
And did become a gracious Lord vnto their present lacke. And (Agatha a Votarisse) tooke Margaret to Queene: Protects her brother euen by Armes, against King Williams teene: Vntill by warre and wise conuay he so to passe did bring That Edgar reconciled was vnto the English King: In credit, though withheld his Crowne, and thus at least did good: His flight Scotch-queen'd his Sister, she regraded Englands blood. For let we Edgar gainst the haer preserued, as exprest, And either VVilliam, luckie Knight at armes, interred rest, And set first VVilliams yongest sonne, first Henry, on the Throne, Through him the royall English and the Normane bloods grew one. On Mawd, Scotch Malcomes daughter by the foresaid Margaret he Had Mawd, that solie did suruiue her drowned brothers three, Her, Empresse to the Emperour then newly being ded, Did Geffrey Plantaganet the Earle of Anioy wed, And she vnto Plantaganet did second Henry beire, Of England, Angeo, Gascoyne, and of Normandie the heire. Yeat Stephen, first VVilliams daughters son whō th'Earle of Bloys did marrie, Did with the Empresse and her son now King now Captiue varrie: But lastly, tyred, and inter'd, all England by his death Was quietly second Henries, who was lawfulst heire by birth. With Hengests blood our droupen Muse it also now reuiues: For harshly sounds our Poeame, saue in matter where it thriues. Let be your bitten Vine, we here a blisfull vintage gayne, That did, and doth, and euermore vnblasted may remaine: For this coriuall seede begot England English againe. From whence we note what Scepters, what discents, & turnes befel: Lesse pleasing vnto some, perhaps, than toyes which many tell That but of phansies, women, loues, and wantonnes can sing: From which their tunes but pip their toungs & thē they hang the wing THis second Henry, mightie both in Empire and in Armes, Was onely by his Cleargie crost with vnbeseeming harmes.
Perplexed therefore at th'apeales that waiward Becket made, To some, demaunding his disease at Normandie he sayd: Our Popes that seeme (they do but seeme) S. Peter to succeede Who did denie, although deserue, high Styles to him decree'd, Are quite vnlike to Peter and Popes thirty three fore-past Who liu'd in miserie and died by Martyrdome at last. Now neede not Tyrants: Popes to Popes be Tyrants: and they all Doe wrest euen Principalities submissiue to their Pall. Peter did sinne, and sinning to repentant teares did flye: Popes sinne not, but to others sinnes giue pardon (els they lye.) Christ washed feete, Kings kisse their feet, Christ gaue to Caesar his, They take, and say that either Sword in their subiection is. The Pope did so our mothers Pheare the Emperour intreate, As that his proud attempts I shame and sorrow to repeate. What cite I forraine matters, when our natiue Stories yeeld Of Myters medling with our Sword an ouerplenteous feeld? We offer Tapers, pay our Tythes and Vowes, we Pilgrimes goe To euery Sainct at euery shrine we Offrings doe bestoe, We kisse the Pix, we creepe the Crosse, our Beades we ouer-runne, The Couent hath a Legacie, who so is left vndone: We fast the Eaue, we feast the day of euery Saint they make, Their houslings, Shrifts, and Sacraments most reuerently we take, By-tale we say Orysons, and to words vnknowne Amen: The Quier doth chaunt, we knock our brests, we bow & crosse vs thē: Their skaer-spright water, boxed Boans, their hoasts, & what not brings The Priest, the Frier, or Pardoner we count not holy things? We seat them in our fattest Soyles for Pasture, wood, and spring, We lodge them safe in stately walles, we sorrowing when they sing. Their Belles call them from easie beds to sing in gownes as warme, But Larums vs from restles Campes, by wounds to heale their harme. And meete is so: but meete also that they protected thus,
Be ot vnquiet, but for their quiet pray for and further vs. When our great Grādsier thought this Isle by Cōquest cleerly wōne, And entred Kent, what earst he did did seeme in Kent vndone. A moouing wood stole marching on, and hem'd his Armie round, When al at once, their boughes cast downe, was heard a warlike soūd, That to the Normanes did disclose an Armie ordered well, Resolu'd to die, rather then leaue the lawes where they did dwell: (For so, in way of Parlie, did their mytred Stygand tell.) Their Bishop, their Contriuer, and their chiefe conduct was he, By whose deuise the conqueror, intrapped, did agree To ratifie the lawes of Kent such as they were, and be. But bearing in a common good with Crosiers crossing Crownes, Proud Anselme in our Vncles raigne did farre exceede the bownes Of Prelacie or pietie (for Church-men should be meeke: Yeat some in practise leaue what they of vs in preaching seeke: For they that bid me doe, and doe themselues the good they bid, Doe leade me to the substantiue, and leaue me not in quid) Yea, either of our Vncles thriu'd in Forraine Conquests more, Than gainst their Church-men, setting al their Kingdome in vprore. One Prelate wrought the pope to curse & crosse his Prince withfoes: Twixt others long ambitions Pleas for Primacie aroes: And now, through Becket, to our selfe no lesser damage groes. I haue had hardy Knights for warres, and helpfull friends in peace, Yeat helples friends, and hartles Knights this Cleargie-pride to ceace. These words heard diuers present Knights, who vexed at the wrong, Did, cleane vnwitting to the King, ariue in Kent ere long, And at S. Bennits Altar, in the Minster of his Sea, At sacring for a sacrifice the sawcie Clerke did slea. Which heard, the Pope canonized the slir-strif Priest a Saint, Insencing Kings against our King, till warres made Henry faynt. Then humbled vnto haughty Priest as Legats sent from Rome He basely bowes: and they to him for begged Pennance dome Purs-payne and heathen battels, and (which worser was decreed)
Barefoote he went, whom Monkes did whip till feete & bodie bleede. Barefoote to Iurie fare the Knights, fo dying for their deede: Nor might they mend it, for as bad euen Emperors did speede. CHAP. XXIIII. THe Kings fayre Leiman Rosamund, and how his Sonnes rebell Iouer-passe. To Richard next the Dyadem befel. He did in Cypris, Sycil, and in Syria warre and winne: Whose glory his confederate Peeres to enuy did bginne: And, warring with the Souldan, left the English King behinde: Who left not fighting till he forst Conditions to his minde, And of Ierusalem was King. But as he did returne, The Austrich Duke, (whose reared flagge our wrōged king did spurne From Acon walles, his victorie,) did Richard intercept, And him in easelesse prison for reuenge and raunsome kept. The Duke his daughter, as the King did theare a captiue lie, Did labour strongly in the loue she would but could not flie: And sighing wept, and weeping spake, and speaking thus shee sayd: Richard through hate, through loue am I in diffring bands betrayd. My haruest hangeth in the grasse, and ere the proofe may blast: Or clew-led Theseus, from the denne of Minotaurus past, To farre more harder starres than was poore Ariadne lest Leaue me he may, of all, yea, more than all, of him bereft. Sweet Loue, Saint Loue, or rather I thy Saint and thou my God, In such desarts let such deceite be, as should be, forbod.
The Gailor, bribed, with his keyes to stay or free him sent her. Loue (louely Richard) makes, quoth she, that I this hell-house enter, Hence make escape, remembring me that thus for thee doe venter. Attentiue to her sprech, but more retentiue of her shape, The King, awaking to her forme, did sleepe his owne escape: And giuing her a meeting kisse, quoth he, so God me keepe As true desire to quite this good in mee shall neuer sleepe. Yeat ransomelesse I will not hence: but fetching backe the lone, When as thy Father shall repay to England tenne for one, I vow thy loue a recompence, till when I liue to thee. Thus seuer they: and raunsome him ere many weekes did free. Soone after on the Belgicke towers he English-flags did reare: Austrich and all the Empire of his prowesse stoode in feare: Vntill a desperate Stragler with an arrow pierst his head, And sent the wofull English home, their worthie Leader dead: Thus Lyons-hart (his courage got that surname) lastly sped. To whom King Iohn, in courage not inferior to the other, Succeeded, but in life and death moretragicke than his brother. IN Scotland, Fraunce, Ireland, and VVales he warred, wearied lesse, Than by the Pope and English Priests wronged without redresse, Nor was, saue from their Soueraignes death, their malice out of date: Yeat Iohn, faine they, hut they felt Iohn, did trouble Church and state. When (for as Gaylers with Conuicts, so Popes deale with a faulter: Their sin-salue like the setting loose from Shackles to the haulter) When Masse and all the Sacraments were Strangers many a day, And that, so farreforth as it in the triple Myter lay, Euen God himselfe was barred hence, and that, prostrate before His Vassall Bishop Langtons feete, the King did grace implore, When Peter pence were graunted, and the English Crowne to hold By rent and Homage of the Pope, and that for sums of gold The French Kings son was cursed hēce, who els had wore ye Crowne And that the reconciled King did seeme on surest ground,
Then he, whil'st he in progresse did at Swinshed Abbey lye, Was poysned by a Monke, that baend himselfe that Iohn might dye. The Monke, more solemnely inter'd and song for than the King, Was cause that diuers diuersly did consture of the thing. Some charg'd the Popes of Auarice, for that when Rings offend They sell them peace: of pride, for that to them euen Monarks bend: Of meere incharitie, for that to wreake their priuate spight Gainst Kingdomes Kingdomes they incense, and, worser, do acquite Euen subiects to allegiance sworne against their Lords to fight: Of Treason, for that to intrap such as from them discent With othes and al things they dispence: Some bid vs thus preuent Their sinnes and sleights, doe not as they, not deale with them, for why? Who doth must liue their Vassal or their Victorie must die. A merrie mate amongst the rest, of cloysterers thus told. THis cloystring and fat feeding of Religious is not old (Quoth he.) Not long since was a man that did his deuoire giue To kill the passions of his flesh, and did in penance liue: And, though beloued of the King, he liued by his sweat: Affirming men that would not worke vnworthy for to eate. He told the erring their amisse, and taught them to amend. He counselled the comfortlesse and all his daies did spend In prayer and in pouertie. Amongst his doings well High-waies he mended: doing which this Accident befell. A dosen Theeues to haue beene hang'd were lead this Hermite by, To whom he went, exhotting them as Christian-men to dye. So penitent they were, and he so pitifull (good man) As to the King for pardon of the Prisoners he ran: Which got, he gaue it them. But this Prouiso did he add That they should euer worke as he. They graunt, poore soules, & glad. He got them gownes of countrey gray, and hoods for raine and cold, And hempen girdles, (which besides themselues) might burthens hold, Pick axe and Spade: and hard to worke the Couent sell together,
With Roabes, & Ropes, & eu'rie toole for eu'rie worke & wheather. So did they toyle as thereabout no Causie was vnwrought: Wherefore new labours for his men the holie Hermite sought: But at departure prayed them to fast, to watch, and pray, And liue remote from worldly men, and goeth so his way. The holy Theeues (for now in them had custome wrought contēt) Could much of Scripture and, indeede, did hartely repent. But when the countrey folke did heare of these same men deuout Religiously they haunt their Celles, and lastly brought about That frō the woods to Buildings braue they wound the Hermits crew, Who was from found-out worke returnde, and their Aposta knew. He going to their stately place, did finde in euery dish Fat beefe and brewis, and great store of daintie fowle and fish. Who seeing their saturitie, and practising to winne His Puples thence, Excesse, he sayd, doth worke accesse to sinne. Who fareth finest doth but feeed, and ouer-feedeth oft: Who sleepeth softest doth but sleepe, and sometimes ouer soft: Who clads him trimmest is but clad: the fairest is but faire: And all but liue: yea, if so long, yeat not with lesser care Than formes, backs, boanes & bellies that more hōely cherisht are. Learne freedome and felicitie, Hawkes flying where they list Be kindlier and more sound than Hawkes best tended on the fist. Thus preacht he promist abstinence, and bids them come away. No hast but good: well weare they, and so wel, as they would stay. The godly Hermit, when all meanes in vaine he did perceiue, Departing sayd: I found you knaues, and knaues I doe you leaue. Hence sayd this merrie fellowe (if the merriment be trew) That Cloystring, Friers cloathing, and a Couents number grew. This heard a simple Northerne-man, no friend to Monke, or Frier, Or preaching Lymmer: for his speach disclosed thus his yre. AFowle ill on their weazens, for the Carles garre syke a dinne, That more we member of their iapes than mend vs of our sinne.
At Ewle we wonten gambole, daunce, to carrole, and to sing, To haue gud spiced Sewe, and Roste, and plum-pies for a King: At Fasts-eue pan puffes: Gang tide gaites did alie Masses bring: At Paske begun our Morrise: and ere Penticost our May: Tho Roben hood, liell Iohn, Frier Tucke, and Marian deftly play, And Lard and Ladie gang till Kirke with Lads and Lasses gay: Fra Masse and Eensong sa gud cheere and glee on ery Greene, As, saue our wakes twixt Eames and Sibbes, like gam was neuer seene: At Baptis-day with Ale and cakes bout bon-fires neighbors stood: At Martelmasse wa turnd a crabbe, thilke told of Roben hood, Till after long time myrke, whē blest were windowes, dares & lights, And pails were fild, & hathes were swept, gainst Fairie-elues & sprits: Rock, & plow Mōdaies gams sal gāg, with saint-feasts & kirk-sights. Iis tell yee, Clearkes earst racked not of purpoe ne of pall: Ylke yeoman fed moe poore tume wambes than Gentiles now in Hall, Yea, ledge they nere sa hally Writ, thilke tide was greater wrang Than heretoforne: tho words had sooth, na writing now so strāg: Iis na Wizard, yet I drad it will be warse ere lang. Belyue doone lyther Kirk-men reaue the crop, and we the tythe, And mykell bukish ben they gif they tache our lakines blithe. Some egge vs sla the Prince and shewe a Bullocke fra the Pape, Whilke, gif it guds the sawle, Iis sure the cragge gangs till the rape: Syke votion gyles the people, sa but sylde gud Princes scape: Sa teend our King his life, and song is Requiem for the Monke: Gud King God rest thy sawle, but Feēds reaue him bath sawle & trōke. Such talke was long on foote, and still was quittance tale for tale. Dunstone, quod one, made Edgar, earst an English Monarke, quale For matter of lesse moment, euen for wedding of a Nunne, Whom in her Cell the King espi'de, lou'de, wooed, and thus wonne. THe same (quod he) that rules this Land the same intreateth thee: Thou maist, sweet Wench, vnto thy selfe deriue a Queene frō me.
What lets, since none may loue thee more, vnles perhaps this Cell, Too strict a place wherein thy selfe, euē Beauties selfe, shouldst dwell. Let nature hide her barren formes and imperfections thus, And in such Puritanes as thou commend her skill to vs. Thou wrongest Nature, molding thee to molde by thee as faer: Thou wrōgest mē, that would beget the fruit which thou sholdst baer: Thou wrong'st thy Countrie of increase: thou wrōg'st me in like sort: Thou wrong'st thy Kin of kindred: & thou wrong'st thy selfe of sport. Shouldst thou but dreame what marriage were, thou would'st not liue a maid: One heart of two, two Soules to one by wedlock is cōuaid. An husbands open kissings, and his secret coyings, nay, The very Soule of Loue, more sweet then thou or I can say, The ioy of babes which thou should'st beare, the Seruice at thy becke, The sweet consorted common weale of houshold at thy checke, Would make thee seeme a Goddesse: who, because thou art not such, Offendest God in hiding of thy Tallent. Too too much Thou dotest on Virginitie, permitted, not impos'd On any, saue on such as for no such thy selfe thou knoest. Els what should meane this penning vp, such vowing, & these Vailes, Since Vessels onely are of worth that beare in stormes their sailes. The Scedsters of thine Essence had they been as thou would'st be Thou hadst not been: Then gratifie the same, thy selfe, and me, And leaue these superstitious walles: Thou profitst not hereby, Nor are we male and female borne that fruitlesse we should dye: Then loue me, for, beleeue me, so will proue a Iubilie. Her red disperst in shadowed white, did adde to either more, To her of beautie, and to him Loue greater than before. She claimes the places priuiledge, and faintly cites a Tex: She pleades her birth too bace, and playes the No-I of her Sex, And fighteth as she would be foyld. But, prized, Durstone makes It Sacrilege: and for to wife the Recluse Edgar takes, In twelue yeeres would be not annoynt or crowne him King & more,
Enioynes him seuen yeeres pennance, and to edifie and store Great Monasteries fortie ere Indulgence could be got: Thus Edgar for his Cloyster cheere did pay this costly shot. CHAP. XXV. IOhns murther bred such murmure. But third Henry, Iohn his sonne, Assisted chiefly by the Pope, his fathers Scepter wonne: Who interdited Lewis, till hee curst him into France, And left to Henry prosperous raigne, till hapned this mischance. A Parliament at Oxenford did derogate so much From his prerogatiue, as that the Quarrell grew to such, That ciuill warres betwixt the King and Barronage began: Not ending, but with tragicke ends of many a worthy man, Brother to brother, sire to sonne, and friend to friend was foe: Al labouring (which they should vphold) their Countries ouerthrow. Now was the King a Captiue, and the Barrons by and by His Conquest, and the ciuill strife too fast begot supply. My heart vnapts mine hand to write the troth of it too trew: Euen warres Idea: more then tongue or eye can say or view. But to conclude (which still concludes) the King he did subdue: And shewes himselfe a gentle foe thus hauing wonne his peace: And after liu'd in honour, and did happily decease. Whose death (then warring with renowme in Syria) being knowne To Edward, he resailed and possest his fathers Throne.
THe hansell of his Scepter was, the Welchmen did rebell: Of whom to Edward, though with losse, the Victorie befell. Then on the French he warred, and a Winner did resayle: And for that Baltoll, whom he made the King of Scots, did faile His Homage, thence from Albanacke to England due and done, Against the Scots he grieuous, but a glorious warre begun. Not Barwicke, though for number bold vntill it flowed blood, Nor any Scottish armes or hold, though infinite and good, Might stay his awing prowesse, till he had their King his thrall, And in that Land, by Conquest, made himselfe the Lord of all. Then taking Scottish othes, which they did breake, and he reuenge, With those Exploits he French attempts as gloriously did menge. Yea Paganes, French, Cambries, & Scots, remembring but his name, Cannot forget their skarres he made, though enuious of his Fame, Matchles for Chiualrie: and yeat his Iustice matcht the same, Not partiall for the Prince his Sonne, a rash vnbridled youth, Whom he imprison'd, hearing of his outrages the truth, And vnto whom he dying spake words worth report and ruth. My life (quoth he) a warfare right in body and in soule, Resignes my robed carkasse to be rotted in the moule. If well I did, well shall I doe, if ill, as ill and worse: And therefore (Ned) worke as I will vpon my blesse or curse. When thou becom'st an earthly God mens liues to ouersee, Forget not that Eternall God that ouerlooketh thee. The least part of a King is his, all owing him, and none Lesse priuate than a Prince, the weale or woe of euery one. He and his People make but one, a bodie weake or strong, As doth the head the lims, or lims the head assist or wrong. Deriue thy lawes from wisest heads, to be vpholden still, Not adding or abstracting as conceited Tier-braines will. Be cheerefull, and in worke nor word be neither proud nor hot, No sincere loue, but seruile feare, or neither, so is got. Encourage good Men by thy loue: reforme the bad by lawe:
Reserue an care for either Plea: and borrow least of awe. Oppresse not rich men, seeking so to please the poore: for neither Is to be doomed, but as right or wrong is found in either. To loyter well deserued gifts is not to giue but sell, When to requite ingratitude were to doe euill well. And (which saue for the ill-mist ill might els haue bene forgot) Be choyce, but chuse: for wiuelesse haue each stranger, place, & shot. Their heire, their home, & cost: which, saue the last, indeed are not. Reforme thee euen to day: vnapt to day, lesse apt to morrow: Youth aptly offers vertues such as yeares vnaptly borrowe. For he that plies the lappes and lippes of Ladies all his prime, And falles to Armes when age failes Armes, then also looseth time, As if a Beare in Moone-shine should attempt the Moone to clime. Well haue I driuen out my date, and well thy dayes shall runne, If thou proue not my Glories graue, nor I plange in my Sonne. The ouer-weening of thy wits doth make thy Foes to smile, Thy Friends to weepe, and Clawbacks thee with soothings to beguile. Yea, those thy Purses Parasites, vnworthie thine Estate, Doe loue thee for themselues, nor will they leaue thee but too late. I blesse thee; if thou banish them, and curse thee, if they bide: My blisse and curse be at thy choyce. And so he shortly dide. FOrth with a second Edward, sonne to Edward, wore the Crowne, He to promote his Flatterers did put his Nobles downe. So Robert Bruze, then King of Scots, found ingresse for his Armes; Recouering Scottish forces, and did spoyle our men by swarmes. Barwicke in fine, and all erst wonne, and more then all was lost: Yeat of more multeous Armies we than Scotland were at cost. No Land deuided in it selfe can stand, was found too true: To worser then the wars abroad the home-bred Quarrels grewe. Grange gotten Pierce of Gauelstone, and Spensers two like sort, Meane Gentlemen, created Earles, of chiefe accoumpt and port, Enuying all equalitie, contrine of many a Peere.
The wrested death: those fewe that liue liu'd mal-contented heere. Good Thomas Earle of Lancaster, on whom the rest relye, The chiefe and grauest of the Peeres, did, ouer-warred, flye Into the woods: whereas himselfe and state he did bewray Vnto an Hermite: vnto whom he, sighing, thus did say. Happie are you sequestred thus from (so I may deuine) Our common wracke of common weale: for how it doth decline Through wilde and wanton Guydes in part I feele, in part I aime, By Presidents too like and fire too likely heere to flame: Heare (if you haue not heard) what fire, our leisure fits the same. CHAP. XXV. THe Spartanes was for rapted Queene, to Ilions ouerthrowe, The Monarke of Assyria chang'd, & Latine Kings also For Tarquins lust, yea how with vs a double chaunge did groe, Whē Brittish Vortiger did doat vpō the Saxons daughter, And Buerne for his forced wife frō Denmarke brought vs slaughter, I ouerpasse. Who knoweth not Ireland, our neighbour Ile? Where Noe his Neece, ere Noe his flood, inhabited a while: The first manured Westerne Ile, by Cham and Iaphets race: Who, ioyntly entring, sundry times each other did displace: Till Greece-bred Gathelus his brood from Biscay did ariue, Attempting Irelands Conquest, and a Conquest did archiue. Fiue kings at once did rule that Ile, in ciuill strife that droopes, When fierce Turgesius landed with his misbeleeuing Troopes.
This proud Norwegan Rouer so by aides and armes did thriue, As he became sole Monarke of the Irish Kingdomes fiue: Erecting Paganisme, and did eiect the Christian lawe: And thirtie yeeres, tyrannizing, did keepe that Ile in awe: Nor any hope of after helpe the hartlesse Irish sawe. Alone the wylie King of Meth, a Prothew plying fauor, Stood in the Tyrants grace that much affected his behauor. For what he sayd that other soothde, so ecco'ing his vayne, As not an Irish els but he a pettie King did raigne. Turgesius friends that Vice-roy for his daughters loue the rather, And therefore for his Leiman askt the Damsell of her Father. Ill wot I what they knowe that loue, well wot I that I know That that browne Girle of mine lackes worth to be beloued so: I haue a many Neeces farre more fairer then is she, Yeat thinke I fairest of those faires vnworthie you, quoth he, But she and they are yours, my Lord, such Beauties as they be. This Preface like the Tyrant well, that longed for the play: Not well contented that so long the Actors were away: Oft iterating his demaund, impatient of delay. Now haue I, quoth the King of Meth, conuented to your bed My Neeces, and my daughter, loath to loose her Maidenhead. But doubt not Sir: coy Wenches close their longings in their palmes, And all their painted Stormes at length conuert to perfect Calmes. Alonely if their beauties like (as likelier haue we none) You may conclude them women, and the Goale therefore your owne. To morrow, seuered from your Traine, vnlesse some speciall few, Expect them in your chamber where I leaue the game to you: Yeat when your eye hath serude your heart of her that likes you best, Remember they are mine Alies, vntoucht dismisse the rest. Sweete also was this Scene: and now vnto an Act we groe. The Irish Princesse, and with her a fifteene others moe, With hāging Glybbes that hid their necks as tynsel shadowing snoe,
Whose faces very Stoickes would, Narcissus-like, admire Such Semeles as might consume I oues selfe with glorious fire, And from the Smith of heauens wife allure the amorous haunt, And reintise the Club-God Dys and all his diuelles to daunt, And make the Sunne-God swifter than himselfe, such Daphnes chaced, And Loue to fall in loue with them, his Psichis quite disgraced, These rarer then the onely Fowle of Spice-burnt Ashes bread, And sweeter than the Flower that with Phoebus turneth head, Resembling her from gaze of whome transformde Acteon fled, From Meth came to Tergesius Court, as Presents for his bed. In secret was their comming, and their chambering the same: And now the lustfull Chuffe was come to single out his game: His Pages onely, and a youth or twaine attending him, Wheare Banquet, Bed, Perfumes, and all were delicately trim. He giues them curteous welcome, and did finde them merry talke: Meane while (the Harbengers of lust) his amorous eyes did walke More clogd with change of Beauties than King Midas once with gold: Now This, now That, and one by one he did them all behold. This seemed faire, and That as faire: and, letting either passe, A Third he thought a proper Girle, a Fourth a pleasant Lasse, Louely the Fift, liuely the Sixt, the Seuenth a goodly Wench, The Eight of sweete Complection, to the Ninth he altreth thence, That mildly seem'd maiesticall, Tenth modest looke and tongue, Th'Eleuenth could sweetly intertain, the Twelfe was fresh & yonge, The Next a gay Brownetta, Next and Next admirde among: And ury feature so intycte his intricate affection, As liking all alike he lou'd confounded in election. Sweete harts quoth he, or Iupiter fetcht hence full many a Thefte, Or hether brought he Thefts that here their Leiman Children lefte. Heere wandring Cadmus should haue sought his missed Sister, wheare Faire Leda hatcht her Cignets, whilst nor Cocke nor Henne did feare. How many view I fairer than Europa or the rest,
And Girle-boyes, fauouring Ganimde heere with his Lord a Guest. And Ganimdes we are, quoth one, and thou a Prophet trew: And hidden Skeines from vnderneath their forged garments drew, Where with the Tyrant and his Bawds, with safe escape, they slew: Of which yong Irish Gentlemen and Methean Ladies act The Isle was filled in a trise, nor any Irish slackt To prosecute their freedome and thamased Norgaines fall, Which was performed, and the King of Meth extold of all. Those Rouers (whose Originals, and others not a fewe, As Switzers, Normaines, Lumbardes, Danes, from Scandinauia grew, A mightie Isle, an other world, in Scythian Pontus Clyme) Thus wrackt, left Ireland free vnto our second Henries time: When, farre vnlike the Methes that earst their Countrie did reore, An Amorous Queene thereof did cause new Conquests and vprore: Dermot the King of Leynister, whom all besides did spight, Did loue, belou'd, the Queene of Meth to whom he thus did wright. THy King, sweete Queene, the hindrance of our harts-ease is away, And I, in heart at home with thee, at hand in person stay. Now is the time (Time is a God) to worke our loue good lucke, Long since I cheapned it, nor is my comming now to hucke: But, since our fire is equall, let vs equally assist To finish what we fancy, say Maligners what they list. No like immortall she-Egge Chucke of Tyndarus his wife, (The wracke of Dardane walles) shal mooue to vs like costly strife. Thy husband no Atrides is: or were it he were such, The Idane ball Iudge did not more, but I would doo as much. For why? thy selfe, a richer cause of warre, art worthy so: Whome to continue euer frend, I carelesse am of foe. My Kingdome shall containe thee that containest me and it: Yea, though we be condemned, Loue or armour shall vs quit. Loues lawe at least adiudgeth barres, cleere bookes, to pleade in breefe Prescription to obiections how his passions bee our cheefe:
For none doth liue not passionate of loue, ire, mirth, or greese. I waite thee in the neerest woods, and thether, watching watch, Doe waite escape: of all things els my selfe doe care dispatch: Let onely Loue (sweete Loue) perswade, if more remaine to wowe, I hope I wish not more be done than what you meane to doo. This read, and red her cheekes, and to his reede alreadie bent, Not casting further doubts vnto her Paramour she went, Conueyed into Leynister. Not many weekes ensewe, When Morice King of Meth returnes, and what had hapned knew. A whitle-winde in a wirle poole roost that paire of doues (quoth he) The single state is double sweet, at price too decre I see. How wowe we woe? and won, how loth we fowle & doubt we faire? And onely then lacke women faults when men their faultes forbeare. The diuell goe with her, so that I with credite might forgoe her, But such doth sinne with sauour, he is flouted that doth owe her. I may not put it vp. vnlesse I put vp many a mocke: Fowle fall that Hrrolde causing that my Gitrone is the smocke, He worth, and wronged, and his wrong a common quarrel made, Assisted by the Irish Kings, did Leynister inuade. King rmte, whom his subiects then and long ere then did hate, Was left defencelesse, desprate of his life, depriu'd his State, And fled to England: wheare the Pope imbulled had of late England for Irelands Conquest: So the Exile welcome was, As aptest Instrument to bring that Stratageme to passe. For but to be reseated was the Fugitiues request, And then to tribute part and leaue to English men the rest. King Henry, yeat in warre else-where, did freely license any To make aduenture for themselues: so Dermot sped of many. Earle Strangome, & the Geraldines, Fitz Stephans, Reymonde, and Moe worth▪ Knights, of Wales for most, did take the taske in hand, And to the Crowne of Englands vse made Conquest of that Land. But should you aske how Dermot sped (Father) he sped too well: And nothing else the Irish bookes doo of his Leiman tell.
Alone obserue what changes heere through onely lust befell: And note our England surfetteth in greater sinnes than it The onely cause that I am Earle an Exile heere doo sit. The County thus concluded, and the Hermite answered this.] CHAP. XXVII. TO lose an Earldome, and to liue an exile what it is I cannot tell, but not to haue what may bee lost were blis. I will not speake of Coiture, nor of Conception, naither It fits I should, for neuer made I Grandsier of my Father: But mine experience at our birth begins it birth, I speake How than doe we no creature worlds lesse helpefull or more weake. From birth our Infancy throughout we liue as not aliue: To others diuersly a care, we sencelesse how we thriue. No sooner we vncradell, be we females be we boyes, But we affect so many, and (God wot) such foolish toyes, And are so apt for daungers, and vnapt to shift the same, As aptly vanities by terme of childishnes we blame. Thence growe we to more strength and sence, still senceles howbeit Of vice or vertue bettring by correction, not by wit: Gamesome, not caring who takes care, nor can we saue or git. Next but demies, nor boyes, nor men, our daungerous times succeede: For vanities erst aymed at we shortly act in deede: Wilde roysting, wanton loue, or else vnthriftie shots and game Doe cuppell, ere we finde our fault, distresse vnto defame.
Perhaps experience beating vs doth bid vs lay to thriue: The first degree to which (say some) is warely to wiue. But, wiued, if our Sainct become (as not vnlike) a Shroe, Then is that first degree to thrift the third degree in woe. Or be it she be constant, wie, well intertayning, faire, Doe graunt her silence, patience, and what vertues els be rare, Yeat by how much more shee deserues so much more we desire To please and profite such an one, for whom on hers we tire Our selues and sences, yea perchance, labour the most we may, Much labour is too little that should houshould charge defray. We aged carke to liue and leaue an ouerplus in store: Perhaps for Spendals: so amidst abundance liue we poore: Our heires waxe sickishe of our health, too long our here abod, Meane while the neerer to our graues the further wee from God: Grippell in workes, testy in words, lothsome for most at length, And such at fourescore as at foure for manners, witte, and strength. Thus Infancie is feeble: and our lustie youth vnstayde: Our manhood carking: and our age more lothed than obayde. And thus from first to last our liues be fruiteles and vnqueate. But you, perhaps, expect I should of nouelties intreate. I haue no tales of Robin Hood, though mal-content was he In better daies, first Richards daies, and liu'd in woods as wee A Tymon of the world: but not deuoutly was he soe, And therefore praise I not the man. But for from him did groe Words worth the note, a word or twaine of him ere hence we go. Those daies begot some mal-contents, the Principall of whome A County was, that with a troope of Yomandry did rome, Braue Archers and deliuer men, since nor before so good, Those took from rich to giue the poore, and manned Robin Hood. He fed them well, and lodg'd them safe in pleasant Caues and bowers, Oft saying to his merry men, what iuster life than ours? Here vse we Tallents that abroad the Churles abuse or hide,
Their Coffers excrements, and yeat for common wants deuide. We might haue sterued for their store, & they haue dyest our bones, Whose tongues, driftes, harts, intice, meane, melt, as Syrens, Foxes, stones, Yea euē the best that betterd thē heard but aloofe our mones. And redily the Churles could prie and prate of our amis, Forgetfull of their owne, when their reproofes had proofe as this: * It was at midnight when a Nonne, in trauell of a childe, Was checked of her fellow Nonnes for being so defilde: The Lady Prioresse heard a stirre, and starting out of bed, Did taunt the Nouasse bitterly, Who, lifting vp her hed, Sayd, Madame, mend your hood (for why so hastely she rose, That on her head, mistooke for hood, she donde a Channons hose.) * I did amis, not missing friends that wisht mee to amend: I did amend, but missed friends when mine amis had end: My friends therefore shall finde me true, but I will trust no friend. Not one I knewe that wisht me ill, nor any workt me well, To lose, lacke, liue, time, frends, in yncke, an hell, an hell, an hell: Then happie we (quoth Robin Hood) in merry Sherwood that dwell. Thus sayd the Out lawe: But no more of him I list to tell. Grammarian-like, in order wordes significant to speake, Logitian-like, to reason pro and contra am I weake: Rhetoricall I am not with a fluant tongue to ster: Arithmatieke in numbring hath substracted me from her: Geometrie her Plattes, Bownes, and Proportions passe my strayne: Not Musick with her Concords or her Discords breakes my braine: Nor yeat Astronomie, whose Globes doth Heauen and earth containe: Let faire Mnemosine her broode their thrise three selues explaine. Expect not here Anatomies of Lands, Seas, Hell, and Skyes, Such length, bredth, depth, & height I balke: nor would I be so wise, Least, knowing all thing els, I should not knowe my selfe precise. The Skyes containe the fierie Lights: Clowdes moysture: & the ayre Windes, Birds & Vapors: men & Beasts the vpper Earth doth beare: Her Bowels Wormes and Mettals: Seas to Fishes properare.
Whom this Astrologie, and this Cosmographie mislike, Beneath the Earth, beyond the Moone, further then farre must seeke. Signes workings, Planets Iunctures, and the eleuated Ponle, With thousand toyes and tearmes wherein our curious Artists roule, Be strangers to my Cell: yeat loe as sound a minde and heart As theirs that calculate their times, eate, sleepe, and wake by arte. What was the world before the world, or God ere he was God, Why this he did, or doth not that, his bidden, or forbod, I dare not thinke, or arrogate such Misteries deuine, Faith with her Fruites significant suffice these wittes of mine, To loue God, and our neighouer as our selfe is all in fine. One Law and Gospell was and is, and eithers drist is thus, To shewe vs how the law doth kill, and Gospell quicken vs: Which Corasiue ahd Lenatiue of Simples made compound Doe rather cure, he kindly heales that alsh feeles his wonnd. This is my rest: if more I knewe I should but know too much, Or build in my eonceited brayne too high aboue my touch, Or else against the hare in all proue toyous: euen such As be too many blockish Clerkes and bookish Clownes, extaceme In all things, saue in honesty, that haue no zeale but seeme. As for the Court it is, you knowe, become a skittish Coult, Of wise men hardlier mannaged than of the glorious doult, Vice rides on horse backe, vertue doth from out the saddell boult. Theare all deformities in forme in some one man wee see: More garded than regarded, franke not to continue free, When as the Marchants booke the Map of al his wealth shalbe. The Muses bacely begge, or, bibbe, or both, and must, for why? They finde as bad Bestoe as is their Portage beggerly. Yea now by melancholie walkes and thred bare coates we gesse At Clyents and at Poetes: none worke more and profite lesse: None make too more, vnmade of more, the good of other men, For those inrich our Gownests, these eternize with their pen. Yeat, soothly, nodds to Poets now weare largisse, and but lost,
Since for the nodant they obserue no pen-note worth the cost: For pallace. Hermites liue secure obscure in roufes imbost. Some few there be much honored (well worthy of so much,) Once wanting, wealthie, then and now in either fortune such: But many a bace stoute blood theare is more lordly than be Lords, Who wheare himself once coucht & bowde nor cap or beck affords: But should we sinne (God sheild wee should in smallest sinnes offend) What smaller sinne then skoffe such fooles so skornefull to no end? The Souldiers qaue nor pay nor pray, but (if I may be bolde) Themselues be prayed vpon by some that doe it vncontroulde: And whilst the same on shore or sas be ouer set or pine, Or Cuppes on Cushions full secure we victorie define: We cast what may bee done, but keep the helps meane time awaye, And diet thriftly our friends to giue our foes a pray. The Citizens, like ponned Pikes, the lessers feede the greate: The rich for meate seeke stomackes, & the poore for stomackes meate: And euery wheare no Gospell is more gospelled than this, To him that hath is giuen, from him that hath not taken is. Court, Citie, Countrie, Campe, and I, at ods thus euen bee, I intermeddle not with them, they intercept not mee, For still I tether thence mine eyes, so heere my heart is free. Beleeue mee, Sir, such is this world, this crosse-blisse world of ours That Vertue hardly hides her selfe in poore and desart Bowres: And such be best that seeme not best: Content exceeds a Crowne: They may be richer, but more sweete my pennie than their powne. For wrest they, cark they, build they, sport they, get they worlds to∣gether, At first or last they die frō al, & passe they wot not whether: Then comes their pelfe in plea, themselues not praysed at a feather. And then (for so the Princes of great Alexander did) Greedie of his, they striue and let the dead-man stinke vnhid. Or he that had a Countrie hath, perhaps a Coffen now: Perhaps lesse Cost, a Sheete and corse: perhaps, his heires allow The toombe himselfe aliue had build, els toombles might he lye,
As, saue for fashion, tearelesse. And it matters not: for why? Testators and Executors so giue and so receaue, As doubtfull whethers ioy or griefe is more to take or leaue: For, as do hogges their troughes to hounds, so these giue and get place: Death, not the Dier giues bequests, and therefore but Graue-grace. Nor all die testate: if they doe, yet wieles may wills preuent: Or what by rigor was misgot, in ryote is mispent. Then Churles, why are they Churles vnto themselues and others too: The good that commeth of their goods is good themselues shall doo. But men doe walke in shadoes, and disquiet themselues in vaine To gather Riches, ignorant to whom they shall remaine. The world thus brooding Vanities, and I obseruing it, Here in the world, not of the world, such as you see me sit. The Earle did well allow his words, and would haue liu'd his life, Durst he haue stayd, for whom pursute in euerie place was rife. He reconuenting armes therefore, and taken Prisner so, Died to his Countries friends a friend, and to her foes a foe. NOr might ye Queene & Kings own Son escape the Spēcers pride, But, fearing, fled to France, and there as banished abide: Til thence supplanted, safetie at Henaude they prouide. Iohn, brother to the Earle, a Knight of Chiualrie the chiefe, With little, but a luckie band, was shipte for their reliefe. No sooner had the Zealand ships conuaide their men ashoare, But English Succors daylie did increase their Standerds more. Yeat first the Queene, Prince Edward, and the Nobles humbly crauc Theirs and their Countries enemies, but no redresse might haue: And then Sir Iohn of Henaude shewde himselfe a warrior braue. The King, his wicked Councellors, his big Vpstarts, and all Were ouercome: So Spencers both from heauen to hell did fal, Put to a fowle and shamefull death: with others that misled The King in Out-rages more great than earst in England bred.
Prolers, Blood-thirstie, Parasites, Make-shifts, & Bawdes did thriue, Nor was an ancient English Peere vnbanisht or aliue: For forraine and domesticke Swords, Plague, Famine, and Exile, Did more than tythe, yea tythe the Tythe of men within this Ile. Of Baldricks, Hoodes, Tabrides, and Furres, from Knights disgraded tore, Attaintures of Nobilitie, and Armes reuersed store, So many Spurres hewen off the heeles, and Swords broke ouer head, Were through a King so light and lewd a Councell neuer read. The King in prison and depos'd, tyrannised, he dide By Trecheries of Mortimer that ruld the Roste that tide, Whilst Edward, in Minoritie, his Fathers throne supplide. CHAP. XXVIII. THIS third of that same Name, as yet in No∣nage for a time, Although a King was vnder-kept by some that ouer-clime: Queene mother & proude Mortimer, familiar more than should, Did and vndid more than they might, not lesse than as they would: Till Edward, better counselled, hong Mortimer, the death Of many a Peere, who Earle of March, and haughtie for his birth, Was Lord of nine skore dubbed Knights, his other traynes except, For greater pompe than did his Prince this Lord of VVigmore kept. But more he had bene happie though lesse hautie in his Halls, More honour in humilitie than safetie in walls: Proud Climers proue not monuments, saue onely in their falls. The senselesse pride of Fooles therefore, whome reuerently we ride,
Should lessen, at the least because that earth their earth shall hide. The Countrie purg'd of Fleecers, and of Flatterers the Court, The King became a Mars for Armes, a Iupiter for Port: Th-Olympds, the Pythea, and the prowesse of the Earth, Did seeme euen now, and not but now, to haue in him their birth: East, South, and North, gaue ayme farrc off, admiring so the West, As if that Mars discarding them had set our Realme his Rest. Philip Valois, & Dauid Bruz, of power and courage more Than any French or Scottish Kings since or of long before, Confedrate with three other Kings and Princes farre and neere, Warre all at once on Edward, but did buy their warring deere. Dauid debelled, left his land, but lastly did returne, And, whilst our King did war in France, much did he spoyle & burne, And proud of mightie Troopes of men, of vnresisted prayes, And Edwards absence, prosperously he on aduantage playes, Vntill, not sending hence for helpe, the Queene did muster Knights, And with the Foe, though tripled-wise, victoriously she fights: The Scots for most did perish, and their King was Prisner taine, And Scotland wholly for a pray to England did remaine Meane while was Paris scarcely left, to rescue Philips Goale, Whom Edward ferrits so from hold to hold as Fox from hoale, That Melancholie he deceast, and valiant Iohn his sonne Was crowned King of France: and then the wars afresh begonne. But after many fieldes, vnto the Foes continuall wracke, The French King captiuated to the English Monarke, backe His Victor sayles, the Prince of VVales, Edward surnamed blacke: The flower of Chiualrie, the feare of France, and scourge of Spaine, Wheare Peter, dispossest of Crowne, was crownde by him againe. Fower yeeres the French, eleuen yeres was the Scotch K. prisners heere. Whose, & the Dolphines ransomes were as great as good their cheere. PRince Edw. Iohn of Gaunt, & all their Fathers sonnes might boaste Of famous Sier, and he of sonnes matchlesse in any Coaste:
Howbeit, King and Prince at last, misled by counsell ill, Through Taxes lost a many hearts that bore them earst good will: Thence finding Fortune contrary to that she was before, Yeat either dying seaz'd of French and Scottish Conquests store: Yea Callice late, and Barwick yet of their Exployts is lest, Though Sonne before the Sier and both of liues long since bereft. When Barwick was besieged, and stood brauely at defence, Sir Alexander Seiton, theare chiefe Captaine, had pretence To linger forth the Siege till Scots should draw the English thence In rescue of Northumberland, and therefore sent his sonne A Pledge of treated Truce: and when the guile-got Truce was done, And Barwick not releeued nor resigned, as it ought, Two sonnes of Seiton were before the walls besieged brought, They ready for the Iybbet and their Father for his Graue, For eyther he must yeeld the Towne or them he might not saue. In griefe he then his Countries cause and Childrens case reuolues: But, partiall vnto either, he on neither Choyce resolues, To be a loyall Subiect and a louing Father too Behooued him: but both to bee was not in him to doo. Nature and honour wrought at once, but Nature ouer-wrought, And, but his Ladie it preuents, to yeeld the Towne he thought. O what pretend you Sir, quoth she, is Barwick woorth no more Than error of such loue? I ioy that I such Children bore Whom cruell Edward honoureth with such a cause of death, For that especiall cause for which we all receaue our breath, Euen for their Countries cause they dye, whose liues for it be dewe, Why see their faces, (constantly she did their faces viewe) The same, my Seiton, seeme so farre from dreading any woe, As if they skornde that Barwicke should redeeme them from the Foe. Full deere they were to me vnborne, at birth, and borne, and now, And Mother like I moane their death and yet their death allow. Moe Sonnes and such you may beget, your honour if you staine, Defected honour neuer more is to be got againe.
Preuent not then your selfe, your Sonnes, and me so great a blis: Adiew, & dye (sweet Sonnes) your soules in heauen shall liue for this With such perswasions did she win her husband from the walls: And Edward executes their Sonnes, and to assault he falls So long that Barwicke yeelds at length, and still vs master calls. THese were the dayes when English armes had eu'rie where request, And Edw. knights throughout the world had prick & praise for best. Not Knights alone, but Prelates too, & Queenes: whereof were twain, The quondam & in esse Queenes, by Armour honour gain: By Warre the Queene that was did cease her husbands tragicke Rayn, And by the Queene then being was the Scotch King Prisnet tayne. It followes then, that as the Pawnce doth circkle with the Sonne, So to the vice or vertue of the Prince are people wonne. O that our Muse might euermore on such a Subiect ronne: But Vulcan forgeth other Tooles, and sharpneth deadlier swords, For little els then ciuill warres our following Penne affords. French Expeditions badly thriue, whereof we cease to speake: Not forraine, but Domestick warres, grew strong to make vs weake. Melpomen here might racke her wits, Sylla & Marius hate, Pharsalian Fields were gentle Frayes, regarding this debate. The second Richard, sonne vnto the blacke Prince (Edward dead) Was crownde an Infant, and from him the Stratagem was bread. The bace attempts of Ball, of Straw, of Lyster, tag, and rag, Of Villains, Of-skoms, Clownes, & knaues that checkmate durst to brag With Richards self, & to their deaths his chiefest Princes drag. Till VValths girdle-Armor made the Armes of London more, Because his courage chiefly gaue an end to that vprore, And what-so-els Occurrants much may interrupt our Vayne, Digesting Yorke & Lancaster, acquiring eithers Rayne, Our Penne shall not endenizen: Now drops it sacred blood Of Men-Gods, English Potentates that in this Faction stood. Richard begun that ciuill warre, that till the Seauenth from him
Did last: though often fields with blood of Citizens did swim. Against the Nobles the vphild innoble, and his Peeres And Commons went alike to wracke, nor God nor man he feares. In fewe, Ambition, Auarice, and Counsell lewd had wrought In him a nature worser than into the world he brought: Whereby, and thus, himselfe and house at length a down-fal cought, Twixt Mowbray D. of Norffolke, and the D. of Hertford, sonne To Iohn of Gaunt, close Conference of better dayes begun. The King (sayd Henry Hertford) more remisse than doth beseeme, Leaues France to French, Scotland to Scots, and vs to woes extreeme: His Flatterers doe fleece the Crowne and Commons, not a State Doth or dares counsell, ancient Coats that on the Crowne should wate Giue aime to bastard Armorie: what resteth then but this? Plucke downe those grating Harpies that seduce our King amis, If worthles still, set vp a King worthier than he that is. The other, saying little then, immediatly reueales The secrete, and before the King his Foe-made frend appeales: Whose Gauntlet raysed by the Duke defendant, at the last It grew to single Combate, when the King his Warder cast, And to the Duke of Norffolke iudg'd for euermore exile, And selfe same law Duke Henry had, saue for a lesser while. Thus That did This, but This and That their Iudge did thus begile: And to his Coffers did escheate a world of wealth, a Pray Vnto his Parasites, which thriu'd by other mens decay. Meane while (whose actious life had lawd) did Iohn of Gaunt de∣cease: So to the banisht Duke his Sonne fiue Cronets did increase. But with his kindly aire the King withheld him all the same: Till entring, ayded by his friends, he wonne beyond his clame: For Richard was imprison'd, and by Parlament put downe, And Henry Duke of Lancaster elected to the Crovvne, The Lyne Lancastrian frollicke, but the house of Yorke did frowne. For to those Hydra-kinded warres that after did ensue Those Families gaue name: though first the Diadem was due
Vnto the house of Clarence, till to Yorke that interest gre we By marriage, here omitted: for we onely giue a viewe How Yorke mis-raigning Lancaster did enter, then how This Was dispossest, That repossest, and how their Vnion is. THE SIXT BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. XXIX. HEnry (the fourth so named) hild the King deposed strate In Pomfret Castell, howebeit in honourable State: And got an Act, that who so wrought the Prisner to restore, That Richards selfe, to voyd their hope, should dye the first therefore: Whose birth brought Nature, gentle Lord, returning whence it straid, Now altred him, erst altring it: and Richard mildly said. I must not say I am, and would I might not say I was, Of great the greatest: lesse they grieue from whom doth little passe: Nor more it grieues to contrarie the same I haue been, then To haue deserued not to be vnmaliced of men. Thus humbled and full penitent liues he, lesse mal-content Than was the Duke of Exeter his brother, whose intent Was as at a lusts to haue destroyd King Henrie, but descryed;
Himselfe, fower such, and many Knights the death of Traytors dyed: And by these primer Yorkests thus King Richards date grew out: But whether brayned, famisht, or exiled rests a doubt: For often Vprores did ensue for him, as vndeceast, How beit solemnely inter'd, himselfe, or Signe at least. Twise by confedrate Chiualrie the Percies and their frends Did fight and fall, for either warre to Henries honor ends. He neuer had but warre, and was victorious euermore, Aswell at home, as also of his Foes on forraine Shore: Till lastly Armor ouercame all Enuie, and he liues Of all beloued, and his death a common sorrow giues. HOt spur his Sonne, Henry the fifth, hung at his Fathers eyes, To watch his Ghoste, and catch his Crowne, and that or ere he dyes. And where the Father doubted if he got it well or noe, The Sonne did sweare, how so it came, he would it not forgoe. His bad did blisse the Bad, the Good dispaire all good: But neither Did aime aright, for sodainly his chaunge deceiued either: Of good becomming best, that was of ill the baddest, and The true perfection of a King was not but in this Land. He lead good fortune in a line, and did but warre and winne: Fraunce was his Conquest: Scots but brag and he did beate them in: A friend vnto weldoings, and an Enemie to sinne. Yeat of the Yorkests neuer lackt he Princes that rebell: Nor other than confusion to their still coniuring fell. In fewe, if any Homer should of this Achilles sing, As of that Greeke & Mymidon the Macedonian King Once noted would I note both Prince and Poet happiest men, That for deseruing prayse, and This for well imployed pen: For well this Subiect might increase the Worthies vnto ten. He, aged thirtie sixe, deceast and left his infant Sonne, His Kingdome, Conquests, and his Queene, whose Fathers Realme he wonne, To graue protection, Regents, and so royall for the port,
As that his Orphants Cradle seem'd an Alexanders Court. Queene Katherin, Daughter of the French, King Henryes wife of late, The fayrest Ladye in the West, hild with her sonne Estate. She oft behild, and hild her peace, a braue Esquier of VVailes, That tyde her fancie to his forme, till fancied forme preuailes. All liking was reuersed Loue, saue Owen Tuder, all Saue him (that durst not dreame such good) to her was lesse than small. She formally, by quaint degrees, attracting him to fauor, Did nourish burnings in her selfe, by noting his behauor. She pitched Tewe, he masshed: She vncompaned, To flie He bids her solitary moodes: She askes the remedie: Disclosed pangues sometimes, quoth he, in Phisicke Phisick is: Which sometimes to obserue, quoth she, doth Patients patience mis: Cureles to Aesculapius and Apellos selfe am I: The latter felt my languor, and, immortall, wisht to die: And yeat, saue one, no one disease lay hidden to his Art: For you were bootlesse then to gesse how to vngreeue my smart. Had Daphne to Apollo beene Apollo, Tuder said, His might haue beene, and so may be your Graces humor staid. He, other Gods and Goddesses, found more contented Loue Beloe, in diffring bosomes, than in equall beddes aboue. I aime at Loue (for thereto your Aenigma doth incline) And aime to him a Deity for whome I so deuine. But gladly doubt I of the Man, for if I doubted not, I should but massacer my lacke in enuy of his lot: Yeat are vnworthie of the Moone Endymions lippes, I wot. But (for I will disperse the mistes of further Mysteries, And toogh the Pinuesse of my thoughts to kenning of your Eyes) If Getry, Madame, might conuay so great a good to me, From auncient King Cadwallader I haue my pettigree. If wealth be sayd my want, I say your Grace doth want no wealth, And my suppliment shall be loue, imployed to your health. It hath beene when as heartie Loue did treate and tie the knot,
Though now, if gold but lacke in graines, the wedding fadgeth not. The goodly Queene in bashfull signes blusht out a dumbe Replie: Which he did constur as she meant, and kist her reuerently. Tuder, quoth she, I greater am than would I were for thee, But can as little maister Loue as Lessers in degree. My Father was a King, a King my Husband was, my Brother He is a King, a King my Sonne, and I thy Soueraignes mother: Yeat Fathers, Husbands, Brothers, Sonnes, & all their Stiles together, Are lesser valewed than to liue beloued of my Tuder: Should England, France, and thou thy selfe gainesay thy selfe for mine, Thy selfe, France, England, nor what els' should barre me to be thine. Yea, let them take me wilfull, or mistake me wanton, so My selfe in loue do please my selfe let all the world say no: Let Pesants matte their marriages, and thriue at peraduenture: I loue for loue: no gentle heart should fancy by Indenture. But tell me, Owen, am I not more forward then behooues? I am, sweet-Heart, but blame me not, the same that speaketh loues. And long may liue, quoth he, to loue, nor longer liue may I, Than while I loue your Grace, and when I leaue disgraced die. But Ladie, if I doe deserue, I then desire dispatch: For manie are the iealous Eies that on your beautie watch. Good hap is like to hit me well, to hit so well is rare, And rarenesse doth commence my sute, let sute conclude my care. Should Caesar kisse (he kissed her) it were but such a kisse: And he, and I, here, or elsewhere, in other sport or this, Doe act alike: no bettring but as your belouing is. You may experience, when you please, what difference in the men: And if King Henry pleased more, blame Owen Tuder then. But am I not (yes, Sweete, I am) more sawsie than behooues? Yeat for my heart forgiue my tongue, This speaketh, and That loues. How he imprison'd did escape, and else what else-wheare reede: The Queene and this braue Gentleman did marry, and their Seede
Began that royall Race that did, doth, and may still succeede In happie Empire of our Throne, a famous line in deede. Once, when this Match was at a point, they merrily disposed, Did descant what from vulgar tongues thereof would be supposed. They will beleeue me amorous, or thee so wiued as Vulcan the Smith of Lemnos that to Venus married was, The Queene did say. And Tuder said: I hope of hansell better, In Venus and in Vulcans names more lieth than the letter: For he was as I would not be, She as you should be neuer, Either so apt to giue and take as pittie them to seuer. I pray thee, Owen, quoth the queene, how met they, canst thou tell? I can he said, and more then so, then marke the processe well. When Vulcan was a Batcheler, and Venus was vnwed, Thus wowde he her, thus wonne he her, thus wowde & won he sped. CHAP. XXX. VEnus the fairest Goddesse, and as amorous as faire, Belou'd of Mars, and louing Mars, made of∣tentimes repaire To Vulcans forge, as to see wrought for Iupiter his Fire And thunders, Mars his Armors, and the Sun∣waines curious tire, When they, indeede, of merriments in Loue did theare conspire: And lastly did conlude the Smith a Stale vnto their sport, Wherein did Venus play her part, preuayling in this sort. Vulcan (quoth she) no God there is, I thinke, but needeth thee:
For Thunders Ioue, Ceres for Sieths, for Armors Mars I see, Bacchus for prewning Kniues, and Pan for Sheep-hookes, Phoebus hee For Cart-tiers, Dis for shakling chaines, Neptune for Ankers, and No God but lackes thee, sauing I that aske not at thy hand. My Swans do draw in silken Geeres, my wheeles be shod with downe, No hardines is in beauties Coach: But thou, by birth no Clowne, But Ioue his Son, a God as wee, art made a drudge too much, When, if that Venus might be heard, thou shouldest not be such. How apt are all in those same toyles that tende to their behoofe To let thee beare till backe doth breake? but common is the proofe, That cunning is not cunning if it standeth not aloofe By this had Vulcan hammered his heate, and bad to stay The Bellowes, and he lymping from the Anfeeld thus did say. My busines, Venus, is ydoe, now may I tend to play: What woudst thou? for I member scarce thy arging by my fay. Wodst that I leaue the forge, and thrt I god it with the Gods? If so thou meanst, thy meaning and my meaning be at ods. Sweeter my Bellowes blowing and my hammers beating is To me, then trimmest fidling on the trickest kit ywis: Aske whatso-else I haue to giue, thous maunde it for a kis. As if, quoth she, my kisses were so currant vnto all? No, not at all to Vulcan, if his kindnesse be so small. I aske thy proper ease, then earne thy proper ease, and aske More than a kisse: at least wise doe thy selfe from Mars vntaske. He is my Foe, frend thou not him, nor forge him Armes, but let Him luske at home vnhonored, no good by him we get. What lets but that we may become superlatiues? Of vs All stand in neede, we neede not them. Then gaue shee him a us. And saist me so, quoth Vulcan, and vnto the trough he hies, And skowres his coly fists and face, and with his apron dries Them, badly mended, and vnto the Queene of Dalliance sayes That Mars should lusk at home for him. Then guilefull Venus playes
Her part so well, that on her lappe his head the Dotardlayes. And whilst vpon her pressed Thies (no Hauen for such Hulke) He olls, and loades her with the weight of his vnwealdy bulke, And whilst she coyes his sooty Cheekes, or curles his sweaty top, The Groshead now and then, as hapt, a thred-bare terme lets drop. Then laughes he like a horse, as who would say, trow said I well? But soone his wits were Non plus, for his wooing could but spell. This fitted her: for so before twixt Mars and her was ment, Though not that she so cunningly should Mars of Armes preuēt. But him to stawle in store, not els employde, was her intent. Her Lubber now was snorting ripe, and she meane while was glad, That for to serue her turne else-wheare so good a Staile she had. What passe I, thinketh Venus, on his forme or fashions rude? For, letting forme and fashion passe, one fashion is pursude In getting Children: at the least, who so the Child shall git, It shall suffice that Vulcan is the same shall father it. Now Mars in heauen, Anchises and Adonis on the earth May earne for Babes, for Vulcan shalbe parent at their birth. Nay, be it that he should espy false carding, what of it? It shalbe thought but ielousie in him, or want of wit. Him frownes shall threat, or smiles intreat, and few wil iudge, I winne, If it shall come in question, that to Cockhole him were sinne. Whilst thus she thinketh in her selfe the Cyclops did awake: And, to be short, more doings passe and they a marriage make. But wonder did the Deities, when bruted was the match, That he so foule a thick-skinne should so faire a Ladie catch, They flout him to his face, and helde it almes to arme his head. Wel, Venus shortly bagged, and ere long was Cupid bread: And Vulcan (in like heresie of fathering as moe) Did rack his Art to arme ye Lad with wings, with shafts, with bowe, Most forceable to loue or hate, as lists him shootes bestow. When Vulcans Venus had obtaind her Cupide armed thus,
Then (for we wish that all besides be sutable to vs) She, of the Gods and Goddesses before the wanton noted, Was of the Gods and Goddesses for wantonnesse out-coted, Not one but wexed amorous, yea euen Diana Doted. Loues Mother had direction of his arrowes, and she wilde Him hit the Son-God: for because he, blabbing had behild Her daliance with Adonis: so that vexed Phoebus loues Faire Daphne, whome nor wooes, nor vowes, nor giftes, nor greatnesse moues. Succeses therefore, and inrag'd, he bastards Cupid and (For stoutly on their honesties doe wylie Harlots stand) Venus did chaife, and of the Gods their strife came to be skand. Dispersing then her goodly haires, she bar'd so sweet a face, As from the sternest Godhood might extort suborned grace. Fast at her side clung naked Loue, a louely boy in deede, And Vulcan, benched with the Gods, his wife did thus proceede: (When Phoebus had already tould his tale with sence and heede.) He sayes, quoth she, for chastitie my hauiour was amis: Which proued or disproued, then in you to sentence is. Ah, listen whence it is, ye Gods, that Venus is abused, Because that Phoebus making loue to Daphne was refused. If that were wrong, the wrong must then by Phoebe be excused: Who, rescuing her Votarisse, did so preuent her brother. But be it that this Boy of mine, not seeing one from other, Did hit him, for the Sonnes offence should he maligne the mother? And shall I tell the Childes offence? Why thus forsooth it was: He fitted him to such a Loue as did for Beautie pas. But if he say it needeles was, because it booted not, I say, that Beautie beggeth if by posting it be got. He wooing like himselfe in post did kisse the post, and shee, Too good to be his forced Trull, is now become his Tree, His speeches too, though spoke by one, concernes in credit three. Mine Husband, and my selfe, and Sonne, Gods, and as good as he.
Now woe am I, we seuerally are, as it were, arayned Of Cuckolrie, of Spous-breach, and of Bastardy, though fayned, Yeat too too forcible I feare to be forgot of some, For slaunder set on foote, though false, is talkatiuely dome. Malicious (for thy malice is thy matter all in all) Is it to harlotize, thinkst thou, a Goddesse wrong too small, But thou must forge it from the Earth, euen from the Sheep-cote? Nay, That colour lacketh colour thou thy selfe I troe wilt say. Ambitious, fayre, and amorous thou termest me: if so, Vnlikely to disparge my selfe or bacely stoope so loe, But being such, and knowing thee in very deede the same, Might, leauing petite loues, haue found thy selfe my readiest game: For Phoebus is a Leacher, els are many tongues to blame. Better no bad of mine (nor neede I feare that fault in thee) Thy bad doth passe by probate, but a Quere is for mee. Perhaps (such as it is) my forme may forge to his pretence: Since Beautie is a common marke, apt therefore to offence. Well, be it Beautie doth atract, atracting is belou'd, Beloued courted, courted wonne, and wonne to action mou'd, Yeat from such causes such effects what Consequence hath prou'd? For Daphne was, I wot, full faire, and well can Phoebus court, Yeat Daphne chastly did withstand, and Phoebus mist his sport. My husband though by trade a Smith, for birth out-brau'd of none, And louely vnto Venus, (though mislik of many a one) May for his plainnes also fit my foes inuectiue drifts: As who would say, I wedded him to salue vp other shifts. By Styx I vowe, although I should exceede my selfe for fare, Yet Venus would be Vulcans, and he knowes I truely sware. He is indeede no Gallant, yeat a God, and meerly free From imperfections, such at least as pay not marriage fee. And for his plainnes, to be plaine, the rather choose I him: For such as he liue best, loue best, and keepe their wiues most trim.
When Roysters either roue at chaunge, be peeuish or precise: Faire women therefore matching thus be not, say I, vnwise: Iudge not by such presumptions then, they add but to his lies. Thus haue you now a Medley of his malice and my mone, His vice, my vowe: and lastly rests your sentence to be knowne. If Mercurie should plead my cause, he could but set me cleare: Good causes neede not curious termes, and equall Iudges heare The Equity, not Eloquence, and so I hope will yee: And so shall gratefull Venus sayle vnder your gracious Lee. So, putting finger in the Eye, the Deities discent: Some hild with Phoebus, some with her: Which strife did Vulcan stent. My wife, quoth he, more honest than her Cuser is, I troe, Shall not ywis be bused by the squanding Pollo so: She loues me, I durst sweare, and saue my selfe she loues no moe: And why should you or I beleeue his yea before her noe? Troth, sayd the Gods, since Vulcan is contented we are pleas'd: And so the variance was by him thus witely appeas'd. Phoebus his Plainte did quash: but so he after-times did watch, As that Sir Hornsbie had by proofe he was a louing Patch, When Mars and Venus playing false his wier Net did catch. Now riddle, Madame, if those tongues that make Sunonamies Of them and vs proue Oracles, what should therof arise? That more, quoth she, which you haue sayd than in the letter lies. But names infect not, nor receiue your Riddle Prophesie: If ought fore-sayd be ominous should any feare tis I. When so the Queene had sayd, then to this more proceeded he: Vulcan, Venus, Cupid, Sol, and Daphne turnd to Tree Were tennis balles to euery tongue of euery Deiee. Tush Tush, quoth Pan, gay Venus and the gentle youth her sonne Are blameles blamed: What think you, would Phoebus thē haue don Had he in loue bin crost as I? And then he thus begun.
CHAP. XXXI. THe Goteheards of Hyrcania hild their Orgies vnto me, And theare was I, vnseene of them, the Festifall to see. Now had they censed, and with glee eate were the hollowed Kids, When as they fell to Rowndelaies, and I the Rownd amids. Not Satires, or the Naiades, were halfe so nimble as This countrey Consort (for each Lad was sorted with a Lasse.) There was a tricksie Girle, I wot, albeit clad in gray, As peatt as bird, as straite as boult, as fresh as flower in May, As faire as Cupids Mother, or through him it is I erre, Ifso I erre (for why his shaft had fixed me to her) Shee daunsing dyed her lilly Cheekes, whil'st I for loue did di: And as vnuisible I stoode (what bootes it me to lye) And drew with breath her sweet-stole breath, so acting spiritually, The feast was done and all vndone that I did wish to doe: My Deity adiornde therefore, in humaine forme I wowe. And first (because that first they should approach vs Gods) I faine My selfe a Priest (for well I wot they sildome wooe in vain.) I made me smug, and with a Tex did intermix a toye, And tould how fine and faire a life our Clergie-Femes inioy, And how our leisure fitted Loue. And let it fit (quoth she) To such as lust for loue: Sir Clarke, you clergefie not me. Then came I curious in my silkes (But who would thinke that Pan Could play the Courtier?) and did faine my selfe a iolly man.
I talkt of Castles, Mannors, Parkes, and all things more than mine. Too course (quoth she) am I for you, and you for me too fine. Then Souldier-like I sued, and did boast of Battels many, And standing on my Manhood would not be coriu'd of any: And sometimes proffered kindnesse, such as came not to the push, But checked for my boystrousnes was balked with a blush. Then play I maister Merchant, and did plye her by the booke: I spake of great Accompts, Receites, nor little care I tooke For rigging and returne of Ships, (her lippes meane while my Pex.) Ply Sir (quoth she) your busie trade, you are besides the Tex. I seeme a countrie Yeoman: Then a Craftsman: both in vayne: The former was too lumpish, and the latter worse of twayne: Doe what I could, I could not doe whereby her loue to gayne. Then thought I, out of doubt as I a God fayne Manhood, so This is transform'd Diana for some practise meant beloe. A yeare was past, and I past hope through coyish chast denyall, And yeat I could not but persist in quest of further tryall. I met God Pryapus (for he, not Venus sonne it is Abuseth vs, This darteth Loue, That driues to lust amis) Seest yonder Clowne? quoth Priapus (not far-off was a Loute With neare a handsome rag, himselfe lesse handsome soole to snout, Lesse wel-form'd, or more il-fac'st, & like Clenchpoope looke & lim, Lesse mannerd, and worse gated than this Saturns-Eeue-made Slim, God neuer made since God made Man, if euer God made him.) That Lob, quoth he, and yonder Lasse that this way driues her Gotes Do marke them Pan, you may obserue from them vnthought-of notes, I knew her for my Minion wench of whom I earst did tell. First blend they heards, and forthwith lips, and after billing fell To other sport, such sport ywis as would haue likt me well. Must I, thought I, giue ayme to such a skrub and such a Saint, That Skowndrell, and this Counterfeit: confounded so I faint. How cheere you Pan, quoth Priapus, the shameles God of lust, Thus can I fit such friends as you with such a Trull of trust:
(We were indeede ere then at odds.) So Priapus he left me, When he had brought me to this sight that neere of sense bereft me. But thus I loathed where I lou'd, and learned not too late That coyest are not chastest, that the gayest Females mate With Loutes as soone as Lords, that Loue is luck not shiftles fate, That cowled, celled, he, or she, whoso, or wheresoeuer, Or Votarie, or Secular, scarse one pryaped neuer. To Pans report did Mercurie replie and thus recite, Of Cupide and of Priapus doth Pan distinguish right: But let be Lust, a word or two of Loue and of his might. I Entring Guest-wise on a time the frolicke Thabane Court, Mine eye presented to mine heart a Nymph of louely Port: Her knew I not, nor knew she me, vnknowne therefore vnkist I loyter on the Earth, meane while in Heauen not vnmist. My Senses held a Synode, and vnacted Acts dispute, And nothing els I did affect but to effect my sute. For whencesoeuer Loue proceedes, or whatsoere it be, Or whosoeuer loueth, Loue tormenteth in degree. Mine Eye conuaid it to mine Heart, mine Heart controwld mine Eye: Yeat Loue retriu'd it selfe, I lou'd not knowing whome or why. Then did I seeke, and find (who am no Milksop as ye wot) Acquaintance in the Court, the which the nicest balked not. Nor smally did my shape, my tongue, and tunes (no common geere) Preferre their Master to a place about their Mistresse neere. When she did sigh then I did sob, I laught if she did smile, And by officious Forgeries pretended to begile. But her, not coy, I found so chast, as saue a kisse or twaine, I nothing got, although in all I vained to her vaine. From ill therefore I grew to worse, from worse to worse, for why? Through ouer-louing at the length I loued ielously.
My Stomacke lest me, euery sense had imperfection then, My colour ceast and, sicke, I forge contrary cause to men. So many Quames came ore my heart as newes to eare or eie Of others commoning in sport, or courting seriouslie. No Corsiue to Coriuals, and no death vnto despaire: I did not hope, yeat held I on with cost to nourish care. Sometime, attyred by the booke, I faind a merrie cheere: Sometime I drouped, and did weare disorderly my geere. But how-soere I came to her, I found her still the same, Gamesome enough to intertaine, and yet for me no game. And though enuiously I aym'd at others better speede, Yeat, too precisely, did I sift such doubts were more than neede. Then rowsing vp my selfe, I with my selfe did reason thus: No folly were in Loue, if so no folly were in vs: Wheare Mercurie is layd asleepe may others lay a straw: The Louer and Beloued are not tyed to one Law: Because I am the same I am should shee not therefore bee The same she is: mine is too loue, but hers to disagree. Then Mercurie be to thy selfe thy selfe, these thoughts begile With meeter thoughts, thou lingerest in losse too long a while. Thinke not thy greatnesse, or thy gifts, or gracious eyes may get her: A Foole more foule may seem more faire, Loue may think bad the bet∣ter. If she determine Chastititie, then falls thy sute to ground: Or if some other be preferd, then better lost than found: Likte, or misliked to thy Loue should reason be the bound. Or Women loue to be belou'd of chaunge of Clyents, or Vncertaine wheare to find them, with the Eagle or the Dorr. Albeit Beautie mooues to loue, and Loue doth make thee sue, Better at first be Non-sute, than at length not to subdue. Such Reasons seeming plausible, I fleeting whence I loued, By absence and new Exercise old Passions were remoued. So did I loue, and so I left, so many a skorne, and skoffe,
Care, cost, disgrace, and losse of time were and may be cut off: And women so lesse stand aloofe, when men can so be wise: So lesser sute hath lucklier speede, than to be too precise. Not women, but our wilfulnesse, doth worke our owne vnrest: Though Beautie, Loue, and they lacke fault, we may abuse the best. SO helpe me Iupiter, (quoth Mars) in Loue so may Ispeede, As Mercurie and Pan doe erre in poynts of Loue indeede: Precisians and plaine Plodders (such is This, and so is That) In Loue doe swallow Cammels, whilest they nicely straine a Gnat. Why what be Women? Women, geld the latter sillabell, Then are they nothing more then Woe, their names remaine doth tell. Their yea, or no, euen when they sweare they loue or loue vs not, Beleeue who list: soone be they gone, as sodainly are got. What neede we creepe the Crosse to giue vnto a begging Saint? Tush tush, a Flye for booke-Loue, none be fortunate that faint. Not paper, pursse, or kerchiefe Plea lets Fancie sooner loase Then at the Shrine to watch the Saint, She is not coy, but cloase: Pollitians know to cheapen, what to offer, when to skoase. The Clowne, no doubt, that potted Pan lackt Art to glose and flatter, And yeat nor Pan nor Mercurie went roundlier to the Matter: He found right Methode (for there is a Methode, time, and place, Which Fooles obseruing do cōmence ere Wisemē haue their grace.) Though dastard Hawkes doe sore aloft and dare not seaze vpon, Or Bussards-like doe sit aloofe vntill the game be gon, Kinde killing Hawkes but wag the wing, and worke tolsowse anon. Once Loue, surreuerence, made my selfe vale Bonnet, So submis My ceremoniall wooing was, as common wooing is: With rufull lookes, sighes, sweete Pigs-nye, and Fooleries more than few I courted her, so much more stout by how much more I sew: Till aptly singled, as it hapt, I say not what did hap, But Loue that late did load my Head, did load her willing Lap. Nor this Lad Loue of that same Loue is guiltie any whit,
For why? nine Moones did wexe and waine betweene his birth & it. Alas poore Boy, before he was, Loue was a common game, The first-made Man, the Rib-reft Man in Eden shewd the same: For when his sudden eyes admir'd the boan-flesht faire Conuart Deriued from his Side, his tongue, directed by his hart, Foorthwith pronounced Woman, but a moment earst vnknoen, So deare as flesh of his owne flesh, and bone of his owne boen: Quit then, ye Gods, this Lad and let your search of Loue alone: Who will in power be felt of all, in person found of none. Or rather is not reall, but some Fansie: if not, then Fantasticall in Women, but essentially in Men. If Loue be such in Women (But mistake me not, for whie? I note them but fantasticall in fault of Destinie) Deferre were then to erre: When all is done that doe we may, Labor we sorrowing all the night, and sewing all the day, The female faultie Custome yeelds lesse merit greatest pay, And ventrous more then vertuous meanes doth beare the bell away. Now touching Venus (worthie such a Pheere, not such a Foe) Vulcan, me thinkes, obserueth well slight proofe in yea and noe, The Court therefore is well aduis'd to Sentence not to groe. The Gods, that did ere while but aime at Vulcans wiues sonnes Fa∣ther, Saw Venus blush, and held that aime autentical the rather. End Gods and Goddesses, quoth Ioue, to argue to and fro: Like good and bad is either Sex. Nay more, behold, than so, I viewd erewhile the Destenies, and thence I thus did know. Zimois, when Troy must perish, shall send downe her Floods a Fleete, And world it were our Father ruld when Create thought him vnmeet: But long time hence, & farre Starres thence, that World shall world an Ile Enuyrond with the Ocean waues, then famous in short while Through often Triumphes ouer Foes and Traffike euery wheare, Howbeit thrice orerunne, and once a Conquest shall be theare. *Those Changes notwithstanding they a People shall remaine Vnchased thence, and of that Streene shall Fiue at length re-raigne.
Dread, terrene Gods, the Fift of those, a terrene God desse, She Euen at the firie Trigon shall your chiefe Ascendant be: Right Phoebe-like (Phoebe may like a Compeere like to her) Retriue her named Name, to time the tryall we refer. This sayd, he bids adiorne the Court, and willed Mercurie Thencefoorth not to conuent the Gods for such a Foolerie, As Loue, the idle Bodies worke, and Surfet of the Eie. And thus the Queene and Tuder chat. But thought of nothing lesse Then that from them Ioues noted fiue fated to such successe Should spring, as sprong, and part springs yet. But cease we to digresse And shew we how her Sonne did long and lucklesse Raigne possesse. CHAP. XXXII. IT rests, fifth Henries Sonne, that made the Hen∣ries more by one, Did in his Infancie possesse his Conquering Fa∣thers Throne, And happely was rulde a Child, & rulde an hap∣pie man, Till with his Parrasites his Peeres and hee with them began A bloodie quarrell: offering so vnto the Yorkests spright For to reclaime, in bold attempts, their discontinued right. Richard Plantagenet the Duke of Yorke, by VVarwicks ayde, Did get the Gaole, not long enioy'd, for he in Armes decayde, Subdued by King Henries Queene, when as by frends and force He had in Parlament obtaynde in euery clause his corse: For, mounted thear the Kingly Throne, that Yorkish Heros sayd, Here should I speake, and shall I hope: and so his Claime conuayd
From Clarence his Progenitor, with reasons such among, As, he Protector of the Realme, King Henries heires were wrung From all Reuersion: hearts and eares did so applaud his tung. Edward his Sonne then Earle of March (the Duke his Father slaine) Wonne, by the Earle of VVarwicks ayde, in double battell Raigne. King Henry fled to Scotland, and the Queene and Prince their Sonne, From France sollicet Succors, which vnto their losse they wonne. Henry was taken, they and their Confedrates were subdu'd: Yeat still the Queene escaped, and she armour still pursu'd. But, VVarwicke pleased, all attempts did faile to Edwards Foes: Displeased, Edward fayled, and declined Henry rose: He crowned Either, and the same discrowned them againe, Admyrd of all, belou'd of all: howbeit lastly slaine By Edward, whilst he did vphold vnchancie Henries Raigne. So VVarwicke perisht, Henry so refalne from Kings estate Was reimprison'd, and his Queene did land her aydes too late: But landing, when of Barnet field she heard the luckles fate, (Albeit Knights Lancastrians store did flocke in her defence) She stoode a second Niobe, bereft of speech and sence: And whilst the Duke of Somerset an ouer-hardie Knight, Did brauely marshall out her force to ouer-matched fight, Hers and King Henries Sonne, the Prince of VVales a proper Lad, In comforting his mother did continue her more sad. Ah Sonne, quoth she, through oft mishaps mishaps I can disgest: I feare for thee, for thee the hope that to our House doth rest. Now all are tryed we can trust, if now we faile we fall: Thy death is in the same request as is thy Fathers thrall: And (which I would it were the worst) the Foe doth thirst my life, To end his Triumph in the deaths of Husband, Sonne, and Wife. Though thy great-Grandsier, Grandsier, & thy Father wonne & wore The King-ring, which thy Father hild yeares thirtie eight and more, Though by the cappitall Remote of Lancaster withstood, Yeat fayle prescription and discents, now lacke they but our blood:
Then learne against thou proue a man (ah hardly hope I so) The Line Lancastrian naturally doth labour of that Foe. The Queene, concluding thus in teares, did then to Armor goe. Fierce was the Field, and either part did valiantly offend: But, Edward ouercomming, when the Battell was at end, The Queene was carried Captiue thence, And Edwards men did bring Her Sonne the Prince (sole sonne and heire vnto the captiue King) Before the Victor, whose demaunds receiuing answers stout, He thrusts the manly Boy from him, whom Glocester about The King (Churle that he was) did stab. (So tragicke was the spight Betwixt those Linages that oft each others so requite.) His death was more than death vnto his Parents: but not long His Father moned vndispatcht alike for death and wrong By foresaid Duke of Glocester, of whom succeedes our song. THus won the Yorkestes ancient Raigne: sixe bloodie Fields did seate Edward the Fourth in Englands Throne, possest a while in queate. He wonne his Subiects loue, and loue was debt to his desarts, But, as must ours, so lastly his vn-bodied Soule departs. He left his Kingdome to his Sonne, his Sonne to be protected By Richard Duke of Glocester, Who, pietie reiected, Grew treble-wise tyrannicall, malicious to the blood Of his deceased brothers Queene, And what so Yorkest stood Betwixt the Scepter and himselfe, aliue, he pricked dead, A Foe to all Lancastrians, as the same by nature bread, This common Deaths-man of those Kinnes, and euery Nobles fall, Whom he but gest Coriuall or might crosse him near so small, This stoope-Frog Aesops Storke, alike tyrannous vnto all, To giltie, giltlesse, friend, or foe was not secure one day, But Either dyes as eithers death might fit him any way. Yea, euen whilst his Brother rulde, when all Lancastrians, and His Brothers twaine, his Nephewes twaine, & Neeces three did stand Betwixt himselfe and home, euen then by blood he hunted Raine:
For when his owne and ruthles hands King Henries heire had ayue, Then Henries selfe, Henrie the sixt a giltles King in bands, He stabd: his brother Clarence dide through him, by other hands But, now Protector, as doe Wolues the Lambes protected he, And fared as if fearing that one wickedder might be. Queene mother and her kindred hild the Orphant King a while, Her Kinne hee murdred, and from her he got the King by gile, Whom (though vncrowned tituled fist Edward) rest his mother, He made be murdred, with the Duke of Yorke the yonger brother When neither Yorkest his Allies, and of Lancastrians none Were left to let it, who should let but he might leape the Throne? He wore indeede the wrested Palme: But yeat, to better bad, By murder of his wife he sought new marriage to be had With that Elizabeth that was the Eldest daughter to Edward the fourth: But all in vaine the King his Neece did wowe, For Henrie Earle of Richmonds friends such doings did vndoe. Which Henry and Elizabeth by secrete Agents were Contracted, he of Lancaster, and she of Yorke the heire: Of which letigious Famelies heer mapped be the Lines, Euen till the Heire of these two Heires both Stockes in one combines. CHAP. XXXIII. HEnrie (as if by myracle preseru'd by Forraines long From hence-ment Treasons) did arriue to right his Na∣tiues wrong: And chiefly to Lord Stanlie, and some other Succors as Did wish and worke for better dayes, th Riuall welcome was. Now Richard heard that Richmond was assisted and a shore,
And like vnkenneld Cerberus the crooked Tyrant swore, And all complexions act at once confusedly in him: He studieth, striketh, threates, intreates, and looketh mildly grim, Mistrustfully he trusteth, and he dreadingly did dare, And fortie passions in a trice in him consort and square. But when, by his conuented force, his foes increased more, He hastned Battell, finding his Coriuall apt therefore. When Richmond orderly in all had battelled his ayde, Inringed by his Complices, their chearefull Leader sayde. Now is the time and place (sweete Frends) and we the Persons be That must giue England breath, or els vnbreath for her must we. No Tyrannie is fabled, and no Tyrant was in deede Worse thā our Foe, whose workes wil act my words if wel he speede: For ill to ills Superlatiue are easely intist, But intertaine amendment as the Gergesites did Christ. Be valiant then, he biddeth so that would not be out-bid For courage, yeat shall honor him, though bace, that better did. I am right heire Lancastrian, he in Yorkes destroyed right Vsurpeth: But, through Either ours, for neither Claime I fight, But for our Countries long-lackt weale, for Englands peace I warre: Wherein he speed vs vnto whom I all Euents refarre. Meane while had furious Richard set his Armies in array, And then, with lookes euen like himselfe, this or the like did say. Why, Lads, shall yonder Welshman with his Straglers ouer-match? Disdaine ye not such Riualles, and deferre yee their dispatch? Shall Tuder from Plantagenet the Crowne by craking snatch? Know Richards very thoughts (he toucht the Diademe he wore) Be mettall of this mettall: Then beleeue I loue it more Than that for other law than Life to super sead my Clame, And lesser must not be his Plea that counter-pleads the same. The weapons ouer-tooke his words, & blowes they brauely change, When, like a Lion thirsting bloud, did moody Richard range,
And made large slaughters where he went, till Richmond he espied, Whom singling, after doubtfull Swords, the valerous Tyrant died. THus ended Englands warre and woe, vsurping Richard dead, When Henry and Elizabeth vniting titles wed: Of which two Heires th'vndoubted Heire of either Line did cum, The Epilogue vnto these wounds, digested in this sum. Fourth Henry first Lancastrian King put second Richard downe: Fourth Edward of the House of Yorke re-seazd sixt Henries Crowne: Lad-Princes twaine were stabd in Field, of either Linage one: Foure Kings did perish: Sundry times now-Kings anon were none: Sixe, three of either faction, helde successiuely the Throne: But from the second Richard to seuenth Henry we pretend Eight Kings this Faction to begin, continue, and to end. The Princes, Earles, Barons, and Knights this quarrell did deuour Exceede the tale of Gentry best and bacest at this houre: So plagueth ciuill Warre, & so from Robe to Ragge dooth scoure. Then luckiest of the Planets weare Predominants, say we, When by this Bedmatch either Heire that Bloud-mart did agree: When Seuenth begot the Eight, and Eight the First and Last for like Our now Pandora: nor till her our humbled sailes we strike. For should we at her Grandsier reare our Colome, yet too poore, We could not write (as Hercules on his) Beyond no more: For he lackt search, our Muse hath Kend an Ocean is in store, Euen matter that importeth worth coparing all before.
THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. XXXIV. NOw let vs poste-alone to Mars and Mercury repar, At least so farforth as wee maye without con∣trowlment daer. Richard the third, Henry the Seauenth (last sub∣iects of our pen) Was slaine, was crownde, with hate, with loue, as worste, as best of men: So not with Yorke and Lancaster doth wonted enuie raigne, Nor can Aeneas Off-springs now of Orphansie complaine. But that Cadwalladers Fore-doomes in Tuders should effect Was vnexpected, saue that God doth destinies direct. Els Owen Tuder had not wiu'd Fift Henries noble Queene: Nor had they of their bodies Earles Penbrooke and Richmon seene: Nor Margret, Somersets sole heire, to Richmon had beene weade: Nor they the heire of Lancaster, Henry the Seuenth, had bread: Nor he of Yorks Inheritrix, Elizabeth, had sped: Nor they vnited either house all other titles dead. Yeat, eare this vnion, Either so ariued to their right, As Psiches on an errant sent to Hell by Venus spight. Worse Ferrymen than Charon, Hoods contagious more than Styx,
Worse Porters than fowle Cerberus were pleas'd, past, stood betwix. How therefore Either dangerously their Labyrinth did passe Shall not be ouerpassed: Thus their seuerall fortune was. Henries the fourth, the fifte, and sixt successiuely did raigne, Vntill fourth Edwards sword to him did lawfull Empier gaine: Lancastrians droupe, the Yorkests had their long expected day: Sixt Henry and the Prince his sonne, by stabbes were made away: The foresaid Margaret, sole heire of Somerset, earst wife Of Tuder, Earle of Richmond, had by him a Sonne in life, To whom, from her, the Crowne-right of Lancastriās did accrewe: He from his English foes himselfe by secrete stealth withdrewe To little Brutaine, wheare he found the Duke a frendfull trewe. This Henry Earle of Richmond, now poore Lancasters Remaine, Was by fourth Edward practis'd home by many a subtell traine: Whome once the gentle Duke (beguilde with promises vnment) Deliuered to the English-men, with whome he homewards went. Forsaken Ladd for yet he was a Ladd) what did remaine But certaine death, so to assure his foes vncertaine raine: Which to establish many a Prince of his Allies weare slaine. But him eare broughta-boorde, the Duke (aduised better, stayd, And him (as if by cnce escapte) to Sanctuarie conuaid. The Lambe so rescued from the Wolfe, that priuiledged place Assured him till Edwards death, and then he hoped grace. But he that was Protector of his murthered Nephewes than Vsurped England, and became a Monsture not a man: Richard the third omitting all his tyrannies beside) To be possessed of the Earle by many a message tride. Great wealth was sent, greater assum'de, but nothing might preuail: The gracious Duke abhord to set his guiltles frend to sayle: But furnished with money, men, and armor shipt him thence To winne his right: yeat churlish Seas did lett such kind pretence▪ Full hardly Richmonds threatned Ship escapt our armed Shoore, For Richard of the Riuall got intelligence before.
Return'de, the Duke did sicken and Landoise did beare the sway: And he for Masses great was brib'de Earle Henry to betray, Yeat through wise Bishop Murtons meanes by stealth he scap'te away. In trauell then from Brutaine to his Grome himselfe was Grome, By interchaunged rayment, till to Angers they weare come. The French King, pittying his distresse, pretended asked aide: And secrete platformes for his weale his English friends had laide. Henry in France, at home his Friends bester them, and the Foe Meane time with hope, with fraud, with feare imployde his witts also. Now of the Earles conspiracy the totall drift was this: Elizabeth the daughter of fourth Edward vow'd he his, And she was vow'd to him, if God with victory him blisse: Our wounded Englands healing balme, for thus thereof ensew'de: The factious Families vnite, the Tyrant was subdew'de, And thence the surname Tuder doth Plantagenet include. AS hardly as her husband did Elizabeth escape: For why? like Stratageme for both did bloody Richard shape. Whilste that her Father liued, now a King, and now exilde, Her Crosses then did happen from such victors as weare milde. But now the same that murthered her Brothers to be King, That did withfraud begin and then with bloud conclude ech thing, That flattred friends to serue his turne, and then destroyde the same, That was her Vncle, yeat did hate her Mothers very name, That thought he liued not because his Neeces weare vndead, Theis now (and blame her not) in her a world of terror bread. But of vnpriuiledged bloud yet had he store to spill, Yet sanctuaries weare not forc'te, yet but expecting ill. Theareofte the Queene her Mother, Shee, and Sisters would reporte Their happie and vnhappie daes, the fewer of first sorte. Happy was I (the olde Queene said) when as a Maide vnweade, Nor Husbands weale nor Childrens woe mistempered my head. Yeat I, beloued, loued and so left that free estate,
And thought me happyer than before, for louely was my Mate, Iohn Gray (a sweet Esquier for his prowysse dubbed Knight) Was, as behoued, all my ioy: who, slaine in factious fight, Your Father, Daughters, late my Lord and Husband now in earth, From me had many a secrete curse, as motyue of his death: Lancastrian was my husband, and that faction had the wourste, So, to releeue my Widdowhood, I kneel'd to whom I curste. Edward (for Henry was depoes'de, and Edward seaz'd the Crowne) (I wot not for what forme of mine) did raise me kneeled downe, And gaue me chearefull wordes, and tooke me curteously aside, And playd the ciuell Wanton, and me amoroufy he eide: His plea was loue, my sute was Land: I plie him, he plies me: Too baece to be his Queene, too good his Concubine to be I did conclude: and on that point a while we disagree. But when I was his Queene (sweete King) not for I was his Queene, But for himselfe, and for the loue that passed vs betweene, I held me happiest vnderheauen: yea, when his aduerse Line Discrowned him, I had inough that I was his, he mine. Then, after fortunes often change, he died, and I suruiue A life exceeding death for griefe and greefes Superlatiue. My heart, ah Sonnes, my heart (deare Hearts) was dead eare yee did die: Too yong weare yee to censure of your vncles tyranny. Then wept shee, and her daughters wept: their onely talke alwaies Was passed ioyes, or present woes: nor hope they better daies, But in Earle Richmonds good successe, that now a power did raise. Too soone had Richard notice that Earle Henry would ariue, By precontract his eldest Neece Elizabeth to wiue: And well he knew in Yorks descent she was immediate heire, And Henry like in Lancaster: a Match for him to feare. Which to preuent he flattered his Neeces from their mother: Who, fearefull Ladies, did expect like deaths as had their brother. And as they feare did he affect, which for the troubles then Was vneffected: now behou'd to winne him loue of men.
Yeat casts he how he might conuay to him his Neeces right, Soone compassing his Wifes dispatch, whose life stood in his light. Then plyes he his amazed Neece to his intious bead Of her abhor'd, Shee in conceite by faith fore-plighted spead. This marrage motion gawles her more than any former griefe: Her selfe, Friends, Realme, Conspiracie, & all it toucht in breefe, And therefore death, late feared, now she fantaseth in cheefe. Meane while did Henry land, incampe, fight, and subdewe his Foe, And, marrying her, long ciuill warres in England ended so. CHAP. XXXV. SEauenth Henries forraine busenes had succesfull honor: heere Three schol'd Ddalien Icarists (whose moun∣ting cost them deere) Did interrupt the peace. The first a Priests bace Puple: he By his Complottors was pretenst'e Duke Cla∣rence sonne to bee. A many of our natiue Peeres, some forraine Princes too, Submissiuly behight him aide in all that they might doo. The Lad was lofty, for himselfe he harrollized well, At full he could his lessons, and a formale lie would tell. For him was fought a bloody field, the Victory the Kinges. Lambert the forged Yorkest, and the Priest (that fram'd his winges) Weare taken: For minority the Icarus was quit: The Dedals for cleargie tites was but intowr'd for it. Thus scapte the Priest. The mother Queene to her that now was Queene Found harder sentence for a crime more venale, as I weene,
Shee that did forward Henry with her friends, her purse, her wit, That had conspir'd, conceil'd, concur'd, for him the Crowne to git, And had him now her sonne in law, vnchauncy Queene, fore-went Her whole reuenewes, and her age as if in durance spent: Because against her heart, good Soule (for bootles to withstand) See yeelded all her daughters to the late Vsurpers hand, Whereby the Vnion might haue quaild, and for it might she must Indure such law, strict law to her of mallice not vniust. THan good old Queene Elizabeth our next young Phaeton Had gentlier Iudgement: He till then frō Realm to Realm had gone, And now in Ireland (hoping no such honor) was at Corke Saluted by some Rebels theare for Richard Duke of Yorke, Fourth Edwards second son. Those Stiles to him were strange, but thay Did feofe them on the bace-borne Muffe, and him as King obay. The Yorkesh Faction (though they knew the error) let not slip Occasion, that they now might haue Lancastrians on the hip: Margret fourth Edwards sisters heart for ioy hereof did skip. Shee had him soone to Burgone, and informes him cuery thing That might concerne Yorks pettegree, or apted for a King: Maliciously repining still at Lancasters successe, And often would thus or thus-like her heart with tongue expresse. God hath forgot our house of Yorke: nay Yorke it selfe forgot: To my late Brother Richards soule cleaue euermore this blot: He made away our friends to make a way vnto our Foe, To Lancaster, proud Lancaster: I, thence these teares doc floe. Had he stock't vp that hated stocke, had he ra'st out that Race, Python had ceast, and he had bene Apollo in that cace. That Henry was Lancastrian, and that Henry was aliue, And where he liu'd, & that he should not liue if we would thr He knew ywis: yeat knew he not his death how to contriue. The Duke of Brutaine is no God, then how the diuell y'ste That both my brothers, laboring him, for whome they
Their Sinons weare too simple, and their bribes but petite geere: Whē had they bought him with their souls they had not bought him deere. The heire of Lancaster (fie how it loathes to sound that name) Enioyes the Crowne: nay worse, enioyes to wife a Yorkesh Dame: Worser, the name Plantgenet is buryed in the same: And, worst of all, their Title such as law bids vs disclame. Who would haue lookt such change to chaunce? oh howe I feed like will As Aeas daughter Aesons house with tragedies to fill? Who can endure to see their friends decline, their Foes ascend? I see it, and for seeing so doe wish my life had end. When that her darling had his looer she left him to his wings: Who flead not to worse company or at lesse game than Kings. He lighteth in the French Kings Court, wheare (honord as the same From whom he falsely would contriue a Crowne by forged name) He had Supplies, and English ayds, and Irish troupes also, With which he lands in England: where King Henry met the Foe. On either part the Battell was right bloodie, but at length The King subdues, and Perke flead the land, dispoyld of strength. Then, as the French, the Scotch King did repute of him: whereby He wyu'd a Lady passing fayre and of the Kings Allie, The Earle of Huntlies daughter of the scotch-blood-royall bread: Shee both before and after that her low-pris'd Mate was dead, When well she knew his parentage, and felt his ebbed state, In onely sorrow did abound, in loue no whit abate: Howbeit in the English Court prefer'd to high estate. Theare (for she was of comely parts and vncompeered face) Shee, often brauely courted, yeelds no Courtier labor'd grace. To one among'st the rest that most admierd her aunswers chaste She sayd: besides the sinne and that I so might liue disgrac'ste, A Presedent of wrong and woe did make me long since vow Chastly to liue the Loue of him whom Fates should me allow. I knew (quoth she) a Knight (a Knight he was in each respecte) I knew a Ladie (fayre she was but fouly to be chect)
They loued long (if that to loue and leaue may loue be sayd) Till lastly she conceyued loue wheare loue should be denayd. Then he, whose Sowles Soule goddiz'd her, perceiuing her vntruth, Became vnlike himselfe, and mou'd, saue her, each one to ruth. At last he runs'distraught about, and what his moods conceited He did: confusedly he wept, askt, answerd, and intreated: Ah many a time (for though his words lackt methode, yeat they mo∣ued) He had these speeches, arguments how earnestly he loued. CHAP. XXXVI. MY Mistresse is a Paragon, the fayrest fayre a∣liue: Atrides and Aeacides for faire lesse faire did striue. Her colour fresh as Damaske Rose, her breath as Violet, Her bodie white as Iuorie, as smooth as polisht Iet, As soft as Downe, & were she down Ioue might come down & kisse A Loue, so fresh, so sweet, so white, so smooth, so soft as this. The Cleonan Lions spoyles for her I would redresse. I would the Lernan Hydras heads with sword and fire suppresse. My force the Erymantheon Bore should brauely ouermatch. The swift-foote golden horned Stag I, running, would orcatch. My bow the Birds of Stymphalus from wastfull prayes should chace. Of her proud Baldricke would I spoyle the Amazon at Thrace. Augeas washed Stables should my seauenth Labour end. I with the Bull of Calidon, victorious, would contend. On horse-deuoured Diomede like honour should be wonne.
Spanish Robber Geron should by me to death be done. pght of Spight in Hespera I golden fruit would pull. Three-headed Cerberus in chaynes should make the Iury full, Bast, Snake, Bore, Stag, Birds, Bealt, Planks, Bull, Theefe, Frute, Dog, Diomed, hokt, fear'd, puncht, cought, pearst, priz'd, washt, throwne, slaine, puld, chaned, horse▪ fead. Were labours lesse than I would act, might I of her be spead. Dll mal-contented Saturne rulde the houre when I was borne: Had Iupiter then starr'd I had not liued now forlorne: Or Mars had steel'd my milkie heart with manlier moods than thees: Or Mercurie had apted me to plead for Louers fees: Or Sol infused sense to search what better me behou'd: Or Venus made me louely, so for loue to be belou'd: Or Luna (Contrary to Loue) had bettered the best: Ah, could seauen Planets and twelue Signes constell one such vnrest? Then lou'd that Sier of Gods when he had vow'd his childrens death: That Sonne of his made wanton scapes with Lasses on the earth. Drus, aske Vulcan and his Arte if thou didst loue or noc. And Hermes that he Herse lou'd will not disclaime I troe. Nor wart thou Phoebus chaste although thou wor'st a willow withe. Thou Citherea hadst a leash of Loues besides the Smith. Endion gaynst Diana could vouch farther than the eye. Thus lou'd ye all, ye churlish Starres, yeat let ye Louers dye. This sayd he, and for this he sayd, I for the ruth of this Did vow, that whoso once were mine I would be onely his. Why? these his words did sauor wit, not one distraught (quoth he.) Nay heare the rest of his vnrest, it followeth thus (quoth she). Oft would he kisse a senceles Tree and say, sweet Mistresse mine, I was, I am, and will be still the same and euer thine. Bleeue me, or if so you doubt, Anatomize my braine, And re my Senses see your selfe the Sourentesse to raigne. Beleeue me, or if so you doubt, rip out my heart, and see Your selfe in it, in it you are and euermore will be. Beleeue me, or if so you doubt, commaund I forthwith dye,
And see your selfe the onely heauen whereto my soule doth flye. If such I seeme and be not such, let nought betide me well. If such I seeme and be not such, I wish no heauen but hell. If such I seeme and be not such, your Fauours let me mis. With that he blest himselfe and sayd, ah, what a wish was this? Then steps he to some other Tree, and, as vnto a frend, Bewayles himselfe, with long discourse of loue to little end. And (as it were a mysterie) thus many a time would tell Of one Erickmon, as might seeme, with him acquainted well. Who would (quoth he) haue thought that he had doted on a Lasses Who rather would haue thought the Girle so gilefull as she was? Once brau'd he it and often found with silken Wenches grace: Yeat (and I wonder) faults he not, though hauing time and place. He neuer hild but gracious thoughts of women, yeat I winne The fayrest She he euer saw might quit his thoughts of sinne. When of the Court and Citie both he could sufficient say, From eithers busie Vanities he getteth him away: Amongst the woods his happiest dayes by-come or to be past He found, had not Gynettas face intrapped him at last. Nor Court nor Citie had she seene, yeat eithers prayse she had: So much more worth by howe much lesse she was vnnicely clad. At sixteene yeares such was she as at Twentie, and at boeth Well worth the louing, for her loore, her face, and comely groeth. Thence, waxing amorous, he checkt his eyes that checkt him so, Which checks as oft were countercheckt by Loue his mightier Fo. He loath'd to liue, that liu'd to loue, and lou'd to losse, for why? He scorn'd that wontlesse passion, or an amorous Foole to dye. Full often therefore would he balke her sight that pleas'd him most, And, if perceau'd to be in loue, false freedome would he boast. But all for nought, not absence or sweete exercise of wit, Or ought besides might put aside Loues ouer-mastring fit. Thus pyned ere he pleadeth loue, yeat pleasing her so well As none had fitter time and place his hearts vnrest to tell,
At length he flatly sayes he loues, when (words too sweet for trew) Her answere was she liked him, and so attonement grew. Then vncontroulled kisses and imbracings (often mixt With lesse than loue too grosse, though more than should be such be∣twixt) Were currant: And if euer man did fish before the net, If euer man might credit her did by her credit set, If euer man for heartie loue deserued honest meede, Erickmon might beleeue himselfe to be belou'd indeede: More arguments of earnest loue gaue neuer Mayde than she, Lesse cause to falsifie that loue gaue neuer Man than he. How beit, on aduantage play'd Gynetta all this while, And by externall smoothnes did obscure internall guile. There was a Swayne, a wylie wagge, that with his apish toyes, His Pedlarie, and pype-notes, such as pleaseth girles and boyes, So chang'd (I would haue sayd bewitcht, but that she often chang'd) Gynetta, that her former loue was sodaynly estrang'd. Erickmon hardly brok't such bace coryuing of the Swayne, And of her loue and wits did wish reducement all in vayne. Was neuer Girle so ouergon that had so good a wit, So well reported of ere then, and well deseruing it, Than was Gynetta: giltie then both of her owne reproofe And of her Louers griefe, that sate and sighte thereat aloofe. And, were it not that she was young, and that Erickmon knew She rather seem'd than sin'd in deede, he might haue err'd in view. With weeping heart he her remaunds to be with him at-one: And many restlesse daies and nights consumeth he in mone, To thinke vpon her madnes, which her selfe beleeued none. Her too much wronged Relict might (as wel he might) be greeu'd, Perhaps offended, but God knowes no whit the more eleeu'd. So wilfull she, so wylie and officious was her Squier, That, craft intrapping craft, they both did enter bootles fier: She bore a mind more haughtie than to humble her so much, And he a bacer minde than that he hop't his fortune such:
Yeat either lik't at randon, not resoluing any end, Vnlesse, perhaps, she dallied him as erst her former srend. Meane while (for Apes be euer Apes) somwhat did he not well That mou'd a discord, and through it their loues deuorse befell. Erkmon languisht all this while not re-beloued long, For shee that ayl'd to doe him right did feofe on him the wrong, Who, giltles, pleadeth giltie (for what was it he would not To reconcile her fauour, lost might seeme ere it was got?) So loue, againe a foote, gaue both re-intertainement hot. Not any, lou'd they nere so much, seem'd more to loue than they, Nor any, lou'd she any whit, in loue made shorter stay Than shee: for he doe what he could, did often times offend: For why? euen impudently she grew toyous in the end, That was so modest comly erst as none might lier amend, A Supersedeas for her loue was euery new-come frend: And being now in much request, and waxing proud of fauour, By artificiall pryde she chang'd her naturall behauour: Her face was Maskt, her locks were url'd, her bodie pent with buske, And (which was needles, she more sweet) her rayment sented Muske: By all she did might seeme to be vnlike her selfe she me: Yeat (worst of all) to sanctum-Sinne too aptly is she bent: Erickmon when that followed her vnpitied, not vpearst, Reform'd his wits, his sute and hope of her, not now as earst, And scornd her mind that scornd his loue to her so firmly geason, For whyshee offred double wrong to wrong and scorne a reason. Thus whilst he hopt he hild her least: so altereth the cae With such as she: Ah such it is to build on such a face. This sayd he, and for this he sayd, I for the ruth of this Did vowe that who so once were mine I would be onely his. Why? this concern'd not him, nor shewd a mā distraught, (quoth he) Nay heare the rest of his vnrest, it followeth thus (quoth shee.) Then (sheading teares) he to the Tree so spoken to would say, Was not Gynetta false that did Erickmon so betray?
But hath my Mistresse cause to change? what cause, thinke you, should moue I fram'd me hers, she fayn'd her mine, my loue is euer loue. May ye faire face proue one foule botch, those shining eies proue bleard That sweete breath stench, like proofe to all that faire or sweete appeard In her that wrongs her true-loue: let her loathed euer lust, Begge may she, and vnpittied pine, rot, perish on the dust, And, dead, be damned, that vnto her true-loue is vniust. Yee men say all Amen, or if amend your selues ye must, Curse not (this Mad-man sayd) but sweare that women be vntrew, Their loue is but a Mummerie, or as an Aprils dew, Got with a toy, gon with a toy: gifts, flattrie, gawdes, or wine Will make her checke & flie to game lesse faire, perhaps, than thine, More amorous than men, and men conuay their loue lesse fine. If such they are (as such they are) and will be whilst they be, Why am I then so true of loue? because not borne a she. Witlackst thou then (fond Foole). I sigh to say true ayme you giue. Wheare grew that lacke (fond Foole?) I sigh to say wheare now I liue. Whence grew that lacke (fond Foole?) I sigh to say frō ioyes remou'd. When grew that lacke (fond Foole?) I sigh to say when first I lou'd. And doest thou loue? ah, too too well I wot I loue indeede. Why doest thou loue? with lucke too ill I loue for louers meede. Whome dosst thou loue? ah, too too well I wot a louely She. What time in loue? with lucke too ill in loue too long for me. Wit lackst thou then that wilfully doest erre and nourish it. Wit doe I lacke, not wilfully, then blame not will but wit. How shall I doe? my Heart is lost, and I am left in woe: Met any man a poore tame Heart? the Heart, good Folke, I owe: Strucken, maimed, all of gore, and drouping doth it goe. A Lasse once fauour'd, or at least did seeme to fauour it, And fosterd vp my frollicke Heart with many a pleasing bit: She lodg'd him neere her Bower, whence he loued not to gad, But waxed cranke, for why? no Heart a sweeter Layer had. But whether that some other Deere estranged her or not,
Or that of course her game is Change, my Heart lackt brouse I wot: Despysd, displeasde, and quite disgrac'st, my Heart euen to this day Dislodged, wandring, woe begon, I wot not wheare doth stray. But see, ah see, I see how Loue casts off Desire his Hound, A fell fleet Dogge that hunts my Heart by parsee each-wheare found. Sweet Cynthea rate the eger Curte, and so thy foe preuent: For loe a farre my chased Heart imboste and almost spent. Thankes, gentle Goddesse: now the Lad pursues a bootles chace: My Heart recouers Couert wheare the Hound cannot hold pace. Now tappas closely, silly Heart, vnrowse not and so liue: The Huntsmans-self is blinde, the Hound at Losse doth ouer-giue. But list, alas, Loues Beagles be vncoupeld, Beautie praites And driues my Heart from out the thicks, and at Recei awaites Vaine-hope, and either now falls in, and now my Heart must dye, Now haue they him at Bay, and now in vaye he fights to flye. Auaunt Desire, ha Curre, auaunt: the Bore so rase thy hyde. Vnto the fall of my poore Heart see see how Loue doth ryde. Hearke how he blowes his death: ah see, he now the Say doth take Of my poore Heart, that neuer more for Loue shall pastime make. Thus liu'd he till he left his life, and for the ruth of this I vow'd, that who so once were mine I would be only his. Yeat (sayd her Sutor) he, not she, was punisht, as may seeme. Yes yes, quoth she, a Conscience prickt is deeply plagu'd I deeme. Then Scotland warr'd on England, and in that same ware did end The Knight that had coryued: so the Ladie lost each frend. Oft saw I her in teares, and oft I heard her to complayne For faith erst lost, for losse now sound, deuiding ghs in twayne. There be that say (if truely sayd) vnbodied Soules haue walkt, And of the Ghosts of these two Knights the like abroad was talkt: Her eares had this and shee the heart that dared not her eyes, For thether whence the brute did grow she (feareles faultie) hies: Her Followers stood aloofe when she, alone approaching, sayd, Beloued both, what meanes this fight? (they seem'd as if they srayd)
Ah, pardon me, sweet First-belou'd, my guile I graunt was great, So is my griefe: My latter Loue refraine, let me intreate. But whilst she spoke of deadly wounds they both did seeme to fall, And after vanisht, leauing her perplext in feare not small: Who thenceforth fared as the Knight that did for her distraught, Stil haunted of the Ghosts, & haunts ye place where they had faught, Vntill of her despayring life her selfe the Period wraught. Thus liu'd she till she left her life, and for the ruth of this I vow'd, that who so once were mine I would be onely his. Tush, this was but a Phantasie, quoth he, of subtill Feends, Deluding her simplicitie in figure of her frends: I heare not that they said or did aught taching her vntruth, But foolish was her feare, the like I censure of your ruth. And shall I tell what they did tell, and say what they did doe? I will, for so, perhaps, you will surcease (quoth she) to wowe. The Ghost resembling him to whom she had disloyall bin Sayd: I, and This, and thou be thus and shal be doom'd for sin: For dotage in my loue, for his deceitfull lust, wetwaine Of freesh-sore wounds do hourely faint, hurt, heale, heale, hurt againe: Nor can I vtter halfe we see, and feare, and suffer still Of endles Torments: onely thou art Auctresse of such ill. Who loue belou'd beleeue no life but wheare their loue doth liue, To fault is then their murdrous fact that first defect doth giue. He had not faulted or I falne hadst thou hild faith to mee: Ah little feele we in regard of Plagues prepar'd for thee. Thus sayd he, and for thus he sayd I for the ruth of this Did vow, that who so once were mine I would be onely his. Well, Madame, quoth the Gentleman, be this so, or a shift, I see to frustrate my demaund is honestly your drift: Then so, or not so, or what so you shall inferre of this It matters not, Perkin is yours and be you onely his. For, sooth to say, weare all saide false, it were indeed a hell To haue a Loues-Coryuall, and as none could brooke it well,
So none should aske, and none should yeeld to alter loue begun, Therefore, sweet Ladie, I conclude such il is well vndun: Mine amorous sute hath here an end: and would you might preuaile With Perken too, that proudly striues to beare too high a sayle: So may you, if perhaps you haue for him so apta tayle As this you tould to me for mee, although more hardly trew As this which I shall tell, that doth include a morall view Of matter worth the note for him, the rather tould by you: Then heare it: for our leisure and the order of my Q▪ CHAP. XXXVII. SVppose (for so must be suppos'd) that Birdes and Beasts did speake: The Cuckooe sometimes lou'd the Owle and so with her did breake. Then flew the Owle by day, so did the Cuckooe all the yeare, So did the Swallow and the Batte: but howe it hapned heare. The Cukooe by the Swallow (then the Swallow was his Page) Did send the Owle a sucking Mouse, a tydie for the age: The Bat (the Bat then seru'd the Owle) preferd the Bringer and The Present to her Mistres sight; that in her Tod did stand. My maister to your Owleship, quoth the Swallow, sends by me This Modicum, desiring you to take the same in gree. The Owle, that neuer till that day had tasted flesh of Mouse, Had quickly lopte a Limbe or two, and feasteth in her house The Swallow with a cut see of her then disgorged wheat: When, talking of the daintie flesh and elswhat, as they eate,
The Bat (then waiting at the boorde) fetcht sighes a two or three: The Owle did aske the cause. And doe you aske the cause, quoth she, Why thus I sigh when thus in sight my kindred murthred be? My selfe was sometimes such, and such am still, saue now I fly: With that she freshly wept: and thus proceeded by and by. A fresh, quoth she, now comes to minde mine Auncestors ill hap, Whō pride made praies to Kestrels, Kites, Cats, Weasels, Baē, & trap: My Grandsier (for wheare Nature failes in strength she adds in wit) Was full of Science: But, insooth, he misapplied it. The Weasell, Prince of Vermen (though besides a vertuous Beast) By shrewdnes of my Grandsiers wit his Holes with hoords increaste, And seem'd to conn him thankes, whō none besides had cause to thank: For Princes Fauors often make the fauored too cranke. Not only Mice, but Lobsters, Cats, and noble Vermen paide In comming Coram Nobis for some crime against them laide. But, God, it is a world to see, when purposes be sped, How Princes, hauing fatted Such, are with their fatnes fed: The Weasel seru'd my Grandsier so and euery Vermen laught To see himselfe in Snare that had in Snares so many caught. Now also liue some wylie Beasts, and fatly do they feede Mongst Beasts of chace & birds of game, with lesse then needfull heed. My Graundsier dead, my Father was in fauour nerthelesse: Nor did his Father more than he for high Promotion presse. And (though I say it) long time he deserued fauors well, For quayling Foe men, and at home such Vermen as rebell: And for the same the Weasell did him mightily preferre: But Honors made him haughtie, and his haughtines to erre. I will be plaine, he waxt too prowd, and plotted higher drifts Than fitted him or fadged well, for who haue thriu'd by shifts? Nor will I say (because his sonne) he wrong'd the Weasell, but The Weasell died, and that that did succeede to shifts he put: For which his Fathers Fortune did oretake him at the last: Such fickelnesse in earthly pompe, which, flowing ebs as fast.
This double warning might haue ikt vnto my wit, but I Did follow Kinde: Nay, more, I did importune Dis to fly, And he did giue me these blacke wings, resembling him that gaue the A proper Gift, and hardly got, to shame me now I haue them. But know yee Dis? some Pluto him or Limbos God doe call: Or, aptlier said, in Hell of diuels the Chiefe and Principall: And somwhat now of him and how I changed say I shall. I hapned on a Cranny, whilst my Mouse-daies lasted, which I entring, wandred crooked Nookes and pathes as darke as pitch: Theare, hauing lost my selfe, I sought the open aire in vaine, Both wanting foode, & light, and life well neare through travels paine The Moole by chaunce did crosse my way, and (as ye know) her smell Supplies her want of sight and serues her purpose full as well: I heard a tracting sownd and, skar'd, my haire did stand vpright, Nor could I see, or fly, but feare and blesse me from a Spright: She had me, hild me, questions of my being theare the cause, And in meane while peruseth me with fauorable clawes. I was about to pleade for life, when she preuents me thus: Ha, Cosen Mouse, what Fortune giues this meeting heere to vs. Feare not my Sonne (I call thee Sonne because I loue thee much) Doe hold thy selfe as merry heere as in a Pantlers hutch: What know'st not me? or see'st thou not? with that she leadeth me Into an higher roome, wheare her to be mine Eame I see. I did my dutie, and my heart was lightned when mine eie Encountered a friend whereas I made account to die. Before me sets Shee Viands, and my stomacke seru'd me well: And, hauing fed, my Grandsiers and my Fathers ends I tell, (For She enquires for them, ere I acquaint her what befell.) The reuerent Moole, then sighing, said: ah, let no Vermine thinke That Fortune euer fauors, or that friends will neuer shrinke: I did fore-smell their lostie flight would cost them once a fall, And therefore, Cosen, see thou be forewarned therewithall. Heere seest thou me (I tell thee, though I prise not Gentry now,
Thine Eame and of the elder house) that long agoe did vow My selfe a Recluse from the world, and, celled vnder ground, Least that the gould, the precious stones and pleasures here be found Might happen to corrupt my minde, for blindnes did I pray, And so contemplatiuely heere I with contentment stay. Admitte the Weasell graceth thee, the more he doth the more The other Vermen will maligne and enuy thee therefore: Himselfe, perhaps, will listen to thy ruine for thy store: Or thou thy selfe, to mount thy selfe, maiest runne thy selfe a shore. That Vermen that hath reason, and his owne Defects espies, Doth seeme to haue a soule, at least doth thriue by such surmies, For what is it but reason that humaine from brutish tries? But man, or beast, neither hath troth that this for true denies, He hath enough that hath wherewith pure Nature to suffies: In ouerplus an ouercharge for soule and body lies, For Souldiors, Lawyers, Carrions, Theeues, or Casualties a Prize, His comber-minde that liues with it and leaues it when he dies, From whome to catch it scarce his heire staies closing of his eyes: O wretched wealth, which whoso wants no Fortune him enuies. Here maiest thou feast thee with a Mad: & here no Pickethanke pries Into thy life, nor words well spoke to ill vnmeant applies: No Flatterer to vndermind: no tongue no eare for lies: No gleaning from the Orphant: no oppressed widowes cries: No bribes to giue, no hands to take: no quarrelling for flies: No wronges to right: no lawes to breake, because no law that ties, But what wee lust we doe, nor doe nor lust badd enterprize: And finde lesse want in Nature, than wits-want in Arts disguize. Nor any heere in force, in friends, fraud, wealth, or wit affies: O doe thou not so rich, so safe, and iust life despies: Theare lacketh not of noble Births to star the courtly skies. Theare be enowe Politians, thou maiest for thy Soule be wise: Then leaue thou matters of estate to States, I thee aduise: And rather sit thou safely still, than for a fall to rise.
Not for shee was my Elder or mine Eame, but for the place I hild my peace, that would haue sayd her Moolships minde was bace. But she perceiues me to dissent, and saieth, Cosen Mouse, Doe as you like, you shall not finde a prison of my house: Stay while you will, goe when you will, come & returne at pleasure, And euer welcome: Vertue is an vncompelled Treasure. This past, & thence passe we through deepe darke waies, saue here & theare The vaines of gould and pretious stones made light in darke appeare: Vaste Vaults as large as Iles we passe, great Riuers theare did flow, Huge wormes & Mōsters there I saw, which none on earth do know. On goe we, till I saw a glimps and she heard noise of flame, Then said shee praiers, bidding me to blesse me from the same. I, musing, frain'd her meaning: She her meaning thus did tell. That flaming Region, euer such (quoth she) is Plutos Hell: All gould, all mettals, wealth, and pompe that nourish Mortals pride Are hence and his, and hether they doe theare Mis-guiders gide: He them inchaunteth, and the same inchaunt the folke on Earth, Vntill their dying dotage theare finds heere a liuing death. Still nertheles I wisht to see the hellish Monarch Dis, When he (more ready to be found then for our profite is) Ore-heard vs, and vnhid himselfe, and shinde in rich array, And seem'd a glorious Angell, and full gently thus did say. That slandrous blind bace-minded Moole, friend Mouse, deceiues thee much, And prates of me, of Hell, and Earth more than is so or such: Beleeue him not, but rather do beleeue thine eyes, and see If any earthly pleasure is vntripl'd heere with mee. Then shewde he sights (which since I found illusions to betray) Of greater worth than Earth affords, or I haue Art to say: Nay, more, he bids me aske what so I would, and I should haue it: Then did I pause, bethinking what was rarest I might craue it. My Holes were stor'd with corne & croomes, on Earth I walkt at will, And in her Bowels now had seene indifferently my fill, Vpon it, nor within it, not sufficing to my pride,
I asked winges, scarce asked when they grew on either side. Short leaue I tooke, & mounting left the Hell God and the Moole, And soared to the open Aire through many a sory hoole. It was at Twilight, and the Birds were gone to roust, but I (Inchaunted with the noueltie of flight) vnweared flye, And had the Sunne been vp, I ween (such pride bewitcht my wit To Egel-fie my selfe) I had assayd to soare to it: Not seeing that my limber wings were Leather-like vnplum'de, But at the Dawning also I of wing-worke still presum'de. The Swallow (and I weene it was this Sallowes father) he Was earliest vp, with him I met, and he admired me. I hild him wing, and wistly he suruaies me round about, And lastly, knowing who I was, did giue me many a flout, And fled to tell the other birds, what vncouth Fowle was bred, Who flockt to see me, till with gibes and girds I wisht mee ded. Then, shifting out of sight, I hung till Twilight in a hoole, Transformde, derided, hunger-spent, and (minding still the Moole) In vaine I wisht reducement of my shape, and (which was worste) My hap was harder than to owne in that distresse a Cruft. Then fled I to my wonted Holes of hoorded food to get, Too narrow by mine added wings that did mine entry let. Now Mise fled me, not to the Moole I would returne for shame, To Dis I durst not, mong'st the Birds I was a laughing game. Then curst I mine aspiring minde, then knew I Dis a Diuell, The Diuell the Prince of Pride, and Pride the roote of euery euill. Hell, Earth, Aire, Heauen, and what not? then conspiring mine vnrest, What might remaine but death for me that liued so vnblest? But as I, fainting, flew that night your Ladiship, Dame Owle, Did call me to your Todd, and glad to see a new night-fowle, Did take me to your seruice, thence your Chamberlaine to be: Ha Iupiter reward it you that so releeued mee. It is a sweete continuall feast to liue content I see: No daunger but in high estate, none enuy meane degree.
Then all this processe (quoth the Owle) doth tend, belike, to this, That I should eate no Mouse-flesh: Nay, Sir Bat, so sweete it is That thou, so neere of Kinne to them, shalt also serue my lust: And there withall in ruthles clawes the haplesse Bat she trust. HEere meant the Courtior to haue left, whom Perkens Lady prayes To tell what end such wowing had: And thus hereof he sayes. The Swallow saw that cruell pranke and flies aloofe and sayde, Vngratefull Glutton, what offence hath that thy Seruant made? Choke mayst thou with the murther So he left her, and vnto The Cuckooe telleth what the Owle vnto the Bat'did doe. Varlet (he waxed cholericke) and what of that, quoth he? Was not the Bat her bond-Slaue, such as thou art now to me? What tel'st me then of other newes then what her answere is Vnto mine amorous Message, sayes my Lady nay or yis? The Swallow told him that through such occurrant of the Bas. He, interrupted, came away vnaunswered in that. A mischiefe, quoth he, both on that and thee ill sauoured Elfe: And in a stammering chafe he fled to wowe the Owle himselfe. The Swallow Mans him thether, whom the deu'lish Owle did hate, And all because he had reprou'd her tyrannie of late. The Cuckooe, offering to haue bilde, she coyely turnde her face, Tis more, quoth she, than needeth that we kisse, as stands the cace: Rid hence yonn same your knauish Page, you sent him with a Mouse To spie my secretes, or belike to braue me in my house. Gods pretious, would you knew I beare a mind lesse bace then that I can disgest your Drudge with me so saucely should chat: Iacke Napes, forsooth, did chase because I eate my Slaue the Bat. O what a world is this that we can nothing priuate haue Vncensur'd of our Seruants, though the simplest Gill or Knaue? Well, rid him of your seruice: Nay, it skils not if of life, At least if so you meane that we shall loue as man and wife, For such Colecarriers in an house are euer hatching strife.
The Cuckooe, hearing this complaint, flew on his trusty Page, And vndiscreatly gaue him strokes that kild him in that rage. Yeat, eare he left his life, he thus vnto his Maister sayd: Thus many honest Seruants in their Masters hastie brayd Are Dog-like handled, either yeat like deare in Ioues iust eyes: Of Harlots and of hastines beware, sayd he, and dyes. When now her gluttony and spight had thus dispatched twaine, The Cuckooe, plying amorously her fauour to obtaine, Euen then, and looking very bigge, in came the Buszard, who Did sweare that he would kill and slay, I mary would he doe, If any Swad besides himselfe faire Madam Owle did wowe. The Cuckooe, seeing him so bog, waxt also wondrous wroth: But thus the Owle did stint the strife. Shee cals them husbands both: Now fie (quoth she) if so you could betwixt your selues agree, Yee both should haue your bellies full, and it no hurt to me. The Buszard faintly did consent, the Cuckooe sayd Amen: And so was Hen inough for Cocke, not Cocke inough for Hen, For she deceyues them both, and had besides them other game: The Gende Buszard dying soone for sorrow of the same. The Cuckooe wisely saw it and did say but little to it, As nooting she was set on it and knowing she would doe it. But what the Swallow warned him of Harlots proued trew, For, as was gessed, also him by trecherie she slew. The Goddesse Pallas, to giue end vnto these tragicke deedes, Descended, and (the dead reuiu'd) to Sentence thus proceedes. The Bat, because begild of Dis, See pittieth partly and Permits him Twy-light flight: to giue thereby to vnderstand That to aspire is lawfull, if betwixt a Meane it stand. The Swallow, for that he was trew and slaine for saying well, Shee doomb'd a ioyfull Sommers Bird, in Winter time to dwell Euen with Mineruas secrete store, as learned Clarkes doe tell.
The Buszard, for he doted more and dared lesse than reason, Through blind bace Loue induring wrong reuengeable in seasō, She eie-blur'd, and adiudged Praies the dastard'st and least geason. Vnto the Cuckooe, ouerkinde to brooke Coriuals, she Adiudg'd a Spring-times changeles note, and whilst his yong ones be By others hatcht, to name and shame himselfe in euery Tree. But liue, quoth she, vnto the Owle ashamed of the light, Be wondred at of Birds by day, fly, filch, and howle all night, Haue lazie wings, be euer leane, in fullen corners rucke, When thou art seene be thought a signe to folke of euill lucke: Nor shall thine odious forme, vile Witch, be longer on my Shield: Whence racing forth her Figure, so the Goddesse left the field. IVst Guerdons for Ambition, for poore Soules opprest for well, For dastard Dotards, Wittolrie, and Harlots nice you tell, Said Perkens Wife. But thus now of her husbands pride befell. At last when sundry Armes had end, Henry victorious still, And Perkens passage was fore-stald, he yeelds of his owne will Himselfe from Churches Priuiledge to Henries Mercy, who Did onely limitte his abode, and lesse he could not doe. But when he sought escapes he then had petite punishment, And after, for some new attempts, to Tower was he sent: Whence practising escape, t'was sayd, he won to his intent Young Edward Earle of Warwicke, that indeed was Clarenes son, And euer had been Prisner theare eare Henries raigne begon, And now by law, too strickt me seemes, for this to death was don. Perken was hang'd, and hang may such: but that the Earle should die Some thought hard law, saue that it stood with present pollicie. Sir VVilliam Stanley dide for this (oft King-law is doe thus) Deseruing better of the King: but what is that to vs? The last of our three Phaetons was tuter'd of a Fryer: Who, being fitted now by Art and nature to aspier,
(The foresaid name of VVarwicke fain'd) seduced folke thereby: As I my selfe in Essex heard and saw a Traitor dye That fain'd himselfe sixt Edward, and to grace-out such his lye, Lookes, bodie, words, and gesture seem'd heroycall, to view He had like age, like markes, and all that might inforce it trew: Whereby to him assisting minds of simple Folke he drew. Our Cowle-mans foresayd Actor so preuailed that the Fryer In Pulpets durst affirme him King, and Aydes for him requier: But lastly both were taken: both did fault in one same ill, Yeat rope-law had the Youth, the Frier liu'd Clergie-knaued still. VVHen Armour ended Auarice began (for then begins The slye Mercuriles, and more by wyles then valour wins.) Beneuolences, Taxes and sore Fines for penall lawes, To Henry hoords from Henry hearts of many a Subiect drawes. Empson & Dudly (fur'd Esquiers more harmefull, being gown'd, To Englands friends than Englands foes, through Auarice profound) In such exacting chiefly Act, applaused of the King, To whom their ciuill Thefts, not Thrifts, exceeding wealth did bring. Yeat whē the gracious King found out their tacking Rich & Poore, He then did pardon much, and much did purpose to restore: But, dying, those two Harpies lost their hated heads therefore. So hardly fauoured of Kings themselues in bownes containe, That they, securely stout, at length doe perish through disdaine. So hardly too some Princes are from priuate Lucar wonne, As, though their bags ore-flow, they think no harme abroad vndone. Henry (acquite his latter dayes of Auarice fore named) Deceast for Prowesse, Policie, and Iustice highly famed.
THE EIGHT BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. XXXIV. EIGHT Henry (heire indubitate of Yorke and Lancaster) Succeeded, and with Kingly rites his Father did interr. His mind, his words, his lookes, his gaet, his ly∣naments, and Stature, Weare such for Maiesties as shew'd a King com∣pos'd by Nature. All Subiects now of ciuill strife, all counter-minds for Raigne, All enuious of his Empier now weare rid, weare pleas'd, or slaine. Rich weare his sundrie Tryumphs: but his cost had foyzen than When Terwin and strong Turnay in resisting France he wan: When Maximilian Emperour did vnder Henry fight: When English Ships did often put the French Sea-powre to flight: And that the French King was inforc'st to craue and buy his peace, Who, wiuing louely Mary, so the warres for then did cease. This sister to our King, and then the French Kings goodly Queene, Was welcommed with Tryumphs such as erst in France vnseene. Iustes, Barriers, Tylts, & Turneyes were proclaymed each wheare for All: Whereforeto Paris at the time flockt Caueliers ful tall, With Princes braue, and Ladies faire of euery Realme about,
And hence, with moe, Charles Brandon, in fine Chiualrie most stout, Whose bodie fitted to his mind, whose mind was puesant, and Whose puesance yeelded not to Mars, this Mars in France did lād: With whō incoūtred valiāt knights, but none might him withstād. The English-French Queene standing theare, admir'd for beautie rare, Behild the Tryumphs, in the which high Feates performed ware. But Brandon (yet no Duke) he was the Knight aboue the rest That in her eye (nor did she erre) acquited him the best. For whether that he trots, or turnes, or bounds, his barded Steede, Did runne at Tylt, at Randon, or did cast a Speare with heede, Or fight at Barriers, he in all did most her fancie feede. Weake on a Couch her King lay theare, whō though she loued well, Yeat likte she Brandon, and the same lou'd her ere this befell: For chastly had they fancied long before she came to Fraunce, Or that from meane estate to Duke Henry did him aduaunce. The dayes of Triumph weare expir'd, and English Peeres with praise Come home, and Lewes King of France decea'st within few daies. Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke then, with honour furnisht hence, Was sent to France for to returne the widow Queene from thence, Who had been wed scarce thice three weekes vnto a sickly King, To her, a fayre young Queene, therefore smal time might solace bring. Yet lesse did timethā braue Duke Charles asswage fair Maries griefe: He chats, she cheers, he courts, she coyes, he wowes, she yeelds in briefe. No windes (thought she) assist those Sayles that seeke no certain Shore, Nor find they constant liues that but they liue respect no more. Let each ones life ayme some one end: as, if it be to marrie, Then see, heare, loue, and soone conclude, it betters not to tarrie. To cast too many doubts (thought she) weare oft to erre no lesse Than to be rash: And thus, no doubt, the gentle Queene did gesse, That seeing This or That at first or last had likelyhood, A man so much a manly Man weare dastardly withstood: Then Kisses reuel'd on their Lips to eithers equall good, And, least King Henry should dissent, they secretly did wead,
And then sollicet his good will, and of their wishes spead. The periut'd valiāt Scotch-King Iames, slayn at braue Flodons Slaugh∣ter, Had also left in widowhood Englands fayre elder Daughter. She also weds a Scottish Earle, vnlicenc'st of her Brother: And was to her Sons Daughters Sonne, now sixt Iames, great-Grand∣mother. A Scruple, after twentie yeares, did enter Henries mind, For wedding of Queene Katherin, a Ladie fayre and kind, Spaynes Daughter, then the Emperours Aunt, and for her vertuous life Well worthie Henry: But for she had beene his Brothers wife, And also of their coiture surmise directed Lawes, He seem'd in conscience toucht, and sought to rid him of the Cause. Then was the matter of Deuorse through Christendome disputed, The Match of all adiudged voyd, and so the Queene non-suted. She, after teares to him from whom she was to be deuorste, Did humbly say: and am I not, my Lord, to be remorste? That twentie yeeres haue bene your Wife, & borne your Children, and Haue lou'd and liu'd obediently, and vnsuspected stand. I am (ah too too sweetly err'd) I was, poore Soule, the same Whom once you did preferre, nor now of me you neede to shame. The blossomes of my beautie was your Bootie, nor my fauour Now alters so to alter so from me your late behauour. But Conscience is the colour of this quarrell: well I wot I also haue a conscience that in this accuseth not: But as the same, perhaps, might say that me succeedes say I, That for the pleasure of a Prince goe many things awry. Which her Fore-doomes seem'd to effect in her that her succeeded, In Queene Anne Bullyn: who, for she in Luthersme proceeded, Was hated of the Papists, and enui'd because preferr'd, And through the Kings too light beleefe (for Kinges haue sometimes err'd) She lost her head, and might haue sayd (some thought) ere she did dye, That for the pleasure of the Prince goe many things awry. So dyde the gracious Mother of our now most glorious Queene,
Whose zeale in reuerent Fox his works autenticall is seene. The Kings foure other Queenes (for why? he dide a Sexamus) Shall passe, though Iane did beare a Sonne to him, a King to vs, Edward the Sixt: and of the same we shall deliuer thus. CHAP. XXXV. SVCH as was Loue in Figure of Ascanius, whē the same In kisses slie did sheade himselfe into the Tyrian Dame, Or such as was sweete Hyacint, Apollos louely Boy, Or Iupiters Ganymaedes, rapt vp to heauen from Troy, Or rather like young Salomon, in sentencing betwixt Two mothers claiming one same Child, was young Edward the Sixt. Now Rome fell sicke in England, but how long she lay in traunce We list not write, alonly death to her did neuer chaunce: For old Rome neuer lackt that durst their liues for her bestoe, Not new Rome that to Hell for her dare soules and bodies goe. Then true Religion might be sayd with vs in Primatiue, The Preachers and the people both then practiuely did thriue: Our decent Church-Rites, still in print, not practise (worthie those Whose reuerent heads collected them frō whence true wisedō groes. Not mangled then of Nouesses and curious Doults, which now Would haue they know not what, & would reform they know not how, Omitting or admitting as their owne Conceits allow)
Did then put forth her Braunches, and weare fruitfull in the bood: And, weare our Church-Lords now for zeale as Church-lawes now for good, Soone might like vnion be, now by indifferencie withstood: For giue to vulgar Heads the head and looke for all confused, At once they publish and repeale, al els, saue Order, vsed: And as Kytts Campe ill-form'd good forme at their reforming Tree, Sonnes ost by aime consorting voice their Fathers hang'd should be, So wheare the Multitude preuaile they censure ere they see. But (might I be so bould to speake to them should speake to mee) A good example would doe good in Church-men, seeing thay In saying oth are lesse beleeu'd, not doing as the say. I know our Churchmen know that Faith is dead where lack good works. Yeat know I not what pollicie in Almes vnpreached lurks. Some teach (& wel) that these concurre, but few doe vrge the Theame Of charitie: affeard, perhaps, our More should vrge their Beame. But feare not, Fathers, preach at full Loue, good workes, & Remorse, More will your bad Examples let than shall your words inforce, To preach by halfes is to be worse than those tongue-holly Iauells, That cite good words, but shift off works and Discipline by Cauells. Oft haue ye handled pithily (not preached without neede) What good to giue, what hurt to take, frō those that Soules do feede: But so obscurely hath beene blancht of good workes elsewheare done, As many, boasting only Faith, Faiths fruites selfe-aptly shonne: When such a faith is but the faith of that faith-fruitles Deuill That cited Scripture vnto Christ, applying good to euill. Tell whether that the Leuite or Samaritane did better: Tell wherein Diues liu'd and dide to Lazarus a Debter. Vnknot sententious Salomon his Parable which is, Full Cloudes will rayne vpon the Earth: How thus is meant by this, Rich mē by Cloudes, poore men by Earth (els Clerks expound amis) Tell, how some Cloudes but misell Rayne: that is, if so they giue A peny Almes or twaine a yeare they thinke they much releeue. Som Clouds flash down their Shewres: that is, som set vp two or three,
And begger so themselues and theirs: say such are foolish free. Some Clouds hayle downe their Raine, beate flat, hurt, & helpe not ye ground: That is, vpbraid whō they releeue, & hold thē seruile bound. Some Cloudes giue Snow, that lights and lies a moysture moystles: so Doe those that say, alas, God helpe, and nothing els bestoe. Some Cloudes doe shewre into the Seas: say such do giue to such Whom Almes make idle, or belike to recompence as much. Som Clouds with lightning, thunder, & lowd winds drip down their raine: That is, giue sildom almes, & those proclam'd & seene, ere ayne. Some Clouds retayne but forme of clouds, with figure black as Coale: That is, looke bigge, Examine long, but Scriptum est their doale. Some gracious Clouds shed temprate Shewres on thirstie earth indeed. That is, the Orphant, Widow, Thrall, succour, protect and feed. Say also whatsoere wee giue, to whosoere it bee, Though giuen in sight of men, if not because that men should see, But with Deuotion, as a worke from Faith that cannot seuer, God for such cheerfull Almes wilbe our bounteous Almner euer. Say, make not as it weare a Quest of quere ere Yee giue, But giue yee Almes as men be poore, not as poore men to liue. Prouided common Beggers nor disordered Lossels, who Men know prouided for, or can but labour none will doe, Than whom doe say (for so is sooth) no Creatures worse desatue, Take you no Orators for them, but that they hang or statue. And thus for this. Our Ouerture to it reduceth mee. The Vncles ofthis Orphant King, so long as they agree, Vphild Religion, King, themselues, and Realme in happie state: Which then began to ruinate when they begun debate.
CHAP. XL. SOme say their falling out was through two haughtie womens strife, The Admiralls Queene Bigama & Lord Pro∣tectors wife: These (for what glorie enuies not one woman in an other?) Began a brawle that ended in the blood of either Brother. Tis thought the Earle of VVarwick threw close fewell to this fire, And nourisht it to cut off them, that so he might aspire: For when the one had lost his head, he forthwith tooke in hand To forge the Lord Protector false vnto the King and Land: Who, though he tryed by his Peeres of treason was acquited, Yeat also of a Statute new he being then indighted, Was hardly found a Felon, and too stricktly sentenc'st so: For meanest fault is high offence vrg'd of a mightie Foe: The King thus lost his Vncles both, to his no little woe. Now VVarwick was become a Duke, feared of high and lowe, Full little thinking that himselfe the next to Blocke should goe: The two Prince-loyall Semers erst made let vnto his lust, But now remayned none whose faith or force he did mistrust. The Orphant King fell sicke (but here suspend what some suspect) The new Duke of Northumberland meane while did all direct. It was contriu'd King Edward from his Sisters gaue the Crowne, Their Fathers Former Act and Will by wrested law put downe: The Sisters Daughters Daughter of Eight Henry, Ladie Iane, Was publisht heire apparant, and that right from Mary tane,
And from Elizabeth, though both collatrally preceed her: And when by ful Confedracie the Crowne-right was decreed her, And Gylford Dudly fourth-borne Sonne vnto Northumberland Had married her, and nothing seem'd the Plot-forme to withstand, King Edward (entred seauenteene yeares of age, & seauen of Raigne) Departed to that endles rest his vertuous life did gaine. The Councel then conuent. But who wil think, perhaps, that one Should alter All, to alter true Discents vnto a Throne? ane, Suffolks Daughter, Gylfords wife (One worthie such estate For righteous and religious life, who nerethelesse should wate Her Intrest after others Two, The younger of which twaine Did match, yea Mate her vertues) was proclamed Queene to raigne, And in the tower of London hild Estate and princely Traine. Meane while fled Mary, doubting lesse her Scepters losse than life: But sildome fayles a rightfull cause that comes to open strife: The Commons knew our either Law prefer'd a Sisters Right Before a Cosens, and fot it did many fadge to fight. Northumberland with Armes pursu'd the Ladie Mary, and Obseru'd directions from the Peeres: who when they vnderstand Of Maries strength of flocking Friends, on sudden came to pas That they proclamed Mary Queene, and Iane her Prisner was: And well was he, that late did seeme a Foe, might first salute The Queene, and all vnto the Duke did their Amis impute. For, soothly, more the Peeres did feare than fauour alway, Who, though he seem'd as forward now in Maries cause as thay, Yeat was he taken and in-towr'd, and lost his head for this: A Warrior braue. But than his Sier, himselfe, one Sonne of his, Like rare Politians seldome liu'de: who in three seuerall Raignes Successiuely did shew them such, though losse did proue their gaines. THe Duke thus dead, Suffolke, Lord Gray, Lord Gylford, Lady Iane, Weare executed: But we blanch the rest excepting twaine,
That is, Lord Gylford and his wife, yong and lesse worthy blame, Because the Dukes their Fathers, all the Councell, all of name, Yea and King Edwards Pattents seald for them, not they, did frame What so was done in this, yeat they must perish for the same. Who higher then this Couple late? and who more wretched now? Of more then much remayned nought, nor law did life allow. Vnhappie Youths, not for they die, but for the mutuall greefe Of him for her, of her for him, which tortur'd them in cheefe. Come was the day, the tragicke day, wherein they both should die, When Either, passing to their end, ech other did espie, Shee in her lodging, waiting death prepared her that day, And he in being lead thereto he Lodging in his way. Assending and dissending Signes then fly and fall apace, And each bemones the other more than mindes their priuate cace. Their Ees, that looked Loue ere while, now looke their last adew, And staine their faces, faultles ere this dismall enter-vew: Their Eares, earst listning ioies, are deafe, vnles to sighes profound: Their tongs, earst talking ioies, those looks & sighes did now cōfound: What parts soere of them had felt or tasted ioyes ere this, Wheare senceles now of any ioy, saue hope of heauenly blis. Whilst Either thus for Earthly Pompe no longer time did looke, He passeth to the fatall Blocke, she praying on her booke: Wence (hauing made a godly end) he was return'd, whilst Shee Prepard for like, and of her Lord the senceles Tronke did see: A sight more deathful than her death that should consort him straite, And for the which her feareles eies did euery moment waite. She vnabashed, mounting now the Skaffold, theare attends The fatall Stroke-and vnto God her better parte commends: And as she liu'd a vertuous life so vertuously she ends.
CHAP. XLI. OMitting Knights, three Dukes, three Lords, al¦so a Queene elect Then perisht thus, and somewhat some of Ed¦wards death suspect. All which fell out a Stratagem, in God his secre Dome, That should induce a Tragedie to England meant by Rome: For when these mighty Protestants, through Ones Ambition, fell, Queene Mary seem'd to shut vp Heauen, and set wide open Hell. Whence swarmed papish Tyrants, that false doctrine did erect, Whilst that seduced Mary did Gods threatned cause neglect. Blamelesse she was not, for a Crowne that could her Foes ore-goe: Nor all too blame, for mightie States do and haue erred so, To Whome the Scriptures weare obscur'd by Christs Italian Foe. Her courage was not common, yeat abused ouer much By Papists cheefly, She her selfe too naturally such. Heere hence she is reprooued of a moste tyrannous Raigne, And of a thriftles Mariage with the trustles King of Spaine. But when rich Brabants supreame Faire, the Bakers daughter, staide The King in dalliance, and the Queene had newes that false he plaide. Tis thought his tarriance greeu'd, & told that one should counsel this Haue patience, Madam, so it was and wil be as it is: Fourth Edward did the like, yeat lou'd his Queene no whit the lesse: Nor did the like vnpatient her, that knew him to transgresse As guiltie of a Leash of Loues, Shores wife and other twaine: She knew as Streams, if stopt, surrownd so Kings wil shew they raign:
As did our second Henry, whome his Queene oft crost in vain. Which, and one other Story, if it please you that I tell, I shall. Yea doc (quoth she:) Then thus (quoth he) it once befell. NOt knowen of Rosamund, his eie had stoed her in his heart: Faire Maide, quoth he, beleeue me faire and all so faire thou art That, weare I Henry Englāds King, thou shouldst be Englāds Queene: But so must fayle, for Elenour already is betweene. He bod me buy thy loue, if so it might be bought with Golde, If not, he bod me sweare he loues: in fayth he loues, be bolde: He bod me aske, if so he came, what should his welcome be, And if, perhaps, he lated weare if he should lodge with thee: Protesting secreasie thereof to all, vnlesse to me, With promise to performe at full each promise as I make it: I promise Loue, Wealth, Secresie, then promise thou to take it. Content you Sir (quoth Ro (amund) you aime your markes amis: I am not for his Highnes, nor for me his Highnes is. And should he know (I shame he should) of this your Brokage bace, He would acquaint you what it weare your Soueraigne to disgrace. Whoso you be, be still the same, or better if you may, Think not Lord Cliffords daughter will vn-maiden her for pay, But know, if Henryes selfe were heere, himselfe should haue a nay. Then know (quoth he) which being knowen, well maist thou know I loue thee, I am the King, and for I am the rather let it moue thee. In sooth, sweet Wench, thou saiest nay thou knowest not whereto: For, weare my wish at work, lesse good wy wish than work would do. What, fearst thou shame? no shame to be beloued of a King: Or dread'st thou sinne? The Pope for pay absolueth euery thing? Or doubt'st thou iealous Elenour? I will remoue that doubt: At Woodstock shall she finde thy bower, but neuer finde thee out: Theare shalt thou passe a pleasant life, commanding me and mine: Then loue, beloued Rosamund, a King subiects him thine. He kist, She blusht, and long it was ere loue from her he wroung,
For, whilst vp played in her heart, it paused on her toung. Not Sibils Caue at Cuma, nor the Labyrinth in Creat Was like the Bower of Rosamund, for intricate and great. The Pellicane theare neasts his Bird and sporteth oft with her, Conducted by a Clew of thread, els could he not but err. Besides her Maydes, a Knight of trust attended on her theare, Who suffred for her Beautie, long concealing it for feare: At length at full and formally he courted her for grace, But all in vaine, nought booted him to haue both time and place: Henry, quoth she, begonne and he shall end my thoughts vnchast: Nor peach't she him, nor he, dismist, did hold himselfe disgrac'st. The Kings three Sonnes had notice of their Fathers Leiman now, So had the Queene, and the yof such coriuing disallowe. Came I from France Queene Dowager, quoth she, to pay so deere For bringing him so great a wealth as to be Cuckquean'd heere? Am I so old a woman, he so young a wanton growen, As that I may not please, that pleas'd, and still might with his owen? What is the Drab, or tempting Diuell? or wherefore doteth he? The French King once, himselfe euen now, for faire preferred me. And hath he toyled vp his Game? and settels he to loue her? Nor Heauen nor hell shall crosse my course but that I will remoue her. Like Phrogne, seeking Philomel, she seeketh for and found The Bower that lodg'd her Husbands Loue, built partly vnder ground: She entred, but so intricate weare Turnings to and fro, That welneere she had lost her selfe, but could not finde her Foe: Yeat out she got, and backe she goes with her Attendants, who Admire their furious Mistresse, and mislike what she would doe. With her Confedrates oft she went, preuented of her will, Howbeit lastly did preuaile: For hap did hit so ill, That whilst the Knight did issue out, suspecting no assaut, He was assailed, & from his giding Clewe they caught. So wonne they vnto Rosamund: Whom when the Queene did vew, Most brauely clad in rich Attire (her selfe more rich of hew)
The beautie and the brauenes of the Person and the place Amazed her and hers, who stoode at gaze a certaine space. No maruell, quoth the Queene, that oft the Court did mis the King, Soone such an Hebe hither such a Iupiter might bring: Now, trust me, weare she not a Whoore, or anies Whoore but his, She should be pardon'd: But in faith I must not pardon this. A Queane coriuall with a Queene? Nay kept at Racke & Manger? A Husband to his honest bed through her become a Stranger? Abide who list, abye she shall, how so I buy the daunger. Faire Rosamund surprised thus, eare thus she did suspect, Fell on her humble Knees, and did her fearefull hands erect: She blush't out beauty, whilst the tears did wash her pleasing face, And begged Pardon, meriting no lesse of common grace. So farforth as it lay in me I did, quoth she, withstand, But what may not so great a King by meanes or force command? And daerst thou Minion, quoth the Queene, thus article to me? That then wert Non-plus when the King commenced Lust to thee: Nay, best he take thee to the Court, Be thou his Queene, doe call Me to attendance, if his Lust may stand for law in all: I know it, Strumpet, so harps he, and thou doest hope the same: But loe I liue, and liue I will, at least to marre that game. With that she dasht her on the Lippes, so dyed double red: Hard was the heart that gaue the blow, soft were those lips that bled. Then forc'st she her to swallow downe (prepar'd for that intent) A poisned Potion: which dispatcht, frō whence they came they went. The wronged Wench, the Quintessence of Beautie, and the same (Saue that intised of a King) stoode free from all defame, Did forthwith sicken, so that helpe for her might none be found, When to the Knight that garded her, then greeued of a wound, She sayd: Weare it that Henry knew his Rosamund weare thus, No waightie busnes might withhold but he would visit vs: Full well I lou'd and loue him still, that should not loue him so, And for I should not worthely I labour of this woe.
Ah Beauty, that betraies thy selfe to euery amorous Eie, To trap thy proud Possessors what is it but Wantons trie? Wheare-through it seldome haps the Faire from meant deceits to flie: At least the nicest Faire aliue shall vanish once as I. Vaine Beauty stoupe to Vertue, for this latter is for euer, Wheareas that former altreth with euery Ayre and Feuer. I pray the Queene of Pardon, whom I pardon from my hart: Farewell my present Friends: But thou, sweet King, wheare so thou art, Ten thousand times farewell to thee: My God, whome I offended, Vouch safe me Mercy: Saying which, her life she sweetly ended. Thus did faire Rose (no longer Rose, nor faire, in sent, or sight) Whome pensiue Henry did inter, and soone her wrong did right, The Queene imprison'd and his Sonnes, rebelling, put to flight: Thus wrought they sorrowes to thēselues in wreaking of their spight, Nor lou'd the King thenceforth the Queene, or left to erre anew. Now rests our other promis'd Tale, a common Tale (if true) Like lesse had harmed Elenour, and more may profite you: Be bitter and it betters not, be patient and subdue: King Phillip is not gone but to returne, which when he shall, Your Maiestie must not exclaime if so you would recall: Impatience chaungeth smoke to flame, but Ielousie is Hell: Some wiues, by Patience, haue reduc'st ill husbands to liue well, As did this Lady of an Earle, of whome I now shall tell. CHAP. XLII. AN Earle (quoth he) had wedded, lou'd, was lou'd, and liued long Full true to his fayre Countesse, yeat at last he did her wrong: Once hunted he, vntill the Chace, long fasting, and the heate Did house him in a peakish Graunge within a Forrest great:
Wheare, Knowne, & welcom'd (as the place & persons might afforde) Browne bread, whig, bacon, curds, & milke were set him on the Borde: A Cushion made of Lists, a Stoole halfe backed with a houpe Weare brought him, & he sitteth down besides a sorry Coupe. The poore old Couple wish't their bread were wheat, their whig were Perry, Their bacō beefe, their milk & curds weare creame to make him mery. Meane while (in Russet neatly clad, with linnen white as Swanne, Her selfe more white, saue rosie wheare the ruddy colour ranne, Whome naked Nature, not the Ayders of Arte, made to excell) The Good mans Daughter sterres to see that all were feat and well: The Earle did marke her, and admire such Beautie theare to dwell. Yeat fals he to their homely Fare, and hild him at a feast: But as his hunger slaked so an amorous heat increast. When this Repast was past, and thanks, and welcome too, he sayd Vnto his Oste and Ostesse, in the hearing of the Mayde: Ye know (quoth he) that I am Lord of this and many Townes, I also know that you be poore, and I can spare you pownes, So will I, so yee will consent that yonder Lasse and I May bargaine for her loue, at least doe giue me leaue to trie: Who needs to know it? Nay who dares into my doings prie? First they mislike, yeat at the length for lucar were mislead, And then the gamesome Earle did wowe the Damsel for his bead. He tooke her in his armes, as yet so coyish to be kist As Mayds that know themselues belou'd and yeeldingly resist: In few, his offers weare so large she lastly did consent, With whome he lodged all that night, and early home he went. He tooke occasion often times in such a sorte to hunt, Whome when his Lady often mist, contrary to his wont, And lastly was informed of his amorous haunt elsewheare, It greeu'd her not a little, though she seem'd it well to beare. And thus she reasons with her selfe: Some fault perhaps in me, Some what is done that so he doth: Alas, what may it be? How may I winne him to my selfe? He is a Man, and men
Haue imperfections: It behooues we pardon Nature then. To checke him weare to make him checke, although hee now were cha'ste: A man controuled of his Wife to her makes lesser haste. If duetie then or daliance may preuayle to alter him, I will be duetifull, and make my selfe for daliance trim. So was she, and so louingly did entertaine her Lord, As fayrer or more faultles none could be for Bed or Bord. Yeat still he loues his Leiman, and did still pursue that Game, Suspecting nothing lesse then that his Lady knew the same: Wherefore, to make him know she knew, she this deuise did frame. When long she had been wrong'd, & sought the foresayd meanes in vaine, She rideth to the simple Graunge but with a slender Traine: She lighteth, entreth, greets them well, and then did looke about her: The guiltie houshold, knowing her, did wish thēselues without her, Yeat, for she looked merily, the lesse they did misdoubther. Whē she had seene the beautious Wench (thē blushing fairnes fairer) Such Beautie made the Countesse hold them both excus'd the rather. Who wold not bite at such a Bait? (thought she) & who (though loth) So poore a Wench, but gold might tempt? sweet errors lead thē both: Scarse one of twentie that hath brag'd of proffer'd Gold denied Or of such yeelding Beautie baulkt but (tenne to one) hath lied. Thus thought she: And she thus declares her cause of comming thether: My Lord, oft hunting in these Partes, through trauell, night, or wether, Hath often lodged in your House, I thanke you for the same, For why? it doth him iolly ease to lie so neere his Game: But for you haue not Furniture, beseeming such a Guest, I bring his owne, and come my selfe to see his lodging drest. With that two Sumpters were discharg'd, in which were Hangings braue, Silke Couerings, Curtens, Carpets, Plate, & all such turn should haue: When all was hansomly dispos'd, She prayes them to haue caer That nothing hap in their default that might his health impaer. And, Damsell, quoth she, (for it seemes this houshold is but three, And for thy Parents Age that this shall chiefely rest on thee)
Doe me that good, else would to God he hither come no more. So tooke she horse, and ere she went bestowed gould good store. Full little thought the Countie that his Countesse had done so, Who, now return'd from farre affaires, did to his sweet-Heart go. No sooner set he foote within the late deformed Cote, But that the formall change of things his woondring Eies did Note▪ But when he knew those goods to be his proper goods (though late, Scarce taking leaue) he home returnes the Matter to debate. The Countesse was a bed, and he with her his lodging tooke: Sir, welcome home (quoth she) this Night for you I did not looke. Then did he question her of such his Stuffe bestowed so. Forsooth (quoth she) because I did your Loue and Lodging knoe, Your Loue to be a proper Wench, your Lodging nothing lesse, I hild it for your health the house more decently to dresse. Well wot I, notwithstanding her, your Lordship loueth me, And greater hope to hold you such by queat then brawles I see: Then for my duetie, your delight, and to retaine your fauour, All done I did, and patiently expect your better Hauour. Her Patience, Witte, & Aunswere wrought his gentle teares to fall, When (kissing her a score of times) Amend, sweete wise, I shall He said, and did it: And your Grace may Phillip so recall. But he (whoso he was) that thus had dubled Tales to cease Queene Maries griefe, for Phillips guile, as well had hild his peace: Her no perswading might disswade from pesiuenes of hart, Vntill that his Vnkindnes in her Deaths-Scene acts it part. But howsoere or whatsoere her cause of death might seeme, Her death did many a good mans life from Tyrannie redeeme: For, as in Passion, so was she in Papistrie extreame. And were not the abodement bad at her to end our Theame, Our Cattell vnto stronger draughts we should and would vnteame, But to the Head▪ land shall our Plough, vnles we breake our Beame. Yeat ere we eare to it (for it shall be our Holly-day) Of somwhat sayd and somwhat scapt rests thus much by the way.
CHAP. XLIIII. BEFORE we toucht (& little els) what Cour∣ses hapt at home, But now, in few, at forren Acts of Natiue Kings we rome: Of British and of English Kings, more famous than the rest, This sparing Catalogue ensewes: whose deedes we thus digest. * Aeeas Off-spring famous Brute did set from Greekish thrall Sixe thousand Phrygan Knights; by him did Guyan▪ Guffer fall: He conquering this Ile, his Name vnto his Conquest gaue: And of his Cornish Cambries men couragious yet we haue. * Torkes Builder Ebranke that subdu'de the imbrians and the Gawles, And built the best of Scottish Townes, next in our Nomber falls. *When Brennus and Belynus had Eight spacious Kingdomes wonne, Had slaine two Consulls, sacked Rome, and matchles Armes had done, And built ten Cities, best that be in Italie this day, Those Kinglie Brothers, as must all, their debt to Nature pay. * Grgnus slew the Dactan King: wonne Tribute: and the same Gaue Spanish Exiles Ireland, whence our Scottish Nation came. * Cssilane did twice beate backe from Brittish Seas and Shore The worthie Coesar, that but then was victor euermore: And thirdly had preuailed but for Luds reuolted Sonne, When as braue Nennius hand to hand of Caesar honor wonne. * Guydar and Aruiragus wonne of Claudius Caesar spoyle: The former in a second Field did sout Vaspasian foyle. *When as the wandring Scots and Pichts King Marus had subdude,
He gaue the Liuers dwellings, lesse than where they since intru'de. * Constantis, wedding Coyls heyre, was Monarke of the West, Who, with this Ilands Scepter, of Romes Empire was possest. *Great Constantine, that worthely a Worthie might be said, The Brittish Romaine Emperour, throughout the world obayd, He made his Siege Bizantium, that retaines his name ere since, And made (but so vnwitting marde) the Priest of Rome a Prince. * Maximian as Emperiall and as valerous as any, With Brittish armour did subdue both Kings and Kingdomes many. *What speake we of great Arthur, of his Chiualrie or Court? Precelling all, sole President of vertue prow's and port, A King of many Kings, his Knights in all Exploits were seene, He was in deede a Worthie, and the Worthiest of the Neene. *Fiue Crownes King Malgo prized. *And in Battells fiftie fiue Against the Misreants valiantly did King Alured thriue: ollo (whose Seede should conquer vs) he hence did brauely beate: That, mager Fraunce, in Normandie his Scythian Troopes did seate▪ *He that re-monarchiz'd our Ile King Athelstone did slay Sixe Kings, twelue Dukes, and countlesse tale of Heathen in one day: The one of Nyne, his Knight Sir Guy, we touch but by the way: Omitting other Kings and Knights, too long in few to say, Of Brittish race a many, and of Saxon Princes some, Whose blood by Normaine Mixture now is tripartite become: O (For, perhaps, from such Consort the Brutes casseerd will be) Three blended blouds of Nations three hath giuen vs Natures three, The Saxon prowesse, Dansh pompes, and Normaine Pollicee: And of the Romanes and the Picts we are no portion small: Foure of which Nations Scythia bred, we thriuing in them all. *KIng VVilliam, Englands Conquerour, from Rollo sixt, with pray Of twice fiue hundred Townes in Fraunce vn-o-met sayld away. * Henry the second, vpon whom the Scotch-King tendant was, (Which Scots their often ouerthrowes we henceforth ouerpasse,
Who to our Kings, Lords Parramounts, not warres but vprores bring) Spoylde Frauncè, wonne Ireland, and deceast of Iuda chosen King. *Next Lyon-harted Richard he wonne Cypris, Siria, and Ierusalem, debelling quite the Sowldan from his Land: He skalde the strong Aegyptian Oste, and king'd his Sisters sonne, And plagued Fraunce and Austrich for the wrongs they had him don. *First Edward made the Turks, Sauoies, the French, & Flemings trēble. *The third so nam'd to them and moe did Mars himselfe resemble: Whose Knights, in 2. Richards dayes, so tickeld France, and Spaine, And parts Lugdinian, that no King but Richard seem'd to raine: Ten thousand were his housholde: Scotch digests we here disdayne. *The fourth and *fifth of Henries were as actious as the rest: Especially the latter was the formost with the best. *Not yeat Fourth Edwards honor from his Ancestors digrest. On these doo vulgar Eares and Eyes so brimlie waite and gaze, As they distaske our priuate Penne notorious Laudes to blaze. Our Catalogue omitteth some for Artes and Iustice good, Some natur'de well, aduised ill, some worthie Laethe flood: Not one fore-cited but deserues at least an Homers Muse, Although with Agamemnons Vaile Apelles shift I vse: But colours to that Painter, Art vnto that Poet none So good, to paint and prayse at ful our following Crowns, saue one, Since Tuders Seede, Henry the Seauenth, ariued Englands Throne. NOr superstitiously I speake, but H. the letter still Might be obserued ominous to Englands good or ill. First, Hercules, Hesione, and Hellen were the cause Of warre to Troy, Aeneas Seede becomming so Out lawes. Humbar the Hun with forren Armes did first the Brutes inuaide. Hellen to Romes Emperiall Throne the Brittish Crowne conuaide. Hengest and Horsus first did plant the Saxons in this Ile. Hungar and Hubba first brought Danes that swayed heere long while
At Harold had the Saxon ende: at Hardiknought, the Dane. Henries the first and second did restore the English Raine. Fourth Henrie first to Lancaster did Englands Crowne obtaine. Henry litigious Lancaster and Yorke vnites in peace. Henrie the Eight did happelie Romes Irreligion cease: The Father of our Mother Nurse, our common Ioyes increase. Which double H. and H. H. heere our homely Poemes Lee, He saue that salueth all our sinnes: And, God, voutsafe thou me A prosperous Course in sayling through the Ocean deepe and large Of her now-Highnes Scepter, for I heere assume that Charge.
TO THE RIGHT HONORA∣BLE LORD, SIR GEORGE CAREY Knight, Baron of Hunsdon, &c. THough late I wright, too soone I wot, I heere Occasion take, (May this to none, wish I, but me Retreate to Sorowe make) Both to remember Hi We meant our Penn-Lee tore-use, As to trans-patronize from him to you mine orphant Muse. Not one aliue that shall not die, thrise happie then the same That, as your Noble Father, shael suruiue them selues in Fame. Both Epitaphes and Elegies his Ghoste hath many an one: Alas, what can I say not sayde, or more than moend him mone? Not matter more than much, nor more for ruth than matter skante, Or lesse of Glorie than of both, would to his Poet want: But, were a Non-plus of his Praise, all were but this in grosse, His Good to his owne Soule is Good, his Death to vs is Losse. What should I adde his auncient Creasts, and noble Petegrae? Such as that Henrie (Primer of you Hunsdon Barons) bee Your Lordshippe, to your Countrie, Prince, and such in high Degree▪ And such as you, when you are not, succeed the Careys blood In stiil-Descents: and than this wish how may I wish more good▪ My Syrinx sounded first to you, and may eare long anewe: B you Mecaenas also to this Poesie doth ensewe. His had it been, had he yet been, that had the rest, which now Yeelds humblie yours, if it for yours your Lordshippe shall alowe. Most humblie your Honors, William Warner.
THE NINTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. XLIIII. AVert your eyes and eares, all yee, that enuie her the fame Of more renowmed Regment than our fluent Thoughts can name. Yee that conceite such Poemes as more learned not conceaue, Reade not the rest, but silently euen at this line doe leaue. Ridled Poesies, and those significantly flowe, Differ in eares as doe in mouths the Apricock and Slowe. Phisitians bylles not Patients but Apothecaries know: Some moderne Poets with themselues be hardly inward so: Not intellectiuely to write is learnedly they troe: Whereby they hit Capacities, as blind-man hits the Croe. Nor Those, not These, feare thou, my Muse, but mildly sing the prayes Of these our present times, lesse grosse than those of elder daies. Our world hath made it course that as the Moone doth wax & waine From gold to siluer, then to iron, and now to golde againe. Of whose faire-cured Leaprosie from former twaine to golde, (For in a Quintessence was all eare Gods worlds-curse of olde) The vndeluding Alcumist is that Elizabeth Whom English, yea and Alients, hold a Goddesse on the Earth. Elizabeth by Peace, by warre, for Maiestie for Milde, Inriched, feared, honor'd, Lou'd, at wel meant Toyes hath smilde, Let then Mnemosines controule, as well they may our Muse,
We shall such grace wheare we transgresse for Supersedias vse. Phoebus, thine humbled Phaeton this second boone doth aske, 'That thou wouldst giue, and ioyntly guide, to, & with me, thy Taske: Infuse Apollo too into thy selfe, thy selfe in me: Yeat then our mightie Subiect threats will much omission be. But what implore I Fictions? that I well imploye my penne, Eternall God, say thou (which thou all-only canste) Amen. When Iupiter and Arcas yong (the Sier, and Sonne) had clos'de Saturnus in Italian Hell, not to be baylde suppos'de, Then Proserpin, blacke Dis his wife, inlargd the Wrangler thence, To vex her Sister, crosse her Siers and Brothers sownd pretence. Then she, euen she whom Cynthia some, and some doe Pallas call, (Yt skils not whether, Eithers lawdes doe aptly her befal) By Saturne, Dis, and Proserpin, giltles molested longe, Vnto the God y'clip't, I-Am, thus motioneth her wronge. O mightiest Mightie, that of nought createdst all that is, And gauste to Man (thy noblest Worke) him selfe, and all for his, And, saue Obedience, didst impose on him no other Fine, And, disobaying, didst redeeme his Losse with decrest Thyne, Which selfe same Thyne, and still same-Oures, I also intercesse, For thee professing being wrong'd, to haue at length redresse. Scarce this was sayd when thus ensewd, the Three weare rapted hence. Saturne and Dis confinde their Hells: Proserpin her offence, Growen through Mis-Guides, Veniall perhaps, we censure in suspence, And faire, lou'd, feard, Elizabeth heere Goddiz'd euer sence. For me to wreste from Hercules his Club as easie weare, As in the Ocean of her fame, with choysest sayles, to beare That fraight, yt with the Indiā wealth may more then much cōpare. Yeat how th'Italian Feends did freat and hetherto inuaye Against thy glory, gracious Saincte, weare ouerlong to saye. But he that of a Prisnor thee so great a Prince did frame, Thy louing, and beloued God, to thee is still the same.
King Phillips-selfe (so doting on his Pope-created Crewe, That, he it suffring, his owne Son and heire those Locusts slewe, Because they feared he would proue vnto the Gospell trewe,) Euen Phillip, now that raketh hell for rascall brybed Skomes To ridde thee hence (indignities that badly him becomes) Once had thee, then not hauing power to doe thee any harme. It is the worke of God (let Rome vncursse, let Spaine vn-arme) That thou art Queene, to plant his word, when we could hope it least, When Ours, & all the Kings had cast their Crownes before the beast, When greedely the Preists of Baal did for thy ruine gape, Thou didst, vnharmde, the Lyons denne and firie Ouen escape. Euen thē when Tryumphs were in hand, bells ronge, & bonfires made, Because Queene Mary of a sonne deliuered was said, Euen then, I say, God mortifide that womb, to bring to passe, That vnto thee, his Queene-elect, no Issue letting was: That soone Religion and our Realme might welcome wished peace: Maiest thou, the Cause thereof, suruiue long after my decease. But if it be his will, to whom are all Euents fore-knowne, That Papistrie shall in our Land againe erect her Throne, Let Spaniards, or what Tyrants els, be Masters heere, so thay Take also with our Land our Liues, and rid vs out the way. For not they only die, but die in lingring Torments, who Fault to their Inquisition, o their Damned Rytes must doe: Then better Bodies perish than should soules miscarrie too: Of neither which hath Rome or Spaine remorse, but thristing Sway, Regard not whome, by whom, or how, they treacherously berray: How oft haue they, the rest ore past, subborn'd our Queenes decay? By wars, wiles, witchcrafts, daggers, dags, Pope, poyson, & what not? To her haue they attempted death, for liewe the Traytors lot: Vouchsafe, O God, those loues of thine be neuermore forgot. Was neuer any thryued yet that threatned her amis: For of anoynted Princes God sole Iudge and Rector is. And if Examples might preuaile, then Traytors might perceaue,
They perish in their purpose, or but Spyders webbes doe weaue. And heere occasion apteth that we catalogue awhile, And vnto English Dukes, from first to last, addresse our Style: Though numbers greater, & as great of power, did pryde begyle, Yeat in this one degree obserue what headding and exile: Yf then such Mighties felt Gods frowne, shal Meaners hope his smile? CHAP. XLV. EDward, surnam'd the blacke Prince, and third Edwards eldest sonne, Third Thomas Duke of Norffolke, This did ende, and That begonne, From Normaine VVilliams Conqueste heere of Dukes the Title hie: Of fortie seuen, but twentie two a naturall death did die. Edward ye Duke of Yorke, that lead fifth Henries Vaward Knightly, Then slaine at Agencourt with fame, we ouerpasse him lightly: Nor Humfrey Duke of Glocester heere catalogue we rightly: Nor VVilliam Duke of Suffolke, who, exilde, on seas was met, And, hated, headded: howbeit sixt Henries Fauoret: Nor Edmund Duke of Somerset, that Henries loued Peere: Nor Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, to that same King as deere: Nor sweet yong Richard, Duke of Yorke, of Glosters kyn too neere: We also two Plantagenets, both Dukes of Clarence cleere, Of which was Thomas slaine in France, George drownd in Malmsie heere: For though these Eight remembred Dukes deceast not in their beads, Yeat none of these had traytrous hearts that forfetted their heads: Howbeit, otherwise, of these weare some that erred so,
That, stomack't for such Errors, did their ends vntimely groe. Nor was the Duke of Ireland, Vere, in second Richards time, A Traytor, but a Parasite, which proude no lesse a crime: He as ambitious, as he was enuious, and enuied, Was banisht by the Nobles, and in banishment he died. Mowbreie of Norffolke (right or wrong) by foresaid Richard was Exiled, and in Italie did hence to nature pas. When second Richard was deposde, and Henrie wore the Crowne, Two Hollands, to restore the one and put the other downe, Conspiring, weare detected, and at Cercester they both, Of Excester, and Surrey Dukes, found death in Vulgar wroth. Richard Plantagenet, the Duke of Yorke, fourth Edwards father, Sought to depose fixt Henrie, and was heard therein the rather, For that to him by law-Descents the Scepter did acrew: But they compound, howbeit warres were reard, and him they slew. Iohn Holland, Duke of Excester, fourth Edwards sentence fleade, And was long after in the sea suspuicusly found dead. Then Henry, Duke of Somerset, rebelling lost his heade. Of Edmund, Duke of Somerset, the like is also reade. So Henrie, Duke of Buckingham, third Richards friend-foe speade. And that tyrannous Richard, Duke of Glocester, his Raigne Vsurped was suppressed, he for blood payd blood againe. Iohn, Duke of Norffolk, fought, and fell at Bosworth field. His sonne Duke Thomas, in Eight Henries daies, did heading hardly shonne, Adiudg'd perpetuall Durance, in Queene Maries raigne vn-donne. VVolsey, that slye, officious, and too Lordly Cardnall, wrought (Who could & would effect his wil) that to the blocke was brought, Eight Henrie raigning, Edward Duke of Buckingham, whose end That Prelate ioyde, the people moend, because his foe, their friend. Seimer, the Duke of Somerset, enuied more than reason, By one that came the next to Blocke, though mightie at that season, Sixt Edward in Minoritie, dide, quit although of treason. No sooner Marie got the crowne, more liklie to be gon,
But Iohn, Duke of Northumberland, beheaded was anone, Who wrought to set the Diedeme Iane Dudlies heade vpon. Her Father Henrie Gray, the Duke of Suffolke, was also A friend vnto that Faction, & the Spanish Wowers foe: But by that act he lost his heade, as did too many moe. In blessed Queene Elizabeth her happie Raigne of peace, The Tragedies, and Tytles too, of English Dukes did cease, Which Thomas, Duke of Norffolke, laste Tragedian, did increase. All theis weare mightie in their times: yeat being Male-contents, Both they, and hundreds powerfull Peeres, for like found like Euents: Howbeit of the common wealth none worser did desarue, Than such as flattred Princes faults, who faulting, all did swarue. Which, in their Pollicie, the States of Hell did then fore-see, When as they ioyned others, Aydes, vnto the Furies three, Narcissus Shadowe, and the Voice of Eccho: than which twaine, How fabulous so-ere it seeme, nought hath or more doth baine: Wherefore to such as know them not we either thus explaine. CHAP. XLVI. WHeare Cadmus, old Agenors sonne, did reste and plant his Raigne, Narcissus (of his Of spring) theare for beautie fame did gaine. His Mother was Lyriope, faire Thetis fairer Daughter, Whome cheefest as the choisest wowde, and braue Cephisus caught her. Boeotia was the fertile Realme, Parnassus Plaine the place Whear this admired Youth was borne, this Lass-Lad forme and face,
No Nymph so faire but wisht him hers, howbeit all in vayne: His selfe-loue wrought his selfe-losse, & his beauty prou'd his baine, Who, proud of Natures plentie, hild all others in disdaine: Till God, who had created Man the fairest Creature, (Howbeit but a shadow of his proper Feature, More differing far than Sun-shine frō the Suns selfe-substance pure) Narcissus ouer-scornfull pride not longer would indure, But frō his forme, that pleas'd him most, his plague did thus procure. As this same fond selfe-pleasing Youth stood at a Fountaynes brym, And proudly sees his shadow theare, admiring euery lym, Eccho, an amiable Nymph, long amorous of hym, But louing, vnbeloued, now, at least to please her Eye, Conuaies her selfe, vnseene, into a Thicket ioyning by, And thear, as much ore-gone with loue, as he ore-gone with pride, She hears, and sees, and would haue pleas'd three Senses more beside And nothing more than euery part, thus stealth-seene, liked her, And nothing lesse, than hidden with vnhidden to conferre, For well it had contented then in more then sight to erre, Although not meanely did his scorne gainst it her stomacke sterre, Meane while the Lad (such power hath pride mens Senses to subdue) Doats on his Shadow, now suppos'd to be a Substance tue: And lastly wowes so formally in words and gestures sweete, That Eccho found his error: and, he saying, Let vs meete, Let's meete, quoth Eccho, mockingly: which, hearing, he with speed, (Beleeuing that his shadow was a Nymph, and spake in deed,) Did leape into the Fountaine, whear that Gallant, drowning thus, Hath left example how like pride may cause like plague to vs. How smooth-tongu'd Eccho, that for him in al, saue voice, did pine, To quit his scorne, baind other Fooles, alike vain-glorious fine, By soothing them, is Nases tale, no purpose here of mine: But how Narcissus shadow and this Ecchos voyce, though they Haue long bene dead, haunt now the World, is it we meane to say.
PLuto, Minos, Radamant, and all th'infernall States, Did pytch a Session, to correct Remisnes in debates: Deuising Orders that on Earth might more Disorders be. Tisiphone, Alecto, and Megaera, these same three Weare shrewdly checkt, because it was obiected, though vntruely, That they weare ydle, Hell lack't Guests, and men on Earth waxt ruly. The hellish Potentates therefore a new Commission framed, Narcissus ghost, and Ecchos voyce, therein of Quorum named. These twayne, and those three Furies thus, Copattentees, leaue Hell, And diuersly throughout the Earth to Soule-infecting fell. Leaue we those others, labouring their Mischiefes farre and neere, Whil'st Eccho and Narcissus are more badly busie heere. Crab'd Saturne, & too-boystrous Mars, direct those Formers matter, Soft Venus, and smooth Mercurie, giue Methode to these latter: Those Furies roughly doe effect their tragicke Taskes, these Twoe So slyely worke, that sweetly men their proper sorrowes wowe. Heer-hence our gold-imbased World in view and valew fayld, For Eccho and Narcissus much in many things preuayld. Hence is it some of high estate themselues doe ouer-like, Whilst deadlier wound them Ecchoing tongues than should a foe them strike. Hence, whence dishonorde, some of them beleeue of men belyed Their glozing Groomes, as Tyrants so by them they wrong enuied. Hence oftentimes Authoritie lookes biglier than a Bull, With Suters poore too sternely quicke, in helping them too dull. Hence both in preaching, harboring, and humilitie, it is Some Prelates sooth, be soothed, lead, and they be lead amis. Hence Lawe, sometimes, as formde of waxe, through new refined wit Of Iudge or Pleador, altereth sans certaintie in it. Hence Martialists in Discipline and ordering their war, Lesse happely, the auncient vse, conceitedly, doe bar. Hence is it that the Lawyers more affect their fluent Tayle, Than what is right, or whom they wrong, or how they speed, or fayle. That Lawyer though who more by Art than right doth ouerthroe,
Consents to sinne, deceiues the Iudge, wrongs Right, is Iustice foe. Hence flattred Gentrie proudly doth degenerat at last: And some would be beleeued such, that of no Gentrie taste. Hence Cittizens with Courtiours so doe vayne-it for the tyme, That with their paper Ladders they euen stately Castels clyme: Then proudly pricke the mounted Sers, the Harrolds, all to blame, Will they, nyll they, vrging fees to gentellize their name. Hence countrie Loutes land-lurch their Lords, & Courtiers prize thesame. Hence worldlings so much studie wealth that they forget the vse, And, drudges-like, presse out the Grapes, not drinking of the iuse. Hence arrant Preachers, humming out a common-place or two, With bad, ill, naught, Pope, pots, play, mack, keeping a fowle adoe, Cogging, and cog'd-with, of a sorte of lazie knaues and queanes, That they be Doltes, and preach to Doltes, will heare it by no meanes. With those do these (who could they steale the Goose would stick the Fether) The Brownist & the Barrowist, goe hand in hand together. Hence is the fashion-Founder of new lockes, lookes, bas-le-maine, And Iohn Deuisor in Attire, one Foole in persons twaine. Hence, more than with our selues our selues, doe Flatterers preuaile: They make vs proude of Virtues, knowne of vs in vs to fayle: But lesse Man-slaughter hurts, than when Men-soothers say al-hayle. Though Eccho and Narcissus haunte, and hurte, each Sex and State, (Our States Superlatiue except, still one for right and rate) Yeat cheesely they with women-kinde preuailed haue of late: And thus of this two Gossips olde, together met, debate.
CHAP. XLVII. THE Younger of these widowes (for they both had thrise been so) Trots to the Elders Cottage, hers but little di∣stance fro: Thear, cowring ore two sticks a-crosse, burne at a smoakie Stocke, They chat how Young-men them in youth, & they did young-men mocke: And how since three-score yeeres a-goe (they aged foure-score now) Men, women, & the world, wear chaung'd in all, they know not how. When we were Maids (qd. th'one of them) was no such new-found pride: Yeat seru'd I Gentels, seeing store of daintie Girles beside. Then wore they Shooes of ease, now of an inch-broad, corked hye: Blacke karsie stockings, worsted now, yea silke of youthful'st dye: Garters of Lystes, but now of silke, some edged deepe with gold: With costlier toyes, for courser turns, than v'd, perhaps of old. Fring'd and ymbroidred Petticoats now begge. But heard you nam'd, Till now of late, Busks, Perrewigs, Maskes, Plumes of Fethers fram'd, Supporters, Pooters, Fardingales aboue the Loynes to waire, That be she near so bombe-thin, yet she crosse-like seem's foure-squaire? Some Wiues, grayheaded, shame not locks of youthfull borrowed haire: Some, tyring Arte, attyer their heads with onely Tresses baire: Some (grosser pride than which, thinke I, no passed Age might shame) By Arce, abusing Nature, heads of antick't hayre doe frame: Once starching lack't the Tearme, because was lacking once the toy: And lack't we all those Toyes & Tearmes, it were no griefe but ioy. But lawfull weare it some be such, should all alike be coy'
Now dwels ech Drossell in her Glas: when I was yong, I wot, On Holly-dayes (for sildome els such ydell times we got) A Tubb or Paile of water cleere stood vs in steede of Glas: And yeat (which still I beare in mind) for it I schooled was, Euen by an holy Fryer, that espyde me tooting so, Who, softly stealing at my backe, cryde suddenly. Ho, Ho. I, starting, turn'd and saw the Fryer, who, though no dyuell he weare, Yeat, for he was a Fryer, I did for soule or body feare, That is, least this weare pride (whereof I sharply now should heare,) Or that the cockish Cowle-man (none but we alonely theare) His ghostly calling layde apart, might carnally appeare: But, meant he well, or mus'd he yll, my Mother comming in, Mends all amys, and soberly the Fryer did thus begin. Yong Damsels, and somtimes (quoth he) old Dotards vnawaer, Doe thus offend, whilst thus they seeme vpon themselues to staer: But what they see is not themselues: And then a Tale did tell, How Eccho and Narcissus weare aucthorised from Hell, That egging, & This acting pride, in Worldlings hearts to dwell: And either oft in Mirrors and in Waters beautious seeme, To curious Gazers inn, who those to be themselues do deeme. Flye glas and water-tooting, Girle, Narcissus fall extreeme: Feare flattrie too: for Men to Maides be Ecchos to subdewe, The Fryer sayd: and all too soone I found his sayings trewe. Yeat then he seemed to haue told a Tale but of a Tubbe, Which three score Wynters-aged Sores euē now, do freshly rubbe. My Parents they weare wealthy, and my selfe in wanton youth, Was fayre enough, but proude enough, so Foole-enough in truth. I might haue had good Husbands, which my desteny withstood: Of three now dead (ah, griefe is drye, Gossyp, this Ale is good) In faith not one of them was so: for by this drinke I sweare, (Requarrelling the Cup, whose Lippes and it vnparted weare, When th'other Beldamme, great with chat (for talkatiue be Cups) The formers Prate, not worth the while, thus fondly interrups.
WHen I (quoth she) the Countrie left to be a London Las, I was not fayrer than my selfe beleeued faire I was. Good God, how formall, prankt, and peart, became I in a trice, As if vnto the Place it weare a Nature to be Nice. Scarce entred I the Teenes, but that to Wed my will was hot: Ye that be married, and intend to marrie, well I wot, The Priest no sooner sayde, but I vpon my typ-toes stand, As if that Lesson had concerned my selfe, euen out of hand. The same proportion with my heart my groeth nor age did hold: Dayes seeming yeares, when I, Vn-wead, was sixteene winters olde. And growing was the greene Disease, which men in Maides doe cure, When came a Louer, I, (for-sooth) becomming full demure. For earst I had obseru'd this Arte, Delay giues men Desier: Yeat lothe to hurt my haste, and least the Hansell should retyer, I was not ouer coye, nor he to warme him at my Fier. I'le blab (for why? for it and more that I in youth did doe, Long since I passed ghostly shriftes, pennance, and pardons too) Such match we made, that Maide, nor Wife, nor Widowe, left he me, But with my Maiden-head he crost the Seas, and farewell he: For from my fault could not, as chan'st, the Somner prole a fee: My belly did not blab, so I was still a Mayde, and free. It comfort should in losse to thinke we had not once to lose, And what we haue as euer to be hild should none suppose: But not in me this sentence hild: more eagerly than earst I on the brydell byte, as loath to fast that late did feaste. Swift gallops tier both man and horse, soone-hot, is soone-cold loue, No Man, I meane, Loue-hot as mine, loues as the Turtell Doue, And, in good soothe, a Sott is she, that cog'd-with cannot cogge: As readily my Loue did gad, as did my Louer iogge. Tush, in those times weare no such toyes as Gagate stones to trie, By toysting them in Potions, if a Maide had trode awrie. But this was rather currant, yea each holy Fathers lore, That therefore Nature sweetneth Loue, that it the world might store.
Which made me thinke it then a sinne (so tender hearted I) Beloued, not to Loue againe, indangring men to die: (For so they swore they would, nor then beleeu'd I men would lye: Whom now I know Camelions, whil'st to pray on vs they plye.) Yeat better times were those than these for our auayle, for why? Euen for good-fellowship at least then wert they roundly to it, Now eare they loue (if euer loue) sententiously they doc it. Who loues not for the Person but the Portion loues no whit, But he that loues for onely Loue, doth reason quite forgit, Say men, and article the Match, lesse by trew Loue than Wit. Vngratefull Men, what would yee more than Loue for Loue? than we Be close, neate, bountious, bucksome, and our bodies Masters yee? Too curious, pettish, ielous, too imperious, too vnstable, Are Men, say Womē: but to beat such Fooles with their own bable, As when that I was yong, our Sex is now, troe I, as able. Old doting Foole, one foote in graue, what prattell I of youth? Contrition, not Shrift-pennance cure, if preach our Vicar truth. Heere, after little pause, they prate confusedly, I wot: Whose talke had often ended, had the Period been the Pot. They tould how forward Maidens weare how proude if in request How brybed, praysed, promisd fayre, men baddest out the best. They talked of a Widowes teares, her haste againe to weade, He gone forgot, his Orphant wrong'd, she spoyld, an Vnthrift speade, They pratteld too of London Youthes, how late their headie gaer Might haue inuited to a Sacke, wheare they prepos'd no shaer. They talk't of times when Beastes could speake, of Foxes, and of Apes: Much needles prattel, what through Drinke, and Dotage, them escapes Yeat Ecchos and Narcissus Voyce and Shadowe (now as then, Working against humilitie, of wantes the worst in men) Caus'd them as thus to vse their prate, and me of this my penne, And to these glorious Follies too those Furies say Amen.
CHAP. XLVIII. THE Monarch of that Continent that doth, in one, contayne Fiue auncient Scepters (for he would the world weare wholy Spayne) As Castile, Aragon, Nauarr, Granado, Por∣tugaile Be newly nam'd, yea India wheare Castillian Powres preuaile: These, States in Affricke, Lumbardie, Peru, Assores, and Both Cicells, Austra, Barbarie, Naples, with Netherland, And many other Prouinces, by such ambition gott, As giueth his Impressa life to verefie the Mot, Him not sufficing (for it saith, the VVorld sufficeth not) Euen he, I say, affecting Raygne in England, Almaine, Fraunce, And all Europa, lately did an holy League aduaunce. The Pope, Him-selfe, Sauoy, and Guise, therein Confedrates cheefe: ome wroght by Bulls, Sauoy by Sword, Spayne yeilded Guise releefe, Guise did religious Treason act: but all did fayle, in briefe. Geneua is vnsacked, Fraunce yeilds Rome small profit, Spayne By coste hath loste, England, through God, tryumphant doth remayne, Nauar hath meanes to haue Nauar: and, when shall God so please, The rightfull heire of Pertagale his Empyre shall re-seaze. Ye Christian Princes, pittie him, in punishing his Fo, That now afflicteth him, and would on you tyrannize so. If one selfe-same Religion (if Religion Romistes haue) If Natures Line, or Natiue Lawes, the Pope that so did craue, If to haue had possest the Crowne, with Portagales applause,
Might haue preuailed, these and more had helpt Antonius cause. But brybed Traytors, fraude, and force, have made the Spaniard such, That Castile, from a Cronet leapt, thinksmany Crownes not much. The great Nauarrois, Sampson, stauld the first Castilian King: But badly Castile quits his loue whence did that honor spring: And from his Line by trecherie the Diademe doth wring. So, by what right or wrong so-eate, Spayne cloureth Crownes toge∣ther And aimeth, euen from Portugale, as is supposed, hether: Not wanting English, willing to be hopled in that Teither. But Traytors, Fooles, & Fugitiues, Whom prouendor doth pricke, Ensew your proper sorow, leane vpon that rotten sticke, Your kindnes shall not mis, at least, this kindly Spanish Tricke. WHen Spaniards and their Partizens eare-while should vs inuaide, In plotting of that Stratageme in Councell much was said: Some of our Queene to be destroyde, of murthering vs some spake, Some this, some that, but all of all an altred World to make: Least English Papistes, then shut vp in Elie and els-wheare, Meane time by vs might lose their liues, some One, by chāce did feare, Which scruple was remoued soone by one, that well did know, Not for religion, but a Realme, did Spayne that cost bestow. Our drift (quoth he) a Conquest is, the Profit meant to Spaine, Not that the English Papists should be Sharers of the gaine. So hope they, but (so helpe me God) our pollicie wear small That they should florish, nay, should liue, could we procure their fall. Theare be they great alreadie, wheare we only great must be, Whom, should they equall, woe to vs when we shall disagree: Now that therefore which we cannot with honestie contriue, Our Foes shall finish, if of them they leaue not one aliue. Thus said he, not gaine-saide: for hang who shall so they may thriue. This Maxime hath hild, and good, wheare they haue ouerthrone By trecherous Agents, of the same they haue not trusted one: Adde, than the Spaniard, prouder and more cruell People none.
Euen Cortes, that with cost and payne, rich India did subdew, And gaue to Spayne his Conquest, found false Meede for Seruice trew. So they that wonne them Portugale, and Naples spead, in few: And too imperiously doe they, oppresse their Conquests new: Yeat boast not perpetuitie, but (Spayne) this Patterne vew. Caldea priz'd Assiria, and Assiria priz'd the same, The Medes and Persians both, and them the Macedons orecame, The Romaines thē, that Empier next had France, the Germaines now, Which onely Title hardly doe the Spanyards them alowe, Spayne hath Nauarre, that once had Spayne, wheare once crown'd wee their King, And once did Spanish-Irish-Scots vs to subiection bring, We Scots, French, Irish: too and fro thus often Scepters flye: Yea to Posterities old names of Lands and Peoples dye. Sicambries, Gawles, Picts, Vandels, Gothes, & Astrogothes, known late In Europ by these names, haue chang'd those names, & Europs State, And with the Spanyards, part of those, may alter in like rate. Each Birde shall then remaunde her Plumes, and naked leaue your Iaye, At least when Phillip shall decease: and why not eare that daye? For power and prowse lacke Turnus Peere, yeat when his Fates with∣stoode, Iturna, no not Iunos-selfe, could doe him any good. But Godhoode none in Indian Golde, & pope-buld hopes shall mis, Nor Macedonian Phillips Sonne Castilian Phillip is: But one who, whil'st he warres for ours, hath lost euen part of his. Not onely Spayne thinke destinate in Pompe not to impaier, Our liued long, that breathes, enuied, not els but odious Ayer: And (which is monstrously too trew) Religion is pretext, Where through the Spanyard and the Pope all Christendome haue vext. Witnes their Powers, by Land and Seas, that threatned vs er'while: Of it a word: and note how God did patronize our Ile.
CHAP. XLIX. THe Spanyards long time Care & Coste, inuincible surnam'd, Was now a flote, whilst Parma to frō Flanders hither aim'd, Like Fleete, of eightscore Ships & od, the Ocean neuer bore, So huge, so strong, and so compleate, in euery Strength and Store. Carikes, Gallions, Argosies, and Galliasses, such That seem'd so many Castels, and their tops the cloudes to tuch. These on the Lizardes shewe themselues, & threaten Englands fall: But theare with Fistie Shippes of ours that Fleete was fought withall. Howbeit of a greater sorte our Nauie did consist, But parte kept Dyet in the Porte, that might of health haue miste, Had Spayns Armada of our wants in Plimmouths Hauen wiste. The rest had eye on Parma, that from Flanders armour threates: Meane while Lord Charles our Admiral, and Drake, did worthy Feats: Whose feareles fiftie Moole-hils bod their trypeld Mountaines bace, And euen at first (so pleas'd it God) pursewde as if in chace: By this (for ouer-idle seemd to English hearts the Shore) Our Gallants did imbarke each-wheare, and made our Forces more But in such warlike Order then their Shippes at Anker laye, That we, vnles we them disperse, on bootles labor staye: Not lacked Pollicie that to that purpose made vs waye. Ours fyred diuers Shippes, that downe the Currant sent, so skaerd, That Cables cut, and Ankers lost, the Spanyards badly faerd. Dispersed thus, we spare not shot, and part of them we sinke, And part we boord, the rest did flye, not fast enough they thinke. Well guided little Axes so force tallest Oakes to fall, So numbrous Heards of stately Hearts, flye Beagles few and smal. Nine dayes together cha'ste we them, not actious, saue in flight
About Eight thowsands perished by famine, sea, and fight. For Treasure, Shippes, and Carrages, lost Honor, Prisners tayne, The Spaniards, hardly scaping hence, scapt not rebukes in Spaine. Well might thus much (as much it did) cheere England, but much more Concurrancie from one to all to stop that common Sore. Euen Chatholiques (that erred name doth please the Papists) waer As forward in this Quarrell as the formost Armes to bear: Recusants and Suspects of noote. Of others was caer. And had not our God-guided Fight on Seas preuailed, yet The Spaniards, land whereso they could, had with our Armies met. Our common Courage wisht no lesse, so lightly feard we Foes, Such hope in God, such hate of them, such hearts to barer bloes. Heere flam'd the Cyclops Forges, Mars his Armorie was heere, Himselfe he sheads in vs, and with our Cause our selues we cheere. But (which had scarfide our wounds, if wounded, with the Balme Of her sweete Presence, so applaus'd as in Sea-stormes a Calme) Her royall-selfe, Elizabeth our Soueraigne lawfull Queene, In magnanimious Maiestie amidst her Troupes was seene. Which made vs weepe for ioy: nor was her kindnes lesse to vs. Thinke nothing letting then that might the common Cause discus, Wheare Prince and People haue in Loue a Sympathie as thus. Howbeit Force, nor Policie, but Gods sole Prouidence, Did cleare fore-bosted Conquest and behighted Thraldome hence. He in Saneherib his nose did put his hooke, and brought Him backe againe the way he came, without performing ought: He fought for vs, Alonely we did shout and Trumpets sound, When as the Walles of rico fell flat vnto the ground. Ya least (for earst did neuer heere like strong Supplies befall, Like loyall hearts in euerie one, like warlike mindes in all, Lesse spaer of Purses, more Fore-sight, and valiant Guides to act, As shewde our hardie littell Fleet that battell neuer slackt) Leaste these, I say, might haue been sayd the cause that we subdew'de, Euen God, to Glorifie himselfe, our gayned Cause pursew'de,
Without our losse of Man, or Mast, or Foe once touching Shore, Saue such as wrackt, weae Prisnors, or but landing, liu'd not more: And as in publique Praiers we did his defence implore, So being Victors, publiquely, we yeelded thanks therefore. Her Highnes selfe (good cause she had) in viewe of euerie Eie, On humbled Knees did giue him thanks that gaue her Victorie. Remaineth, what she wonne, what Spaine & Rome did lose in fame: Remaineth, Popes vse Potentates but to retriue their Game. CHAP. L. IF not with minds preiudicate, but holding in sus∣pence A while the Papacie, that takes and giues so much Offence, With single hearts, and Eies, and Eares, al christi∣an Princes would Peruse the sacred Scriptures (as in verie deede they should) Then might they iustly censure, how in owlines, or Pryde, In Charitie, or Crueltie, how straite to God, or wide, In Doctrine, and in Discipline, Rome hath, and now doth guide, With still Prouisoes from the Laie the Scriptures light to hide, Least should (as would, and cleerely doth) their Cosning be espide Wherby, euen ipso facto, is their Cause against them tride: The sinne of Pride made Lucifer gainst God him selfe rebell, And through that sinne he so sedu't that Adam also fell. Then plaid he Rex ore all the Earth, except a faithfull Fewe: Till Christ, incarnate, on the Crosse Synns Kingdome did subdewe. Then Christ, was powrefull in the world, for Faith had practice right:
And what could more our Ghostly Foe then Faith & Practice spight? His auncient Stratageme therefore to plant he casts anew, And by the pride of only Workes from Faith a many drew. Then were such Honors heapt on Popes, (Worlds-Aiects ere that time) That Lucifer him selfe than they presum'd not more to clyme. Their golden Legend, though not it autenticke be in aught, To vs doth teach a Storie that to them might now be taught. Theare was a Man of stature bigge, and bigge withall in minde, For serue he would, yet One thā whō he greater none might finde. He, hearing that the Emperor was in the world most great, Came to his Court, was tertaynd, and, seruing him at meate, It chanc't the Diuell was nam'd, wherat the Emperor him blest: When as, vntill he knew the cause, the Pagane would not rest. But when he heard his Lord to feare the Diuell his ghostly Foe, He left his Seruice, and to seeke and serue the Diuell did goe: Of heauen, or hell, God, or the Diuell, he earst nor heard nor carde, Alone he sought to serue the same that would by none be darde. He met (Who soone is mett) the Diuell, was intertayn'd, they walke, Till, comming to a Crosse, the Diuell did fearefully it balke. The Seruant, musing, questioned his Master of his feare: One Christ, quoth he, with dread, I mind when doth a crosse appeare. Then serue thy selfe, the Gyant said, that Christ to serue I'le seeke. For him he askt an Hermit, who aduisde him to be meeke, found, By which, by Faith, and works of Almes, would sought-for Christ be And how & where, to practice these he gaue Directions sound. Then he, that skond his Seruice late to greatest Potentates, Euen at a common Ferry now to carrie all awaites. Thus doing long, as with a Child he ouer once did waide, Vnder his Loode midway he aints, from sinking hardly stayde. Admiring how, and asking who, was answered of the Childe, As on his Shoulders Christ he bore, by being humblie milde, So through Humilitie his Soule to Christ was reconcilde,
And, of his Carrage, Christo-fer should thenceforth be his name. Then lett this popish Scripture, Popes, at least you Conuerts frame: Of which Conuerting, Christo-fers yee thenceforth shalbe said: If not, apply and perish in your Luciferring Traid. Ye know, I know, that but in Christ may no Redemption be: So your greate friend, our Gardner, on his death-bed could agree: But to the Vulgars open not, gainst Rome, that gap, quoth he. So miserable is your state who, seeing, will not see, That Christofer, eare Christo-fer, was Atheist lesse than yee. Well answered once a King of ours the Pope, that bod him free Two Pelates, terming them his Sonnes: The King seem'd to agree, But sent their compleat Armor: looke are these thy Sonne, quoth he. False Hesket too not falsely spake, reporting lately this, That such as Papists would seduce, and of seducing mis, Are marked dead: For he to whom he so did say, feare I, Earle Ferdinando Stanley, so dissenting, so did trie, As other Peeres, heere, and els-where, haue found the like no lye. Nor preached he the Pope amis, that did to him applie This Tex, to witt: This is the Heire, come on and let him die, Th' Inheritance let vs inioye: Nought seeke they els, for why? Those bad be good that giue, those good be bad that Giftes deny, From Annanias literall fault they Consciences would tye: These death-eide Basilisques therefore in euerie Sense doe flie. Be of Religion iumpe with them, in all their Toyes affe, A Peter-Penny, if withhild, knocks all the rest awrye. Hell, Heauen, Bulls, Pardons, Pope, and to be Pope, doth mony buy. Yea, too blasphemous, they inroch vpon the Deitie, Though of these ifers haue been that perish through a Flie. Each sinne gainst God, how vile so-eare, will Popes with Pardons fit: Crosse but the Pope, pardon thou him, he will not pardon it. For Faith his common Plea is sword and fire against his foes: But who, but fooles, beleeue that Faith exacted is by bloes. Than those three Mightie Emperors, Fift Charles, with Ferdinand,
And Maximilian, with the Pope did none more partiall stand: Yeat suffred they the Consciences of Protestants in peace, But Philip, nor the Pope will now their Inquisition cease: Though Either suffer Iewes, and Stewes, because of Gaines increase. CHAP. LI. THis Spanish Inquisition is a Trappe, so slylie sett, As into it Wise, Godly, Rich, by Blanchers bace as fett. Direct or indirectly then to answeare all is one: From those Inquisitors escape but verie fewe or none. Euen so by racking out the ioynts, or chopping off the heade, Procustes fitted all his Guests vnto his iron beade. Aue Maria, Credo, and the Pater noster say, In Latin, els they pennance thee, and take thy goods away. Nay, these though said, both say and doe as they, yeat all for nought, They will exact by Torture what thou thinkest, and hast thought, Of Masse, the Pope, & Popish points, til in the Lapse thou fall: Then, Mercie God, amongst those men no mercie is at all: A bloodier Law vsde bloodierly was neuer heard or shall. Tormenting men vntill they gesse by whom they are acus'de, Which gessed, it against themselues for Euidence is vs'de: As who would say, so be it must, because it so is mus'de. Phillip, abusiuely seduc't, and World-deceiuing Pope, Peruse all Lawes, euen Paganizme, past vnder heauens coope, And rightly pondring those with this, thē speak your thoughts indeed,
Was not your Draco Sathan that himselfe could thus exceede? Here adde for badde we might your League, if That of This had need. O happy and thrise happy Realme of ours, and other Lands, Wheare, touching death by Clergie-doomes, the Pollicie withstāds. THen freated Paule, Pope Paule the Third, when Peter came in Plea▪ No Maruell, Luther preached gold, and glorie from his Sea. But, see an helpe: Ignatius then conceited had his Sect, And crau'd Confirmance of the Pope, which Paule did then reiect, But when he heard that Orders vowe might cheefly him auayle, Them Iesuists he incorporates: nor they his Pope ship fayle: But for his onely Doctrine are Apostles, and as trew, As to the Diuell the deadly-Sinnes to Popes this Order new. Yeat these be those are vnder-hand deceiu'd whilst they deceaue: Witnes the Gallowes, wheare for most they end those webbes they weaue. For vnaduised are, me thinks, our Iesuistes in this, In Cell-life since so strict, and here they hanging seldome mis, That, for Applause at least (although euen so weare bacely badde) They change not Treachers vnto them to whom from vs they gadde. But better course than either weare secure at home to staye, And theare with loyall hearts attend what Subiects should obaye, Wheare no tyrannizing is ore the Conscience, though it straye. And Men of ciuill Carriage, though in bodies not imployde, Win good Report, they shiftles shame that wish their Home distroyde. Young English Fooles, for cause too trew, we pittie you in deede: First for ye are our Countriemen, then for that ye proceede Gainst Scripture, Lawe, and Nature, and Fooles palpable, in that Ye note not how your Follies make our English Foxes fat: Allen at Rome, Others els-wheare, that liue hand-ouer-heade, By tasking you to broach those Faultes for which themselues be feade. Whilst these lie burrowed, safe frō skath, mongst you adoptiue Cubs, They doe obserue the pregnanst witte, whom Discontentment rubs, Of Atheist, factious, desprate, or vaine-glorious, him they schoole,
And then transport to England, thear to play the dangerous Foole: Seduciugly insisting on performance of their vow, That doth Rebellion, Regecide, and breach of Othes allow. Though Dauid knew his Soueraigne Saul disfauored of God, And might haue kild, and then bin crownd, such sin his soule for-bod. Which of the Pariarks, Prophets, or Gods People, whilst they saru'd Euen Ethnicks, traytrously vnto their owne Affections caru'd. But thus do ye, nay worser, for your Darnell giddeth so, As Gods Annoynted and Belou'd ye censure for his Foe: But woorst of all, by murthring her to merite Heauen ye troe. Put case the diulish Act were done, to scape yeat lacks your Charter, And dead with Tormēts, not the pain, but cause, doth make the Marter. Say that the Pope lacks Malice, Say your selues doe loue the State, Too grosly yeat your Doctrine faults in things of greatest wate. Which your Absurdities do our Diuines confute, I wot: Ye say his Popeship cannot erre, We proue ye erre in, Not. Nor in the Sacrament that Christ is really we hold. Your Transubstantiation we iustly haue controld. Yours for the Liuing and Deceast Propitiatorie Masses, And Purgatorie, should we graunt, ye might conclude vs Asses. Your Worshipping of Images, and Inuocating Saints, And Supererogation, vs with your Defects acquaints. Besides the Supper of our Lord, and Baptisme, we reiect Moe Sacraments: Howbeit ye Fiue other doe erect: As Confirmation, Penance, with Priest-Order, Marrage too, And extreame Vnction. Ouer more too much applause ye doe Works Meritorious. Of the Cup the Laye ye do bereaue: And of translated Scriptures, so, vnspied, to deceaue. Dges▪ Vowes, Indulgences, Confession in the eare, Dissoluing Subiects from the Faith they should their Princes beare, Dispensing with the Scriptures, for Reuenge, to please, or gaine, Your Pardons, Pilgrimages, and your halowed Paltries vaine, Pope, and what-so is Papistrie, well may we call profaine:
Ambitious Rome, that for thy Pompe not sparest Soules to baine. Once weart thou truly Catholique, corrupted fouly now, Not outed quite the Church, A Sparke in her we thee allow: And wish thou weart, as then thou weart, when as the Fathers good, As touching Anti-christ, and whence, in both mis-vnderstood. No Maruell, euen to Daniels-selfe in Mysterie it was: And dye did those good Fathers ere that Scripture came to pas. But now, who-so can Anti-christ but etymologize, And knowes the Pope and Rome, the Place and Man of sinne descries. Sheep-clothed Wolues, Christs Pro-contra, the Popes haue bin & be: No place but Rome for Anti-christ, none but the Pope is he. CHAP. LII. BVt humaine Purenes none is such, but it to err is knowne: Thinke not we labour here your Faults, and o∣uer-leape our Owne. For in the best of men the Flesh and Spirit com∣bat still: One thing the Spirit, and the Flesh the contrarie doth will. We Vertue praise, but practise Vice: possessed weale we flye, And tract off woe. At Heauen we ayme, but with a worldly Eye. Our selues we loue, yeat than our selues we haue no crosser Foe. For peace we warre, a peruerse warre that doth our selues ore-throe. At once we burne, and are key-cold. We seeme to stand that fall: To heale that hutt. We brag of bad. We dye ere death doth call. We triumph while we are subdude. We blisse our proper baine. We gladly doe subiect our selues vnto each giddie Vaine.
Our gadding Thoughts conceite the Cloudes, our selues meane while for got. Our Nay is Yea, our Yea is Nay: we will, and then will not. Our Soules like this, our Flesh lusts that As Proteus changeth, so Doe our Affections: and our Thoughts be shifting too and fro. Euen Hydra-like we flesh our Faults: our Mindes doe wauer still. Our selfe-Conceits be winged: and we flie from good to ill. Our Peace with Discorde breedes our woe: the Contrarie our Ease. We neuer doe but plague our selues, whilste that our selues we please. We would be we, as if not we. Vs Plentie maketh poore. We, partiall, blame, inable, and disable vs eremore. All these, and wilfull Sinnes besides, to vs with you and all Too common we confesse. But of our Doctrine speake we shall. Propitious be to vs, O God, that Faith haue practise too: Which we omit as Publicanes, as Pharisies ye doe. Our Doctrine though is Gospell, yours Traditions but of Men: Enough of Yours: Examine Ours by Touch of Scripture then, VPon the onely Scriptures doth our Church Foundation lay: Let Patriarchs, Prophets, Gospell, and th'Apostles for vs say: For Soule and Body we affirme, are all sufficient thay: Yeat ye adde Canons, part corrupt, some Bookes ye quite denaye. We by the Hebrew, and the Greeke, their primer Pennes, expounde Each Scripture, by the eldest Clarks, whē doubtful Textes be found: Not by the Latin onely, as ye would that all weare bounde. So farforth yeat the Fathers and the Councels we approue, As doe their Expositions tende to sincere Faith and Loue. Els fully Scriptures, in themselues, explaine themselues, say we: I searched with that humble Spirit by which they written be: Through which is ofte from literall speech a spirituall sense set free, Vpon which sense the Catholique Church did, doth, and must agree. Nor doth our Church admit, at least allow, of those in her, That teach not Faith sincerely, winne to Heauen, from Hell deter, That with new Glozes tainte the Text, or such as be vnreade
In that sweete Promise of the Seede should broose the Serpents head: The Alpha, and Omega, of all Scriptures, and whereby Of grace, through faith in Christ, our Soules reuiue, and Sin doth die: Our Church affects, how so effects, such pure Theologie, And Guides, and to our Naturall Prince, graunts sole Supremacie. Gods Cou'nant with the Patriarchs, and extending to the Seede, Vs Gentiles to coequall is a Primate in our Creede: And Christ we know the ende of it. In Circumcisions place Is Baptisme. And intirely we the Tables Two imbrace Which God himselfe in Synai wrote, and gaue to Moses then, To publish to the people, Two Commandements in Ten: Scriptures Idea, couched in our Loue to God and men. Th'Apostles, Athanasian, Nice, and Bizain Creeds we hold Autentick, by the holy Spirit in sacred Writ inrowld. One Godhead of three Persons, in coequall Maiestie, Doe we beleeue: of whom the Sonne did for Beleeuers die: The only Ransome that redeemes from Sathans Tyrannie: Euen Christ, the Way, the Truth, the Life, not crooked, glozed, fraile, But right for Rule, in Promise firme, in Guerdon near to faile: Who to reproue the bad, approue the good, and to assure The Wau'ring, and against the Diuell our safetie to procure, Did, giltles, die, that we, lost Soules, might liue: naught els did make That he, his Deitie adiorn'd, did humaine Nature take: Nor, glorifide, disclaimes he vs, vnles we him forsake: And what is fruitles Faith, but such Apostasie? and what Ensues Apostasie, but to be doomed Dam'd for that? No Doctrine, or Traditions, we hold currant, saue the same That Gospell, or th'Apostles Acts, or Pennes, include or name. Baptisme, incorporating vs in Christ, and vs in one, Christs misticall last Supper, whear in Signe his death is knowne, Be Sacraments, except which twaine, doe we accept of none.
By only Christ our Aduocate we to the Father pray: Nor thinke we Saints deceased can our Sutes to him conuay: Howbeit still most reuerently of Saints we think and say. Vnnecessarie Burthens, on our Christian Freedome laide, Contrarie these, that but beleefe, and vertuous life perswaide. Yea only Faith doth iustifie, say we, of Gods free grace, By Christ: not Faith is idle, but doth Charitie imbrace. Who may, but will not helpe doth hurt, we know: and curious thay That, dribling Almes by Arte, disband wel-Meant frō wel-Dons pay: And he that questions Ones distresse, and doth not helpe indeuour, Than he that sees, and nothing sayes, or cares, is lesse Deceiuour. Then hope we health when sinne is felt repentantly in heart: Adde then new life, and we to God, God doth to vs conuart: Thus Peter vsde his Keyes, not thus play Popes S. Peters part. For Cleargie-men, and Laye, our Church hath godly Discipline: Lawes worthie better than sometimes are those the Lawes define. Our Princes in their Policies and Lawes doe we obay: Though God his Cause they seek to crosse, yeat we for thē do pray, In patience, not peruerse Attempts, for better times we stay. Not as denide, but as deuout we doe and should abstaine From Meates euen meete, the proude Flesh frō sins excesse to waine, Which, shuld we skāt, & yet be dronk with lust or like were vaine: Saue also publique Policie doth publique Sparing craue, In Fasts or differences of Meates, no other keepe we haue. Almes deedes, and workes of Charitie we practiuely professe, And follow Saints as they did Christ, & leaue whear they trāsgresse: Such, and so much, as sayd, are we: forgiue vs, God, if lesse. For godly though Religion, Prince, and Policie they are, Yeat things, that of themselues be good, abuse brings out of square, And sundrie Faults in sundrie Folks we sometimes must forbare: Howbeit with best gouernd States our State may now compare.
CHAP. LIII. A Wise man liuing like a Drone, an old-Man not de∣uout, Youth disobedient, Rich-men that are Charitie without, A shameles Woman, vitious Lords, a Poore-man proudly stout, Contentious Christians, Pastors that their Function doe neglect, A wicked King, no Discipline, no Lawes men to direct, Are Twelue the foulest Faults that do all Common-wealths infect: In most of all which Twelue erres not, or much in any one, Our State, respecting this, of some, Lawes not abused none. Our God-blest Queene, Palladium of our happie publique Weale, For worth so farre beyond all words, we one only touch in zeale. No Realme than ours hath wiser Lawes, for euery Right & Wrong: Nor is through Meed, or Meanes, the Weake betraied to the Strōg, Though of vn-Quaifed Iudges some is sung another song. But who the Person, not the Cause, respecteth, hath forgot The Creator of Persons, who and Iustice differ not. A Councell watchfull for the State. Our Benches euery wheare Supplide with Iudges learned, iust, and such as God doe feare. Winke here and there at Auerice, Incharitie, and Pride, And better Cleargie than is ours not Europe hath beside. Say me, who can, whether Extreame hath harm'd Religion more, That old of theirs too prodigall, or This of ours too poore? Then Giuing gaue too slack a Raine, now-Gleaning curbs too sore. By Slauerie and by Symonie now Church-Preferment comes: Like Nabal and to Helies Sonnes get Church-men vp their crōmes.
Too much, too little, or a meane, sort out alike, we see, House-keeping, nor Humilitie, in any of the Three. Be hospitalious, Churchmen: Lay, cease sacrilegious sinne: Your Soules-sore, but their Stores-salue, whence, euē whiningly, they winne, By pinching from the Pulpet, and their Purses, with this note, Scarse will their Studies stipend them, their wiues, and Children cote. And verely it is a fault, and maimed Learnings Foe, That Church-Possessions should amongst the Laye be shared so. And verely it is a fault, if so the Cleargie liue, As theirs to take be thought no Sinne, nor Meede to them giue. Almightie euerlasting God, which only work'st great wonders, Amend such Pastors, and vnite thy Flock that Sathan sunders. No one thing quailes Religion more than foundring Presbytrie: Each Sot, impugning Order, saieth, and doth his Fantasie: Our Booke of Common prayer, though most sound Diuinitie, They will not reade, nor can they preach, yeat vp the Pulpet towre, Thear making tedious Preachments, of no edifying powre. O learned Seers, whose good liues and Doctrine doe agree, (Not barren is our Land of such) heer-hence vn-meant are ye: To you, in Reuerence and Reward, may nothing wanting be: T'is only wisht your work from Dolts, your Hiues from Drones were free: T'is wisht in These, in Fugitiues, in Papists, and (more bad, Whom to perswade to reason, were with reason to be mad) In Calophantick Puritaines, amisse amendment had. THese Hypocrites for these three Gifts to their Lauerna pray, Iust to be thought, all to beguile, That none their Guiles bewray: Their Arte is fayning good they want, and hiding bad they haue: Their Practise is selfe-praise, of praise all others to depraue. On Loue, say some, waites Ielosie, but Ielosie wants loue, When curiously it ouer-plus doth idle Quarrels moue. Best Puritaines are so ore-zeal'd: But should I terme the rest? Inhospitalious, Mutinous, and Hypocrites the best,
Insociable, Maleparte, foxing their priuate good, Exiling hence wel-neere al Troth, meete Sports, & Neighbourhood, Learnings Foes, contemptuously by them be Lawes withstood, Self-pleasers, Skorners, Harlots, Drones, against the Haire in all: Of their extreame, whence Atheisme breeds, be warning Hackets fall. If euer England will in ought preuent her owne Mishap, Against these Skommes (no terme too grosse) let England shut the gap Their giddie heds gaue colour first that Spayne gainst Flaūders arm'd, And thē their Coūtries Foes they helpt, & most their Coūtry harm'd. If Hypocrites why Puritaines we terme, be ask't, in breefe, T'is but an Ironized Tearme, good-Fellow so spells Theefe. Well-working single-hearted Men in silence (such be some) Will not apply, but saintish, not in Deede, but by the Dromme. To Vnion that our stablisht Lawes for publike Prayer ties Not all, is wondred, and offends obedient Eares and Eyes. The rather, for knowne Humorists, Sots, noted Mal-Contents, Here innouate: and each one to a diuers Sect conuents, Too much irreu'rent, in, and to, the Church and Sacraments. But leauing these, retier we to ill-drifting Rome and Spayne, Whō doth our Queene, next vnder God, frō Europs Spoyle detayne.
THE TENTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. LIV. IN Scotland, France, & Netherland, whilst Phil∣lip, and the Pope, Did Swordes, and ciuill Tumults broach, of pri∣zing them in hope, Her Highnes, through the highest Power, ina∣bled was to ayde Those Countries, to defend her owne, and Phil∣lips to inuayde. Of Scotland first, and then of France, and Belgike shall be saide: When first of othe things shall be this short Remembrance made. It is a saying auncient (not autenticall, I win) That who-so England will subdew, with Ireland must begin. Imagine Stukelies onely name includeth all that's ill: He forging worth, and to our State Maleuolent in will. Of bounteous Pensions was therefore possest in Spayne long while, Vntill (for it a Nature was in Stukelie to begile) The King, whom he had cozen'd long, him purpos'd to exile. Then for the Pope the Fugitiue a welcome Agent was: (For nothing ill, might worke vs ill, hath Spayne and Rome let pas)
Of him he had an Armie, that for Irelands Conquest sayles: When through a fight in Barharte that Expedition fayles. But how had guiltles England then deseru'd such hostile Spight? Her Rebell why relieued they? why arm'd they him to fight? Why did? (why doe I aske that know the Spanyard so ambitious, The Remaine Prelate pompious, and, which more is, auaticious?) Why did, I say, Pope Pius Bull, and Gregories Calfe disqueate Our Sou'raigne, and her Subiects, that did neuer them mis-treate? Vnles for Princes to giue Lawes to theirs be to offend Proud Spayne, and Rome: if so, as so, let God the Quarrell ende. What else had England done, whē they did foster there, with more, Our Traytor Moereton, sent from them to stirre an here-Vprote, Which cost the North, two northerne Earles, and their Consorts full sore? He whispring, how that Bull had made Anathema our Queene, Deptiu'd her all Authoritie, discharg'd her Subiects cleene, Blest all her Foes, curst all her Friends, left England Anies praye, And all for damned that did ayde or her in ought obaye. So arrogant, malitious, and mischieuous is that Bull, That Belzebub, the Prince of hell, appeares in it at full. Why sent they it by Felton to be bishoped at Paules? Why fe'ed they Fitz-Morrice, that in Ireland marshal'd Brawles? Saunders, that false seditious Priest that fortified theare, Why march't hee with their Ensignes? Why did they those charges beare? They shooke our Hiue, & forst vs forth to sting thē when they fee'd False Desmond, and the Rebell now, that as the rest shall speede: For God against all Traytors hath assured wrath decreede. These Sturres, and more in Ireland, and a many Treasons heere, Haue they abetted, to the King of Catholikes full deere. More than his paper Pellets too the Pope hath been at cost: His Alchumie, a dram to win, a pound of Gold hath lost. Was it for loue they did erect Receptacles for Ours? Or so by schooled Treacheries to adde vnto their Powrs?
Their Iesuists, our Iudasses, act so remote from Loue, As Faiths Relaps, Rebellion, and to Rege-cide they moue. Story, insatiate of the blood of Martyrs, and a many Blood thirstie Priests, bloodier than whom nor hath nor might be any, Tutting their Naturall Princes death, and Ruine of our State, Doe they, and then did nourish, when twixt vs seem'd no debate. That Spanish-Iewish Atheist, and Lop-heauie-headed Leach, (Vnworthy a Physitions name) fowle Lopas, we impeach, And Parret, that aspyring Knight, hence bryb'd for duties breach: Hence haue been poysned of our Peeres, whom Bribes could not ore∣reach. But what are these, and more than these, to it the Guizian Scot, Fatall to Seas of blood, and to her owne by earned lot, Did with our Foes against our State and Soueraignes life complot▪ Wherein King Phillip and the Pope especially weare hot. Here, but in Reuerence of her Sonne, an happie Prince in all, Religion, Peace, his Subiects Loue, of Emperie not small, Precelling his Progenitors, a Iusticer vpright, Yea ouer-long it weare we should Particulars resight, How Nature, Wit, and Virtue, decke his body, words, and minde, Or, if his Fames Deminatiue in any thing we finde, It is but part of Maiestie, through Puratizme declynde, Yea, if for him, whom (and deseru'd) we haue so firme a frend, It might, I say, be spoke, not thus of Marie should we end. Her Fauoures vnto Dauid Rize, offensine to the King His Highnes Father, but for him in Storie would we bring, With hers, and Bothuels double wrong to Eithers married Bead, How they wrought Paricidie, how the treacherous Couple wead, How, odious to their Owne, with hard escape of liues they flead, How, since our Prisnor, blood she sought, & much through her was head, Yea all that Buchanā doth wright should largely here be read. Yeat not her Infancie should be vpbraided with the blood Of many thousand slaughtred Soules, when periur'd Scots withstoode
Her Marriage with Prince Edward, which Eight Henrie swore thē to, When they esteem'd vs Hereticks (so Papists Oathes vn-doe.) But, for th'aforesaid Reuerence, touch we but Hers and Her, That, indirectly, heer did her abortiue Clame prefer. CHAP. LV. KIng Iames the fourth, that fayld his faith, and lost for it his life, Had Iames the Fift, by Margaret, our Daugh∣ter, and his Wife: Fift Iames, through Melancholy ends, for Ours gainst him good chance, And left this Marie, whom the Scots, an Infant, wead to France: Thus, from Seuenth Henries Daughter, she her Title did aduance, But howsoere by blood, or by our Lawes, she here could clame, T'is sure, too soone, and treacherously, she did preferre the same, And first and last vnto our Queene her selfe a Foe did frame. Our Marie was no sooner dead, but that her Gizards arme, And into Scotland Locusts-like in her Pretext did swarme: Whilst she, in France, did vndertake our royall Armes and Stile: Behoou'd therfore our Queene to stand vpon her Guard meane while. Lord VVilliam Graie, our English Mars, not Martiall more than wise, Did with an Armie hence pack thēce our dāgerous Neighbour Guise: Nor died few of Either part, whilst Marie thus would rise. Since when the League did oft her Right, with wrong too much, sur∣mise. Of Cōquests Spayne, of Cōuerts Rome, our Queene doth cheefly bar, Gainst her therefore they chiefely wrought Conspiracies and Warre:
And not for Maeries Title, or her any virtuous Giftes, Thinke that they her inleagued, but from her to plot their Driftes. Her selfe meane while, false-Paradi'zd, besybbing Aesops Croe, Vain-glorious through the Foxes gloze, did ende her song in woe. Sufficeth what is said before, to shew wherefore she flead: Here was she taken, whom if Scots had taken, had been dead: Put vnder Guarde: and so was meete should one that quarreld Ours, And not her selfe alone, but had Abbettors forren Powrs. Yeat Princely her Allowance, and more stately, as is sayde, Than had she been in Scotland: nor was Libertie denayde Of Hauking, Hunting, and Disports: that, had she been content, Her merriest and securest daies a Prisoner she spent. Scotland, though labourd of our Queene, would not receiue her and Such Treacher, though imprison'd here, prou'd she to either Land, That death awaited her at Home: and had we let her goe, She was the Leagues shot-Anchor might our Queene and State o're∣throe. Percie and Neuell, auncient Earles, This yet in Spanish paye, (Though bacely ill, too well for him his Countrie would betray) That other headed, both her Wreckes, wee touch but by the way. With that succeeding County, who concurring with his brother, Once pardon'd, still conspyred and (Lawes Progresse so to smother) Dispatcht himselfe: Paget and moe, like guiltie as those other, Whose faultes & falls had Rome & Spayne their Father, her their Mo∣ther, Omit we. Nofolks House, from first of Howards made a Prince, Though fauor'd of the Commons, haue defected euer since. As Absolom vs'd Curtesie but as Ambitious smoake, Last Thomas Duke of Norfolk so did his aspyring cloke, Whō promis'd faith once fre'ed, but that promise soone he broke. Him for Confedrate with those Earles, rebelling Proofes did touch: And with this Scottish Queene that he Intelligence had much: Her Marriage that he closely sought, and her Escape pretended, And in her Right, had fadg'd their wrong, her Highnes Raine had en∣ded:
Of Rising neer to London, and to take it Plots they layde: From Netherland the Spanish King had promised them ayde: From Scotland into Spaeyne should be the Infant-King betrayde: Ireland meane-while with aduerse▪ Armes should also be ore-layde: And hereof, to, and fro, the Pope, weare Letters still conuayde, All which, and more, directly prou'd, he, piied, lost his head: Nor ought his death, from being such, did stand his Sonne in steade. So hardly finde we Great-men in their Greatnes satisfide, Or for their Greatnes, not to be of other Men enuide. But what is All to those haue All, when but in Trifles crost, Disgrace, or Greese, or Grudge, vn-queare no lesse than all weare lost? Conclude we then, all Riches, Forme, Pompe, Worlds-Applause, but Winde: Conclude we then, to Monarchize is to cōmand the minde. Throckmorton yeat, more priuie and more practising than those, With her, Mendoza, Papists here, forren, and Land-leapt Foes, Did Mischiefes that imported more our practiz'd State disclose. But when of Parry, Babington, and their Attempts I thinke, With whome this Scottish Lady in their bloody hopes did linke, All foresaid Practises seeme then Epitomies to it Whereto these folliall Traytors did themselues and Senses fit. Our Centinels, almost too late, the Larum bell did ring, Yeat hardly then to arme her selfe our Generall they bring: The Queene of Scots frō Ours almost her Crowne & life had priz'de, Eare to preuent the same she would, by audience, be aduis'de. When gentle Durance might not salue that Daunger, did remaine, (Which God, and Nature tolerate) slea rather than be slaine: To which our Parliament aduis'd our Queene, but long in vaine▪ So far was she from foing her, that sought her life and Rayne.
CHAP. LVI. NOw thirtie sixe our greatest Peeres and States had power to heare, And to determine, and, as found, her to con∣demne or cleare, By Statute passed in our Queene her seuen and twentith yeare. These noble Tryers, iustly then examining the Cause, With reuerent Note of her, who heard and spoke to euery Clause, Did, after diuers Daies so spent, adiudge, by Verdict trew, Her guiltie of most trayterous Conspiracies, not fewe: And then from Fotheringhaye themselues to Parliament with-drew. Of this Infection, that our Peers and People had, and would Remediles impoyson, if not medeine it we should, By some Decision of the Lymme whence all the bayne did floe, Our publike Weales Phisitions much did argue to and froe. Did neuer English Parliament, fully conuented then, Consist of Noblier, Learneder, Wiser, and Worthier men: By these it was debated how this common Foe might liue, Without her death whom God to vs a common Blisse doth giue. Much was it labord, wished much some Course herein might holde, But to resolue of any none had reason to be bolde. Her still obdurate Malice to her Maiestie was cleere: If she preuaild, Religion was assurd an Altring heere: Our Nobles Crocodile, at home, and hence, our Foe-hop't Head: Then must our Queene, Religion, Realme, or She for them be dead.
Wherefore from Either House were sent the chiefest Men, to craue Her Highnes that the passed Doome might Execution haue: Whereof She askt to be aduisde, and (earnest her to saue) Dismissed them with louing words, and biddeth them expect Her Answer shortly: nor did She the sending it neglect: Though contrarie to it that all did, hopingly, affect: For she, perplexed in that case, did lastly them direct To studie Meanes how Both might liue, the Perill ouer-past: Which much amaz'd: yeat solemnly they handell it at last. Mercie to her, Malice in her might happily preuent, Was sayd, but not resolu'd, for oft she Mercie vnder-went, When rose the Earles, and other times, yeat neuer did repent, But of our Queene to be destroyd had made her Testament. A straiter Garde, Bonds, Hostages, were also nam'd in vaine: For, should she prize our Queene, who then durst her or thē detaine? Or what were these to recompence the Losse we should sustaine? For Loyaltie to take her Oth, was thought to purpose small: Such Othes she oft had falsifide, nor thought it Sinne at all To breake them to an Heretike (our Queene so Papists call.) To banish her, were to possesse our Foes of their desier, For vs to rid away the Smoake, and runne into the Fier, To set her free to make a Head for them against our Queene: In few, no safetie for vs, but in her Death was seene. So wholly by the Parlament concluded was, and so Reported to her Maiestie, still pitying her Foe. In more sententious, learned, and delibrate sort, than I Can set it downe, past all toucht heer: So did her Maiestie In answering earst, and now to them her Aunswer Aunswer-lesse, Sweet Adumbrations of her Zeale, Mercie, and Wit expresse. But with her Oracle that bod them do, and doe it not, Play'd they as Alexander did with King Gordians Knot.
OF Spays huge Nauy, toucht before, great Rumor now was spread, And that th'Inuaders meant to make this Scottish Queene a head: For which continued doubt of her in English hearts was shead. Not in the Vulgats only, but some Nobles of this Land, Who had (not knowing it our Queene) then got into their hand The Writ of Execution, that her Heading did purport: The which was executed soone, and in a solemne sort. This nature-frended Ladie, had she bin as wise as witrie, Who by the Massacres in France had learnt to leaue off Pittie, Made there too apt for bloody Acts, the Pope for it too blame, To take her death, too much deseru'd, her selfe did meekly frame. She bids commend her to her Sonne, and will him to eschew All Practises and Policies, for thence her Sorrowes grew: True Romish, Scottish, and true French, tell all my Friends I die. When Meluin (vnto whom she spake) did, weeping, thus replie, The wofulst Message, Madame, this that euer me befell, When of my Queene and Mistresse Death I shal the Tidings tel, She, kissing him, sayes pray for me, and bids him so farewell. Then of a debt was due from her she did the payment craue, And that her Seruants might enioy those Legacies she gaue, And to attend her at her death some of her Owne to haue. All which the Earles commissoned did yeeld vnto: and so She to the black-clad Scaffold, there to take her death, did go. Now Mary Stewards Troubles shall haue ending, once or twise She sayd, and not to mone for her did giue to Hers aduise: And whilst the Writ in reading was no more regarded it, Than if it had secured, or concerned her no whit. Beades at her Girdle hung, at end of them a Medall, and An Agnus-Dei bout her necke, a crost-Christ in her hand. They prayed her to set a-part those popish Toyes, and pray In saith to Christ, in only whom her whole Saluation lay: And, offring then to pray with her, that Offer she withstood,
Alleaging that our Prayers can doe Catholiques no good. So doth the Popes false Calendar of Saints of Sense bereaue Our Traytors, who dye Papists that therein it them receaue. Was neuer yet Religion heard so pestilent as this: Their murdring vs for Lawfull, of their Creed a portion is. So had they schooled her, and that her bloodie Mischiefs past Were meritorious, which the Pope would honor so at last. That, euen then, the Gospels Light illuminate her heart Was prayd of Ours, whilst she with hers prayd, as pleasde her, a-part. Then to her wofull Seruants did she passe a kind a-dew: And kissing oft her Crucifix, vnto the Block her drew, And, fearles, as if glad to dye, did dye to Papisme trew. Which, and her other Errors (who in all did euer erre) Vnto the Iudge of Mercie and of Iustice we referre. If euer such Conspirator, of it impenitent, If euer Soule, Pope-schooled so, that Sea to Heauen sent, If euer one, ill-liu'd, did dye, a Papist, God-wards bent, Then happie she. But so, or not, it happie is for vs, That of so dangerous a Foe we are deliuer'd thus. The brauely mannag'd Iorney of the Countie Sussex, who Did merit praise beyond my Penne, Sir VVilliam Druries too Made into Scotland, added to Lord Grets sayd-Prowesse theare, Did lesser rid our Queene and Realme, their Realme & King of feare, Than Maries end: Who of her selfe all Treasons did prefer, Gainst either State: our forraine Foes deriu'd Pretexts from her. But thus Elizabeth hath salu'd, Ours, and Scotch Troubles. Now Ensues we shew her Aids to Frāce, who wrought their Broiles, & how.
CHAP. LVII. IT by a Polititian a Germaine (to whose lore, Haue Machiuilian French-Euents since sorted e∣uer-more) Before Queene-Mother, Charles the King, and others priuate, was Aduisde a Monarch absolute in France to bring to pas. Aristocratick Gouernment, nor Democratick pleasde But where to one Mans Emperie is Monarchia seasde. He told his Ttauels, and in States his Obseruations: how, Besides the only Turke, he none a Monarch did allow: Who suffreth none by Might, by Wealth, or Blood, to ouer-top: Himselfe giues all Preferments, and whom listeth him doth lop. His Bands of Ianizaries, who are form'd and nourisht still From Childhood his owne Creatures, hold all at his owne will. He out of these his Captaines, and his Bassies doth elect: They, to deserue their Founders trust, his only Weale affect: The rather, for their Dignities, and all that All possesse Determine at his will, behooues therefore not to transgresse. Saue his Religion, none is vsde, vnlesse in Conquests late, And that of Policie, thereby to adde vnto his State: Nor euen there permits he of Religion to debate. Nor walled Townes, nor Forttesses, his Empier doth digest: Except vpon the Froires, for securing of the rest. His Subiects thus, Theirs, and the whole, at his Deuotion, needs No Imposts, Taxes, or the like, whence Tumult often breeds.
Discourst of his Experience thus, he then descends to it, Whereby of Monarchia might himselfe the French King fit. Whereas (quoth he) French Policie consists of Three Estates, The Princes, Nobles, Commons, and each one of th'other wates For hearts and helpes, and oft the King is bridled of those Three, Himselfe therefore, such Lets remou'd, sole Monarch thus might bee. Of ancient Peeres, of valiant Men, great Lords, and Wisemen all, By forced Warre, or fraudfull peace, to temporize the fall: Whereto Religions quarrell then presented meane not small. Meane while, vntill of them by turnes weare Riddance, did behoue To worke them Mal-contents, the King to labor vulgar Loue. Immediatly, euen from himselfe, No whit at their Request, To passe Preferments, not to them, but els as likes him best: And but of Peeces ruous the Great-Ones to possesse: And when his Creatures shall grow to more, those Great to lesse, To quarrell then those Nobles, when in them great hearts would lurk That for the Souldier, or the sword of Iustice, should make work. So to prouide that of the States be no Conuention nam'd: Religion not disputed of: Strong Townes, which oft haue tam'd The French Kings, be dismantled: And when things as thus be fram'd, His Maiestie (quoth he) shall hit the Marke whereat is aim'd. WHen this, & worse than thus, this worse than Machiuel had said, With that Conuenticles Applause, so working was not staid: For hence, if Accidents we shall obserue, may be collected The ciuill Warres and Butcheries in France to haue effected. Religion gaue the colour, whear though infinite were slaine, The Church reform'd did not resist, yeat still by losse did gaine: For blood of Martyrs well is sayd to be the Churches Seede, Where Massacres haue plashed there is spread a triple Breede: In Sense it seem'd a sillie Spring, should Europe ouer-floe, Whence Luther his occasion tooke against the Gospels Foe: As Scotlands foresaid Guizian Broyles, euen France her Tumults so,
From other then Religions cause did at beginning groe: So ph sold, and Christ betrayd, was meeter than was ment Of Ben-Iamests, or by the false Iscarots foule Intent: But howsoeuer ill haps well, Woe stayes whence ill is sent. French second Henries Fauorites, the Constable, and Guize, The one of them ambitiously the others Hight enuies: Each growing crosse, and crossing, it to Factions grew at length, Poore Hugetz vndoubted then, nor dreamed they of strength: Alone in Henries, Francis, and ninth Charles their Raignes, of them French Papists, as our Maries, did to Martyrdome condemne. But by such Law as Wolues doe Lambes, those Innocents for most Were slaughtered, whole Townes sometimes with these in thē they rost: And like now threatned Guize against the Saints in euery Cost. The Guizians (so that Faction shall in this Report be sayd) Through Nonage of the Pope-taught King, grew Mighty & obayd: Queene-Mother (Mischief-Mistres) in their Pageant featly playd. Meane while the Royals and the Peeres they Practise to betray: Some in the bloodie Massacre at Paris made away. But what offend I Christian Eares with horror of that deede? From Sarazens, nor Sauages, did euer like proceede. Let that black Marrage-Feast, when were so many Thousands slaine O Saints, at peace with God and men, be neuer nam'd againe: Let be a Law in euery Land, to punish such as speake That Christiās should, like Hel-hoūds so, with God & Nature breake: Farre be it that Posterities should heare, that Charles the King For such oule Murthers, bon-fiers bod, and caused Bels to ring. Yeat tell the Popes Procession, and his Iubilee for this: For Popes be impudent, and bads their blessings neuer mis, To haue them Fathers of those Acts, no Newes at all it is. But more than twise sixe yeares ere this the ciuill Warres begun, When on the Lambes of Vassie did the Guizian Butchers run: when the Edict had giuen Peace vnto the Church reform'd, And odious to the Papists seem'd that Peace, who therefore storm'd:
And then the Duke of Guize, who earst had figur'd for the Crowne, Hence calculating hopes, did set his bad Designements downe: Alonly quarrelling, till then, the Princes of the blood, Who, partly quail'd, were yet vnkild, and to their tackling stood. So with the Papists band's the Duke himselfe, not for Deuotion, But aduantagious seem'd that Meane for blood-Drifts & Promotion This Faction thus had Heart and Head, the Other yet vnborne, Till to the Prince of Condie flockt the Hugenotz, forlorne, And tolde the sauage Butcheries at Vassie newly made, By ruthles and seditious Guize, on Thousands, whilst they prayde. Like skathed Sheepe, escaped from blood-sucking Dogs, they quake, Imploring his Protection: which he then did vndertake. Thus, through Necessitie, this Part had also Heart and Head: Euen after hundreds thousands such good Christians so were dead. This knowne, to him from euery Part the Persecuted flie, So was the Prince of vertuous Troopes possessed by and by. CHAP. LVIII. NOt Spayne this while, that held for France great Signories, did sleepe, But through the Fingers into It, with lusting Eyes, did peepe: At least, by nourishing those Broyles, all got She hopes to keepe. For It, whose Scituation so Spayns scattred Realmes disioynes, Her Teeth had watred long, and now, to weaken France her Loynes, Gainst France she France doth strēgthē with the Soother of her gold: And for that Purchace to the Diuell, is fear'd, her Soule is sold.
Directions also came from Rome, that setteth all on fier: That, by what Right or wrong so ere, the Guize should still aspier: To send the royall Bloods to Heauen or Hell, it skils not how: Were Pardons sent for Murthers: Buls to clear Alleageance vow: That, on Damnation, none perswade, much lesse of Peace allow. And not alone gainst France this League was halowed, but gainst all That worke the Gospell to erect, whereby the Pope might fall: Was more than time, troe we, to goe, should not the Church vs call. But call did they, and come did we, and to their labors fall, When weare their Townes demolished, with Slaughters thear not small. This busie Head of that bad League (for yet the monstrous Beath Of Sextus Quintus and the Diuell, the grand League, had not breath) This Guize bereft vs Calice, and in France our Peeces all: Then fell in hand with Scotland, thence with vs in hand to fall: This, in his Neece the Scottish Queene her Claime, did all he might To dispossesse Elizabeth our Queene of regall right: This on the infant-Person of his naturall King had seazde: And prosecuted now in France what Violence him pleasde: The Popes sworne Butcher, and proud Spayns fore-Runner, to prepare Her waies for France & England, which their Owners cannot spare: This with the blood of Innocents made Channels ouer-floe: Against this Cham, and his Beau-Peeres, inuited English goe. Els, saue that God can all, was feard Religion should haue quaild, And Spanyards, nestling ouer neere, had easlier vs assaild: For on the Theator of France, the Tragedie was ment Of England too: Wherefore our Queene her Interruptors sent. How Ambrose, Earle of VVarwick, did in Frāce high Feates not few: How bloodie Claudie, Duke of Guize, a common Souldier slew: How Francis, sonne of that Guize, did ciuill Broyles renew: The persecuting Francis, Charles, and Henries, hence a-dew: Which Kings, as said, to work themselues French Monarchs Atheists playd, Or doting ouermuch on Rome, their Realme & selues betrayd: The skarlet Borbone, whom the Guize a painted French King made:
Salcedo fayling Monsiurs Death, which did the League conspier: The Prince of Orenge, murthred through Farnesian Parmas hier: Renoumed Condie poysned, in his time the Leaguers feare: How Pope-sent Saunders gainst our Queene in Ireland Armes did beare: (For Leaguers then in Pollicie preuented Lettes each-wheare, By Armies, or Armadas, or their scattred Iesuists, who Haue had small cause to brag that they with England had to doe:) The often sworne and for-sworne Peace, that hapned in the while Queene-Mother, Phillip, Pope and Guise, the French Kings did begile: Queene-Mother for Ambition of imployment, King of Spayne, To make his Vsurpations sure, yea France it selfe to gaine, The Pope to keepe his pompe in plight, Guise for the regall Ring: How all, though drifting dffringly, at length to ende did bring The House Valoys, of Capets Stocke, which Stocke had quite decaide, But that it pleaseth God the Crowne in Brbons House is staide: How till the Barricados Feast, when Guise vn-vizard was, Vnder Religions Cloake the Routes in wasted France did pas, And after then, both Hugenote, and Papist too, if frend Vnto Valoys, or Burbon, sound like Enmitie, or end: Of Sauoy, (hoping France) his Aydes, and ll successe in all: How Guise, and Lorraine, in the Pit for Henre dig'd did fall: How Frier Iames, Pope-blest, and brib'd of Maye, did Henrie kill: How vnto Mayne, pursewing Broyles, it wrought not to his will: The Massacres, and Stratagems, did in these Tumults chance: How God in all his Warres did blesse Nauar, now King of France: And how, next God, that Frāce is French our Queene is Author cheef, All These, thus blanch't, we leaue, and shall of Belgick be as breefe. But be it first remembred how, euen for the Parents sinne, God plagueth in Posteritie: as came to passe, I winne, In second Henries, of the Church reform'd a bloudie Foe, (Though otherwise a worthie Prince, nor tache we him but so) And Katherine de Meds, whose Athisme wrought much woe. These had sowre Sonnes, not one of which did die a naturall death,
All ,  Males none extant on the Earth▪ No maruell, euen to Dauids Seede, for Dauid▪ sinne, hap't such: And though the holy Writ containes that Storie, yeat to tuch This Purpose, let vs heare it here: Example vrgeth much. CHAP. LIX. OF holy Dauid, and his House, the Man approu'd to be By Gods owne Mouth, to Gods owne heart, the y Troubles see. His Soule was euer godly firme, though fraile in flesh as Man, For who of Adams Seede from sinne acquite them could or can.) Our walls of flesh, that close our Soules, God knew too weak, & gaue A further Guard, euen euery Man an Angell Guide to haue: And Men to vs be Angels, whilst they worke our Soules to saue. For, eare his Fall, Man was not left vnto himselfe so free, But that he had a Law, and Those that should his Temptors be, And tempted, then the Spirit, that for God himselfe was made, Was dared by the Flesh, that to the Spirit earst obayde: The Soule by either laboured to thriue, or be betraide. To erre is proper then to Men, but brutish to persist: With Praise, and Praier, still to God, as Dauid thriu'd, or mist, He plied: more in louing God, than liuing godly blist. Vgratefull Saule distressing him, or what eare then befell, Or afterwards, nor other then Domestick Greefes we tell. The troublous Sequels Nathan tould of Dauids House, when as, To wanton it with Bethsabe, Vrias murthred was,
Effecting now, is onely it whereto our Pen shall pas. Thamar, Ammon, Absolom, Adoniah, also wrought Vnto their Father woe enough: let these on Stage be brought. Now to the Tribes was Dauid as the Zodiack to the Signes, Euen Signifer to euery Prince that circled his Confines. A Monarche great, in Acts and Fame more great, but great'st of all, In that he was belou'd of God, nor ceast on him to call, Who raid him, often falling, for his Crosses weare not small. Loue- M,  King of Geshurs Daughter, baire To Dauid  Abm, and Thamar peereles faire. No arer ye than viuous, though disastrously she speade: Su is admyred Bewtie that hath Worlds of Mischiefes breade. Amon, whom Ahinoam bore to Dauid, was the cause Of hers and his owne griefe, in that he gaue his Eyes no lawes. For Loue is but a Terme, like as is Eccho but a Voyce, That This doth babble, That doth breed, or not, is ours the choyce. And Virtue curbs▪ Affection, and for Conscience flyeth sinne: To leaue for imperfection, feare, or shame, no praise doth winne. But not so happy he as feare, or shame, or ought, might stay His rankled thoughts, but sicke, luste sicke, for Thamar Ammon lay: And subtell Ionadabs Aduise did her to him betray. For neuer was Pretence so fowle but some would flatter it: No any thing so pestilent as mis-applied Wit. Seeme feeble sicke, and when the King thy Father visits thee, Then faine an Appetite to Meate by Thamar drest (quoth he:) Aske that she dresse it in thy sight, and of her hand to take it, When priuate so, thy Market bee as thou doest mar or make it, Well pleasde this Counsell: Ammon askes, and Dauid yeelds anon: Nor readier Dauid to bid goe, than Thamar to be gone: Like Philmela, attering on she might go With Tereus, that prepos'd her shame, was Thamar forward so: When either Virgin was surprisde, wheare least they look't a Foe. So gratious, portly, resh, and faire, and (which no lesse attract)
So modest, wittie, affable, had Nature her compact, That such as, in his Canticles, her Brother hath purtrayde His Loues Idea, litrally might Thamar such be saide. Goodly thus, and gladly then, and not suspecting harme, She, entring wheare he lodged, did afresh the Leacher warme. His leasing Sicknes then to acte by Arte was more thau neede, For, seeing her, imagine all his Senses sick in deede. More could she nor, more should she not, than she in kindnes did: All adding Fewell to the Fier, which yet from her lay hid. Now, saue of him and her, the Roome was cleard by his deuise, When he did aske to eate, which she did bring him in a trise: Full glad (good Soule) her Cookerie might please him any whit, When not her Cookrie, but her selfe, his appetite did fit. Concerning which he breakes with her, indeuoring her consent: Whereto, amaz'de, she counter-works, nor would for ought relent. How pretious her Virginitie, what sinne it to defile, How for their Fathers Luste much woe was prophesied ere-while, How Incest was much more a sinne, she wished him to way, How permanent the Shame to both: Enough did Thamar say, To haue preseru'd Virginitie, if lust had brook't a Nay. But pleading teares and words lackt waite, by force he rauisht her, And hauing forst, he forced not to hide how he did erre: Nor more he loued her ere while, but hates her now as much: Of Lust and vnchast Coiture still is the Sequell such. Her now vn-virgin'd Eyes did shame to view the common Light: She therefore would haue stayde, at least not come in cōmon Sight, Supposing, by her Blusshings, all would ayme her altred Plight. But out his Doores by violence he shutteth her, wherefore Aloude she cride, with bitter teares, her faire attier she tore, And did all Signes of sorrow, whilst the cause admired was. But when her Brther Absolom found how had come to pas, He comforts her in all he might, and to his house conuaies His wofull Sister, wheare thenceforth, as desolate, she states:
Like Prognes sister pensiue, but her moodes weare milder still, This wanting will, not speech to rayle, That wanting speech not will. Contrary-wise thought Absolom of nothing but Reuenge, And with his choler thinke ye him these thoughts among to menge: Did Cadmus, for his Sister rapt'e, so many Countries rome? And shall I sleepe my Sisters Rape, that may be quit at home? For Rape of one, scarce honest, was at Troy such tenne-years Fight? And shall one easie bloe seeme much, sweet Thamers wrong to right? Simean and Leui, worthy Sonnes of Israel our grand Sier, Yee in reuenging Dinas Rape haue set mine heart on fier, Euen mine, that for a greater wrong should greater things acquier. Poore Sychem, thou didst loue in deede, and Marriage Rites affect: Lewde Ammon, thou did'st lust in deede, and then thy Rape reiect: Poore Sichem, she a Stranger was whom thou so much didst wowe: Lewde Ammon, she thy Sister was with whome thou hadst to doe: Poore Sichem, thou to prize thy loue, didst leaue thy Godes for hers: Lewde Ammon, thou to please thy luste, no God at all prefers: But howsoeare in these, in this no diffrence shall remaine: Poore Sichem he was slaughtred: lewd Ammon shall be slaine. Nor more Maachas goodly Sonne in stomaking did threate, Then did this Newes his Father now offensiuely disqueat▪ At poynt almost to act as much as Absolom did plot, Euen Ammons death, had not he been his Isiue first-begot. For which he earst had hild him Deare, and present Nature wrought, And that himselfe had amorous Slyps, is likely too, hee thought: But howsoeare, in woe enough, he ouerpafseth it Which Absolom, in wroth enough, nor could, nor would, forgi: Two yeares in silence, neartheles, he labord of that fit. To his Sheep-shearing Dauid and his Brethren he inuites, (Such as our Wakes, conuenting Kinnes to Feastings and Delightes) Now listen what Catastropha this Stratagem behightes. The King excus'd his comming, whome his Sonne importunes so, As Ammon, and his other Sonnes, had leaue, and will, to goe.
Vnwilling though (by what Presage I wot not) Dauid seem'd Of Ammens going: but what Fate ordain'd hath none redeem'd: Go did he, wheare full merily he frollicked that tyde, When, by his Ostes Attendants there, of sudden Wounds he dyde: (Which after Bar quet did their Lord for onely him prouide.) More skar'd than hurt the other Sonnes of Dauid flead with speede, Yeat eare their home-returne the King had notice of the deede, And feared much their safetie, till them he saw, and then Was such confused sorrow, more was neuer seene among'st Men. To Geshur Absolom escapes, three yeares an Exile thear, Till Dauids kinde relenting heart to Ioah did appeare: By meanes of whome, recalled home, he lastly purchast Grace, Yea well-appay'd was Dauid, if weare Absolom in place. Lou'd neuer Father more a Sonne than him his Father lon'd, Prou'd neuer Sonne vngratefull more than he vngratfull prou'd: For hauing stolne the Peoples hearts, by affable Pretexts, He faines his vowes at Hebren, but the Diadem affects: And, by collected Forces theare, distressed Dauid more Than Sle, the Cananites, or all, hap't after, or before: Enforcing him to flie the Land. But dwell we not of this: God neuer fauor'd such Attempts, or euer sayled His. When Dauid seem'd, in common Sence, already on the hip, Was Absolom himselfe ore-throne, whom God made ouer-slip, What, wisely, false Achitophel had counseld him to doe, Whose Counsell not receau'd, he hong himselfe, and worthie too, Ambitious Absolom, now foyl'd, as on his Mule he flead, Was carried vnderneath an Oke, wheare, caught-vp by the head, (Euē by those bewtious Locks, of which, & him, such praise is read) He sighte (and cause he had) and said (or say he might) that All Which so vniustly seeke to clime, most iustly so doe fall. But whatsoeare he thought or spake, this holds autenticall: We thinke no greater blisse than such to be as be we would, When blessed none, but such as be the same that be they should
Had one Man all that all Men haue, he nothing had, vulesse He also had a Soule that All as nothing did possesse. Natures Mynion, Eyes Admier, and now in-ayred Earth, (For, hanging, Ioabs ruthles speare had vented vitall breath, Although the King his counter-maunde should haue contraried so) Effected had his Fathers heart no Substance else but woe: So kinde and ouer-kinde was he in mouing such a Foe. But thus of this, and thus to him this following Crosse did groe. CHAP. LX. TO epilogue our Tragedie, now Adoniah acts, With whome, olde Dauid to depose, euen oabs-selfe compacts: Yeadiuers Captaines did reuolt, and with the Sonne rebell, Which not a little greeu'd the King, that lou'd the young-man well, Who, next his brother, did for forme, and soly now excell. Remayn'd but Salomon and he, and he the elder Sonne, Too forward yeat to practise Rule eare Dauids Raigne was donne: But what God meaneth is, Amen: The Scepter was behight To Salomon, and Nathan mou'd the King to do him right: Who, aged, caus'd his Diadem to roalize the head Of Salomon, annoynted now: which heard, the Rebel, flead. So haue we seene, not yeares farre-past, long-Plottings ouerthrone, Euen in a trise, to day a Queene, to morrow lesse than none: Such was her Fate, but not her Fault, that stoode for Maries Throne▪ Nor cite I this A Noueltie, like Pul-backs many an one.
Repentant▪ Adni now vnto the Altar flies, thereof: which one, that it espies, vnto Salomon, that sent to fetch him Thence: Which wuld not be, till swore the King to pardon his offence: Whom  we now so pardoned, or rather in suspence. or though a Kings Competitor in one same Land may liue, eat take he heed, the sleightest cause a cause of death doth giue: Which hapned him, eare hapned this, inserted by the way. Dauid decea'ste, in Salomon was sole and sou'raigne Sway, When , to prolong his life, did at the Altar stay. Euen he that in so many Brunts for Dauid did preuaile, That, saue for Adoniah now, Allegiance neare did faile, That, saue for sheaded blood of twaine, could none impeach of wrong, Euen this grand▪ Captaine of the Hosts, a luckie Knight so long, Hand-fasting now the Altar, clames that Priuiledge, in vaine: For thence he would not, and the King commaunds he thare be slaine. Which Warrant did Banaiah serue: And so this Worthie died, For Abner and Amasas blood, like-Worthies and as-tried. With Adoniah now remaines we act and ende our Sceanes, To whō, might seeme, small good was meant, what il soere he meanes: Wheare crowned Might, & crossed Right so neere together dwel, Behooues that Forrest-flying Feare, whereof the Fox did tell: Our factious Lancaster and Yorke thereof could witnes well. Abisag, Dauids Hebe, that in comfort of his Age, Attended him at Bed and Boarde, when naturall heate did swage, Howbeit still a Virgin, and the goodliest Wench aliue, Enamours Adoniah: at the least with her to Wiue He drifteth, not detayned but for Salomons consent: Of which he moued Bethsabe, for which she Sutor went To Salomon, that thearewithall was onely not content, But also tooke occasion hence, of more, perhaps, than meant. naah, by the Kings Commaund, did Adontah slea: For Cryme perhaps, perhaps because a Crowne might come in Plea.
For Salmon, diuinely wise, could Subtellizings sound: That much the Mad knew Dauids mind, that Many she had bound, Whilst gratious earst, with Benefits: her Kinred strong he found: That oa and Abiatar weare on his Brothers side: That his aspiring sleepes, nor must be slept, the King espide: Or else-what? Adoniah was dispatched out of hand: So sped his Sue, so was confirm'd to Salomon the Land: If Others otherwise, not I as others vnderstand. Nor better Meede for Merits could these Dauidists alleadge: Yeat did their Father eate the Grapes that set their Teeth on edge. Then charitable, godly-wise, and continent, weare fit Should Parents be: So prosper they, Theirs, and whom Theirs begi▪ Of Scotland, quieted by our Queene, and France, by her kept French, Is toucht: Of Belgike, long selfe-vaind, rests how the blood doth stēch. CHAP. LXI. THe Inquisition threatned, wrought in ether∣landers feare, And Signes of altring Regment in their ancient State appeare. As ful-fead Children with their Foode, by Peace this People play, Till, in world-matchles Wealth, did them Secu∣ritie betray. They hearing what King Philip meant against their State, did minde What in the Fables Morall of the Stock and Storke we finde: For in the Ladie Regent, and her Brother Philips Corse, Their hearts presāg'd like diffence  twixt Rigor and Remorse. Arm'd was the Duke of Al, who by warres, by wiles, by
Shuld cōquer, circūuent, cōsume, those Lands, their Lords, the Good. These to haue his sufficed not the Spanish King, vnlesse He Monarchize their Land, their Lawes, and Liberties depresse. The other Part their Consciences and Priuiledges pleades, Nor other cause than only thus to Armor Either leades: For There, else-Where, and euer Spayne, when Spayne wold Scepters lurch, Concludes for Spayne, though euer Spayne begins for holy-Church. No Armie was as yet ariu'd, when as the Belgies send To Philip their Submission, and their Loyaltie defend. If ought were done contrarie to his Edicts (as indeede Weare some too busie Protestants did order-les proceede) They did transpose that Fault vpon those Innouators rude, Protesting all that Subiects should: and humbly too they sude, (Vouching his Father, Vncle, Kings, and Emperors of old, Who let their Liege-men, diffring from their own, Religion hold) To suffer Consciences in them to God-wards vncontrold. For which, and for their Charters, did they offer Masses large, And euermore to vndergo all Truage, Taxe, and Charge. But Theirs to alter quite in all was it that Philip ment: To plague therfore those seauenteene Shires was war-flesht Alua sent. This, like a pleasing poysning Aspe, to act as he did arme, At first Ariuall, Pardons did for passed Crimes proclaime. That tractable kind People so he to his bent did frame: Who wear not then by hostile Meanes men easily to tame. He thus of them possest, did then, by she Degrees, surprise Their Townes, puts Garisons in them, built Cittadels likewise, Inducts the Inquisition, and strange Imposts did deuise, Cals pardon'd Crimes in question, faines the Guiltles to offend, And thus an Aspe, and poysnous more, prou'd Alua in the end. For why? ambitious men seeke, get, possesse, and practise State, With restles minds, by fawning Meanes, enuide, in haughtie rate. This priuiledged Prouince, and this Paradized Earth, Thus stripped of her golden Fleece, and faintly drawing breath,
Was phisickt of Elizabeth, who with her English Balme, Then much the poysnous biting of that Spanish Aspe did calme: Euen Pittie preaching thus to her, that Nature is reuerst, When as her selfe is not amongst her owne Consorts disperst. She to that Countries Father, to that honorable Knight, The Prince of Orange (armed then in Christ his cause to fight, And for his Countries Weale) permits first Voluntarie Aides▪ And lastly, when that neighbour Fier too neerly her inuaides, And their extreame Oppression did her Charitie inuite, (By Ambassies Spayne often mou'd to doe the Belgies right, Howbeit touching Peace in vaine) she franklier friends their Cause, Who were inforced to defend their Faith, their Liues, and Lawes, Against their Soules and Bodies foes, and (which might all perceaue) Our cause was handled then in theirs, then theirs were ours to leaue, And (which had often ayded vs in many a Field and Fleete) In ancient Loue with Burgundie to breake, was thought vnmeee. How thence tyrannous Alu was reuoked, all too late, When pitiously declined was their flourishing Estate: Ere which Oppression, where the King had countles Profits thence, Now Ownes he nothing there, not held with infinit Expence. The Slaughters, Sackings, Mutines, the Kings Vice-Gerents sence, How Horne, & Egmōd, Coūties braue, through Aluas Athisme spead, How Orange, through our Soueraigns Aids preuaild, how lastly dead, How Anioy also, through her Meanes, became that Peoples head, How now her Highnes only-selfe, next God, doth them secure, Her valiant Warriors there, whose Laudes might special Pens allure, And here mean-while should ours, saue that I cannot but deuine, Their Chiualrie to be reseru'd for higher Muse than mine, To which though some we leaue, yeat (by their leaues) of some is sayd Themselues they haue misgouern'd, and their Companies berayd, Some More regard of Tents, and Trash, in their Retreats haue made, Then of our craised men, may such Conductors low be laide, And some too ruthles, rioteus, and of their Charge rmisse,
Haue starued vp in number moe than Foe-slaine number is: Thus some of some report, perhaps not true in all as told: But somewhat somewhere faulteth, for no fier, no smoake be bold. To be officious getteth Friends, plaine Dealing hated is: Yeat better plainly to reproue, than fainedly to kisse: We cannot also loue our Friends, and flatter their A-misse: How these and thus-like passed Thear we ouer-passe it heere. Note in our Queene, Religion wrong'd, it selfe did euer cheere: And whear the Spanish Nimrod hunts in Monarchie to hold All Christendom, through God, that Drist she chiefly hath controld. Nor did, nor doth, nor shall it need, that thus to her be told: Who would to God, but works no good, who seeketh fame by ease, Comes short of both, no lesse than Mappes to very Lands and Seas. Not only thus, but in this while, her Fleetes haue oftentimes Set prosprously her Men on Shore, euen in the farthest Climes: Whēce haue they brought, by fayr Cōmerce, great riches to our Land, Or glorious Spoyles from such as did their peace or Prowse withstād, Of which shall be digested here the Progresse, in some parte, Though stately be the Subiect, and too slender be our Arte.
THE ELEVENTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. LXII. INexplicable Nature, by the God of Nature wrought, Makes things seeme Miracles to some, by some not Wonders thought: And euery Climates People, both as they are Men, and liue, Do differ: nothing, if obseru'd, She, not admir'd, doth giue. The VVorkman rather than the VVork extoll we though in her, Not curiously, and all things to his Prouidence refer. VVho reades Sir Iohn de Mandeuil his Trauels, and his Sights, That wonders not? and wonder may, if all be true he wrights. Yeat rather it beleeue (for most, now, modernly approu'd) Than this our Storie, whence suppose he was to Trauell mou'd: Not contradicting though such Pens that write, perhaps more trew, That Pennance him to Pilgrimage hence, of Deuotion, drew. Of noble Parentage and rich was Mandeuil exact, To whom nor Feature, Actiuenes, not Peoples fauour lackt. A Ladie of the royall blood, Third Edwards Cozen say her,
On whom, for rarest Raritie, might Arte-spent Nature stay her, Inamours him: who held it sinne, if ought he should omit, Might please and prize his Ladie, coucht in Courage, Coste, or Wi. But quite it quail'd his hopes to thinke he strain'd to reach a Starre: Oft Reason therefore did with Loue, Loue did with Reason warre. She is too high: and what of that? it hath, thinks he, bin seene, As High haue stoopt as Low: For Loue, right-labourd, wins a Queene. And can I hope that Beautie, which is Adamant to all? Yea, Beautie, Natures Iuy-bush, each Passenger doth call. But should she loue (Foole that I am to hope, that should despaire) Such Births as she not else must loue, but as they licen'st are. Yeat were it Mandeuil she lou'd, mislike it then that list, Our vertuous Loue, else-where, as here, should render vs as blist. O, would she loue, it should suffise: such, not of vulgar Moulds, Whō once she blesseth with her Loue, for him she Sooth-fast holds: The only vertue of which Loue, all other Lacks controules. Such were his Ebbes, & Floods, and down although in Loue he sits, Yeat, fearing Death and her disdaine, his Heart deuour'd his Fits: ▪  not meanly passionate, he fared not as those, Whose melancholy Fooleries be Pylots to their Woes. Alreadie was he gratious both with her and all the Court, And, more to be, did exercise Armes, and each actiue Sport, Nor was he Stoicall in ought, but affable in all, And apprehends, euen fleelingly, her Humours as they fall. If sad were she, then sad was he: if merrie, merrie too: His Senses liable to all, she did, or did not doe If her he heard to speake, he sayd Cassandr spake lesse trew, If her he saw, hers praisde he more than Cythereas hew, If odorifrous Sents he smelt, he fathers them on her, If but her hand he toucht, that Touch did highly him prefer, But Dified swore he him her bed-game Sweets might taste, And swore his Thoughts: for where we loue, euē there our Soules be plaste. His Vertues and Officiousnes to her wards, so had wrought,
That vnto little lesse than loue she, by Degrees, was brought. Then errant Knights, & euery Knight, yea Kings, would ost defend The Beauties of such Damsels as it lik't them to commend: And Prizes were preposde for such, whose Champions bore thē best At Tilts and Turnies, and his Dame was Soueraigne ore the rest. Such Iusts, in England to beheld, were now proclaim'd, and The Chiualrie of Christendome conuented in our Land. Three beautious forren Ladies, with Sir ohn his Ladie stood Competitors, to win the Prize, maintain'd with Champions good. To shew the foure-fold March of Knights, whose Prowse shuld plead ano, Vnder distinguisht Flags her Forme their Fancies waited on, Their rare Accomplements, and each Deuise to see or reede, To shew the richnes of the Prize, behight the Victors Meede, The Damsels richer hew for whom such Triumphs were decreede, The Cost, and great Concurse was there, were ouer-long to say: In few, was nothing wanting that might honor such a day: Now sound they to the Iusts, and now vn-horst was many a Knight: For Foyles were Foyles: most brauely al their Sides and selues acquite: And almost grew the day to end, before it could be seene Who bore him best, whē, moūted well, both Man & Horse in greene, A Knight appear'd: his Banner had the Picture, and in gold King Edwards Cozen Elenor was legibly inrould. Against him ranne right hardie Knights, that thundred on his Beuer: But he vnhorst the most of them, himselfe vn-horsed neuer: At least he lost his Stirrops, that incounters him, wherefore Of Knighthood he, and Elenor the Prize of Beautie bore, The Iewels set for Victorie, and aduerse Banners three, Were yeelded him: whilst Elenor did long her Knight to see. But as they marched to depart, with Beuer shut, he made To her a Conge: closely then he Thence himselfe conuaide. Much wonder all, who, and of whence the hardie greene-Knight was: But secretly, vnknowne of all, he to his Home did pas. A Womans Loue is Riuer-like, which, stopt, will ouer-flow,
But when the Currant finds no let, it often falls too lowe: Faire Elenor wish't nothing more than that she might him know: Meane while the Fier of Loue in her, from sparkes to flame did grow. But Mandeuil was more discreet, than that for Mens applause, He would be known: as knowing that from Praise takes Enuie cause. To moue the King threats death, in vaine to labor her he wist, Since many mightie Potentates had labord her, and mist. She, he, and England seem'd too neere, his hopes, thought he, too farre: He absence therefore poynts to plead vnto his Loue in barre. Of Ceur-de-Lion, Erigen, VVilliam the Pylgrim, who Wrot Richards Syrian Watres, Curson, Glanuile, and Longe-spee too, Long-shanks, eare King, his Knights, and of our English many moe, That through the triple Orbs did Armes and Trauels vnder-goe, And famous thus aliue, and dead, Here and Abroad, did groe, He cal'd to minde: resolu'd in minde his Life to finish so. Bills of Exchange and all things els, prepard for Trauell fit, Vnto his Friends, grieu'd he would goe, he then imparteth it. The King did giue him Letters for safe-Conducts, of the Corte Loth him to leaue, he taketh leaue: But in more speciall forte Of Elenor: good Sadnes she thus spoke, as if in sporte. Some discontented humor sends you hence, as I deuine, Which, be whereso you shall, will be with you, be yours as mine. Nay, Madam, quoth Sir Iohn, twixt vs this diffrence is to finde, I both in minde and body, you need trauell not in minde. Yes yes, quoth she, my Minde I wot meete may you farre away, If so, then giue to it this Ring, and that I sent it say. So, with that Riddle, and a Ring she gaue, they kindly parte: Nor knew she him the Knight she meant, nor he to him her heart: For, second to the greene-Knight (whom she thought not him) was he Her Fauoret, of him therefore she would remembred be. Now let vs say the Lands, the Seas, the People, and their Lore, This Knight did see: whom, touching which, not storie shall we more: But to our English Voyages, euen in our times, shall frame
Our Muse: and what you heare of Theirs, of his the like do ame, For Countries, not for Customes (then, and now, not still the same.) Yeat interlace we shall, among, the Loue of her and him: Meane while about the World our Muse is stripped now to swim. CHAP. LXII. FRom then, when first my Father, eare my birth, was one of those, Did, through the Seas of ysie Rocks, the Musco∣uites disclose, We shal our English Voyages, the cheefe at least, digest, Of which in this her Highnes Raigne haue been perform'd the best, And herea while let Mandeuil and his Beloued rest. To name the diuers Peoples that in Europe be, weare much, Not but remotest Regions, of our Natiues seene, we touch. But, Moderns, Yee (of whom are some haue circum-sail'd the Earth) Here pardon vs your Sailes, and giue your proper Praises bearth. Infuse yee Penn-life too into ore-taken Fames by death. Caboto (whose Cosmographie and selfe-proofe brake the Ise To most our late Discouerers, Debtors to his Aduise) Had vs, eare Spayne, possest of that which Spanyards now abuse, But, he inuitin̄g, idly we did offred Gold refuse. Yeat him to say for most the Meane, it weare not vs to shame, Of English new Discoueries, that yeeld vs Wealth and Fame. Reserue we to the Actors though (of whom lost some their Wealth, Their liues a many, all at least indangered their health, In trewer Perils, and more braue Achieuements, than the Tailes
Of Iason and Vlysses, of their fabled Sea-toyld Sailes) The Glorie of the dangerous Gole: Nor let vs here forgit (In which I first did breath this Ayre) London, preferring it. Some Marchants theare, of Worth, did mind with Nations, then, vn∣knowne. New Traffiques, & the Passe thereto was by Caboto showne. By his Instructions and their costs three Ships were rigged out, Hugh VVilloughby the Admyrall, a Knight both wise and stoute. Next place (whose braue performance of Imployments euer liue) To Chancelor, grand Pilot for that Voyage, did they giue. Now sayle they for the Northeast Parts, Cathayas Shores to finde: Incountred with huge Seas of Ise, with stormie Gustes and Winde. Scotland, Aegeland, Halgland, th'Isles of Roste, and Lofoot past, Tempestiously Arzinas Rhode receiued Sir Hugh at last. Theare he, and all of two his Ships, attempting bootles shiftes, Weare in that Climate Frozen dead, shut vp with isie Driftes. Thus died he and all with him, if so to die be death: But no, saith Heauen, no, saith their Fame, suruiuing them on Earth. Then Chancelor, his onely Ship remayning of that Fleete, For Fynmarke, at the VVardhouse sayles with his Conforts to meete. There day it is two months of length, and Mal-strands Poole it makes. Such hidious rore, deuouring floods, that tenne miles distance shakes. Wheare frustrate of his Friends in quest, with courage not deiect, He for the Course preposed did his ventrous Sayles direct. KIng Arthur, Malgo, Edgar, once to haue subdewd are saide Orkney, Gotland, Island, and those former in that Traide: Gronland, VVireland, Curland, and colde Scrikfyn them obayde, Newland, with others, and those Isles wheare men, saue Eyes alone, Are hid in hides of Beasts, and Beasts saue Fish, haue Fothernone. Now Chancelor, ariuing mong'st the Laplandes, at last, They seeing vncouth Men and Shippes, weare wondringly agaste, (For eare that day was heard no Shippe that churlish Pole had past.) The Lapland Bay wheare he ariu'd, now cald Saint Nicholas Bay,
Though Russiah, fifteene hundreth Miles from Mosco is away: Theare Winterd he at Newnox, till safe-Conduct being sent, Thence to their King on swift-drawne Sleads through frozen waies he went. Not like Sarmatian Scithians (for the Moscouites be so) He found them plaine, but rather much in Pompe to ouer-floe, They neuer in the Russian Courte till then did English see: His intertainment therefore was as stately as might be. In sundrie Roomes weare hundreds seene in Gold and Tyssue clad: A Maiestie, Augustus-like, their King inthroned had. Let passe what paste in speech betwixt our Pilot and their King: Full well could Chancelor demeane himselfe in euery thing: Let passe how in Basilius Court most royally he fead: Suffise it that our Agent of his arrant thither spead: That is, that Ours might trade with thē, of which large leaue is read. More, not vnworthie note, here of our purpose is to say, But this be first of Mandeuil remembred by the way. CHAP. LXIV. WE left him form'd a Trauelet (braue Pilgrim Knight farewell,) And Elenor (sweete Soule) in Loue, with whom she could not tell. He trauels for to leaue his Loue, not caring where he lose it, She for her Loue to finde, it skils not whom, so him that Oose it. The greene-Knight, be whoso he shall, her heart had branded hers: Wheare is that Second She that Loue for Vertue so prefers? Her onely, speede howso he shall, his heart had branded his:
Wheare liues that second He that so, by louing, betterd is? T'is often seene, Loue works in Man a weake deiected minde, T'is euer seene, a Womans Loue doth alter as the winde: Example then be Mandeuil for Men, not to be idle In Amorous Passions: Labor is to loue, at least, a Bridle: Example too be Elenor: But let vs say no more, For Women euer alter, saith the Gospell preach't before. Conclude we then, when Elenor and Mandeuil did die, The Method of true louing did with them to Heauen flie, For euer since too feruent in their Loue are Men, for most: But, Iris-like, in Womens Hearts Loue too and fro doth poste. One Stafford, of a Noble House, a Courtiour of good hauor, A friend, and fast to Mandeuil, and in the Prince his Fauor, From Gyprus, from his Friend receiu'd two Letters, one was his, The other sent to Elenor: and that purported this. Of you receiued I a Ring, a Token to your Minde, If so I met it: and it is my fortune it so finde. For if the Heart may, as it might, for Minde be vnderstood, My Heart is yours, your Ring so mine: Harts interchang'd were good. More did I feare, than euer in your Ladiship I found, Disdainefull Lookes, frō those faire Eyes that me with loue did woūd. Now speake I Loue, far from those Lookes so forceable to kill: Howbeit that I loue is not to worke or wish you ill. Not more than this (though Princes Frownes beare death with them) feard I: For had you lou'd, the King mislikt, what had I for'st to die? Wheare I haue been (were blasphemie from Women to detract) Great store of Beauties haue I seene, but none as yours exact. Courts also more than stately, with faire Ladies in the same: Which seemed common Formes to me, remembring but your name. When in the Holly-land I prayd, euen at the holy Graue, (Forgiue me God; a sigh for sinne, and three for Loue I gaue, Against the fearce Arabans I the Soldans Pay did take, When oft, at Oset, for Saint George, Saint Elenor I spake.
The Amazones, those lustie Girles, beleeue me lik't me Well: But nothing in the best of them but doth in you excell. I look't vpon the sterile Lake where Heauen-fir'd Sodom was: For one, thought I, here such as you not so had come to pas. Most sweete and Soueraigne Balsamum in Indian Fields I saw: More soueraign sweeter Sēts, thought I, my lips frō yours could draw. Nere Aethiop when the spice-sweete Well of youth I saw, I saide, My Lady lacketh not hereof, Perfection needs not Ayde. I sawe (nor wonder you I should, who sees you sees as much) The onely Phoenix: Foule, and Faier, but it, and you, none such. But, flying thus about your Blaze, your Gnat doth burne his wings: To my despairing Passion more your praised Bewtie brings. Not Trauell tiers my Loue a whit, but Loue doth tire on me: Which should I wish, me better, or you baser of degree? Be still the same you are, let me exile my selfe for euer: Two diffidenses I conceit will let me hope you neuer: The first my selfe, vnworthy you, the latter, and the least, The Kings Consent: But, well I wot, Loue is a Lordly Feast: Aguize (so should you) so, and so despayre is part releast. One comfort is, before you doome is Execution done: My voluntary Banishment already is begon. Which if you neuer shall repeale, shall neuer end, or when (Ah, can I hope it?) should you, not for vs is England then. Nor is it but our minds that make our natiue Homes our Graue) As we to Ours, Others to theirs like parciall Fancie haue: Transmute we but our Mindes, and then all one an Alien is, As if a Natiue: One resolu'd makes euery Country his. Your Answer that by Pen our speech to this return'd shall be, Voutsafe it vnto Stafford, for an Other-I is he: In perfect Friendship no suspect, for two are one in all, Communitie or doubling ioy, or making griefe more small, But would you to an Vnitie of hearts twixt vs incline, Wheare Friendship is angelicall, our Loue should proue diuine.
More write I not: blest may you liue: teares ouertake this Line. When (Stafford present) Elenor this Letter had perus'de, She said, as else-where shall ensew: Now is in vs infus'de Fresh matter of Discoueries. How Chancelor he speade Is said before: of Russia thus remaineth to be reade. CHAP. LXV. AVaste and spatious Empier is Moscouie, in the same Bee Riuers, Tanais, Volga, and Boristhenes of fame, With yearely hallowed Mosca, which the Pri∣mate hauing blest, (Whom to attend the Clargie, Lords, and King himselfe be prest) He thinks himselfe an happie Man may touch the yse-hewne Pit, But him in Heauen already whom the Primat sprinks with it. Euxinus, and the Caspian Seas, doe wash those frozen Shores, Which vs with fish, oyles, hōny, salte, furs, & good Traffiques stores. More temprate be the In-land Parts: They reape what they doe Sowe Within the compas of fower Moones, inn all their haruest, mowe, And house their Beasts: Thēselues keep close in Stoues vntil the Spring, And sport with their face-painted Wiues, hild thear a comely thing. In Customes of the Greeke Church, much corrupted, are they lead: Monkes, Friers, & Priests swarme theare, not more thā in their Portesse reade: Nor more haue Priests, or People, than a ceremonious care, Grosse Worshippers of Images, which in their Houses are: In all too superstitiously deuoted. Though the Pope Theare stickell not, their Primate takes as large and pompious scope.
Besides these Christians (for vnto themselues they arrogate The soundest Christianitie) are subiect to their State Idolators, that doe adore euen Diuels, or did of late. Not of the Samoeds rude-wrought Gods, or blood-Rites wil we tarry, Or of the Stone, neere vnto which did VVilloughby miscarry, To which bring Saylers whit-Meats, least their Ships should Tempests harrie, But that same female-Idoll cal'd Zelotibab, in part Of Russia, or the Diuell himselfe acting in it his Arte, Is worth the note. When ought amisse amongst them doth befall, An Instrument of Musicke, and a siluer Toade withall They lay before the Idoll, and before her prostrate fall. Then, Musick sounded, he to whom the Toade shall come is slaine, (For come it will) when presently the man reuiues againe, And tells the cause why hap't the ill, and how to pacifie The angrie Idoll: which is done, though some for it should die. The King by Monarchia rules, more absolutely none, Great Duke of Russia late his Stile, imperiall now his Throne. He holds a Maiestie not meane, and all of All his Owne, When to imploy their goods vpon the common good is knowne: Himselfe, both Iudge, and Iuror, ends with Equitie Debates. Armipotent in Warte, and hath subdewed mightie States. An hundred thousand leads he forth against his Foes to fight, That scorne both hunger, thirst, and cold, wounds, yeelding, feare and flight. Of cloth of gold, rich Stones, & Plumes, his royall Tent is pight: Nor to his Souldiours skants he Gifts, that well themselues acquite. But what particulate we thus, that much in few would write? NOw wheare we left of Chancelor: he gratious with that King, Obtayned for our Marchants, as he wished, euery thing. With Letters then of Credence for himselfe, and Marte for them, He puts to Sea for England, whome theyse about did hem. But with vndaunted Courage, to his neuer dying Fame, All Difficulties ouerpast, to London safe he came.
Thence, after some aboade, with new Consorts, an other Fleete, And Notes digested for their new attempted Traffique meete, He did resayle to Russia, there receiued as before: Cheefe Agents Gray, and Killingworth, bearded fiue foote and more. In all things with the King for ours did Chancelor preuaile, And now our Agēts knew their Homes, & where to make their Saile. But now must end our Swan-song, now the Swan himselfe must end, Euen he, that toyld such tedious Seas his Countries weale to mend, Returning Homewards, neere at Home, euen on the Scottish Cost, Did wracke, and those aboord his Ship then perished for most. But that he drown'd his care to saue the Russie, sent to vs In his Conduct, is said the cause: but drown'd he was, and thus. This Marte, thus set a foote, was Thence for Ob an other sought: Wherein not little was it, that praise-worthy Burrough wrought. Of him and (whom I neuer can commend with praises dew) Of Ienkinson ensues: But first of Elenor anew. CHAP. LXVI. YEE heard how she his Letter read, whilst Stafford was in place, Which hauing read, shee stoode as if astonished a space. Her blusshing, and vn-blusshing, made that Staf∣ford doubted whether It pleased, or displeased: which, the troth to say, did neither. Varietie of Men to court a Woman is her pride, Than which their Vanitie of Men is nothing lesse espyde. What are to vs, but common hutts, those common hopes they giue,
If then their Loue doth dye to vs, when ours to them doth liue? They Nero-like sing Troy, when Rome by them is set on fier, Iest at our earnest. Let vs now to lenor retier. More modest she thā such (though most, in Mēs behalfe, might better) And comes, quoth she, from Mandeuil this ill-come-welcome letter? Beleeue me, Stafford, ill it comes that sayes a cause in me, That from his Natiue home he should thus selfe-exiled be. If amorous Hopes, or Hopes vnheld, to him from me had past, I had indeed bin guiltie, as too forward, or not fast. But to the Cause, Effect, and all, not-guiltie, doe I pleade: His Loue is Newes, mine to despairewhat was it him should leade? Our Court (I will not wrong the Man, nor flatter him a whit) Can hardly shew another-such for Person, Prowse, and Wit. But as for me (setting a-part my Birth, to which, or any So borne, our State is interest) what am I more than Many? If beautious now (here let me chide his Indiscretion, who Farre from a Meane of it so meane doth make so much adoe, And least perhaps he should haue glib'd, a vertue doth not note, Whēce loue shuld spring, which makes me gesse he doth not loue but dote) If beautious, as I sayd, what els is Forme but vaiding Aire? Yea oft, because assaulted oft, it hurteth to be faire. And were not my Descent, and I a Fauorite in Court, My common Forme, vnheeded then, might passe without report. But, were my wishes mine, the Court by me should be the lesse: So much it hath of Vanitie, and painfull Idlenesse. Since such is he, and of my selfe my selfe but so esteeme, Himselfe by Silence, me he wrong'd, disdainfull me to deeme. I could be angrie, were he here, with him for erring so, Disdaine (the Volgars Fault) is not in Gentrie found, I troe. But feare he did, and wisely too (for God forbid that I, Vnworthie that I am, should haue indanger'd him to dye) The Kings displeasure: Or, perhaps, vnpossible he thought
My loue should equall his, or I a trans-Marine be wrought. But if he intertain'd such thoughts, there also did he erre: Loue is a lordly Feast, he writes, and I the same auerre. For if (not rashly though, I hope) vpon my Choice I stand, My hand shall neuer giue my heart, my heart shall giue my hand: Yea, so I liue with whom I loue, what care I in what Land? With Women is too vsuall now Theirs, and themselues to sell For Ioynters, by Indenture, with imperious Men to dwell, And he doth her, and she doth him, with his, and hers vpbrayde: But that I chiefly match for loue shall, when I match, be sayde. Good Daies beget, bad Daies trie Friends, nor him a friend esteeme, Whom firme, as to thy selfe thy selfe, thou darest not to deeme, Say some: But Mandeuil, I see, of you accompteth so, As of his firme and choycest Friend, then, least I tedious groe, I tell thee, Stafford, next to one, is Mandeuil the Man I could haue loued, but I loue, whom not vn-loue I can. Yeat if you aske me whom, or where, that one beloued is, I cannot answer whom, or where, yeat am, and will be his. Madame, quoth Stafford, yet your speech hath head, nor foote, nor Middle, Not naming him, you end a Sphynx, and tie me to a Riddle. Well, friend you are to Mandeuil, nor foe (she sayd) to me: The greene-Knight, Victor at the Iusts a few yeares past, is he. In sooth, quoth Stafford, if for him be resolute your Choyce, Chuse not againe, with you for him consort I also Voyce. Nor thinke, in that I him prefer, I Mandeuil reiect: Friendship may brooke Triplicitie, and shall in this respect. For your owne sake, and for his sake (than Mandeuil no lesse My Friend) I shall (his Soules desire) you of that Knight possesse. Almost an Extasie of Ioy her from her selfe did seuer, Hearing of him, for whom her heart did hunt, and els should euer: And though she did obserue his soone Reuolt from friend to friend, And him thereof had tacht, weare not her priuate Cause to end,
Yeat was she silent touching it, and modestly pursewes, In Quest of her beloued Knight. But tarrie yet that Newes, First Burrough, Ienkinson, and what by them was done peuse. CHAP. LXVII. IT is no common Labour to the Riuer Ob to sayle, Howbeit Burrough did therein, not Dangerles, preuaile. He through the foresayd frozen Seas in Lap∣land did ariue, And thence, to expedite for Ob, his Labours did reuiue. What he amongst the Vaigats, and the barbarous Samoeds notes, Their Idols, Deer-skin Tēts, how on their backs they bare their Botes, In which, but Hides, securely they doe fish those Seas all day, And how on Deere they ride, and all on Sleds by Deere conuay, Do eate their Dead, to feast their friends their Children sometime slay, Their store of Sables, Furres, and Pealts, fetcht thence from farre away, How, at our ra and Lion Signes, their Frost and Snow is greate, Let be, and many things we might of this new Tract intreate, By Burrough found: whose Praise not much is Chancelors behinde, As Master in that Ship with him that first did Russia finde: And in this Northeast Trade, with Praise, do Pet & Iackman mind. Yeat longer (for not largelier One yeelds Matter) let vs dwell Of Ienkinson. But where shall we begin his Lawdes to tell? In Europe, Asia, Affrick? For these all he saw, in all Imployd for Englands common good. Nor my reioycing small,
That from Elizabeth to Raigne, and I to liue begunne, Hath hapned that Commerce and Fame he to his Natiues wonne. NOw, vnder his Conduct, was hence vnto his Home conuaide The Russian first Ambassadour, Heere honor'd, whilst he staide: Nor Captaine Ienkinson was there lesse graced, where he wrought, That all things to a wished end were for our Traffique brought. Here-hence also a friendly League twixt either Prince effected: Nor little is their Amitie of vs to be respected. For, though the Moscouites from vs be People farre remote, Yeat, if how Danes, and Norses, haue inuaded vs we note, And how the Russies, in the like Attempts, might hold them back, For only it, were thence no Trade, ill might their Friendship lack. From Mosco then by Iournies long the Caspian Sea he crost, Himselfe and Goods by Tartars oft in danger to be lost. Their Hordes of carted Tents like Towns, which Camels drew, their Kings, By names of Murses, Seltans, Cans, to whō for Passe he brings The Russian King his Letters, how (and royally they troe) With Wild-horse flesh, and Mares milke, him the Kings did banquet tho, Their hawking for the Wild-horse (For their Hawks will seaze vpon The horses neck, who chaffing tiers, and so is kild anon) Their oft Remoues for Pastures fresh (nor Grasse their Pasture is, But heathie Brush, few Cattell though doe thriue as theirs with this) Their naither vse of Coyne, or Corne (for Tillage none is theare) Such Warriors, and Horse-Archers, as they liue not whom they feare, Their crosse-leg eating on the ground, Pluralitie of wiues, In Turkeman (So the whole is sayd) and more of their rude liues, And how the Marchants, trauailing by Carauan, that is, Great Droues of laden Camels, Meate and VVater often mis, And how for vs did Ienkinson in Bactra Mart begin, Let passe, to passe to it for vs he did in Persia win. VVith this Memento, in Returne from Bactra, diuers Kings Sent in his charge their Legates, whom to Mosco safe he brings.
Thence did he sayle for England, Hence for Mosco back againe, And, with our Queene Elizabeth her Letters, did obtaine The Mosicks Letters, to the Kings by whom he then should pas, For Persian Traffique: And for this he thence imbarked was. NOw in Hyrcana, Shyruan, or Media, all as one, Suppose our enkinson before King Obdolowcans Throne. Though sumptious Citties he possest, yeat for the Summers heate, On airesome Mountaines held he then his Court, in Pleasures greate. Of silke and gold imbroyderie his Tents, his Robes inchac't, With Pearles and pretious Stones, and Looks of Maiestie him grac't: On Carpets rich they trode, rich Traines on him attendance gaue, With sixe score Concubines, that seem'd so many Queenes for braue. Before his faire Pauilion was of Water cleere a Fount, Drinke for himselfe, and his (for most of Water they account.) Scarce Cleopatras Anthony was feasted with more cheere, Of varied Meates, and spice-Conceits, than enkinson was heere. In formall Hawking, Hunting, Chace, not thē came Tristram eere. Such was this King for stately, such for affable, and kinde, There and abroad so lou'd, and feard, as like was rare to finde. Yeat, notwithstanding such his Wealth, his Signorie, and State, He of the Persian Sophie held his Land, subdued late. But in such friendship, as the Shaugh (the Sophie so is saide) Would yeeld to Obdolowcan in what so he should perswaide: Which well in Ienkinsons behalfe, but shortly after, made. Him often questoned this King of Vs, and Europs strength, And him, with Gifts, and Priuiledge, for Mart, dismist at length. Silks, raw, & wrought, Spices, & Drugs, & more-els, worth the Mart, Our Marchants fetch from thence, and there our Marchandize cōuart. Things wisely thus dispatched there, with men for his defence, And Letters from that King vnto the Shaugh, he traueld thence. In trauell thitherwards, he grieues, in wonder, to behold
The down-Fals of those stately Townes, and Castles, which of old, Whilst Persia held the Monarchie, were famous ouer all, Nor Alexander wonne of those one Peece, with labour small. The mightie Citties Tauris, and Persipolis, he past, Two ruin'd Gates, sundred twelue miles, yet extant of this last: The Gyants Wonders on the Hill of Quiquiffs heard he tolde, And of the yearely Obit, which their Maides to Channa holde. This was indeed a wonder, for this Virgin so was bent To Chastitie, that by selfe-death, she Marrage did preuent. Here Mandeuil, perhaps, had bin, and tooke occasion heere, To feare least Flenor in like might imitate too neere: Euen Toyes in Loue discourage, Loue frō Toyes resumeth cheere. Of him therefore, whilst Ienkinson rests at his Iornies end, With Obdolowcans Sonne, that on the Sophie did attend. CHAP. LXVIII. SO Knightly Mandeuil demeanes himselfe a∣gainst the Foes Of Melek Mandibron, that he in Aegypt famous groes. And, of himselfe, that Soldan did to Mandeuil commend A greater Match, than els his Thoughts with hope could apprehend, For vertuous, beautious, Birth, & Wealth, a Match for none to mēd. This Ladie (also of the blood, and heire vnto her Father, A mightie Prince in those same Parts) he courteth now, the rather
To intermit that home-bred Loue, which seaz'd on him indeed, As for to proue how such as he with such as she might speede, And there experimented, here to cease or els proceede. Fye, Mandeuil, how good so ere thy Merits otherwise, In making Loue vnmeant thou didst thy selfe but mis-aduise. Though thou could'st buzze about the flame, & keepe vnskorcht thy wings, Few safely play with edge-Tooles, sin to iest at holy things. With women, made for Men, therefore soone won, yeat edging Sute, With Marrage, praisde enough in him did first it institute: With Women, who when all was made, and Man of all possest, Yeat lacketh Man an Helpe, sayd God, and Man with Woman blest: With marrage, that legitimates our Propagation, and Two Hearts in one transplants, in all befalne, or taine in hand: With women, that no lesse attract our Senses them to leeke, Than Hunger for to labour Foode, or Anguish Ease to seeke: VVith Marrage, that preferreth vs, and stayes vs in content, Vnanimieth weale or woe, as either vs is sent: In Nature Women, Marrage by Tradition, either twaine So sacret, and autentick, as we naither should profaine. To trifle then or Them, or This, were not so slight a sin, As that thy Vertues, Mandeuil, would fault, think I, therein. But for she was a Pagan, and thy selfe a Christian theare, And she the Soldans Tender, thou didst forme a Loue for feare. For that thou should'st reny thy Faith, and her thereby possesse, The Soldan did capitulat, in vaine: the more thy blesse: For than a VVoman euermore the Diuell tempteth lesse. Yeat that they tempt, not theirs but ours the sinne: for if I see, And steale, a pretious Gemme, the Gemme faults not, the Theft in me. Howbet when to actiue and to passiue loue it groes, And VVomen then shall alter, them as Diuels then suppose: And like of Men, if Men alike shall Reputation lose. This faire Aegyptian Ladie (of the English Toy in this,
To wit, in forward Loue to whom the farthest Commer is) Might easly haue bin wonne of him, not at an easie rate, If to his Faith a Recreant had Miscrent bin his state. But he, immoueable aswell in Faith, as former Loue, Did there so well, as he from thence with honor did remoue. On Elenor he still deuisde: yeat sometimes, to allay Those Moodes, by mustring in his mind these thoughts, did thus assay. Full soone the fairest Face, thought he, would cease from being such, If not preserued, curiously, with tendring more than much. Or age at least, and that not old, so alters it that was, That Helen did disclaime her selfe, for Helen, in her Glas. That great Phisition that had liu'd, in health, an age admirde, Did answer, askt the cause, not he had done as Flesh desirde. Then Mandeuil bethinks him of the Labyrinth of Cares, Incumbring married Men, and neer that life, and loue, forswares. How tedious were a Shroe, a Sloy, a Wanton, or a Foole, (All foure a-like threatning Mislike, when time should Dotage coole,) How seldome Women come vndow'd with one, or some, or all, Or answerable Faults to these (to men not Crosses small,) The Flattries, and the Fooleries, whereby are women wonne, With fishing long to catch, perhaps, a Frog, when all is done, And all that Sexs Infirmities, his Thoughts did ouer-runne. But like as Mothers beate their Babes, & sing them when they crie, Loues Incantations so did he with Malice such defie: The Amorous with the sea-Crabs gaet doe angring Amours flie. This humour, and the honor, by this Knight in Aegypt wonne, Ore-passe we, and in Persia see what Ienkinson hath done.
CHAP. LXIX. AT Casben hild the Shawgh his Court, who thir∣tie yeares, and odd, Had not been seene abroade, thereof by Prophe▪ sie fobodd. Like Maiestie he kept, as those great Monarchs did before The Macedons subdewed them, of Wiues he had like store, Besides most bewtious Concubines, not lesse than fifteene score: And yearely of the fairest Maides, & Wiues, doth make new choyce: When much the Friends, and Husbands, of those chosen doe reioyce. Him blesseth he to whome doth he one of his Relicts giue: Yeat Persian Shaughs esteeme themselues the holiest Kings that liue. For when a Christian (whom they call an Infidel, because He not beleeues in Mahomet, nor Mortezalies Lawes) Is cal'd to audience, least the same prophaine wheare he doth stand, Must doffe his Shooes, and to and fro treade on new-sifted sand. Our Soueraignes Letters to the Shaugh so Ienkinson presents, Who, being ask't his arrant, said those Letters like Contents. But new-made Peace with Turkie him of new-sought Trade preuēts The Turkish Marchants, fearing least their Traffique might decrease, Had, by that Basha, mard his Mart that then had made that Peace. The Shugh did also question his Beleefe, and quarrell it: So, well appaid is enkinson, if well away he git, Whome, with our letters to the Turke the Shaugh, to send was bent,
Had not the Hyrcane Murzey Posts vnto his Father sent, And Obdolowcans Letters then disswaded that intent: When, with a Present for himselfe, he Thence to Hyrcan went, And theare did him the heart-trew King most kindly intertayne, And thence dismisse with Gifts, when he no longer would remayne: Nor onely his Ambassadors vnto his care Commends, But moment of that Ambassie which he to Mosco sends. There now suppose them well ariu'd, and bringing gratefull newes Of waightie Messages, whearin the Mosick him did vse. Conuenient time he nerethelesse, for Persian Trade attends: Which Arthur Edwards, thither sent, succesfully theare ends. This Edwards, and a many here vnnam'd, deserued well In these Imployments: but of All weare tedious al to tell, For, sauing of Discouerers we purpose not to dwell. Els would we here reuiue, but that through Hakluits Pen they liue, (To him, your Fames sweet Trumpetor, Yee English, Garlands giue) A Catalogue of Names, that in this North, and Northeast Clymes, Haue more obseru'd, and more deseru'd, than perish shall with times. Nor be my Father here forgot: for he, amongst the rest, Deserueth in this Generall remembrance with the best. And here, from out those churlish Seas, with Ienkinson we sayle To London, theare an aged Man, to tell this youthfull Taile: How he had past All Europe, seene all Leuant Ilands, and Greece, Turkie, Affrick, India, Sur, Aegypt, the holie Land, And all the foresaid Lands in all imployde, and intertainde, Of Emperors, and Kings, as if him selfe a King had raign'd. Rest may thy honorable Boanes, good old▪ Man in sweet Peace: Nor haue thy Phoenix-Ashes since beene barren of increase. But late had we a Fowle like rare, vs'd oftner Sea than Shore, Ofte swam hee into golden Strands, but now will so no more, For, though he weare a dyuing Fowle, to Heauen did he sore. In England, not Arabia, now the Phoenix Bird is bread,
And euermore shall theare reuiue, when shall the olde be dead: The Maiden Empresse, and her Knights their Enterprises rare, Which now haue pearst through euery Pole, of all admired are. Remaineth now, that we intreate of great Achieuements done By English, in contrarie Clymes, since first her Crowne begonne. But ride we first at Anker, though a roomesome Sea we haue, To listen Staffords Comforts which to Elenor he gaue.
THE TWELFTH BOOKE OF ALBIONS ENGLAND. CHAP. LXX. WHen Stafford sounded had, as said, the Ladies Loue-seaz'd heart, He to a Banquet her inuites, and did for then depart. Now to his Lodging (which had earst been Mandeuils also) Comes Elenor, accompned with a crew of La∣dies more, Of which was one that Stafford lou'd, of her beloued: She Instructed was by him of all should there effected be. The Banquet ended, Dorcas (so was Staffords Ladies name) Thus speaketh vnto Elenor, as if it weare in game. In yonder Chamber (poynting to a locked Doore thereby) Hath Mandeuil his Closet and no common Armory. Full many things theare-in, quoth she, both rare and rich saw I: Howbeit Stafford, euen to me, did long that sight denye. Weare he and all the rest abroade, wheare lies the Keye I wot: Then sayne you sicke, and sleepie, so the rest may hence be got. Soone Ladies listen Nouelties, and serue themselues with Shifts,
Not sooner Dorcas had deuis'd, but Elenor it drifts. So finely fayn'd she ill-at-ease that none beleeu'd her well, Saue Stafford and his Ladie, so preposing as befell: And all saue onely Dorcas, whom she praies with her to stay, Did sadly leaue her to her Rest, and that she rest did pray. Meane while the Ladies and their Oste into the Garden walke, Where Stafford did inuent them Sports, and hild them pleasant talke. The Ladies twaine, thus left alone, the doore they open, wheare To them in compleat Armor seem'd the greene-Knight to appeare. The Burgonet, the Beuer, Buffe, the Coller, Curates, and The Poldrons, Grandgard, Vambraces, Gauntlets for either hand, The Taishes, Cushies, and the Graues, Staffe, Pensell, Baises, all The greene-Knight earst had tylted with that hild her Loue his Thra, She sawe, on Crosses and els-what, by Staffora so set out, That to haue seene her very Knight made Elenor no doubt. At first she feares, but lastly findes the Armor was vn-man'd: When skaerd, and cheerd, with Dorcas she did enter, theare at hand, The Closet wheare the Prizes of the for said Iusts did stand. These, and that Armor, Dorcas saide, are Mandeuils, the same Your Knight, that won himselfe, for Force, to you for Faire such fame▪ But, Sweete, let this be spoke in Shrift, so was it spoke to me: Long haue you thirsted it, know I, which now you heare and see. Though Stafford was by Mandeuil coniured to conceale it, And I by Stafford, what is it but that I may reueale it? What shame, a Gods name, can redowne to him, by being knowne The Knight that honord both himselfe and you, as more might none. Beleeue me, reason none his fame should thus obscured lye: But whatsoeare the Scruple be, now out it is, for why? To you lies bare my heart, and shall. With that (by pre-conclusion Twixt him and Dorcas) Stafford made a mannerly Intrusion. Why how now Ladies, sicke, and heale, and taine so soone in ame? You should, quoth he, to Pownd, weare this a churlish Ruslicks fame.
In vaine, I see, hath Mandeuil forbidden me or sight, Or speech hereof to Elenor: And Dorcas serues me right: Bab'd be our Shrifts to women, of simplicitie, or spight. Well, Lady, (for by now I gesse you know this Armors Knight, And you, concerning other things, haue reade what he did wright) If firme you hold for him (as you haue said, and should doe still) For you, and him, and both, therein imploye me at your will. Who mightier than the Soldan? Yeat, as Mandeuil me wrights, A Lady of the blood, right faire, he him for Wife be hights: But, weare she Empresse of the World, his Resolution is, She either shall be Elenor, or neuer any his. Full well she knew those Sights, and at those Speeches did reioyce: The greene-Knight had been Mandeuil, had been in her the Choyce. That Wish, the Man, his Worth, their Loue, concurriug in this wise, Had he been also present, what more Blisse could she deuise? Thence went they out into that Roome where had the Banquet bin, And theare was she about to speake, when came the Ladies in: Full well appayde to see her cheer'd, and frained then her quaem, (For nothing lesse than forged Panges, or what had past they aem.) Then went they all to whence they came, and Elenor did plie For Mandeuil: What was it now for him she would not trie? Oft Stafford, She, and Dorcas did consult, and then conclude This Course, not to be changed: which eare said, be first pursude Of English, that in Affrick, and in Asia, bring to pas, That England now is famous, wheare but late vnnam'd it was.
CHAP. LXXI. OF Northerne Regions partely is epitomed be∣fore, Of other later Voyages ensues a few, of store. Great Personages cannot want great Poets theirs to tell. Nor may they want, nor want o them would I, wrot I like-well. But of some Meaners, that their liues haue ven∣tured no lesse, Perform'd as much, Some more, and Some that haue, as many gesse, Vnto their Betters made the way to glorie they possesse, Shall we digest: Or it we speake of great-Ones, they be dead, For Writers aduantagiously are of the Liuing reade. Thy Raigne also, Elizabeth, shall bound our Pen in it, Which to our Theame inferreth Texts, no times yeeld more so sit. Like amotous Scape from England as of Elenor to Rome, Made Macham in Madera reare his hence-stolne Louers Toome, Then raigned here Third Edwara, when so trauel'd Mandeuil, And in those daies thinterring There of Machams Loue befell. A Chappell built be there, his name and hers ingrauen in Stone, To Iesus dedicated (then, and England, there vnknowne.) Of him, this Ilands Porte is cal'd Machico, to this day, Whom Affrick Mores to Cstile, as a Wonder, did conuay: For in an hollowed Tree, or Trough, not hauing sayle or Oates, (The Shippe they came in leauing him) discouer'd he the Mores. By which discouery, and by his Instructions, did ensew,
Th' berians did Madera and Canaries Isles subdew. Hence (els had Macham past our Penne) did time effect our Trade For Guinie, in her Highnes Raigne acquir'd, and patent made. For not in Maries weare those Partes, as now, so fully found, Yeat still to gratefull Eares may those Negotiators sound, To wit (although an Alien) good Pinteado, abus'd By moodie VVindam, Guinte first, and Benyn, these perus'd: Next Gainsh, then Towrson diuers times, and theare my Father dide: Since, rife that Voyage, Brasile, and to Cape-verd Isles beside. Gold, iuet, muske, graines, pepper, woad, & iuory thence be brought: In Barbarie, old Mauritaine, like Trade this raigne hath wrought: Of Affrick, and America, by Ours no part vnsought. In Tewri, Sirta, Aegypt, Greece, the Turks whole Empier now, Our Queene is gratious, our Commerce, and Agents, they allow. Of World-admired Drake (for of his Worth what argues more, Thā fame enuide? Some, for was his so rich, thought theirs too poore,) And his braue Breeder Hawkins (yeat be honord euery Pen, That, howsoeuer, honor them as high resolued Men) In Fiction, or in Mysterie, to reade would lesse delight, Than would significantly some their glorious Iores wright: The paines of such inuited Pens such subiect would requite. Adde Gilbert, Greenuill, Frobisher, of Knights to make vp fiue, All in their better Parts with God, with Men their Fames aliue. Adde hilton, Oxnam, Fenton, VVard, Dauis, an other Drake, With diuers here not catalog'd, and for a Cheefest take All actions Candish, and of these eternall Pen-worke make. And, for a gowned Cicero, and one that did not liue But to his Prince, and Countrie, Lawdes to VVaisingham doe giue. The ds, and Aeeados, for Text, and Truth, might yeeld Vnto that learned Muse that should manure that plentious Field. Was neuer Prince imployed Peace, with praise, to profit more, Or Ralme could, in the Raigne of one, boast worthy Men like store:
Out Foes can also witnes her armipotent, in few, Religiō, Vertue, Wealth, Peace, War, her Throne with same indue. And here mine altred Muse this Theame surceaseth to pursue. Of These, East-Indian Goa, South, & South-east People moe, And of their memorable Names those Toyles did vnder-goe, Is one elaborated Pen compendicusly doth floe. Omitted then, and named Men, and Lands (not here, indeede, So written of as they deserue) at large in Hakluit reede. To him, and (who deserues like-well of England, both as Any Haue wrote of England) Camden, and to English Poets Many: Of which are some (praise-worthy though) that towre their Wits too hie, To make a Pitch for Loue, whē they at fairer Fowles might flie, Now vaile I Bonnet. Rest thee, Muse, abrode what need we rome? Our seauenteene Kingdomes once, now One, yeeld Work enough at Home, All which her Highnes owneth now, as shall anon be saide: But of our English Louers first be this Addition made. CHAP. LXXII. NOw at Constantinople (once Byzantium) in old Thrace, Had Mandeuil to Stafford wrote should be his Wintring Place: Next Summer would hee bee at Rome: That Stafford should direct For either Place his Letters, which he, longing, did expect, So Sefford had to Elenor the same informed, who, And Dorcas, euermore their Loues did argue fro and too.
They may, quoth Dorcas, make more nice, but few or none, I troe, That labour not of our disease: and why, I pray you, noe? To be with God, what good more good? For it we all should aske. But for by death it must be done, but few affect the Taske. Virginitie, though praised, is alike perform'd, for why? As much the Flesh is fraile therein, as in the feare to dye. What, was it sayd to all, but vs, Increase and Multiply? No Clarke will so expound that Text, God shield they should, say I. All yeeld, that Marrage is no sinne, if chastly then we liue, And Man and wife their Bodies each to other wholly giue: If so, as so is granted, what needs curious strugling then? Since God and Nature formed Men for vs, and vs for Men. Ill match those dallying Girles, pray I, that intertaine by Arte All Louers, giuing Hopes to all, of all to make their Marte, And, hauing blaunched many so, in single Life take pride: When not a Strumpet Men so much abhorre, and more deride. Aswell as too remisse in choyce, we may be too precise, And lose, as Aesops swimming Dogge, a Substance for Surmise. But if we marke, in matching, this (which perfecteth Content) That in the Man of Vertues be and Loue a Couplement, For either Fortune worke we that we neuer shall repent. We coyly may consume our Youth, till times may alter so Or forme, friends, wealth, or fame, that we out of Request may groe. But lose that list their Prime, since now I haue that may delight, He shall participate my best, that must my baddet Plight. For true it is, as Vessels of first Liquors euer taste, Loue, seasned so with Sweets of Youth, the same doth euer last. Nay should my Stafford (God forbid) lesse kinde than think I proue, I neretheles would still be his, in chaste and cheerefull Loue. No men, troe I (the rascall Sort except) but women may, In Patience, temporizing well, informe, and, erring, stay. And reason (were there Scripture none, so bidding) we forbare
In men their Moodes, because of vs they wholly take the care. Admit we bring them Portions great, and beautie sought of Many, Alas, what bring we one, that might not els haue hap't to any? For (let me speake it to no Blab) it is a Question, whether That longer think it we, or Men, vntill we come together. Well Wanton, well, quoth Elenor, if Men should heare your chat, This last I meane, at least they would conclude for vs in that: Concerning which, vpon my Tongue shall mine Opinion dye, Though should I say to it, and all, Amen, I sooth'd no Lye. Saint Stafford thine, Saint Mandeuil for me, God for vs all, I haue bin, a, and will be still resolu'd, what ere befall. In saying which came Stafford in, and wils them to dispatch To Ship-boord: (for before had they determin'd of that Match.) Alreadie had he shipt their Stuffe, lack't only they a boord: Which Opportunitie did now that time and place affoord. How they escap't, or how disguisde, what skils it? scap't they are, All three imbark't for Italie, and had the winde so faire, That almost thither had they reach't, before they missed weare. For them great search, and sorrow much was made, but all in vaine, None knew or whē they went, or whence, or where they did remaine. Here see you, what can mightie Loue in either Sexe effect: Here see you also friends for friends nor weale nor woe respect: Here see you one that fear'd to speake, is followed farre to speede: Here see you that a Woman dares, if she conceits the Deede: Here see you one in loue, not moop't at home, but mapping Lands: Here see you how gainst all things els, for Ladies Vertue stands: Here also heare what they, ariu'd in Italie, did see: And first at Rome, when first shall this of Else-what spoken bee.
CHAP. LXXIII. ELizabeths now-Monarchie ore seauenteene Crownes of old, As formerly was promised, shall briefly here bee told. Before the Scots did plant them Heere, own'd ancient Brutaines All, And still, take I, her Homager may England Scotland call: Which ouer-passe, not now possest, in this Accompt we shall. Of either Land the Marches, and much more, for most now Ours, The warlike Picts possessing Here, built Castles, Towns, & Towers, tes, Scots, and Romaines (then our Lords) oft daunting with their Powers: Tstly ciuil Strife, & Scots, disskingdom'd thē frō Hence, Whom Orkney Ilands, as is sayd, haue harbour'd euer sence. The Braines, by these Picts of long opprest with thraldome sore, To be deliu'red of such Foes, did Saxon Aides implore. So playing as did Aesops Horse, that angrie with the Hart, To be reueng'd, did craue in ayde of Man to take his part: Till when the Horse was neuer back't nor bitted, Either now He hauing suffered, would haue helpt, but then he knew not how. The Brataines, hauing called so the Saxons to their aide, Could not be rid of them, to whom they had themselues betraide: But by the same were they at length debelled into VVailes: Each of whose Kings, of long time Three, in Englands Monarch failes. The Saxons getting Brutaine thus (which they did England name) At once of them in seuerall Parts Seauen Kings did rule the same:
All which, by VVesterne Adelstane, in Monarchie was got, Which since (saue Iron-sids & the Danes once Deuidēt) chang'd not. Fiue Irish Kingdōs likewise add, now drown'd in Englands Crowne. The Seauenteenth was the Isle of Man, in Ours now also downe. Our Mandeuil, here cited, of Earle Mandeuil exact In Stephens Raigne so famous, Man, in Scots Possession sack't, And with the Spoyle of al that Isle thence, and his Brother, pack't. Consent of times, Names, and Records, affirme, may seeme, no lesse. But Monteacute, Count Salsburie, it wonne, and did possesse. Of Percies after, Stanlies next, and still (gesse I) holds Man, From honorable long Descents: and from they first began, All loyall, hospitalious, lou'd, still powre-full, and I pray, That in that Noble house those Termes may neuer-more decay. This Man was diuers hundred yeares a Kingdome, and not small, Rul'd Hebrides, the Orcades, to Thul the Islands all, And chances there, and Changes, worth the note, did oft befall. As how the naturall Incolants the Iselanders subdew, Them Norses, rish them, them Scots, and English them, in few. Beauchamp, the Earle of VVarwick, (first, and last, and but a while) Was King of VVight, Sixt Henries Gift that Honor, and that Ile: VVhich added, Eighteene Kingdoms, al possest, ieke Englands Stile. These now, thus couched all in One, saue Parcell Scots withhold Of Penthland, and some barren Isles subdu'd to Man of old, Since hath one Monarch ruled, vs hath rendered secure: VVhereas Pluralitie of Kings did euer Losse procure. Twise ioyn'd our Ilanders in one, when twise did Caesar faile: Disioyning, He, Picts, Saxons, Danes, and Normaines did preuaile. The Spanyard, in Conceit, deuoures our Countrie, in no hope But of Disiunctiues, who, thinks he, lesse loue their Prince than Pope. Let France admonish England, turn'd Religion turnes not Spayne From thirsting France: Neutralitie brought late-lost Calice Baine: And Spanish't-French liue Peasants-like, that, French, did Princes raign. Our Elders▪ illy did they well, for so should not be done,
Much lesse to causeles Armes against their Prince ought Subiects ron) So badly brook't this Spanyards fam'd Espousall with their Queene, That, euen at VVestminsters Law-Barres, were harnest Pleaders seene, Fear'd with the trooped Bands yt wold that Banes with swords forbid: Of which were pittied those that dide, the Rest winkt-at, and hid. Their meaning had it Praise, had not the Manner bin in fault: The Manner now doth hold, may none in selfe-same Meaning hault: But arm'd be euery hand, and heart, hence Englishly to beate Spayn, that our Bodies wold inthral, Rome, that our Soules doth threat. Yeat (which hath blinded, bridled, and beguil'd, them many a day) Their Inquisition wish I from the Spanyards rid away. What good remaines to wish the Pope, this, that had none bin borne, From him to steale his ill-got Coyne, from vs to ship our Corne. The best things brought from Rome, to vs conuert, troe I, to ill: But new Rome left, of old Rome now abreuiat we will. CHAP. LXXIV. WHen Stafford and his double Charge to Italie were come, In health, and rich (for hence brought they in Coine no little Some, With Iewels of rare estimate, and else-what of great worth) For Mandeuil they seeke, and him at last did listen forth. That in Constantinople yet he was, a Marchant saide: And thither Staffords Letter was to him with speed conuaide, Purporting only that himselfe at Rome his comming staide.
Meane while in Rome (the Mistris once of all the world) they view Such wonders, couch't in Ruins, as vnseene might seeme vntrew. Once was it compast, as is read, with fiftie miles of wall: Now some to twentie, some to lesse, in that accompt doe fall: It hauing Towers so many as the yeare hath dayes in all. From fortie miles was water brought in Pipes o Arches thether. Were vaulted walkes through euery Streete, gainst Sunne, and rainy weather. The sumptious Bathes, with Pallaces thereto of rare delight, The roomesome Ponds, where very Ships some Festiuals did fight, The Trophie Arches, where to life Triumphants were purtraide, The Statures huge, of Porphyrie and costlier matters made, The Theaters, Pyramides, the Hill of halfe a mile, Raisde but of tribute Pot-sheards, so to boast their Power long while, The Obelisks, of one whole Stone neere fortie yards or more, Huge Pillers, caru'd in Masonrie with Prowse of Knights before, The stately Bridges, sometimes Eight, now fewer, Tyber crosse, The Thirtie goodly Gates, of which is now of number losse, The huge Colosses, Conduites, and else-what, that shew'd a State Beyond beleefe of ruin'd Rome, in part repair'd of late, They wonder at, & how the world could yeeld such Pomp, debate. Though some the seauen inclosed Hils, did ancient Rome containe, Lye waste, or Vine-yards, more doth yeat of Maiestie remaine, Euen in the Rubble of the old, than in the now renew'd, Though Rome retaines a Statelines, nor fairer Pyles are view'd. The round Pantheon, once the House of all the Heathen Gods, Stands yet a Temple, but lesse deckt for rich by too much ods. On Auentine the down-fals are of Temples store to see: On Tarpie of the Capitol, were wont their Guild to bee: On Palantine of Pallaces, on Caelius signes of Playes: Quirinall, Exquell, Viminall, of Bathes shew braue decayes. These Hils, with Vatican and old Ianiculum ore-past, Shew we how Rome did rule, was rul'd, and ruin'd at the last.
FRom Ianus (called Noe of some, aphet of some Noes Sonne, And Iaphets sonne of others) Rule in Tuscan first begonne, Raign'd in sixe hundreth twentie yeares of Latines Twentie one: (Son of the Eight of which was Brute, first Soueraign of our Throne) The last of these Numitor was, whome Romulus did kill, And, building Rome, slew Remus, there to lord-it at his will. * This Citie, then Receptacle for all, how vile skils not, Of Italie by one and one the Sixteene State-Lands got. Tarquinius raign'd the Seauenth in Rome, whē for the Out-rage done Vpon Lucretia, Kings did cease, and Consuls then begonne: Whē had two hūdreth thirtie yeres bin Kings, that much had won. * In this estate of Consuls (Two, remoueable each yeere) Rome flourished in Victories fiue hundreth yeares well neere. No age can boast like valiant Men, or Senatours so graue, That Warre, and Peace, vnto the world at their Deuotion gaue: Whose only naked Maiestie not Armour then could braue: Like Monarchie none euer had, or likely is shall haue. * VVhen now the world was wholly Romes, and Pompei ouercome, Then Iulius Caesar did Vsurpe the Common-wealth of Rome. Had Thirtie eight bin Emperours successiuely, when as Did Constantine to Siluester Rome, by Donation pas. * This Constantine (surnam'd the great, Our heire, and of our blood) Baptiz'd of Siluester, did hurt, as hap't, by doing good: VVhen to Constantinople he remou'd th'imperiall Seate, Rome prou'd too proude for Priests, or pride of Priests for Rome too great. Besides, was little Policie in Partnership of Raigne, For Rome, and Greece, one Empier earst, was rul'd as if of Twaine: VVho also chose their Caesars, that their priuate Turnes did waite: VVhence, after at Bizantium Nine had held imperiall State, Rome by the Gothe Alaracus was sackt in barbrous rate. And here the Romaine Monarchie did palpably decline: As doth her Prelacie, and soone shall quite, may we deuine.
But shall we yet digresse of Rome, subiecting vs so long? Then least, as now your Eares, our Pen your Memories should wrong, Remembred be wheare stayde our search of Countries, where left we Of Manaeuil and Elenir, and wheare these Louers be. CHAP. LXXV. ANon as Constantine left Rome, for Greece, to Syl∣vester, (So cal'd of liuing in the Woods, whence earst he durst not ster) For consecrating after. Popes they golden Rites prefer, And, hansling Rome with Heresies, in factious Schismes did erre. Scarse was it come vnto the Third, when those that liu'd before, (But fewe escaping Martyrdome) in Deserts, meeke and poore, Did wrangle for Saint Peters keyes, and Primacie of all The christiā Church: which to their Sea, though long, at length did fal. Hence Dispensations, Iubilees. Pardons, and such rack't geere, Weare had at Rome: nothing, naught worth, theare had, not payd for deere. Yeat not, till long, the Emperours they dared to prouoke, That now in choyce of Emperours did labor greatest stroke, And Sculers from church-Affayres in all did sequester, But wrought that Seculers should all vnto the Church refer: Effecting so, that Emperours and Kings did kisse their feete, Deposing, and disposing, them, and theirs, as they thought meete. Whē now the blind seduced World was brought vnto their bent, And more their busie heads could not, ambitiously, inuent, Was Pope, & Pope, & sometimes Three: Popes poysond, Popes exild,
Popes strangeld, cozen'd Popes, a Pope deliuerd of a Childe: Was neuer heard such Tyrants, or of other Potentates So many did miscarrie, through Ambition, and Debates. But be obseru'd, in highest pitch of Pride in Cleargie-men, God still hath wrought, Religion, Realmes, and all haue ruin'd then. So, in her Roofe, it far'd with Rome: he whisel'd, and did swarme From out the North Barbarians that gainst Italie did arme. At sundrie times the Goth, the Dane, the Vandale, and the Hunne, With others, foure times sacked Rome, and oft the Land ore-runne: Nor only so, but there did raigne, in spight of who sayd nay: Whence Cisalpine is Lumbardie vnto this present day: And Rome, which since our Brennus, none durst enterprise, was made A Bootie to each barbrous Force that would the same inuade. In vaine the Romaine Emperors their ancient Right defend, For through seditious Popes the French begun where Those did end. From Pharamonds to Pepins House they foyst the Crowne of France, And to the Westerne Empier then did Charlemaine aduance. From France to Italie againe, to Germanie from thence, Whereas the naked Title hath inured euer sence. Thus erring Rome hath, doth, & wil, our christian World vnqueate: May therefore Princes ioyne to race that Monster from his Seate. What, will ye see a glorious God of earth? goe see the Pope: Aspiring Lucifer? who els? Truth fals't? reuersethe Cope: Queanes like to Queenes? There halfe-mile Streetes affoord no other Sort, If Skarlet Hats meane while and Stoles haue not ingro'st the Sport. Full fortie Thousand Curizans there, Ladies-like, doe liue, That to the Pope for wantoning no small Reuenew giue. Their wiues they mew frō churchmē there: whēce doth this By-word come? More Priuiledged Harlots liue thā honest wines at Rome. Well, by their Fruits ye may them know. Thus is cast vp this Some. WHilst were those Broyles in Italie, did many there reiect Obedience to the Emperors, who could not them protect:
So diuers Cities did themselues infranchize, growing States: And each of them Dominion to her Common-wealth delates. Weare ouerlong although we should but briefely ouer-ronne The free-Italian States, of which the Spanyards part haue wonne: As Naples, Myllaine, royall That, and Duchie This, both twaine So peopl'd, fertile, pleasant, rich, as neither shew their waine. But should we speake of Venic's Pompe, the Citie, and the Scite, Too little should we speake, although too much we here should write. But, Gallants, will you view the Courte of Venus, and not so, But Myrrors too of Courtesie? to rich-built Genoa goe: But farre from drifting Florence keep, least Machiuels yee groe. Ferrara, Vrbine, Mantua, Placence, and Parma are Braue Cities, great for State, and please those which to them repare. I wot not what this spatious Land doth lacke that Man can wish: Ayre tēprate, fertile Grounds, vnmatch't for fruits, beasts, fowles, & fish: Men valiant, rich, kinde, courtly, and faire Academies many, For braue and bewtious women doe, nor need they yeeld to any. Now to our English Trinitie of Louers let's returne, That still, in expectation of the Fourth, at Rome soiourne. Theare, after Prayers, Church-times, Sights, & Stories sometimes read, Amongst their merrie Tales was this, how one, inamour'd, spead. CHAP. LXXVI. AFaire young wife of Lyncolne-Shire (if say our Author truth) In traueling to London-wards, squir'd of a clownish youth, Was by a Yorke-Shire Gentleman ore-taken, & together This Cocke of game, and Henne (as he supposed) of that Feather,
Doe iourney on: And, liking her, when words of course had past, And nodding pricked on before her Seruing Creature fast, He thus began. Faire Mistresse, since our Trauell lies one way, If so you please, one Inne, one Boord, (and I for all will pay) May serue vs both: I also was about, one Bead, to say. The Gentlewoman (formally then modest) blushing, sayd, For Inne, add Boord, as pleaseth you: And so her Answer staide, But would you add the Third, quoth he, more would it please in deede. What that you pay for al? quoth she, nay, so weare more than neede. Tush, that (And yeat best Orators to Women knew he Gifts, And therefore named, Pay, as if by chance, to edge his drifts) Was out, quoth he, at vn awares: I also named, Bead. You said you were about, quoth she, which still let goe for dead. Thus off and on they dialogue best part of all that daye: He could not win her to consent, nor would he take a naye: For long a goe the Calendar of Women-Saints was filde, Fewe not to Opportunitie, importunated, yeild, Thinks this our Northerne wilie Ladde, hartie, and hardie too, Who neuer would giue-out: nor more, than thus, yeelds she to doe, That is, to bead: he swearing but to kisse, and her imbrace. Then merrily for Huntington they mend their former pace. Alighted theare, for Supper he bespeakes the dantiest Cheere, And either in one Gallerie had Chambers, somewhat neere. Betwixt their Chambers placed was a Southerne Gentleman, That by officious Signes twix't them to sound their Match began. Her extraordinary Forme, on worke the rather sets His heart, and Senses (such an hand of vs such Bewtie gets.) Resolu'd at last of what was meant, and how therein to deale, This Smel-feast from the bidden Guest, did thus the Banquer steale. He gaue it out, that all might heare, he earely would away, His Man fayn'd feare to ouer-sleepe, and would not downe him laye: But, when that all besides betooke themselues to sleepe and rest, One while he walkes the Gallerie, another while he drest
His rustie Sword, which badly did the Northern-man disgest. In vaine he chate, in vaine he wisht the Seruing-man were gon: Nor durst he out to boord his Loue (for much it stood vpon Their Credits to be cautilous.) The Southern-man, this while, Got to the Gentle-womans bed, and did (no force) beguile Her Expectation: Swore you not? quoth she, and he did smile. But, had he bin the Man forsworne, if God forgaue the Sin, She pardon'd him the quo advi that he had trespast in, And, for that Nights work, swore to sweare no Man frō like, I win. This Chaer thus chaer'd, as closely as he went returnes he backe Vnto his proper Bed, nor long he sleepes ere thence he packe. No sooner cleered was the Coast, but that the bidden Guest Steales to her Chamber doore, then lock't, (for now she means to rest.) A male-Content retireth he, not dreaming what had bin, But better Opportunitie hopes at their next-nights Inn. Next Morne they meete, when, blushingly (but angrie not a whit) Ha Sir, quoth she, I'le trust againe your Oth, so kept you it. Well, bite, and whine (quoth he) who trusts a Woman so is saru'd. First museth she, then iests it out, soone finding how was swaru'd. But thus the Northern-man did faile, that did no cost omit, And thus the Southern-man preuail'd, at charge no more then Wit. The best is yet behind, but ere be told the Storie out, Amongst our Louers, now at Rome, heare how was brought about. AT Rome is Mandeuil ariu'd, Stafford and he are met, To say their Greeting, for the much, were here too long a Let. Of Elenor her health, and more, suppose not Questions few: For yet full little Mandeuil of her Ariuall knew, Nor shall, till of his Loyaltie, and life, be further View. At Staffords Lodging had he seene (as is th'Italian Guies) Two portly Ladies, Head and Face, all vailed, saue their Eies: Twixt one of these, and Stafford, much of Kindnes to haue past Had he obseru'd, and thereupon thus breakes with him at last.
I haue not seene the couer'd Dish, that so your Diet fits, But much I feare it surfet may, quoth he, your queasie wits: Needes must I enter now the Lists, to combate Dorcas Foe, Euen Staffords reason that from Heauen to Hell is posting so. I will not aske, nor doe I care, what bewtie, wealth, or wit, Your here-found Mistres hath, why you should home-left Loue forgit: But this, I know, not Rome affords whome more you might affect Than her, whome wronged here I see, and more than seene suspect: And wherein differs Man from Beast, but in Affections checkt? What, is she married. Then doe yee superlatiuely sinne: Or Mayde? I like not Maidens that so forwardly beginne: Or Curtizen? What doth she with a Vaile that is so vile, As not to blush at shame, but, baer'd, is wonted to beguile? But Married, Mayde, or Curtizen, or what you please her name, I like not him makes loue to one, and wrongs the very same. I tell thee, Stafford, be she good, or bad, thou here doest courte, Thee I pronounce too bad, yt with fore-plighted Loue do'est spourte. Let it suffice my Friendship hates Absurdities in thee: Farre be it Trauelers should play the Spyder, not the Bee. I would thy courted Lady here, and her Consorte, heard this: (A needles wish, next Roome weare both, and ouer heard he is) Then should they heare thee false to one, a Choyser is not heere, And, fearing like, suspect thy Loue, of Precontracts not cleere: Or falsed Matches, finished in wrong of Others, might, By stil improsprous Presidents, detetre from wronging Right. To honest Eares might this suffice to interrupt herein, Or spoke I vnto Harlots, this at least from Lust should win: Al Touch-sweet, Tast-sweet, Eye-sweet, Eat-sweet, Sent-sweet, Soule∣sweet, is A vertuous Match, but vitious Loue in al contraries this. Suppose this firme and naked Loue, and Friendship, much to please His Auditorie, seene, and not, and Safford, to appease His Discontent, pretends a soone Returne for England thence, And so this Parlie ended, and on either part Offence.
Stafford had said to Mandeuil, that Elenor, to trie Whether his Loue did not with time, new Loues, and Trauell die, Required backe the Ring she gaue, which if he could her send, She would beleeue him loyall, and requite it in the end. That Ring, in this Regarde, did he commend to Stafford now, And, saue to her, he giue the same to none exacts a Vowe. The next third following day was fayn'd the time he wold frō thence, Whome to accompanie on his way had Mandeuil pretence: Wherfore they feast their Friends, & thē their Friends, amōg'st the rest, Vnknowne of him, was Elenor with Mandekil a Guest. Such Arte she vs'd, and such Attier she wore, and who would looke For her at Rome? that present her not for herselfe he tooke. Vpon her Finger he espide his Ring, deliuer'd earst, Yeat silently deuoures the Greefe, that to his Soule had pear'st. He, and the rest, inuited weare to sup abroad that Night: Night, Guests, and Suppers ende are come, when (greeued though in Spright He, to recouer backe his Ring, did vse this clenly sleight: In one had he a Mommerie deuised and a Maske, And euery masking Mommer tooke a Lady to his taske, He her, with whome he had espyde his Ring, and Dauncing donn, To looke, as if for somewhat lost, to ground-wards he begonne. Was ask't what myste, he whispers her, that he had lost a Ring, Which wanting in each Mommers Mouth, was made a penall thing: Faire Lady, lend me this, quoth he, that on your finger is, And (giuing her a Tablet rich) for Gage accept of this. Her Courtesie, his colour'd Want, and Gage, effected so, That she, the Pawne accepted, did her loned Ring forgoe. Now on the Boord weare cast the Dice, her turne was come to play, Which Opportunitie takes he, and shifts him thence away. Nor knew she him, nor her knew he, for her she was indeede: But thus he spead his purpose, and of this did thus proceede: Which, eare we shal reporte, insewes our Iests Remayne to reede.
CHAP. LXXVII. AT VVare (in Hertford-shire a Towne, not bet∣tered, I winne, Of thorough-Faires, from Thence to Twede, for many an harbrous Inne, Washt with the once ship-bearing Ley, by Al∣fred slu'ste in Three, To dissipate the Dane-Fleete, that expugning Hertford bee,) Next day they timely tooke their Inne, had sup't ere Sunne was ser, Abroad walkt she, vnseene did he into her Chamber get. First giuing out he would to bed, least, mist, be marde the Sport, And, least she feare, the day before had made to her report, In Merriment, that oftentimes he walked in his Sleepe, And then nor Lock, nor Let, could him from Place, or Person, keepe: If in this fit I chance on you, be not afrayd, quoth he. But, if you come, I'le whip you thence, then best not come, quoth she. Thus, and with this Preparatiue, he counts the Bootie his, And on the Rushes, vnderneath her Bed, he couched is, And what with watch the night before, and wearines that day, And to be fresh, anone, he slept, assoone as downe he lay. Meane while, a lustie Yeoman of a Northerne Bishops, who Was often there a Guest, and good, alights and goes into The Gentlewomans poynted Roome, and say what they could say, There would he lodge, for that had bin his Lodging many a day, Loth were they to displease him (for an Harbinger he was) And then were Bishops botious, as they too and fro did passe.
For whensoeuer they remou'd to Place, or Parlament, Their common Meany (not a few) on Foot with Bowes fore-went, Nor niggardly was then to them allowed to be spent. Themselues, with learned Chaplains & great Traines did follow then, And frankly spent in euery Place, relieuing many Men. Yea, Monasteries, Colledges, Schooles, Hospitals, Hie-waies, Bridges, and like, were founded by the Prelats in those daies. But Laters could not so, for why? were Those so fleeced Theirs, As but a thousand yearely Fee, some purcha'st to their Heires. But now be some (may such be long, and such to them succeed) To whom in all doth nothing want of reuerent Worth indeed. But say ye Sooth, haue Cleargie-men Coshairers? tush a Lye: To aske doe Courtiers, Church-men shame to offer Simonie: And that should be such Fault, appeares small likelihood, say I. Obscurely more, with lesser Port, lesse hospitalious too, The great-Ones neuer liu'd, nor rack't their owne, as now they doe. Then either this is false that thus they fleece, or this is true, That euen Consumption of their owne, is Sacrilegers due. But wander doe we from our Iest, of that doth thus ensue. The Bishops man sups, and to bed, whilst soundly sleepes that other: The Gentlewoman, barr'd that Roome, is lodged in another: That in the Bed fell fast a sleepe, This vnderneath awakes, And, in his creeping out, and vp, no dinne at all he makes. One heard he breathe, ar't there? thought he, haue with thee by & by: And softly kist, wheare felt so rough, he fear'd t'haue kist awry. He grop't therefore her Face, and caught the Yeoman by the Beard: And rudely starting vp (not more in all his life afeard, Thē buskling to his Sword) cride Theeues: That other in such taking, As though he were a Man right good, he stood amaz'd, and quaking. The Oste and Ostlers with a Light and Tooles, then next to hand, Came in, where he, almost vnstript, but wholly skar'de, did stand. They wonder (for they knew him well) that he should be a Theefe: Good Sirs, quoth he, be still, we all deceiued are, in breefe.
Then, taking some a-part, he tolde his Cause of being theare, And praies their silence, and in Wine was washt away that Feare. The Gentlewoman, hearing this, vn-Inn'd by day did peepe, And (honester than would himselfe) left him to wake, or sleepe. This stale-Iest tolde, Of Mandeuil now let vs Promise keepe. WIth modest Mirth were ended now the Maske, and Reuels, when Vnto their Lodging Stafford did the Ladies Vsher then. There Elenor was passing sad, and, being ask't, did tell The Circumstances of her Ring in order as befell, And shewes the gaged Tablet, seene and knowne of Stafford well. Her, weeping ripe, he, laughing, bids to patient her a while, For Mandeuil supposde him wrong'd, and wrought, {quod} he, that wile. But how for you he loueth yours, it argues, and withall A gentle-manly minde his great Exchange for value small. Nor thinke I lesse, nor argue lesse of Loue, and Gentrie too May what, in both preuenting him, I meane, quoth she, to doo. His Tablet sent she, and therewith this Breuiat, by a Page. Of you I aske not backe my Loane, but take it, and your Gage: Yours Either, Neither say I mine, Both shall be, I presage. He musing of her Meaning, thus to her lets his be knowne. Of you I aske not back my Gage, but take it for your Loane: Mine triples yours, not yours, and yeat for Price gets yours, but One. Not musing of his Meaning (which to her was not for Newes) She of her Meaning also meanes that he no longer muse. Now Mandeuil, though grieued much at Stafford, whō he thought In Rome to riot, Dorcas not esteemed as she ought, And for his blabbing him to herthe which had had his Ring. Against an Oth, meanes nerethelesse him on his way to bring, And comes to Staffords Lodging, who prepar'd for no such thing. But for a Bridegroome trim'd, and trim was All, and She for Bride Him contradicted, when, as sayd, had Mandeuil espide That likelihood: who, sighing, sayd, not henceforth will I chide,
But pitie Stafford, now so farre from wonted Stafford wide. A Friend should not (not you will I in this Infirmenes) flye, Alone of Dorcas wronged here not witnes shall mine Eye. Came you to Rome to lose your selfe, and finde at Rome a Friend, There to begin his Sorrowes where your Senses make an end? Or thriue they more, or trauell lesse, may Englishmen, wish I: Hence should they profit, whence for most they least doe fructifie, How stoicall growes Mandeuil, quoth Stafford, since his Trauell: With you, for like, may I ere long, haue cause no lesse to cauell. With that, from out another Roome to him, that would away, Then Dorcas-like came Dorcas out, intreating him to stay. What should we say his Ioy, that his Mis-deemes did sort to this? Was not a gladder man, and yeat anon he gladder is, When Elenor, then like her selfe, to him came also out: But whether gladder he, or she, thus met, shall rest a doubt. That very day both Couples wead, but what they did that night, Not men vnpractis'd can report, for Action, or Delight. Nor creeded be this Loue-Tale of this Ladie and this Knight. THus, of what worth so-ere, is brought this Work of Ours to end: More haue wee donne, hence outed, more wee purpos'd to haue pend, Which to intelligenced Men, more daring, we commend. Well wotring, Acts heroick, and great Accidents, not few Occurre this happie Raigne, here-hence, of purpose, blanched vew. Nor Perpetuitie my Muse can hope, vnlesse in this, That thy sweet Name, Elizabeth, herein remembred is. And this, hope I, doth bode me good, that very day wherein Was finish't This, did of thy Raigne yeare Thirtith nine begin. May Muse arte-graced more than mine, in Numbers like supply, What in thine Highnes Praise my Pen, too poore, hath passed-by. A larger Field, a Subiect more illustrious, None can aske, That with thy Scepter and thy selfe, his Poesie to taske. Thy Peoples Prolocutor be my Prayer, and I pray, That vs thy blessed Life, and Raigne, long blesse, as at this day.
An Addition in Proese to the second Booke of ALBIONS ENGLAND: contayning a Breuiate of the true Historie of Aeneas. ACcept him (friendly Reader) where he is, not where he ought, and as he speaketh, not as he should. Misapplied he is not for Matter prece∣dent, howsoeuer the penning or misplacing may like or mislike for the English or Order. Rather hath my Remisnes borrowed of Decorum and your Patience, than that a Patriarke of our Brutons should be ab∣ruptly estranged: Of Aeneas therefore it thus followeth:
Aeneidos. WHen the reuengefull Flames of Try, properly called Ilion, then the princi∣pall Citie of all Asia, had perfected the more than Tene yeares Siege of the Grecians expugning of the same, then Aeneas (howsoeuer by some authorities noted of disloyaltie to∣wards Priam, in this not vnworthily surnamed vertuous) burthening his armed shoulders with his feeble and most aged Father Anchises, that laboured also vnder his loade of the Troian Gods and sacred Reliques, Aeneas (as I say) with such his Burthen, leading by the hand his Sonne Ascanius of the age of twelue yeres, followed not only of the beautifull Creusa his wife the Daughter of King Priam, but also of a many Troians participating that com∣mon calamitie, brake through the wastfull Flames, mauger the wrathful Foes, into the fields of Phrigia. Theare the Aire emptied of down-burnt Turrets, and filled with smoake of fired Buildings, assured frō their hearts more teares to their eyes, than the benefit of their present Escape could promise them comfort. Try therefore not to be rescued, or Creusa (in this businesse lost and perishing) to be recouered, Aeneas and his Followers imbarking themselues in Simois, after long & weary Sea-faring arriued in a part of Thrace called Cressa, bounding on Mygdonia. Here Aeneas, purposing an end of his tedious Saylings, and not meanly furnished of
Treasure conuayed from Troy, laied Foundation of a Ci∣tie (after the Founder) called Aenea. This Citie going for∣ward lesse effectually than was expected, Aeneas, supposing the Gods to bee yet opposite to the Troians, knocking downe a milke-white Bull pitched an Altar to doe Sacri∣fice. Neere at hand were growing diuers shrubbed Trees, the Boughes whereof (for the greater reuerence and exor∣nation of the present Solemnitie) he cutting and sliuing downe, perceiued blood in great abundance issuing from the broken Branches: whereat long admiring, and with great terror and deuotion intercessing the Gods to reueale the meaning of that miraculous Accident, at the length he heard a pitiful & feeble voice (for diuessly in those daies, did the Diuels answere and giue Oracles) thus answering. Reason were it (Aeneas) that the Graues of the dead shuld priuiledge their bodies from the tyrannie of the liuing: but by so much the lesse doe I esteeme my preiudice, by how much the more I know thee vnwittingly iniurious. Thou Aeneas, in these Braunches, thou tearest the bodie of thy vnfortunate Brother-in-law Polydor, Sonne to the like∣starred Priamus. Troy as yet was only threatned, not besie∣ged, when my Father (as thou knowest) deliuered me with a world of Treasure to Polymnstor the barbarous King of this Countrie, here daungerles (as he pretended) to abide, as the Conseruor and Restauration of his House and Empyre, whatsoeuer should betide of him, his other Issue, or the Warres then beginning: but the Greekes preuailing, Aua∣rice, and the declining State of Phrigia, imboldned my Gar∣dein (fearles of Reuengers) to the murthering of me: which he traytrously accomplishing on this Shore, secretly raked me vp in these Sands, without honor of better Sepulcher: and of my body (so hath it pleased the Gods, and Nature) are sprong these Branches, in tearing of which thou tormē∣test me. Howbeit, in respect of my desire to profit thee by
foretelling of thy Destinie, I account mee happily harmed: For know (Aeneas) that in vaine thou doest build where the Gods deny thine abode: leaue therefore these defamed Coasts, and prosperously plant the Remaine of Troy and thy Posteritie in the fertill Italian Clime. The voyce thus ceased to speake, and Aeneas, without further touch of the forbidden Shrubs, continuing his feare finished the Sacrifice, & after the Phrigian fashion solemn∣lie held an Obit to the Ghost of his murthered Kinsman. THen, by this admonishment, he and his Troians leauing the new reared Citie, disanker from Thrace in quest of behighted Italie. But no sooner had they put to Sea, thē that the windes and the waues sollicited (a Poeticall fiction) by the wife of Iupiter, so tossed and turmoyled the disparkled Nauie, that the horror of the circūstances cōtinually threat∣ning their liues, left onely hoped-for death as the remaine of all comfort. At length, these instruments of their long wan∣drings, and the causes of Anchises & of many noble persona∣ges there perishing, coūterpleaded (as is fabled) by Venus, tos∣sed their distackled Fleet to the Shore of Libya. Neere to the place of their arriual stood the beautifull Citie of Carthage, which Elisa (whom the Phaenicians for her magnanimious dying, did afterwards name Dido) had newly builded: Aene∣as by safe-cōduct receiued frō her repayring thether, found such royal entertainemēt, that in respect of the present solace he had forgottē al passed sorrowes, & his hart-spent Troians found bountifull supplies to all their late endured scarsities. In the meane while Aeneas, for personage the Iouilist, for wel-spokē the Mercuxilist, & no lesse fortunate vnder Venus her constellatiō, with his comelines so intised the eyes, with his speeches so inchaunted the eares, and with his vertues so enflamed the heart of the amorous Cathagenian Queene, that hardly modesty discented that her tongue affirmed not
the loue which her eyes outwardly blabbed and her heart inwardly nourished: In the end, not able longer to containe such extraordinary Passions, in this order she vented the same to the Lady Anna her Sister. My trusty Sister, quoth she, (then sighing out a pause) how many great Princes, since the decease of my late husband Sichaeus and our departure from Tyrus, haue in vaine labou∣red a marriage with me, hath been vnto thee no lesse appa∣rant, than of me hitherto vnapproued: but now (haled on I know not by what destinie) our new-come Guest Aeneas the Troian (whose matchlesse personage and knightly pro∣wesse I partially commend not, all confirming of him no lesse than I can affirme) the same euen the same hath sup∣planted my chast determinations of continual widowhood, with an amorous desire of a second marriage: howbeit, to determine without him, as I must, were to bee deceiued of him, as I may. What counsell? My selfe (Anna) ah my selfe to motion loue were immodestie, and to be silent lesse tolerable than death. I would (a violent no voluntary wish) that Elisa knew her selfe beloued of Aeneas, Aeneas not knowing himselfe so loued of Elisa. Her Sister with a cheereful countenance promising com∣fort performed the same in this answer. Dum signes (quoth she) haue their speeches: not any that obserueth your looks, but easily aymeth at your loue: greater is the wonder of your strickt chastitie, than it would be a nouell to see you a Bigama. That priuatly peeuish and curious, This publiquely wishd and commodious: Or euer Carthage be perfected in the ayre, Elisa may putrifie in the earth: What Monu∣ment then leauest thou to thy Tyrians, scarce warme in A∣k, than a Cities imperfect foundation? Which being alreadie an eyeore to the wild and warlike Libians, Bar∣cs, Getulians, and the rest of the Africans, shall then bee verly extinct, with the very name of the Foundres▪ but in
matching with so great and valiant a Prince as Aeneas, thou shalt not onely liue with whom thou doest loue, and by con∣sorting thy Tyrians with his Troians strongly disappoynt the enuie of those Nations, but (for Nature hath not giuen thee such beautie to die barren) being a wife, become ( doubt) a mother, and by legitimate propagation so glad thy Subiects feareles of ciuill dissentions. Who can then dislike that Elisa should so loue? Burie Sister the thoughts of Sichae∣us with his dead bones, and prosperously prosecute and pre∣uaile in thy sweete passions of Aeneas: Plie him with all prouisions and amorous entertainements: onely for his Shippe-works fayne delatory wants, and by Winter be past he, partly comming, will (feare not) bee perfectly reclay∣med. This counsell of Anna, though it heaped as it were A∣thos on Aetna, yet was it praised and practised of Elisa: for Counsell soothing the humor of the counselled, howsoeuer vnprofitable, is accounted plasible. Henceforward the Queene (to be admired, not matched for her exquisite beau∣tie, and rather borrowing of Arte than scanting Nature, as braue in apparell as beautifull in person, and voted, euen in her better part, to the loue of Aeneas) so sorted all her eui∣ces to his best liking, that shortly himselfe laboured with her in one and the selfe-same paine of wished-for pleasure. O∣mitting therefore the circumstances of their discourses, fea∣stings, and all poeticall faynings, onely proceede we, in few, to the Euent of these their amorous Beginnings. A Hunting was generally appoynted, the Queene, Aeneas, their Ladies, and Knights brauely mounted, the Standes were prewned, the Toyles pitched, the Hounds vncoupled, the Gamerowsed, a foote, and followed, when sodainely, a∣midst the harborlesse Desart in the hotest pursute, the Skye, ouer-cast with black Clowdes, showred downe such flshes
of Lightening, vollies of Thunder, Haylestones, and Raine, that glad was euery of the Tyrians and Troians, dispersing themselues, to shift for one, Elisa and Aeneas in the meane while finding a Caue that sheltred them twaine. Being there all alone, vnknowen of and vnsought for of their Seruants, Opportunity, the chief Actresse in al attēpts, gaue the Plau∣diate in Loue his, Comedie. Imagine short wooing where ei∣ther partie is willing: their faithes plighted for a mariage to be solemnized (with kind kisses among) hee did what har∣med not, and she had what displeased not: A young Aeneas should haue beene molded, had he not bin marred (as might seeme) in the making. Whē this sweet Caulme in the sharp storme was with the tempest thus ouerpassed, then came they both out not such as they entred in, & were receiued of their Traines, attending their pleasures, not examining their pastimes: and so hauing continued the Chace vntill night discontinued their sport, they retyring to Carthage were sumptuously feasted of Elisa in her Pallace. During these their Alcion dayes (not generally liked of all) one there was, a noble Troian, that had these speeches to Aeneas. Shouldest thou beleeue (farre be it from Aeneas so to be∣leeue) that the Oracles of our Gods, behighting vs the Con∣quest of Italie, were superstitious, thē beleeue also (vndecei∣ued mayst thou so beleeue) that our effeminate abode here is vaine and slanderous: to attempt that former without an O∣racle, yea with the losse of our liues, is honorable, because we are Trotās: to entertaine this latter, inuited and daunger∣lesse, reprochful, because we are Troians▪ Ah (Aeneas) haue we shipped our Gods frō home to be witnesses of our wan∣tonnesse here? Beleeue me, better had it bin we had died in Prgia, men, than to liue thus in Affrik like women. Consi∣der also the place whereinto we are now brought, and then conceiue of the possibility of our here abode: shal I tel thee? were there not (if in the meane while no other Accident
crosse thy now blisse) were there not, I say, an Elisa here to loue thee, or were there not an Aeneas to be beloued of her, no sooner shuld the first deceased of you be deliuered of life, than the Suruiuors of vs Troians be denied this Lande: And then, (if we should proue so vngratefull as to resist our Relieuors) hauing number, yet want we Munitiō: for neither our Ships be tackled, nor we armed, but at the deliuerie and appointment of the Tyrians. Learne therefore (Aeneas) af∣ter so long pleasure in loue, at the last profitably and politick∣ly to loue, and whatsoeuer thy playe be in Affrich, let hence∣foorth the Maine bee Italie. Mean-while commaund (most humbly we desire to be so commaunded) that thy shippes be secretly calked, allowed, ballaced, tackled, victualled and armed: and then (thy selfe also reformed) wittingly or vnwillingly to Elisa leaue her & her effeminate Citie: with Resolution neuerthelesse (ifthou so please) at more ley∣sure to loue her. So effectually did Aeneas listen to this mo∣tion, that giuing order for the repayring of his Fleete, he pro∣mised a speedy and sodayne departure: and his men, not slipping opportunitie, executed the same with as effectuall diligence. It happened in this meane while, the Queene to mount the high Turrets of her Pallace royall, whear looking towards the Roade, she perceiued how earnestly the Troas labou∣red in trimming, pauasning, and furnishing their Nauie: then assuring her selfe not deceiued, that she should be deceiued, and descending as it were maiestically madde, meeting with Aeneas, shee said. Before (Aneas) I beheld thy ship wracks and wants I be∣leeued some God arriued at Carthage: yea when I knewe thee but a man, my conceit honored thee with a Detie: but now these thine inhumaine Treacheries (not worthy the vnworthiest Titles) argue so farre off from a Godhoode, as thou shewest thy selfe lesse than a Man and worse than a
Diuell. What hath Carthage not worthie Aeneas? I assure thee, if any be so much, no citie is more happy thā Carthage. But the Queene pleaseth not Aeneas, oh that Aeneas had not pleased the Queene: thē might I haue bettered my choise for honour, or not haue bewayled thy chaunge for the dis∣honour. But (vngratefull) wilt thou indeede leaue me? Yea, then that thou meanest the contrary nothing more false: but to deriue thy departure frō any desart of mine nothing lesse true. If therefore the life of Elisa, the loue of Elisa, the land of Elisa, her wealth, thy want, her teares, thy vowes, her di∣stresse, thy dishonour, the delights of this Shore, the dangers of those Seas, Carthage possessed, Italie vnconquered, peace without warre here, warre without peace there, thy wracks past, the Winter to come, any euils whereof I warne thee, any good that I haue wrought thee, and more good that I haue and doe wish thee, if any thing said, or more than I can say, hath or doth want Argument to seate thee in Affrick, yet at the least for thine owne safety stay a more temperate sea∣son, vrging in the meane while excuses for thine vnurged departure: and so I flattered, shal either patient my selfe, or re∣pent thy fleeting in a milder Extasie. I did (well may I fore∣thinke mee so to haue done) entertaine thee beyond the de∣gree of an Hostesse or the dignitie of a Guest: & yet (vngrate∣full Guest to so kinde an Hostesse) for such welcome thou hast not pretended a farewell. Thus, alas, finding thy loue lesse than it ought, I repent to haue loued more thā I should, and because thou appearest not the same thou wert, I am not reputed the same I am: but as a ridiculous by-worde of the Tyrians, the Stale of the Troians, and the scorne of the Af∣fricans: howbeit (in trueth) the fayth-plighted Wife of faithles Aeneas. But who will so beleeue? Nay beleeue not so who will, thy departure shall be my death, my death thy sinne, thy sinne the worldes speech, the worldes speech thy reproofe, and thy reproofe my purgation. For were
thy selfe Iuror and Iudge of the more offensiue, my credu∣lencie, or thine inconstancie, the Iuror could not but giue Verdict for Elisa, and the Iudge sentence against Aeneas: then (if not for my suite, yet for thine owne sake) let me not pleade tediously and without grace, that plead so truely, and with more griefe than for the quantitie I may suffer, or for the qualitie thou canst censure. Aeneas, not lightly gauled at her impatience (whome he still loued more than a little, howbeit lesser than his now re∣garde of honour) thankfully acknowledged her great boun∣ty, counter-pleading to haue pretended a departure without leaue taken, vouching moreouer the displeasure of his Gods for contempt of their Oracles manifested by fearefull Dreames and sundry Visions, as also the vrging of his ro∣ans impatient of tarriance. So that he resting in Resolution not to be wonne by wooing, or reclaymed by exclayming, the Queene became speechlesse and sencelesse, and was in a swoune conuayed from his presence. In which businesse hee boording his Shippes, in the dead of the night hoisting vp Sayles, left Carthage to seeke Italie. THe Queene, not capable of any rest, by day appearing dis∣cryed from a Turret the Roade cleered of the Troian Nauie: then not willingly silent, nor able to speak, She stood as stoode Niobe after the fourteenth reuenge by Latonaes Issue: Which her then and after Extremities, to be glaun∣ced at, not iudged of, briefely I thus decipher. Imagine a substantiall and a palpable appearance of Loue, Wrath, Sor∣row, and Despayre, acting in their aptest habites and extrea∣mest passions, and then suppose Elisa not onely the same, but more feruently louing, more furiously wrathfull, more con∣fusedly sorrowful and more impatiently desperate. Imagine lastly the first three imagined Actors, after long parts occupi∣ed, leauing the Stage to the fourth, as to the perfectest Im∣perfection:
and then from such imagined Stratagem attend this actuall Catastrophe. A Wizard or Witch (the two common Oracles of ma∣ny too credulent women) had instructed the Queene, that an Immolaō or burnt Sacrifice offered to the Internal Dei∣ties, of the Armour, Ornaments, and all whatsoeuer the Re∣liques of Aeneas t behinde him at his departure from Carthage, would effectually estrange the outrage of her pas∣sions, and exct in her the very remembrance of Aeneas. This Counsell (either for that at the first she beleeued it pos∣sible, or for that oportunitie so offered it selfe to practise the thing she did purpose) Elisa entertaining opened the same to Anna her Sister: who, simply vnsuspious of the sequell, prouided secretly (as was giuen her in charge) a pyle of dry Faggots, crowned with Grlands for the dismal Sacrifice: which and Elisa her selfe in a readinesse, Aeneas his Ar∣mour beeing her eyes Obiect, became in this wise her tongues Subiect. With this, quoth she (eying the Armour) the craking ro∣ins boastd to haue buckled with the gallant Diomdes, not seldome to haue offended the defenceles Grecans, and after many loued blowes at the sacking of Troy, valiantly to haue boorded his thence-bent Nauie: this Armour profitable to my priudice, there defensiue to him, to be here offensiue to me, were it vnnecessary to this Sacrifice, should neuertheles burne for the same trespasse. This Cup, this Phrigian Cup, too guilty of too many Tyrian draughts, Assistants in for∣ming me audaciously amorous, shal now occupie these cere∣moniall flames as the then Accessary to a cōtrarie fire. These Bracelets, and these Ear-rings (by too often and officious hands fastned and loosed with begged and graunted kisses a∣mong, and now lesse precious by the giuer his practise) shall also ad Cders to the repentant payment of mine ouer ra∣ted pleasure. Lastly are remaining only two Reliques of that
Recreant, this Sword, and Elisa herselfe. But what? did dest thou (Aneas) leaue this & thine Armour in Carthage, as if in Italie thou shouldest encounter another Esa? Inconside∣rate that thou art, albeit such fearelesse Cōficts best beseeme such effeminate Captaines, yet no climate can affoorde thee one so foolish, & therefore in no Countrey expect such For∣tune. The Storme (ah frō thence are these teares) sheltring vs twaine lately in one Caue, was (no doubt) ominous to these euils: for then should I haue remembred, that like as Shelters are chiefly sought for in Stormes, so mē labour our fauours onely in extremies: but their lusts satisfied, or wants suppli∣ed, as of Shelters in Sunne-shine they estimate our bountie, leauing thenceforth euen to seeme such as (in troth) they ne∣uer were. But what is naturall, is of necessitie, onely let it be graunted he is a Man, and it followeth necessarily he is de∣ceitful. Flie, Traiterous Aeneas, flie vnfollowed and vnfrien∣ded of Elisa: euer may the winds be contrary to thy Course, and the Seas not promise thee one houres safety: euer be thy Ship drowning, and thy selfe neuer but dying: often resayle in a moment, whence thou wert sayling a moneth: let no blaste from the Ayre, or Billow in the Sea, stirre but to thy preiudice: and when no horror and mishap hath sayled thee, with thy dead body, to the vttermost plagued, perish also may thy Soule vnpardoned. But least mine incharitie proue lesse pardonable than his Iiuie, I that will not liue to heare it so, heartily disclayme to haue it so: pardon therefore, yee Gods,  desiring it, & him deseruing it. Troth is it this one Sacrifice shall giue end to mine infinite sorrowes: but not (a∣las) with these burnings (rather found guiltie of new be∣ginnings) but with my hearts blood, the latest Ceremonie wanting to this Exequse. Scarcely had these words passed her mouth, when with Aeneas his Sword she pearced her Brest: so performing on herselfe a Tragedie sought for, and to hers a terror vnlooked for.
WHilest Dido, (so named of this her death, or as haue some, not lesse probable, of so preuenting Htarba: me∣nacing her marage) was thus passionate and did thus pe∣rish, Aeneas, after weary Sea-saring, much sorrowe, many people and places seene and sayled from, arriuing in Sicisie, was oyfully entertained of this auncient friend King Ace∣es, and there (as the yeare before at Drapenum) did solem∣nize and Anniuersaie at the Tombe of his father Anchises. The Masteries, feates, and actiue pastimes tried here by the Troian and Sicilian youth, with land and sea Skirmidges, the running, riding, leaping, shooting, wrestling, and such like, with Bacing on foote and on horsback (this last, a sport lately vsed of our English youthes, but now vnpolliuckly discontinued) Or how the Women of Troy (whereof ma∣ny were also imbarked from thence) tyred with the perils of the Sea, and intised with the pleasures of Siciie, to pre∣uent further sayling, fired their Ships (not without great losse rescued:) Or how Aneas building there the Citie A∣, peopled the same with his women, and impotent Tro∣ns: Or of the drowning and Reuise of Palinurus, and ma∣ny Occurrents hapning here, at Cuma, Caieta, & else-where I omit, as lesse pertinent to our purpose then the hastning of Aeneas into Italie. Wherefore shipping him from Sicilie, I now land him in Latium: in which part of Italie raigned and was Resident in his Citie Laurentum the King Lati∣nus: to whome Aeneas addressed an hundred Knights, one of them deliuering this Ambassie. Ignorant are we not, most gratious King (for in that Title art thou famous, and in that triall may we proue fortunate) of thy Consanguinitie with the Troians, by noble descents from Dardanus our auncient Progenitor: neither canst thou but know that Troy is sacked, and her people for the most parte slaughtered: onely know (if already thou knowest it nt) that Aeneas our Duke with a few his Followers, after
more than seauen yeares sayling, are lastly (and lucki lie I hope) arriued in thy Countrie: Howbeit of many places, for pleasure and ferulitie most worthy manuring, haue wee abandoned the quiet possession: yea many the greatest Prin∣ces of Europe and Affrica, haue voluntarily desired our Ta∣riance denied: only infinit Seas haue wee sayled, and more sorrowes sustained to seeke this Clime, from whence wee Troians deriue our Originals, and whither our Gods haue directed vs by their Oracles. This thy Countrie, in respect of the bignesse, may easily affoord roome for a new Troy to be builded: A plot more spacious we doe not aske, A smal∣ler suite thou canst not graunt, if with our present extremi∣ties thou also peise our purposed loyalties. Neuer were wee thy foes, and euer will we continue thy friends. Seated wee must be, and here wee would be. We dare not disobey, the Gods commanding it, nor would we discontent thee in de∣maunding it: graciously therfore conceiue of our Petition, and gratefully receiue from Aeneas these Presents. Hauing thus sayd, he in the name of Aeneas, presented the King with a most rich Mantell or Robe, with an inua∣luable Crowne of Golde enchased with precious Stones, with the late royall Scepter of King Priamus, and with o∣ther Treasure: which Latinus cheerefully receiuing, retur∣ned the Troians this answer. Had not the Gods commāded your hither repaire, which I gainsay not, were we not of consanguinitie, wherein I dis∣claime not, Or my Kingdome not roome-some enough to receiue you, as it is, Or had ye not brought precious and peaceable Presents, as ye haue, yeat to dismisse Wayfarers vnrested and vnreleeued were contrary to the Gods of Hos∣pitalitie, and (which they defend that I should therein of∣fend) Latinus his honour. Ouer: fast he sitteth that securely sieth: for as he that is timorous hath  little prouidence,
so he that is feareles hath too much presumption: yea lesse grieuous are expected than vnlooked-for euils. I speake not this as I feare to fall, but as I fore-see I may fall: for the vn∣pearching of others should be fore-preachings to vs. Priuie am I vnto your distresse, applying the like possibility for me so to decline: for who is priuiledged from becōming such? And who is such that would not haue succour? Sorrie I am that ye haue so ill cause to estrange your selues from home, but glad that I am in so good case to entertaine you here. Let Ae feare him and prosper yee in Italie: my land well may abide it, and my selfe brooke it. Yea more (for the Oracle of my minde consorts no doubt with those of our Gods) Lauinia my sole daughter and heire, forbidden a Natiues and behighted a Strangers Marriage, hath found a Husbande and I a Sonne-in-lawe: at the least I wish it would bee, and hope it will bee. Make my thankes to Aeeas for his Presents, and bee you Masters of your Peti∣tions. The Troians being then sumptuously feasted, euery man on a giuen Courser brauely and richly mounted, dismissed, returned, and Latinus his answere and Present deliuered, Aeneas, neuerthelesse as farre from being secure as ioyous of such Tidings, knowing the good speede of a Stranger to be an Eye-sore to the people, and therefore not careles sus∣pitious of it that might causeles succeede, strongly inmured his Men in a new-built Fortresse. In the meane while their Arriuall and Entertainment with Latinus occupied, and for the most part offended, all Italie Enuiously stormed Amata Queene that Lauinia her Daughter and Darling should be wedded to a Stranger, an Exile (as she termed him:) and therefore, when she could not disswade the King by flatterie, shee incensed his Nobles and Subiects to resist it forcibly. On the other side,
Turnus, Prince of the Rutiles (in person exceeding all for comelinesse, and in Armes equall to any for his courage, to whom Lauinia was before promised in Marriage) as Mal∣content as any for being thus circumuēted by Aeneas, held a Counsell in his sumptuous Citie Ardea scituate in the territorie of Latium, how to intercept the Troians by wies, expell them by Warres, weaken them by wants, disap∣poynt Aeneas, and possesse himselfe of Lauinta. Often sent he Messengers and sometimes Menaces to aduertise Lati∣nus that he was promised he should, and to assre him hee purposed hee would enioy her or anger him. But by how much more Latinus was religiously vnremouable in his Resolution for Aeneas, by so much the more did Turnus giue loose raines to his headie anger: Howbeit sufficient matter wanted for his malice to worke vpon, vntill by euill happe his choler tooke aduantage of this colour. Ascanius with diuers Troian Gentlemen his Friends and others his Attendants, hunting in a Forrest not farre from their For∣tresse, by chance did incounter, strike, and chace a fayre and well spread Stagge, which the Children of one Tyrrhus (the Kings Raunger and Steward of his Grounds, a Man of no meane account amongst the Latines) had from a Fawne nourished, and so intreated that no Beast might bee more tamer: This Stagge thus stroken and followed of the Tro∣ians, taking the readiest way to the house of Tyrrhus, and with bleeding haunches entring the Hall, was first espred of Syluta or Ilia, a young Gentlewoman, in whose lappe hee sleeping had often layd his head, and at whose hands he had many a time taken Brouse, been kemmed, and trimmed. She▪ seeing the Stagge in such a plight, almost swouned ere shee could weepe, wept ee shee might speake, spoke ere shee was comforted, and was comforted onely in promise of Reuenge. At the winding of an Horne, came flocking
Heards-men, Shepheards, Plow-men, and  of Groomes, finding Almon the eldest Sonne of Tyrrhus, and their young Mistris Syluia grieuously passionate, and the Stagge bloodie and braying his last, question no further what should be done, but were furiously inquisitiue after the Doers. In this meane time, by euil hap, Ascanius and his Com∣panie drawing by Parsie after the Stagge (which they knew not for tame) were entered the view of this Shoole of inra∣ged Clownes: who all at once and suddenly, with such wea∣pons as they had or found neerest at hand, as Staues, Sheep∣hookes, Dung-forks, Flayles, Plow-staues, Axes, Hedging-Beetels, yea Lbbats newly snatched frō burning, and what not? fiercely assayled with down-right blowes the amazed Troians: who not hauing leisure to aske questions, coura∣giously entertaine the vnknowne Quarrell▪ and so long and daungerously for either parte continued this confusion of blowes and effusion of blood, that by now it was bruted at the Fortresse and at Laurentum, and was anon increased by rescue from either Faction: neither had this Skuffling an end vntill night was begun: at what time the Latines, Ru∣tiles, & Troians left the wild Medley, howbeit not discon∣tinuing their malice. Of chiefe account amongst the Latines, were slaine lustie Almon, and aged Galesus, (this latter a man of an honest and wealthie condition) whilest he vnseasonably amongst blowes deliuered vnregarded perswasions of Peace. The wounded Corses of these twaine did Turnus cause to bee conuayed to the view of Latinus, as Arguments of their common dammage, himselfe with an enuious heart and an inuectiue tongue amplifying the same o the vttermost: not vnassisted therein by the yrefull Queene Amata, or vn∣furthered by the hurlie burlie of the impatient People, all
labouring the King to denounce Armour against the Tro∣ians. Latinus in this tumult of his Subiects, and trauell of his Sences, assuring himselfe that Aeneas was the man pro∣phesied to the Marriage of Lauinia and succession of La∣tium, disswaded, but might not perswade with the headie multitude. In fewe, with such efficacie did the dead Corses inuite it, the Queene intreate it, Turnus affect it, & the Peo∣ple follow it, that lastly, though against his minde, the King did suffer the Laurentines to reare on their Walles abso∣lute Tokens of imminent Warres: Thus found Turnus that which he longed for, and Aeneas no lesse than hee looked for, and either solliciting succours, were not long vnfurnished of hardie Souldiers: yea, in respect of their multuous Armies, the Warres lately ceased at Troy, might now haue been sayd to bee reuiued in Italie. But as in his Wandrings, so in his Warres, my purpose is breuitie: ei∣ther of which the Lawriat Trumpetor of his glorie hath so effectually sownded, that many might amplifie, I could i∣terate, but not any amend it: neuerthelesse in remembring of this Historie I haue also vsed other Authorities. IT followeth, After long Warres valiantly on either part performed, many great Kings, Princes, and Personages perished: when lastly the Rutiles begunne to bee repentant of their wrong, and the Troians wearie of the Warres, Aeneas and Turnus meeting had these words: And first Aeneas. Often Truces haue wee had (Turnus) for the buriall of our dead, neuer treaties of peace for the welfare of those a∣liue: onely once (as I haue been euer) diddest thou seeme (thou diddest but seeme) prouident that no moe should mis∣carrie, offering me Cmbate, which I accepting haue in
vaine expected: for since thy minde changed, I wot not by what meanes, hath changed the liues of I wot not how ma∣ny. But now, when for the palpable leasing thou shouldst not speak like Turnus, shouldst thou deny the better of the wars to abide with Aeneas, and yet I still be Aeneas, though play∣ing vpon that Aduantage with Turnus, euen now, I say, my selfe doe request thee of that Combate whereby further Blood-sheds may happily be concluded. Beleeue mee, wert thou a Begger and I a Monark, yet (so much doe I emulate, not enuie thy glorie) I would hazard all in a Combat reque∣sted by thee so valerous a Competitor. But least (perhaps) I ouer-breathe thy tickled Conceit with more selfe-lking than is expedent, know man, Turnus know, Nature, Birth, Arte, Education, not whatsoeuer els are in any thing more beneficiall to Turnus, than that iustly he may enuie as much or more in Aeneas. To this answered the Rutile thus: Whether thou spea∣kest this (Aeneas) as insulting ouer mine infortune, or as in∣solent of thine owne felicitie, or emulous (as thou sayest and I beleeue it) of my glorie, trust me, onely if thus in thy better successe to abandon thy selfe to such offered disad∣uauntage bee not indiscretion, neuer heard I wherein to de∣rogate from thy policie: but say it indiscretion, yet by Iupi∣ter (Aeneas) it is honourable indiscretion. Not to encoun∣ter so heroicall (for in thee I enuie not that Epitheton) a Combattant, is as contrary to my thought as contenting to my very Soule, and as contenting to my Soule, as if Aneas were alreadie conquered, and Turnus Conquerour: either which I deuine, at the leastwise I am determined to aduen∣ture. Be prouided therefore (Aeeas) of courage, for thou prouokest no Cowarde, but euen Tuus, that would haue asked no lesse, had he not doubted Aeneas not to haue da∣red to answer so much. Thus, and with these Conditions:
that further warres should finish, that the Espousall of La∣uinia and Succession of Latium should bee the Prize to the Victor, a Combat to bee tried by these twaine body against body was (vpon Othes taken and other Circumstances) a∣greed vpon. Now were they Armed, Mounted, did Encounter, and their Coursers breathlesse, the Riders dismounting vigori∣ously buckle on Foote: both offende, either defende, & nei∣ther ainted: Lastly (not with vnrequited blowes) was Tur∣nus disarmed: the Vanquished pleading for life, & the Vic∣tor not purposing his death, had hee not espied on his Shoulders the sometimes Baldrike of his once especiall Friend Pallas, King Euanders Sonne, whom Turnus in Battell ouercomming had put to Sword: then Aeneas say∣ing, onelie in this Spoyle thou shalt not triumph, and onely for his sake am I vnintreatable, shoffed his Sworde through his breast: Turnus so ending the World, and Ae∣neas the Warres. Then was he peaceably wedded to Lauinia, and shortly after possessed of Latium: After which, about three yeares he, dying, left his Kingdom to Aseanius, and Lauinia with childe. She at her time, and at the house of the before re∣membred Tyrrhus, was deliuered of Sylis Post-humus (so called of his being borne amongst the Woods, after the death of his Father.) To him (because in right it was the in∣heritance of Syluius from his Mother) did Asanius volun∣tarily resigne the Kingdome of Latium: and of him (for his honorable Regiment) were all the after-Latine kings called Sylij: Finally he hunting and mistaken amongst the Thic∣kets for a Stagge, was slaine with an Arrow by his Sonne Brutus. This Brutus for sorrow and his satie, accompa∣nied with many lustie Gentlemen and others of Aeneas
his Troians Ofsprings, imbarking themselues, after long Sayling ariued in this Iland then called Albion: whose Giant-like Inhabitants (in respect of their monstrous ma∣king & inciuill Manners sayd to haue bin engendred of Di∣uels) he ouercomming, manured their Countrey, and after his owne name called it Brutaine. And thus hauing begotten Brutus an Originall to our Brutons, I conclude this abridged Historie of his Grandfather Aeneas. FINIS.
