25204 99838800 3189
CANTVS. BALLETTS AND MADRIGALS TO fiue voyces, with one to 6. voyces: newly published BY Thomas Weelkes. IN LONDON PRINTED BY THOMAS ESTE, the assigne of William Barley. 1608.
To the right vvorshipful his Master Edward Darcye Esquier, Groome of her Maiesties priuie Chamber, Thomas Weelkes wisheth all heauenly ioyes whatsoeuer. RIght worshipfull, it is no small comfort the Musicke pro∣fessors conceiue, when they consider the euer misdeeming multitude to brand them with infamy, whom the most Ho∣norable spirits haue alwaies honored: and although pouer∣tie hath debarred them their fellow arts mens companie, yet nature hath set their better part at libertie, to delight them that loue Musicke. Amongst so many worthy men dayly labouring to call home againe the banished Philomele, whose purest blood the impure Minstralsie hath stained, I must presume to remember one of your wor∣ships least labours, (your greater deedes greater men must seeke to re∣quite) the entertaining into your seruice the least proficient in Musicke, who with all dutifull obseruancie, humbly commend my poore labours to your worships protection. My yeeres yet vnripened, and this worke not a little hastened, cannot promise any choice notes of Musicke, yet notwith∣standing I presume that gentlenes which accepts my seruice, will neuer reiect the labours of his seruant: Thus humbly taking my leaue, I leaue these to your worships fauours, and you to the keeping of him that best can keepe you. Your worships seruant. Thomas Weelkes.
The Table of all the Ballets and Madrigales contained in these bookes ¶To 5. Voices. AL at once well met faire Ladies. I To shorten winters sadnesse. II Sweete loue, I will no more abuse thee. III Whilst youthfull sports are lasting. IIII On the plaines Fairie traines. V Sweet hart arise, why doe you sleepe. VI Giue mee my hart and I will goe. VII Harke all ye louely saints aboue. VIII Say daintie dames shall we goe play. IX Phillis goe take thy pleasure. X In pride of May, the fields are gay. XI Sing wee at pleasure, content is our treasure. XII Now is the bridalls of faire Choralis. XIII Sing sheperds after mee. XIIII Welcome sweet pleasure, my welth and treasure. XV Ladie, your eye my loue enforced. XVI Wee shepherds sing, wee pipe, wee play. XVII I loue, and haue my loue regarded. XVIII Come clap thy hands thou sheperds swaine. The first part XIX Phillis hath sworne shee loues the man. The second part. XX Farewell my ioy adue my loue and pleasure. XXI Now is my Cloris fresh as May. XXII Vnto our flocks sweet Corolus. XXIII ¶To 6. Voices. Cease now delight, giue sorrow leaue to speake. XXIIII ¶FINIS.
I. AL at once wel met faire Ladies, sing we now, wee now, ij. sing wee now, wee now, ij. our loue repaid is, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. All at once well met faire Ladies, sing we now wee now, ij. ij. wee now, ij. our loue repaid is. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet harts doe not forsake vs, till night to sleep betake vs, ij. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Sweet harts doe not forsake vs, till night to sleep betake vs, ij. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Cytherea shall requite you, With delight least sorrow fright you. Fa la. Then help yee daintie Ladies, To sing our loues repaid is. Fa la.
II. TO shorten Winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with glad- nesse, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. To shorten winters sad- nesse, See where the Nimphs with gladnesse, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la, Disguised all are comming, Right wantonly a mumming, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Dis-guised all are com- ming, Right wantonly a mumming. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la.
III. SWeet loue, I will no more abuse thee, ij. no more abuse thee, Nor with my voyce accuse thee, ij. But tune my notes vnto thy praise, ij. and tell the world loue nere decaies, ij. ij. ij. ij. decayes: Sweet loue, doth concord euer cherish, what wanteth concord soone doth perish. what wanteth concord, concord, what wanteth concord soone doth pe- rish.
IIII. WHilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Whilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. With reuels and with wassels, make griefe & care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. With reuels and with wassals make griefe and care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. For youth it well beseemeth, That pleasure he esteemeth. Fa la la. And sullen age is hated, That mirth would haue abated. Fa la la.
V. ON the plaines, Fairie traines, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set lesures. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la. On the plains, Fairie trains, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set leasures, Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la la la. Nimphs be- gin to come in quickly, thick & three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. present there to behold, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Nimphs begin to come in quickly, thick & three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. present there to behold. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
VI. SWeete hart arise, why doe you sleep, why doe you sleep, ij. ij. ij. why doe you sleep, When louers wanton sports doe keepe ij. ij. The Sunne doth shine, the Birds doe sing, doe sing, the birds do, sing▪ ij. doe sing, the birds doe sing, ij. doe sing, and May delight & ioy doth bring, & ioy doth bring. Then ioyne we hands and daunce till night, Tis pittie loue should want his right. want his right. Tis pittie loue should want his right. ij.
VII. GIue mee my hart, & I wil goe, and I will goe, ij. or else forsake your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no, Giue mee my hart and I will goe, giue mee my hart, my hart, giue mee my hart, or else forsake your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt mee, doubt mee, with no no no ile flout thee, ij. with no no no I meane to flout thee, no no no no no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt mee, With no no no I meane to flout thee, with no no no, With no no no I meane to flout, to flout thee, no no no no no no no no no no no no no. Now is there hope wee shall agree, When double no imparteth yea, no no no If that bee so my deerest, With no no no, my hart thou cheerest. no no.
VIII. HArke all yee louely saints aboue, Diana hath agreed with loue, ij. his firie weapon to remoue, to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Hark all yee louely saints aboue, Diana hath agreed with loue, ij. his firie weapon to remoue, to remoue. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Doe you not see how they agree, thē cease faire Ladies, why weep yee, ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la Fa la la la la la. la la la la. Doe you not see how they agree, then cease faire ladies, why weep yee, ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. See, see your Mistrisse bids you cease, And welcome loue, with loues increase, Diana hath procur'd your peace. Fa la la. Cupid hath sworne his bow forlorne, To breake & burne, ere Ladies mourne Fa la la.
IX. SAy daintie dames shall we goe play, go play, And run among the flowers gay, the flowers gay, about the va-lies ij. & hie hils, ij. which Flora with her glo- ry fils. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Say daintie dames shall we go play, go play, And run among ye flowers gay, the flowers gay, about the va- lies, ij. and hie hils, ij. which Flora with her glo- ry fils. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be wonne, to daunce & sport, til day by don. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be wonne, to daunce and sport till day be donne. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la▪
X. PHillis goe take thy pleasure, ij. goe take thy plea- sure, my hart thou hast now broken, ij. hast bro- ken, Goe frolike there sans measure, ij. ij. those wounds thy lookes laid open, laid open, ij. Ingrauen there Phillis may finde, ij. may finde, Phillis is faire, but too vnkinde, ij. vnkinde, ij. but too vnkinde, ij. but too vn- kinde.
XI. IN pride of May, the fields are gay, ij. ij. the fields are gay, The birds doe sing, doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la. In pride of May, the fields are gay, ij. the fields are gay, the birds doe sing, ij. doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. So nature would, that all things should, with ioy begin the spring, ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. So nature would, that all things should, with ioy begin the spring. ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Then Lady deere, doe you appeare, in beautie like the spring. Fa la la. I well dare say, the birds that day, more cheerfully will sing. Fa la la▪
XII. SIng wee at pleasure, at pleasure, Content is our treasure, ij. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sing wee at pleasure, at pleasure, Content is our treasure, ij. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet loue shall keep the ground, whilst we his prayses sound, ij. his prayses sound, all shepherds in a ring, shall dauncing euer sing, ij. euer sing. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet loue shall keep the ground, whilst wee his prayses sound, ij. his prayses sound, all shepherds in a ring, in a ring, shall dauncing e-uer sing. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XIII. NOw is the bridals of faire Choralis, Where eu'ry shepherd tunes his roundelaies, his roundelaies, ij. Where eu'ry shepherd tunes his roundelayes, his roundelaies, And I, ij. in honour of my Thoralis, ij. ij. my Thoralis, Will not forget to sing her gentle praise, For ere the Sunne his iourney doth re- new, Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish, that now I wish, ij. ij. ij. were true. Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish, ij. were true. Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish were true.
XIIII. SIng shepherds after mee, ij. ij. our harts doe neuer, ij. ij. disagree, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sing shepherds after me, after mee, ij. ij. our harts do neuer disagree, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, our wealth is ease, we wish no more, black are our lookes, we goe not braue, we goe not braue, a mery hart is all we haue, ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, our wealth is ease, we wish no more, black are our lookes, we goe not braue, ij. a mery hart is all we haue. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la.
XV. WElcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no no no no. Welcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no no no no, This mirth delights mee, When sorrowes frights mee. Then sing wee all. Fa la la la la. This mirth delights me, When sorrowes frights me, Then sing wee all, Fa la la la la la. Then sing we all, Fa la la la la. Sorrow content thee, mirth must preuent thee though much thou greeuest, thou none releeuest, no no, Ioy come delight mee, though sorrow spight mee. Griefe is disdainfull, sottish and painfull, then wait on pleasure, and loose no leasure, no no, Harts ease it lendeth, and comfort sendeth.
XVI. LAdy, your eie my loue enforced, your eye my loue enforced, ij. And your proud looke my hart deuorced Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Lady, your eye my loue enforced, your eye my loue enforced, ij. And your proud looke my hart deuorced. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. That now I laugh, ij. ij. ij. and now I cry, and thus I sing, before I dye, ij· I dye Fa la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. That now I laugh, ij. ij. ij. and now I cry, & thus I sing, before I dye, ij. I dye. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la.
XVII. WEe shepherds sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Wee shepheards sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Wee care for no gold, ij. but with our fold, we daunce and praunce as pleasure would, ij. as plea- sure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Wee care for no gold, ij. but with our sold, wee daunce and praunce as plea-sure would. ij. as plea- sure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XVIII. I Loue, I loue, and haue my loue regar- ded, I loue, and haue my loue regarded, & sport with sport, as wel rewarded, Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. I loue, I loue, and haue my loue regarded, I loue, and haue my loue regarded, & sport with sport, as well rewarded. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. which makes me alwaies laugh, which makes me laugh, ij. when others weep, ij. and play with loue, ij. whē others sleep. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. which makes mee laugh, which makes me alwaies laugh, ij. when others weep, ij. ij and play with loue, ij. when others sleep. Fa la, Fa la, Fa la, Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la, Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la.
The first part. XIX. COme clap thy hands thou sheperds swaine, ij. Come clap thy hands, come clap thy hands thou sheperds swaine, Phillis doth loue thee once againe, ij. ij, a- gain, If thou a- gree, then sing with me, ij. Phillis my choyce of choyce shall be. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. of choyce shall bee.
The second part. XX. PHillis hath sworne she loues the man, ij. ij. ij. she loues the man, Phillis hath sworne she loues the man, the man, that know's what's loue, and loue her can, ij. ij. Phi-lemon then must needs agree, ij. Phillis my choice of choice shall be. ij, Phillis my choyce of choyce shall bee. ij. Phillis my choyce of choyce shall bee. ij.
XXI. FArewell my ioy, ij. ij. farewell adue my loue & pleasure, ij. to sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, ij. no longer leasure, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Farewell my ioy, ij. Farewell adue my loue and pleasure, ij. to sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, ij. no longer leasure, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Farewell, ij. a- due, a- due, a- due, vnto our next consorting, ij. Sweet loue be true, and thus we end our sporting. ij. our sporting. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XXII. NOw is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in greene & flowers gay, Fa la la la Fa la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Now is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in greene, & flowers gay, Fa la la la. Fa la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la, that haruest ioye might soone appeere. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. that haruest ioy might soone appeare. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. But shee keeps May throughout the yeere, And August neuer comes the neere, Yet will I hope though shee bee May, August will come an other day. Fa la la.
XXIII. VNto our flocks sweet Corolus, ij. our bagpipe song now caroll thus. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Vnto our flocks sweet Corolus, ij. our bagpipe song now caroll thus. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Whilst flocks & heards be grazing, let vs our rest be prai- sing. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Whilst flocks & heards be, grazing, let vs our rest be prai- sing. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. To teach oar flocks their wonted bounds, On Bagpipes play the Shepheards grounds. The tender Lambs with bleting, Will help our ioyfull meeting.
An Elogie in remembrance of the Ho: the Lord Borough. 24. CEase now delight, ij. ij. ij. giue sorrow leaue to speake, In flouds of teares, ij. bewayling his decease, bewayling his decease, ij. ij. Whose timelesse death, ij. a-stony heart would break, would breake, ij. would break: Sweet Boroughs life, was Musickes life encrease: Borough is dead, Borough is dead, ij. Borough is dead, ij. great Lord, of greater fame, of greater fame, Liue stil on earth, by vertue of thy name of thy name. Liue still on earth by vertue of thy name, by vertue of thy name. ij. of thy name. FINIS.
ALTVS. BALLETTS AND MADRIGALS TO fiue voyces, with one to 6. voyces: newly published BY Thomas Weelkes. IN LONDON PRINTED BY THOMAS ESTE, the assigne of William Barley. 1608.
To the right vvorshipful his Master Edward Darcye Esquier, Groome of her Maiesties priuie Chamber, Thomas Weelkes wisheth all heauenly ioyes whatsoeuer. RIght worshipfull, it is no small comfort the Musicke pro∣fessors conceiue, when they consider the euer misdeeming multitude to brand them with infamy, whom the most Ho∣norable spirits haue alwaies honored: and although pouer∣tie hath debarred them their fellow arts mens companie, yet nature hath set their better part at libertie, to delight them that loue Musicke. Amongst so many worthy men dayly labouring to call home againe the banished Philomele, whose purest blood the impure Minstralsie hath stained, I must presume to remember one of your wor∣ships least labours, (your greater deedes greater men must seeke to re∣quite) the entertaining into your seruice the least proficient in Musicke, who with all dutifull obseruancie, humbly commend my poore labours to your worships protection. My yeeres yet vnripened, and this worke not a little hastened, cannot promise any choice notes of Musicke, yet notwith∣standing I presume that gentlenes which accepts my seruice, will neuer reiect the labours of his seruant: Thus humbly taking my leaue, I leaue these to your worships fauours, and you to the keeping of him that best can keepe you. Your worships seruant. Thomas Weelkes.
The Table of all the Ballets and Madrigales contained in these bookes ¶To 5. Voices. AL at once well met faire Ladies. I To shorten winters sadnesse. II Sweete loue, I will no more abuse thee. III Whilst youthfull sports are lasting. IIII On the plaines Fairie traines. V Sweet hart arise, why doe you sleepe. VI Giue mee my hart and I will goe. VII Harke all ye louely saints aboue. VIII Say daintie dames shall we goe play. IX Phillis goe take thy pleasure. X In pride of May, the fields are gay. XI Sing wee at pleasure, content is our treasure. XII Now is the bridalls of faire Choralis. XIII Sing sheperds after mee. XIIII Welcome sweet pleasure, my welth and treasure. XV Ladie, your eye my loue enforced. XVI Wee shepherds sing, wee pipe, wee play. XVII I loue, and haue my loue regarded. XVIII Come clap thy hands thou sheperds swaine. The first part XIX Phillis hath sworne shee loues the man. The second part. XX Farewell my ioy adue my loue and pleasure. XXI Now is my Cloris fresh as May. XXII Vnto our flocks sweet Corolus. XXIII ¶To 6. Voices. Cease now delight, giue sorrow leaue to speake. XXIIII ¶FINIS.
I. AL at once wel met faire Ladies, sing we now, sing wee now our loue, ij. repaid is, ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la. All at once well met faire Ladies, sing wee now, sing wee now our loue, ij. repaid is. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet harts doe not for- sake vs, till night to sleep betake vs, ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Sweet harts doe not forsake vs, till night to sleep betake vs, ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Cytherea shall requite you, With delight least sorrow fright you. Fa la. Then help yee daintie Ladies, To sing our loues repaid is. Fa la.
II. TO shorten Winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with gladnesse, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. To shorten winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with glad- nesse, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Disguised all are comming, Right wantonly a mumming, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Disguised all are comming, Right wanton- ly a mumming. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
III. SWeet loue: I will no more abuse thee, abuse the, Sweet loue, I will no more abuse thee, ij. ij. Nor with my voyce accuse thee, ij. accuse thee, But tune my notes vnto thy praise, ij. and tell the world loue nere decaies, and tell the world, ij. loue nere decaies, and tell the world loue nere decayes: Sweet loue, doth concord euer cherish, what wanteth concord soone doth perish, soone doth pe- rish. what wanteth concord, what wanteth concord soone doth perish.
IIII. WHilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Whilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. With reuels and with wassels, make grief & care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la, With reuels and with wassals make grief & care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. la la la la la. For youth it well beseemeth, That pleasure he esteemeth. Fa la la. And sullen age is hated, That mirth would haue abated. Fa la la.
V. ON the plaines, Fairie traines, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set lesures. Fa la, Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la. On the plains, Fairie trains, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set leasures, Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la. Nimphs be- gin to come in quickly, thick and three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. present there to behold, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Nimphs begin to come in quickly, thick & three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. present there to behold. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la.
VI. SWeet hart arise, why doe you sleep, why doe you sleep, ij. Sweet hart arise, ij. why doe you sleep, ij. When louers wanton sports doe keepe. ij. when louers wanton sports doe keep, doe keep: The Sunne doth shine, the Birds doe sing, ij. doe sing, doe sing, the birds doe sing, ij. ij. ij. ij. and May de- light and ioy doth bring, ij. Then ioyne we hands and daunce till night, Tis pittie loue should want his right. should want his right. ij. Tis pittie loue should want his right.
VII. GIue mee my hart, and I will goe, and I will goe, ij. or else forsake your wonted no, your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no no, Giue mee my hart and I will goe, and I will goe, ij. or else forsake your wonted no, your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt mee, ij. With no no no, I meane to flout thee, ij. ij. With no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt me, ij. With no no no I meane to flout thee, ij. With no no no ile flout thee, no no no no no no no no no. Now is there hope wee shall agree, When double no imparteth yea, no no no If that bee so my deerest, With no no no, my hart thou cheerest. no no.
VIII. HArke all yee louely saints aboue, Di- ana hath agreed with loue, ij. his firie weapon to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Hark all yee louely saints aboue, Di- ana hath agreed with loue, ij. his firie weapon to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Do you not see how they agree, thē cease faire ladies, why weep yee, ij. Fa la la la la la▪ Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la Fa la la la la la la la la la. Do you not see how they agree, then cease faire ladies, why weep yee, ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. See, see your Mistrisse bids you cease, And welcome loue, with loues increase, Diana hath procur'd your peace. Fa la la. Cupid hath sworne his bow forlorne, To breake & burne, ere Ladies mourne. Fa la la.
IX. SAy daintie dames shall we go play, And run among the flowers gay, ij▪ about the va- lies, ij. and hie hils, hie hils, which Flora with her glory fils. Fa la la la la Fa la la la. Say daintie dames shall wee, goe play, And run among the flowers gay, ij. about the va- lies, ij. and hie hils, hie hils, which Flora with her glory fils. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la. The gentle hart will soone be wonne, to daunce and sport til day bee donne. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be wonne, to daunce and sport, til day bee donne. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
X. PHillis goe take thy pleasure, goe take thy pleasure, ij. my hart thou now hast broken, ij. ij. Goe frolike there sans measures, ij. ij. Those wounds thy lookes laid open, ij. ij. laid open, In- grauen there Phillis may finde, ij. Phillis is faire, but too vn- kinde. but too vn- kinde. ij. ij. ij but too vnkinde, ij.
XI. IN pride of May, the fields are gay, ij. are gay, in pride of May▪ the fields are gay, The birds doe sing, doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. In pride of May, the fields are gay, ij. are gay, In pride of May, the fields are gay, The birds doe sing, doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. So nature would, that all things should, that all things should, with ioy begin the spring, with ioy begin the spring, Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la. So nature would, that all things should, that all things should, with ioy be- gin the spring. ij. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la. Then Lady deere, doe you appeare, in beautie like the spring. Fa la la. I well dare say, the birds that day, more cheerfully will sing. Fa la la▪
XII. SIng wee at pleasure, at pleasure, Content is our treasure, ij. trea- sure, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sing wee at pleasure, at pleasure, Content is our treasure, ij. trea- sure, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet loue shall keep the ground, shall keepe the ground, whilst we his praises sound, ij. all shepherds in a ring, shall dauncing e-uer sing, ij. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet loue shall keep the groūd, keep the groūd, whilst wee his praises sound, ij. all shepherds in a ring, shall dauncing euer sing. ij. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XIII. NOw is the bridals of faire Chora- lis, Where eu'ry shepherd tunes his roundelaies, ij. ij. And I, ij. in honour of my Thoralis, ij. Tho-ralis, ij. Will not forget to sing her gen-tle praise, For ere the Sunne, ij. his iourney doth re- new, renew, Sweet loue shall act, ij. that now I wish were true. were true. that now I wish, were true. Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish were true. Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish were true. were true.
XIIII. SIng shepherds after mee, ij. sing after mee, our harts do neuer disagree, ij. disa- gree Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Sing sheperds after mee, ij. sing after mee, our harts doe neuer disagree, ij. disa- gree. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, black is our looke, we go not braue, ij. a mery hart is all we haue, is all we haue. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, black is our look, we go not braue, ij. a mery hart is all we haue. is all we haue. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XV. WElcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no. Welcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no. This mirth delights mee, when sorrows frights me. Then sing we all. Fa la la la la la. This mirth de- lights me, When sorrows frights me, Then sing we all. Fa la la la la la la. Then sing wee all, Fa la la la la. Sorrow content thee, mirth must preuent thee though much thou greeuest, thou none releeuest, no no, Ioy come delight mee, though sorrow spight mee. Griefe is disdainfull, sottish and painfull, then wait on pleasure, and loose no leasure, no no, Harts ease it lendeth, and comfort sendeth.
XVI. LAdy, your eie my loue enforced, enforced ij. And your proud look my hart deuorced. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Lady, your eie my loue enforced, en- forced ij. And your proud look my hart deuorced. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la. That now I laugh, ij. ij. I laugh, & now I cry, I cry & thus I sing, before I dye. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. That now I laugh, ij. ij. I laugh and now I cry, I cry, and thus I sing, before I dye. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XVII. WEe shepherds sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Wee shepheards sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Wee care for no gold, ij. but with our fold, wee daunce and praunce as pleasure would. ij. as pleasure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Wee care for no gold, ij. but with our fold, wee daunce and praunce as pleasure would. ij. as pleasure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XVIII. I Loue, I loue, and haue my loue regarded, ij. and sport with sport, as well rewarded. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. I loue, I loue, and haue my loue regarded, ij. & sport with sport, as well rewarded, Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Which makes me laugh, which makes me alwaies laugh, ij. when others weep, ij. and play with loue, ij. when others sleep. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la▪ Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Which makes me laugh, which makes mee alwaies laugh, which makes me laugh, when others weep, ij. and play with loue, ij. when others sleep. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la.
The first part. XIX. COme clap thy hands thou shepherds swaine, ij. ij. ij. thou shepherds swaine, Phillis doth loue thee, ij. once againe, a- gaine, If thou agree, then sing with mee, ij. Phillis my choyce, of choyce shall be. ij. ij. ij. ij. Phillis my choice of choice, Phillis my choice of choyce shall hee.
The second part. XX. PHillis hath sworne she loues the man, Phillis hath sworne, ij. ij. ij. she loues the man, Phillis hath sworne, ij. she loues the man, That know's what's loue, and loue her can, ij. Philemon then must needs agree, ij. Phillis my choice of choice shall bee. ij, Phillis my choyce of choice shall bee. ij. Phillis my choice of choice shall bee. ij. of choyce, of choyce shall bee.
XXI. FArewell my ioy, ij. farewell, adue my loue and pleasure, ij. To sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, Fa la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la, Farewell my ioy, ij. Farewel, a- adue my loue and pleasure, ij. To sport and toy, we haue no longer lea- sure, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la. Farewell, ij. a- due, a- due, adue, ij. vntill our next consorting, Sweet loue be true, and thus we end our sporting. ij. ij. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XXII. NOw is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in greene and flowers▪ gay, Fa la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Now is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in greene and flowers gay, Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Oh might I thinck August were neer, that haruest ioy might soone appeere. Fa la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. la la la la la. Oh might I thinck August were neere, that haruest ioy might soone ap- peare. Fa la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. But shee keeps May throughout the yeere, And August neuer comes the neere, Yet will I hope though shee bee May, August will come an other day. Fa la la.
XXIII. VNto our flockes, ij. sweet Coro- lus, vnto our flockes sweet Corolus, our bagpipe song now ca-rol thus. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Vnto our flocks, ij. sweet Co-ro-lus, vnto our flocks sweet Corolus, our bagpipe song now ca-roll thus. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Whilst flocks and heards be grazing, let vs our rest be praising. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Whilst flocks and heards be grazing, let vs our rest be praising. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. To teach our flocks their wonted bounds, On Bagpipes play the Shepheards grounds. The tender Lambs with bleting, Will help our ioyfull meeting.
An Elogie in remembrance of the Ho: the Lord Borough. 24. CEase now delight, ij. ij. ij. giue sorrow▪ leaue to speake, to speake ij. In flouds of teares, ij. bewayling his de- cease, beway- ling his decease, ij. bewayling his decease, ij. Whose timelesse death, ij. a stony heart would breake, ij. ij. a stony heart would breake: Sweet Boroughs life, ij. was Musickes lifes encrease: Borough is dead, ij. Borough is dead, ij. great Lord, of greater fame, of greater fame, Liue still on earth, by vertue of thy name. thy name. by vertue of thy name. Liue still on earth by vertue of thy name. by vertue of thy name. ij. ij. ij. FINIS.
TENOR. BALLETTS AND MADRIGALS TO fiue voyces, with one to 6. voyces: newly published BY Thomas Weelkes. IN LONDON PRINTED BY THOMAS ESTE, the assigne of William Barley. 1608.
To the right vvorshipful his Master Edward Darcye Esquier, Groome of her Maiesties priuie Chamber, Thomas Weelkes wisheth all heauenly ioyes whatsoeuer. RIght worshipfull, it is no small comfort the Musicke pro∣fessors conceiue, when they consider the euer misdeeming multitude to brand them with infamy, whom the most Ho∣norable spirits haue alwaies honored: and although pouer∣tie hath debarred them their fellow arts mens companie, yet nature hath set their better part at libertie, to delight them that loue Musicke. Amongst so many worthy men dayly labouring to call home againe the banished Philomele, whose purest blood the impure Minstralsie hath stained, I must presume to remember one of your wor∣ships least labours, (your greater deedes greater men must seeke to re∣quite) the entertaining into your seruice the least proficient in Musicke, who with all dutifull obseruancie, humbly commend my poore labours to your worships protection. My yeeres yet vnripened, and this worke not a little hastened, cannot promise any choice notes of Musicke, yet notwith∣standing I presume that gentlenes which accepts my seruice, will neuer reiect the labours of his seruant: Thus humbly taking my leaue, I leaue these to your worships fauours, and you to the keeping of him that best can keepe you. Your worships seruant. Thomas Weelkes.
The Table of all the Ballets and Madrigales contained in these bookes ¶To 5. Voices. AL at once well met faire Ladies. I To shorten winters sadnesse. II Sweete loue, I will no more abuse thee. III Whilst youthfull sports are lasting. IIII On the plaines Fairie traines. V Sweet hart arise, why doe you sleepe. VI Giue mee my hart and I will goe. VII Harke all ye louely saints aboue. VIII Say daintie dames shall we goe play. IX Phillis goe take thy pleasure. X In pride of May, the fields are gay. XI Sing wee at pleasure, content is our treasure. XII Now is the bridalls of faire Choralis. XIII Sing sheperds after mee. XIIII Welcome sweet pleasure, my welth and treasure. XV Ladie, your eye my loue enforced. XVI Wee shepherds sing, wee pipe, wee play. XVII I loue, and haue my loue regarded. XVIII Come clap thy hands thou sheperds swaine. The first part XIX Phillis hath sworne shee loues the man. The second part. XX Farewell my ioy adue my loue and pleasure. XXI Now is my Cloris fresh as May. XXII Vnto our flocks sweet Corolus. XXIII ¶To 6. Voices. Cease now delight, giue sorrow leaue to speake. XXIIII ¶FINIS.
I. AL at once well met faire Ladies, faire Ladies, sing we now our loue repaid is, ij. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. All at once well met faire Ladies, faire Ladies, sing wee now, our loue repaid is, ij. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet harts doe not forsake vs, till night to sleep beetake vs, beetake vs, Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Sweet harts doe not forsake vs, till night to sleep betake vs, betake vs. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la.
II. TO shorten Winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with gladnesse, Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. To shorten winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with gladnesse, Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Disguised all are comming, Right wantonly a mumming, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Disguised all are comming, Right wantonly a mumming. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Though masks incloud their beautie, Yet giue the eye her dutie. Fa la la. When Heauen is dark it shineth, And vnto loue enclineth. Fa la la.
III. SWeet loue: I will no more abuse thee, ij. a- buse thee, ij. ij. Nor with my voyce accuse thee, ij. But tune my notes vnto thy praise, ij. and tell the world loue nere decaies, ij. ij. ij. Sweet loue, doth concord euer cherish, what wanteth concord soone doth perish. soone doth perish. what wanteth concord soone doth perish.
IIII. WHilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Whilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. With reuels and with wassals, make griefe and care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. With reuels and with wassals, make griefe and care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. For youth it well beseemeth, That pleasure he esteemeth. Fa la la. And sullen age is hated, That mirth would haue abated. Fa la la.
V. ON the plaines, Fairie traines, were a treading measures, ij▪ Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set leasures. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la la la. On the plains, Fairie traines, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set leasures, Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la la la. Nimphs begin, to come in, quickly thick and three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. Present there to behold, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Nimphs begin, to come in, quickly thick and three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. Present there to behold. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la.
VI. SWeet hart arise, why doe you sleepe, ij. why doe you sleep, ij. When louers wanton sports doe keepe. ij. ij. doe keep, The Sunne doth shine, the Birds doe sing, the birds doe sing, doe sing, the Birds doe sing▪ doe sing, and May delight and ioy doth bring, ij. Then ioyne we hands and daunce till night, Tis pittie loue should want his right. ij. his right. Tis pittie loue should want his right should want his right.
VII. GIue me my hart, and I will goe, and I will goe, ij. or else forsake your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no, Giue mee my hart and I will goe, and I will goe. ij. or else forsake your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt me, doth doubt me, With no no no ile flout, With no no no I meane to flout thee, With no no no, ij. I meane to flout thee, no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt me, doth doubt mee, With no no no ile flout, With no no no I meane to flout thee, With no no no ij. I meane to flout thee. no no no no no no no no no.
VIII. HArke all yee louely saints aboue, Diana hath a- greed with loue, ij. his firie weapon to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Hark all yee louely saints aboue, Diana hath a- greed with loue, ij. his firie weapon to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Do you not see how they agree, then cease faire La- dies why weepe yee, ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Doe you not see how they agree, then cease faire la- dies, why weep yee, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la.
IX. SAy daintie dames shall wee goe play, And run among the flowers gay, flowers gay, ij. about the va- lies, & hie hils, and hie hils, which Flora with her glory fils. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Say daintie dames shall we goe play, And run among the flowers gay, flowers gay, ij. about the va- lies & hie hils, ij. which Flora with her glory fils. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be won, will soone be won, to daunce and sport till day be don. till day be donne, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be won, will soone bee woone, to daunce and sport, till day bee donne. till day be donne. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
X. PHillis goe take thy pleasure, ij. goe take thy plea- sure, my hart thou now hast bro- ken, my hart, my hart thou now hast bro- ken, Goe frolike there sans measure, ij. ij. Those wounds thy lookes laid open, ij. Ingrauen there Phillis may finde, ij. may finde, Phillis is faire, but too vnkinde but too vnkinde. ij. ij but too vnkinde, ij. ij. but too vnkinde.
XI. IN pride of May, ij. the fields are gay, ij. ij. are gay, The birds doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. In pride of May, ij. the fields are gay, ij. ij. are gay, The birds doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la, So nature would, that all things should, with ioy begin the spring, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. So nature would that all things should, with ioy begin the spring, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XII. SIng wee at pleasure, at pleasure, Content is our treasure, ij. our treasure, Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sing we at pleasure, at pleasure, content is our tresure, ij. our treasure, Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la, Sweet loue shall keep the ground, whilst we his praises sound, ij. ij. his prai-ses soūd, all sheperds in a ring, shall daūcing euer sing, ij. euer sing. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la, Sweet loue shal keep the groūd, whilst we his praises sound, ij. ij. his praises sound, all shepherds in a ring, shall dauncing euer sing. ij. euer sing. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XIII. NOw is the: Where eu'ry shepherd tunes his roundelaies, his roundelaies, ij. And I, ij. in honour of my Thoralis, ij. ij. Will not forget to sing her gentle praise, For ere the Sunne his iourney doth renew, Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish, ij. were true. Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish, ij. ij. were true. Sweet loue shall act, ij. that now I wish were true.
XIIII. SIng shepherds after mee, ij. after me, our harts doe. neuer disagree, disagree, ij. disa- gree, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Sing sheperds after mee, ij. after me, our harts doe neuer disagree, disagree, ij. disa- gree. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, we go not braue, a mery hart is all we haue ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, we goe not braue, a mery hart is all we haue, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la.
XV. WElcome sweet pleasure, my wealth & treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no. Welcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no. This mirth delights mee, when sorrows frights me. Then sing wee all. Fa la la la la la. This mirth delights me, when sorrows frights me, Then sing wee all. Fa la la la la la la. Then sing wee all, Fa la la la la la. Sorrow content thee, mirth must preuent thee though much thou greeuest, thou none releeuest, no no, Ioy come delight mee, though sorrow spight mee. Griefe is disdainfull, sottish and painfull, then wait on pleasure, and loose no leasure, no no, Harts ease it lendeth, and comfort sendeth.
XVI. LAdy, your eie my loue enforced, ij. And your proud looke my hart deuorced Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Lady, your eie my loue enforced, ij. And your proud look my hart deuorced. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. That now I laugh, ij. ij. I laugh, and now I cry, & thus I sing I sing before I die, I die, before I die. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. That now I laugh, ij. ij. I laugh, & now I cry, & thus I sing, I sing, before I die. I die. before I die. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la.
XVII. WEe shepherds sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. We shepherds sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. We care for no gold, ij. but with our fold, we daunce and praunce as plea- sure would. ij. as plea- sure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la. We care for no gold, ij. but with our fold, we daunce and praunce as plea- sure would. ij. as plea-sure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XVIII. I Loue, and haue my loue regarded, ij. and sport with sport, as well rewarded. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la. I loue, and haue my loue regarded, ij. and sport with sport, as well rewarded. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la. Which makes me alwaies laugh, which makes me laugh, ij. when others weepe, ij. ij. and play with loue, ij. when others sleep. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Which makes mee alwaies laugh, which makes mee laugh, ij. when others weep, ij. ij. and play with loue, ij. when others sleep. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la.
The first part. XIX. COme clap thy hands thou shepherds swaine, ij. ij. ij. thou shepherds swaine, ij. Phillis doth loue thee once a- gaine, ij. doth loue thee once againe, If thou agree, then sing with mee, ij. Phillis my choyce, of choyce shall be. ij. Phillis my choice, Phillis my choice of choyce shall bee. ij. ij. ij. of choice shall bee.
The second part. XX. PHillis hath sworne ij. ij. ij. she loues the man, ij. Phillis hath sworne, she loues the man, That know's what's loue, and loue her can, ij. and loue her can, Philemon then must needs agree, ij. Phillis my choice of choice shall bee. ij, ij. Phillis my choyce of choice shall bee. ij. ij. ij.
XXI. FArewell my ioy, ij. adue my loue and pleasure, ij. ij. To sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, ij. no longer leasure. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Farewell my ioy, ij. adue my loue and pleasure, ij. ij. To sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, ij, no longer leasure, Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Adue, ij. a- due, vntill our next consor-ting, consor- ting, Sweet loue be true, and thus we end our sport. And thus wee end our sporting. and thus wee end our sport, and thus wee end our sporting. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XXII. NOw is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in greene and flowers- gay, Fa la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la. Now is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in greene and flowers gay, Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Oh might I thinck August were neer, that haruest ioy might soone appeere. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Oh might I thinck August were neere, that haruest ioy might soone appeare. Fa la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. But shee keeps May throughout the yeere, And August neuer comes the neere, Yet will I hope though shee bee May, August will come an other day. Fa la la.
XXIII. VNto our flocks, ij. sweet Corolus, ij. our bagpipe song now caroll thus. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Vnto our flocks, ij. sweet Co-rolus, ij. our bagpipe song now caroll thus. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Whilst flocks & heards be grazing, let vs our rest bee praising, bee praising. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Whilst flocks and heards be grazing, let vs our rest be praising, bee praising. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. To teach our flocks their wonted bounds, On Bagpipes play the Shepheards grounds. The tender Lambs with bleting, Will help our ioyfull meeting.
An Elogie in remembrance of the Ho: the Lord Borough. 24. CEase now delight, delight, ij. ij. giue sorrow leaue to speake, ij. In flouds of teares, beway- ling his de- cease, ij. Whose timelesse death, a stony heart would breake, ij. ij. Sweet Boroughs life, ij. Sweet life, Sweet Boroughs life was Musickes lifes encrease, encrease: Borough is dead, ij. is dead, Borough is dead, ij. Borough is dead, great Lord, of greater fame, of greater fame, Liue still on earth, by vertue of thy name. Liue still on earth by vertue of thy name. by vertue of thy name. by vertue of thy name. of thy name. by vertue of thy name. thy name. FINIS.
QVINTVS. BALLETTS AND MADRIGALS TO fiue voyces, with one to 6. voyces: newly published BY Thomas Weelkes. IN LONDON PRINTED BY THOMAS ESTE, the assigne of William Barley. 1608.
To the right vvorshipful his Master Edward Darcye Esquier, Groome of her Maiesties priuie Chamber, Thomas Weelkes wisheth all heauenly ioyes whatsoeuer. RIght worshipfull, it is no small comfort the Musicke pro∣fessors conceiue, when they consider the euer misdeeming multitude to brand them with infamy, whom the most Ho∣norable spirits haue alwaies honored: and although pouer∣tie hath debarred them their fellow arts mens companie, yet nature hath set their better part at libertie, to delight them that loue Musicke. Amongst so many worthy men dayly labouring to call home againe the banished Philomele, whose purest blood the impure Minstralsie hath stained, I must presume to remember one of your wor∣ships least labours, (your greater deedes greater men must seeke to re∣quite) the entertaining into your seruice the least proficient in Musicke, who with all dutifull obseruancie, humbly commend my poore labours to your worships protection. My yeeres yet vnripened, and this worke not a little hastened, cannot promise any choice notes of Musicke, yet notwith∣standing I presume that gentlenes which accepts my seruice, will neuer reiect the labours of his seruant: Thus humbly taking my leaue, I leaue these to your worships fauours, and you to the keeping of him that best can keepe you. Your worships seruant. Thomas Weelkes.
The Table of all the Ballets and Madrigales contained in these bookes ¶To 5. Voices. AL at once well met faire Ladies. I To shorten winters sadnesse. II Sweete loue, I will no more abuse thee. III Whilst youthfull sports are lasting. IIII On the plaines Fairie traines. V Sweet hart arise, why doe you sleepe. VI Giue mee my hart and I will goe. VII Harke all ye louely saints aboue. VIII Say daintie dames shall we goe play. IX Phillis goe take thy pleasure. X In pride of May, the fields are gay. XI Sing wee at pleasure, content is our treasure. XII Now is the bridalls of faire Choralis. XIII Sing sheperds after mee. XIIII Welcome sweet pleasure, my welth and treasure. XV Ladie, your eye my loue enforced. XVI Wee shepherds sing, wee pipe, wee play. XVII I loue, and haue my loue regarded. XVIII Come clap thy hands thou sheperds swaine. The first part XIX Phillis hath sworne shee loues the man. The second part. XX Farewell my ioy adue my loue and pleasure. XXI Now is my Cloris fresh as May. XXII Vnto our flocks sweet Corolus. XXIII ¶To 6. Voices. Cease now delight, giue sorrow leaue to speake. XXIIII ¶FINIS.
I. AL at once wel met faire Ladies, sing we now, we now, ij. ij. ij. our loue repaid is, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. All at once well met faire Ladies, sing wee now, we now, ij. ij. ij. our loue repaid is, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet harts doe not forsake vs, till night to sleep betake vs, ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet harts do not forsake vs, til night to sleep be- take vs, ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la.
II. TO shorten Winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with gladnesse, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. To shorten winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with gladnesse, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Disguised all are comming, Right wantonly a mumming. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Disguised all are comming, Right wantonly a mumming. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Though masks incloud their beautie, Yet giue the eye her dutie. Fa la la, When Heauen is dark it shineth, And vnto loue enclineth. Fa la la.
III. SWeet loue, I will no more abuse thee, ij. ij. Sweet loue, I will no more abuse thee, Nor with my voyce accuse thee, ij. ij. But tune my notes vnto thy praise, ij. and tell the world loue nere decaies, ij. decaies, ij. ij. loue nere de- cayes: Sweet loue, doth concord euer cherish, what wanteth concord soone doth pe- rish. what wanteth concord soone doth pe- rish.
IIII. WHilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Whilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. With reuels and with wassels, make grief and care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. la Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. With reuels and with wassals, make griefe and care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. For youth it well beseemeth, That pleasure he esteemeth. Fa la la. And sullen age is hated, That mirth would haue abated. Fa la la.
V. ON the plaines, Fairie traines, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set leasures. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la la la. On the plains, Fairie trains, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set leasures, Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la la la. Nimphs begin, To come in, quickly thick and three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. Present there to behold, ij. to behold, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Nimphs begin, To come in, quickly thick and three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. Present there to behold. ij. to behold. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
V.I. SWeet hart arise, why doe you sleepe, ij. why doe you sleep, Sweet hart arise, why doe you sleep, ij. you sleep, When louers wanton sports doe keepe. ij. doe keep, The Sunne doth shine, the Birds doe sing, doe sing, the birds doe sing, the Birds doe sing, ij. ij. and May delight and ioy doth bring, ij. Then ioyne we hands and daunce till night, Tis pittie loue should want his right. his right. Tis pittie loue should want his right.
VII. GIue me my hart, and I will goe, giue me my hart, my hart, giue me my hart, or else forsake your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no no, Giue mee my hart and I will goe, and I will goe. ij. or else forsake your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt mee, With no no no I meane to flout thee, With no no no, With no no no I meane to flout, to flout thee, no no no no no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt me, doubt mee, With no no no ile flout thee, ij. With no no no I meane to flout thee, no no no no no no no no no no no no no. Now is there hope wee shall agree, When double no imparteth yea, no no no If that bee so my deerest, With no no no, my hart thou cheerest▪ no no.
VIII. HArke all yee louely saints aboue, Diana hath agreed with loue, ij. his firie weapon to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Hark all yee louely saints aboue, Diana hath agreed with loue, ij. his firie weapon to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Do you not see how they a- gree, then cease faire ladies why weep yee, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Doe you not see how they agree, then cease faire Ladies, why weep yee. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
IX. SAy daintie dames shall we goe play, go play, And run among the flowers gay, flowers gay, about the va- lies ij. and hie hils, which Flora with her glo- ry fils. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Say daintie dames shall we goe play, go play, And run among the flowers gay, flowers gay, about the va- lies, ij. and hie hils, which Flora with her glory fils. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be wonne, to daunce and sport till day be donne. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be won, to daunce and sport, till day be donne. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
X. PHillis goe take thy pleasure, goe take thy plea- sure, my hart, my hart thou now hast broken, ij. Goe frolike there sans measures, ij. ij. Those wounds thy lookes laid open, laid o- pen, ij. thy lookes laid open, Ingrauen there Phillis may finde, ij. Phillis may finde, may finde, Phillis is faire, ij. but too vnkind. vnkinde. Phillis is faire, but too vnkind, vnkinde, ij. ij. but too vnkinde. vn- kinde.
XI. IN pride of May, the fields are gay, ij. ij. the fields are gay, The birds doe sing, ij. doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. In pride of May, the fields are gay, ij. ij. the fields are gay, the birds doe sing, doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la. So nature would, that all things should, with ioy begin the spring, ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. So nature would, that all things should, with ioy be- gin the spring. ij. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la.
XII. SIng wee at pleasure, Content is our treasure, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sing wee at pleasure, Content is our treasure, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet loue shall keep the ground, whilst we his praises sound, ij. his praises sound, all shepherds in a ring, in a ring, shall dauncing e-uer sing, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet loue shall keep the ground, whilst wee his praises sound, ij. his praises sound, all shepherds in a ring, shall dauncing e- uer sing. ij. euer sing. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XIII. NOw is the bridals of faire Chora- lis, Where eu'ry shepherd tunes his roundelaies, ij. his rounde- laies, ij. And I, ij. in honour of my Thoralis, ij. ij. Will not for- get to sing her gentle praise, For ere the Sunne his iourney doth re- new, Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish were true. that now I wish, ij. were true. Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish, that now I wish were true. Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish ij. ij. ij. were true.
XIIII. SIng shepherds after mee, after me, ij. ij. our harts doe neuer disagree, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Sing sheperds after me, ij. ij. our harts do neuer, ij. ij. disagree, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, our wealth is ease, we wish no more, black is our looke, we goe not braue, we goe not braue, a mery hart is all we haue, ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, our wealth is ease, wee wish no more, black is our looke, wee goe not braue, we goe not braue, a mery hart is all we haue. ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la.
XV. WElcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no no no no. Welcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no no no no, This mirth delights mee, When sorrowes frights mee. Then sing we all. Fa la la la la. This mirth delights me, When sorrowes frights mee, Then sing we all. Fa la la la la la. Then sing we all, Fa la la la la. Sorrow content thee, mirth must preuent thee though much thou greeuest, thou none releeuest, no no, Ioy come delight mee, though sorrow spight mee. Griefe is disdainfull, sottish and painfull, then wait on pleasure, and loose no leasure, no no, Harts ease it lendeth, and comfort sendeth.
XVI. LAdy, your eie my loue enforced, ij. ij. And your proud look my hart deuorced Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Lady, your eye my loue enforced, ij. ij. And your proud look my hart deuorced. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. That now I laugh, ij. ij. ij. and now I cry, and thus I sing, before I dye, ij· ij. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la. That now I laugh, ij. ij. ij. and now I cry, and thus I sing, before I dye. ij. ij. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la.
XVII. WEe shepherds sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Wee shepheards sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Wee care for no gold, ij. but with our fold, we daunce and praunce as plea- sure would. ij. as plea- sure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Wee care for no gold, ij. but with our fold, wee daunce and praunce as plea-sure would. ij. as plea- sure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XVIII. I Loue, I loue, and haue my loue regarded, I loue. and haue my loue re- garded, & sport with sport, as well rewar-ded. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. I loue, I loue, and haue my loue regar- ded, I loue, and haue my loue re- garded, & sport with sport, as well rewarded, Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. which makes mee laugh, which makes me alwaies laugh, ij. when others weep, ij. ij. and play with loue, ij. when others sleep. Fa la, Fa la, Fa la, Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la, Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. which makes me alwaies laugh, which makes me laugh, ij. when others weep, ij. and play with loue, ij. when others sleep. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la.
The first part. XIX. COme clap thy hands thou sheperds swaine, ij. ij. ij. ij. Phil- lis doth loue thee once a- gaine, ij. ij, If thou agree, then sing with me, then sing with mee, ij. Phillis my choyce, of choyce shall be. ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. of choyce shall bee. ij.
The second part. XX. PHillis hath sworne she loues the man, ij. ij. ij. ij. ij. she loues the man, That know's what's loue, and loue her can, ij. Philemon then must needs agree, ij. must needs agree. Phillis my choice of choice shall be. ij, ij. ij. Phillis my choyce of choyce shall bee. ij. of choyce shall bee.
XXI. FArewell my ioy, ij. adue my loue and pleasure, ij. To sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, ij. no longer lea- sure, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la, la▪ Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Farewell my ioy, ij. adue my loue and pleasure, ij. To sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, ij. no longer lea- sure, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Farewell, ij. adue, a- due, vntill our next consorting, ij. consorting, Sweet loue be true, and thus we end our sporting. ij. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XXII. NOw is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in green & flowers gay, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Now is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in green, & flowers gay, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Oh might I thinck August were neere, that haruest ioy might soone ap- peere. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Oh might I thinck August were neere, that haruest ioy might soone appeare. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la, Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. But shee keeps May throughout the yeere, And August neuer comes the neere, Yet will I hope though shee bee May, August will come an other day. Fa la la.
XXIII. VNto our flocks, ij. sweet Corolus, vnto our flocks sweet Coro- lus, our bagpipe song now carol thus. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la Vnto our flocks ij. sweet Co-rolus, vnto our flockes sweet Co-ro-lus, our bagpipe song now caroll thus. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Whilst flocks and heards be grazing, let vs our rest be prai- sing. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Whilst flocks and heards be, gra- zing, let vs our rest be prai- sing. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. To teach our flocks their wonted bounds, On Bagpipes play the Shepheards grounds. The tender Lambs with bleting, Will help our ioyfull meeting.
An Elogie in remembrance of the Ho: the Lord Borough. 24. CEase now delight, ij. delight. ij. delight, Cease now de- light, giue sorrow leaue to speake, ij. In flouds of teares, ij. be- wayling his decease, bewayling his de- cease, ij. ij. Whose timelesse death, ij. a stony heart would breake, ij. ij. would break: Sweet Boroughs life, ij. was Musickes lifes en- crease: Borough is dead, Borough is dead, is dead, ij. ij. Borough is dead, great Lord, of greater fame, of greater fame, Liue still on earth, by vertue of thy name. ij. by vertue of thy name. ij. ij. thy name. FINIS.
An Elogie in remembrance of the Ho: the Lord Borough. SEXTVS. 24. CEase now delight, ij. now delight, Cease now delight, ij. delight. Giue sorrow leaue to speak, ij. In flouds of teares, ij. bewayling his de- cease, beewayling his decease. ij. ij. his decease, Whose timelesse death, ij. a stony heart would break, would breake, a stony hart would break, ij. would break, Sweet Boroughs life, ij. was Musicks life en- crease, ij Borough is dead, ij. is dead, Borough is dead, great Lord, of greater fame, of greater fame. Liue still on earth by vertue of thy name, Liue still on earth by vertue of thy name. ij. ij. by vertue of thy name. ij. FINIS.
BASSVS. BALLETTS AND MADRIGALS TO fiue voyces, with one to 6. voyces: newly published BY Thomas Weelkes. IN LONDON PRINTED BY THOMAS ESTE, the assigne of William Barley. 1608.
To the right vvorshipful his Master Edward Darcye Esquier, Groome of her Maiesties priuie Chamber, Thomas Weelkes wisheth all heauenly ioyes whatsoeuer. RIght worshipfull, it is no small comfort the Musicke pro∣fessors conceiue, when they consider the euer misdeeming multitude to brand them with infamy, whom the most Ho∣norable spirits haue alwaies honored: and although pouer∣tie hath debarred them their fellow arts mens companie, yet nature hath set their better part at libertie, to delight them that loue Musicke. Amongst so many worthy men dayly labouring to call home againe the banished Philomele, whose purest blood the impure Minstralsie hath stained, I must presume to remember one of your wor∣ships least labours, (your greater deedes greater men must seeke to re∣quite) the entertaining into your seruice the least proficient in Musicke, who with all dutifull obseruancie, humbly commend my poore labours to your worships protection. My yeeres yet vnripened, and this worke not a little hastened, cannot promise any choice notes of Musicke, yet notwith∣standing I presume that gentlenes which accepts my seruice, will neuer reiect the labours of his seruant: Thus humbly taking my leaue, I leaue these to your worships fauours, and you to the keeping of him that best can keepe you. Your worships seruant. Thomas Weelkes.
The Table of all the Ballets and Madrigales contained in these bookes ¶To 5. Voices. AL at once well met faire Ladies. I To shorten winters sadnesse. II Sweete loue, I will no more abuse thee. III Whilst youthfull sports are lasting. IIII On the plaines Fairie traines. V Sweet hart arise, why doe you sleepe. VI Giue mee my hart and I will goe. VII Harke all ye louely saints aboue. VIII Say daintie dames shall we goe play. IX Phillis goe take thy pleasure. X In pride of May, the fields are gay. XI Sing wee at pleasure, content is our treasure. XII Now is the bridalls of faire Choralis. XIII Sing sheperds after mee. XIIII Welcome sweet pleasure, my welth and treasure. XV Ladie, your eye my loue enforced. XVI Wee shepherds sing, wee pipe, wee play. XVII I loue, and haue my loue regarded. XVIII Come clap thy hands thou sheperds swaine. The first part XIX Phillis hath sworne shee loues the man. The second part. XX Farewell my ioy adue my loue and pleasure. XXI Now is my Cloris fresh as May. XXII Vnto our flocks sweet Corolus. XXIII ¶To 6. Voices. Cease now delight, giue sorrow leaue to speake. XXIIII ¶FINIS.
. AL at once well met faire Ladies, sing wee now our loue repaid is, ij. ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. All at once well met faire Ladies, sing wee now, our loue repaid is, ij. ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Sweet harts doe not forsake vs, till night to sleep betake vs, to sleep betake vs, Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Sweet harts doe not forsake vs, till night to sleep betake vs. to sleepe betake vs. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la. Cytherea shall requite you, With delight least sorrow fright you. Fa la. Then help yee daintie Ladies, To sing our loues repaid is. Fa la la.
II. TO shorten Winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with gladnesse, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. To shorten winters sadnesse, See where the Nimphs with gladnesse, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Disguised all are comming, Right wantonly a mumming, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Disguised all are comming, Right wantonly a mumming. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Though masks incloud their beautie, Yet giue the eye her dutie. Fa la la. When Heauen is dark it shineth, And vnto loue enclineth. Fa la la.
III. SWeet loue, ij. ij. I will no more abuse thee, Nor with my voyce accuse thee, ij. But tune my notes vnto thy praise, and tell the world loue nere decaies, and tell the world, loue nere decayes, loue nere decayes, ij. Sweet loue, doth concord euer cherish, what wanteth concord soone doth perish. what wanteth concord soone doth perish.
IIII. WHilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Whilst youthfull sports are lasting, to feasting turne our fasting. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. With reuels and with wassals, make griefe and care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. With reuels and with wassals, make griefe and care our vassals. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. For youth it well beseemeth, That pleasure he esteemeth. Fa la la. And sullen age is hated, That mirth would haue abated. Fa la la.
V. ON the plaines, Fairie traines, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set leasures. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la. On the plains, Fairie traines, were a treading measures, ij. Satires plaid, Fairies staid, at the stops set leasures, Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la la la la. Nimphs begin to come in, quickly thick and three- fold, Now they daunce, now they praunce, ij. Present there to behold, Fa la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Nimphs begin to come in, quickly thick and three- fold, Now they daūce, now they praunce, ij. Present there to behold. Fa la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
VI. SWeet hart arise, ij. why doe you sleepe, ij. The Sunne doth shine, the Birds doe sing, the birds doe sing, doe sing, the Birds doe sing, doe sing, and May delight and ioy doth bring: Then ioyne wee hands and daunce till night, Tis pittie loue should want his right. should want his right.
VII. GIue mee my hart, and I will goe, ij. or else for- sake your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no, Giue mee my hart and I will goe, ij. or else forsake your wonted no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt mee, With no no no I meane to flout thee, ij. no no no no no no no no no no no, But since my deere doth doubt mee, With no no no I meane to flout thee, ij. no no no no no no no no no no no. Now is there hope wee shall agree, When double no imparteth yea, no no no If that bee so my deerest, With no no no, my hart thou cheerest. no no.
VIII. HArke all yee louely Saints aboue, Diana hath agreed with loue, his firie weapon to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Hark all yee louely saints aboue, Diana hath agreed with loue, his firie weapon to remoue, Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Doe you not see how they agree, then cease faire La- dies why weep yee, ij. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Do you not see how they agree, then cease faire La- dies, why weep yee, ij. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. See, see your Mistrisse bids you cease, And welcome loue, with loues increase, Diana hath procur'd your peace. Fa la la. Cupid hath sworne his bow forlorne, To breake & burne, ere Ladies mourne. Fa la la.
IX. SAy daintie dames shall we goe play, And run among the flowers gay, ij. about the va- lies, about the va- lies and hie hils, which Flora with her glory fils. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Say daintie dames shall we go play, And run among the flowers gay, ij. about the va- lies, about the va- lies and hie hils, which Flora with her glory fils. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be won, to daunce and sport till day be donne. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. The gentle hart will soone be wonne, to daunce and sport, till day be donne. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la.
X. PHillis goe take thy: My hart thou now hast broken, my hart, my hart thou now hast bro- ken, Goe frolike there sans measure, ij. Those wounds thy lookes laid open, thy lookes laid open, Ingrauen there Phillis may finde, ij. Phillis is faire, but too vnkinde. but too vnkinde. Phillis is faire, but too vnkinde, but too vn- kinde. ij. but too vnkinde.
XI. IN pride: The fields are gay, In pride of May, the fields are gay, The birds doe▪ sing doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. The fields are gay, In pride of May, the fields are gay, The birds do sing, doe sweetly sing, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. la la la la la la la la la la la la la, So nature would, that all things should, with ioy begin the spring, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. So nature would, that all things should, with ioy be- gin the spring, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la.
XII. SIng wee at pleasure, Content is our treasure, ij. Fa▪ la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la▪ Sing we at pleasure, Content is our tresure, ij. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la la la, Sweet loue shal keep the ground, whilst we his praises sound, ij. his praises sound, all sheperds in a ring, shall dauncing euer sing, ij. Fa la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la, Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la, Sweet loue shal keep the groūd, whilst we his praises sound, ij. his praises sound, all shepherds in a ring, shall dauncing euer sing ij. Fa la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la, Fa la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la. Fa la la la la.
XIII. NOw is the: Where eu'ry shepherd tunes his roundelaies, ij. Where eu'ry sheperd tunes his roundelaies, And I, and I in honour of my Thora- lis, Will not forget to sing her gentle praise, For ere the Sunne his iourney doth renew, Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish, Sweet loue shall act, that now I wish, ij. that now I wish were true. that now I wish, that now I wish were true.
XIIII. SIng shepherds after me, after me, our harts do neuer disagree, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. Sing shepherds after mee, after me, our harts doe neuer disagree, Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, we go not braue, a mery hart is all we haue. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. No war can spoile vs of our store, we goe not braue, a mery hart is all we haue. ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. la la la la.
XV. WElcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no. Welcome sweet pleasure, my wealth and treasure, To hast our playing, ther's no delaying, no no no no no no no no. This mirth delights mee, when sorrows frights me. Then sing wee all. Fa la la la la la. This mirth delights me, when sorrows frights me. Then sing wee all. Fa la la la la la la. Then sing wee all, Fa la la la la la. Sorrow content thee, mirth must preuent thee though much thou greeuest, thou none releeuest, no no, Ioy come delight mee, though sorrow spight mee. Griefe is disdainfull, sottish and painfull, then wait on pleasure, and loose no leasure, no no, Harts ease it lendeth, and comfort sendeth.
XVI. LAdy, Your eye my loue enforced, And your proud looke my hart deuorced. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la. your eie my loue enforced, And your proud looke my hart deuorced. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la. That now I laugh, ij. and now I cry, and thus I sing, I sing be-fore I die, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la. That now I laugh, ij. and now I cry, and thus I sing, I sing, before I die▪ ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la.
XVII. WEe shepherds sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Wee shepherds sing, we pipe, we play, with pretty sport we passe the day, ij. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la. Wee care for no gold, but with our fold, we daunce and praunce as plea- sure would. as pleasure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la. la la la la. We care for no gold, but with our fold, wee daunce & praunce as plea-sure would. as pleasure would. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la. la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XVIII. I Loue, and haue my loue re- garded, and sport with sport, as well rewar- ded. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la. I loue, and haue my loue re- garded, & sport with sport, as well rewarded. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la la. Fa la la la. la. Fa la la. when o- thers weep, and play with loue, when others sleep. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la. Fa la. Fa la la. when o- thers weepe, and play with loue, when others sleep. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la. Fa la la. Fa la. Fa la la. My Loue with loue hath me requited, With twentie kisses me delighted. Fa la. Which makes, &c. Fa la. Sweet hart thou hast my heart for euer, That sweetly didst my hart deliuer. Fa la. Which makes, &c. Fa la.
The first part. XIX. COme clap thy hands thou shepherds swaine, ij. Phillis doth loue thee once againe, ij. Phillis my choyce, of choyce shall be. ij. Phillis my choice of choice shall bee, ij. Phillis my choice of choyce shall bee of choice shall bee. of choice shall bee.
The second part. XX. PHillis hath sworne she loues the man, shee loues the man, ij. she loues the man, That know's what's loue, and loue her can, Philemon then must needs agree, Phillis my choice of choice shall bee. ij. ij. Phillis my choyce, of choyce shall bee. ij. of choice shall bee.
XXI. FArewell my ioy: Adue my loue and plea-sure, To sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Adue my loue and pleasure, To sport and toy, we haue no longer leasure, Fa la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fare- well, ij. A- due, a- due, vntill our next con-sor- ting, Sweet loue be true, And thus wee end our spor- ting. ij. our spor- ting. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la la.
XXII. NOw is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in green and flowers gay, Fa la la la, Fa la la la, Fa la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la, Now is my Cloris fresh as May, all clad in green, & flowers gay, Fa la la la, Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Oh might I thinck August were neer, that haruest ioy might soone apeer. Fa la la la la la, la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la. Oh might I thinck August were neer, that haruest ioy might soone appere. Fa la la la la la la la la, Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la, Fa la la la. Fa la la la la la la. But shee keeps May throughout the yeere, And August neuer comes the neere, Yet will I hope though shee bee May, August will come an other day. Fa la la.
XXIII. VNto our flocks, our flocks sweet Corolus, ij. our bagpipe song now caroll thus. Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Vnto our flocks, our flocks sweet Corolus, ij. our bagpipe song now caroll thus▪ Fa la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la. Whilst flocks & heards bee grazing, let vs our rest bee praising. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la. Whilst flocks & heards be grazing, let vs our rest be praising. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la. Fa la la la la la la la la la la la. To teach our flocks their wonted bounds, On Bagpipes play the Shepheards grounds. The tender Lambs with bleting, Will help our ioyfull meeting.
An Elogie in remembrance of the Ho: the Lord Borough. 24. CEase now delight, ij. ij. de- light, giue sorrow leaue to speake, to speake, In flouds of teares, beeway- ling his decease, ij. Whose timelesse death, a stony heart would break, ij. would breake, Sweet Boroughs life, ij. was Musicks lifes encrease, ij. Borough is dead, is dead, Borough is dead, ij. Borough is dead, great Lord, of greater fame, of greater fame, Liue still on earth, by vertue of thy name. ij. of thy name. Liue still on earth by vertue of thy name. by vertue of thy name. by vertue of thy name▪ thy name. FINIS.
