25401 S114005 99849233 14371
AN ANSVVEARE VNTO CERTAINE CRABBED QVESTIONS pretending a reall presence of Christ in the Sacramente: Latelie propounded by some secret Papist, to the great troubling of the con∣sciences of the simple. Together with a Discouerie of the Iesuiticall opi∣nion of Iustification, guilefully vttered by Sherwyne at the time of his execution. Gathered & setfoorth by Peter Whyte, very necessary & profitable for this daungerous time. Seene and allowed according to the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions. fleur-de-lis ¶ VBIQVE FLORESCIT. LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe and Henry Kirkham, & are to be sold at his shop at the little north doore of S. Paule.
To the Right Honou∣rable the Lorde Ambrose Dudley Earle of Warwicke, Maister of the Queenes Maiestres ordinance, & Knight of the honourable order of the Garter, & one of her Maiesties Priuy Counsell, Pe∣ter White desireth from God in Christe Jesu continuall encrease of true godlinesse, with much honour in this life and in the world to come, the Crowne of eternall Glorie. THe shortnesse of Sa∣tan his time (most noble Earle) in this worlde by hys ex∣treame rage, wher∣in in these dayes ful of all daunger hee goeth farre be∣yonde hymselfe, may very well ap∣pere.Apoal.  In which short time no doubt, he will so bestirre him, that the very deapth of his craftes and mischiefe shalbe instantly imployed to the di∣sturbance of the Church of God, & the vpholdinge of hys owne king∣dome (now readie to fall) in that he
possibly can, eyther in hymselfe by continuall temptation, or in his in∣strumentes and members, by sedi∣tions, conspiracies, treasons, hypo∣crisies & dissimulations in all thin∣ges but especially in matters of re∣ligion,Ephes. 6. which S. Paule termeth spi∣rituall craftines in heauenly things. Which thing is most euidēt in these last messengers of hys, the Iesuites or rather Iebusites, the verye dregs of the bottomlesse pitte, led by the vncleane spirite of error, which do not a little disturbe the poore flock of Christ, maruelously disquiet and trouble the consciences of the ig∣norant, and occupie with noueltie the heads of the multitude by their secreate conferences, where they haue accesse: and by their pamflets and libelles spread abroade, where they thēselues cannot come: wher∣unto is adioined one other perilous mischiefe, namelye the workinge hand of the dissembling Papist, and Atheist, whereof the one being di∣spensed withall from the Pope to conforme themselues often times
outwardlye vnto the lawes, that thereby they maye the safelier and without suspition further the Iesui∣ticall attempted enterprise, is the verie mischiefe of our time. These insinnuate themselues oftentimes into suche places wherein they can doe harme, and by flatterie winne great credite in the world, and euer as opportunitie serueth, they geue the Gospell a blowe, so that some∣time they wounde daungerously to the greate hinderance of true doc∣trine, and the againe renewinge of Poperie. These they be (right ho∣nourable Earle) that are the verye poyson of our time. The Pope by his Iesuites and seminaries, without these is altogether lame and can do nothinge. The simple papistes all∣thoughe obstinate, and refuse for conscience to come to the churche, in respecte of these are nothinge. These vnder color of law dare bold∣ly, and impudently impugne Gods lavve, these deface the preachers, discredite the ministerie, seduce & deceyue the people, so that where
anye one of these is of credite or countenaunce in any parish within this land there the minister trauay∣leth in vayne, hys doctrine is with∣out credite and fruite be hee neuer so painefull. There is nothinge but brawles and contention, there the people haue their mindes alienated from the preacher vnprepared to receiue the Gospell, and very ready for these seminarie Iesuites. Thys poysoned infection (righte noble Earle) must either haue a speedie & strong purgation, or els it wil breed into an incurable leprosie. It is now past recouerie by preaching & tra∣uell of the minister. For thereof is made either a skoffe or els a matter of course without fruite, therefore the swoorde and authoritie of the stronge magistrates, ioyned with a feruent zeale of Gods trueth, must cure this infection: the preacher is too much in contempt, and the in∣ferior magistrate too weake to re∣medie this mischiefe, which if it be not in time prouided for, will bring this florishinge realme and churche
of God therin nourished vnder our gratious Debora vnto such miseries and iuste deserued plagues,3. Reg. 18.19.20.21.22.23.24. Paral. 28.29.34.35.36. Ierem. 52. Thren. 1.2. Cant. 2. 2. Corr. 11. Prouer. 12. as the sufferie of lyke hypocrites in the dayes of Ezechias and good Iosias did bringe the kingdome of Israell vnto. For these be those foxes that Salomon would haue taken foorth of the Lordes vineyarde leaste they vtterlie spoile it. These bee Operarij dolosi that canne and will dissemble their countenaunce agreable vnto the time, whilest they sette forward the decay, and seeke the ouerthrow of our happie time, and no mar∣uell hereof for the deuill himselfe is transfigured into an angell of light to further his owne purpose. Ther∣fore euery one of Gods children in his place and calling, are to oppose thēselues to their vttermost against these and suche like enterprises of Sathan: The godlye magistrates in the zeale of Phinies and Iehu with the swoord to suppresse these newe spronge IesuitesNumb. 25. 2. Regm. 10. (as her gracious Maiestie with her honourable and godly counsell haue necessarily be∣gon
to doe) and wythall to roote forth of this common wealth these disguised Gybeonites,Iosu. 9. Iudg 13. 1. Reg. 18.19. and dissem∣bling Ephramites, that can not, or wil not pronounce Shiboleth right∣ly, and as they should doe. The Bi∣shops, preachers and ministers with the spirite of Elias painfully to ga∣ther the drosse and poperie againe (lately scattered by these Semina∣ries) out of the harts of the people, both by preaching & writing, and in like sorte to enforce the true do∣ctrine of Christ his Gospel earnest∣ly vpon them: so shall the Lordes busines be done with effect, and the Lord will withdraw his curse from vs, which we haue iustlie deserued for dooing his worke hitherto so negligentlie. Herein I thought I could not any waie bestow my tra∣uell better for the time, and more for the profit of gods Church, then to ansvvere certaine crabbed que∣stions, touching a pretended reall presence, subtillie penned by some secret enemie, to the troubling of the minds and consciences of the
simple. Wherin I haue also added a discouerie and confutation of the subtiltie of the Iesuitical opinion of iustification, guilfullie vttred a late by Sherwin at his death. But by Al∣bertus Pighius, and others verie daungerouslie long agoe at large put foorth to the hurt of manie, which answere I haue offered vnto your Honor, not as things vvorthie of such a personage, but that vnder so good a protectiō they may with more fauor come into the handes of manie, presuming greatly here∣in of your accustomed clemencie, alwaies coupled vvith the feruent zeale of true religion. Wherein the Lord dailie more & more encrease your godlie zeale to his glorie, your owne felicitie, and the great com∣fort of his Church. Amen. Your Honors most humble and faithfull Orator, Peter White.
The Principall contentes in this Aunsweare. 1 First the Papistes leaue the written worde & flie vnto vnwritten verities. 2 Secondly to cleaue onely to the written woord of God in matters of Faith & Religion is the infallible marke of Christes true Church. 3 Thirdly that the doctrine of the reall presence is false and vntrue, against the truth of Scri∣ptures, and Fathers, against the certainty of the natures of Christes person, the trueth & being of Sacramentes, full of blasphemous absurdities, renewinge againe sondrie wic∣ked heresies, it is also variable and most vn∣constant. 4 Fourthly of the manner of Christes presence in the sacrament of his body, that it is agreable with the nature & properties of hys person, with his presence in Baptisme & in his word and that as it is certaine and true, so most ef∣fectuall and comfortable. 5 Fiftly who were the firste inuentors of the reall presence and howe it was thruste vpon the Churche, and confirmed with their name & age. 6 Sixtly that this carnall presence hath bene at al times, and since the springe thereof resisted by godly learned men, as other corruption haue bene.
THE OBIECTION. FRom the beginning of the Christian church, vntill the yeere of our Lord. 1517. all that on the earth professed openlie Christes Ca∣tholike faith, did be∣leeue as well in the Greeke as in the La∣tin Church, the real presence of Christes bodie and blood vnder the formes of bread and vvine after consecration duelie made.If this be tru then the matte is at an end. But if you thinke i vntrue, then an¦swere directly to the matter folowing. This faith of theirs vvas preshe∣vved by the deliuerie from hand to hand of that doctrine, euer since the beginning of the Christian Church, and was main∣tained by the preaching and vvriting of the learned Fathers, and pretested by the godly Honor vvhich the Christian people gaue to the said Sacrament in the time of Masse, or otherwise. THE ANSVVERE. THese Obiecters (good Rea∣der) at the first as it vvere the groūd of all their religiō
(whiche in trueth it is) leaue the Scriptures, knowing that by them they can not proue, tharticles of their religion, and flie vnto vnwrit∣ten verities, and traditions deliue∣red from hand to hand, and there∣vpon they laie their foundation. So that and if thou vvilt giue them leaue this vvaie to proceede,spoe. 13. bess. 2. they can easilie proue vvhat they list vn∣der the name of tradition. Yet such is the deadlie vvounde, that the sworde of Gods spirite hath giuen the beast, that all their traditions and vnwritten verities, are manifest and directlie contrarie vnto the vvorde of God. We must therfore in all things belonging to faith fol∣lowe the counsell and example of our sauiour Christ, of his Apostles, the belieuers at Thessalonica, & of all the primitiue and auncient fa∣thers, our Sauiour commaundeth vs to search the Scriptures, he pro∣ueth the necessitie and truth of his office, death, and resurrection out of the Scripture. He reproueth his Disciples because they vvere dull
and, slowe beleeuers of the Scrip∣tures.Iohn. 5. Luk. 24. & 4. Act. 17. 2. Timoth 3. 1. Timoth. 3. 1. Pet. 1 3. Pet. 1. Collos. 3. The Apostles sende vs vnto the Scriptures. The Thessalonians are greatlie commemded for sear∣ching the scriptures, and making triall of S. Paules doctrine by the Scriptures. Sermo Christi inhabitet vos largo, (saith S. Paule) Let the doc∣trine of Christ dwell in you abun∣dantlie. The Scriptures vvere vvrit∣ten (saith Ireneus) that they might be fundamentum & columna fidei,l.b. 3. cap. 3. both the foundation and piller of our faith.Aug. super Ioan. tract. 49. When Christ our sauiour did and taught manie things, electa sunt autem quae scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere viderentur. Truelie those things that are sufficient for the saluation of the belieuers are chosen and vvritten out. In this re∣spect did the auncient fathers a∣gainst all heresies laie them selues vpon the Scriptures.Tertul. de resur. carnis. lib. 1. Ex scripturis arguuntur haeretici, Heretikes are by the scriptures reproued. And as Tertullian vvriteth:De spiritu sanct. Ciril super Ioan. cap. 16 Aufer deni∣que haereticis quaecunque Ethnici sapiunt, vt de scripturis solis sistant quaestiones, &
stare non poterunt. Take from the he∣retikes the things they haue com∣mon vvith Infidels, and force them to grounde their faith vppon the Scriptures onlie, and their questi∣ons shal not be able to stand.ill super . 16 No man (saith Chrisostome) maie with∣out the Scriptures pretend the ho∣lie ghost.August ibi. lem Non aliam quam Christus docuit disciplinam sequetur, nec alias fe∣ret leges: he shall followe no other doctrine then Christ hath taught, he shal giue none other lawes. And S. Ierome vpon the words of Saint Paule: If an Angell come from heauen, &c. Non dixit si quis docuerit contra, sed praeter, & supra. He saide not if anie man shall teach contra∣rie, but besides that alredy is taght. And againe, Post Apostolos quamuis sanctus sit aliquis, quamuis disertus, non habet authoritatem, auoniam dominus narrat in scripturis. After the Apostles though a man be lerned and holie, yet hath he no authoritie, for the Lord doth teach in the Scriptures. And Tertullian,e prescrip. ad∣erfus hereticos. Nobis vero nihil ex nostro arbitrio inducere licet, sed nec
eligere, quod aliquis arbitrio suo induxe∣rit Apostolos domini habemus authores, qui nec ipsi quicquā ex suo arbitrio, quod inducerent eligerūt, sed acceptam a Chri∣sto disciplinam fideliter, nationibus assig∣nauerunt. We must not onelie bring in nothinge of our owne heades, & pleasure, but also not receiue or choose those thinges, whiche haue beene so broughte in of others. We haue the Apostles of Christ authors whome wee must follow: who also broughte in nothing of their owne inuētions, but that doctrine which they receiued of Christ, did they set downe vnto the people. We there∣fore cōtinuallie say with Augustine and Ambrose Non audiaemus haec di∣co, haec dicis, sed audiamus haec dicit do∣minus,August. contra Petiltan. Donat. cap. 9. Ambros. de Virg. lib. 4. sunt certè libri dominici quorum authoritati vtrique credimus, vtrique consentimus, vtrique seruimus, ibi quaera∣mus ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram. We must not belieue that which this man and that man affir∣meth, but that which God him self teacheth vs to be true. We haue the worde of God, whose authoritie we
belieue, to vvhom vve do consent, and vvhom vve obey, there must we seeke our Church, there muste vve sifte and examine our cause. Nos noua omnia quae Christus non docuit iu∣ra damnamus, quia fidelibus via est Christus. We iustlie condemne all newe things that Christ taught vs not: for Christ is the vvaie vnto the faithfull. And because he hath not taught this Real presence, vve con∣demne it as you shall see. For the Lord hath saide, 12. & 13. Non facietis singuli quod vobis rectum videtur, hoc tantum facito domino, nec addas ad illud, neque minuas ex eo. You shal not do cuerie man vvhat seemeth good in your owne eies, But that vvhich I com∣maunde you, that shall you do vn∣to the Lorde. Thou shalt not adde therfore anie thing vnto it, neither take anie thing from it. This first position, namelie that from the beginning, &c. is false and contrarie to the testimonie of the Scriptures, of Fathers, th'articles of the Christian faith, the practise of the olde Liturgies, yea to the po∣pishe
Masse, and agreeth with the errors of Marcion, Valentinus, and such like: it is also contrarie to the nature of a Sacrament, it draweth with it a number of blasphemous errors, touching aswell the dietie as the humanitie of Christ. The Scriptures do teach vs, that Christ, before his passion did tell his disciples, that in the reall pre∣sence of his natural body,Iohn. 14. & 16. & 17. he would leaue not the world only, but them also. For in his praier immediatlie before his passion, he vttreth these vvordes: Nowe am I nor in the vvorld, but they are in the vvorlde. And I come vnto thee, kepe those, holie Father, whome thou haste giuen me, that they male be one euē as we are one.Iohn. 12. When I was with them in the vvorld, I keept them in thy name. And a litle before he saith, I leaue the vvorld, and go to my father. The poore shall you al∣vvaies haue vvith you: but me you shall not alvvaies haue. And according to these sayinges of our sauiour Christ. S. Luke saith,Luk. 24.
that he ascended vp into heauen. S. Marke saith,Mar. 1. he was taken vp into heauen, and sitteth at the right hande of God. The Angels said, he should come in such visible maner, as his Apo∣stles sawe him taken vp. S. Peter saith,Act. 1. & 3. heauen must holde him vntill the restoring of all things. S. Paule saith,Hphes. 4. Colos. 3. that he is on the right hande of God aboue the hea∣uens, and continuallie appeareth before his father for vs. The Articles of our faith sale,Hebr. 8. & 9. & 10. he is in heauen at the right hande of God his father. Which saying can not be true, if Christ be really pre∣sent vnder the formes of bread and vvine. Also S. Paule saith,1. Corinth. . huseb. in hist. cle. lib. lica. 2. August. super Loan. homil. 26. the children of Israel beeing in the vvildernesse, did eate and drinke the selfe same Christe that vve novve doe: but if vve doe it reallie, vnder the formes of bread and vvine, then is it not true that S. Paule saide, for the bo∣die and bloud of Christe vvas not
then really conceiued in the womb of the Virgine Marie, therefore not of them reallie eaten. There∣fore it followeth necessarilie, that they and vvee doe eate the selfe and the same Christe, and that it is spirituall that vve eate, and not reall. S. Paule saith, it vvas spirituall. S. Augustine saith, although the outward signes of the Sacramen∣tes of the Israelites: and our Chri∣stian sacramentes bee diuers, yet the things thereby signified are all one, and therto he alleadgeth the place of S. Paule. And against Faustum Maniche∣um he saith,Lib. 19. cap. 16. Quanto errore delirant qui putant mutatis signis sacramentis∣que etiam res ipsas esse diuersas. With vvhat greate errour doe they lye, and deceiue, that thinke the sub∣stance or the thing of the Iewishe and Christians sacramentes are di∣uers, because the signes and sacra∣mentes are changed. Bartrame also in his time,Ad Carolum Magnume. affir∣meth the same thing.
It is also against the authoritie of the Fathers. For they teach vs that Christ concerning his humane na∣ture is in heauen, and no vvhere els, really present in that nature. They also saie that there are tvvo partes of euerie sacrament, the one muisible, heauenlie and spirituall, the other visible, naturall, and ter∣restriall. They also vvith S. Paule do teach vs,1. Cor. 10. & 11 that the substance of bread and vvine remaine still in the sacrament after consecration: vvhich thinges be vtterlie vntrue, if the bodie and bloud of Christ be reallie present vnder or in the sormes of bread & vvine. That Christ is onelie present in heauen concerning his humane na∣ture,Aug. super Ioan. tract. 3. S. Augustine manifestlie affir∣meth. The bodie of our Lord (saith he vvherein he did arise,tract. 5. super Ioan. cap. 12. can be but in one place, and his truth eue∣rie vvhere diffused. And in an other place interpreting these vvordes of S. Iohn. The poore you shall haue alwaies vvith you, but me you shall
not haue alwaies. He saith, The good heare this, & are not sorovv∣full, he spake of the presence of his bodie. For according to his Maie∣stie, his prouidence, his ineffable and inuisible grace, he performeth that vvhich he said, Beholde I am vvith you vnto the ende of the vvorld: but according to his fleshe vvhich the vvorde tooke vnto it according to that which was borne of the Virgin, bound of the Iewes, nailed to the tree, put downe from the crosse, vvrapped in linnen, put in the graue, and according to that vvhich rose againe, you shall not haue me vvith you alvvaies. Why so? because he was conuersant with his disciples, according to the pre∣sence of his bodie fourtie daies af∣ter his resurrection, and they ac∣companving him in beholding, not in folowing, he ascended into heauen, and is not here and there. He sitteth at the right hande of his father, & is here. For the presence of his maiestie departed not from vs. According to the presence of
his fleshe it vvas truelie saide vnto his Disciples, You shall not haue me alvvaies. For the Church had him according to the presence of his fleshe, but a fewe daies, nowe the Church holdeth by faith, but seeth him not vvith cies. And in his Epistle to Dardanus (saithe he) Doubte not but that nowe the man Christe is in that place from vvhence he shall come.Aug. ad Darda. . 97. Keepe vvell in minde and holde faithfullie the Christian confessi∣on, that he rose from death, and ascended into heauen, sitteth at the righte hande of the father,Act.8 and shall come from none other place to iudge the quicke and the dead, and in the same man∣ner shall he come againe. The An∣gelles also witnessing the same, as he vvas seene go into heauen, vvith the same forme and visible substaunce shall be come againe. For truelie he hath not taken na∣ture or naturall properties, from that bodie vnto the vvhiche hee hath giuen immortalitie. Accor∣ding
to this forme of humanitie he is not thought to be euerie where. For vve must take heede that we do not so stretche his diuimitie to his manhoode, that we take awaie the veritie of his bodie. It followeth not, that because his manhoode is inseperably vnited vnto his God∣head, that therefore he is eurie vvhere as God. And in the same place God and man is one person, and Iesus Christ is bothe God and man, and is therefore euerie vvhere as hee is God, but he is in heauen in that he is man. And again the same father saith,Ibidem Doubt not but that Christe is in some one place in heauen bicause of the maner of his verie true or naturall bodie. And in another place, See you Christ ascending into heauen, be∣leeue in him being absent, truste in him that is to come, and yet by his secret mercy feele him present. Against the heretike Faustus a Ma¦niche he saith, that christ according
to the presence of his bodie,Aug. in Psal. 46. Aug. contra Fau∣stum. lib. 20. ca. 2. could not be in the sunne, in the moone, and vpon the crosle at one time. The same thing in effect doth the same Augustine vvrite vpon the E∣plstle of S. Iohn. Cirill also in diuers places,Ciril. super Ioan. lib. 2. cap. 3. lib. 6. cap. 14. li. 2. cn. 21. as vp∣pon Iohn in his seconde booke the thirde chapte, in his 6. booke his 14. chapter, 14. chap. affirmeth the same thing that Augustine doth, touching the absence of Christ from vs in the re∣all presence of his bodie:Idem in Ioan. Onp. 3. lib. 2. and a∣mong other things he saith, Christ could not be present with his Apo∣stles in the flesh, after he had ascen∣ded into heauen vnto the father. So saith Origen,Origen in Mat. 1. that Christ as he is mā, is not euerie day present: but his diuine power that vvas and is in Christ, is euerie daie present. Ʋigilius saith also,Ʋigilius contra Eutlchen lib. 1. that the sonne of God in his humanities is gone frō vs: but according to his deitie he saith, I am vvith you vnto the vvorlds end In the shape or forme of a seruant, that he tooke frome vs into heauen, he is absent from vs,
and yet notwithstāding he is both absent and present. And in his fourth booke,Ʋgilios lib. 4 If there be one nature of the vvord and the flesh, how is it that vvhen the word is euerie where, the flesh is not eue∣rie vvhere. For vvhen he vvas in earth, his humanitie vvas not in heauen. And novve because it is in heauen, it is not in earth, & so cer∣tainlie is it not, for vvee looke for Christ to come from heauen accor∣ding to the same flesh, which Christ vve belieue nowe to be vvith vs in earth according to his vvorde or in his diuinitie. Therefore according to your opinion the vvorde is con∣teined in some place vvith his flesh, or els his slesh is euerie vvhere vvith the vvord, because one nature doth not receiue diuers and contrarie things into it selfe. And it is much diuers, contrarie, and vnlike to be circumscribed in one place, and to be eucrie vvhere: for the vvorde is euerie vvhere, but the fleshe is not euerie vvhere. Whereby it appea∣reth that one and the same Christe
consisteth of both the natures, the vvorde and the fleshe. This is the faith and catholike confession which th'appostles deli∣uered,Simlokin Damast the martirs confirmed; and the faithful do kepe vntill this day. To these might be added Fulgen∣tius,Thrisost, de spirit. sancto. Hiero. in explicat. Simboli. Fulgent, ad Trast∣mind regem. Damasus, Chrysostomus, Hie∣tome, Bartrame, and Barnarde, but these recited be sufficient to teache vs that Christes body & bloud are not really present in the formes of bread and wine: for if that vvere true, then were it false to say, that Christ in his humane nature is not now in earth: but in heanen, his humanitie is in one place in heauē. The Church had Christ but a fewe daies with it, after his resurrection, according to his manhood. He can not be in diuers places according to his manhood, Both the natures of Christe are still reserued in their properties without confusion, nei∣ther is the Deitie tyed to one place by reason of his humanitie, nor yet is the humanitie in many places by reason of the deitie. These things
haue these fathers taught to be the catholike, faith, whiche, faith by no means can stand with the real pre∣sence, the real presence therefore is contrarie to our Christian faith. Thirdly,Liturgia Chrysest. tome. 5. this carnall presence is cotrarie both to the practise of the old Liturgie, and also the words of the Popish Masle, Th'olde Liturgies exhort the people to lifte vp their hartes from the signes into heauen saying, Sursum corda,Dionis. ecclesiast. Hierarchia. cap. 2. the people an∣swere, Hahemus ad dominum, We lift them vp vnto the Lorde. And this was done that the people shoulde not so much fix their eyes vpon the signes present, as their harttes vpon the Lord Christ being in heauen. Nowe if Christ were really pre∣sent in the bread,Canon. Missae. Te igitur. &c. then vvere it not only vaine, but vvicked also to ex∣hort the people frō the place that is vnder or before their eies vvhere they say Christ is really present, in∣to an other place where Christ is far distant. For if he be really in the bread, then ought wee not onely with eies, but also with hart, faith,
and minde to seeke him there. For if he be there, then is he espeeiallie there for vs. But he is not there re∣ally, therfore according both to the practise of th'olde Liturgie & Masse in this point he is to be sought by faith in heauen,Cellos. 3. vvhere he is at the right hand of God. Againe, the popishe Masse doth twise after cōsecration make praier vnto God for those things that be before them,Gabriel Bielin Cammom Miss. namely the bread and vvine in this sorte. First the priest crosseth the bread, and the chalice fiue times, saying: In the memo∣riall of thy resurrection, and glori∣ous ascension,Durandus ibidem super secreta. Iodocus. Clictouius ibidem super secreta. Teigitur. &c. we offer vnto thee of thine owne giftes, a pure hoste, † an holie hoste, † holie bread of eternall life, † and the cup of euerlasting health, † vpon the vvhich giftes we beseeche thee vouchsafe to looke cherefullie and mercifullie, and re∣ceiue it as thou somtime receiuedst the giftes of thy iust childe Abell, and the sacrifice of our Patriarke Abraham, and that which the high
priest Melchisedech did offer. Again immediatly after the priest praieth in this maner: We humbly beseech thee almightie God, com∣maunde that these giftes maie be caried by the handes of thy holie Angels in thy high altar before thy presence, or sight of thy diuine ma∣iestie. Now must this practise either denie the real presence of Christ in the bread and wine after their con∣secration, or els vvith great blas∣phemie confesse, that their priestes take vpon them to be mediatours betwene God the sonne & God his father. For they first blesse & crosse him, if he be there reallie present, thē they desire the father to looke mercifullie and cherefullie vppon him, then doe they desire that the Angels maie carie him vp into his fathers presence. I praie you shall vvee thinke these thinges to agree vvith the Real presence of Christ? What shall vve thinke? that God is angrie vvith his sonne, and that he needeth to be intreated for? Or shall vve thinke that the deitie of
Christ is not able without helpe of Angels to carie him selfe into hea∣uen, who rose from death, and as∣cended into heauen by the power of his deitie? Or shall vve thinke that the reall presence of Christ is at anie time absent from his father vvho continually maketh interces∣sion for vs at the right hande of his father?1. Io. 2. Act. 2 1. Tim. 3. No, no, this practise dothe declare vvwhat the first Church did thinke of the simbals, namelie that they vvere sacramentes of Christes bodie and not his reall and natu∣rall blood in deede and substance. Fouthly,Magister senten. lib. 4. dist. 11. this imagination of real presence vnder the formes of bread and wine, confirmeth two maner of waies,Guiller. Vocill. in sentto. lib. 4. th'opinions of Marcion, Va∣lentinus, Eutiches, and suche like, which either demed Christ to haue a naturall bodie,Linwoode in prouinc. lib. 1. or els that his na∣turall bodie vvas deified, and so be∣came one nature with his deitie,Durand. rational. lib. 4. part. 1. whereby the naturall prophets of his humanitie, as to be put in one place at once, to be locall to haue forme, quantitie, lineamentes and
proportion of a naturall bodie, vvere vtterly destroyed and done awaye. This doth this real presence as I saide bring in againe, for the Papistes say, that this real presence in the bread and wine is without Quantum: that is, without forme, proportion, or any lineamentes or diuision of members, that where the flesh is, there is also the bloud, and where the head is, there are al∣so armes, body, feete, and all the rest. By which confusion vvith Mar∣cion and the rest, they destroie the veritie of Christes humane nature, For as the scriptures and fathers do teach vs, Christes humaine nature was not, nor could not bee other∣wise proued, then by forme, quan∣titie, lineamentes, and proportion of his body. He saide to Thomas, bring hither thy finger and feele:Iohn. 2. Luk. 24. and to all his disciples when he was risen, Feele and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as you see me haue,1. Iohn. 1. feare not therefore for it is I. And S. Iohn sayth, That vvhich vve haue seene with our eyes, handled
with our handes,Lambardus. Scotus. Dur. vndrs. Gabriel Biel. Chclouius. Hardingus & e∣iusdent farragistis nelulones quam∣piurimi. &c. When acci∣dentes by this meanes are taught to be vvithout substāces, as vvhite∣nes, woundnes in the bread, rednes in vvine, and taste in them bothe, and yet nothing is either vvhite, found, red, or tasteth. I praie you for as muche as this sacrament is a certaine, a visible, and sensible signe of Christes body, natiuitie, death, and resurrection, shall not the he∣retikes saie in deede, he appeared to be borne, to die, and to rise a∣gaine, but in truth he did not so? For as in the sacrament of his na∣tiuitie, death, & resurrection, there appeareth to our senses, vvhitenes, roundnes, and taste, and yet in trueth nothing is either vvhite, rounde, or tasteth:Totul. conera Marcio. lib. 4. Ireneus contra bareses. lib. 4. cap. 32. & 34. Theodoret. contra Nest. Gelasius contra Eutiche. Chrysost. ad Cesarium monac. Contra Apollina. euen so Christe appeared or seemed to do and suf∣fer these things, but in deede and trueth it vvwa not so? Against this reason can there be no exceptiō taken, for th'auncient fathers, Tertullian, Ireneus, Theo∣dorite, Gelacius, Chrysostome, and others did by the reall substance of
bread and vvine conumce these he∣retikes of falshoode, and confirmed the trueth of Christes birth, death, resurrection, and ascention into heauen. Which thing surelie they could not haue done, if the sub∣stance of bread and vvine remaine not in the sacrament. For the here∣tikes would haue cōcluded against them as aforesaid. Fifthlie, this opinion of real pre∣sence destroieth the nature and propertie of a sacrament, whose na∣ture and propertie is in signifying to be like the thing they do repre∣sent and signifie.Aug. aei Bmis. epist. 23. So saith S. Augu∣stine, Except (saith he) the sacra∣mentes had some similitudes of those things vvherof they be sacra∣mentes, they trulie could be no sa∣cramentes.1. Cor. th. 10. And because of this si∣militude they obteine the name of those thinges vvhereof they be sa∣cramentes: as after a certaine man∣ner of speache the sacrament of the Lords body is called the Lords bo∣dy, the sacrament of his bloud is called his bloud. &c.
This analogie & similitude stan∣deth in feeding,Aug. super Iohn. cap. 6. tract. 4 Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 34. nourishing, com∣forting, and in vnion or fellowship, for bread & wine do fede, nourish, & comfort the natural body, euen so the bodie and blood of Christ with the merits of his passion, do spirituallie fede, nourish, & comfort our soules,Aug. ciuit. lib. 10. cap. 4. & 5. Crprtian. de caeiae. and as many cornes and grapes are vnited into one lofe, & one vvine: euen so are vve vnited in one misticall bodie, communion and fellowship vvith Christ, vvho is our head. But accidentes vvithout substaunces do neither doe, nor shewe these things, therefore haue not the nature and properties of a sacrament. Againe a sacrament is a visible signe of an inuisible grace: but accidentes vvithout substance can neither be seene, nor yet possi∣blie be: and sure I am they vvil not saie these accidents are fixed and staied in the real presence of christ. Therfore the premises being true, namelie that there must nedes be a similitude, proportion, & analogie betweene the sacramentes and the
grace signified, the which similitude by the testimonie of S. Paul, Tertul∣lian,1. Corinth. 10. Tart. Cotra Mad. Irens. centra lib. 4. cap. 34. Cyprian, & manie others, stan∣deth in feding, norishing, cōforting and vniting, as aforesaid, this reall presence therfore vtterly destroieth the nature and property of a sacra∣ment. Sixtlie, it draweth vvith it ma∣nie blasphemous errours, both a∣gainst the deitie and humanitie of Christ, whereof for breaitie sake I touch but a fewe. First if Christ be reallie present in the bread,Disisnedus de er∣diton Christi fi∣delium in sacra∣mento ardinis. then that thing be∣ginneth now to be God, vvhiche a litle before vvas bread, and so with Arrius the seconde person is made a creature. Thus in deede do Pa∣pistes vvith blasphemie speake of the sonne of God, saying,De haers inter Scotiscitas, Tho∣mistitas, Skon∣stitas, & locusta∣rum exanmi, magna est con∣cortatio. the priest is the creator of his creator, or him that made him. Their practise also affirmeth that that thing which is God mase and doth come to corruption. For the vvine sowreth, the bread mowldeth and is burnt. Now for as muche as the humane
nature of Christ is so inseperably vnited vnto his deitie, that since his resurrection his humane nature is in no place: but there is also his deitie, it followeth necessarilie when that sowreth, mowleth, and is burned that is the reall bodie and bloud of Christ, that the deitie also with the same sowreth, mouldeth, and is burned. And by this means the glorified bodie of Christ which hath put off mortalitie, and put on immortalitie, is not onelie giuen to corruption and mortalitie againe: but also the deitie is geuen vnto corruption vvith the same. Next if there be a real presence, then had Christ either two bodies, one pas∣sible vvherein he died, and an o∣ther impassible vvhich he gaue to his disciples, or els vve muste saie vvith the master of sentences,Magist. sentenc. lib. 4. dist. 11. that the Disciples did eate a mortall and passible bodie,Durand. rational. lib. 4. such as Christe then had, and vve an immortal and impassible bodie, suche as he nowe hath. Now vvhether of these opi∣nions be holden, they are false and
blasphemous. First, to say Christ had tuo bodies is monstrous, against scriptures,2. Cor. 11. & against fathers. Secondlie, to saie vvith the Master of Sentences, that he gaue his disciples a mortall bo∣die, and vnto vs an immortall bo∣die, is falfe & against S. Paule, who saith, That vvhich I receiued of the Lord, do I giue vnto you, for the Lord Iesus in the same night he was betrayed tooke bread, &c. Also if there be a reall presence, then the vvicked do eate the fleshe of Christ and drinke his bloud, yea mice, yea hogges maie doe it,Lib. 4. dist. 12. Alex. de Hales parte. 4. quest. 48. Glossa. desc. 9. Guiller. Verrel. in sentent. li. 4. dist. 9. saith Alexander de Hales. The Master of sentences is brought into a maze, not knowing vvhat to saie in this matter. Some other saie, it is no in∣conuenience to saie, the mouse ea∣teth the bodie of Christ, when she gnaweth the host.Harding in his reply. M. Harding con∣fesseth, that the vvicked, yea mise and dogges maie eate the bodie of Christ reallie and in dede. But whe∣ther they do or not, for as much as it doth conteine no article of our
saith, but the vvhettinges of the scholemens wits, it doth not preiu∣dicate the trueth of Gods vvorde, neither is hurtefull to anie mans iudgement, saith M. Harding. Thus it foloweth with great blasphemie and monstrous absurditie, that the vvicked and mice do liue by Christ also, for they eate Christ, & hogges and dogges maie do the same. For Christ saith:Iohn. 6. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, shall liue for euer. But this conclusion vvhich by no meanes can be auoided if there be a reall presence, is absurde and most blasphemous, against the glorie of Christ, the trueth of his vvord,August. super rens. and th' authoritie of the fa∣thers, vvho saie that the euil receiue the sacramentes to their condem∣nation, but they do not eate or re∣ceiue the thing signified by the sa∣craments. Wherby it apeareth that no church or father either Greeke or Latin did of manie hudred yeres after the ascentiō of Christ, peceiue or holde this grosse and absurde o∣pinion of real presence.
Lastlie,Scetus super seus. lib. 4. dist. 9. Durand. rational lib. 4. 1. Cor. 2. Rom. 8. forasmuche as this reall presence dependeth vpon the in∣tention of the priest consecrating, vvhich intention by the opinion of the scholemen, (as vvell appeareth by Scotus, Gabriel Biel, Durand, & a number mo) it is impossible to proue the same at anie time, be∣cause no profe can be made of the mind or intention of anie man, for no man knoweth vvhat man inten∣deth but God alone. And it is im∣possible to knowe vvhat the priest intendeth, vvhose intent as it is the ground and foundation of this real presence: so is it most vncertaine, yea more vncertaine then anie sha∣dowe, although twentie thousande priestes vvere consecrating at once, for their mindes are more vncer∣taine then the bodie of anie sha∣dow, yea be it a vvether-cocke. Ex∣perience hath so taught the papists the veritie of the wauering cogita∣tions of their priests,In briou in can Missie. that they haue in the secrets of their Masse deuised the stopping of their eares, & shut∣ting of their eies, for feare of distra∣ctions.
THE OBIECTION. WEll it might be, that same one in his heart thought amisse of that holie misterie, and that somc fewe in corners also conspired against the tructh thereof, as Wickliffe and some other like: as nowe full manie maie be suspected to thinke that Christ is not the saut our of mankind. But as no Christian teacheth openlie and in expresse wordes this day, that Christ is not the redeemer of the world, so did no man with the tolcration or authcritie of any spiritual Pastor, in open pulpet preach, write, or professe, hat the bodie of Christ was not present in the Sacrament of the altar, if the Priest had once fulfilled the solemne benediction which our Lorde Ie∣fus commaunded. THE ANSVVERE. WHat you call spiritual pa∣stors I knowe not, but well I vvote the Apostles of Christ, the primitiue fathers, Origen, Tertulian, Ciprian, Irene, Theodorete, Chrysostome.
Gelasius, Vigilius, and Augustine,Wickliffe liued in the yeere of our Lord. 1376. yea and Christ himselfe (who vvas I thinke a spirituall pastor) haue spo∣ken against this reall presence, not secretlie and in corners, but openly in pulpits long before Wickliffes time. Th'untrueth therefore of this vvell appeareth by that which hath alreadie bene saide.Iohn. 6. 1. Cor.10. Christ himselfe reproueth the Caphernaites grosse opinion of eating his sleshe,August.super Ioan. cap. 6. & drin∣king his bloud reall and carnallie, and taught the eating & drinking to be spiritual and by faith. So doth S. Paule with the residue of the ho∣lie fathers, and the practise of the first Church, teach vs (as is alreadie shewed) a spirituall eating, and no reall. S. Cyprian saith,& super Psal. 95. Cyprian de coena. Nostra vero & ipsius coniunctio, nee miscet personas, nec vnit substantias, sed effectus consociat & confoeder at voluntates: Our con∣iunction and his, neither blendeth the persons, not yet vnites the sub∣stances, but ioyneth the affections, and coupleth the willes. That Be∣ring atius, Wickliffe, Hierome de
Praga, and Hus, are noted among the first that preached and vvrit a∣gainst the real presence more sharp lie and more plainlie, then anie o∣ther before them had done, proued not their vvriting and doctrine ei∣ther to be false or new, but rather cuidētlie declareth the time wher∣in th'opinion of this real presence beganne to bee receiued into the Chruch. Against which corruptiō these men did most sharplie set thē selues, and as the true ministers of Christe vvith the authoritie of the scripture, the practise of the firste church and fathers, did resiste and gainsaie this erronious and newe doctrine. And on the cōtrarie part, the Bishops, Cardinals, Monks, and Friars, vvith all the rest of the cler∣gie as the ministers of Antichrist, did by tirannie, general Councels, false & diuelishe miracles, cause the Church to receiue this opinion of real presence, vvhich before that time vvas strange and vnknowen.
THE OBIECTION. ON the other side, if in the first sixe hundred yeeres the Christians had belieued as the Lutherans, Protestantes, Swinglians now do, he that had first be∣gon to haue taughte the real presence of Christes bodie & bloud, under the formes of bread & wine, must at that time haue bin noted and reputed for an heretike, he must haue bin conuinced by some general or prouincial Councell, kept either in the East Church, or in the West, the Prea∣chers and Doctors of that age shuld hans written against him. THE ANSVVERE. THe diuersitie of these names deuised by the Papists, with a number mo besedes, as Cal∣uinistes, Hugonites, Presci∣sians, and vvhat not? bring no new articles of faith, or diuersitie of o∣pinions into the vvorld, or be de∣uided in substaunce of Religion (Martin Luther onelie excepted in one poynt,) but holde and teache
the auncient and Catholike faith, deliured by Christ and his apostles, in the canonicall bookes of th'olde & the new Testament, wherin they continuallie heare the voice of the true shepheard and sauiour Christ,Apoc. 9. & 18. Es 16. and vvhereby they knowe the Ro∣mish church to be the sinagogue of antichrist, & therfore being warned by the scripture, they flee from it as from the bottomles pit of darknes and denne of vncleane beasts, from whence these fiue hundred yeeres there hath flowed vnmeasurable stormes of Sectaries, aswel disagre∣ing in substance of religion & wor∣ship, as in name and profession, as appeareth by the Premonstatenses, Augustinians, Dunstinians, Benets, Bonames, Monkes, blacke & white, Barnardines, Franciscanes, Bene∣dictes, Augustine friars, Crossed friars, blackfriars, white friars, some beggers, some lyers in steede of preachers, some Mionres, some obstinate, with Hermites, Ankors both men & women, with Nunnes of all sortes, and last of all the secte
of Iebusites, and all these, I saye, with an infinite number besides, who do differ in sect, habite, wor∣ship of God, (or dishonouring of God rather) and substance of re∣ligion. But if there be anie difference at anie time among vs, it is onelie a∣bout suche remainders of Poperie, as the misbegottē bastards of An∣tichrist haue left among vs. In dede as the deare children and seruantes of God,Galla. 2 Peter and Paule did sharp∣lie contende about the reliques of Iudaisme: euen so at this day some contention nowe and then ari∣seth among the preachers of the Gospell about some remnantes of poperie, which for our great vn∣worthines God hath yet left amōg vs, as he did leaue a remnāt of Ca∣nanites,Iudicum Hethites, Iebusites to trie the children of Israel withal. The myserie of iniquitie (as the Apostle said) did worke euen from the beginning with increase of loy. tering laborers, and decaie of faith∣full pastors. Cyprian saide in his
time.De delunia & tontatioue dom. Pinl p. 2. 2. Timi 3. Rarus hodie Phinies, qui perfode∣rat impudicos: rarus Moses qui occider at sacrilegos, rarus Samuel, rarus Iob, rarus Noe, & flens cum Apostolo dico: inmicos crucis Christi, qui terrena sapiunt magi∣stratus quorum deus venter est, qui in hijs quae dicere nefas est, elegantur & glo∣riant. At this day Phinies that may thrust through the shamelesse, is sel∣dome found: Moses to slea the ido∣laters is rare, Iob, Aaron, and Noe be verie thinne. I saie vvith th'apo∣stle vveeping, the enimies of the crosse of Christ that sauer earthlie thinges, teachers vvhose bellie is their God, impudentlie reioyce & glorie in those thinges, vvhich once to name is vvicked, venerunt peri∣culosa tempora quae praedixit apostolus,Math. 24. 2 Thess. 2. Iohn. 4. Apoc. 6. & 9. the daungerous times vvhiche the Apostle foreshewed are come. Yet before the generall Apostasie (whi∣che our Sauiour Christ foretolde, th'apostle S. Paule prophesied of, and is so euidentlie described in the Reuelation) did come, there, coulde no herisie no sooner arise, but that the vvatchefull pastors
did by and by note the autor ther∣of by vvriting, and afterwardes through the helpe of godlie Em∣perours in Councels both gene∣rall and nationall, condemne such herisies vvith their authors, as well apeareth by ecclesiastical histories. For although the mysterie of ini∣quitie did euen in th'apostles time worke in the hands of Antichristes ministers, yet throght the diligence of good pastors it vvas mightilie vvithstood: but after the departure of these faithfull pastors, through the negligence of such as afterward sought their owne ease vvith pro∣motion and great dignities, and falling fast aslepe with pleasure and securitie, the enuious man found fit time & oportunitie for the better sowing of his cokle & darnel,Apoc. 6. so that the ministery of the gospel decaied, the truth was gretly darkned, & the church of God vvas not only vvith many corruptions & superstitions defaced, but became a pray vnto ra uening wolues, which vtterly ouer∣threwe the first beawty therof, and
chased, banished, and put to flight the true ministerie of the Gospel of Christ.Matth. 7. 2. Thess. 2. Whereby the man of sinne inuaded the temple of God, sitting therein as though he had bin God. After this (I saie) the noting and vvithstanding of heresie vvaxed much colder, and for a time the churche or sanctuarie vvas troden vnder foote, and the true members of Christes Church driuen into the vvildernes,Apoc. 12. & 13. vvher God did prouide a place for the same. For after a thousand yeres ended, Satan being for a time letten forth of the bot∣tomlesse pit, the man of sinne inua∣ded the Church of God, as wel ap∣peareth in the Reuelation,Apoc. 6.20. where∣unto agreeth manie writers of that age.Arnolph in conci. Lio Rauensi. anno. 1015. Arnolphus the Bishop of Au∣relianense saide openlie of the Bi∣shop of Rome: Quid hunc in sublimi solio residentem veste purpurion & aureo radiantem, quid hunc inquam esse cense∣tis. Nimirum si charitate destitudtur, sola{que} scientia inflatur & extollitur. An∣techristus est in templo dei sedens & sese ostentans quasi sit Deus. What do you
iudge of him that sitteth in so high a throne clothed in purple and shi∣ning vvith golde,Apoc. 19. vvhat I praie you do you thinke of him, truelie bee∣ing voide of loue, and puft vp vvith knowledge, he is verie Antichriste, sitting inthe téple of God, bosting of him self as though he were God. Eberchardus allo the archbishop of Salisburg said opély in the Cou∣cel of Reginoburg, Sub Pont.In concilio Regi∣nolrg. an. 12.0. tempore Frer.  secuade. Max. titulo, pastoris pelle lupū seuerissimū (nisi coeci sumus) sentimus: vnder the name of th chiefe or greatest Bishop, ex∣cept vve be blinde,Math. 7. vve feele the most cruel vvolfe in the clothing or skinne of a shepheard. And againe, among manie other thinges, to this purpose he saith, Hildebrandns ante annos centum & sep∣tuaginta, primus specie religionis Anti. christi imperij fundamentum iocit, Hil∣debrande an hundred and seuentie yeres ago, vnder the show & cullor of religion did first lay the founda∣tion of Antichristes Empire or kingdome. And againe he saithe, Pontifices, Babilonis soli regnari cupiunt,
ferre parem non possunt, credite experte non cessahunt donec imperatore in ordi∣nem redacto, Romani imperij honore so∣luto, pastoribus veris oppressis, per hune morem omnia extinguant, omnia pedibut suis conculcent, atque tui templo Dei se∣deant, extollantur{que} super omnia id quod colitur.2. Thess. 2. Apoc. 9. The Bishops of Babilon de∣sire to reigne alone, they can abide no peere, beleeue him that hath made a triall of them, they vvill ne∣uer haue done vntill they haue broughte th'Emper our vnto their bowe dissolued the honor or maie∣stie of th'Emper, and oppressed the true pastors of Christ, that in this sorte they maie extinguish all thin∣ges, and tread al things vnder their feete, and that they maie sitte in the Church of God, exalting the' selues aboue euerie thing that is vvor∣shipped. To these maie be added Ioachim Abbas, Franciscus Petrarcha, Mar∣silius Patiuinus, Michael Cecenus, Baptista Mantuanus, Laurentius Valla, Hieronimus Sauonarola, and before these foure hundred yeeres
the Waldenses, with manie other that shewe howe the Pope inuaded the church, and oppresled the true ministers and pastors of the same, whereby vvithout resistaunce bee might do vvhat he listed. But these fewe out of manie haue I noted, bi∣cause the propounder of these que∣stions vvould beare the vvorlde in hand that his Romish church, euen from the Apostles time haue hol∣den their faith or articles of religi∣on vvithout contradiction or gain∣saying of anie (except those that he hath named) that the Reader maie vvell perceiue, when the resistance of errors vvaxed faint, & by vvhat meanes the Churche grewe vnto great decaie, and also vvhat litle credite the papists deserue in their sayings and vvritings. Thus also from the time of the Machabees, vntill the comming of Iohn Baptist, did the hipocriticall Pharisees vvithout controlement corrupte the lawes of God, and yet I thinke no man vvill saie that they had the trueth, bicause before the
comming of Iohn Baptist and our sauiour Christ no man did controll them. No more maie any saie that popishe errors be no errors because no man vvas able to vvithstand thē in these last fiue hundred yeres. THE OBIECTION. IT is not possible that all the vvhole Church which to that daie had bolie∣ued the misteries to be consecrated vpon the altar, to be no more but onelie bread and vvine, to be onelie tokens of Christes bodilie absence in substance to be neither asacrifice propitiatorie, nor the real bodie and bloud of Christ, should sodenlie tho∣roughout all nations change their catho∣like and vniuersall beliefe, vvithout anie trouble or tumult at all, vvithout anie contradiction or disputation, yea vvithout any man knowen or euer heard of vvhich should first commend vnto them the newe opinion of nine hundred yeres old. Is it credible that so manie millions of Chri∣stian men, as vvere in the Church at the ende of the first sixe hundred yeres, belie∣uing
the one yeere those halowed thinges vpon the altar to be stil bread and vvme, should the next yere after altogether, in al countries & languages, fal down prostrate or kneele, or at the least bowe to the vorie same things, as to the true bodie of their maker & sauiour, which before they had bin taught to be vnreasonable & vnsensi∣ble creatures? And did they al this with∣out anie guide or preacher vvho mighte vvill them to do this? Or did all the prea∣chers in Christendome at one moment chaunge their mindes, and bid the people do so? Or did some fewe go through the partes of the vvorld, and vvithout resi∣stance of anie man preach that newe do∣ctrine? Were all the pennes of vvriters of histories so tied, that none of them all was able to vvrite anie one mans name vvho after the sixe hundred yeres past taught, first, seconde, third, or at anie time that chaunge of beliefe throughout Christen∣dome? Was that Heretike so almightie that no man durst vvrite his name, nei∣ther vvhilest he liued, nor vvhen he was departed out of this vvorld? If the man vvere vnknowen, at the least vvhy had his sect no proper name? Was not there
one learned man in the Church of God, either vvilling or able to resist the furie of nevve doctrine in the matter of Chri∣stes Supper. THE ANSVVERE. FIrst the true Churche of God did neuer thinke so singly of the reuerent mysteries, as to saic they vvere no more but onlie bread and vvine, onlie tokens of Christes body a bsent in substāce, but belieueh them, and receiueth them to be holie misteries vvherby the Lords death is laide before out remembrance, all the righteousnes and benefites of his death & passi∣on are offered vnto vs, the vvhiche things being of vs by a liuelie faith receiued, bring vvith thē remission of our sinnes, renuing and feeding of our inwarde man to euerlasting life. And thus after the bread and vvine beeing once altered from prophane vses vnto the nature of a Sacrament, are no more saide to be onelie bread and vvine, onlio
tokens of Christes absence in his substance, but they are the sacra∣mentes of the Lordes death, the bread of the Lorde, and the cuppe of thankes giuing,Corinth. 10. & 11. Aug. ep. st. 26. vvherein the vvorthie receiuer is made parta∣ker of the Lordes bodie, and of the Lordes bloud, to his great ioy and comfort. As concerning the Lordes pre∣sence & absence, there is sufficiently saide before, neuerthelesse the first Church neuer acknowledged anie other presence in this sacrament, then they acknowledged in the sa∣crament of baptisine. Suche a pre∣sence as agreeth with the veritie of Christes body being in heauen, and with the nature of a sacramēt. Both the sacraments, althogh they admit no real or naturall presence, yet do they admit & witnes such a presēce as being spiritual and heauenlie, is also most comfortable & effectuall. For as in baptisme Christ by the power of his spirite is present to washe away our sinnes, to regene∣rate vs, & make vs members of his
misticall boide,Idom. Eshel. 5 Coloss. 2. yea bones of his bones, and fleshe of his fleshe, and yet is there in this worke of our re∣generation, no reall persence of Christ, or change of anie substance imagined,Super Ioan, homni∣lic. 50. Gallst. 3. but al is spirituall, super∣naturall and heauenlle. Habes Chri∣sturrs in presentiper baptismaties sacriamē∣tim, saith S. Augustine, thou haste Christ present by the sacrament of Baptisme. We are saith Chrisostome in bap∣tisme made flesh of Christes flesh,Super epise. ad. Pip. chom. 20. Ephes. 5. & bones of his bones. And againe speaking of Christes presence in the bucharist: Sic & in baptismo. E∣lien so is he present in the sacra∣ment of Baptisme. And the renerent father Beda,Bida super 1. Cor Cap. 10. Auguen formone ad disantes. Nulli aliquatenus ambigendum est, tunc vnumquenqse fidelium corporis & san∣gumis Christi participem fieri quando in Baptismate membnum Christl efficitur: No man may doubt bt that eue∣rie faithfull man is then made par∣take of the bodic and bloud of Christ, vvhen he is made a member of Christ, To these might manie
mo fathers be added, but these are sufticient to proue, the selfe and the same presences of Christ to be in the sacrament of Baptisime that is in the Eucharist. For when we acknowledge our birth to be altogether spiritual, and nothing materiall, naturall, or cor∣porall, and to be vvrought vvith∣out the real or naturall presence of Christ, by vvhom yet neuerthelesse vve are regenerated and made the sonnes of God, it were not onelie foolishe, but a monster to imagine the feeding and nourishing of this life vvhich commeth by this birth, to be otherwise then according to the nature of the birth. The birth is altogether spirituall, the nourish∣ment therefore is altogether spiri∣tuall. Christ is effectuallie in reg∣neration bestowed vpon vs,Origen. in lib. 4. homil. 4. & super Exnd. hornil. 13. & super lib. 4. hum. 9.1 Tertral, de carnis resurrectione. so is he effectuallie offered and bestowed in his vvord, and yet doth no man imagine that Christ is included in the vvater, or in the letter of his vvorde. Christus auditu deuorandus est, intellectu ruminādus, & side digerendus.
Christ must be eaten by hearing, chowed vpon againe by vnderstan∣ding & throghly digested by faith.De creua domiui, in medio. Aud S. Cyprian, Esus huius carms, est quadam auiditas, & quoddā desiderium manendi in Christo, quod est esca carni, hoc est animae fides, non dentes ad mor∣dendum acuimus, sed side sineera panem sanctum frangimus. The eating of this flesh of Christ is a greedie appetite, & a l̄oging desire to dwelin Christ. Loke vvhat meate is nvto the body euē the same is saith vnto the soule. We whette not our teeth to bite with, but vvith a true faith vvee breake this holie bread. Christe is not reallie saide to be present ei∣ther in the letter, or in the vvorde, & vvhy then should not vve thinke the saine in the supper, when we see and vnderstande that his pre∣sence bothe in baptisme and in his vvorde is certaine and effec∣tuall, and yet neither real nor cor∣porall. Moreouer this presence of Christ in his word and sactaments, is so far beyond the reche of our sinple
vnderstanding, that vve be not able to comprehende it by wit and rea∣son, and therefore beleeue it by faith, asluring our selues that God is most true in his promises. Wee therefore rather feele the benefite and comfort of his presence in our hartes and minds by a liuely faith, then are able to expresse it by our owne vvitte and tongues. The fearch after this ineffable maner of Christes presence in this sacrament hath broght a number into a dan∣gerous Laberinth, and in the ende brought foorth this absurde, mon∣strous, and blasphemous opinion of the real presence by the vvaie of transubstātiation, ful of al idolatrie and superstltion, taking the out∣warde signes in this sacrament for Christ therby signified, and th'acti∣on, vvhich duelie performed doth call Christes death to our remem∣brance (which to do is the principal end of this facramēt) for the sacri∣fice of Christes death,Malb. 26. 1. Cer. 11. Aug. de ciuita. de. lib. 10. cap. 5. Cryso. super Heb hoil. 17. vvhereof this sacrament is (as saith Augustine & Chrisostome) but a remembrance.
And so by this meanes that thing vvhich vvas ordeined to shew forth Christes death effectuallie, did they abuse to the hiding and drkening of the force and effect of Christes death and passion, vvhiche is the onelie sacrifice propiciatorie for sinne,Iebr. 9. & 10. for beseides this there neither is, nor euer was anie other. The first Church therfore, as they knew the death of Christ inseperably ioy∣ned with the sacrifice propiciatorie for sinne, that no propiciatorie sa∣crifice could bee made for sinne vvithout the death of Christe, so did they neuer teache this sacra∣ment to be a sacrifice propiciatorie for sinne. That sometimes in the fathers this sacrament is called a sacrifice,Aug. ad. Bcnifa lny so. super Heb. omilia. itis because it doth repre∣sent the sacrifice of Christes death, and so it according to the nature of Sacraments obteineth the name of the thing that it signifieth as is aforesaid.rene. contra hera∣s. lib. 4. cap. 32. As also that in receiuing of this sacrament, the vvorthie re∣ceiuers offer vnto God their pray∣ers, yea them selues, vvhiche is an
acceptable seruice and sacrifice to God, not for sinne, but of thankes giuing. In this sence is it called a sacri∣fice,Aug. de Trinit. lib. 10. cap. 5. Aag. ad Ianua Epist. 32. 1. Coren. 10. & 11 Iguasi. ad Suy Epiph. ad Faw. Epipi. Havcs. not that it is so (as S. Augustine saith) but that it doth signifie, and in this sence and meaning both in scriptures and fathers it hath sun∣drie names and callinges, as the Lords bodie and blood,Ganes. 17. Excd. 12. the bread of the Lorde & the cup of thankef∣giuing, the communion, the holie gathering loue, the Lordes supper, &c. Yet it is not all these whose names it beareth, but signifieth these, and therefore is so called. But the papistes neither regar∣ding the vse nor signification of sa∣craments haue driuen them selues, as I said, into such a Laberinth, that vvhat to saie therof they can finde no certentie or ground: for vvhere a sacrament is a visible signe, seale, or testimonie of an inuisible grace.Ciuisate dei. li. 10. cap. 4. & 5. Petrus Lombard. sent. li. 4. dist. 10. thus S. Augustine out of the scrip∣ture doth define a sacrament, say∣ing: Sacramentum est visibilis forma inuisibilis gratiae. A sacrament is a vi∣sible
sible forme, shape, or shew of an in. uisible grace. Againe he calleth it visibile signum, a visible signe. The Papistes define this sacrament of the Lordes bodie to be an inuisible signe of a visible bodie. Thus do they define it, Caro Christi inuisibilis, est sacramentum carnis visibilis. The inuisible flesh of Christ is the sacra∣ment of his visible flesh. Thus both contrarie to Scripture, Fathers, the veritie and trueth of Christes hu∣mane substance, reason, common sence, yea contrarie vnto thēselues, they saie they knowe not what, and againe reuiue vvith Marcion and other suche heretikes, a fantasticall opinion of Christes humanitie, to the vtter ouerthrow of the ground and substance of christian religion, which chieflie standeth in the cer∣tentie of Christes humaine bodie and nature.1. Iohn. 4. They sometime saie, the accidentes of bread and vvine, as vvhitenes, roundnes, &c. are the sacraments of the bodie of Christ, & now thinuisible bodie (say they) is the sacramēt of the visible body.
& thus they haue found vs out two sacraments, and three bodies.Durand. inter mi∣rula huius sa∣eramti. Sent. lib. 4. dist. 4. Iamvode pro lib. 1. Sotus in sent. lib. 4. alist. 9. Durund. rational. lib. 4. de can. Misse One sacrament where the accidentes be the sacramēt, another where the in∣uisible flesh is a sacrament of the vi∣sible flesh, three bodies, one mortal that he gaue his disciples in his last supper: an other visible and in hea∣uē, the third inuisible & in the bred and wine, & in euery cromb & drop therof. And according to this fran∣tike & fantasticall error, they haue deuised a duble corporal presence, one, Cum proprijs silis demensi ouibus & mēsuris, with his proper lineaments & measure of his body, & thus he is in heauen with his glorified body. An other presedce as his corporall body est in hostianō mediantihus dimēsionibus proprijs, is in the host or cake without the proportion or linea∣ments of his body. Thus thou seest good reader, not only their wicked erronious & blasphemous opiniōs,Ierim. 2. 2. Thess. 2. Coliss. 2. but also th'emptines of their childishe brain they know not whither. Are not al they therfore, that forsaking
the certentie of Gods vvord (laide downe in the scripture to be the ground & stabilitie of our faith & religion,Prene. lib. 1. & 2. 2. Thess. 2. Coloss. 2. to followe the vnwritten verities or fables rather of Popery, iustly forsaken of God, and giuen ouer to belieue leasinges to their owne condemnation, because they tooke no pleasure in the trueth. In this maner vvandred the vaine bo∣sters of Angelicall visions in the A∣postles time, pretending great ho∣lines and religion of Angels vnder the name and title of Christ. So did Marcion and Valentinus wander a∣boue the cloudes after their owne dreames and fansies, vtterly de∣stroying the trueth of Christ and Christian religion. Solet this say∣ing therefore of Augustine bee al∣waies opposed against vnwritten verities.De vnitate eccles. cap. 15. Legant nobis haec de scripturis sacris, & credimus, haec (inquam) ex canone diuinorum librorum legant: Let them reade these thinges vnto vs of the scriptures, these thinges (I say) out of the canones of the di∣uine bookes.Ibidem. eap. 12. And a litle before:
Credo illa quae in scripturis sanctis legun∣tur, non credo ista qua ab hereticis Vanis dicuntur. I do beleeue those thinges that I reade in the holy scriptures, I do not beleeue those things that vaine iangling heretiks do affirme. Now touching th'alteration of this faith of the Lords supper where the Papistes pretende an impossibilitie that it should without tumult & stir be done, it is before declared, how that not onely th'alteration of the Lords supper, but also of manie o∣ther things were easilie & vvithout gainsaying broght into the church vvhen the ministers thereof did so decaie as they did after the first sixe hundred yeres,2. Thess. 2. Act. 20. Apoc. 12. and that the childe of perdition began euen then to inuade the Lords sanctuarie, and in shorte time vvas Lorde ouer the same, renting & spoyling the flock of Christ, still persecuting the true members of his church, as is before plainlie declared. About the time of Gregorie the first in deede this matter among o∣ther like corruptions began first to
smell, and yet but a litle. And after the seuen hundreth and thirty yere it brake out further, as appeareth by Damasene,Anno. Dom. 730 vvho as in Gregorie the secondes time among other corruptions he defended & main∣teined imagerie, euen so vvith re∣newing againe the blusphemous herresie of Eutiches he dreamed of a real presence,Lib. 4. cap. 14. Non est figura panis & vinum corporis & sanguinis Christi. (absit enim hoc) sed ipsum corpus Do∣mini deisicatum, ipso Domino dicente, hoc est meum (non figura corporis) sed corpus, non figura sanguinis sed sanguis. The bread and vvine are not the figure of Christes bodie & bloud, but the verie bodie of Christ deifi∣ed. For the Lorde saide him selfe, This is my bodie, he meaneth not, that it did represent his bodie and bloud,Tertul. contrae Marc. lib. 4. but that it vvas his verie bodie and blood. But did not Ter∣tulian interprete these vvords, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my bodie, say∣ing, Id est figura corporis mei, that is to say,Contra. Adamant. Iick. the figure or representation of my bodie So did S. Augustine,
saying, Non dubitauit dominus dicere hoc est corpus meum, quando dedit nisi signum corporis: He stucke not to saie, this is my bodie, when he gaue but the figure of his bodie.Ieronim. super Math. cap. 26. This he did saith S. Herom, vt veritatem cor∣poris & sangainis representaret, tha he mighte represent the trueth of his bodie and bloud. These Fathers vvere ledde by that spirite of God that vseth the like phrases and doth so interprete them.Gones. 7. As this is my couenant that euerie man∣childe bee circumcised. When in deede circumcision vvas not the couenant, but a signe thereof. So is it in the place interpreted,Rom. 4. and so doth S. Paule interprete it. And a∣gaine,Gents. 41. the seuen kine are seuen yeres: the senēeares are seuē yeres,Esai. Daniel. 2. 1. Corinth. 10. Israel is my vine, Thou art the gol∣den head, O king: The rocke vvas Christ:Apoc. 1. the seuen stars are the seuen messengers of the cōgregatiōs: the 7. candlesticks are the 7. cōgregati∣ons. The spirit of god in Ioseph. in Esai, Daniel, S. Paul, S. Iohn, did say figuratiuly thes things ar, whē they
but onelie signifi, and vvere not in deede, and so of the Lordes supper the fathers haue interpreted it. But Damasen beign led by an other spi∣rite, the spirite of error and Anti∣christ, giueth another interpretati∣on. Thus haue you the man named that first taught this error. And a∣bout the eight hundred yeere to breake further out, against the whi∣che Bartrame at the requeste of Charles the great did write,Bartraine tract. de Eucharist. and af∣ter him diuers other,Anno. 785. Anno. 1035. Anno. 1076 as Beringari∣us, Wickliffe, Hierome, Hus, and o∣thers, and this not in corners, but in the moste famous place of the vvorld in the court of Charles the great,Platina lib. 15. iin the Councell of Laterane vvhere Pope Nicholas forced Be∣ringarius the Archdeacon of the famous Church of Augania, to ac∣knowledge the real and carnal pre∣sence in most grosse maner.Polidorus historia Anglorum. lib. 19 Anno. 1420. And in the famous Vniuersitie of Oxforde, Wickliffe did, with manie other vvell learned, impugne this reall presence. In Bohemia, in the coun∣cell of Constance and Basill, vvas
this error of reall presence, among manie oter grosse etrors, then by Antichrist thrust vpon the Church and people of God, impugned by good and learned men, although by the tyrannie of those Councels, the trueth for a time vvas suppres∣sed, banished, and put to flight, and driuen to hide her selfe. These pla∣ces I thinke were no corners. Moreouer, although no man be∣fore that time did so purposelie & preciselie preach and vvrite against the reall prsence of Christ in the sacrament, because no man did be∣fore that time of corruptiō, drreame of suche a presence, and therefore no neede of such preaching or vvri∣ting: yet did our Sauiour Christ in the institution of the sacramentes teache vs that he is absente in the reall substaunce of his bodie.Matth. 16. So doth S. Paule,1. Corinth. 11. So often as you eate of this bread, and drinke of this cuppe (saith he)you set foorth the Lords death vntill his comming a∣gaine. The selfe same thing do the Scriptures & Fathers (as it alreadie
proued) teache and vvrite concer∣ning the absence of christ touching his humane presence, from this sa∣crament, as also from all other pla∣ces, heaucn onelie excepted, vvhich must onlie enioye his presence vn∣till the daie of iudgement.Act. 3. Purther, where the papistes do i∣magine that this alteratiō must be in one yere, or in a shorter time, or els by no meanes it could be, is childishe, and foolishe toye to leade the simple into a maze.2. Thess. 2. For as Antichrist did not in one mo∣ment of time, or in one yere, en∣ter into the poslession of Christes Church. But with long cōtinuance of time, before he could enter, al∣though his mysterie vvas a vvor∣king in the Apostles time,Epist. Iohn. 3. and yet preuailed not vntill a long time af∣ter, euen so this error of reall pre∣sence was not in one yere receiued, but with a long cōtinuance of time by a litle and litle, as the sinceritie of doctrine decaied, was it brought in and stablished, vvith kneeling & vvorshipping, which before was
not vsed of Christians tovvardes this sacrament. Before that time Christians did vvorship Christ re∣presented & signified by that sacra∣ment, and vsed with reuerence to their comfort, the outward simbals as the holie misteries by the which the death of Christ was laide forth to their remembrance. But after this corruption stabli∣shed, then cōmeth the mangling of the Lords supper, and violating of his holie institution, bringing it in∣to one kinde that Christ ordeined in two kindes, and making that priuate to the priest, that was insti∣tuted especiallie for the people. Then transubstantiation, then sa∣crificing for the quick & the dead, yea for beasts and hogges, which I am sure the papistes vvill not saie vvas done all in one moment of time, or in one yere. Do not the papists know, that as∣ter the Church of a long time had bin assalted by heresies, and perse∣cuting torments, giuing them the ouerthrow, & alwaies contemning
the chast spouse of Christ did at the laste receiue peace and quietnes, which brought vvith it securitie & idlenes.Apoc. 9. And then fell that great starre from heauen (spoken of by S. Iohn) into the earth. Which fal∣ling starre, namelie the Bishop of Rome, receiued of the beast the key of darknes, and therewith ope∣ned the pit, vvhence did, & yet dal∣lie doth, ascende the smoke of all superstition & ignorance, vvhich in time brought forth in finit swarmes of Monkes & Friars, and such like, vvhich corrupted all true doctrine, & vvasted the same euen as Locusts consume all the grene things of the earth. And in stead of true doctrine filled mēs eares vvith lyin dreams and superstitious fansies. Thus came this real presence, & all other sonde and superstitious toyes into the Church, not at one instāt, but by long degrees of time, not by faithful and ture preachers, but by monkes and fivars, and the infinite swarmes of false deceiuers.
THE OBIECTION. IF none vvere learned inough to con∣quer it by preaching, disputing, or vvri∣ting, at the least vvise vvould none do his best, to set foorth a bare historie of that tragidie? Or vvho euer hath vvritten that the vvhole Church chaunged her faith in this matter? So manie Councels haue bin kept in all ages and countries, so manie heretikes names and opinions, who vvere but in priuie corners, haue bin of late yeeres vvritten vnto vs, as Gogonuli, Waldenses, Petrobusiani, Pseudo Napo∣litani, Bogardi, Beguinae, vvith such like, and could this herasie of Christes real pre∣snece ouerrunne the vvhole Churche so farre, that fiftie yeres past and vpward no small chappell can be named in the vvide vvorld, where Christes supper was made vvithout adoration of his bodie & bloud, as present vnder the formes of bread and vvine, and yet could no man vvpon the earth be found in the space of eight hun∣dred & fiftie yeres to leaue in monument of histories vvhen that heresie began, or by vvhom it was promulgated, or vvhat name vvas giuen to it. Did Satā in those
eight hundred yeres so stronglie oppresse Christ, that his Gospell vvas cleane dark∣ned, and his kingdome loste. Did hell gates preuaile against the whole Church? Did the rocke it selfe faile? Did the holie ghost cease to teach the people of God all truth? I thinke it will be said the Bishop of Rome did preach, cōmend, set forth, and maintein that heresie. But they must shew which Bishop sirst began, & who writeth that of him, and by what meanes he was so miraculouslie obeied, that no resistance in the vvorld is read to haue bin made anie vvhere against him, and yet surelie he neuer lacked enemies in the East Church. THE ANSVVERE. IT verie vvell appeareth by that I haue alreadie said, that diuers learned men did both vvrite and speak against it, as Bartrame and others, yet after the botomles pit of Monkishe and Friarishe supersti∣tion vvas once by the bishops ope∣ned, vvhose authoritie ruled in eue∣rie Councel, neither would writing
or speking take place against those. that abusing the name of Christe, did gather Councels to suppresse Christ, vntill the measure of their wickednes vvas fulfilled,Apoc. 14. at vvhich time as vve nowe see, Christ accor∣ding to his promise hath to his owne glorie, and the great comfort of his children,Ihidem. 17. opened their madnes and sollie, vvherwith they haue a long time bewitched the Kinges and other inhabitants of the earth. Likewise by these Waldenses and others, vnto which a great number mo of al ages since these corruptiōs entered, maie be added, who euer spake against this matter of reall presence, wel declare, that ther was no time wherin this & other corrup tions were not preached against, al∣though the preachers & manie mo with them by the tyrannie of the Monkish locusts lost their liues. But bicause the first authors & de∣uisers of this carnal and grosse pre∣sence are so earnestlie called for, I will more largelie laie them forth, vvith their names and time. First
after the sixe hundred yeres ended diuers superstitions crepte into the Church,Damas. 728. whereof the adoring and vvorshipping of the bread in the sa∣crament vvas one among the rest. against which superstition and ido∣latrie, diuers learned men did both vvrite and speake,Bert. 800. Beren. 1049. as Bartrame, Be∣ringarius, & others, then the main∣teiners of this idolatrie in worship∣ping the bread, imagined a real and carnal presence, and confirmed the same, first vnder Pope Leo the ninth in the councel of Vercellence,. 1033. wher an isfinite number of Bishops and Monkes were gathered together at that time. Yea and long after there vvere two opinions or iudgements of this matter, one sound and true, holding a spirituall presence,Damess . 14  licfiatum. an o∣ther false and vnture, holding a real and carnal presence, with the sub∣stance of bread & vvine. Then grew therein a third muchmore vvicked then the second, and preuayled a∣gainst the two formes, that is, a real and carnal presence by way of tran∣substantiation. Of these three opi∣nions
speaketh the Master of Sen∣tences,Sent. lib. 4. dist. 9.10. & 11. condemning the first (which in dede in true and Apostolike) for heresie, the seconde he something misliketh, the third he aduaunceth for the truth.Super dist. 9.10. & 11. Diuers other vppon the sentences do the same. Linwode said,Prouinc. lib. 1. super cap. altiss. & infra. Sciendum est quod de corpore Christi tres sunt opiniones. We muste vnderstande that there are three opinions of the bodie of Christ, vvhich are recited by diuers vpon the fourth booke of senten∣ces. By this you maie perceiue the opinion of real presence is nothing so certaine as the Papistes do pre∣tend, there is nothing (as is already declared) more vncertaine, vncon∣stant, & variable. But the propoun∣der of these questions, either is ve∣rie vnskilfull in his owne doctors, or els verie vnmindfull of the olde Prouerbe: Oportet mendacem esse me∣morem, it behoueth a lyer to haue a good memeorie.Damas. li. 4  1. Conc. Lateran. 1059. To returne to the naming of the first authors of the reall presence: Damascine, Pope Nicholas the second of that name.
by the counsel or rather the enfor∣cing of Hildebrande: After pope Gregorie the 7. in the first Councel of Laterane, established this errour vvithout mētion of transubstantia∣tion. Then stoode vp Lanfranke bishop of Tucinense,Anu. 1083. and after of Canterburie, and tooke vpon him the defence of this real presence, as apeareth in his bookes against Be∣ringarius. Then Pascasius,Anno. 1015 Guimūdus, Algarus, Adelmanus Vulfus, Anselmus the bishop of Cantorbu∣rie, Hugo, with a number beside. Then Innocentius the 3. pope of that name,Lateran. Cont. ag. 1215. with the second councel of Laterane, againe established this carnal and real presence by vvaie of transubstantiation, then followed Gratian with his Decretals,Cone. Const. & Basil. 1430. Lōbard with his sentences, Scotus with his questions, vvho neuertheles saith it vvas no heresie before the great Councel of Laterane to haue deni∣ed transubstātiation. Petrus Com∣mester, Alexāder de Hales, Cabriel Biel, Durande, vvith a milion of Locustes, and idle belies beside: and
last of all the Councell of Trident with the vvhole rable of Iebusitical Seminaries. Thus haue you both the begin∣ners and the continuers of the real presence noted, togeather vvith their time, vvhich vvas the time of ignoraunce and greate darkenes, the verie kingdome of Antichrist,Apoc.. vnto vvhom vvas giuen the keye of the bottomlesle pit, out of vvhich this article vvith a nūber mo did a∣rise. And this was not in the spring of the Gospell, not in the time of the primitue Fathers, but ma∣nie hūdred yeres after their death, yea three hundred yeres after the death of the reuerent father Beda, vvas it before this reall presence could get rooting in the first de∣gree. Satan as in the yeeres be∣fore he had by heresies, schismes, and persecutions (as I saide) affli∣cted the Church: so in the middle age of the Church he did inuade the same,Apoc. 7. holding captiue at his pleasure suche as had not recey∣ued the marcke of the liuinge
God that suche as loued not the truth might be delighted in fables to their condemnation,Apoc. 7. Ezech. 9. & yet nei∣ther failed the rocke,2. Thess. 2. nor the holie ghost ceassed to teach the people, no more then did the dayes of A∣braham when he vvas in Chaldee, in the dayes of Israel vnder Pharao, in the time of Helias vnder the wic¦ked Achab, and in the time of the Pharisees before and at the com∣ming of Christ,Math. 16 Genes. 12 Exod. 1.2.3. & 4. 1. Reg. 19. Historia Euang. when he founde all thing belonging to true religion either cleane defaced, or marue∣louslie corrupted. No more vnder the tyrannie of the pope did the rocke faile, but still continued, and the holie ghost did stil teache those that were builded vpon the rocke, leauing those that vvere buylded vpon the sandes to be a praye for Satan in the hand of Antichrist. That the Bishop of Rome vvith his Monkes vvere the first that o∣penlie taught and confirmed th'er∣ror of the real presence,Leu. 9. & Nicho∣les. 2. appeareth by Nicholas the seconde and his Monkes in the councel of Laterane
is so euident that it cā not be gain∣said, that vvhich he had once be∣gon, the same did his successours with like crueltie maintaine, yea al∣though God did from time to time stir and rayse vp Enoche and Elias vvho rebuked them of their mad∣nes.Mal. 4. Apot. 12. We now shewe them vvhat Bi∣shop began first openlie to teache and confirme this opinion, who so euer before Nicholas the secondes time, did heare of such a confessi∣on, as he forced Beringarius to make, vvhich afterwarde a number of the Monkish & frierish rable did mainteine, as appeareth by Lanke∣franke,Ia lib. de sacram∣adersus . 2. Lombardus . Durand. . lib. 4. Gratian, Lombarde, vvith scholemen and Canonistes, an in∣finite rable, whereof some greatlie misliked of the ouergrosse (by their owne iudgement) opinion of Pope Nicholas, who forced Beringarius to confesse that the reall bodie of Christ vvas not onlie broken sensu∣allie vvith the priestes handes, but also crushed & torne vvith the teeth of the receiuer. Against this opini∣on, diuers of the popes friendes
haue taken exception, saying, Cor∣pus Christi qui incorruptibile est, non di∣uiditur in partes vel dentibus laceratur, sed fractio potest fieri in ipsa forma sacra∣mentalis panis. The bodie of Christ is incorruptible, & cā not be deuided into partes: but the breaking maie be said to be in the verie forme of the sacramental bread.In sequente Missae corporis Christi. vers. 14.15. & 20 Thomas A∣quinas, Manet tamen Christus totus, sub vtra{que} specie, a sumente non concisus, non confractus, nō diuisus, &c. Nulla rei fit scissura, signi tantum fit fractura, &c. Christ remaineth whol vnder both the kindes, not crushed, broken, or deuided of the receiuer, &c. No breaking or fraction is made of the bodie, the signe is onlie brokē. &c. But yet notwithstanding this mis∣like, so great was the blindnes and corruption of that time, that who soeuer could do anie thing in the popish kingdome, shewed his skill that vvay to the building vp of that kingdome of darknes. For the Monkes & Friars as they vvere the mainteiners and bringers in of the real presence, euen so had they the
whole gouernment vnder their A∣pollion the B. of Rome, to do what they vvould. Was not I pray you in this 500. yeres all true and sincere preaching of the gospel vtterlie ex∣tinguished (except in some few that were saine to hide thē selues) ouer∣throwen, & in steede of holie scrip∣tures & preaching therof, the true honor of god & the vse therof, was broght into the Church. Monkishe dreames and Frierish fables, as the legend of lyes, the promptuarie of miracles, & such like, wherby Gods truth & his word were not only ba∣nished & put to flight, but with it al good learning, & in steede therof a Monkish barbarisme receiued & a long time allowed, as though the puritie of the Greke & Latin toung had neuer bin, vvhich nowe vve see vvith the Gospel to be restored a∣gaine. For as their time vvas by the prouidence of God limited vnto thē: so when it was ended, then did God begin to ouerthrow their de∣uice, that he might againe restore the gospel of his sonne, to prepare
the way for his comming to iudge∣ment. THE OBIECTION. THe trueth is, that all the Bishops of Rome, yea al the Bishops of the whole world taught this to be his real bodie, and this to be his blood. And this faith dured from the last supper of Christ in al faith∣full men,This obiection is already an∣swered. vvithout any denying or direct impugning therof, vntil Beringarius be∣gan to teach otherwise. But his owne re∣canting, and the three Councels gathered straight against him at Ʋercelles, Towres and Rome, do rather shew vvhat & how constant the Catholike faith vvas of olde time in that behalfe, then anie thing helpe and abetter the opinion of those men, who now a daies endeuor to establish new in∣uentions of their ovvne. THE ANSVVERE. THat neither the Bishoppe of Rome, neither yet anie other bishop or father receiued frō Christ and his Apostles anie
suche grosse & absurd opinion as is this real presence, vvel may appeare vnto euerie simple man by that which is alreadie saide. For there maie he sce, that our fauiour Christ, his Apostles, the primatiue fathers, the practise of the popish Masse, Bar¦trame, and others since his time, teach vs, that Christ in his humani∣tie, in the real presence of his bodie is no vvhere but in heauen, and can not possiblie be in two places or moat once. And to haue denied this reall presence had bin no heresie (by the iudgement of Scotus) something before the last fiue hundred yeeres. For he in one place vpon the tenth distinctiō, thus concludeth.Super dist. 10. quest. 1. Vnde est simpliciter herisis hodie, sentire, quod non sit ibi realliter verum corpus Christi. Whereby to thinke that the verie bodie of Christ is not therein the hoste reallie is this daie simplie an herisie. As who should saie, there hath bin a time vvhen this real pre∣sence might vvithout touch of he∣risie haue bin denied.
It therefore is false & vntrue to saie that the Bishop of Rome, or anie o∣ther lerned man receiued this reall presence of Christ. &c. they learned it of the smoke that rose out of the bottomlesse pit, as is aforesaid. Also that this faith of theirs had not en∣dured from the time of the last sup∣per vntil Beringarius, appeareth by that treatise of the sacramēt which Bartrame vvrote vnto Carolus Magnus. Further how should that endure so long, that at the last sup∣per was vtterly vnknowen vnto the church and people of God, as is a∣fore largelie proued. Whereunto I will adde these sayings of Origen, Ciril, Chrysostome, and Augustine. Secundum diuinitatis naturam non peri∣grinatur à nobis, in Matth. . 33. il in Iohn. 10. ap. 7. perigrinatur secundum dispensationem corporis quod suscepit. Christ according to his deitie, or Godhead, is no stranger, or is not absent frō vs, but in the dispensa∣tion of his bodie he is a stranger. Etsi corpore absuero,. imperfect. tamen presens ere vt Deus. Although I be absent tou∣ching my bodie, yet as I am God I
vvill be present. S. Chrysostome saith: In sacris vasis non ipsum corpus Christi, sed misterium corporis eius conti∣netur, The verie bodie of Christ it selfe is not conteined in the holie vessels, but the sacrament of his bo∣die.Super  homil. 50. And S. Augustine saith, Dices quomodo tenebo Christum absentem, quo∣modo in coelum manum mittam & ibi sa∣lutem teneam, fidem mitte & tenuisti, patres tui tenueriant carne, tu tene corde. Thou vvilt saie, howe shall I holde Christ being absent, how should I reach my hande into heauen, that I might haue Christ sitting there, streatch forth thy faith, and thou hast holde of him. Thy forefathers helde him in the flesh or bodily, but holde thou him by faith and in thy heart. These Councels vvhereof Rome or Laterane vvas the chiefe, are so farre from signifying the constant faith of the Church before the sixe hundred yeeres, that they vtterlie impugne the trueth in innouating new deuises, altering and chaun∣ging things that vvere before that
time, and condemning for herisie and vvickednes those things that before vvere holden and belieued for good and lawfull, as vvel appea∣reth by their decrees. Therefore these Councels, and al other gathered by the Bishoppe of Rome his authoritie, be as good & lawfull vvitnesses in this or any o∣ther matter of controuersie, as the Councell gathered by Annas and Caiphas, and the rest of the priests at that time, are vvitnesses against Christ our Sauiour. To vvhom be praise for euermore. Thus according to your Margi∣nall note, you are directlie, answe∣red in this matter, and if there be any thing to be said, or any excep∣tion to be taken against this, it shall be further answered. FINIS.
A DISCOVERIE OF THE IESVITICAL OPINION OF IVSTIFI∣cation, guilefullie vttered by SHERWINE at the time of his execution: Gathered and setfoorth by PETER WHITE, verie necessarie and profitable for this daun∣gerous time. Seene and allowed according to the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions. fleur-de-lis ¶ VBIQVE FLORESCIT. LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe and Henry Kirkham, & are to be sold at his shop at the little no dore of S. Paule.
The Contentes. 1 SHerwines confession. 2 The first diuision of righteousnes imagined by the Papists. 3 The Diuision of Iustification de∣uised by the Schoolemē, and af∣terwardes new burnished with other termes by Pighius, Ecchi∣us and other of their time. 4 The Iesuiticall diuision of Iustification. 5 The Description and Diuision of the Papisticall faith. 6 The substance of the matter in all these Diuisions is al one with the Schoole∣men, latter papistes and Iesuites, not∣withstanding theire difference in termes or wordes. 7 The termes or wordes of art vsed of the schoolmen the latter Papistes & the Iesuites; and wherein they differ in these termes, and wherein they a∣gree. 8 That there is no such a threefold dif∣ference of righteousnes before God as the Papistes imagine. 9 The righteousnes of the lawe and the righteousnes of the Gospell with their difference.
10 The Papistes make Christe no more beneficiall vnto his Church then is the lawe. 11 That the father doth not only offer our Saluation vnto vs wrought in Christ: but also through him doeth effectually bestowe the same vpon vs by a liuely faith in Christ. 12 That this faith wherby weare iustifi∣ed, is not of our selues, neither depē∣ding vpō our free wil (as the papistes imagine) but it is the gifte of God in Christ, and the worke of his spirite by the Preaching of the Gospell, and de∣pendeth vpon our election. 13 That this faith onely iustifieth beefore God with out the helpe of workes. 14 That this faith respecteth onely the promise of God made vnto vs in the death and passion of Christ, and not legall or temporall promises (as the Papistes wickedly pretend.) 15 That the promises of the Gospell are free and absolute, and not condicional as the legall and temporall promises are. 16 That a liuing and iustifiyng faith is
alwaies fruitfull and neuer idle or barren, and although it onely & alone doth iustifie, yet is it neuer alone or voide of good workes. 17 The distinction of the Iesuiticall first and second iustification, with their termes and woordes of arre haue the same meaning and corruption that the schoolemen had. 18 That the Papistes leaue nothing vnto Christ and his Gospell in the worke of our iustification, but onely this, that he teacheth how a man may iu∣stifie him selfe before God. 19 That the continuall remission of sinne through Christ, is our onely iustifica∣tion before God. 20 That sanctification and renouatiō are not our iustification before God, but the fruites therof & follow the same. 21 That renouatiō and sanctification are not perfected at one instant or mo∣ment of time (as the Papistes ima∣gine) but by cōtinuance not through∣ly performed vntill by death morta∣litie be put off. 22 The true interpretation of the place of
S. Iames, that the Papistes abuse to proue iustification by workes. 23 That Sherwin in the forme & wordes of his confession meant not as they did pretend, but meere contrarie, and therefore like vnto the prophecie of Cayphas. 24 Why the Papistes and especially these Iesuites refuse the termes & wordes of the schoolemen and conforme their wordes like vnto the Scripture.
THE PREFACE To the Reader. THe old serpent, The red Dragon,Gen. 3. Iob. 1. Apoc. 9.12.13 1. Cor. 1.2.3. Mat. 15. Esay 28. Sathan the deceiuer of the whole worlde, the continuall selaūderer and accuser of Gods childrē hath no way (gentle reader) more molested Gods people, and preuailed against his Church to the great hinderance of his true worship and glorie of his blessed name, then by renting the vnitie of his Church into the sectes and fac∣tions of men, couering neuerthelesse these manifolde sectes and factions vnder the Cloake and shadow of the Catholike Church when in deede there most times emong these factions either remaineth no part of Gods worship and true religion at all, or els verie little, and that so corrupted, as therein the true glorie of God may no way appeare, when the true glorie of God his worship and religion is truly founded in Christe,Gen. 3 17. Deut. 18, Esay 8.9.10.13. Mat. 3 10.28. Rom. 1.3.4.5.10. 1. Cor. 1. Iohn 1.6. Ephes. 4. Collos. 2. Epist. Iohn cap 1.2. by whom the knoweledge of God the father, wisedome, righteousnes, sanctification and redemption is denied vnto vs through ope∣ration of his holy spirit and ministerie of his worde, and wee againe by the same meanes as it were by iointes and cooples inseparable conioyned vnto Christ in whom dwelleth the fulnes of the Godhead substan∣cially, and is the only head of his Church & Sauiour of his bodie, that in him and tho∣rowe him we may both see and enioy the glo∣rious
presence of God essectually. This craftie workeman Sathan so cunning li transsigureth himselfe as though he were an Angell of light,1. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 2. Ebru 1.2.3.4.8.9.10.13. Apoc. 1.4.6.7.10.11.14. Cal. 1.2.3.4. Phil. 1.2.3. that hee often renteth the parts and mēbers of this bodie from Christ and God: conioyning them vnto himselfe through the inuentions, titles, and holines of men, treading downe the true doctrine of Christ, his precious blood, death and merits by the doctrine of mens deuises, merits, and other such like abhominations. Thus be∣gan Sathan in Paradise to worke at the very beginning: Thus so soone as the lawe was giuen vnder Moyses, wrought hee by Corah, Dathan, and Abyran, and hath so continued vntill this day,Num. 16. and will doe vnto the worldes end. Vnder the titles, names, & traditions of Saduceis, Esseans, and Pha∣riseis he aduanced so farre his owne king∣dome, that hee vtterly defaced the kingdome of God, blinded both Priest and people, that not onely the name of a true Israelite in re∣spect of a Saducie, Esseā, or Pharisy was of no regard or estimation, hee thereby so much blinded them that they knewe not Christ the true Messias whē he was come among thē: but vtterly refused him and to their great condemnation reiected him whom they dai∣ly had in their mouthes and bragged them∣selues to be his people, his Church, and chil∣dren of Abraham,Iohn 1. vnto whom as vnto his peculiar inheritance he was especially sent. The sonne of God found none more obsti∣nate & malicious against him, his doctrine, and kingdome, then these men that continu∣ally
vaunted and bragged of his name, pro∣mises law, Church, and kingdome. After Christes giorious Ascention, by false Apost∣les Sathan set forward againe his aunciēt practice, which although the great paine and diligence of the Apostles & Apostolicall Pa∣stors in their time mightily suppressed: But when the Apostles and the Apostolical Pa∣stors were taken out of this life to rest with the Lorde, and that the faithfull workemen and diligent Pastors wared shant and thin in the Lordes vineyard, then did Sathan go forward very busily with this practice:Act. 20. 2. Thes 1 Apoc. 13 2 Tim. 4. Apoc. 9. and by such as came sorth of the very bosom of the Church, speaking great thinges to the drawing of Disciples and followers after thē, vntil he had set his chiefe Preudēt, anti∣christ & vicar general in his sente, wherin hee in these sectaries stil pretendeth religion and godlinesse: but alwaies denyeth and detest∣eth the substance thereof, this well appeareth in the sectaries of all ages: but especially af∣ter the first seuen hundreth yeered, when the Monkish Locustes began to rise & swarme out of the bothomles pit, & to spreade them∣selues into the worlde, as the Benedictes, Augustines, Donstinians, Cistrians, with an infinite number beades, some blacke, some white: and when the admiration of these be∣gan to decay, then giueth the Deuill a fresh onset againe by a newe supplie of fryers, Chanons, Nunnes, Ancorettes, and Here∣mites, a new band of other sectaries, which termed thēselues schoolemen & Canonists, some Sententionaries, Some Thomistes,
some Scotistes, some Canonistes, some Summistes, some Penitenciaries, Angelli∣cal Doctors, some Cyraphicall, and some Sorbonistes: and euery of these for the most parte both of sundry orders and fraternites and of diuers opinions, and yet euery of these orders, fraternities, sentences, decrees, ordi∣naunces, holines, yea and their houses and garments, whether they were old or newe of more honour, estimation and credit, then their Christ, his death, his passiō, his merits, his in tercestions, his Gospell, or any thing vnto him any way belonging. And nowe last of all as the onely fray of his kingdome the Deuill hath transformed the former sec∣taries this nee founde Hidra or sect of the Iesuites the very dragges of his bothomles pit, whose beginning, falshed and abhomina∣ble hipocryste diuers learned and godly men of our time as Chimnisius, Boquin and our owne countriemen Master Charke, Master Hammer and Master Filde haue both true∣ly and effectually described.Apoc. 12. Apoc.  Apoc. 18. These (good reader) are guided by the three vncleane spi∣rites that come out of the beastes mouth. These be sent into the vniuersall worlde as the last power and strength of Sathan to re∣payre and bolde vp against Christ and his gospel the kingdome of Antichrist now euen falling downe. These the Pope sendeth into al Countries, but especially where the gospel is preached, reily to seduce the people to drawe younglings into their Seminaries, to moue & frie rebellions, to practize the euer∣throw of Godly Princes and zealous magi∣strates
that their kingdome might againe become a pray vnto the Romish Antichrist, and so to be made doublely the children of hel fire, as they themselues be. These recapi∣tulate into thē selues the whole substance of Popery, & take vpon them the defence there∣of more impudently then any yet heretofore newe or olde. These in hipocry e and al ma∣ner of dissēbling goe far beyond the Mōkes, Fryers, Nunnes, Chanons, or whatsoeuer dissembling broode hath beene heretofore. It may seeme that the Deuill in these mē hath shewed his whole skil of dissembling and the very depth of his crafte: for where in the for∣mer sectes he rent the Church by the names of men and with grosse rearmes and homely wordes, opposed mans inuentions againste Christ and his gospell, in these men he labo∣reth to plucke Christes aheritaunce from him by the title of his owne name peculyar onely vnto himselfe, & by furnishing againe the corruption of the scheolemē leauing their knowen and lothsome rearmes by a new shewe of wordes and termes of their own in∣uention, that vnder them without suspicion they may deliuer againe the vile and filthie puddle of frinking Popery. These newe Messengers of his there∣fore hee Garnisheth with the Nne and title of Iesuites, pretending them there∣by to be the true reformers of Christs church sent from God in these laster dayes. But (gentle reader) This Latet Anguis in Herba: This name or Title of theirs is ful of deceite & perill:Esay 8.9. First in this title (Iesuite) they blas∣phemously
rob Christ of his special & pe∣cuilar title and name, of his office, that ney∣ther may nor can without great blasphemy,Mat. 1. be geuen to none other, by reason of the sig∣nification of the same. And thou (sayth the Angell) shalt call his Name Iesus,Phil. 3. because hee shall deliues his people from their sinnes, & this name is aboue all names and geuen onely to the sonne of God, this is euer actiuely taken & neuer pastiuely, it sig∣mfieth to saue and not to be saued by any o∣ther. These blasphemous Iesuites there∣fore as they can by no meane saue and deli∣uer men from sinne: so shall they neuer (ex∣cept they repent from this blasphemy) be sa∣ued from the bottomles pit of hell: but there with the Deuill and his Angels for their wie∣ked presumption shall they be euerlastingly damned. Secondly vnder the shewe of this name and title they most crastely and wickedly dissolue the vuity of Christs Church & misti∣call body, defacing the name and title of a christian, wherewith the holy ghost hath gar∣nished and beautified the members of his bo∣dy, as a name most conuenient for their cal∣ling. This name and title (I say) as a pro∣fane thing and to base for their holynes and professiō: thus in the spring of the gospel did Sathan labour among the Corinthians to dissolue the vnitie from Christe, vnder the name of Paule, Apollo, and Cephas, and af∣terwardes as I saide throughly & wickedly performed it vnder the names of Benedict, Frauncis, &c. Their owne Gratian long
agoe thus said of the like. Negat Christian, qui se negat Christianum: He denieth Christ,Causa 11. Quaesu. 5. that denieth the name of a Christian. Thirdly, with the great hurt & extreeme perill of all Christian Realmes, they dayly awayte to destroye by trayterous practizes, Godly Princes, and zealous Magistrats, by sturring vp sedition and rebellions emonge their subiectes, and oftentimes procure despe∣rat persōs to attempt horrible murders vp∣on Noble personages, and as King Iohn was poysoned by a besperat Monke, sundry Emperors by such their religious praizes: so in these daies sūdry great personages are put in great dāger by these holy persōs. The leagues of Gods Children, with the wicked, wherby the mightie helping hande of God hath continually beene turned euen from his owne deare children is no more daungerous vnto the Godly and Christian princes,Deut. 17. Leuit. 18.19. 2. Reg. 18.19.20.21.22.32. c 35. 1. Macha. 8.9.12.14.16. Examples the of are manie both newe an lamentable. Baruch. Timo. 3. Rom. 13. Tertul. ad Scapulam. then the accesse of this religious fraternitie or ho∣ly league and brotherhood vnto the presence of Kinges, Princes, or other noble mē is dā∣gerous vnto our state and time. The pro∣phets of God led by his holy spirit taught vs to pray for Tyrauntes, yea for such as op∣pressed and persecuted the Church of God, af∣firming that in their peace and safetie the Church of God yet vnder the Crosse shoulde prosper. But these led by the vncleane spirit, prepare and suborne desperate persons to kill and murder Godly Princes and Magi∣strates that be nurses and vnder God the de∣fenders of the Churche. Godly Princes therefore for the better safetie of themselues,
and subiectes may not deale herein as Por∣cenna did, who when hee vnderstood, that di∣uers desperate persōs had sorne his death, fled, and left the siege to auoyde that daun∣ger: But they must followe the commaunde∣ment of God in the auoyding of their flatte∣ring promises and friendship, and depende vpon the inuicible power and arme of the Lorde that neuer faileth such as do trust one∣ly vnto his helpe and defence, and vtterly de∣stroy the dissembling kingedome of Popery seruing the members thereof,. 11. as God gaue commaundement of Agag and the Amate∣kites, of the Cananites: as Moses serued the false prophet Balaam with the Madianits:Reg. 18. Reg. 9. as Dauid serued the children of Ammō: E∣lyas & Iehu the false prophets and priestes of Baall,ester. and all the posteritie of Achab: as Mardocheus serued Ammon and his poste∣rity. Finally as the Lord commaundeth the strumpet of Babilon to be serued:poc. 18. So shall they with peace and safetie raigne to the glo∣ry of God and comfort of his Church, which they can neuer possibly doe so long as these Antichristian members doe abuse their cle∣memcie and mercy as hetherto they to their great imboldening haue done. Therefore of them, Olim quod Vulpes oegroto cauto Leoni. Respondet, referam, qua me vestigia terrent omnia te aduorsum spectantia nulla retrorsum. As the wilie Fox aunswered the sicke Lion. Well I say the steps of all men that trusteth thē, maketh me afraid, we see many noble persona∣ges destroyed by thē, from their holy Caue re∣turneth
none, in their felowship is nought but bloud and destruction. We still therefore crie with the holy Ghost, Tollite Vulpeculas, De∣moliuntur enim vineam Domini: Out with the ve∣ry Cubbs, for they destroy the Lordes vineyard. Fourthly (as it were an other Hyrostratus by burning Diana her Temple, or an other Curtius for a yeres pleasure with great pride and oftentation to leape desperatly into the Gulfe to win a vaine reporte or same emong the foolish people, or as it were an other des∣perate Monke newe returned from hell, shre∣uen and houseled to poyson King Iohn (a most Noble and valiant Prince) to the end he might through so vile and wicked a fact be accoūted amōg the popes Canonized saints) doe these wicked and desperate Hipocrites attempt with losse both of body and soule to murther christiā princes & godly magistrats to be Regestred in the Popes Martyrologe to haue Graines, Beades, Medalles, bles∣sed & plenary pardons giuen in their names. These Hypocrites herein follow the steps of the desperate Iewes that wickedly and wil∣fully cast away themselues to saue the tēple which God would destroy.Iosephus de bello Iudeico We may not ther∣fore be deceiued with this desperate hipocrisie of theirs: For hereof we haue infinite exam¦ples, as of the Circumcilians in S. Augus∣tines time, of Thomas Becket, Thomas More, Iohn Fisher, Fekton and such like,Tertul. August. whose desperate deathes may not commend them vnto vs for Martyres. For not the death but the cause maketh a Martyre. Last of all as these Iesuits the last brood
of Antichrist doe with like hipocrisie seeme to forme their speeches vnto the Phrases of the Scripture, and to vse the sentences of the holy scriptures to couer & hide from the sim∣ple the vgly and Monstrous face of fil∣thy popery, that thereby they might with lesse suspition cure againe in the heartes of the people the deadly wounde of the beast, which otherwise to doe, the Diuell well seeth is vtterly impossible. Thus Alberius Pig∣hius, Eruius, Andradius, the late Courcell of Trident, and thus the late executed Iesuites attempted to perfourme: But among the residue Raph Sherwin, one of the foure exe∣cuted at Tiburne for treason on Friday the first of December playeth this pageant most guilefully to the deceauing of a greate num∣ber then and there present,1581. and purchased by his deepe & desperate Hipocrisse a commen∣dation aboue the rest, as though there had bin wrought in him before his death, some fast of Christ and true religion. But all was sub∣tiltie & an hipocriticall hipocrisse, to leade the people from the detestation of his popery to a liking or a more tollerable iudgement there∣of: If Raph Sherwin (good reader) had meat according to the good fourme of words by him then vttered, then woulde hee vtter∣ly haue cōdemned mans merites, inuocation of Saintes, with the residue of his popety to that point belonging, & contrary to the persō of Christe and free iustificatiō by his death: This hee did not. But contrariwise (saieth he) I die a good Catholique, that is, to wit an arrogant and an obstinate papist. These last
wordes of his (gentle reader) namely I die a Catholique, doe well declare his meaning no∣thing to agree with his good forme of words, by him first vttered. Therefore one Master Edward Fleetewood a godly learned Prea∣cher, and I, thought good by conference with Some of his fellowes yet remaining in the Tower, to learne out by them his meaning in the good forme of wordes by him at his death vttred, therby either to sift out the bot∣tom of their Iesuitical practize, or to giue oc∣cation vnto his fellows by his worses to re∣pent and embrace the trueth, and hauing cō∣ferēce with Iames Bosgraue, Iohn Hart, & Henrie Orton, wee found their meaning in these good wordes vttered by Sherwin, to be nothing lesse then to attribate our whole iustification wholly and onely vnto Christ, as the good forme of his wordes did pretēd: but partly vnto Christe & partly vnto them: selues, as in the discouery more plainely will appeare, which thing all papistes haue here∣tofore done. Sherwin therefore meant not, and the rest of the Iesuites intend not to re∣tract any thing from the grossenes of Pope∣rie, but guilefully and subrilly to vpholde the whole. The Lorde of his great mercy spee∣dily treade downe Sathan vnder our feete for the better ouerthrowe of this wicked king dome, the full restoring of the beautie of Christes Church, and comfort of his deare Children, So be it.
Faultes in the First booke. For Elegantur, Legantur For gloriant, gloriantur. fol. 23 For purputea, purpure. For aurea, aureo. For tui, in. fol. 25 For presed se, presens. For so let, let. fol. 32 For the dayes of Abraham, he did in the dayes of A∣braham. fol, 40. For Nicholas the second, Leo the ninth and Nicolas the second. fol. 40. For he had, they had. For his, theirs. For whosoeuer, who euer. fol. 41. Faultes in the Second Booke. For wherein the exact rule of the Law, Read wherein the righteousnes of man is compared wyth the exact rule of the Law. fol. 2. For applicatum, Read explicatum. fol. 5. For your clamorous, Read our clamorous. fol. 11. For tempored, Read tempered. fol. 12. For credamor, Read credamus. fol. 16. For cum creditis, Read per cum creditis. fol. 17. For qui, Read cui. fol. 33. For their, Read the. For leud tent, Read leud entent fol. 37 For penerall, Read generall. For then deuils, Read then the deuils. fol. 38. For hec loquitur, Read hic loquitur. fol. 38.
Sherwins confession. I Acknowledge that in me, and of me, there is nothing but sinne and abhomi∣nation, and J trust onelie to be saued by the death and blood shedding of Iesus Christ. The discouerie of this Con∣fession. FIrst for the better vn∣derstāding of their sudtilitie wee must remē∣ber that of iustificatiō before God they make three differences. The first wherein the righ∣teousnes of man is compared with the righteousnes that is in God.Albertus Pighius de fide & iuscifi. Concil. Trident sess. 6. And thus they confesse, that no creature is righteous
before God, compared with his righteousnes. The seconde, wherein the exact rule of the lawe, that is absolute & perfect. And mans righteousnes compared vnto this, they confesse is found vn∣righteous, and altogether vn∣cleane. Vnto these two righ∣teousnesses, whereof the one is in God him selfe, the other absolute in his lawe, doe they refer all the places of scripture, condemning mans works, and righteousnes. And do further acknowledge, that man is vt∣terly vnable, to fulfill the lawe in this perfection. Then do they imagine an o∣ther righteousnes before God, according to the rule of Gods iustice, tempered and framed to our infirmities, to be the rule of our life. By this neither, bi∣cause
no man fulfilleth euery part thereof, is any man iusti∣fied, they confesse. Then after this diuisiō they proceede vnto others, wherein they would seme to mislike the Scholemens corruptiō in this matter of Iustification: for be∣ing pressed with the manyfest light of the word in this poynt, so farre as they can not denye vs to be iustified only through Christ: yet hauing their harts hardned,Exod. 7.8. they do with Iames and Iamores withstande the truth, seeking still by showe of newe words & strange termes to couer the vgly opinion of the scholeen concerning iusrifica∣tion, and to se a newe colour thereon: for it is the very foun∣dation of all popery and popisl abominations: Therfore with all digence do they garnish it,
as the three vncleane spirites proceding out of the Dragons the beaste and false prophets mouth,Apoc. 16. will giue thē vtterance. Some of them as Albertus Pighius,ighius de iust. ickaus coutra utherum. Conc. Trid. ses. 6. a. de inerem. custi. Can. 9.10.11.12. narau. in Conc. rid. Ekchius, and others of their time, deuide Iustifica∣tion into two paries, whereof the first they wholly attributs vnto Christ: the seconde they appoint vnto them selues, as the disposers thereof. Others of them, as the Couneel of Tri∣dent, Alphonsus, the Censure of Colen, Andradius with this last broode of the Iebusiticall locustes, by a distinction make two iustifications, which they call primam & secundam, the first and the second. But before I enter the description of this se∣cond diuision, for breuitie sake, and to auoyde tedious repeti∣tions, I will diseouer the first:
whereof (as it is saide) they make two parts, one belonging vnto Christ as the onely wor∣ker thereof: the other belon∣ging vnto them selues, as the disposers of ye thing already wroughte and offered vnto them by Christ. Concerning the first part, & that belonging vnto Christe,Conc. Trid, scs. 6. they say that by his death and bloudsheding we are redeemed from the captiuitie of the diuel, and eternall death, and recon∣ciled vnto God, and beeing voide of al righteousnes in our selues, in him, and through his righteousnes onely we are iu∣stified, that he only may be our iustification, redemption, and sanctification before God, and this without anye deserte of ours.Albert. Pigh. de fide & iustificas. And therefore in this parte belonging vnto Christe,
Vnicum nobis salutis nostrae, & solidum est fundamentum,ighiusibidem He is the onely & sure groundworke of our saluation. In the respect of this part of our redemption,Ibide  & saluation quatenus ex Deo & Christo (as Pighius and other she Papists cōtesse (in so much as it is, of God and Christe, Shērwin confesseth ther was nothing of him or in him, but sinne, and that he onely trusted to be saued by the death and bloudsheding of Christ. But now touching the appli∣cation hereof which is she se∣cond parte, Sherwin and the rest chalenge vnto them selues, & so leaue Christ but one parte of our iustification, and in this point standeth the confrouersie betwene them and vs, concer∣ning our iustification: and with Sing subtiltle they beguile them
selues, and others. Therefore that this subtilty may plainely appeare vnto the very ignorāt, here foloweth Pighias his owne wordes concerning this matter. Hactenus de redemptio∣nis ac salutis nostrae in Christo no∣bis redditae misterio. &c. Vt existi∣mo satis applicatum est, nunc de e∣odē quarenus ex nobis pendet. &c. Hitherto hath it (as I thinke) bin sufficiently entreated, of the mysterie of our redemption, as it is geuen vnto vs in Christe: and now will we handle it, in that which depedeth vpon our selues. And this parte they terme ye disposing cause of our saluation:Pbius de fide &  which they say stan∣deth vpō two branches, name∣ly faith and workes, in those which be of yeres of discretiō. But in children they say, that the  of ptisme is
the disposing cause, and there∣fore they wickedly denie salua∣tion vnto children departing before baptisme.I. de sacra∣. fol. 200. Their fayth they diuide into two sorts, that is, in fidem acquisitam & infusam. Acquisitam they define to be an habite of the minde, whereby we certenly without wauering assent vnto those things which are from God, eyther in his worde, or by tradition reuealed vnto the Church for our salua∣tion. And they call suche a faith the Catholike faith, whiche is of our selues, say they, and stā∣deth of the assent of our will and reason, and so is it a per∣fecte faith, depending greatly vpon mans freewill. And these two partes are diuers things, and are distinguished, yea som∣time seperated from workes, & from fiducia, which foloweth
faith that worketh by loue, and yet neuerthelesse is Catholike,Conc. Trid. ses. 6. Canon. 6.. and perfect: but yet informis, and so soone as workes are thereto ioyned they cal it forma∣tam, and so iustifieth. For so long as it is informis, that is, without works, it iustifieth not although it be both catholike, and perfect, which perfection, as they say, may be in sinners. Now their catholike faith ioy∣ned with workes which they call a formed faith, they call their preparatiues  oure saluation, and these prepara∣tiues they terine the disposing cause of our saluation, wherby we receiue the holy ghost ether in hearing the worde, or with∣out the word by ye sacraments,Pighius de side & iustitia. and wheresoeuer these dispo∣sing causes are present, ther the holy ghost is neuer absent: and
where they be not, there is the holy Ghost absent. And thus say they doth God impute our saluation vnto our workes, in respect of that part depending vpon our selues. Thus iustification,Cone. Trid ses. 6. cap. 6. Tal Tilmus. esacra. lib. 4. which is temission of sinnes, reuouation and sanctification, folowe the preparing and disposing causes by a voluntarye receuling of grace. For (say they) we are iu∣stified by faith and charilie to∣gether, as the disposing cause of our iustification, or as the necessarye meanes to obteine grace of iustification, but ra∣ther by charitie then by faith, because charitie goeth before our iustification as a necessary cause, to obteine at Gods hand in Christ the grace of iustifica∣tion and adoption of his chil∣dren. And further they affirme
that God doth first require our owne workes, vnto whiche he proiniseth, that his grace shall not be wanting. For although Christ be made the full, parfeet, and sufficient cause of our iusti∣fication in so muche as in him is, yet is he effectual vnto none but vnto such as through these preparations and workes re∣ceiue him being with that con∣dition offered vnto them. For all the promises of our saluati∣on are euerywhere conditional and not absolute.Pighius. de sile & iusti. fol. 17. And further they say, that in the matter of iustification, there is no more attributed vnto ye faith, whiche respecteth the promise of God touching Christ his death, pas∣sion, and resurrection, then vn∣to that faith which respecteth any other promise of God what soeuer. Thus muche of their
faith which they call acquisitam. Nowe their faith infused is not of our will,Iohan. Damas. lib. 4. cap. 11. nor the habite of our minde, &c. but the gifte of God for the benefite of the Church, in working miracles, and is nubred among the giftes of the holy ghost.Abacuk. 2. Rom. 1. Pighuis de. fide &  at. Conctl. Tridens. sessio. 6. But that faith whereby the iust man liueth, by the whiche onely euery one of Gods chil∣dren layeth holde of their iusti∣fication in Christ, they vtterly reiect, calling it speciall, hereti∣call, and wicked. First, the substaunce of the matter, aswel to the scholemen, as to the later Papistes and Iesuits, is one, but the termes or wordes of Arte, as I maye cal them, are somtimes diuers, and proper vnto some one of their opinions, and some com∣mon vnto them all. They all
agree, both the scholemen and the rest, that Christ hath suffi∣ciently of him self wrought our iustification, and offereth the same vnto vs conditionallye,Pighius de iustifi Eckius contra Lu∣therum. Concil. Trident. de increm iusticu. Canon. 9.10.11.12. Andrad. in Trie Cone. sententi li. 3. distinci. 19. Gabriel Biel  sent. l. 3. dist. 32 knocking at the doore of our conseience by the holy Ghost to moue vs to receiue it, and this knocking the scholemen call gratiam primam, gratiam preueni∣entem, and gratiam operantem, the first grace, the preuenting grace, and the grace working alone, where the holy Ghoste moueth and stirreth our will and indeuours. Albertus Pi∣ghius and others called it iu∣stification belonging to Christ, & offered vnto vs. The Coun∣cell of Trident, Andradius, and the Iesuites,Pantheologia in sent. Thome. called it the first iustification which is wrought (as they saye) by the infused righteousnes of Christ, which
they call Charitie in hering or cleauinge to vs. Then those workes which the Scholemen call Merita congrui, workes of congruence, Pighius, ye Coun∣cel of Trident, and the Iesuits call workes of preparation and the disposing cause of our iusti∣fication. Then those which the scholemen did terme works of condigne, Pighius and those of his tune terme the answering of the condition of our saluati∣on. The Councell of Trident, Andradius, the censure of Co∣len, the rest of the Iesuites call the second iustice, or iustificati∣on, which stādeth (as they say) not in the free remissiō of sume, but in satisfying and further deseruing and meriting of eter∣nall life (as was saide before.) Therefore sayth Gabriel Biel,Iusentens. lib. 4. Anima gratia informata, per actum
à voluntate simul & elicitum de cō∣digno promeretur vitam aeternam. The soule infourmed by grace, doth through worke drawn out of the voluntarie wil and grace together deserue euerlastinge life. The discouerie of the second Diuision. WHere the censure of Co∣lon, Andradius,Opinio Iesuiterium de infuse iusttia Consura Colon Andrad. in Conc. Trid ss. 6. & other such, deuide iustification into ye first and second iustice, or righ∣teousues, they say the first iu∣stice is that inheringe and abi∣ding iustice, wherwith the vn∣regenerated man is first infu∣sed, receuing the habite or qua∣litie of infused charitie, and this righteousnes (they say) is not the remission of sinnes onelye, but sauctificatiō of the inwarde
man, wherby he is both called iust, and is so in deede, and this righteousnes they call charitie, abiding or inhering to the in∣warde man. And when the Scripture saith, that faith is reckned vn∣to vs for righteousnes, it mea∣neth nothing els (say they) but that the qualitie of righteous∣nes is infused into vs, for God vouchsafeth the faith that hee findeth in vs worthy to be infu¦sed with righteousnes that in∣hereth or abideth, wherby men are iustifyed. The second iustification (they say) is the exercise of the infused charitie, bringing foorth good workes, wherby the second iu∣stice both is, and ought to bee had. And this righteousnesse doth merite more then the first infused righteousnes, for it de∣serueth
euerlastinge life, as a due rewarde thereof, and this not by faith alone, as at ye first, but by faith and workes toge∣ther, which deserue remission of sinnes, and satisfie Gods iustice for the same, &c. This seconde iustice the Schoolemen terme, meritum ex condigno, merite of condigne. In the appearance of the di∣uersity of these opinions, which in trueth is nothing in substāce, but a shew of wordes, & change of termes, we must) good Rea∣der) for the auoyding of subtile laberinthes, obserue what is common vnto them all, aswell Scholemen as the rest, & what is proper or peculiar vnto each of them by themselues, wherin they differ, or agree among thē selues, or with the Scholemen whose grosenesse they worlde
seeme to mislike: So shall wee without tedious repetitiō both vnderstand their meaning, and with breuitie discouer and con∣uince their falshode. The termes or words of art proper to the Iesuites, ye coun∣cell of Trident, Andradius, and others of that race. Iustitia pri∣ma, Iustitia secunda, Charitas infu∣sa & inherens. The first Iustice, the second Iustice, Charitie in∣fused, & cleauing to vs, termes proper to the Scholemen, me∣ritum congrui, meritum condigni, merite of congruence, and me∣rit of condigne. Termes com∣mon vnto all the Papistes, as, Gratia prima, gratia secunda, gratia preueniens, gratia subsequens, gra∣tia operans, gratia cooperans, iusti tia infu sa & inherens, fides in∣formis & fides formata, fides ac∣cuisita, & fides infusa. The first grace, the secōd grace,
the preuenting grace, the follo∣wing grace, the grace working by it selfe, the grace workinge with our wil or indeuour, iu∣stice infused and cleauing to vs faith vnshapen, and formed faith, faith gotten of our selues and faith infused, faith generall and faith speciall. Thus because they woulde seeme to say something, and to be doctors of the Lawe, they leade both themselues & others into an endles laborinth ofian∣gling words, and vain termes, knowing not what they speak, neither whereof they affirme: but these Sophismes haue the Sorbanists first inuented and your clamarous Iesuites now follow, that by shew of wordes and termes, without sence they may seeme to auoide such con∣siōs, as the true sence of the
seriptures, for the confusing of their papisticall opinions, doth recessarilie enforce vpon them. Now it remayneth therfore (gentle Reader) that I shortlie and brieflie confuse these Sor∣bonicall and Iesuiticall sophis∣mes, and that not by words & termes, as their manner is to delude their hearers, but by e∣uident and plaine testimouies of Scriptures according to the true analogie, and meaninge of the same. And first, touching their three fold righteousnes, or iustice be∣fore god, the Scripture know∣eth no such diuision. The Scriptures lay foorth vnto vs two kindes of righte∣ousnes before God, one that is of the law of God, which lawe first ingrauen in man his heart before his fall, after written in
Tables of stone by the finger of God, and opened at large by the holy Ghost, in the bookes of Moises, the Prophetes, and Psalmes: and most cleerelie in the bookes of the newe Testa∣ment: conteineth in it the abso∣lute and perfect righteousnes, that whosoeuer fulfilleth the same, shall liue therein, and be iudged righteous before God: and this law being the perfecte image of Gods iustice, and the absolute rule of mans life, recei¦ueth no qualification,Deut. 30. Luke. 1.10. Leuit. 18. Rom. 3.8. Galat. 3. Iob. 15 Iohn. 1. Mat. 15. Rom. 7.8. Galat. 3. Psalm. 19. Mat. 5. nor in no parte doth condiscend vnto our infirmitie, but requireth an ab∣solute and perfect obediēce, and a conformitie vnto the same, & for that it findeth this in none, (Christ onlie excepted) it condē∣neth all absolutelie, shuttinge them vnder sin vnto condem∣nation, and iustifyeth none, ey∣ther
in whole or in parte. Hea∣uen and earth shall perish, but not so muche as a title of this law shall diminish. For as God cannot be altered, so the Law, which is the rule of his iustice, and the true image of himselfe, can in no part be temperod un∣to our infirmitie: if it can, then let some of the Sorbonical Ie∣suites, or Iesuiticall Sorboni∣stes, lay it down by the testimo∣nie of the Scripturrs, Et erit mihi magnus Apollo. The other righteousnes be∣fore God, is in Christ only, Quē proposuit Deus propitiatorem per fidem. whome God hath made our propitiation through faith.Nmo. 3. Eum qui non nouerat peccatum, pro nobis peceatum fecit, vt nos iustitia Dei efficeremur in ipso. Him that knew no sin,2. Cor. 5. did God make a sacrifice for sin for vs,
that we might be made ye righ∣teousnes of God in Christ,1. Cor. and God hath made him vnto vs, wisdome, righteousnes, and sā∣ctification, and redemption. Secondarilie therfore, where they attribute this rihhteous∣nes only vnto Christ, as ye wor¦ker and offerer thereof, & keepe thapplication thereof vnto thē∣selues, they take from God the best part of his office, and are found lyars against God. For Christ doth not ouely worke it for vs in all thinges belonging vnto himselfe: but the Father doth also bestow it vpon vs, in∣uesting vs by a liuely faith into the righteousnes of his sonne: otherwise wee should gaine no more by Christ, then we doe by the Law: For the Lawe both conteyneth and offereth perfect righteousnes vnto vs:Rom. 7.9. but it
worketh it not, and that for no lack that is in it selfe, but is in vs: For thus wee should make God and Christ in the worke of our redemption, no better then a Phisition, and much worse then a kinde Nurse or louinge Mother. A skilfull Phisition doth in deede prouide necessary medicine for the patient, but the receite thereof he leaueth vnto himselfe. A good Nurse or mo∣ther will not only prouide meat for the childe, but they also in what they can, bring the childe to the receiuing thereof.Ierim. 23.32. But now the Father and the Son by the holy Ghost worke together in this woorke of our iustification.Ezec. 11.16. Esay. 44.45. Iohn. 5.6.10.14.15.17. Mat. 16. Pater meus vs{que} ad∣huc operatur, & ego operor: The Father worketh as yet, and I also worke, & no man commeth vnto mee, excepte my Father
draw him. And of his greate loue towardes vs, he hath ge∣uen his Sonne to die for vs: so doeth hee geue vs the meanes whereby wee doe receiue him with his benefites, which saint Paule doth euidently declare. His wordes are these:Ephes. 2. Deus qui diues est in misericordia, &c. God that is rich in mercy through his great loue wherewith he lo¦ued vs, and whē we were dead through sin, he hath also quick∣ned vs together through christ by whose grace ye are saued, for by grace are yee saued through faith, & that not of your selues: It is the gife of God not of workes least any man shoulde glory:Iohn. 6. For wee are his worke-manship created in Christ Ie∣sus vnto good workes: which God hath prepared for vs to walke in. Here is the greate
riches of Gods loue and his grace the efficient cause of iusti∣fication,Mat. 3. Christ the merite & re∣spect:Esay. 53. Faith the meane and in∣strument betweene Christ and vs: and withall the gift of god, from which instrumēt or mea∣nes, our desertes and al works whatsoeuer are excluded in the apprehension of this iustificati∣on,Tittus. 2. and worke ordeyned of god, doe follow our iustificatiō to be our exercises. Loe (good Rea∣der) what may or can bee sayde plainer. In this worde of iu∣stification is there nothing foūd of oures: The whole worke is Gods, we are no agentes here∣in, but workmanship wrought of God only: so that the whole worke belongeth vnto God, & nothing therin vnto our selues. Therefore these Sorboniticall Iesuites are herin many wais
found liers against god and his trueth. Thirdly this faith whereby we apprehend our iustification in Christ is neyther of our sel∣ues, or any habit of our minds, reason or will, nor yet formed by workes, whereby together with workes we should be iu∣stifyed: but is the free gifte of God, depending vpon our elec∣tion, geuen vs in Christ Iesu, at the hearinge of the worde, through the working of the ho∣ly ghost, and doth only or alone without workes iustifie vs in Christ, and bringeth forth such works as the worde requyreth, being the fruites of our iustifi∣cation, to the glorie of God, the profite of our brethren, and wit∣nessing our iustification both in∣wardlye in our conscience, and outwardly before men: shal eui∣dently
appeare. First, that faith is the worke and gifte of God, in vs appea∣reth by the wordes of our Sa∣uiour Christ,Iosm. 6. Mat. 16 Ephe. 6. Hoc est opus Dei, vt credatis in illum quem misit ille. This is the worke of God, that ye beleue in him whom he hath sent. Nemo venit ad me,Philip. 1 nisi fuerit ei datum a patre meo, No man commeth to me except it shal be geuen him of my father. And S. Paul saith,Iohes. 2. Gratia saluati estis per Fidem, & hoc non ex vobis, dei enim donum est. Ye are saued by grace through faith, and that not of youre selues, for (this faith) is the gifte of God. And againe,Rom. 12. Sicut Deus vnicuique di∣misit mensuram Fidei. Euen as God hath deuided vnto euerie one the measure of faith. And Augustine vpō the sixt of Iohn saith,August. super Iohan. cap. 6. trast. 17. Credere datur nobis, quid e∣nim
habes quod non accepisti? To beleue is geuen vs, for what hast thou, that thou hast not re∣ceiued. Againe,1. Cor. 4. Deus si opere fi∣dem nostram miro modo agens in cordibus nostris vt credamur, num∣quid metuendum est ne totū facere possit. If God doe worke faith in our heartes by a wonderfull meanes, what? shall wee feare that he canot work out the rest. Ex fide ideo dicit iustificari homi∣nem, non ex operibus,Lib. 2. de predest. cap. 2. Ephes. 2. colem lib. cap. 7. quia ipsa pri∣ma datur, ex qua impetentur cetera Therfore doth he say a man is iustifyed by faith without wor∣kes, because faith is first geuen, wherby the residue is obteined Ipsam fidem dixit esse opus dei,August. super Iohan. cap. 6. tract. 25. nec dixit hoc est opus vestrum, sed hoc est opus dei, &c. Christ sayde, that Faith is the woorke of god, that yee doe beleeue in him, whome hee hath sente,
that he that doth reioyce, may reioyce in the Lord,Ieronni. in epist. ad Ephes. cap. 2. Et haec Fi∣des non est ex nobis, sed ex eo qui vocauit nos, non nostrae voluntatis, sed Dei muneris. And this faith is not of our selues, but of him that hath called vs neither is it of our willes, but of the gift of God. Then, that this gifte of god dependeth vpon our election, it is euident. for S. Paul calleth it,Titus. 1. Fidem Electorum, the faith of the Elect. And again, Fides non est omnium.Thess. 1. All men haue not faith:Rom. 9. For, quorum vult Deus mi∣sereatur. & quos vult indurat. God sheweth mercye on whom hee will, and whom he will he har∣deneth. And they only beleeue, qui praeordinati sunt ad salutem.Act. 13. Rom. 8. Ephes. . that are ordeyned vnto salua∣tion, for whom hee hath chosen and ordeyned vnto saluation,
those he calleth. And that this faith is giuē vs in Iesus christ appeareth by these places, and many others: Nemo nouit patrē nisi filius,Mat. 11. Luk. 14. & cuicunque voluerit fili∣us reuelare. No man knoweth the Father but the Sonne, and he to whom the Son wil re∣ueale him. Therfore seing that the knowledge of god commeth by faith, it must necessarilie fol∣low, that this faith is geuen vs in Christ.Ephes. 6. This faith is geuen vs saith S. Paul, of God the Father, in Iesus Christ. And further he saith, that he liueth by that faith which is in Iesus Christ. And againe, Audita fide vestra in Iesu Christo.Galat. 3. Coloss. 1. When I hearde of your faith that is in Iesu Christ.Philomon. And to Philemon he saith, that faith is in vs tho∣rough Iesus Christ. And saint Peter saith,1. Pet. 1. vers. 21. God through his
mercy, begate vs againe vnto a liuely hope through the resurrection of Iesus Christ from death,Philip. 2. Eum creditis in deum &c. For, through him, ye beleue in god, who raysed Christ from death, and gaue him the glorie, that your faith and hope might be in God.Coloss. 1. And therefore is he called the image of the inuisible God,Hebr. 1. the brightnes of his glo∣rie,August. de tract. lib. 4. cap. 20. idem. cont. am. cap. 36. and the expres image of his substance. Haec fides definita est in Christo, qui in carne resurrexit a mortuis, &c. This faith is fixed in Christ, who in the flesh rose againe from the dead. This faith of Christ is that founda∣tion whereby Christ dwelleth in our heartes, who doeth in∣wardly teach vs, and therefore as the Apostle saith,Galat. 3. Rom. 1. Conclusit Scriptura omnia sub peccatum, vt promissio ex fide Iesu Christi dare∣tur
credentibus. The Scripture shutteth all vnder sin, that the promise by the faith of Iesus Christ, might be giuen vnto all that doe beleue. And this faith the holy ghoste worketh in vs, through the worde.Agust. de fide es oper. cap. 16. Fides est ex auditu, auditus vero per verbū dei. Faith commeth by hearing and hearinge by the word of God. Dedit igitur ipse alios Apostolos,Rom. 10. Gal 1.3. Colloss. 2. Ephe. 4 a∣ios vero Prophetas, &c. ad opus ministerij, ad edificationem inquā, corporis Christi, donec euadamus omnes in vnitatem fidei, & agniti∣onem Filij Dei, &c. And he gaue some Apostles, and some Pro∣phetes &c. to the gathering to∣gether of the Saintes into the worke of ministration, into the edifying of the bodie of Christ, till we all meete together, into the vnitie of faith, and know∣ledge of the Sonne of God, &c.
Placuit enim deo per stultitiam pre dicationis.1. Cor. 1 &c. It pleased God by the simplicitie of preachinge, to saue them that beleeue: Renati estis non ex semine mortali: sed ex immortali per sermonem Dei viui. Ye are new born, not of mortall seede, but of immortall by the word of the liuing God.1. Pet. 1. Iacob. 1 Is pro∣genuit vos fermone veritatis, Hee hath begotten you through the worde of truth. And of the silk woman Lidia S. Paule saith,Act. 16 Cuius cor deus aperuit vt attende∣ret ijs quae dicebātur a Paulo. And the holy Ghost opened her hart that shee harkened vnto those thinges that were spoken by Paul.1. Cor. 3. Ego plantaui, Apollos riga∣uit, deus autem incrementū dedit. I planted saith Saint Paule, Apollos watered, but god gaue the encrease. Habentes saith the Apostle,1. Cor. 4. eundem Spiritum Fidei.
hauing ye same spirit of faith. In this worke of Faith therefore, these fiue concur and goe toge∣ther. 1. The grace of god. 2. the word of god. 3. the preaching of the word. 4. the hearing of the word preached. 5. the holy ghost opening the hearts of the hea∣rers,Act. 16 whereof Lidia the Silke∣woman is an euident example. But where these things concur not, there is no faith,Prouerb. 30 and there the people perish. That this faith iustifyeth on∣ly or alone without the helpe of workes, is most euident. First, for that the gospel is the power of God vnto saluation,Rom. 1. vnto eue¦ry one that beleeueth. Next the tree must be made good, before the fruites thereof can in any respecte bee good.Mat. 7.2. Conditi su∣mus in Christo Iesu ad opera bona.
we are first made (or new rege∣nerated) in Christ vnto good workes, so that our iustificati∣on goeth before the worke,Iphes. 2. and therefore faith without works doeth iustifie. Thirdly,Rom. 1.3.4.5.9. Gallt. 3.4. the holy ghost euery where in the work of our iusti∣fication before god, seperateth workes from faith. We are iu∣stifyed in receiuing, not in ge∣uing, in receiuing remission of sinnes.Ephes. 2. Rom. 4. Psal. 2. Beati quorum remissae sunt iniquitates. Blessed are they whose sinnes are forgiuen, and therefore not by workes. If a∣ny works might be iined with faith to iustification, then the workes of the Law:Rom. 1.4. Gl. 3.4. Ph. 1. om. 3 4. Gl. 3.. But iusti∣ficamur fide sine operibus Legis. We are iustified by faith, with∣out the woorkes of the Lawe, therefore, without all other whatsoeuer. If euer any was
or might bee iustifyed with the helpe of workes before God, then Abraham, but Abraham was not: therefore none other can be. Also,Rom. 2. Rom. 4. 1. Pet. 3. the faithful are iu∣stifyed as theire father Abrahā was iustifyed, but Abraham was iustifyed before God by faith, without workes: by faith therefore without workes are all the faithfull iustifyed. And thus the godly learned did alwaies thinke of our iusti∣fication. Iustificati sunt gratis (saith S. Ambrose) quia nihil operantes,Ambros. super Rom. cap. 4. neque vicem reddentes, sola fide iu∣stificati sunt dono Dei. They are iustifyed freelye, because they worke nothing, nor geue anye thing in exchange but are iusti∣fied by faith onely through the gifte of God. Againe,Ambros ibid. Obde. Sic decre∣tum dieit a Deo, vt cessant Lege, solam fidem gratia Dei posceret ad
salutem. So saith the Apostle, it is decreed that the law geuing place, the grace of God might require only faith to saluation. Hoc ipsum monet exemplo pro∣phetae, vt sine labore, & aliqua ob∣seruatione, sola fide iustificantur a∣pud ipsum. This self same thing doth hee admonish by the Pro∣phets example, that without labour, and any obseruation, or ceremonie, they may be iustify∣ed through onely faith before God.Ambros. super Rom. cap. 9 And in another place. Sola fides (inquit) posita est ad salutem. onely faith (saith the Apostle) is set downe to saluation:Ambros. super Rom.  Manife∣sto beati sunt, &c. They are ap∣paratlye blessed (saith the A∣postle) vnto whom without a∣ny labor, or worke their sinnes be conered, and their sinnes re∣mitted: No workes of rpen∣taunce required of them, but
Faith onely. And Hilarius, Sola Fides iustificat:Cano. 9 Faith only iustifyeth. Origen also proo∣ueth by the example of ye thiefe Of Mary Magdalene,Origen in Rom cap. 4. And of the Publicane, And by many other reasons, that onely Faith doth iustifie. The same doth Athanasius,Basil. homil. de fid Athen. in Galat. cap. 3. Basill, Chrisostome, and other of their time, euidently prooue, whome because I woulde bee shorte, here I doe omitte. That this iustifying Fayth in Adam, Noe, Abraham,Pi. de sule & iustificatione. fol. 85. or any other of Gods Elect, respe∣cted, or doth respect, the Crea∣tion of the worlde, the making of the Arke, the multiplying of ye posterity, or any other promis whatsoeuer (as ye papists ima∣gin it doth) but onely y• promise of christ made vnto Adam,Gen. 3 and stil renued vnto his Posteritie, shal euidently appeare,
The righteousnes no doubt of God which is good before god, commeth by the faith of Iesus Christ vnto al and vpon al that doe beleeue.Rom. 3. Iustificantur autem gratis, eius gratia per redemptionē factam per Iesum Christum, quem proposuit Deus placamen per fi∣dem in sanguine suo. For they are iustifyed freely by his grace throgh the redemption that is in Christ Iesu, whom god hath made our pacification through faith in his bloud, according as it was promised vnto Adam, Et semen mulieris ipsum conteret caput serpentis.en. 3. Apocalip. 12. The seede of the woman (namely Christ) shall breake the serpentes head. And vnto Abraham,Gn. 12.17. . 3. Act. 3. In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes, non dicitur in seminibus, sed devno, qui est Christus. In thy seede shal all nations be blessed, He saide not
in sedes, as of many,Mat. 3. but of one which is Christ. Hic est filius me∣us dilectus, in quo mihi complacuit This is my beloued sonne, in whō I am well pleased. Thus we see we are iustified in no o∣ther promises, but onely in the promise of Iesu Christ, & that in the promise of his death and resurrection, and therto the ho∣ly ghost referreth our faith,Coloss. 1.2. Heb. 1.2.3.4 Rom. 4. as ye plainly see, He dyed for our sinnes, and rose againe for our iustification. We are regenera∣ted into the hope of life,1. Pet. 1. per resur rectionem Iesu Christi ex mortuis. by the Resurrection of Iesus Christ from death,Coloss. 1. For it plea∣sed ye father that in him should all fulnes dwell, and by him to reconcile all thinges vnto him∣selfe,2. Cor. 5 &c. Neque sub coelo aliud da∣tur nomen hominibus, in quo opor tet nos saluos fieri. Neither is
there any other name or mean, vnder heauen geuen vnto men wherein we must be saued. Now what shall we thinke of these Papistes,Act. 4. Pghi. de side e iusti. sol. 88. that tell vs, Intelligis in iustificationis nostrae negotio, vt nihil plus euergiae, tri∣buat Fidei promissae iustificationis in Christo, quàm fidei alterius, cu∣iuscunque rei proditae, aut promila a Deo. Thou vnderstandest ther∣fore (saith Pigh ius) that in the matter of Iustifycation, she A∣postle may attribute no more vnto the faith of Iustification promised in Christ, then vnto the faith of any other promise whatsoeuer, foreshewed or pro∣mised by God. Do they (good reader) make any other thing of Christ, and the promises in him, then of Legall & transitorie. Nay doe
they not in effect say yt whichis reported to be dissolutely vtte∣red of Pope Leo 10. vnto Bē∣bo his cardinall,In vta Pn. Quantum no∣bis ac nostro cetui profuerit ea de Christo fabula, satis est seculis om∣nibus notum. Lo esteemed the gospel of Christ, but a fable of small profite. They shoull it a∣mong other Legall and tempo∣rall promises. These men ac∣count the scriptures of ye gospel as a nose of waxe,Pig. Hosepres. verbo. but the holy Ghost accountes thereof as of the mightie power of God to saluation, as of the word of life ye immortal seed of our regene∣ratiō, as of a two edged sword,H. . Mt. 8. that deuideth the marow and the sinewes, in respect where∣of, they account al other things as drosse. These felowes therfore though they coūterfette ye resemblance
of the Lambe,Apoc. 4.9.13 yet in deede they come out of the bottomles pit, & speake with the mouth of the Dragon, and are led by ye spirit of error,. Tim. 4. speaking great lyes in hipocrisie,. Tim. 3 but the Lorde will not suffer them to preuaile any longer. But vnto vs that beleue, the Apostle teacheth this faith to be of the promises of Christ his death, and therefore he calleth the gospel not the word of crea∣tion, of the flood, of the goinge out of Charran, of posterity, or of any such thinge, but hee cal∣leth it the worde of the cros.2. Cor. 1.2. That the promise of Christ is the obiect to our faith in iu∣stification, and not any other promises whatsoeuer, which promises and our faith are cor∣relatiues, that this promise is absolute without conditiō, may
by that which is already sayde, plainly appeare. Wherunto for better helpe of the vnlearned I will adde somewhat more. Ne∣ther are these promises in christ conditionall, as were the legall promises, but absolute and free and therin they differ from the promises of the law. For (saith ye apostle) promissiones dei in chri sto sunt etiā,2. Cor. 1 Ephes. 2 Rom. 3.4. Galas. 3 4. 1. Corn. 1. Apoc. 4.5. the promises of god in Christ are absolute and firm. They are absolute in christ that no man should brag: but onelye in god through Christ and that all reioycing of man shoulde be taken away, that God onelye might haue the praise. Now (good Reader) where both in the olde and new tēsta∣ment, there are found conditio∣nall promises, they bee of two sortes, the first seeme to be, and are so in deede and trueth. The
other vnto the vnskilfull seeme to bee, but are not so in deede. Such as be conditionall, are these:Leuit. 18. Galat. 3. Qui fecerit ea, viuet in ijs, He that fulfilleth them shal liue by them. Hoc fac, & viues. This doe,Luke. 10. and thou shalt liue: And such other doe belong vnto the Law,Mat. 6. and are not any way to be drawen vnto the gospell. Those that seeme to be, & are not, as, if you remit other men their trespasses, your heauenly Father will remitte you youre trespasses.Ezech. 8 &c. And if a Sinner doth repent him of his wicked∣nes, &c. And many other such phrases, belonginge vnto the gospell, be no conditionall pro∣mises, but speeches borrowed from vs, exhorting vs vnto our duetie, shewing foorth plainlye vnto vs the fruites of our iusti∣ficatiō, which without al doubt
we shall bring foorth when we are iustifyed. For we are not iustifyed to be idle, barren,Luk. 1 Ephes. 2. Tit. 2 2. Tim. 4. Mat. 6. 2. Pet. 1. and fruitles, but to bring forth such fruites as the Lord hath ordei∣ned for vs to walke in. For, a good tree cannot bringe foorth bad fruit. By these and such like, wee must make tryall of our selues, whither we be in the faith: whē we see one eat or drinke a great deale, we say he was hungry or thirstie, because we see him eat so much or so greedely: So doe we say that one is whote, be∣cause we see him sweate, yet do we not say, that his eatinge or drinking is the cōditional cause of his hunger or thirst, nor yet the sweat the cause of his heat: But contrarie we say, hunger, thirst, and heate, are the causes of eating, drinking, and sweate:
euen so,Ezec. 18. Mat. 6. the turninge from ini∣quitie, the remitting of trespas∣ses, are not the causes of the for geuenes of our sinnes, but the fruites thereof, and trial of our state. And this would the pa∣pistes see if they were not blin∣ded by the spirite of error,1. Tim. 4 Ephe. 2. that ruleth the children of vnbeliefe. That after iustification, this faith bringeth foorth such wor∣kes as are agreeable vnto the law of God, appeareth in these words:Ephe. 2. Titus. 2. Luk. 1. Mat. 6. Conditi sumus in Christo Iesu ad opera bona. We are crea∣ted (or renued) in Christ Iesu vnto good workes, which God hath prepared for vs to walke in.Hebr. 9 Et purificaret sibi ipsi populum peculiarem, studiosū bonorū operū Hee hath purged vs vnto him∣self, a peculiar people, studious of good workes. Thus although in the work
of our in stification, workes be not conioyned with Faith, yet are they not seperated from faith.Rom. 3 Galat. 3. For although faith alone doth iustifie, yet is it not other∣wise alone, but alwaies fruite∣full by good workes: It is one thing to be alone, and destitute of good works, which faith ne∣uer is, and another thing to iu∣slify alone, which faith alwaies doth: and by this faith,Ephes. 4 1. Tim. 1 althogh it be not singular vnto any, but general vnto the whole church of God, yet is euery faithfull man speciaily iustifyed, & there∣by specially liueth. One mans faith doth not iustifie another, but euery mā is iustified by his own Faith. Iustus fide sua viuet.Rom. 1 . 2 Galat. 3 Hebr 10 The iust shall liue by his owne faith, and not by another mans For he cānot be sure of the sted∣fastnes of other mens, & there∣fore
cannot be saued by their ge¦neral faith.Heb. 1 Galat, 3 Phlip. 2 Hebr. 11 1. Pet. 1 Rom. 5.8 This faith notwith¦standing the iangling of ye sor∣bonistes, is vnto euerie man yt beleeueth, his speciall hand and instrument, wherewith he ap∣prehendeth Christ certainlye, without wauering, and therby liueth. It is therefore called of saint Paul a sure confidence of thinges hoped for, and the cer∣taintie of things not seene, and thus oftētimes in ye seriptures Fides, Spes, and Fiducia which cō∣teyneth both, be confounded, or put one for another. Where the councel of Trident, Andradius, with the Iesuitical brood of the last locusis,Apoc. 9. would with a distinction of a first & se∣cond righteousnes, beguile vs, and lead vs from the beholding yt only righteousnes of al Gods children in Christ, which com∣meth no other wayes, but by ye
forgeuenes of sinnes, through the only faith of Christ. They are by the places already allea∣ged,Rom. 3 Galat. 3 manifestly & euidently con∣uinced: yet for the further satis∣fying of ye reader, I wil briefly ad something more. These men in their first iustificatiō as they cal it, or ye first grace as ye schole mē terme it, deny remissiō of sin to be our iustificatiō, but say yt it is such a sanctification of the soule, as therby we are both cal led iust, & are so in deed, so that by an iufused righteousnesse, which they tearme Charitatem inherentem, infused into yt faith of urs, found in our selues be∣fore we were iustified, & stirred vp by the grace of god first mo∣uing vs: & thus they stil speake like ye dragon,Apoc. 13. & not like ye lamb who by ye holy prophets & apo∣sties cōtinually say ye remissiō of
sinnes by the only faith of christ without workes, is our iustifi∣cation from time to time before God.Psalm. 32.51 Rom. 4 Col.  For God hath set foorth Christ to be the continual paci∣fying of his Displesure through faith in his blud, to declare hys righteousnes by the forgiuenes of sinnes, And in the Euange∣listes where sin is declared to be the cause of our infirmities, and the deuils power in man, so the remission of sinnes, is the curing and healinge of all those infirmities, and the ful delyue∣rance from the power and tirā∣nie of the deuill: whereby wee may euidently see, that as sinne seperateth vs from hod,Mat. 9 Mar. 2 Luk. 5 Iohn. 5.8. Gen. 2. Deut. 32. Ezec. 18 Esai. 43 50.59.64 O. 13. Mat. 12 & con∣demneth vs before him: so re∣missiō of sinnes doth restore vs againe to Gods fauor and pre∣sence, and iustifyeth vs before him, and therfore is the remis∣sion
of sinnes our onely iustifi∣cation before God, and not the renuing of inward mā, as these deceiuers doe pretend. For our renouation and sauctification folow the remission of our sins, as an effecte or fruite of our iu∣stification, which in deed is the remission of sinnes: for the tree being by gods fauoure through remission of sinnes made good, the fruite thereof, which is san∣ctification, must necessarily fol∣low. And thus faith was im∣puted vnto Abraham for righ∣teousnes, not by deseruige, or receiuing infused righteousnes (as Andradius,Adrad. in co. trident. Rom. 4 In. 3 G. 12.15.17.13 18 32 & the Iesuites imagine) but by remission of sinnes, and then followed sanc∣tification and obedience, with daily increase, by the workinge of gods spirit, witnessed by his workes, as well appeareth by
the storie of his whole life. And all these graces,Esai. 41. Rom 9. G. 18 Ierm. 18. Esai. 45. 2. Tim. 2. Ephes. 2. Gol. 2 Pet. 1 & good thinges, did still depende vpon Gods election, that hee had or∣deyned and called him therto in Christ, & no part thereof depen∣ding of him felf, as the Lord by the prophet faith: Who calleth the iust man from the East, &c. euen I the Lord that am with the first and with the last. This also S. Paule euidentive proo∣neth in the election of Iacob, and out of the Prophet Iere∣mie, by the example of the Pot∣ter and his vessels: And to Ti∣mothie he saith, that the Electe are in the Lordes house vessels to honor, thereunto created in Christ Iesu, by whom they are quickned by remission of sins. In theire seconde Iustifi∣cation, these Iesuits say their infused Charitie, firringe vp
good woorkes,Con. trident. de in∣cre. iust. sess. 6. can. 9.10.11.12 (which the Schoolemen call woorkes of Condigne) deserne both remis∣sion of sinnes, and eternall life. They make a greater shewe, greatlye pleasinge themselues, and beguile the simple, vtter∣ly excluding onely Faith, and free Remission of sinnes, and punishment due for the same. as thinges thereunto nothinge belōging: which is as if a man woulde say, that in the begin∣ning a Tree liueth by the Fat∣nes of the earth, & the strength of his owne Sappe, but after∣wards liueth by the Fruite, as though the Fruite did not con∣tinually take life & nourishment from ye Tree, but did giue life & moisture vnto ye tree, which of it self ye fruit hath not, but is cō∣tinually nourished & kept in life by the sap & moisture of the tree
Such are the absurde opini∣ons of our religious Iesuites, who in effect, together with the Schoolemen and latter Sor∣bonistes, leaue vnto Christ no∣thing in the worke of our iusti∣fication, but only this, that hee openeth the way how enery mā may iustifie himselfe, and so the gospel to teach nothing els,Albert. ig. de ust. Ethius cont. a Lutia. but how men may iustify thēselues by their own workes, and this euidentlye appeareth vnto all men, that will not bee wilfullye ignorant, by these new and old termes or wordes of art, which for this purpose the Papistes haue deuised.Coun. trid. sess. 6 An radan con. trident. As, workes of preparation, or disposing causes of our saluation, Charitie infu∣sed, stirring vp our free wil and faith, or the holy ghost knocking at ye dore of our free wil (which is also called the firste Iustice)
workes of congruence, meeting with the first grace, or with the prenēting grace. These termes be equiuolent, and haue all one meaning, as also haue their se∣cond iustice, and workes of con∣digne, that answere the condi∣tion, as well appeareth by the censure of the Iesuites of Co∣len, the councell of trident. sess. 6 De operibus. canon. 7. & cap. 6. ca∣non. 4. de fide. ca. 5.6.7.8.9.12, 13.Pigln. de iust. cont trident. sess. 6. de operibus can. 7. et de imbecal. iusti∣ficationss. ca. 1. can. 4. Pantheol g. Gal Bielan senten. Durand. in senten. Li.The master of sentences. lib. 3. distnct. 19. Pantheologia ex senten∣tia Thome. Gabriel Biel lib. sentēt. 3. and 4. and out of others, of the bottomlesse pitte an infinite table. The like meaning haue they in their termes of faith,Pighi. de iust. con. trid. de fide. sess. 6. Andrad. ut con. tridens. formed & vnformed, begotteen of their free will, and infused: So that while in wordes they grant vs to be iustified by a formed faith
(as they terme if) they pare the same so near, that they leaue no thing therof but a naked name of saith, void of Christs merits taking vtterly from vs iustify∣cation that is by the only faith in Christ, which Iustification is the very sum of all true ver∣tue and godlines. But nowe, forasmuch as Iustification be∣fore God, is the continuall re∣mission of our sinnes through the only faith of Christ (as it is alreadye saide) and that not in the beginning onely, but conti∣nually so long as wee dwell in this life,Mat. 6. and therefore Christ Iesus our Redeemer teacheth vs to cry from time to time for∣geue vs our sinnes. These Ie∣busiticall papistes, and popish Sorbonistes doe herein there∣fore declare themselues to bee led by the three vnclean spirits, (as is alreadye saide) of Anti-
christ, and not by ye spirit of god as they would pretend.Gen. 12.17 Rom. 4. Galet. 2.1. 1. Cor. 1 For the spirit of god by S. Paul in the example of Abrahā & dauid vn to whom ye remissiō of sins was accounted their only righteous∣nes before God, and ye a longe time after they were first ealied yea, many yeares after, they were reckned ye seruantes and frends of god, ye the remissiō of sins is our only righteousnesse before god. S. Paul applyeth ye righteousnes of abrahā that he speketh of, vnto him 14. yeares after he was called out of carrā And further he saith ye Abrahā was at no time iustified by his owne workes, for then he had somethinge wherein hee might haue gloried: but he saith yt A∣brahā was cōtinually iustifyed before God by faith, without works yt he might always glo∣ry in the Lord.
The same thing we finde in Dauid, Reg. 18 Psal. 81.32.18. & 0.143. Act. 15. Esai. 6.64 that was a man euē to the liking of God. Of Esay al∣so, whom the Lorde had clean∣sed, and yet saith he of himselfe among the rest of Gods Chil∣dren, we are all as an vncleane thing,Mat. 20. Luk. 17. all our righteousnes are as futhie ragges. And Christ our Sauiour saith, that when wee haue done all that is com∣manded vs, yet are we vnpro∣fitable deseruing nothing: For god is debtour vnto none. And S. Paul of the regene∣rated man,2. Corrin. 1.5 Psal. 32. Coloss. 2. Act. 13. in his owne person cryeth out, saying, Oh wretch that I am, who shal deliuer me from this bodie of sin & death? He saide not, my workes of cō∣digne, or stirred vp by the firste grace (as doe these Iesuites) but he saide, I thank God tho∣rough Iesus Christ our Loid,
which dyed, yea rather which is raysed againe, which also is at the right hande of God, ma∣king intercessiō for vs vnto his Father, who is stil in Christ re∣conciling vs vnto him self, tho∣rough ye remitting of our sins, in Christ therefore is remission of sinnes continually preached vnto vs, aswell after our rege∣neration as before, els were it in vaine, that euery where in the Scripture remission of sins freely in Christ is inforced, as the very matter of our saluati∣on, and reconcilement to God.1. Iohn. .. Mat. 3. Esai. 35.If any man sinne (saith Saint Iohn) wee haue an aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the righteous, and he is the pa∣cification, or Propitiation for our sinnes, and this not in the beginning, but continuallye all our life long, and therefore hee
saide of himselfe, and others al∣ready iustifyed, If we walk in light &c. The bloud of Iesus Christ cleanseth vs from al our sinnes. If we acknowledge our sinnes, God is faithfull and iust to forgeue vs our sinnes.Philip. 3. 1. Cor. 4. And S. Paule fled vtterly from his own righteousnesse, yea from that he might any way chalēge either by obseruing the Law, or by his painful trauell or labour in the gospell, and claue only so the righteousnes of God, that cōmeth through the onely faith of Christ. And our sauiour Christ him∣selfe calleth sinners vnto him,Rom. 1.7. Eze. 18. Mat. 11.18.promising continually remissiō and forgeuenes of sinnes so of∣ten as they repent, yea to seuē∣tie times seuen times, that is, continually. Wee ought there∣fore at all times confidentlye
through Christe to come vnto the seate of grace,Esai. 1.55. Apoc. 22. Heb. 4. assuring our selues to finde helpe in time of neede. We saye to these Iesuites therefore with S. Augustine,Aug. de circit. de Bar. in cant. can serm. 23.and S. Barnard, Iusticia sancto∣rum. &c. The righteousnesse of Saintes in this worlde stan∣deth rather in the forgiuenes of sinne, then in the perfection of vertue.Ambro. de Iac lib. 2. And with S. Am∣brose, as Iacob in the coate of his brother Esau was accep∣ted vnto Isaac his father, so we in yt righteousnes of Christ are accepted before God. And further with Austine we say,Aug. ad Bonis. lib. 3. cap. 5.we must still depend vpon the onely merite of Christ, and this being our onely hope, where is then confidence of workes?Ber. super. ca. serm. 16.And againe with Barnard we say, Our merite is the Lordes
taking of mercye, this is the whole merite of man, if he put his whole trust in him that sa∣ueth the whole man. There is no cause why thou shouldest aske, by what merite we shuld hope for good things when thou hearest in the pro∣phet, I will do it not for your sakes, but for mine owne, saith the Lord.Barnard. in ps. 91. Super. Cant. ser. 23. And againe, O solus vere beatus qui non imputauerit dominus peccatū.Ezech. 22.32.36. &c. Sufficit mihi ad omnē iustitiā solum habere pro∣pitium cui soli peccaui.Barn. super Cant. ser. 23. O truely happy vnto whom god wil not impute sinne. &c. It suffiseth me vnto all righteousnes, to haue him merciful, whō I haue only offended.Idem. ser. 61 Ego fidenter, quod ex me mihi deest, exurpo mihi ex vis∣ceribus domini mei, quoniam mi∣sericordiae effluunt, nec desunt fo∣ramina per quae effluant. I doe confidently take vnto my selfe
that which wanteth vnto me of my self, frō the bowels of my Lord, for his mercies flow out abundantly, neither do the con∣duites want wherby they may stil flow out. And againe with Austen we say,Aug. in confess. Vae hominum vi∣ta quantumuis laudabili, si remota misericordia indicetur. Wo vnto the life of man, be it neuer so laudable, if it shal receiue iudg∣ment without mercie. Therefore propter illud imper∣fectionis vicium si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus.Aug. epist. 26. ad Hieron. 1. Iohn. 1. &c. prop∣ter illud etiā vitium quantumlibet profecerimus, necessarium est no∣bis dicere, dimitte nobis debita nostra. Because of that imper∣fection of ours if we shall saye we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, & there is no trueth in vs, yea for that imperfec∣tion of ours, how much soeuer
we go forward (in vertue and godlines) it is necessary for vs to say, forgiue vs our trespases But these Iesuites herein de∣ceiue thē selues also,ncil. trident. sess.  & sess. 7. llen. in his booke  purgatorie. as in their first & second iustice, that they imagine vnto themselues a ful and perfect regeneration, or re∣nouation, in their first conuersi∣on, by the receiuing of the sacra¦ment of Baptisme, & thervpon grounde this false principle of the second iustification. For so long as ye most perfectest liueth in this world, so lōg carieth he both in soule & body,ne. lib. 4. abri. byel. & urand. in. sent. b. 4. Mat. 5  Rom. 6.7.12. oloss. the sinne and corruption of the olde man (which the Apostle tearmeth, earthly members) which are daily more and more to be mor∣tified yt our regenerated part or inwarde man may increase to further renouation, euen vnto a perfect man: and therefore
are we exhorted stil to this fur∣ther mortifying of the olde man,Ephe. 4.5. Psal. 51.103 and pray earnestly to god that hee will by clensing vs more and more from our sinnes performe the same.Esai. 6. 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 5. Galat. 2.5. 2. Tim. 2. And thus Dauid, S. Paule, Esaie, and all the godly continually expec∣ted, knowing, 'that when this body of sinne by death should be put of, it shuld be performed through Christ Iesu, by whom in the meane time they liued by a liuely faith in the worke of this newe birth, in continuall mortification and renouation. The performance whereof is the dailye remitting of sinne throgh the bloud of Christ. For the last enimy that herein must be destroyed is death or morta∣litie. S. Paule confesseth,Hebr. 9. that after his new birth and con∣uersion, there still remayned a
resistance, which he called the law of his members,2. Ioh. 2.1 which al∣though it did not raign in him, yet did it marueilously vexe,Apo. 1.7.8.14.12. let & hinder him, so that he cōfessed he had not then already attai∣ned,Rom. 7.6.either was alredy perfect,2. Cor. 12.but still followed the prefixed marke in Christ,Philip. 3. throgh whom (as he was in him comprehen∣ded,2. Tim. 4.so) he fought a good fight, fulfilled his course,2. Cor. 9. and kept y• faith,Luk. 16. to the receiuing of that crowne of righteousnes,2. Cor. 2.5 which the Lorde the righteous iudge did giue vnto him at the day of his dissolution,Philip. 1. which day he with all the rest of Gods deare children earnestly desired & lon∣ged after,1. Pet. 1. as thend of all their trauel, & the full perfecting of their regeneration to their e∣uerlasting glory in Christ. And to be short S. Augustine
saith,Aug. de peceatorl meritis & remiss 2. Cor. 4. Non ex qua hora quisquis baptizatur omnis vetus infirmitas eius absumitur, sed renouatio inci∣pit à remissione omniū peccatorū. &c. sed si in ipso animo qui est ho∣mo interior perfecta in Baptismo nouitas fieret, nō diceret apostolus, etsi exterior homo noster corrumpi tur, interior renouatur de die in diē, profecto enim, qui de die in diē ad∣huc renouatur nondum totus est renouatus. Al our old infirmitie of concupiscence is not wyped away or consumed from yt time that euery man is baptised: but renouation beginneth at ye re∣mission of all sinnes. But if per∣fect newnes might be wrought in Baptisme in the soule which is the inward man, then would not ye apostle haue said, althogh our outward man be destroied the inward man is day by day renued: for truly he yt is yet dai∣ly renued, is not as yet wholly renued.
And the verie forme of Sher∣wins confession doth euidently conuince these Iesuites and al other Papistes whatsoeuer, of great blasphemie and wicked∣nes. For if there be nothing in vs, nor of vs, but sinne and ab∣homination, and that we trust to be saued onely by the death and bloudshedding of Christe, (which is most true) thē where is their infused righteousnes, workes of congruence or pre∣parations, to forme & fashion their faith? where is their de∣seruing merits, satisfying wor∣kes, or works of condigne, stir∣red vp and drawen foorth by their firste iustice? There are none at all, no not one, they are all abhominable. &c. But this confession of Sherwins was vnto him selfe, and is vnto the rest of his fellowes yet remay∣ning
as was their prophesie of Caiphas vnto him and the rest of the priests the Scribes, and Pharisees, which although it was both good and true, & the worke of the holy Ghost in that il man to declare the purpose of god for our redēptiō in ye death of christ: yet had both caiphas & the rest of the pharisies a lewd tent and a contrarie meaninge in the vttering thereof, euen to the death of Christ, and preser∣nation of their own state: euen so these Iesuites, notwithstan∣ding the forme of good wordes they here vse, there lyeth hid in their heartes a wicked and de∣uelish meaninge, to the ouer∣throw of Christes office, and glorie, as by the discouery ther∣of hetherto hath wel appeared. Now where the Papistes, & papisticall Iesuites obiect saint
Iames, they doe by a double Sophisme beguile themselues and others.Mark. 3. Exod. 8 c. 10. Ioh. 6. Act. 8. Mat. 10.26. That is to wit, in this word Faith, & in the word Iustification. For faith in that place of S. Iames, is taken for such a faith as the Deuill hath, as Pharao had, as the Caper∣naits, and such others, that for a time beleeued, and such a one as Iudas and Simon magus had, and like vnto the Iesuiti∣call faith, and I thinke, worse then the Deuils faith. They should doe well therefore, and finde lesse damnation, if they forsake with Iudas, in playne tearmes, the name of Christ, & call themselues no more Iesu∣ites, after so good a name, but Iscariozites, and Magozites, accordinge to the substaunce of theire Religion. For where Iudas solde his Maister but
once, and Symon Magus woulde haue bought the holye Ghost but once, they doe it infi∣nitely, and neuer make an ende thereof. Now to their sophisme, & first where S. paul in ye example of Abraham, taketh faith for the knowledge of god, & the assente vnto his word, with trust or cō∣fidence therin wherby Christ is apprehēded. S. Iames taketh it for a shadow of faith, sepera∣ted from fiducia, such a one as ye papistical, peneral, or catholicke faith is, which iustifyeth before God, no more then deuils faith can iustifie. S. Iames did not say that such men as hee spake of, had Faith: but hee sayeth: What and if a man say he hath Faith? which intrueth Saint Ieames importeth them to want.
Secondly,Rom. 4. Gal. 3.4 S. Paul referreth iustification vnto God, I haue (saith he) made thee a father to many nations, euen before god. And S. Iames referreth it vn¦to mē, and therfore saith, shew me thy faith by thy workes, & then bringeth the example of A¦braham, to conclude yt by works in the sight and iudgemente of men, we are iustified, and not by knowledge, which there hee calleth only faith, And this a∣greeth with our sauiour Christ who saith,Iam. 3 Mar. 5 1. Pet, 2 Sic luceat lux vestra &c Let your light so shine before men, that they may see youre good woorkes, and so glorifye your heauenly father. Againe S. Paule and sainte Iames bring both an example but yet vnto diuers endes, the one to proue that we be iustify∣ed by faith only without works
and that before God: the other to trie out a false hipocriticall shadow of faith, frō a true liue∣lie iustifying Faith, that neuer wanteth his works. And this tryall hee maketh by woorkes, which euer attend vpon a true Faith, as the inseperable fruits thereof. Etsi non precedunt iustifi∣candū,August. de Fr. & operbus. sequuntur tamen iustificatū. Although workes goe not be∣fore him that is to be iustifyed, yet truely workes follow him that is already iustifyed. And thus also doth S. Au∣gustine interprete this place of S. Iames, so doeth Thomas Aquinas.Quest. 76 Haec loquitur (saith S, Augustine) de operibus quae sequun tur Fidem, &c. Vnde Apostolus ait Fide obtulit Isaac cum tentaretur. Haec oblatio est opus & testimoniū Fidei & Iustitiae. Saint Iames speaketh here
of those workes which doe fol∣low Faith. Wherefore he saith, Through faith Abraham offe∣red vp Isaac, wher he was try¦ed of God. This oblation is the worke, and Testimonie of his faith and iustificatiō. Aquinas saith, Opera iustificāt declaratiue. Workes declare vs to be iusti∣fyed. Thus thou seest by the dis∣course of the Iesuiticall confes∣sion and opinion of Iustificati∣on, drawen out of the Schoole of the Sorbonists, that Sher∣win meant nothing lesse in his late confession at his death, thē yt which the people for the most parte did suppose him to vtter. If he had ment as the good forme of words doe to all good Christians importe, why did he not first detest and condemn his Iesuiticall profession? Why
did hee not geue some open te∣stimonie of repentaunce from his vile and detestable poperie? For, his forme of words is vn∣to his Iesuiticall Profession, Popish Religion, as contrarie,2. Cor. 6. Psal. 37 Luk. 7.19.23. 2. Reg. Mat. 3 Apoc. 14.19. as Light to Darcknesse, trueth to Falshoode, Christ to Beli∣all, and he that will doe anye thing acceptable to God, must first decline frō euil that he may do good. So did Mary Mag∣dalen, Zache the Publican, the Thiefe vpon the crosse, and all penitēt sinners, for so the Gos∣pell teacheth. But herein Sherwin fol∣loweth the practise of the holy Fathers of the Trident Coun∣cell, and the sorboniticall Doc∣toures, in whom the Deuil for the better vpholdinge of hys Antychristyan Sinagogue, (e∣uen nowe beginninge to fall)
in all falshoode, and Religious craftines goeth farre beyonde himselfe, For they, seeing the people beinge long oppressed with their superstitious Tyran¦ny, now by the continual prea∣ching of the gospell, in these last dayes to begin both to suspecte, and to mislike the abhominati∣ons of their Popishe Religion, thoughte it more then time to leaue the grosse, and homelye tearmes of the Schoolemen, and barbarous Predecessours, in this matter of Iustification, and to set a new. Face, and fine colour vpon that vile and cor∣rupt matter, by shewe of good woordes, borrowed from the Gospell, according to the time, interlacing the same with new Distinctions, and burnished Tearmes of arte, so that except men do very carefully examine
the same, they are able to de∣ceiue, not the simple onelye, but the wise and learned also: Yea, if it were possible, euen the verye electe. So skilfull are they to dissemble their mea¦ninge by shewe and coloure of strange wordes and tearmes. This maner of dealing, thus dissemblinge, and hidinge their owne meanings to the beguy∣ling of the world, is not (good Reader) that deuiding of Gods worde, that S. Paule requy∣reth of the Lordes Ministers. But contrariwise, that braule of wordes, and prophane cla∣mors in vaine, thinges tending vnto farther impietie, woun∣ding the conscience of the igno∣rant, and greeuing the godlye like the frettinge of a Canker. The Lord therefore deliuer his Church from the handes of
such subtill workemen, whose consciences are seared with ob∣stinate hyyocrifie, and guide it by his holy spirite in the labour of faithfull Pastors vntill the comming of his sonne Iesus Christ our Lorde, to whome with the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons and one eternall God, be all glory and honor now and for euer. LONDON ❧ Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe 1582.
