423.6 23434379 26623
Obseruations to be vsed in letting of blood, purging, ba∣thing, and Sweating. &c. Of Blood letting. LEt not Blood at any time without iust cause, for it bringeth weaknes, and many in∣firmities: and when it is to be done, let  be with due considerations, and the aduice of some learned Phisition, so that it may be done (if necessitie enforce not the contrarie) after good di∣gestion, and fasting, in a fayre temperate day and beware of all maner of excesse, as labouring, watchyng, carnall copulation. &c. And these Signes generally are good to let Blood in, namely, Aries, Libra, Sagittarius, and Pisces. Perticulerly, for chollericke persons, when the Moone is in Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces. For the flemmaticke in Aries & Sagittarius
es: and it is best comforted, when the Moone s in Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius. The second is the vertue digestiue, so named, because it digesteth or altereth the noryshment into a due forme. If it be too weake to do the ffice, it is best strengthened when the Moone s in Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. The third is the vertue retentiue, and is cal∣ed so, because it keepeth in the good noryshment, artyll the digestiue vertue hath duely digested nd changed it. It is chiefly holpen, the Moone eing in Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorne. The fourth is called the vertue expulsiue, be∣cause his office is to expell and put out those su∣perfluous excrementes whiche remayne when he other vertues haue done their offices duely. It is best relieued the Moone being in Can∣er, Scorpius, and Pisces. The vertue Attractiue is gouerned of ye Sunne. The vertue Digestiue is gouerned of Iupiter. The vertue Retentiue is gouerned of Saturne. The vertue Expulsiue is gouerned of ye Moone.
Of the Eclipses of this yeer of our Lord. 1591. AS touching the Eclipses in this yeer which are three in number: that is to sa one of the Sunne happening the .x. day  Iuly, at two of the clocke and .xxvi. min. in th after noone, beyng darkened but one poyn which is a very small thyng, and of no gre signification. And the seconde (which is the first of th Moone) is the .xxvi. day of Iuly, at .iiii. of t clocke in the after noone also, and vnder o Horizon, being yet darkened .xvii. poyntes a a halfe. &c. And the thirde, which is the seconde of t Moone, is the .xx. day of December at three  the clocke, and .xx. min. in the mornyng, in t signe. Cancer, & wyll be darkened .xix. poyn and more in the .viii. house of the Heauens. Of these I say, in respect that one sh not be seene of vs at all, and another very lyt and the thyrde, though it shalbe manifes seene, yet the effectes thereof shall not take pla
declares & shewed in the perticuler iudgementes of the dayes of the monethes, conteyning this first quarter. &c. The distemperance of this quarter is lyke to breed any sicknesses, and sundry diseases, as∣wel ing folkes, as in old, as namely Agues of all fates, Stitches, grypinges, the Collicke, Surftes, the Megrime, and ache in the Head and Shoulders, Plurisies, small Pockes, Wores in the Maw, Horsenes, Rewine, Ca∣tharre, Coughes, hardnes in fetching the breath the Strangurie, and such others, payne∣full to ffer, and not easie to cure. Of the Spring time. THe Spring taketh his beginning at the mes entring into the first min. of the fe Aries, which shalbe on Thurseday the .x  of March, at .iii. of the clocke and .xvi. min. in the after noone, making the day & nyght to be ne length through the whole worlde. The quarter of the yeere is naturally hot and moyst temperately, and is therfore reckoned the most lsome tyme in the yeere, and it is now the b tyme to remoue sicknesses, and griefes
gotten before, and also to preuent those to come: for if the body of man do abounde with humors, which are ready to oppresse nature, whether there be present sicknes by the meanes of them, or els danger of sicknes to come: those humors are best to be emptied out of the body nowe, ey∣ther by lettyng of blood, purging, hathyng, sweating, or such lyke euacuation, which at this tyme I wyll not prosecute. The disposition of the weather in this quar∣ter of the yeere, is lyke to be very variable and inconstant: for as there are lyke to be many hot and dry dayes, shewyng a great lclynes of continuance: so on the contrary there wylbe of∣ten shewers tempered with the sam and sun∣dry clappes of thunder and lyghtninges, making the weather vncertayne, with cloudi distem∣pered heate, and moystnes. The sicknesses lyke to be in this , are Feuers of long continuance, Fluxes of the belly, the faslyng sicknes, rotten coughes, thinne rewines, the head ache, pluresies, htre impo∣stumes in the brestes and sydes, Stitches, Crampes, payne in the necke and br, with dyuers others, both noysome and also nous.
most part stormie, and very colde, with great inconstantie, as cloudy sometime, and thycke darke weather: at other tymes fierce raines by shewers, & often dryuing wyndes, with snow or fleete myrt with rayne. At other times thunder, with rai, and such lyke distempered weather. It is to be feared that nowe some strange sickness  and vnknowen diseases shall happen, and be heard of among the people, and also bur∣nyng As, inflammation of the Lunges, passions of the Hart, obstructions in the Luer, weakenes in the Backe, swellyng and hardnes in the Spent, Rewines, Catharres, watery Fures, and such lyke, both dangerous & deadly. God of his great mercy turne from vs all those euylles which are entended against vs, and geue vs grace to amende our wicked lyues, the procuring causes of all our punishmentes, and let vs first be carefull for our soules, as for our
deane contrarie: As first, to study for good∣, next for health, and last for wealth for yf  first seeke the kingdome of God, and the ousnes thereof, the other things albe inistred vnto vs. But we see by exence  at is too common, so great blindnes  be a∣ong men, that they care in such wise for ryches ely, that in respect thereof, they  lytle r health of the body, and nothing at all for the ood estate and prosperitie of the soule,  cause ost lamentable and sorowfull. A note of the names and natures of some of the Windes, and what syck∣nesses they breede and bring. The east Wind called Subsolan being
colde rayne, and enclined to thunder. The .xiiii. day, colde and inconstant. The .xv. and .xvi. dayes, mylder weather then before. The .xvii. and .xviii. dayes, waueryng, and lowryng cold. The .xix. day, fresh ayre. The first quarter on Saterday, the .xx. day, at .viii. of the clocke, and .xi. min. in the morning, moyst weather, and colde. The .xxi. and .xxii. dayes, fresh wyndes, and raw cold. The .xxiii. and .xxiiii. dayes, some rayne. The .xxv. and xxvi. dayes, temperate for this tyme. The .xxvii. day, colde and somewhat wyndy. The full Moone on Sunday, the .xxviii. day, at .iiii. of the clocke in the morning, close and colde, the wynd somewhat Northerly. Of March. THe first and second dayes, colde and foule weather. The .iii. and .iiii. dayes, colde, but not so foule as before. The .v. and .vi. dayes, shewery. The .vii. more temperate.
noone, some moysture threatned. The .xxix. and xxx. dayes, fayre for the tyme. Of May. THe first and seconde dayes, colde ayre, and variable cloudes. The .iii. and .iiii. dayes, lowryng and close weather. The .v. day, sme small rayne. The last quarter on Thurseday, the .vi. day, at .v. of the clocke and .xiiii. min. in the mornyng, fresh weather, the wynde Northwest. The .vii. and .viii. dayes, colde & moyst weather. The .ix. and .x. dayes, very temperate. The .xi. day, much lyke the two former. The new Moone on Wednesday, the .xii. day, at .vii. of the clocke, and .xxix. min. in the eue∣nyng, wynd & rayne. The .xiii. and .xiiii. dayes, variable. The .xv. and .xvi. dayes, cloudy and moyst weather. The .xvii. xviii. and .xix. dayes, gloomy weather, with some shewers. The first quarter on Thurseday, the .xx. day, at one of the clocke, and .iii. min. in the mornyng, wyndy & cloudy, westerly wyndes threatnyng rayne. The .xxi. & .xxii. dayes, rayne. The .xxiii.
Of September. THe .i. and .ii. dayes, temperate and low∣ryng. The .iii. and .iiii. dayes, rayne and wynde. The .v. and .vi. dayes, variable and lyke to thunder. The new Moone on Tuesday, the  day, at .v. of the clocke in the after noone, somewhat freshe, but dry, the wynd towarde the north. The .viii. and .ix. dayes, wyndy, with some she∣wers. The .x. day, fayre. The .xi. and .i. dayes, vnsetled weather. The .xiii. and .x. dayes, wyndy and waueryng. The first quarter on Wednesday the .xv. day, at .ix. of the clocke in the nyght, nyssyng rayne and wynd. The .xvi. xvii. and .xvi. dayes, boysterous & lowryng weather. The .xix. xx. and .xxi. dayes, more mylde then the former. The full Moone on Wednesday, the .xxii. day, at .ix. of the clocke, and .xi. min. in the nyght, temperate weather, the wynde east. The .xxiii. and .xxiiii. dayes, some raine falle and af∣ter it is wyndy. The .xxv. xxvi. and .xx. dayes cloudy close, with rayne and cold. T .xxviii day, cold ayre toward euenyng.
and xxiiii dayes, very seasonable. The .xxv. and xxvi. dayes, somewhat wyndy and ouercast, yet holdyng vp. The lat quarter on Saterday, the .xxvii. day, at .vi. of the clocke, and .xxv. min. in the eue∣nyng, me small frost toward. The .xxviii. day, somewhat lowryng & thycke cloudes. The . xxix. and .xxx. dayes, cold ayre, and ouercast weaher for snow or thicke rayne. Of December. THe .i. and .ii. dayes, darke or thicke ayre, as it would snow. The .iii. and .iiii. dayes, wyndy and foule. The new Moone on Sunday, the .v. day, at x. of the clocke and .xxv. min. at nyght, cold and wyndy. Th .vi. day, rayne and cold blastes. The .vii.  .vii. dayes, cold and dry. The .ix. and x. dayes  eate & seasonable for this tyme. The  dayes, wynd and cold raynes. The  arter on Munday, the .xiii. day,  and .xxviii. min. before
