4667 S119214 99854421 19842
THE SONG OF THE BELOVED, Concerning his Vineyard. Modulated, and applied, to moue men to know and embrace that, which be∣longeth to their peace, in this their time. By Iohn Carpenter of Norleigh in Deuon. Iere. 2. 21. I planted thee a noble Vine, and wholly a right seed: How art thou turned then into a bitter, vnfruit∣full, and straunge Grape? LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1599.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipfull Sir Iohn Stawell Knight, in the Countie of Som∣mersed, the grace and bles∣sing of God, with all prospe∣ritie, in Iesu Christ our Lord. THe Iewes beeing captiued in Babilō (Right worship∣full Sir) were not a little sorrow∣full, not onely for their miserable thraldome of body: but also for this, that they could not then, and there exercise themselues in the right ser∣uice of the true God, as they might sometimes freely haue done in the Citie of Ierusalem and land of Iudah:
therefore, when the Babilonians (in their merrie moode) required them to sing one of the Songs of Zion: they in their heauinesse answered them: How shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange land? howsoeuer it was delightsome to the Babilonians, now triumphing ouer those Iewes, to heare them to sing one of the Songs of Zion: it was (doubtlesse) no Iesse wofull to the Iewes, to sing the Lords Song, then and there among such as scorned and cōtemned both them and their holy religion: then it was sometimes loathsome vnto those Iewes, to heare the holy Pro∣phets to sing and modulate such di∣uine Canticles and Songs at home in their owne land. But thus did the Lord deale with thē in his vpright iudgements, that for as much as they neither loued, nor delighted in, but altogither loathed and disdai∣ned, both the Lords messengers and
their holy Songs & diuine Sermōs, euen then, when they had a time of grace and peace, with fit opportuni∣tie to heare & sing the same to their owne solace and the glorie of their God: and therein resembled them that would not daunce vnto them that piped, and proued like the bar∣ren and vngratefull vineyard: there∣fore a time & place ouertooke thē, where in (they being miserably cap∣tiued) were thralls vnto such, as did (in the like sort) both disdaine them, and deride those holy Songs and so∣laces in the which their soules shuld take the greatest delight and cōmo∣dity: neither had they the like peace and opportunitie to vse and exercise that which they had both neglected and grossely abused in the due time: wherein as their vnthankfulnesse was deciphered towards the Lord God after his manifold benefites on them bestowed: so his iudgements
laid on them for the same, were like∣wise expressed and made knowne. The Lords Prophets foreseeing such things to ensue on that vnthāk¦full people, did not omit, nor for∣beare, to foreshew them therof, and the same by many Arguments to ap∣proue, wishing and admonishing them to accept gratefully, and to vse reuerently the graces of Gods spirit offered them, the which would bee for their good; and that the neglect thereof, would surely bring vpon them intollerable troubles & woes both of body and mind: the which gentle admonition, when the Pro∣phets perceiued, how lightly the Iewes did regard & loosely obserue, it grieued them not a little, howsoe∣uer those hard hearted Iewes could not bee moued to lament for them∣selues, vntill their dayes of sorrowes came. Hereat Ieremy wept bitterly for them, whereof also hee made a
Booke of mournfull Songs, entituled, s Lamentations. And this Isayah the Pro∣het perceiuing (being now moued by e spirit of God in the anguish of his fflicted mind) did not onely reprooue  threaten thē in his ordinarie Sermōs, ght wofull that they so little regarded heir owne health▪ but also composed a ertaine mournfull Song, which he en∣tuled, The Song of his Beloued, touching is Vineyard. In the which he depainted nd set forth before them, their horrible ngratitude towards their God, whom hey had moued to sigh and complaine hereof, and prognosticated their future iseries. And surely, as these Sōgs were omposed and sung vnto them for testi∣onies against them, and to admonish hem: so also were they both written & reserued in the holy Register for ex∣mples vnto vs, on whom the ends of he world are come; to teach, instruct, nd warne vs, not onely to accept, em∣race, and highly regard the Songs of he Lord and his diuine religion in this
our owne land and time: but also, to yeeld vnto him the sweete and timely fruites of the same: lest (peraduenture) being iustly depriued both of this bene∣fit, & of al meete opportunities towards the recouery of this lost treasure, we shall not only desire to see one day of the Sonne of man, and shall not see it; thirst after that which we neglected & not haue it; and long for that which we loathed and not obtaine it: but also full longsomly lament the losse of our hap∣pinesse, and the sense of our miserable condition with those wretched Iewes. All these things (Right worshipfull Sir) when I had deepely waighed, and wel cōpared both this our time, & the people and condition of the same, with that state & conditiō of the Iewes (being yet at home in their ownland, then whē the Prophet Isayah was moued to sing this heauy Song) I was also moued in that my meditation, o renew & modu∣late the same, though thus simply, yet (as I presume) in right concord & har∣mony,
for the solace, instruction, & ad∣onitiō of my brethren & countrymē, d to publish it vnder this Title, The ong of the Beloued, &c. And this being us composed and modulated, I haue ought it good to dedicate & cōmend hiefly to your Worship, therby to ex∣resse my willingnes, not only to bene∣t others (though not with siluer and old, yet with such as I haue) but also y desire to vtter some sparkle of my hankful mind towards your W. whose nciēt good wil, bonnty & right friend∣y courtesies extended towards me & ine, as I gladly acknowledge & keep n grateful memory▪ so would I with all y hart indeuor to requite to my pow∣r▪ Let it please your W. therfore to take his poore present, & to esteeme y• same ccording to my good meaning: but hiefly after the goodnes of the thing it elf, being (indeed) the Lords Song, and herfore worthy to be so entitled: & the which being weyed in equal ballāce, is ightly preferred aboue siluer & gold: nd is no lesse comfortable to them that
are sorie for the affliction of Ioseph, an loue the Lord Iesus: and therefore  nothing doubt, but that as your Wor∣ship hath vttered your louing affection to the Lord and his truth, by hearing of his word preached, by reading of the Scriptures, by perusing the godly la¦bours of the best learned, and by th friendly entertaining and defence of hi Ministers, with other Christian ver¦tues: so ye will gladly accept, embrace and defend the truth of this excellen Solace of the glory of God, the comfor of the Saints, and the right good seruic of her royal Maiestie, in that high func¦tion wherein ye are now placed. An thus I commend your Worship, wit my good Lady, to the Lord God, who euer blesse you and your familie, an giue you all prosperitie in Christ Iesu Your Worships ready to be vsed in the Lord. Iohn Carpenter.
The Preface to the Reader. THE Lord God, seeing that the house of Israel, and the men of Iudah, (the which he had cho∣sen, blessed, and beawti∣fied before all the nations of the earth) notwithstanding all his benefits powred forth on them, would neither feare and serue him according to his word, nor yeeld vnto his goodnesse the pleasant fruites of Godlinesse: but rather, as Children most ingratefull towards their most louing and deare father, rebelled a∣gainst the Lord their God, and angred him with their monstrous and manifold abhominations: neither by the exhorta∣tions,
reprehensions, admonitions, threat∣nings, and often preachings of the Pro∣phets in the Name of the Lord, they could be moued to repent and turne to the Lord: but rather continued wallowing in their sinnes without repentance, to the high dis∣pleasure of God, and their owne horrible destruction: he now at the length put∣teth a Parable in the mouth of his Pro∣phet Isayah, which concerneth the whole matter, and sendeth him therewith to those vnthankfull children. Agayne, the Prophet moued by the Spirit of God, con∣sidering how little he had preuailed af∣ter all his long preachings, prophesies and labours employed and bestowed on them: and how little they esteemed his plaine words and ordinarie dealing among them, he endeuoureth another way then before he accustomed, and vseth another kind of stile and veine of speaking. And there∣fore he sayth, that he will now, not pro∣phesie, or preach, or speake, as he was wont to do vnto them: but sing a Song:
namely, the Song of his Beloued con∣cerning his Vineyard. The which being done, he expoundeth and applieth to the state and condition of the people of Israel and Iudah, to whom he had pro∣posed the Parable, and of whome he had sung the Song. And by this, he would (if it were possible) moue and stirre vp them, who, as yet, would not be moued by any other wayes or meanes. Now, ha∣uing taken in hand to modulate this sweete Solace of the Prophet, I meane, the Song of the Beloued concer∣ning his Vineyard, I haue thought good, not only to expound, but also to ap∣ply the same, obseruing therein (as neere as I could) the methode and order of theThe diui∣sion of the matter into three parts, singer thereof: and therefore I haue made thereof three generall parts, viz. 1. A Proeme, or a preparation to a Song or Parable. . The Song or Parable it selfe, with the exposition thereof.
3. The Application of the same for in∣struction and admonition, to this people and time. The first part is made of these wordsThe first part hath fiue circum∣stances, or branches. of the Prophet, Isay. 5. vers. 1. Now will I sing vnto my Beloued, a Song of my Beloued, concerning his Vineyard. And this part yeeldeth to our consideration these fiue things: viz. 1. The person of the Prophet, being the Actor, whereof there is made one Chapter. Chap. 1. 2. The manner of his dealing with the people, which is in a Song, as Chap. 2. 3. The kinde and nature of his Song, which is a Canticle and Parable: as, Chap. 3. 4. The person, to whome he consecra∣teth the Song: whic is, to his Be∣loued, as, Chap. 4. 5. The Title of the Song, which is, Of his Beloued concerning his Vine∣yard, as, Chap. 5.
The second part is made of the words immediatly following: viz. My Belo∣ued had a Vineyard in a very fruitfull hill,The second part hath 6. branches. &c. vnto the end of the sixt verse, and eeldeth these sixe things to be conside∣red: viz. 1. The great loue and mercie of God towards the people of Israel and Iu∣dah, and thereof are made eight Chap∣ters, as 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. . The Lords expectation of their fruit∣fulnesse in good works, and thereof are made two Chapters, as in Chap. 9. and 10. . The horrible ingratitude of the peo∣ple of Israel and Iudah, yeelding the vnpleasant fruits of wickednesse and sinne, as in Chap. 11. and 12. . The Lords appellation to their owne guiltie consciences: and his request of iudgement of themselues in the case, as in Chap. 13. . The Lords complaint against them, with his repoofe of them for their vnkindnesse, as in Chap. 14. The Lords iust sentence of condem∣nation
and terrible commination of the execution of the same against them: and hereof are made foure Chapters, as in Chap. 15. 16. 17. 18. The third part hath two Chapters,The third part is an application of the mat∣ter, as ver. 7. and is made not only of the example of this Prophet, who hath applied this Pa∣rable to the people of his time, as vers. 7. but also of the example of Christ Iesus in the Gospell, whom also his Apostles, Pe∣ter, Paul, Iude, Iames, and other his Ministers, haue immitated, vsing to make such like Parables and Similitudes, perpe∣tuall instructions, and admonitions, by a sound application of them to the poste∣rities, especially to the people in their times. So in those two last Chapters, haue I (in the feare of God) applyed the present Song or Parable (for an instruc∣tion and admonition) to this our tim and Nation, and that the sooner, leas whiles we be busied in gazing on th state and condition of others, we either forget or neglect our owne. Neithe
may we thinke, but that both this and o∣ther such Songs and Parables in the law, in the Prophets, in the Psalmes, and in the Gospell, may be worthely made appli∣catorie, not only to them to whome they were then proposed: but also to all others in the posteritie, who are drenched in the same or like sinnes; the which in those Songs and Parables were reproued, and that both the one and the other, are kept in the holy Register, and layd downe (as Paul sayth) for examples vnto vs, who thereby be warned also to take heed, that we neither contemne nor abuse the loue and mercies of God, nor proue vn∣kind towards his goodnesse, after all his large bounties powred forth on vs: but that (as we are most bounden) we yeeld him the pleasant fruites of gratitude, and holy workes, the which he requireth and expecteth: lest we be both worthelie reproued, and rightlie recompenced with such greeuous plagues, as our sinnes do iustly deserue, and the which the Lord
hath yet in his mercy withholden from vs, most willing by his so long-suffring, wee should bee drawne to repentance. The Lord God graunt, that we may yet now at length be perswaded (by the mo∣tion of his holy Spirit in our hearts, and the sound of his word in our eares) to be∣leeue, that this is written and reserued for our learning also, and not for the Iewes onely: and that we may thereby the sooner consider of our present state and condition, and learne to be wise by the consideration of the hard haps of o∣thers, rather then to be schooled by Ex∣perience, the mistresse of fooles: which hath caused many a wretched wight to sing the Song of had I wist: when else they might haue modulated the Lords holy Song in their owne land in peace, to their exceeding ioy, and best solace. Moreouer, albeit that the wise man needeth not to haue line vpon line, and lesson vpon lesson, here a little, and there a little, (as those foolish Iewes needed
to haue, whome therefore the Prophet sayah reproueth, and vnto them, all was little enough): yet because the Rea∣ders for the most part, vnwilling to be wearied with large discourses, like bet∣er of briefe lines, then of long lessons, I haue for their sakes disposed the parts into certaine particular Chapters, accor∣ding to the matters and circumstances of the same, as ye may perceiue, being (in∣deed) most willing (after the example of this Euangelicall Prophet) to vse that way and meane, which might best pro∣cure Readers, and allure hearers, of that which shall bring rest to their Soules, and do them most good. More thine, then his owne, in the Lord Iesu, Ioh. Carpenter.
Isai. 5. ow will I sing to my Beloued, a SongA proeme, or prepara∣tion to a Song. of my Beloued, concerning his Vine∣yard. ers. 1. MY Beloued had a Vine∣yard in a very fruitfull ill. Vers. 2. And he hedged it, and athered out the stones of it: and e planted it with the best vine: and e built a Tower in the middest hereof: and made a Wine-presse herin: and he looked, that it should ring forth grapes: but it brought orth wilde grapes. Vers. 3. Now therefore (O inha∣itantThe Song. of Hierusalem, and man of Iu∣ah) iudge (I pray you) betweene e and my Vineyard. Vers. 4. What could I haue done more to my Vineyard, that I haue ot done to it? Why haue I looked
that it should bring forth grapes and it bringeth forth wilde grapes Vers. 5. And now, I will tell▪ yo what I will do to my Vineyard: will take away the hedge thereof and it shal be eaten vp: I wil break the wall thereof, and it shall b trodden downe. Vers. 6. And I will lay it waste▪ it shall not be cut, nor digged: bu bryars and thornes shall grow vp▪ I will also commaund the Cloudes that they rayne no rayne vpon it. Vers. 7. As for the Vineyard of theThe Appli∣cation of the Song. Lord of hoasts, it is the house of Israel▪ and the man of Iudah, the plant of his pleasure: of these he looked for Iudge∣ment, and loe; Oppression: for Iustice, and loe, a Crying.
The Song of the Beloued, Concerning his Vineyard. The first part. Isa. 5. ver. 1. Now will I sing to my Beloued, the Song of my Beloued, concerning his Vineyard. The first Chapter. Of the Prophet, being the Actor, or Singer of the Song. THis part conteineth a Proeme, wherein the Prophet Isayah maketh preparation to sing the Song of his Beloued. But before that we speake
thereof, or of the Song, it is meete that wee consider of the Prophet himselfe, and so commence and begin our Orati∣on with him, who here setteth forth him∣selfe as the Actor or singer of the Song: for speaking of himselfe, he sayth, I will sing. This is that very Prophet, afterThe kinred and name of the Pro∣phet. whom the whole booke of this prophe∣sie is entituled, namely, Isayah the sonne of Amos, Isay. 1. 1. howbeit, not of that Amos which is named and numbred a∣mong the twelue lesser Prophets: but of him who was the brother of Amasiah or Azariah the King of Iudah: for in this, as the best learned in the Church do con∣sent, so is there no small difference in the name: for the Prophets name beginneth with the hebrew Y, as Yamos: but the fatherY Amos. of Isayah his name beginneth with A, and endeth with z, as Amotz. By this it appea∣reth,Amotz. that Isayah was of the Royall bloud of Iudah, the which by this his function, hee rather beawtified, then distained With this well agreeth the name of thi Prophet, for Isayah is a most sweete and delectable voice, and noteth health
good newes & gladnes, and it is asmuch to say, as Iaschay-iah, that is, the health, or sal∣uationIsayah. of the Lord. And seeing the holy Ghost hath exhibited vnto vs this Pro∣phesie vnder that delectable title, let vs (as soone as we either heare or reade the same) promise to our selues some ioyfull, wholsome, and happie thing therein to come from the Lord. Neither shall we e therein deceiued, if wee deceiue not our selues through our owne infidelitie nd fleshly lusts, as those commonly do which receiue the graces of Gods spirit n vayne. 2. What the calling and office ofThe calling and functi∣on of Isayah Isayah was, it playnely appeareth in the xt Chapter of his Prophesie (the which Chapter after the iudgement of the best, hould be in order the first) for there∣ is conteyned his calling, and the be∣nning of his Prophesies, where hee yeth, verse 1. I sawe the Lorde sitting pon an high Throane. And there hee yeth, that hee heard the Lorde to say, hom shall I send? and who shall go for vs? Isayah answered (after that his lips were uched, his iniquitie taken away, and his
sinnes purged) Here am I, send me: and he sayd, Go, and say vnto this people, ye shall heare, &c. Lo, here is the office of the Prophet, his calling, and authoritie. He is called by the Lord, and made his Em∣bassador vnto his people, to declare vnto them his word and iudgements. Thus are they called, and are (indeede) the Pro∣phets of the most high God, which are not instructed, taught and authorized by any humane arte, studie, industrie, o power of man: but furnished and inabled by the light and power of Gods spirit and sent forth to preach the holy myste∣ries of God, to reproue sinnes in the peo∣ple, to threaten them with the iudgemēt of God, that be rebellious and obstinate and to preach remission of sinnes to th repentant. And this is a thing commo to all the Prophets. 3. Further, because it pleased th high God, to shew himselfe vnto thiIsay calleth his prophe∣sies visions. Prophet (according as his capacitie wa made able to comprehend) and fro thence gaue him in charge what to do (in like sort as Kings and Princes befor they send foorth their Embassadors i
matters of importance, do call them into heir presence, and shew plainely, and de∣iuer vnto them their will and commis∣ion) therefore Isayah calleth his prophe∣sies Visions. By this also he would per∣swade, that he hath brought nothing to he people, but that which he had per∣fectly seene reuealed vnto him: yea, things certaine and heauenly, and such as con∣cerned the Maiestie of God and his peo∣ple, which intimated these three things:  1. First, that as his authoritie was of the Lord of heauen: so ought they to whom he was sent, to reuerence and accept the same.  2. that therefore it behoued him∣selfe to walke therein honestly, wisely, nd worthely.  3. that hauing such a war∣ant, and behauing himselfe accordingly, e needed not to feare the sterne faces of men. 4. This Prophet beyond all others,Isay was an Euangelical Prophet. hath preached and testified most plainely nd significantly of the Conception, the irth, the life, the death, the resurrection, he Assension, the rule, Dominion, Glo∣ie, and perpetuitie of our Lord Iesus Christ, and of that glad tidings of the re∣mission
of sinnes, and eternall peace in the Sonne of God, and therefore he hath bin worthely called, not only a Prophet, but al∣so an Euangelist, & an Euangelical Prophet. 5. The labours of the Prophet inThe great and long labours of the Prophet and about these things appeare to be great, and also of long time he taught and instructed the people with all wisedome, constancie, humanitie, vehemencie, as the cause required: he feared not to reproue the corrupt manners, not only of th common people, but also of the Priests and Princes: to this end, that they might amend their liues, and not to perish in their vngodlinesse without warning. And hee amplifieth his Sermons with many exquisite and pithie words, accor∣ding to that which Salomon noteth in the wise Preacher, and that they mightEccles. 12. not forget at any time the great mercies of God on them declared in his mani¦fold benefits, he often vseth these and such other like words in the Lords be∣halfe: I haue nourished and brought v children: I haue adopted them: I haue brought them out of Egypt: I haue born them in my bosome: I haue giuen them
good land: I haue made them victors ouer heir enemies: I haue prescribed vnto them the right Gods seruice. I haue formed them for my selfe. I haue created them for my Glory, &c. 6. And thus continued he busied inThe time that Isayah prophesied. this his charge, aboue threescore and fower yeares, within the which time, suc∣ceeded fiue Kings in Iudah: as namely, Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, and Manasses. In the historie of the which 5. kings, we may easily vnderstand the state and condition of the time and people: and therein how comparable to this time & people we may likewise consider. But howsoeuer the people declared thēselue worthy such a benefit, it is certain that the Lord expressed his loue towards them in this, that he vouchsafed thē the presence & painful ministery of so holy a Prophet.How the people e∣steemed of the Prophet and his words. 7. But all this they nothing considered, and therfore, as they contemned the mer∣cies of God; so contemned they his Pro∣phets: and notwithstanding all the trauels of this Euangelicall Prophet, & his good∣nes towards thē, they neuer gaue him his ight honor amōg them, but despised him,
tooke him as a foole, and made him their iesting stocke, whereof he was moued to say, chap. 57. 4. On whom haue ye iested? vp∣on whom haue ye gaped, and thrust out your tongues? His words also they compted as fables, and of no credit: whereof he com∣plained, Isa. 53. 1. Who will beleeue our re∣port? And (indeede) vnto this impietie were the people come in this time, not∣withstanding those excellent meanes they had to be well taught and instructed by the Prophets. Thereof it is sayd, 2. Chro. 30. 10. that when King Hezekiah in this time sent forth his posts to call the people to the Lord, they would not be∣leeue, but laughed the messengers to scorne, and mocked them. And indeede this is that the Prophets find, and this is the com∣mon reward that the Ministers of the Gospell receiue after their labours. 8. Moreouer, this Prophet findethThe reward of the Pro∣phet after his long la∣bours. (besides that) a more heauie reward of those vnthankfull people: for after that he had sharply reproued them for their pride, their couetousnes, their oppression, their crueltie, their dronkennesse, their whoredome, their idolatrie and vnthank∣fulnesse;
he was at the length accused and called by them, before King Manas∣ses, for an heretike and a seducer of the people: whereupon (notwithstanding he was of the Royall bloud, and neare vnto the King) he could neither be liked of the people for the hatred they beare his mi∣nisterie; nor be tollerated of the King, for that he had reproued him for his ido∣latrie: and therefore Manasses comman∣ded him to be cut asunder with a saw, that he dyed. 9. Lo, this is the wages which thisThe ingra∣titude of the people to them that do them good. painefull labourer receiued after his long dayes worke of this vnkind people. Such a thing is therefore worthely taught and reproued in the fable of the old dog, the which said to him that beat him sorely, Quam cito meritorum meorum oblitus, ita in me saeuus es? How cruell art thou to∣wards me, whose good deserts thou hast forgotten? And well thereof sayd the Greeke Poet: O'uk'esti cháris metópisthen' euergéon, That is, Thankfulnesse for good deserts is rarely found.
10. Howbeit, all this should not dis∣courageThe Mini∣sters of God ought not to be dis∣couraged by the hard lots o their fellow Mi∣nisters. them that be thus called and au∣thorized, neither should they thinke all their trauailes in this bestowed in vaine, no more then the like discouraged Ieremy, Daniel, Amos, Zachary, Hoseah, and many others: but rather with them, and with the Apostes of Christ, they should be glad (as their maister hath warned them) that they are thought worthie this ministerie, and to suffer those rebukes and persecuti∣ons for his sake. Neither shal they be ex∣tinguished, which are thus abandoned & thrust out frō among men: but they shallIsa. 57. 1. 2. be sure to rest in peace, whē others broyle in torments: and shal with Daniel, Ieremy, and this holy and Euangelicall Prophet,Dan. 12. shine as the brightnesse of the firmament, and as the starres for euer and euer: when their persecutors shall perish, and weepe, and wayle, and gnash with their teeth, in vtter darkenesse, without comfort. For God is not vnrighteous, that he shouldHeb. 6. 10. forget our works and labours of loue, which we haue shewed towards his name, in that we haue ministred vnto the Saints, and yet do minister: Therefore, perswa∣ding1. Cor. 15. 58
that God is righteous, and will re∣member vs in goodnesse, and that those ur labours in him are not in vaine, let e∣ery one of vs (as the Apostle requesteth) hew the same diligence to the full assu∣ance of hope vnto the end, that we be not slothful, but followers of them, which hrough faith and patience inherit the promises, committing the successe of our labours and our selues, wholy to the Lord. CHAP. II. 2. The manner of the dealing of the Pro∣phet with the people: viz. Now will I sing, verse. 1. HAuing spoken before of the person, office, labours, and reward of the Prophet, it is meete, that now we consider the manner of his dealing withThe Pro∣phet consi∣dered the nature of the people and of the time. the people in this place, and in this time. Surely, the Prophet (as it well beseemed hym) had euer a due con∣sideration both of the nature of the
people to whome he spake, and of the time wherein he spake, and (according to the same) he behaued, vsed, and ordred himselfe in his ministerie. This, as we find, was likewise obserued of Christ Ie∣sus himselfe, of Dauid, of the Apostles of our Lord, and the holy Martyrs, and fa∣thers of the Church. 2. In the dealing of this Prophet w are to obserue these three things, viz. 1. the affection and mind of the Prophet 2. his veine, and stile in speaking. 3. the nature and kind of his Oration or Sermon. The first whereof is noted in1 The moti∣on of his mind. Quaeso. Nunc. this particle, Na, or Ana, which signifieth the motion of the mind: by the which a man sheweth the desire of his heart to∣wards his superiour, to perswade or in∣treate, or encline him, to yeeld or harken to his words: and is interpreted, Now for∣sooth, or now I pray you, or earnestly beseech you. By this therefore, the Prophet ex∣presseth his able mind, and the submis∣siuenesse of his heart, with the earnest de∣sireHis humble submission and cour∣tesie. he had by all wayes and meanes to allure and perswade the people. He now behaueth himselfe, not as a man of the
Royall bloud, not as a Prince, neither as Pope, or as an high Prelate: but, as a ruant to his Maister, as a subiect to his rince, as an inferiour man to his Supe∣or, saying in all humilitie and reueēce, beseech you, I pray you, I earnestly intreate u: Thus he assayed by gentlenesse, ourtesie, and humble desires, to get au∣ience, and to allure the people to accept nd embrace his words. 3. Neither thought he, it was meete or him to deale otherwise with them inHis discree dealing. his time, when men being fat and full ith prosperitie, were become more like Tygars, Lyons, Buls, Beares & Wolues, hen like Sheepe or Lambs: and there∣ore, as men that vse such coloured gar∣ments, words and gentle meanes, as ra∣her allure them, then constraine them to ecome gentle: so was it the best way for he Prophet to do and behaue himselfe owards this people, that thereby (if it could be) he might allure and perswade hem with gentlenesse, which would in no wise abide to digest sharp and rough dealing. Now therefore I beseech you with all courtesie, and gently pray you (my
maisters, my Lords, my friends) that y will vouchsafe to hearken vnto mee fo your own good. The righteous man Noa after the floud wished with all his heart that the Lord would in this sort allure Ia∣phetGen 9. 27. to enter into the tabernacle of Shem And thus Paule dealing with some of that posteritie, I meane the Gentiles, sayth vnto them: Now I beseech you bre∣threnRom. 12. 1. by the mercies of God, that yee giue vp your bodies a liuing sacrifice, holy, ac∣ceptable to God. 4. In this sort the Prophet teacheth humilitie and gentlenes to the MinistersA lesson for the Mini∣sters of the word. of the word, who should be indeede (as Christ hath taught them) rather Seruants to all, then Lords of all. Neither can the Romane Byshop and other proud Pre∣lates, but blush and be ashamed (if they were not too impudent) in that they so much extoll themselues aboue their brethren in proud titles and worldlie promotions: yea, and deale with them more like Tyrants of the Heathen, then the Ministers of the Gospell. Surely such persons do no nor shall allure the peo∣ple to godlinesse: but rather terrifie and
discourage them, 1. Sam. 2. 1 as the sonnes of Eli d the people of God. They be such, neither enter into the kingdome ofLuk. 11. 52. auen themselues, nor suffer others at willingly would, to enter therein. ut the Prophet, to the end he might ra∣er draw them to goodnes then discou∣ge them, doth gently pray and beseech em, to giue him audience. 5. Next, the Prophets stile and veine2 His veine of speaking, he singeth. noted in this, where he sayth, I will g. As if he sayd: Behold, I haue thus ng time prophesied, preached, and ad vnto you, and therein haue I de∣ared the goodnes of God towards you, hat hee looketh for at your hands: a∣ine, your vnkindnesse towards him, d what will be the end thereof: I haue proued you, and threatned you, and cal∣d and warned you: howbeit, ye be ne∣r the nearer to the amendment of your es. Therefore, now I mind not to call u to an ordinary Sermon or Lecture, or  my accustomed maner of prophesying, t to a Song: for I wil now rather modu∣e and sing (as a Poet) then speake (as Prophet:) yea, I will be vnto you,
as a woer now, who by some louing dit∣tie and sweete Song, will assay to allu and get the heart and affection of m best beloued. 6. The cause that moued the Pro¦phetThe cause that moued the Prophet to sing: First, to get hea∣rers. to vse this veine, was partly to ge him hearers: partly, to make them mo attentiue to his words: partly, that th things which he deliuered therein, shoul be the better remembred. For first, b this extending and lifting vp of the voi (beyond his accustomed manner) he dre the people to flock about him, as they d about them that sing in the streetes. Suc a meane vsed he to get audience: for th longer he preached among them, th more loathsome he was vnto them: an might preach and teach long enough ( some of our Ministers do now in the Churches) without hearers. But he hat happely by this singing some audienc before whome, he might deliuer his e¦rand, who should be made witnesses bot for him touching the discharge of his d¦tie, and for themselues and against them¦selues, touching their monstrous vnkin¦nesse to the Lord their God, howsoeue
they iested at him, as whom they made their iesting song, & accounted his words but as the pleasant sound of him that was a cunning Singer: as they also esteemed of the Prophet Ezechiel and Ieremy, andEzech. 33. 32. their words. 7. Howbeit, the Prophet was perswa∣ded (for his part) that by this kind of dea∣ling2. To make them atten∣tiue. they would be the more attentiue to his words, as to matters of great waight: for howsoeuer men vse songs and ditties ow, and abuse this diuine exercise by heir sensuall lusts, and howsoeuer they e∣teemed them then, yet in the old time hey committed nothing to song, but the matters most noble, most waightie, and of he highest importance. As Moses com∣osedExod. 15. in a song the remembrance of the onderful deliuery of the people of Israel ut of Egypt, when the Lord had brought em safe through the red Sea: the which ng, Moses, Aron, Miriam, and others did ng, to the praise of God, and comfort of emselues. Afterward Moses composedDeut. 38. . other Song of the great blessings of od on the people: and of their great vn∣ndnes towards him, for the which he
threatneth them with Gods future iudge∣ments. These be matters of no small accompt. Such the Prophet handleth in this place, and many such haue we registred in the new Testament, as theLuk. 1. 44. 68 & 2. 14. 29. Apo. 5. Song of the Angels, the Song of Za∣charie, the Song of Mary, the Song of Symeon, the Song of the foure Beasts, of the 24. Elders, and the Creatures. In the hearing whereof, wee shoulde prepare our mindes to the considera∣tion of high, strange, and great mat∣ters. 8. Thirdly, the Prophet composeth3. That the matter might be the better learned and remembred. this matter in a Song, to this end, that it might be the sooner learned of euery one, be ruminated in euery mans mouth, and so be had and kept in mind: for there is not any thing sooner learned, nor more spoken of, nor better remembred, then that whereof men make their Songs, and vse dayly to modulate for their solace and recreation of mind. And therefore they of yore vsed to compose in such song the worthie acts, exploytes, and vertues of noble and famous Princes and per∣sonages, that thereby their worthie deed
and excellent vertues might be knowne, spoken of, and remembred through many generations. And what things ought more to be learned, spoken of, and re∣membred, then the most noble acts and works of the Lord of Hoasts? Of this sin∣geth Hezekiah: O Lord, to all those thatIsa. 38. 16. 18. 19. 20. shall liue hereafter, to all men shall it be knowne. The father telleth his children of thy faithfulnesse. And we will sing my Songs n the house of the Lord, all the dayes of ur life. And thus singeth the Psalmist, I will make thy Name to be remembredPsal. 45. 17. hrough all generations: therefore shall the eople giue thanks vnto thee world without nd. Moreouer, as the mercies of God, nd his noble works, are by such meanes et foorth, knowne, and remembred:  also, the vnkindnesse of men towards is goodnes, shall not be couched, con∣ealed and buried, but be called into emembrance against them that will not pent. As that whereof Moses made a ng. Frowardly haue they done against himDeut. 32.   their vices, not beeing his owne children; t a wicked and frowarde generation.
And this the Lord commanded Isayah toIsa. 30. . note with an yron pen, to be remembred for euer. 9. Finally, as the Prophet changeth hi accustomed veine, so also altereth he hi ordinarie dealing with them, as touching4. The na∣ture of the Oration▪ a Parable. the nature and kind of his Oration. Fo whereas he was wont to speake vnto the people in simple words & plaine terme now he is forced to take vp a Parable for the Song is a Parable. But of this, a also of the causes that moued him there vnto, it shall be spoken (and God will in the next Chapter. 10 But by the premised, we may wel gather in what sort the Prophet apply¦ed himselfe to the people, and the time neither omitted Ieremy, Ezechiel, and o¦ther Prophets the same. Paul also (a¦mong the Apostles) made himselfe  a Iewe to the Iewes, and as a Gentile t the Gentiles, to winne both. All th notwithstanding, the people behaue themselues both to the one and to the o¦ther, much like them, vnto whom it w sad by Christ in the behalfe of all pain full Apostles and Ministers: We▪ ha
piped to you, and ye haue not daunced: we haue mourned to you, and ye haue not wept. And some such there be in this time, which pipe, which sing, which lament and weepe, to allure the people to re∣pentance: but all cannot preuaile to moue the affection of the stiffe-necked and hard-hearted people, who, whe∣her we will or no, will wallow in their bhominations, and dye in their sinnes. CHAP. III. Of the kind of the Song: and what the Song is. He sayth, I wil sing a Song. verse I. AS we haue considered the manner of the Prophets dealing with the people: so now we will obserue the ind of the Song which the Prophet sin∣eth, and what the Song is. The Hebrewes haue diuers kinds ofThe He∣brewes had diuers kinds of ongs. Halal. Songs, whereof some they call Tehilloth: hat is, Prayses and laudes. And this kind s made of that word, which signifieth
the exaltation of the voice, in extol∣ling, in lawding, in glorifying either the worthie person, or his noble action. Some they call Mismorim, that is,Mismor. Psalmes, verses, and artificiall Metres, which hold in number and feete. SomeQuasi ex ather & quibusdam longis vo∣cibus. Schir. they call Scherim, that is, Canticles or Balades, in the which are respected ra∣ther the voyce and words of the singer and matter, then any artificiall compo∣sition of syllables, and is made of a word, which signifieth Schor. to intend or extend the voice, and by translation, to sing or descant. 2. Of this sort, Rahi Ioseph numbrethMunster. in Cant. 1. vp ten Songs, wherewith (as he sayth) God is glorified in this world, and shall be glorified in the world to come.  The first of the which Adam sang on the Sabbath day, when his debt was remit∣ted, and it is the 92. Psalme.  The se∣cond, Moses did sing with the children of Israel, at what time they had passed on dry foote through the red Sea, Exod. 15. 1.  The third sang the Israelites, when the water was giuen vnto them.
The fourth sang Moses, when he sayd, Heare yee heauens, &c.  The fift Iosuah sang, when in his warre the Sunne stood still against Gabaon.  The sixt sang Ba∣rak and Deborah, when Sissera was de∣liuered into the hand of Israell.  The seauenth, Hanna the mother of Samu∣el did sing.  The eight modulated Da∣uid of all those great signes and won∣ders which the Lorde wrought with him.  The ninth w that which Salo∣mon the King did sing:  The tenth is that which the children of the transmi∣gration shall sing, when they shall be deliuered from their captiuitie. This proueth hee out of Isayah, not for vs Christians, but for his countrie men the Iewes. Howbeit, among all these he maketh no mention of this memorable SongThe kind of the Song. Schir-ha∣scirim. of Isayah the Prophet against the Iewes, the which neuerthelesse is reserued in the holy Register for vs Christians, and is of that kinde which Salomon compo∣sed, entituled, The Song of Songs, as mayCant. 1. be gathered, not only by the title there∣of,
but also by that word which the Prophet vseth, when hee sayth, I will sing. 3. And (indeede) as this Song soun∣deth much like a Loue Song, and see∣meth to allude to the fashion of Louers, who are wont to allure one another with pleasant and sweete Songs and Ditties, so seemeth it to be of the like note and musick which Solomon modu∣lated in the like kind of Song, where∣in hee setteth foorth the spirituall loueThe Song hath both pleasure and sorow. and sweete communication betweene Christ and his Church. But yet, when we consider the end of this Song, we can scarcely discerne betweene it, and our mournefull Song, for the beginning thereof is not so Comicall, but the end is also as Tragicall, for though he began to sing of loue and benefites, yet he en∣deth his Song with anger and displea∣sure. He began thus: My beloued had a Vineyard in a plentifull hill, the which he hedged, planted, and beawtified, and this is gladsome: but he endeth thus: The Vine∣yard is ingratefull, therefore my beloued is angrie with it, he is not minded to do
any more good, but rather he will spoyle and waste it: and this is wofull. Such a nd of Song singeth the Prophet. 4. Moreouer, as we haue obserued theThe Song is a Parable nd of the Sōg, so let vs note what is mēt y the Song. The Prophets by a Song, o sometimes vnderstand a Parable: as is Prophet saith. In that day this Song all be sung in the land of Iudah: Isa. 26 1. at is, they shall vse or applie this Para∣e. Againe: Sing of the Vineyard of New∣ine: Isay. 27. 2. that is, propose a Para∣le of the Vineyard. So (indeed) the Song hich the Prophet singeth heere, of theWhat the Iewes vn∣derstand by a Para∣ble. ngratefull Vineyard, is a Parable, and f that kind which Christ often vsed in e Gospell. But the Iewes vnder this ord, vsed to comprehend all kinde of imboles, Riddles, Prouerbes, Adages, pothegmes, Allegories, Misteries, and ll obscure and darke sentences whatsoe∣er, the which had in them something ore hidden and conceited, then could lainly be vnderstood of euerie one that ther heard or read the same: And so eaneth the Euangelist, when hee saith,Luk. 8. 10. hat Christ spake to the people in Parables:
that is, he spake in an hard, darke, and my¦sticall saying, far beyond their vnderstan¦ding. And it is certain, that the Prophet i this place maketh such an obscure an darke oration vnto them, as that they t whom he proposed it, could not by an by vnderstand the pith and substance o the matter therein conteined, no mo then the Iewes vnderstood the meanin of Christ, when he spake in parables vnt them. This is a Similitude taken from thWhat a parable is. Truth, of the which there be right man in the diuine Scriptures, and the whic neuerthelesse without an expositour t giue the sence of them, are as words spok in a strange tongue, and sealed vp fro them to whom they be spoken. 5. If ye demaund, what moued the Lor to speake by the Prophet Isayah in thi sort, vnto the people of Israel? I answere euen that which moued Christ in thWhy the Prophet speaketh in a parable. Gospell to speake in parables to the Iewe And we find not, that Christ spake to th in parables, but in simple & plaine word vntill they began to sclander, deride, an contemne both him, and his doctrine an works: but after that time, he spake as in
strange language vnto them, and that for ese three causes: first, because they loa∣edThe first cause that moued Christ to speake in parables. Mat. 13. 10. and contemned the plaine teaching, leased the Lord to shut them vp in vn∣liefe, and depriue them of the benefit ereof. For when this question was pro∣sed to Christ by his disciples: Why spea∣t thou to them in Parables? he answered d said vnto thē, Because it is giuen to you nly) to know the secrets of the kingdome of auen: but vnto them it is not giuen: tea∣ing vs, that the knowledge of the diuine ysteries apperteineth not to all men, but ly to such, as it shall please God to giue that is, to the disciples of Christ: and that th in Christ is the only key of all pa∣bles and darke sentences of the holy criptures: to him that wanteth faith, hatsoeuer is spoken is as a riddle or pa∣ble: and so spake Christ to the wicked d reprobate Iewes in Parables. 6. S. Paul after a sort expoundeth is sentence of Christ, shewing that a strange tongue or Parable is an euident gne of Gods vengeance and curse to∣ards1. Cor. 14. 21. 22. the wicked, which haue contemned e plaine doctrine and truth of his word.
Tongues, saith he, are for a signe not tStrange Tongues are as Para∣bles to thē that be∣leeue not. them that do beleeue, but to them that be¦leeue not. And so must we vnderstand h words of Christ to his Disciples, To you saith he, (which are beleeuers, and are le by the spirit of God) it is giuen to kno the Mysteries of the Kingdome of heauen▪ but vnto them which are without (that is▪ which haue no faith whereby to attain to the pith and substance, but do stay  the bare barke, and letter of the word) speake I in Parables? Againe, it is said, that without Parable he spake nothing vnto the Iewes. Marke. 4▪ 34. but vnto his Disciples (which belee¦ued in him) he expounded all things. 7. The Lord proceedeth both in con∣firming nd amplifying of the cause▪They that contmne plain words shall be fed with darke Riddles. Mat 13. 13. Therefore I speake vnto them in Parables, because they seeing, do not see: and hearing, they heare not, neither vnder∣stand. And why? For this peoples heart is waxen fat, and their eares are dull of hea∣ring, and with their syes they haue wincked, least they shuld see with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and should returne that I should heale them. As if hee said: They
haue euen thrust away from themselues y graces, and haue made themselues vn∣orthie the knowledge of my waies and erlasting life. When they might haue eard, they would not heare: when they ight haue seene, they would not see: hen they might haue vnderstood, they ould not vnderstand: when I called, ey refused: when I stretched forth my and, they did not regard, but contemned y counsells, and set my corrections at aught: therefore, when they will, they hall not: yea, because they would not vse heir hearing, their seeing, their vnder∣standing to their owne good, when they ad it, euen that shal be taken from thm gaine. For vnto him that hath, it shall be giuen, and he shall haue abundance: but from hem, that shall be taken away, which they aue. Therefore, I speake vnto them in darke and mysticall sayings. To this pur∣pose serueth also that Prophesie of Isaiah. In hearing, ye shal heare, and shall not vnder∣stand:Isay. 6. 9. 10. and seeing, ye shall see, and not per∣ceiue, &c. 8. And to note, that this kind of dea∣lingWhen the plain prea∣ching of with those rebellious and stubborne
children, was not only a preamble tof the word, is turned into obscure sayings, it is a preamble to plagues ensuing. their destruction, but also a warning t all others in the posteritie, to take heed▪ how they negiected and contemned th graces of God, and shut vp their hearts i the deadly dungeon of vnbeliefe. The Prophet saith, that when he asked the Lord, how long this deafnesse, blindnesse, an hardnesse of heart should continue, he an∣swered him, vntill the Cities be wastedIsa. 6. 11. without inhabitants, and the houses with∣out man, and there be a great desolation in the middest of the land. This is that which ensueth, the deafnesse, the blindnesse, and the obstinacie of this people. 9. The second cause that moued theThe second cause was to perswade them to giue eare. Lord to propose this Parable to the peo∣ple by the ministerie of the Prophet, was that the Prophet might thereby per∣swade the people to hearken and heare him to the end of his oration, who (as I sayd before) being as fierce Tygars and wild beasts, would otherwise haue inter∣rupted his words, and fallen vpon him, as the Iewes did on S. Stephen. Act. 7. Thus Nathan, when he should speake to DauidNathan. . Sam. 12▪ 1. in the case of Vriah, tooke vp a Parable.
Thus Ioatham proposed a Riddle to theIoatham▪ Iudg. 9. 8. Christ. Math. 21. chemites. Thus Christ himselfe did of∣n vse Parables: when he would re∣ooue the pride, the couetousnesse, the gligence, the wickednes of the Priests d rulers of the Iewes, who yet were ntented to listen to such things, when ey would abide the simple preaching, one otherwise, then Herod suffred Iohn e Baptist and his words, when he re∣oued him in plaine termes. 10. Hereof was it, that men in old timeThe vse of Comedies, Tragedies, &c. uented those Comedies, Tragedies, bles, prosopopoiaes, and fictions of per∣ns and things, which deciphered & re∣oued the pride, insolencie, ambition, in∣atitude and abhominations of certaine ird persons, and of thē absent, to teach, dmonish, & put in mind second persons, nd them present, before whom, and to hom they spake. And to these things oth the Princes and the people rather ue audience, then to that simple oration f truth, which doeth reproue them to eir faces, neyther do they thinke it wfull for the Minister of the word, to ll them wherein they be faultie, and
how needfull it is they did amend, albei they themselues, know themselues guilti and cannot but acknowledge the equit of his dealing with them therein. 11. But in this, they be likened noMen rather heare and look on the fauls of o∣thers, then either a∣mend or thinke, or suffer to be told of their owne. onely to the eye, which both seeth an correcteth all other things saue it selfe but also to that couetous wretch, wh notwithstanding he would not vse his ri¦ches, but brooded on them, and was a poore in the middest of plentie, doth ye admire and laugh when he heareth th Poet tell of Tantalus, who was thirstie i the middest of the streame, and died wit drouth. Thus (I say) the very guiltie con¦science can harken and behold, so long a he perswadeth that yet the Prophet o Minister poynteth not to him, but t some other person. For such therefore,  Parable is more meete, then a plaine Ora¦tion. 12. The third and last reson is, thaThe third cause that moueth the Prophet to sing a Para∣ble. Dauid con∣demneth himselfe. by this kind of dealing, the guiltie an faultie person might be drawne in, to giu sentence against himself, euen then, whe he thinketh to condemne an other man King Dauid hearing the Parable which
Nathan proposed, imagining the case o ouch any other man besides himselfe, aue this iudgement against himselfe, As e Lord liueth, the man that hath done this,2. Sam. 12. 5. all surely dye. And the chiefe Priests,Math. 21. 41 ulers and Scribes, hearing the Parable hich Christ proposed, of the perfidious usbandmen, and being asked what the ord of the Vineyard would do to those hus∣andmen? They answered him (giuing ntence against themselue) He will cru∣lyA Parable hath not the like ef∣fect in all men. destroy those wicked men, and well let out s Vineyard vnto other husbandmen, which all deliuer him the fruites in their seasons. hese both Parables were: expounded d applyed, the one by Nathan to Da∣d, the other by Christ to the Scribes, riests, and Rulers of the Iewes, the which t had not the like effect in either: for auid acknowledged his fault, repented, d was forgiuen; but the other waxed grie, continued obstinate, and dyed in eir sinnes. 13. And (indeede) as Dauid gaue dgement against himselfe vpon the aring of his Parable: and as the Priests, cribes and Rulers also censured them∣selues
worthie destruction. So these vThey giue the sen∣tence a∣gainst thē∣selues. thankfull people were induced by th parable of the Prophet Isayah, to co¦demne themselues, whose very senten of condemnation, that same is, which th Lord thereupon confirmeth by the Pr¦phet against them thus: It is meete ther¦fore, that this good and painfull husbandm do take away the hedge from that ingratef Vineyard, that it may be eaten vp, and  breake the wall thereof, that it may be trod downe, and that he lay it waste, &c. To su speaketh Paul, Rom. 2. 1. Therefore th art inexcusable (ô man) whosoeuer thou  that iudgest: for in that that thou iudgest ¦nother, thou condemnest thy selfe: for th that iudgest doest the same things. For th causes was it, that the Prophet Isayah  not only sing a song, but such a song  hath in it a Parable, that is, a mysterie a obscure and darke saying. But of the m¦ter, and circumstances of this Parab I mind to speake in the second part,  the grace of God.
CHAP. IIII. whom the Prophet consecrateth his Song, viz. To his Beloued, verse 1. AFter the order of the words, we are next to note to whome the Prophet singeth. He sayeth, I will sing vnto  Beloued. Here the Prophet sheweth,  whose prayse hee consecrateth his g. When S. Luke had written twoLuk. 1. 1. ned Volumes, the one, entituled,  Gospell after Luke: the other, TheAct. 1. 1. es of the Apostles, he dedicated them h to his deare Theophilos: and so o∣rsTheophilo also haue had a desire to commend ir best labours to such personages as y most reuerenced and best affected. us the Prophet Isayah hauing com∣ed a Song, sayth, he will sing the same is beloued friend. . And (as it seemeth) he alludeth inThe Pro∣phet allu∣deth to the manner of writers , to the manner not only of them that e and dedicate bookes, but of Woers
and Louers (as I sayd before.) As if of Bookes and Woers. sayd: seeing men▪ vse to sing Songs  commend and please them whom th most loue and affect, I will also af their manner Sing a Song to my Belo For I haue also a Beloued: howbeit,  Beloued▪ is not as theirs: but my Belo is mine and I am his: Cant. 5. 10. my Belo is fayre and ruddy▪ Cant. 5. 10. 3. Bt (this notwithstanding) we  not imagine▪ that therefore the P¦phetWho is the Beloued. was pissionated with any fleshly  worldly conceit▪ or affection, as th fleshly woe bd louers be: but rat that he wa enflamed with a most h and godly zeale, and an ardent ffect of loue, and desire to promote▪ the gl of God▪ whom before all other thing loued, and to the which he would  those and all his labour should be c secrated. Therefore we may iustly c sent with the best Expositours of place, that by this his Beloued he ment Lord his God, and the same, whose sp¦tuall loue and communication with  Church▪ Salomon describeth after Cant. 1. Pal. 45. manner of the man and the woman t
ardently desireth the fauour and societie e one of the other in chast loue. Of this loued he reioyced, and might say with e holy Spowsesse, Lo, this is my Beloued, d this is my Louer, ô ye daughters of Ieru∣em: My Beloued is not a fleshlie but pirituall louer, and he will be pleased t with fleshly, but with spirituall loue: , the true worshippers worship him in rit and truth, and loue him so. . By this, we learne to ascribe the ry of all our actions to God, to writeWe ought to conse∣crate our labours to God. okes, and dedicate them to his honor compose Songs, and sing them both h the spirit▪ and with the vnderstan∣g, to his eternall praise, as to the wor∣est and best beloued. Thus also Mo∣ Deborah, Hanna, Dauid, Salomon, ay, Zachary, Hezekiah and others, wred forth their Songs to the Lord,  gaue him the glory. Thus also sang  Angels, Glory be to God on high. TheyLuk. 1. t attribute the power and glory of t vertues and commendable labours o any other, do derogate from his aiestie, and blaspheme his honour▪ erefore, let vs sing vnto the Lord, and
extoll the glory of his Name, as the Psa mist hath also taught vs saying: Not v to vs, ô Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy Na giue the Glory, for thy louing mercie, and f thy truthes sake, Psal. 115. 1. 5. At the least, the Prophet bThus should wee com∣mend the successe of our labours to God. singing to his Beloued, doth commen the successe of his labours, and the iudg¦ment of all things to the Lord God As if hee should say (to our vndersta¦ding) Seeing I haue a long time pipe and none would daunce: seeing I ha preached and prophesied vnto this pe¦ple, and neuer a one of them beleeue my report and words: I will now bri the matter before the high Iudge, a to him will I commend both it, and t successe of my trauailes. I will sing v to him, yea, I will complayne v him, and call him foorth as a witne for me against them. Thus, this P¦phet in the first Chapter calleth to Isay. 1. 2. Heauens and the earth, as if he eith spake to them, or called them to be w¦nesses against the people. Thus, MDeut. 32. 1. also dealeth with those vngratefull Isr¦lites. So sayeth Micah, I will looke h. y. 7.
vnto the Lorde. And Zacharie beeing rought to the place of execution, (at e commandement of that vnkind Ioash) ommitted the cause to God, saying: he Lord looke vpon it, and require it. So2. Chro. 24. 22. eere this Prophet committeth all vnto od, as we also ought to do; for vnto the ord it onely apperteineth either to make  marre all. 6. It is obiected, that the ProphetThe Pro∣phet by this word Belo∣ued, mea∣neth not the people, but God.  this place rather commendeth his Song  the people of Israel, to whome hee ake, because hee sayth, I will sing to my eloued, and then proposeth the matter  the people, the which also he might ll his Beloued, in respect of his loue to em, and his great desire to reforme and end them: But that which followeth thstandeth all this, and ratifieth that hich is said before: namely, that the Pro∣et by his Beloued, meaneth the Lord. r he saith, he will sing a Song of his Belo∣d to his Vineyard. And it is certaine, that  Song or Parable, which he proposed, is e word of God, & the Vineyard where∣ he spake, was the people of Israel and dah, vnto whom the Lord himselfe in
mercy behaued himselfe as an husband∣man to his Vineyard: for so the Prophet expoūdeth it, My beloued had a Vineyard that is to say, the Lord of hoasts had  chosen and peculiar people: namely, th house of Israell, and the man of Iudah. 7. There be here two other question to be answered, whereof the first is, why he calleth God a Beloued: the second i why he calleth him, his Beloued. Tou∣ching1. Why he calleth God Beloued. the first, we haue the reason of this title in the 2. Chap. of the 2. Booke o Samuel, vers. 24. where Dauid named hi sonne Iedid-iah, the Beloued of the Lord for that (as it is there sayd) the Lord loue him. So the Psalmist (speaking of Chris in the person of Salomon) sayth: Thou arPsal. 45. fayrer then the children of men, full of grac are thy lips: the reason is added, becaus God hath loued thee for euer. And th Prophet calleth the Lord Iedid, Beloue for that he is the same chiefe Good; thGod is the chiefe good which (before all things) is to be loue and to be desired, according to that com∣mandement, Thou shalt loue he Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, wi all thy power: And, first seeke: the kingdom
of God, and the righteousnes thereof. 8. Next, the Prophet calleth him My2. He cal∣leth God his Belo∣ued: as speaking in the be∣halfe of the Church. Beloued, partly as speaking in the person of the whole Church: partly, for him∣selfe. He speaketh in the behale of the Church as Salomon did who brought in the same, speaking of Christ, as a faithfull wife of her husband, saying: My Beloued is mine, Cant. 2. 16. Againe, I haue sought for him whom my soule loueth: and in that respect, the Lord nameth himselfe an husband, and his people his wife: Hos. 1. & 2. So is the Lord my Beloued (saith the holy Spowsesse) because he loueth me, as the good husband loueth his wife: he is my best Beloued, because I affect and de∣sire him, as the good wife affecteth and desireth her husband in holy loue. And such (indeede) he would our loue should be towards him, as his loue is towards vs. The Church said, I am sick with loue: so let vs loue him, and let vs be sick with his loue. 9. Next, the Prophet speaking in his3. As spea∣king in his owne be∣halfe. owne behalfe, calleth the Lord his Belo∣ued, because the Lord had especially cho∣sen, called, and loued him: and also, for
that hee affected and desired his loue, mercy, and holy graces before all world∣ly treasures. For this cause was the Lord called the God of Abraham, the God of Isaack, the God of Iaacob, the God of Daniel, as the same, who had bene especially good vnto them, and whome they loued and serued before all other Gods. And in this sence Paule sayth, I thanke my God: God, that loueth and1. Cor. 1. 4. preserueth mee; God, whome I loue and serue with my whole heart. 10. Finally, by this word, the Pro∣phet expresseth his thankefull heart vn∣toA note of the Pro∣phets thāk∣fulnesse to God. God, whose loue and goodnesse he doth not only acknowledge, but reue∣rently remember, and endeuour to re∣quite to his power (through his Grace) to stirre vp, and to prouoke the people to do the like. Neither could they deny, how bountifull the Lord had bin in bles∣sings towards them, therein declaring his great loue to them, as Ezechiel also sayth in the 16. Chapter: or that there∣by, he might make them blush at their monstrous vnkindnesse, who would nei∣ther confesse his loue to them, nor shew
any token of good will towardes him: whereat the Lorde was moued to say, I will call her Beloued, which was not be∣loued, and her whome I loued, will I reiect and cast off. Therefore sayth the Pro∣phet, I will sing to my Beloued: that is, to God, whose loue towards me I acknow∣ledge, and whom I only loue and ende∣our (by all meanes possible) to expresse and vtter this my loue towards him, as he hath expressed his loue towards me. This is my Beloued, and I am his. A most worthie lesson for all men to learne and follow, according to S. Iohns rule: Let vs1. Iohn. 4 9. 10. loue God, for he loued vs first, and let vs expresse this loue, by keeping of his com∣mandements, as our Lord hath in his Gos∣pell commanded vs.
CHAP. V. The Title of the Song. viz. A Song of my Beloued concerning his Vineyard, verse. 1. THere be in the holy Scriptures di∣uers Psalmes and Songs diuersly entituled, either according to the names of the Authors of them, or the persons to and for whom they were dedi∣cated or composed, or according to the matter in them conteined. As, the PsalmeDiuers titles of Psalmes. of Dauid the seruant of the Lord: the Prayer of Moses the man of God: the Song of Salomon: the Song of Mary: the Song of Zacharie: the Song of Degrees: the prayer of the afflicted: the Song for the Sabboth day: the Song to giue in∣struction: a Song committed to Asaph: a Song committed to the sonnes of Ko∣rah, &c. But this Song before all others, as he singeth it to his Beloued, so also he entituleth it of his Beloued touching his Vineyard. And in this, he giueth two
things to be considered, viz. first, whoseTwo things in this title. the Song is that he singeth, and secondly, what matter the Song concerneth. First he saith, that the Song is of his Beloued: next, that the Song concerneth the Vineyard of his Beloued. 2. I sayd in the Chapter before, that the Prophet calleth God his Beloued, and now, in that he calleth the Song, the Song of his Beloued, it is asmuch, as if he had called it, the Lords Song, for that is hisThe Lords Song, and why it is so called. meaning, namely, that he would sing a Song of the Lord. And worthely doth he so entitle it, first, because the Song was not the Prophets, but the Lords: for (in∣deede) the Lord put this Parable and Song in the mouth of the Prophet, as he also put a Parable in the mouth of the Prophet Nathan, whom he sent to Dauid. By his commandement was it, that one of the Seraphims flew vnto the Prophet with an hoat coale in his hand, which he had taken from the alar with his tongs and touched his mouth, as him∣selfe sayd, Isay. 6. 6. 3. By this, he would declare the cre∣dit of the matter, testifying, that hee
brought vnto the people nothing of hisThe credit and autho∣rity of the Song. owne, but that which was the Lords, who spake by his mouth. Thus said Christ to his Apostles whome he sent forth to preach, partly to embolden them, and partly to giue authoritie to the word they preached, It is not you that speake, but the Spirit of my Father which speaketh within you. Againe, The words that I speake, are not mine, but his that sent me. So, he sayth, I will sing a Song, not mine owne, but my Beloueds, that is, the Lords. Neither can it be but a comfort to the Minister, when he is assured of his calling, and the cause, to be the Lords: and a notable credit for the matter, when the people can per∣swade, that it is the Lords. 4. Next, the Prophet entituleth the Song, the Lords Song, because it concerned the Glory of God, and the case of his people. As the Iewes in Babilon called that Song the Lords Song, which concerned the praise of God, the seruice of God, thePsal. 137. 4. Religion of God. In that sence, the Euan∣gelist saith, that Christ spake vnto his A∣postles of those things which apperteined toAct. 1. 3. the kingdome of God. And we call that a godly Sermon, a godly Song, a godly
Psalme, in the which, the Glory of God, and the consolation & instruction of his people is set forth and furthered. And here we are taught, what should be the chiefe matter of our Sermons, our Songs and parables: and wherein we should (in∣deede) meditate, as our chiefe exercise & delight with that Blessed man, Psal. 1. 2. 5. Againe, considering the excellencieHow to vse the word of God. of the matter, as bewtified and authorised by the author thereof, that is, by the Lord of hoasts, we should both reuerently vse t, and aduisedly dispose it. God wil not be leased, that we handle his holy mysteries with vnwashed hands; nor that we mixe is pure diuinitie with mans inuentions; or that we apply them to prophane vses o please mans fleshly lusts: but that we se thē holily, modestly, zealously, wisely,  the feare of God, to his glory, to the omfort of his Church, to the discharge f our duties. And also the Lords will is, hat we should sing the songs of mercy to hem that repent, and the songs of iudge∣ment to thē that be obstinate, as the Pro∣het hath taught vs; least (peraduenture) e should seeme to sing the Lords Song in a range land; to giue things holy to dogs;
and to cast pretious pearles before swine▪ 6. Finally, the Prophet (to make dif∣ferenceThis Song concerneth the Lords Vineyard. betweene this Song, and other the Lords Songs) telleth what thing th Song chiefely concerneth, namely, th Vineyard of the Lord. But thereof, with the matter of the Song, and what the purpose of the Lord is in the same, it shall be (by the help of God) declared in the second part. The end of the first Part.
The Second part, conteyning The matter and substance of the Song of the Beloued, &c. erse 1. My Beloued had a Vineyard in a very frutefull hill. And he hedged it about, &c. vnto the end of the 6. verse. CHAP. I. The briefe Summe and disposition of this second part. AS the Song of the Beloued concerning his Vineyard, hath in it a Parable (as it is declared in the for∣mer part: so, in the
Parable, the Prophet couertly descri¦bethA descrip∣tion of the state of Is∣rael and Iu∣dah. the state and condition of th people of Israel and Iudah: to the en that seeing their owne sinnes and i gratitude, and for the same, their futu miserie (as in a Glasse) they might be  shamed, and be driuen to repentanc thereby to eschue that heauy iudgeme hanging ouer their heads. And in th part, the Prophet setteth foorth these six memorable points to be considered, v 1. The great loue & mercie of God towarSixe points to be consi∣dered in this part. the people of Israel and Iudah: 2. his ex¦pectation of their good works and thank¦fulnesse. 3. their horrible vnkindnesse t¦wards him. 4. his appellation and requ of iudgement in the case. 5. his complai 6. his sentence and commination again them. 2. And these points are gathered o of the Song:  The first, of these word My Beloued had a Vineyard in a veVerse 1. fruitefull hill: and he hedged it, and gath¦red out the stones of it, and he plantedVerse 2. with the best plantes: and he built a Tow in the middes thereof, and made a Win presse therein.  The second of these words
Then he looked that it should bring foorth apes.  The third of these words: And brought foorth wilde Grapes.  The fourth  these words: Now therefore ô inhabi∣tsVerse 3. of Ierusalem, and men of Iudah, ge I pray you betweene me and my Vine∣d.  The fift of these wordes: What ld I haue done any more to my Vine∣d,Verse 4. that I haue not done vnto it? Why e I looked that it should bring foorth apes, and it bringeth foorth wilde Grapes?  e sixt and last of these words: AndVerse 5.  I will tell you what I will do to my Vine∣d: I will take away the hedge there∣ and it shall be eaten vp: I will breake  wall thereof, and it shall be trodden ne: And I will lay it waste: It shallVerse 6.  be cut, nor digged: but bryars and nes shall growe vp: and I will also com∣nd the cloudes that they rayne no rayne n it. 3. And these points our Lord Iesus  the Gospell worthely obserueth in  Parable (which he proposed to the es) of the perfidious husbandmen, ch (indeede) touched not onely the  Priests, Scribes and Rulers of the
people, to whom the Lord had com∣mitted the charge of his Vineyard, tha is, of the people of Israel and Iudah, bu also, the whole state of the Iewes. An therein it cannot be denied, but that th Lord alludeth to this Parable which th Prophet hath proposed, and the sam both expoundeth and applieth to themChrist ob∣serued those sixe points in his Pa∣rable pro∣posed to the Iewes. Math 21. 33. as of the conclusion may be gathered for first, the loue and mercy of God is s forth, in that Christ sayth, There was  certaine housholder which planted a Vine¦yard, and hedged it round about, and made Wine-presse therein, and built a Tower, a let it out to husbandmen. 2. His expect¦tion is expressed in this: And when thVerse 34. time of the fruit drew neere, he sent his se¦uants to the husbandmen, to receiue t fruites thereof. 3. Their ingratitude ap¦peareth in this, that the husbandmen toVerse 35. 36 37. 38. 39. his seruants and beat one, and killed anothe and stoned another, &c. 4. His appellatio and request of iudgement, is declared  these words, When therefore the Lord Verse 40. the Vineyard shall come, what shall he do  those husbandmen? 5. The complaint  considered of these words: Reade ye neuVerse 42.
in the Scriptures, the stone which the buil∣ders refused, the same is made the head of the corner. Complayning as it were, that those high Priests, Scribes and Elders of the Iewes, who were accompted the buil∣ders of the Church and common wealth of Israel, had reiected Christ, and so denyed the mercies of God, who had eene most bountifull towards them. 6. The sentence and commination is conteined in these words: Therefore IVerse. 43. say vnto you, that the kingdome of God shall e taken from you, and shall be giuen to a Nation which shall bring forth the fruites hereof. And this is the summe of the whole. 4. Surely, as the Lord God hath de∣lared his loue, and sweete mercies on allThe mer∣cies of God. he Nations of the earth (howsoeuer they aue acknowledged the same, and beha∣ed themselues): so hath not any one Na∣ion vnder the heauens more felt and in∣oyed the sweetnesse and happy fruites hereof, then the children of Israel, and hiefely them of Iudah, to whom he had ndeede) dealt in his loue more bounti∣ull then to others. And this is witnessed
first by Moses, who telleth with whatDeut. 32. wonders and tokens the Lord had freed this people from the Egyptians, and pre∣serued and mainteined them in the Wil∣dernesse; and how the Lord had bene vnto them, as a Father to his Sonne, as an Eagle to her yong, and as a most gra∣tious King to his true and obedient peo∣ple. Of this the Psalmist also modula∣teth in many places, and after report of many the Lords wonderfull workes of mercie towards them, he concludeth, saying: He hath not done so with euer nation, neither haue they knowne his iudge∣ments, Psal. 147. 20. 5. After this, Isayah was bolde an vrged this argument before the face o Kings and Princes. Ieremy also was plen∣tifull in these things: and (to let pass the rest) how copious and eloquent i Ezechiel in his 16. Chapter? he com∣menceth there with the originall of this people, and declareth most amplie, ho wonderfull the Lord hath bene in hi mercy towards them from time to time Therefore of this people, farre beyon all the nations vnder the heauens, di
he most expect to be serued in SpiritWhat God expected of them. and truth, who indeede (beyond all o∣thers) should in this declare themselues gratefull to him for such his great bles∣sings. But (alas) as there is no Nation which hath not angred God by great abhominations and sinnes, so was thereBut no Na∣tion angred him more then the Iewes. neuer any that more deceiued the Lords expectation, then this people of Israel: ea, they did not onely decipher their orrible ingratitude towards him, but also farre passed all the Nations of the earth in wicked abhominations & sinnes ginst God, to his great displeasure and heir owne woe. Therefore the horrible ingratitude ofThey be made a Glasse to all poste∣rities. his people, and their finall destruction or the same, is made a glasse and example o all posterities, not to be commended nd followed; but to be loathed & aban∣doned of them that mind to reteine the grace of God, & to enioy the sweet fruits nd comfortable effects of his loue, for he eternall consolation of their soules. 6 But now, seeing it pleased the Lord to et forth all these things by his Prophet nder the Parable of the Vinitor and
his Vineyard, let vs examine the perticular circumstances; and first, those which do expresse the great loue and mercies of the Lord, towards the house of Israel and Iudah. CHAP. II. First, the loue and mercie of God is ex∣pressed in these words: viz. My Beloued had a Vineyard, verse 1. IN this Song or Parable, we heare the Prophet to tell of a certaine Vinitor or husbandman, and of his Vineyard: of the place of the Vineyard, of the hedging, cleansing, and planting thereof with the best plants, and of a Towre and a Wine∣presse builded and made therein: of all the which, I mind and God will to speake in order. For albeit that (after the iudge∣ment of some men) it is not necessary that we should exquisitely sift euery word, or that the Allegories of the same should be expounded: thinking it enough that
only by the words we should generally nderstand the Lords loue and mercy to is people, and their vnkindnesse toward▪ im: yet haue I thought it meete and nuement to examine euery word par∣icularly, and thereof in the feare of God) o yeeld the sense, as of an Allegorie or Parable which cannot wel be vnderstood without an exposition: and that the soo∣er, because it may appeare euen to the gnorant and vnlearned, with how many ich and particular bounties the Lord had lessed and beawtified the people of Israel, and how carefull, prouident and watchfull he was ouer them at all times: a vehement Argument to haue stirred them to thankefulnesse. Neither should we be ingratefull to the Lord, when (the rather by the cōsideration of these things) we meditate of the Lords loue and mer∣cies towards our selues, the which in very deede haue bene, and be right plentifull and most apparant in this our time. 1. First therefore, in that the Lord GodThe Vini∣tor and his Vineyard. likeneth himselfe to a man, and speaketh after the maner of a man, thereby apply∣ing himselfe and his words to our infirme
and grosse capacities, it argueth his loue and fauour to man, who, as a Father lo∣uing and liking his little Sonne, will etiam in baculo equitare (as they say) shew himselfe as a childe to teach his childe. And thereof singeth the Psalmist: Who is like vnto the Lord our God, that hath his dwelling on high? who yet abaseth himselfe to behold things in heauen and in earth? And who can but wonder with the same, that considereth how the Lord so highIsa. 9. and wonderfull vouchsafeth to encline himselfe to our condition, to humble himselfe to teach and instruct vs: to be mindfull of vs: to regard vs? But yet, more apparant is his loue and mercie to his people, in that he likeneth himselfe not onely to a man, but also to an hus∣bandman: yea, to a wise, carefull, and painefull Vinitor, and his people toGod is as a Vinitor. his Vineyard, which is also oftentimes spoken and repeated in the holy Scrip∣tures. 2. There is not (in all the Scriptures) a meeter Comparison to set forth the loue and mercies of God to mankinde: for, as there is not any possession of the
husbandman more pretious and deareA notable comparison to expresse the loue of God to man. vnto him, then is his Vineyard: so nei∣her any, that requireth the like proui∣dence, care, labour, and dayly regard. By this the Lord would teach, that the people of Israel and Iudah were not only vnto himselfe a pretious inheritance: but also, that himselfe hath a speciall loue, li∣king, and regard of the same, to consolate and embolden them in all afflictions that put their trust in him, and to stirre them vp to expresse their thankfulnesse, by bringing forth and yeelding vnto him the fruites of righteousnesse. And such a thing intended our Sauiour when he sayd to his disciples: I am theIohn. 15. 1. 5. 8. Vine, and my father is the Husbandman. Againe: I am the Vine, and yee are the Branches. Againe, Herein is my Father glorified, that yee beare much fruite, and become my disciples. This similitude doth aptly set forth the loue and mercie of God to his people: but to amplifie and enlarge the same, the Prophet bringeth in certaine particulars, numbring vp cer∣tain special benefites that the Lord of his goodnes had bestowed on his Vineyard:
that is, on the people of Israel and Iuda 3.  But here it is said: What? is no God the Lord of all people, kindreds, anPsal. 24. 1. tongues? sayth not the Psalmist: Th Earth is the Lords, the plenty of the round world, and they that dwell therein? HowGod is sayd to haue one Vineyard: and how? Answere. then is it sayd, that God hath this one Vineyard? as if therefore in respect of this one, all other Nations did nothing belong vnto him? I answere: As those things which men affect, and vse either little or nothing, are sayd to be not their owne, in respect of those things which they most loue and vse dayly; so, albeit the Lord knoweth who be his, and hath also other sheepe which are not of this folde, yet because it pleased the Lord to elect & choose those sheepe of the house of Israel from and before all others, and to fauour and feede them with right good pasture, and to be present and dayly hel∣ping them, and to accompt and recken them for his peculiar people: therefore they are called his Vineyard: his sheepe, and his peculiar people, and he is called their God. 4. And indeed, the Lord God hath
not one only Vineyard, but many Vine∣yards,God hath many Vine∣yards: but yet one a∣boue all: euen of and among the Gentiles also: And the time is come, that those sheepe which are without, are also both called and brought into the right sheep∣fold vnder the chiefe Shepheard, accor∣ding to that desire of Noah whē he prayed thus, O that God would perswade Iaphet to dwell in the Tabernacles of Shem! But vn∣till that came to passe, the Gentiles were excluded (as it were) from the people of God, and the Israelites were chiefely ac∣compted and called the Vineyard of the Lord, as the same of whom he had most regard, and to whome he expressed his loue by large benefits before all other Nations, as Esdras also sayd to the most high. O Lord, Lord of euery forest of the2. Esd. 5. 23. earth, and of all the trees thereof, thou hast chosen thee one onely Vineyard: And of all lands of the world, thou hast chosen thee one pit: and of all the flowers of the ground, thou hast chosen thee one Lilly: and of all the depthes of the Sea, thou hast filled thee one Riuer: and of all builded Cities, thou hast sanctified Sion to thy selfe. And among all the fowles that are created, thou hast named thee
one Doue: and of all the cattell that are made, thou hast appointed thee one Sheepe: and a∣mong all the multitude of people, thou hast gotten thee one people: and vnto this people (whom thou louest) thou gauest a law, which is approued of all. And this is approued by many testimonies and examples in the Law, in the Prophets, in the Psalmes, and in the Gospell. 5. In this respect Christ sayd to the Sy∣rophenissan, It is not meete to giue the bread which belongeth to the children vnto dogs.Mat. 10. 5. 6. Againe, I am not come, but to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel. And sending forth his Disciples, he charged them saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the Cities of the Samaritanes enter ye not: But go rather to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel. This was (I say) vntill the time of the Gentiles, who then also came by faith, and made a challenge of the me∣rits of Christ, according as the Pro∣phets, and Salomon in his Songs had pro∣phesied. Of this also, Peter, by the vi∣sion he sawe was fully certified, and Paule to the Romanes, Chap. 11. at large disputeth.
But the purpose of the Prophet wasThe pur∣pose of th Prophet. o set forth the loue and mercie of God, hiefely towards the house of Israel and he Iewes, whom he had wonderfully lessed and enriched with benefites, and nto whom the Prophet preached and xpounded, and applyed the Parable ccordingly. CHAP. III. The loue and mercie of God, expressed also in these words, viz. In a very fruitefull hill, verse 1. WHen men intend to plant Gar∣dens, Orchards, and Vineyards, they first make choyce of the lace, and soyle, such as they thinke to beThe place of the Vine∣yard. oth fertile, pleasant, and most meete for he purpose: neither without this prouidēt oresight, may they expect any fruite of heir labours. Salomon displayed his owne are in this case, when he sayd: I haue made y great workes, I haue built me houses,
I haue planted me Vineyards, I haue mad me Gardens and Paradises, and planted i them trees of all fruite: Eccles. 2. 4. 5. Vnto this point of husbandry alludeth the Pro∣phet Isayah, when he sayth, My Beloue had a Vineyard; Bekeren Ben-schamen, tha is, In an horne of the sonne of Oyle. By an horne, the Hebrews vnderstanAn horne. Sonne of oyle. pleasure, strength, heigth: by Oyle, they note fatnesse, plentie, fertilitie: and by the sonne of Oyle, they note that which i of Oyle, or commeth of oyle, or fatnesse a phrase vsuall with them, as the Sonne o Nobles: the sonne of dayes: the sonne o death: the sonne of plentie, &c. So, by th horne of the sonne of Oyle, the Prophe meaneth a very pleasant and plentiou ill or high countrey: declaring thereby, that God had planted his people in  land both pleasant and plentifull of allPleasant and fertile. fruites. 2. Some moralizing on this place, vn∣derstād by this hill, the field of this world: but they exceede the meaning of the Pro∣phet, who doubtlesse speaketh of the land of Chanaan, and alludeth to the words of the promise made to them that hearkned
to the Lords voyce, and walked in hisDeut. 28. 1. 11. 13. ayes, Deut. 28. The Lord will set thee on gh aboue all the Nations of the earth. A∣ine: He shall make thee plenteous in good∣sse in the fruite of thy body, in the fruite of y cattell, and in the fruite of thy ground, in e land which the Lord sware vnto thy fa∣ers to giue thee. Againe, The Lord shall ake thee the head and not the tayle: and ou shalt be aboue only, and not beneath. nd speaking againe of this speciall land  the Lords Vineyard, he sayth vnto the ildren of Israel, The land whither yeThe plentie and plea∣sures of the land of promise. Deut. 11. 11. 12.  to possesse, it is a land of mountaines and lleys, and drinketh water of the rayne of auen (which was in this preferred to the nd of Egypt, which for want of rayne rely needed to be watred with streames awen out of the riuer Nylus.) This land eth the Lord thy God care for: the es of the Lord thy God are alwayes on it, from the beginning of the yeare, to the end of the yeare. And this no∣d his continuall prouidence ouer this nd beyond all others. This is the same  the which the Lord spake when he said, at he would deliuer his people out of
the hand of the Egyptians, and bring them out of that land, into a good land and  large, into a land that floweth with milk and honey. And indeede, Moses both be∣leeuing and foreseeing this in the Spirit prophesied thereof in his Song, saying He caried him vp to the high places of thDeut. 32. 13. 14. earth (for the land of Canaan was indeed high in respect of Egypt) that he migh eate the fruites of the fields: and he ca∣sed him to sucke honey out of the stone, an oyle out of the hard Rocke: Butter of Ki and Milke of Sheepe, with fat of the Lamb and Rammes fed in Bashan, and Goate with the fat of the graynes of wheate, an the red liquour of the Grape hast th drunke. 3. Some would referre this only t the Citie of Ierusalem, which was high then all other Cities, and the Countr thereabouts, no lesse fruitefull, especiall in Vines, the which do grow and pr¦sperBacchus amat col∣les, Aqui∣lonem, & frigora Syluae. naturally, rather in the high hille then in the low countries, chiefely ther where they haue the heate of the Sunne a pure ayre & sweete humor. And there of is it, that all Vines are not of like goo¦nesse
and pleasant taste, because all pla∣ are not alike in goodnesse and na∣e for it. And it is certaine, that as the ophet commendeth the field whereon  Vineyard was made by the situation reof on an hill, and by the goodnesse he soyle: so he would thereby display  plentifulnesse and pleasures of the d of Canaan, into the which the Lord d by his grace brought his people of ael, and planted them: as also the happy e & condition of that people, as long hey enioyed the presence and fauour God in that pleasant land, in regard ereof, all nations called them blessed, he Prophet Malachie sayd.Mala. 3. 10. 4. And this shall wee the betterThe situa∣tion of the land of Chanaan. Mare mortuum. we, if wee note, how this land was bordered and compassed about. It  on the East side thereof, the Dead , whereas in the olde tyme were ed the Cities of Sodome and Go∣rha, the which Countrey as wee de in the booke of Genesis, Chap. 13. . was both pleasant and plentifull in ites, and therefore Loth in his de∣ting from Abraham, made choice
thereof to dwell there. Beyond the whiAlthamer. in Syl. Bibl. Sea, was the Countrie of Moab and A¦mon, and the great Riuer Euphrates, b¦yondLuther. in Isay. the which is Babilon, and the regi of the Chaldaeans, and beyond that Per Then on the North side lieth Galilaea, the backe whereof is the Mountaine ¦banus, beyond the which is Damascus,  the famous Riuer Euphrates: then Sy and Assyria, which bend towards the E then beyond that, is Zidon and Tyre,  tending something towards the W Then on the West part, are the Philist or the land of Palestina, with the coasts the great Sea, called Mediterraneum, the Sea of Palestina. And then, lastly the South side, Egypt, Ethiopia, the red S Edom and Midiam. But Egypt, thoug be set on the South side of Iudaea, de¦neth very much to the West. And th are the limits or bounds of the land Chanaan, otherwise called the land promise: the which is more at large ¦scribed in those places of the Scriptu as Gen. 10. 19. Exod. 23. 31. Nomb. 34. to verse 13. Deut. 11. 11. 24. Iosh. 1. and Ezech. 47. 15. vnto the 21. verse.
5. Now, by this we may gather, that e Lords Vineyard was sited indeede  the hill of the sonne of Oyle (as the Pro∣het sayth) that is, in a most pleasant and uitfull land. Such a blessing did the Lord ue to the children of Israel, and suchThe good things be∣long to the good. ood things bestoweth he on his people, things ordeined (indeede) not for the icked Chanaanites, but for the godly raelites: not for the atheisticall world∣gs, but for the true worshippers of od, howsoeuer the wicked haue and do yly vsurp on them and abuse them:  stirre vp the children of God to the ght consideration of his fatherly loue d mercies towards them, and to be right ankfull vnto him, by whom and from hom, they enioy these so rare blessings. 6. Where the Prophet sayth, My Be∣ed had a Vineyard in such a place, he ould teach vs whose those good things e, and who giueth and bestoweth them  the children of men. The Diuell saith, ll these things be mine, and to whom soeuer ill I giue them, Luke. 4. 6. But he lyeth ost falsely: for he hath nothing, butWhose the things of  permission from the Lord. For the
earth is the Lords, the world is the Lords,the world are? Gods. and all whatsoeuer is therein is the Lords, who giueth the same to whome soeuer hee will. Thus also the worldly man sayth▪ These Lands, these Parks, these Forests, these Granges, these Manours, these Farmes, and all these things be mine: I haue gotten them, I haue trauailed for them, I haue aduentured my life, and pe∣rished my conscience, and now they b mine, nor belong they to any other. This was Nabals resolution. But the Prophet saith: The Vineyard is the Lords: The vine∣yard of the Lord of hoast is the house o Israel: and the man of Iuda his choy plant, and whatsoeuer we haue for th vse of our life, is the Lords: for he giueth water and bread, milke and honey, and whatsoeuer else. And this the seruant o Abraham confessed, when comming toGen. 24. 35. Bethuels house, to get a wife for Isaak h maisters sonne, he said: The Lord hath bles∣sed my maister wonderfully, that he is becom great: for he hath giuen him sheepe an beeues, and siluer and gold, and men-ser∣uants, and maid-seruants, and camels, an asses: So he acknowledged that his mai∣ster
was enriched of the blessing of God, from whom he knew that euery good thing came, and not of any labour or wisedome of his, albeit he was a man both wise and vertuous. 7. Oh that men would in like sort ac∣knowledge whose all these things be, and ow they be enriched with them in theWe should consider of whom we haue our wealth, &c. and vse i well. world, and that they would accept & vse them as his gifts, and not to abuse them after their lusts. Let vs know, that the Lord hath a Vineyard and talents, and e setteth forth his Vineyard to some: e lendeth his talents to other. Let not now the Husbandmen say, this Vineyard is our owne, and we will not aue this Lord to rule ouer vs: Nei∣her let them which haue the talents o be employed, neglect them to their pleasures, and recken not of any ac∣ompt: But let the Husbandmen know, that they are but tenants, and that the Vineyard appeeineth to their Lord, who looketh for the fruits thereof: and let the other know, that the talents belong to heir maister, to whome they ought to eeld increase thereof, else shall they
be thrust out, and destroyed for euer: for the Vineyard is the Lords: the Ta∣lents are his: and he will not that we de∣rogate from him, and arrogate to our selues that which belongs to his honour. CHAP. IIII. The loue and mercie of God towards the Iewes expressed in this, that he hed∣ged his Vineyard about, verse 2. IT seemeth to some, that the Prophet obserueth not the right order of hus∣bandmen,The hed∣ging of the Vineyard. who begin first to plant be∣fore they hedge their Vineyards. And to that order it seemeth that our Sauiour in Math. 21. 33. alludeth when he sayth, that the housholder planted a Vineyard, and hedged it round about. Howbeit, we should rather respect the matter and drift of the Prophet, then his methode, being cer∣taine, that the Lord (who is only wise) did not plant only his Vineyard in such a place, but also added all things necessarie both for the defence, saferie and pro∣speritie
of the same. And yet we shal not neede to subuert the Prophets order inThe Pro∣phets order may be ob∣serued. this, seeing that according to the same, it may be true enough, that the Lord first edged his Vineyard, and made all things safe and sure about the very place thereof, before that he planted therein the choice Vine, as those husbandmen accustome to do, which before they till and sow their land, do first hedge and fence it strongly round about. 2. And this shal appeare plaine enough, f by this hedge we vnderstand either the Lawe of Moses (as some expound it) or the Diuine Protection, whereby the Lord gouerned, defended, and preserued the children of Israel, and of the which, they nioyed the benefit and commoditie long ere they came into the land of Chanaan:Reade Psal. 105 8. 13. 14. but then and there they felt the sweete sauour of the same most aboundantly, as that Vineyard which is enuironed and well fenced round about with a most mightie and substantiall hedge. And in this respect the Prophet obserueth such an order, as well became the Lords wise proceeding by his prouidēce in this mat∣ter,
whereof Christ spake summarily. 3. This Hedge is expounded some∣timesBy the hedge, is noted some∣time the Law: Munster. in Isa. 5. to signifie the Law giuen by Mo∣ses, by the which the people of Israel was kept in order within, and well de∣fended from the foes without; and with∣out the right vse whereof, they retey∣ned neither good order nor safetie, but confusion and ruine: howbeit, the Hedge here chiefely noteth the Diuine Prote∣ction, by the which (as by an hedge) theThe Diuine Protection. Lord both defended and preserued the children of Israel. Of this hedge spea∣keth the Psalmist, saying: Who so dwel∣lethPsal. 91. vnder the defence of the most highest, shall abide vnder the shadow of the Almigh∣tie. Againe, There shall none euill happenThe com∣moditie of this hedge. vnto them, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling: for he shall giue his An∣gels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee in all thy wayes. This hedge did the Lord pro∣mise to make about Ierusalem, when he sayd by the Prophet Zacharie, I my selfeZach. 2. 5. will be a wall, or hedge of fier round a∣bout her. And in this time, he repro∣ued the Deuourer for their sakes, ney∣therMala. 3 11. did he suffer him to destroy the
fruite of the ground, nor was their Vine barraine in the field, as sayd the Prophet Malachie. 4. This is that hedge, with the which the Lord did compasse Elisha round a∣bout, when to defend him from the rage of the Syrian souldiers, he sent horses2. King. 6. and chariots of fier, which enuironed the Citie of Dathan where Elisha was. And this hedge did the Lord God make round about Iob, and all that he had, soIob. 1. 9. strong, that the Diuell himselfe could not so much as touch him. Therefore he sayd, Doth Iob feare God for nought? hast thou not made an hedge about him, and a∣bout his house: and about all that he hath on euery side? thou hast blessed the worke of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. That is, hath not Iob good cause to serue God, seeing God pro∣tecteth him and his house and substance, and blesseth and prospereth him? but if the Lord would remoue from him this hedge, he should soone be as bare as euer Adam was, when he sought with fig leauesGen. 3. 7. to couer his nakednesse.
5. Indeed, whensoeuer this hedge is gap∣pedThe want of the hedge. Psal. 80. (in the Lords displeasure) there is then neither safetie nor prosperitie at all: for (as the Psalmist sayth) the wild Boare out of the wood, and the wild Beasts of the field do deuour them within: that is, the cruell Tyrants, and such as hate both the people of God, and the holy religion, are prest and ready to inuade and deuoure them. The Assyrians wanted this hedge, when2. King 17. 25. being in the cities of Samaria, they were destroyed of Lions, which the Lord sent among them, for that they feared not the Lord. And this hedge was gapped, before this, to the Israelites, when the Philistines entred into the Vineyard, and smote 30.1. Sam. 4. 10. 11. thousand footemen of Israel, and tooke away the Arke of God, with the which (as the wife of Phinez complained) the Glory of Israel was departed. 6. When the Psalmist on a time per∣ceiued this hedge to be gapped, through the which the wild Boare of the wood, and the wild Beasts of the field had en∣tred the Vineyard, he lamented, and complained vnto the Lord in the behalfe of the distressed people, and prayed also
to him in these words: Returne we beseech thee, ô God of hoasts: looke downe from hea∣uen,Psal. 80, 14. and behold and visite this Vine, and the Vineyard that thy right hand hath planted, and the yong Vine, that thou madest so strong for thy selfe. He desired, that the Lord would yet in mercy repaire againe this hedge vnto them, and defend them: andDeut. 11 11. 12. that (as Moses sayd) he would watch ouer them, to preserue and protect them from the beginning of the yeare, vnto the end thereof, as he had in times past. 7. This is that hedge, which Moses calleth the refuge and defence of Israel, the shield of their help, and the sword of their glorie. This did the Lord cause to go before all, to proceede with all, and to compasse, keepe and defend all. This be∣gan in our election, was stretched forth in our calling, florished in our redempti∣on, shined in our sanctification, and shall be perfected in our glorification, through the merit of the Sonne of God. This wasPsal. 105. 14. Exod. 14. Iosh. 3. 16. & 4. & 5. as a wall vnto the Israelites both on the right hand and on the left hand, when they came through the red Sea, when they passed ouer Iordan, when they mar∣ched
towards the land of Chanaan, whiles they prospered in the holy land, and glorifyed the Lord their God in their hearts. 8. And this is the Hedge, by the which the Lord (through his Sonne) blesseth, prospereth, and preserueth both vs and our houses, and all that we haue, whiles we truly serue him, maugre the surie of our foes. Therefore, let vs be thankfull vnto God, and reteine his Grace, to serue him with reuerence and feare, so shall this hedge be maintained for our continuall safetie, peace, and comfort. CHAP. V. The loue and mercie of God, expressed al∣so in this: that he gathered out the stones of the vineyard, verse 2. NExt to the enclosing, the Prophet telleth of a clensing, saying, thatThe clen∣sing of the Vineyard. his Beloued gathered out the stones. There be some which would confound this circumstance with that which goeth before, expounding this place to be a
alling, or placing of stones in order, as n a wall, for that the word Sákar, signi∣iethIn secundá coniugati∣one. to gather stones, to place stones, to edge with stones, or to make a wall with tones: and so much the sooner, because hat Christ in the Gospell speaketh of the edging and planting, but not of the clensing of the Vineyard. Howbeit, it s true, that neither Christ nor the Pro∣het meant that the Vine could wellMath. 21. 33 rosper and grow there where the stones ere not gathered out, and the ground leansed of bryars, thornes, and other oysome things. S. Luke making report f the same thing, as respecting ratherLuk. 20. 9. he drift and purpose of the Lord, then he exact repetition of circumstances, elleth neither of the place, nor of the edge, nor of the clensing, nor of ye tower, or of the wine-presse: but only sayth, A ertaine man planted a Vineyard, and let it rth to husbandmen. And yet is it certaine, hat the Vineyard was not only planted, ut had al things prouided both necessary nd conuenient in & about the same. Be∣des that, the word as it may be & is best xpounded, signifieth to clense from stones.
2. Therefore the best expositours haue and do consent in this, that the Prophet here meaneth a picking out of the stones from the Vineyard, and a cleansing of the soyle to make it capable of the plants; and profitable for the fruite. And in this;The maner of husband∣men. he alludeth to the manner of husband∣men, who before they cast in their seed or plant in their fields, do first clense and purge the same of brambles, bushes; thornes, stones, and whatsoeuer els which may hurt or hinder the growing of the seed, plants, and fruits thereof. 3. He gathered out the stones: A stonWhat is ment by a stone. in the Scripture is diuerslie taken, but i this place in the worst part, as we may ga∣ther by this, that the stones be gathere out of the Vineyard, as things vnprofi∣table and noysome to the Vines. ByThe Gen∣tiles. stones, are ment sometimes the Gentil and heathen people, and those (some say) Iohn the Baptist ment, when he sayd, G is able euen of these stones to rayse vp chil¦dren to Abraham, Math. 23. And here by the stones, are vnderstood those hard∣hearted Chanaanites, whom the Lord caThe Cana∣nites. out before the children of Israel, an
thereof the Psalmist singeth to the Lord, hou hast driuen out the heathen with thine nd, and thou hast destroyed them, Psal. 44.  Againe: Thou hast cast out the heathen, d planted it. Psal. 80. 8. That is, thou hast pelled the cursed Chanaanites, and anted thy people (euen the Israelites) their Land. 4. And these the Prophet callethWhy they be called stones. nes for the hardnesse of their hearts, e which would not be mollified with e word of God, to serue to any good e. And in this sense Christ calleth them nes, which hauing stonie hearts, when e seede of the word is cast among them,They that haue hard hearts, be as stones. fer not the same to take roote. So the rd by Ezechiel, calleth such kind of sons, stony hearts. Chapt. 11. 19. & 36.  That is, hearts which are obstinate,  will not bee mooued to repentance. ch stones the Lord gathered out of his neyard, that he might giue rest and speritie to the same. Such stones would e bene as pricks in the eyes, and whips the sides, and an intollerable burthen he Lords people, had he not expelled m, and caused the land to spew them
out, as things most vnworthie so good lād. Thus did he vnto them of his iustic for their stony hearts, and filthie abh¦minations: and thus did he for his Vin¦yard, of his free loue and mercie towar the same, without any desert. 5. Let vs learne to make vse of thi and such other examples, as Paul w wont to do to the Romanes and Cori¦thians,1. Cor. 10. Rom. 11. applying them vnto these daye to admonish vs, on whom the ends of thThe vse of this exam∣ple. world are come, how that God, wh the same now, that he was then, will al reiect vs, as he reiected them, if we b stones, that is, hard-harted, stiff-necke stubborne, and polluted with the lik abhominations and sinnes. And let  pray to the Lord in the name of  deare Sonne, to put that new Spir within vs, to tke away that stony hea out of our bodyes, and to giue vs  heart of flesh, that is, soft and tractable that we may be moued by the allurin pipe of his word, to walke in his way to keepe his iudgements, and be indeed his people, and that he will be & continu our good God, with whom we may liu
honour among those liuing stones of his ple, and not be gathered out and re∣ed frō his Vineyard, with those dead  sencelesse stones which are good for hing. Further, by these stones, may be vn∣stoodStones also signifie all sinnes and abhomina∣tions. all kind of errours, sinnes, and ominations, the which are no lesse some to the good vine, then those vn∣sitable stones which the husbandman h to gather vp and cast out from his l are hurtful to his seed. And these also Lord God gathered out frō his Vine∣: he banished away errours, he par∣ed their sinnes, he abandoned all kind hominations, and consecrated this le to himselfe, through the most llent Graces of his Spirit, where∣hey might be and continue wise, e, pure, and an holy people, as to m he might say (as to his innocent wsesse) Behold, thou art fayre (my e, my Sister, my Spowsesse) and with∣pot. Finally, by these stones are ment more erally all things whatsoeuer were of∣iue, noysome, or vnprofitable to the
Lords people, to the end he might (the things being remoued) furnish them w things good and profitable. Such a mat¦mindeth this Prophet, Chap 57. 14. wh prophesying of the returne of the peop from their captiuitie into their own la that none impedimēt might hinder th happie returne and way homeward, h saith: Cast vp, cast vp, prepare the way, t vp the stumbling blocks out of the way of  people. Againe, he saith: Cast vp, cast  the way, and gather out the stones: that  prepare your selues, and remoue away t lets that may hinder you. 8. So the Lord gathered out the sto from his Vineyard: that is, he reiected  Heathen in respect of his people, the c¦dren of Israel: he expelled and cast the stonie Canaanites: hee cleansed thThe Lord remoued all naughty and vnpro∣fitable things from his Vine∣yard. from all abhominations, and suffered those grosse sinnes of the Heathen  raigne among them: and hee remo from them all noysome impedime that the Vine being planted, might spr vp and prosper. And in this, is set fo the great regard and care that the Lo (in mercie) had of this people of Isra
And by this the godly (which are the ds true inheritance) do not onely ac∣wledge the Lords great loue and mer∣owards them: but also his desire to nse them from all errors, impediments hinderances, to their daily growing, spering, and beaing the fruites of ctification; and they gladly adde to  example, that commandement which ist gaue them for theyr good. If thy t hand hinder thee, cut it off and cast it  thee: which also alludeth to that d of God spoken to Moses, saying: Put hy shooes from thy feet, for the place wher∣hou standest, is holy ground. Exod. 3. 4. d the which Iohn the Baptist in his prea∣g, did warily obserue, Prepare, saith he way of the Lord, &c. For, neither OD and Mammon, nor Christ  Belial can agree: nor can such burrish es, agree with the pure Vines in the eyard of the Lord: therefore they be hered vp with those noysome toyes, d cast out.
CHAP. VI. The loue and mercie of God to the e declared in this, that hee plan his Vineyard with the choise V verse 2. AFter that the Prophet had spok of the place of the Vineyard,  the hedging about, and cle thereof, he also speaketh of the planThe plan∣ting of the Vineyard. as also of the kind of vine where wit was planted: and as without this, all  rest is nothing worth, so neither can  labour and cost be quited, except  plants be of a good kind. Therefore  Prophet sayth, He planted it with the  plant: The Hebrew word is Sorek. Vitis e∣lecta. Gen. 49. 11. Sorek▪ t is, the choise Grape. Of this kinde  Vine spake Iacob, when he blessed  sonne Iudah, saying: Hee shall bind  asse foale vnto the Vine, and his asses colt  to the best Vine: He shall wash his garm in Wine, and his cloake in the bloud  Grapes. And this kind was wont to gro
the valley of Palestina, where Samson ued Dalila, which valley was also na∣edIudg. 1. after the Vine, by the which the ountry was most commended. 2. Now, as the best things are set orth by the things of best price and stimation: so here, as by the Vineyard, e Prophet ment the people of Israel, hich the Lord chose and tooke from ong all other people: so also by the oise Vine, or the best Plant, he vn∣erstandethWhat is ment by the choice Vine. the best and choice persons  and among that people of Israel, es∣ecially of them of the house of Iudah,  Dauid (of whom is mention made in salm. 78. 71. and Salomon, and some ch others, whom the Lord God had osen, illuminated, and inspired with  principall spirit, and made zealous and le, some to rule and gouerne: some  teach and instruct the people: some  minister in the house of the Lord: nd euery one of them to serue God, and enefit the Common wealth in his▪ seue∣all calling, according to the law & word f God. And that this choice vine noteth specially them of Iudah, the Prophet
himselfe in his exposition of the Parab witnesseth it, saying: The man of Iudah his pleasant Plant. Ver. 7. 3. Of this Plant singeth the Psalmi and telleth vs from whence it was take and how it was planted after that t place was cleansed and prepared, sayi to the Lord: Thou hast brought a Vine From whence this Vine came. of Egypt, thou hast cast out the Heathen a planted it. That is, thou hast brought th chosen people out of Egypt, and hast  out the stonie hearted Chanaanites, an planted that people in the land, wher they dwelled: Psal. 80. 8. And of this h speaketh yet plainer. Thou hast driuen  the Heathen with thine hand, and plan them, thou hast destroyed the people of t land, and caused them to grow: that is, tho hast gathered out the stones, euen the so¦nie Chanaanites, with thy mightie pow and destroyed them, as things noyso and vnprofitable: and thou hast plant thy choise Vine, euen thine elected peo∣ple, and caused them to prosper in tha good land. 4. Some would, that by this Vine wThis Vine sometimes noteth Christ. should vnderstand our Lord Iesus Christ▪
whom the father promised to Abraham, and ratified to his seede, beeing borne in he Tribe of Iudah: and the rather would hey it should signifie Christ, for that the Prophet speaketh in the singular number oth in the Parable and in the exposition of the Parable. He saith not Vines or Plants: but a Ʋine, or a Plant Sorec. And ee saith, not the men of Iudah are his Plants: but, his pleasant Plant, is Ish∣ehudah: the man of Iudah. And to this, may also that of the Psalmist bee applied, which in the Gospell is performed by Christ, who was called out of Egypt afterMat. 2. 15. he death of Herod, alluding to an other Prophesie which said, Out of Egypt haueHos. 11 1.  called my Sonne. And indeed, albeit this singular kind of speech may well be refer∣ed to that singular kind of Vine, or cho∣en Grape, and signifie that peculiar peo∣le, whom the Lord God chose from and boue all other Nations of the earth: yet will I not denie, but that the Prophet in his, may poynt vnto him, who said vnto is Disciples, I am the Vine: ye are the Branches: that is, vnto Iesus Christ theIoh 15. 4. rue head of the holy Church, in whom
(doubtlesse) that was truly verified an accomplished, which was prefigured by the deliuerance of the Israelites out o Egypt, and by planting of the choise an holy people of God in the pleasant lan of Chanaan. And in this, the loue & mer¦cieChrist was borne in the Tribe of Iudah. of God appeared most bountifully vn¦to this people: that he vouchsafed the his owne sonne, according to the Pro¦phesie, which saith: When Israel was  child, then I loued him, and called my so out of Egypt. And this Plant is to all othe preferred, without comparison, as the onely true Vine in whom the Lord is w pleased, and the same in whom the true beleeuers doo prosper and beare fruit Ioh. 15. 4. 5. Others also by this choise Vine, haueThe church. The holy religion. vnderstood the Church and holy religi∣on, the which the Lord placed and plan∣ted in and among that people, where also he was of long time best erued and hono∣red. Howbeit, the best learned of our age haue expounded it simplie of the holy & zealous men of Iudah, (as I said before) and so they haue translated the place as wee haue accepted it: He planted it with
he best Plants: The men of Iudah are his leasant Plants. And indeede, these being by his goo Grace framed and made like▪ vnto the Image of Christ the true Vine, whom they immitate as the right branches of the same, in tenne things: as first in the Roote. 2. in the Stem. 3. in the Barke. 4. in the Branches. 5. in the Leaues. 6. in the Flowers. 7. in the Sap. 8. in the Fruite. 9. in the congruitie of the Grapes. 10. in the vse of the Wine, that is to say: 6. First, as the Roote of the Vine1 The Roote. then best prospereth and beareth when t is planted in that conuenient hill or oyle which is set against the heare of the Sun, hath a pure ayre and sweet humor: so doth the soule and mind of the godly man the best prosper, whē it resteth in the loue of God, in the iustice of Christ, and in the sweete operation of the holy Ghost. 2. As the Stē of the Vine among all other trees,2 The Stem. exceedeth in growing from degree to de∣gree: so the godly man encreaseth daily in godlines far beyond al others, proceeding frō one vertue to another, as of the which spake Salomon: Many daughters there be which gather riches togither: but thou goest beyond them all. Pro. 31. 29.
3. As the Barke or rinde of the Vine ap∣peareth3. The Barke or Rinde. withered and drie, notwithstan∣ding it hath plentie of sap within it, chief∣ly in the winter: euē so, howsoeuer the god¦ly mā appeare vnder the crosse of afflicti∣on, yet is he replenished with the sweete liquor of life: for the Kings daughter isPsal 45. Canti. . glorious within, though she seeme blacke and deformed without. 4 Fourthly, as the branches of the Vine be naturally flexible and hang downe∣ward,4. The Bran∣ches. especially in the time of bearing of fruite, as offering both her selfe and her fruites to them that will vouchsafe to take thereof: so the godly man is both hum∣ble and liberal, willing to submit himselfe to others, and to giue to others, of that which he hath. 5. As the leaues of the Vine do both cleanse & heale the woūds5. The Leaues. and soares of them that take and applie them: so the words of a godly man being (as it were) wholsome and seasoned with the salt of the heauenly wisdome, do both purge and heale all the wounds & enormi∣ties of sinfull cōsciences, as it is said; he sent his word and healed them. 6. As the flowers6. Psal. The flow∣ers. of the Vine do by their wholsome smell
and sent expell euery venomous thing, rom the which therefore the Serpents nd venomous wormes do flie in the time f their blowing: euen so the good life nd manners of the godly man, expelleth wicked imaginations from the hearts, and ndgodlinesse from the hands of many of hem that behold them. 7. As the liquor or sap of the Vine be∣ng cut in the spring time, droppeth forth7. The liquo or sap. much like those teares that drop from the yes of him mourneth: so the godly man ho is afflicted, is often prouoked to weepe, sometimes for himselfe, sometimes or others, sometimes for that the glory of God is prophaned among men. 8. As the8. The fruite. ruite of the Vine is sweete in it selfe, plea∣ant to him that vseth it, and profitable to he Vinitor: so the vertues of the godly an are in himselfe comfortable, to his orethren delightsome, and profitable to he glory of God. 9. As the Grapes9. The Grapes mixt togi∣ther. do well concord one with an other, and make as of many but one Wine: so not onely the godly doo concord in the Vine Christ, but also all their good workes doo in a most sweete harmonie
and communion consent one with ano∣ther, to the prayse of God, and comfort of men. 10. Lastly▪ as the wine both comforteth10 The wine comforting and enfla∣ming. and enflameth them that vse it: so the spirituall vertues of the godly, do both comfort them that thereof take vse, and enflame them with a feruencie of holy: zeale; especially then, when it pleaseth God to make the examples of those holy men, applicable to them that either be∣hold or heare thereof, through the ver∣tue of his spirit. And herein also appe∣reth that godly enuie, where many men beholding the forwardnesse of others, do stiue to excell them, and to run before them towards the goale of eternall life. 11. As all those Christian and godly vertues are found and be indeed actually and really resting and raigning in the bo∣die of Christ without measure: so also are they by participation and application; found in the godly in a measure, whom the Lord hath and doth conforme to the image of his Sonne, and who indeed (as the members of Christ) do indeuour to follow the Lambe their head, whithei so∣euer
he goeth. Such a Vine did the Lord God plant in his Vineyard: & such seeds weth he in the Church, that so good an iginall and begtning might happily ue the semblable proceeding and suc∣sse. Neither that any fault might be foūd  him touching his discretion and choise the Plants, howsoeuer the Vineyard ould proue in the end, he made a chiefe d speciall choise of the best Vine. 12. Thus the Lord in the Gospell tel∣h,Frō whence the euill fruite commeth. how that the good man sowed good seed is field: and therfore when the tares ap∣red to spring vp with the seed, and the estion was asked from whence those tares e? hee, to cleare himselfe of all fault, d: I did (for my part) sowe good seede:  those tares are cast in by the enuious man, les men slept, to hurt and hinder the peritie of my seede. And indeede, in  there be so many vngodly Miscre∣ in the Church, and so many horrible ominations and greeuous sinnes in  world, it is not long of GOD good housholder: for hee hath not nted any such Plants in the Church,  sowen such tares in the worlde:
but the Enuious man, that is, the Diue who hath in himselfe nothing but wi¦kednesse, it is he, that hath done this; h hath conceiued mischiefe, and brough forth vngodlinesse: he hath planted th wilde grape, he hath cast in the tares a∣mong the wheate in the field: he trou∣bleth the Church with wicked & vngod∣ly persons; he pestreth the world wi noysome and filthie abhominations, er∣rours and sinnes. 13. But the Lord God, who is  good and gratious to his Vineyard, ha therein planted the choice Vine, and sowe the good seede: that is, godly and zealo persons, the true and right Religion,  godly and heauenly Graces, and spiritu good vertues, the which kind of plan and like seede, cannot but fructifie a bring forth vnto him the like fruites and if the fruites which appeare be no this kind, esteeme them not to be th right fruits of this plant, or of this seed for men do not of thistles gather figs, n of thornes grapes. Thus as the tree well knowen by the fruites, so are me by their deedes; for the good man fro
the good treasure of his heart, bringeth orth that which is good: and the euill an from the euill treasure of his heart, rngeth forth that which is euill. CHAP. VII. The loue and mercy of God, expressed in this, that he built a Tower, or great thing in the middes of the Vineyard, verse 2. AS the Lord was most diligent and carefull to enclose, cleanse, & plant his Vineyard, so also he spared no st to beawtifie, to fortifie, to gard and rnish the same. For now the ProphetThe buil∣ding of the Tower. yth, that he builded Migdal bethocho. Migdal bethocho, at is, a great or high thing in the middes ereof. This word is translated into reeke Pyrgos, which we call a Tower.  he Prophet meaneth, that the Lord ade some mightie monument, or great orke in the middes or chiefe place of e Vineyard, and would, that by the ilding thereof, we should note his loue
and affection to the place.  2. by the gr¦nesse of the worke▪ his cost, expenc care and regard.  3. by the placing ther of, his exquisite wisedome and prosp¦tion. 2. For men do commonly build ho¦sesWhere mē build, they delight in the place. in those places whereof they haue  pleasure and delight. And this had  Lord to this place, where he had set  name, as the Psalmist sayth, and wherePsal. 78. 69. he would that his owne sonne should horne. Of this Vineyard, he sayd by  Prophet Hoseah: When Israel was a chilHos. 11. 1. then I loued him. And of the same he say by Ieremy: I haue loued thee with an euIere 31. 3 4. lasting loue, therefore with mercie I ha drawen thee. And thu singeth the P¦mist thereof, The Lord hath chosen Psal 132. 14. 15. to be an habitation for himselfe: he h longed for her, who sayth: This shall  rest for euer, here will I dwell: for I hau delight therein. Therefore to make  he saith: I will build thee, and thou shall  builded, ô virgine Israel. Againe, I with Ieremy. 44. you, and not destroy you. 3. And as in building there is bestow3 The buil∣ding of a A Tower requireth both cost and labour. cost & labour: so the building of a Tow
requireth an vnmeasurable charge & la∣our: but the Lord buildeth a Tower: allu∣ng to the manner of those builders, hich being very rich and wealthy, spare ither cost nor labour to build and set  that which shal be most pleasing vnto eir harts in the places wherin they haue delight to dwell. Thus, when Dauid ouided for the building of the Temple,  heaped vp a wonderfull treasure and re of all things belonging to the same. nd thus, to take away all occasions of estioning, how this great matter should  accomplished; the Prophet doth not ly tell vs, that all the Earth is the Lords h the plenty thereof: but also sayth, t the zeale of the Lord shall bring to e that which he hath deuised, neither ll the greatnesse of the cost, nor the measurablenesse of the labour, hinder  ppose therein. He buildeth not this Tower in a ner or by-place of the vineyard, but in4 The place of the To∣wer.  middes thereof: alluding to them t build their houses in the middes, or he most conuenient places of their in∣itances. Thus the Lord as most wise
and prouident, hath disposed all his worHow God hath dispo∣sed his works. Gen. 1. 31. in the best order (as we see in the mighti works of the Creation he hath done) an hath ordred all things to be most fit an conuenient for the prosperitie and goo of his Saints. And thus hath he done fo vs: therefore let vs also yeeld our selueWhat we must do. fit for the Lords building, and edifie on another: let vs bee thankfull vnto h Grace, for such his great cost and care be  stowed in and for vs; neither let vs m¦mure to bestow of that the Lord hat giuen vs, towards the aduancement of hi glory, and the comfort of our brethren  moreouer, let vs (after his holy example  vse and employ the wisdome, reason a iudgement which he hath adorned  selues with, to the right ordring of all o actions and affaires. 5. It hath pleased some to conclud this great edifice or building in nter¦plation: but it liketh me better, that by th same we vnderstand either the great m¦tropolitan citie of the Iewes, namely Ier¦salem, or rather the Temple which Sal¦mon builded therein, not only by the co¦mandement of Dauid his father, but al
by the will, power, and authoritie of e Lord: and therefore was chiefely at∣buted to the Lord himselfe, as the salmist saith, He chose the tribe of Iu∣h, euen the hill of Zion which he loued, d there he builded his Temple on high, and id the foundation of it like the ground which  hath made continuall. Psal. 78. 70. And of rusalem he saith againe: Hierusalem is ilded as a City that is wel compact together  it self, whereunto the tribes, euen the tribes  the Lord, go vp to testifie to Israel, to praise e name of the Lord, Psal. 122. 1. 6. Neither may the place be amisseThe good policie or gouernmēt of the Israe∣lites. ansferred to the good gouernment and ell ordred common-wealth of Israel, to d for the which the Lord raised vp, in, d among them, sometimes most wise & liant Captaines, as Moses and Iosuah; metime prudent and vpright Iudges, as arach, Gedeon, Samuel: sometimes most oble and famous Kings (especially in Iu∣ah) as Dauid, Salomon, Iehosophat, Hze∣ah, Iosiah, and such others, which are also gnified by this Edifice or Tower. And f these speaketh Dauid, when he singeth us: Peace be within thy walles or Towers,
and prosperitie within thy palaces. 7. By this Tower may likewise be vn∣derstoodThe great works of God. the great and wonderfull worke of God, wrought and declared openly, and in the middes of this people, of the which the bookes of Moses, of Iosuah, of th Iudges, of Samuel, of the Kings, of theReade Psal. 105 27. and Pal 40. verse . Chronicles, and of the Prophets, do a large testifie, whereof also the sweet Psalmist of Israel hath in many places spoken at large. Neither was there eue any nation vnder the heauens, to whom God came so neare, as he came vnto theDeut. 4. 7. 8. 33 3. and 10. 21. Israelites in all that they called vnto hi for: nor was there any nation so grea that had ordinances and lawes so righ∣teous: nor was there euer any people that heard the voyce of God speaking out of the middes of a fier: nor hath the Lord assayed to go and take him a nation from among nations, by so many tentati∣ons, and signes, and wonders, and warre and a mightie hand, and a stretched o arme, and by great feare, as Moses plainly told them. 8. Finally, this great worke or To∣wer, doth not vnaptly signifie that my∣sterie
of Godlinesse, whereof S. PauleThe myste∣rie of godli∣nesse. ake, saying: Gneat is the mysterie of odlinesse: for God was made manifest in1. Tim. 3. 16. e flesh, was iustified in the Spirit, was ene among the Angels, was preached  the Gentiles, was beleeued on in the orld, and was receiued vp into Glory. This  that new and strange thing, whereof oth Ieremy, and Isayah, yea and Daniel,Isa 7. 14. and 19. 5. Iere. 31. 2. d other Prophets, haue so plainely oken and prophesied. A worke sur∣assing all other in greatnesse: a won∣er, farre beyond all other wonders to e maruailed at. The building of this difice is of more value, cost, and care, en the building of Heuah of the ribGen. 2. 22. f Adam. 9. And this is applyed accordingThe vses of a Tower.  the sundrie vses of a Tower, which e among some others, these foure: at is to say:  First, the Tower is buil∣ed for a beawtie to the place;  Se∣ondly, for a meete prospect and watch nto the extreme borders, or as a gard  the same:  Thirdly, for a defence nd preseruatiue for them that bee ithin it:  Fourthly, for a terrour
and destruction to them that be withou it. And so (indeede) euery of these grea edifices before mentioned (as they are, and may be wisely considered) did bewti∣sie and adorne this people with high glo∣rie: did yeeld them a right watchfull re∣gard and prospect vnto euery part and member of their Common-wealth: did strongly arme, defend and preserue them that dwelled vnder the shadowe thereof, and astonished and vanquished their foes on euerie side. 10. Thus hath the Prophet declared,The happy state of thē which haue the presēce of God. not onely what cost and charge the Lor bestowed on the people of Israel, to ex∣presse his loue & affection towards them but also how prosperous and happie wa the state and condition of that people, so long as the Lord was present among thē with his loue, grace, mercie and blessings. And (indeed) this was their glorie, in the middest of them (as the Lord said by the Prophet Zacharie:) this was their wise∣dome,Zach. 2. 5. this was their defence, and this was their victorie and triumph ouer their ene∣mies.
CHAP. VIII. he loue and mercie of God to his people signified by this, that hee made a VVine-presse in the Vineyard. vers. 2. WEe haue heard of the hedging, cleansing, and planting of the Vineyard, as also of a Tower uilded in the middest of the same. Vn∣o this (the Lord continuing his care, ost and regard, willing to omit nothing)The Wine∣presse.  added a Wine-presse. The Pro∣het saith, he digged therein a Lake, or a essell, or a Tun: The Greeks call it Lenor: hat is, a Vessell, in the which the liquor f Grapes, or the new Wine, is woont to e pressed out. But because the word is iuersly taken, it hath pleased the Latine nterpretors, to translate it Torcular, the which we call in English, a Wine-presse, a hing incident to the Vineyard. For by his, the Grapes are pressed, and the Wine aken out to the right vse. And this was a
token of the conceiued hope of the fer¦tilitie of this Vineyard, in and about the which, ther was bestowed & imploied such care, diligence & vnmeasurable expences▪ 2. But for as much as the Prophet spea∣keth in a parable or dark saying, which nee∣deth an explication, we may not omit to search out the true meaning of the Pro∣phet, & sense of his words, least that whiles we speak with the tongue, we obserue not Pauls rule, to speake to edification. By a Wine-presse in the Scriptures, is signifiedThe prea∣ching of the law, and doctrine of the Crosse. sometime the preaching of the Lawe, and the Doctrine of the Crosse, the which by the power of the spirit of God doth won∣derfully breake downe the pride of mans heart, the courage of the cruell oppressors of the Saints, shaketh euerie strong holde which is raised vp against the Lords an∣noynted, and striketh into their hearts a terror of the diuine iudgements, their owne consciences beeing guiltie, accusing them of sinne. Because the children of Is∣rael, whom the Lord brought out of E∣gypt, were by nature stiffe-necked & hard∣hearted, neither would be restrained and nourtred by that law which the Lord had
written with his finger in the harts of mē, e at length gaue them a law written, the which also, he caused Moses to proclaimeExo. 20. nd publish openly, to be both heard and nowne vnto all. This law did the Pro∣het expound vnto the people, and om thence did denounce the iudgemēts f God vpon them that transgressed the he same. 3. Saint Iohn t ptist, before he prea∣hedThe prea∣ching of Iohn Bap∣tist. Christ Iesus, & made the people ac∣uainted with the sweetest solaces of the Gospel of Christ, prepared their harts with aw, and the doctrine of the Crosse, say∣ng: Repent ye: for now is the Axe laide toMat. 5. & . & 21. he roote of the tree: so that euery tree which eareth not good fruite, shall be he wen downe nd cast into the fire. Christ himselfe cal∣eth into memorie this lawe, denouncing udgements and wo on the rebellious peo∣ple, and to bannish out of the hearts of his Disciples, that vaine dreame touching the pleasures of a worldly kingdome and car∣all libertie: he saith plainly, He that will he my Disciple, must take vp his crosse & fol∣low me. Saint Peter, when hee would bruse the hard hearts of the Iewes, who
had crucified the Lord Christ, & so presse out thereof the liquor of contrition, the teares of sorrowfull eyes, and the water of a bruised heart and greeued spirit ac∣ceptable to the Lord, put the Winepresse in vre: he hauing accused them, as guil∣tie of sinne: preached vnto the IewesAct. 2. 38. & 3. in these words: Repent ye: or amend your liues. Againe. Repent and turne ye, that your sinnes may be blotted out. In thisGood Grapes. Wine-presse, were bruised Adam and He∣rah, Dauid and Salomon, Peter, Magdalen, Paul, and other the seruants of God, who vpon the Preaching of the Law and Doctrine of the Crosse of Christ, haue (as the right Vine) yeelded vnto the Lord the sweete liquor of godlinesse, when some others beeing obstinate and hard-hearted, beeing brought vnto the Wine-presse and bruised (like vnto the naughtie Vine) haue yeelded him theNaughtie Grapes. vnpleasant liquor, and vnsauerie sap of wickednesse and sinne; as Pharao, King Saule, Herod, Iulian, Nero, Iudas, Demas, Simon Magus, and such o∣thers. 4. Sometimes the Wine-presse, sig∣nifiethPassiōs and afflictions.
all passions and afflictions, the hich it hath pleased the the Lord to y on his people for their sinnes: as ee reade in the Bookes of the Iudges nd Kings of Israel, how oftentimes e Lord afflicted, not onely priuate and ngular persons: but also great perso∣ages, and whole countries for their ab∣ominations and sinnes, as it was requi∣e for him so to do, and yet in mercie, as erein expressing the nature of a louing ther, to his disobedient child. BeyondThe passion of Christ.  others, those passions and crosses, which  pleased God to lay vppon his owne onne Iesus for our sinnes, are by this Vine-presse, excellently depainted and set orth. This is the same Vine, whom the ather sent foorth from his bosome and lanted in his Vineyard: this is that lambIsa. 53. The right Wine. Iudg. 9. aine from the beginning, whose bloud ssuing forth from the Wine-presse of his rosse, hath pleased God, and comforted nen. And thus he saith: I haue troden theIsa. 63. 3. Wine-presse alone: albeit, this was some∣imes spoken against the Idumeans and nemies which persecuted the Church, nd which the Lord himselfe would de∣stroy,
and therefore he is set forth there as a victorious King or Captaiue, all blou∣die and redde, after the great slaughter of his enemies: yet do the holy fathers vn∣derstand the place of the Crosse and passion of Christ, by the which hee, powring out of his bloud, did ouer come the diuell. Now, as he would, that all they which followe him should take vp their Crosse and do the same: so would he, that wee should not refuse to tread this Wine-presse with him, as Peter, Paul, Iames, Iohn, Stephē, Polycarpus, & other his faithfull Apostles Martirs and Ministers haue in their pla∣ces done, and so yeeld forth the precious liquour of the Vine.The Mini∣sterie of the word and discipline. 5. Sometimes the Wine-presse noteth the externall ministerie of the word of God, the exercise of the Lawe of God, and that godly discipline, by and in the vse whereof the sweete iuyce of righ∣teousnesse and holinesse is wroong out and applied to the glory of God, and the edifying of the Church. And surely this thing is as needfull in the Church at all time and times, as is the hand of
a man vnto his bodie, by the which that ode is taken and applied whereof the ody liueth: and as needfull, as is the ine-presse to the Vinitor. And Vine to esse out and bring to right vse the liquor  the Grapes. And this surely was erformed (as the Lord would haue it) y the meanes of those godly Kings, rinces, Iudges, Captaines, Magi∣ates, Prophets, Priestes, and Mini∣ers, which the Lord raised vp and pla∣d ouer, in, & among the people of Israel  time to time as the Histories and testi∣onies of holy scriptures do truly testifie.The ful∣nesse of all things 6. Sometimes by this Winepresse is no∣d the fulnesse, aboundance and plentie  all good things. And indeed they were nderfully enriched, prospered and bles∣d, far beyond all other Nations (as the riptures report.) In thi sense, vnder this nerall word are collected and drawen gither (as it were) not onely all those nefites and blessings before particular∣ named and considered: but also  others whatsoeuer (if any more can  thought on) which the Lord had be∣wed on them.
By the which he would that this peop should be fully perswaded of his gre loue towards them, for whom he was  willing to do whatsoeuer was meete,  requisite to be done, to their sacietie a happinesse. 8. Lo, all these things hath the Lo done and bestowed on his Vineyar that is, on his people Now let vs hea and consider what he expecteth of the in lieu of those his blessings: and there note (as we may compare our con and blessings with theirs) what he no requireth of vs, whom he hath in his lo enriched & adorned with so many nob benefites, and diuine graces. CHAP. IX. 2. The Lords expectation of fruits, v verse 2. Then he looked that it should bring foorth Grapes. WE haue heard before of t great care, cost, and diligence
the husbandman, wherin the Lords great oue and mercie to his people is set forth. Now wee are come to his hope and ex∣ectation. Hee expested (saith the Pro∣het) that the Ʋineyard should bring orth Grapes: Yanabim (the word no∣th) Grapes in the Vines, or the clusters of rapes. This word is vsed by Pharaos utler, who said to Ioseph, The clustersGen. 40. 11.  Grapes waxed ripe, and I tooke the apes and wroong them into Pharaos ppe. And of such Grapes speakethIerem. emy: Grapes on the Ʋine, Figges  the Figge-tree: that is, clusters of rapes. 2. By this, the Prophet would teachThe end of our calling, deliuerie, and bles∣sings, e Iewes, and not onely them, but  also, and all others n the posteritie, t the Lord hath not loued them, d stored them with is benefites, to  ende, that they should onely with  barren Figge-tree, muster with greene ues, and make shew of fruite when it h none: or bring foorth vnwholsome ites and naught: but that they should ld him fruite correspondent to his e, mercie and good nature: and this he
looketh for, as that King, who hauin both pardoned and aduanced the guilti person, would that euer afterward he should be therefore thankfull and obedi∣ent: and as that husbandman, who ha∣uing bestowed cost, care, diligence and la∣bour on his field, would that it shoul yeeld him the encrease and fruites  his trauells: else, the Lord will notone¦lyIsa. 1. complaine, I haue exalted childre and they haue rebelled against mee, an bee most vnthankfull: but also wi giue ouer those rebelles and vnthank¦full children to the spoile and vtter de¦struction. 3. Vnto this part alludeth the LoMat. 21. in the Gospell, where hee saith: M 21. 34. And when the time of the fruite dre neare, hee sent his seruants to the H bandmen to receiue the fruites of  Ʋineyard. And therein hee sheweWhat he expecteth. first, what the Lord expecteth of the on whom hee hath bestowed his ben¦fites: secondly, at what time hee ¦quirethWhen. By whom. it: and thirdly, by whom first, that which hee expecteth is  fruite of his labour on them bestow
secondly, hee required it at the time  fruite, or in the due time: third∣, by the Ministerie of his Ser∣ts. 4. Indeede the Lord expecteth of4. What the Lord ex∣pecteth.  people the fruites of his trauells (as ken after the manner of men) that is, d fruites, such as in nature, quali∣ and quantitie, may be something verable to his loue and manifolde sings. adde, in quantitie, not, in that  is able to yeelde a full measure, o recompence the Lord for that hee  receiued of him: neither dooeth  Lord expect or require it: know∣ how vnable man is to extend it:  how vnprofitable hee is, when  hath done all that hee can, or ld doo: but, in this sense,  of him to whome much is giuen;  shall bee required; that how great  blessings are before others, by so h the more shoulde wee exceede rs in good fruites and thankful∣e. And this in effect the Lord teacheth,
saying vnto them that followed hi Herein is my father glorified, that ye gro and bring foorth much fruite, and bec my Disciples. Againe, euery brau that beareth not fruite in mee shall  cutte off, and cast into the fyre.  15. 2. 5. This was the preaching of Iohn The prea∣ching of Iohn the Baptist. Baptist to the Iewes: bring ye forth the f worthy amendment of life, and thinke no say with your selues, we haue Abraham  our father. As if he said: it is a vaine thi for you to brag of Abraham, and w God hath done for him: and how ma benefites he hath bestowed on his c¦dren, if waxing proud thereof,  care not to immitate Abraham,  yeelding to the Lord such fruites  Abraham yeelded. So saide Chri if yee were Abrahams children,  would doo the deedes of A¦ham. 6. All the preachings, admonitions, e¦hortations,The end of the Mini∣sterie of the word. threatnings, and lessons of  holy scriptures, tend to this, that m might be perswaded to beleeue in G and to bring forth the fruits of godlines
e thankfull to God, who as he hath ted, preserued and blessed them, ht also saue them, and glorifie them is euerlasting Kingdome, through  merittes of his onely sonne, Iesus ist. Luk. 1. . The Lord also obserueth the time:The time when the fruites are required. ee sent not for the fruites vntill the e time. Thus indeed it pleaseth the  to waite and expect our amend∣t & conuersion, vntill the opportune : but then, hee would not willingly efrauded.  And this is not onely refer∣o the whole time of our growing and ring here in this world: but also to   opportune time of his offered es. For euery thing vnder theEccles. 3. 1. Gal. 6. Eccles. 21. 1. Hebr. ens hath a time allotted. There∣ the Apostle exhorteth: Whiles ye  time, do good to all men: obserue the : exhort one another whiles it is  to day: and Christ biddeth vs to ke whiles it is day. That is, to accept  grace of God, and in the time of his cies to yeeld him the fruites of thank∣nesse. As then was the time for the IewesThe time of the Iewes.
to yeelde good fruites, ripe fruit when the Lord yet continued his lo to them, and graunted them the v of his word, godly Princes, a pro¦perous peace. And this is our tim hauing and enioying the like. The ti is present: let vs not bee vnfruitfull Our time. vngratefull: but let vs yeeld timely fruit to the Lord. 8. Finally, the Lord hath certai3. By whom the Lord re∣quireth the fruits of the Iewes. seruants sent foorth to require this fruit as Christ said, hee sent his seruants and who bee they? The Prophets a fathers of the olde Testament, we those whose Ministerie the Lord vse to require this fruite, and to call t people of Ephraim and Iuda to an a¦count. Such he chose, called and named hi wise and faithfull seruants: yea, after this hee sent his owne sonne in the flesh vnt them, with this hope, that they would no onely reuerence him, but yeelde hiBy whom he doth now re∣quire the fruits of vs. the fruites of the Vineyard: And now h ceaseth not (as yet) to send vnto vs h faithfull Princes, wise Magistrates, pain¦full Preachers, and godly Ministers, t
require and do the like. Howsoeuer the ewes baue bene and declared themselues people most vngratefull, let vs (as those ncient thankfull men) bee willing to ouble benefits on vs bestowed (if it were ossible) rather then to be noted vnthank∣ll, especially to our most gracious and ercifull God. Let vs answer his expecta∣on in yeelding him at this opportune me, some good fruites. CHAP. X. Vhat fruites they are, which the Lord requireth: viz. Iudgēment and Iustice. THe Prophet Isayah in the 7. verse of the 5. Chapter (expounding the Pa∣rable he had proposed) telleth what hose fruites are which the Lord God loo∣ed for and required to be yeelded to him f his Vineyard in the due time, say∣ng: he looked for Iudgement, and forIudgement, Iustice. Mischpat. Zadarah. ustice: the which two words are ften times combined and ioyned togi∣her, and diuersly taken, according to the
diuers formes, parts, and actions, to th which they be placed, vsed and applie Sometimes they be referred to the dutiThe dutie of the Magi∣strates. of the Magistrates onely: sometime to them, and to the duties of all other also; signifying in the one, the ordi¦dinarie function, and publike admi∣nistration; and the ordinarie and law∣full knowledge and discerning of caus according to certaine prescript lawes, whereby the Innocents are defended▪ the guiltie are punished, and iustice iThe dutie of subiects and of Chri∣stians one towards an other. administred to euerie person. In the other, that ciuill obedience and eter∣nall right which men owe and are bound by the law, to yeeld one to an othero them. 2. Againe, as they be applied to thThe Magi∣stracie. magistrate and his office, two things  considered; namely to condemne and pu∣nish the malefactors, & that is Iudgement and to absolue the Innocents, and to de∣fend them from the iniurie of the wicked and this is Iustice: as Chap. 1. vers. 17. SoDauid. it is reported of Dauid the chiefe Magi∣strate in Israel, hee did Iudgement an Iustice to all the people. 2. Samuel. 8.
And this did Salomon execute in thatSalomon. emorable example of the two harlots at pleaded before him for the liuing ild. He shewed Iustice, when he gaue e child to his owne mother: he gaue dgement, whē he condemned the other hich had falsely accused the iust and in∣cent. So also Iehu did yeeld IudgementIehu. killing the Prophets of Baal, & Iustice preseruing the Prophets of the Lord. nd thus the holy Ghost commandeth to iustifie iust matters, and to con∣mne wicked matters, the which who doeth, shall be said to yeeld Iudgement d Iustice: and the which two things, the ord doth expect and require of all them at be put in authoritie, as Iere. 22. 3. 3. As the words are referred to the3 The people and their duty. ople, and their dutie, they comprehend the works and things which the Lord th commanded and required of man, pecially those which are conteined in e second Table of the Lawe, by the hich they should declare and confirme eir Religion before men, as Christ com∣anded:Math. 5. So let your light shine before men, hat they may see your good works. These
indeed are the fruites of the feare of GodFruites of the feare of God. and the signes of holy Religion, the which, whosoeuer bringeth not forth (howsoeuer he be entitled either in the Church, or in the Common-wealth) he i either as that barrain fig tree without figs and as that Vine without grapes: or th bitter roote that bringeth foorth bitter fruite, and that euill man, that from the euill treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is euill. 4. And these two words may in this1. The mind and con∣science. 2. The word and action. part be aptly referred, the one to the mind and conscience: the other to the word & action: in the which, the one is as the tree, the other as the frute, expressing the kind of the tree. And this cannot but draw mē to a more neere examination of them∣selues. Euery one is ready to say, that he loueth God, and that he beleeueth well: but this is certaine, that he only loueth God, and hath faith, that loueth his neigh∣bour, his brother, and hath an earnest de∣sire to do those works, and to performe those duties which the Lord hath enioy∣ned him in his lawe. And we cannot say, that that man hath a liuely and sound
faith, and is a right worshipper of GodFaith and workes. according to those commandements conteined in the first Table) who ex∣presseth not the same by a good worke, by an holy life: for faith which worketh ot, is a dead faith; but by the worke, oth the life and the qualitie of the faith  manifest. Therefore sayth S. Iames, Shew me thy faith by thy workes. 5. For as men do commonly gather uch kind of fruite, as either their trees or heir seeds do naturally yeeld (as not figsSuch as the tree is, such are the fruites. f thistles, or grapes of thornes: but figs f the fig trees, and grapes of the vines:) o there springeth frō a good faith and the eare of God, not impuritie, not sinne, out holinesse & righteousnesse, which are he end of our redemption, as Zacharie ngeth, Being deliuered from the hand of ur enemies, to this end, that we should serue God in holinesse and righteousnesse, before him, all the dayes of our life, without feare. And this conteineth loue, mercie, gentle∣nesse, peace, meekenesse, humilitie, long∣suffring, and an obedient heart and ende∣uour to obserue and keepe the lawe of God in all things. In and for the which,
Christ himselfe hath sayd, that he will commend them that shall stand at hisMath. 25. right hand at the last Iudgement, as the notes and arguments of their faith and feare of God. And that the Prophet had this meaning, we may gather by this also, that he opposeth against Iudgement, Op∣pression: and against Iustice, a Crying: as in that which followeth is more plainly de∣clared. 6. The Prophet in this alludeth (as it seemeth) vnto that place in Gen. 18. 9. where God commending righteous A∣braham, sayd, that he knew that AbrahamTo do iudg∣ment and iustice, is to keepe the way of the Lord. would commaund his children, and his hous∣hold after him, that they keepe the way of the Lord: he addeth, to do Iustice and Iudge∣ment: to the obseruation of the which way, (as to that which the Lord prescri∣bed them to do, and whereof he will call accompt) the Prophet calleth and allu∣reth them. Lo, there is the fruite of faith and holy religion, expounded to be a walking in the way of the Lord: that is, a keeping of the Law of God. 7. This was commanded to the Iewes vnder these two words, Iustice, and Iudge∣ment.
And this Micheah testified that the Lord required of the people, to do iustlie, to loue mercie, humble thy selfe, and to walke with God, Sapi. 6. 8. Christ also said in the Gospell, that the Iewes should haue Iudgement, Mercie, Faith, being the waightie matters of the Law, Math. 23. 23. Which al∣so S. Luke comprehendeth in these two words, Iudgement, and the loue of God, Chap. 11. 42. Such pleasant fruits yeelded holy Iob, of whom the Scriptures report,Iob yelded those fruits. that hee was an vpright and a iust man, (though he were a Gentile and no Iew, to the condemnation of the Iewes) and the word is expressed, in that it is added: he feared God, and eschued euill. Such fruits also both Zacharie, and his wife Eliza∣bethZacharie and Eliza∣beth. yeelded among the Iewes, of whom it is written by the Euangelist, that they were iust before God. This Iustice was dis∣cerned in them by the fruits and outward appearance, and not by the cause, which only commeth of the free mercy of God in Christ: and therefore he addeth, that they walked in all the Commandements of the Lord without reproofe, Luk. 1. 6. And thus sayth the Lord by this Prophet of
Ierusalem before her rebellion: It wIerusalem had iudge∣ment and iustice. full of Iudgement, and Iustice lodged therein. Whereby he meaneth those works of the second table, for vnto those works he op∣poseth fornication, murther, filthinesse, rebellion, theft, couetousnesse, briberie, iniustice, &c. as Isa. 1. 21. 22. 23. 8. Thus haue wee considered what fruites the Lord God expecteth and re∣quireth of his Vineyard, such as are both pleasant to him, and profitable for the Vineyard. These be the fruites, whereby wee expresse our thankefulnesse to the Lord; then the which, nothing is more commendable in the iudgement of all good mē; then the which nothing is more delectable to be heard of, nor more ac∣ceptable to be cōsidered, nor more fruit∣full to be performed. Whiles the inhabi∣tors of Ierusalem yelded this to the Lord, we heard him not to complaine, saying: I haue nourished and brought vp children, butIsa. 1. they haue rebelled against me: but we heard him to reioyce ouer them, and to com∣mend them, saying, Ierusalem which hathIsay. 1. 21. promised fidelitie vnto me (as a faithfull wife to her husband) is a faithfull City: it is full
of Iudgement, and Iustice lodgeth therein. 9. All this premised, doth Moses com∣ehendDeut. 10. 12. 13. 14. 15. 20. 21. in these his words to the Israe∣es. Now Israel, what doth the Lord thy od require of thee? but to feare the Lord y God, to walke in all his wayes, and to loue m, and to serue the Lord thy God with all ine heart, and with all thy Soule: that thou epe the Commandements of the Lord, and  Ordinances which I commaund thee this y for thy wealth. Behold heauen, and the auen of heauens is the Lords thy God, and e earth with all that therein is. Notwith∣nding the Lord set his delight in thy fa∣ers to loue them, and did choose their seede ter them, euen you aboue all people. CHAP. XI. The ingratitude of the people, noted in this: That the Vineyard brought forth wilde grapes, verse 2. NOW let vs consider how the Iewes answered the Lords expectation.
This people, notwithstanding all thoWhat kind of fruites the Vine∣yard yeel∣ded. benefits which the Lord in his loue a mercie had bestowed on them, declar themselues a people most vnthankfu neither was there euer any nation vnd the heauens that so much deceiued t hope and expectation of the Lord (as may speake it after the manner of me touching the vnnaturall dealing, and ¦postasie of that people, whose future dege¦neration and ingratitude, we cannot say but that God foresaw from the begi¦ning, and caused his seruant Moses to sDeut. 29. & 30. & 32. and write thereof, ere euer he brough them into the land of Chanaan. 2. As soone as the Prophet h shewed what the Lord expected,  namely, that he might receiue Grape which his Vineyard should (in all righ and reason) haue yeelded him, he adde by and by, how his hope and expectati∣on therein was frustrated: for the Vine¦yard brought forth Baashim. Wildgrapes stincking and bitter. Baaschim, that is (a the word noteth) a kind of fruite, whic in smell is most odious and stincking; an in taste, most loathsome and vnsaueri The smell of this fruite is as the stincke o
dead Carion, especially of the dead ody of a man. The Prophet vseth this ord, when he speaketh of the odious hell of their dead bodies whome the ord should slay, Chapt. 34. 3. saying, heir slaine shall be cast out, and their stinke all come vp out of their dead bodyes. And e Prophet Ioel hath the same word, hapt. 2. 20. His stincke shall come vp, and  corruption shall ascend. And in this it trarieth the Hebrew word, and the eeke 'ároma, which is a most sweeteA'roma. l odoriferous scent, as of Myrre, Ci∣mum, Calamus, Casia, or pretious oint∣ts, and sweete hearbes and flowers. 3. The taste of this fruite also, is as taste of the sap of wilde and sowre pes, or as the sweete ieuse or dropping he willowes, and such like, most bit∣owre, harrish, and loathsome, as that on yecketh the stomacke, and prouo∣h vomit. Neither is this fruite much ike in taste vnto that roote of bitter∣se,A roote of bitternesse. which (as the Apostle sayth) sprin∣h vp and troubleth the Lords people, r. 12. 14. Moreouer, Iob hath the e word, the which is translated (as it
may well enough) Tares, or Cockle, a Let thistles grow in steede of wheate, an for Barley Baascha. Baascha, the Tare or Cockle Chap. 31. 40. And in this place the Pro∣phet vseth the plurall number, to note that there were many of this kind, Ex acer∣bis vuis succus: arborum lachrymae, melligo. Diosc. li. 3. ca. 9. th Greekes call them Omphacas, ampélo agrias agriamphélous, which the Lati translate, Labrustas, Labruscas, vuas agr¦stes, syluestres, & erraticas, and we cal the wild grapes, as such which grow in the ed¦ges, banks, and hedges of the Vine yard and besides the fields of corne, as weeds and things vnprofitable and noysome. 4. It is certaine, that the Proph meaneth by this word Baashim, not o fruite, but many fruites, and that of su a kind, as is not onely contrary and noy some to the right grapes; but also mo loathsome, hatefull, and naught. By th which, he would depaint and set forth not onely the vnkindnesse of the peo¦ple of Israel and Iudah to the Lord: b also the kinde of the fruites that th brought forth and yeelded to the Lor He sayth not, that the Vineyard broug forth nothing: for that had bene mo
tollerable; but that it brought forth ruits, howbeit, most stincking, and vnsa∣erie fruites. Benefites bestowed, should e kindly accepted, acknowledged, re∣embredIngratitude towards them that bestow be∣nefites. & wel requited: but here, they e neither accepted with kindnesse, nor cknowledged, nor remembred, nor well quited: nay beyond all this, which is ost monstrous, they are rewarded with il by them of whom the Prophet corn∣ained in the person of Christ, They haue warded me euill for my good, to the great iefe of mine heart. Such fruits indeede lded this vineyard, which were neither swerable to the nature and kind of the od plant, nor to the wisdome, care, cost d diligence of the good husbandman: t all contrary and naught, that farre yond all hope and expectation. 5. But it is demaunded from whenceF whence came those naughtie fruites▪ se naughtie fruites came? for it could t be, that the good and choice Vine uld bring thē forth, no more then the od wheate could produce tares. Here  must note, that he saith not, that all e Vineyard was of this Vine: but that  plāted therein this Vine. Now indeed
the wilde grapes came not of this, as it ap¦peareth, but of such bitter rootes, as th enuious man had planted, when the righ vines were either oppressed or remoue (as Isa. 57. 1.) that is, the Diuell did sow tares, whiles men slept, and he went his wa And this naughtinesse could not be co¦rected nor amended, nor changed (se¦ing the Lord hath appointed euery nat¦rall thing to keepe his kinde) neither by the goodnesse of the choice vine, no by the commoditie of the place, not b the diligence of the husbandman, b must of force bring forth fruites aft kind, as stincking and vnsauery fruites  the semblable rootes. 6. And here we may behold as in glasse, ye notable degeneration & naug¦tinesseThe dege∣neration of the Iewes. of the people of Israel and Iuda who most ingratefull to the Lord the God, did not only not bring forth frui to him acceptable and pleasant, but a most iniuriously gaue place to the Diu (as Adam did) and brought forth grap of gall, and bitter clusters, the wi whereof, is the poyson of Dragons, a the cruell gall of Aspes, as Moses sa
Deut. 32. 32. 33. And the reason ereof is also alleaged in the same Chap∣, where he sayth: Their Vine is (not t choyce Vine which the Lord hath nted, but) the vine of Sodom, and of the es of Gomorah. Againe, they haue be∣ed thēselues frowardly towards him,  being his children, but a froward and oked generation. And this Prophet in  first Chapter in the behalfe of the rd, disclaimeth them thus: Ah sinfull ion: a people laden with iniquitie, a e of the wicked, corrupt children: they e forsaken the Lord, they haue prouo∣ the holy one of Israel to anger, they gone backward. 7. But did not the Lord foresee this?God did foresee all this, and spake of it before it came to passe.  doubtlesse, for all things are open ore his eyes, and he foreknoweth m ere euer they come to passe, ney∣ can his hope be frustrated, nor his ectation deceiued (as the hope and ectation of a man is deceiued) and refore was not this also hidden from n, what fruites this Vineyard would ld him. Moses foretold of this in Deut.  29. saying: I am sure, that after my
death ye will vtterly be corrupt, and tur from the way which I haue commanded yo And the Lord sayth by this Prophet Isa. 48. 8. I knew that thou wouldest grie¦uously transgresse, therefore haue I calle thee a transgressour from the wombe: tha is, from the time that I brought thee o of Egypt. It is sure that the Lord foresa their rebellion; and what he was to expec from them, he knew wel enough: as like wise he knew, before he made Ada what would follow. Therefore this is no spoken as if there were in God a doubtf hope what would follow: nor doth th Prophet subtilie dispute what the Lor expected in his own secret counsels: b he telleth, how meete it was, that ye peop should haue shewed themselues thank¦full to him, whose great blessings and gr¦ces on them bestowed, they should ney¦ther forget, nor deny, nor reward with ¦uill, nor depriue themselues of his day blessings and benefits, through their ow abhominations and sinnes. 8. Thus the Lord hath commanded t Gospell to be preached & published to for their obediēce to the faith: howbe not so, as therefore in his secret counse
be expecteth that obedience in all; for heGod doth not looke that all men should be conuerted: for there will be some obstinate and vngod∣ly persons to the end of the world noweth wel, that all wil not beleeue, nor ey. The godly are by the word of od mollified, as waxe with the heate of e Sunne, and drawen to repentance: the her are hardned as clay, and made inex∣isable. Neither may we thinke, but that e Lord hath made them ensamples vn∣ his owne children, who are wont to emble, and take instruction at the con∣deration of his iudgements on the wic∣d, as the Lion is wont to do, when he eth a dog beaten before him. And thus e Lord doth not only foreknow what sueth, but also prouideth so, that euen e same things which are most noysome d grieuous to the vngodly, are most ofitable & comfortable to his children. nd in this, appeareth both the iudge∣ent and mercie of the Lord: his iudge∣ent on those vnthankful Iewes: his mer∣e on them which beleeue and continue  his grace, Rom. 11. 22. . To conclude, as the holy Ghost hath kened those works and duties which we we and are bound to yeeld to our God,  those fruites which are of the best ste and liking, as to the fruite of the
choyce vine, and the most pleasant grape then the which nothing is more accep¦table and delightsome to the Husband¦man: so hath he compared mans disobe¦dience, ingratitude and sinnes, the whic he should warily eschue and abandon, t those fruits that are of the worst taste an most loathsome, as to the wild and sow Grape: then the which, nothing is mo hatefull and vnpleasant: He sayth, tha the Vineyard of the Lord, namely, th house of Israel and the Iewes, yeelde him wild grapes; that is to say, fruites mo odious & noysome: whereas they shoul haue yeelded him good fruites and pro¦fitable. And in this, they haue not fol¦lowedGen. 4. 4. 5. that righteous Habel, who offred v to the Lord that which was good: b they followed that wicked Cayn, who of¦fred vp that which was naught and noy∣some, to the great displeasure of God they brought forth vnto him, not th thankfull fruits of a good faith, but th vnpleasant fruites of faithlesse ingrati¦tude: as in the Chapter following, it sha be plainely declared, by the grace o God.
CHAP. XII. viewe of the naughtie fruites of the  Vineyard: viz. Of the sinnes of the Iewes. F wee well note the Prophets words,  wee shall heare him to tell vs plainely  what hee meaneth by those wilde rapes which the Vineyard brought rth. For he saith, Lo, oppression: Lo, a ying: Vers. 7. the which two words, do nswere those two former words, Iudge∣ent and Iustice: and that by a pretie allu∣n, which the Hebrewes call, ZacothParono∣masia: Polities Linguae. aleshon: that is, a decking or garnishing of e tongue: where (indeed) the Prophet yneth togither two words of neare like und, but of a contrarie signification: as e looked for Mischpat, and loe Misch∣ac:There was neither Iudgement nor Iustice, but oppres∣sion, and crying. for Tsedacah: and loe, Tseyacah. 2. Where the Lord looked for Iudge∣ent, behold, he found oppression: where e looked for Iustice, behold, he found a
crying. There was neither Iudgement to suppresse the wicked, nor Iustice to defend the godly: but the wicked did oppresse the innocents, and the innocents were constrained not onely to complain of the iniurie to them in authoritie, but also, to crie to the Lord for vengeance on theyr oppressors. In a word: there wanted the feare of God. And so all humanitie, gen∣tlenesse and iust dealing: and in sted thereof, there swayed the malice of the di∣uell, and so all inhumanitie, crueltie and iniurious dealing one towards an other. Therefore the Prophet in his first Chap∣ter, saith: How is the faithfull citie become an harlot? It was full of iudgement, and iu∣stice lodged therein: but now, they are mur∣therers: couetous, deceitfull, extortioners, theeues, brybers, cruell and vnpure. And truly, where these sinnes sway, there is neither any feare of God, nor good reli∣gion, whatsoeuer shewe of holinesse men make before the world. The Prophet would therefore set foorth these their sinnes euen before their faces to con∣uince them, as transgressors of the lawe of GOD, whiles they would
with the Pharisee iustifie themselues efore all other Nations, as the nely keepers and dooers of the law of God. 3. And it may be, that as in the two ormer words, Iudgement and Iustice, the Prophet would comprehend al godly ver∣ues: so by those two latter words oppres∣on and crying, hee would comprehend all ngodly vices. And that as those 2. words udgement and Iustice were first referred to he function and dutie of the Princes and udges, and then to the people (as it is be∣ore said in the 10. Chapter) so here, the Prophet doth (no doubt) reproue the vn∣ust dealing and abuses of the Princes andHe first re∣proueth the vniust dea∣ling of the Magi∣strates. Magistrates, which were wont to oppresse ther men with their tyrannie, when they hould rather haue administred iudge∣ment: and the poore innocents were compelled to groane and crie out for want of Iustice which they requested to haue at theyr handes; the which came into the eares of the Lord, as that clamour of the Israelites in Ae∣gypt, and as that of righteous Loth in Sodome, and as the innocent bloud
of Abel from the earth. And as that loud crie of those Saints vnder the Altar, say∣ing: How long Lord, holy, and true, doest not thou iudge and auenge our bloud on them that dwell on the earth? Apo. 6. 10. 4. Indeed, such Princes and Magi∣strates, this Prophet vehemently reproo∣ueth, and from thence descendeth to the common people, he calleth them, as theyIsa. 1. 10 21. 23. deserued: Princes of Sodomah, and rebel companions of theeues, and murtherers: ha∣uing (indeed) a taste of the Vine of S∣dome, whose Grapes be of Gall and clu∣sters bitter; whose Wine is the poyson of Dragons and the cruell Gall of Aspes, asDeut. 32. 33 Moses prophesied: for whereas they should seeke Iudgement and Iustice, in sup∣pressingIsa. 1. 16. 17. the vngodly, and such as oppres∣sed the Innocents, and helping, defen∣ding and releeuing the poore oppressed, they did not onely neglect their dutie therein, but also became cruell oppres∣sors themselues. As such of whom Salo∣monEccles. 4. 1. complained, saying: Behold the teares of the oppressed, and none comforteth them: the strength of the hand of them that oppresse them, and none giueth them consolation. As
if he said, the poore Innocents be oppres∣dThe poore oppressed, find no Iu∣stice nor Iudgement in them that should extend it. by tyrants and cruell hearted persons, nd they find no Iustice, nor perceiue dgement to be administred by them ho are called and exalted to this functi∣. And those kinde of the Princes of rael, immitated Iulian the Apostate, who ither punished them that oppressed the ore Christians vpon their complaint, r deliuered, nor defended them from eir oppression, as he should in right haue ne. 5. After that the Prophet had poin∣dFrom the Magistrates he cōmeth to the peo∣ple. to the Princes and Magistrates of Is∣el, who had broken the yoake (as Iere∣e said) then he commeth to the people, om also with the same words he repro∣th, charging them, that they haue not ely neglected Iudgement and Iustice in eir kind and manner of dealing: but al∣ haue bene as tyrants one to an other: pressing, and deceiuing one an other f them, without all law, humanitie, mer∣e, Iustice, Iudgement and pietie, trans∣ressing therein most horribly the lawe nd commaundements of the Lord God, o lesse then did Gomorah: and therefore
the Prophes calleth them the people of G¦morah,sa. 1. 4. 5. 6. 10. a sinfull Nation, a people laden wi iniquitie, corrupt children: And thus t Lord chargeth them by Amos. Chap. 5.  They turne iudgement into wormewood,  leaue off righteousnesse in the earth: that i where they should vse iudgement and i¦stice as a fruite most sweete and pleasan to the Lord, they did in steed therof, prac¦tise all kind of oppression and crueltie on towards an other of them: whereof ther ascended vp a pitifull crie, as of the poor oppressed against their oppressors. 6. Thus farre the Prophet speaketh  generall words: from the which heede scendeth to certaine particular sinnes an abhominations of the Iewes, with th which, (as with most vnsauorie fruites) they had displeased the holy one of Isra∣el: yet not, that euerie particular sinne ofCertaine particular sinnes. this people is heere numbred vp (for that had beene a matter both labour∣some and vnpossible, in so much a they were polluted with infinite sinnes) but some certaine vices, which most raig∣ned among then at that time. So Eze∣chiel,The sinnes of Sodome. when he speaketh of the sinnes of
Sodome (to the which he compareth Ieru∣lem with her sinnes) he nameth onely ose 4. viz. Pride: fulnesse of bread: aboun∣nceEzech. 16. 9. of idlenesse: and contempt of the poore. nd these Christ seemeth to note in theThe sins of the rich men. Luk. 16. 19. 20. 21. h man. Luk. 16. 19. Who no doubt, d in him many other sinnes besides:  pride is noted, in that hee was athed in purple and fine white: se∣nd, his fulnesse of bread, in that he ed dilitiously: third, his idlenesse,  that hee vsed it euerie day: fourth,  neglect of the poore, in that hee  not releeue poore Lazarus at his e.The sins of the Iewes. And thus Christ speaking of the fidious Husbandmen, Mat. 21. no∣h chiefly their contempt and blou∣ crueltie against the Prophets, the uants of GOD, and his sonne:  the which he did sufficiently depaint d set forth their monstrous ingratitude ainst God. So here the Prophet num∣eth vp (as I said) some certaine sins, d such as we may thereby well iudge of e rest. Now therfore, as the prophet had before
generally vnder two words; comprehe¦ded either all the wicked abhominatio of the Israelites, or at least their two cap¦tal vices: so in the words following the e¦position and application of the Parabl dooth hee number vp and note some c¦taine particular sinnes, as the vnpleasa fruites of the ingratefull Vineyard. A first he depainteth foorth the insatiabThe coue∣tousnesse of the rich men. couetousnesse and ambition of tho worldly rich men, who are neuer conten with any houses or fieldes, be they ne¦uer so many, but labour daily ro encroa and get more, howsoeuer they come b them: as if the Lord had giuen all the ear to them, and not to any besides them; an that therefore, it is lawfull onely for the to haue all, and not lawfull for any poo man, to possesse and enioy any paro portion thereof with them. Thus Alex∣ander hauing the conquest of the world, was not contented, but would haue th other world also at his commaundement But the Prophet threatneth them with a woe (as with those sowre Grapes o tares) meete for nothing, but for the fire Vers. 8.
7. Another sowre Grape the ProphetRioters, gluttons, & Epicures. oteth and condemneth to the fire, in the euenth Verse, where hee saith: Woe to them that rise vp early to follow drun∣nnesse, and to them that continue vntill ht, till the Wine inflameth them; as h as spend most of their time in ryo∣g and excessiue pleasures, and vse  meanes possible to prouoke the ne, and regard not the worke of the rd, neither consider the operation of  hands. 8. An other wilde Grape the Pro∣etImpenitent cōtemners of Gods Iudgemēts. noteth and censureth to the  in the 18. verse, saying: Woe be to n, that draw iniquitie with cords of vani∣ and sinne, as with Cart ropes: &c. ch, as are impenitent, contemners of ds iudgements; deriders of the Pro∣ts and Ministers; and of a reprobate e: and vse all exercises and allure∣ts to harden theyr consciences in e. 9. Another wilde Grape hee notethMen impu∣dent and of▪ an impious iudgement.  condemneth in the 20. verse, saying:  vnto them, that speake good of euill, and  of good: which put darknesse for
light, and light for darknesse: that put  for sweete, and sweete for sowre: As such, are not ashamed of sinne, nor care for h¦nestie, but are growen into an impude and desperate impietie. 10. An other wilde grape he noteth anContēners of doctrine, discipline, & admoniti∣ons. condemneth in the 21. Verse, saying Woe vnto them, that are wise in the owne eyes, and prudent in theyr  sight. As such as are contemners of  doctrine, discipline, and good admon¦tions: such as disdaine to learne of ¦ny Hos. 7. 8. beeing (indeede) dead, ere u they perceiue themselues sicke, who therefore Salomon calleth children, a fooles. Pro. 1. 11. An other wilde Grape hee n¦tethSuch as glo∣rie in their wicked ex∣cesse, and iustifie the wicked for rewards. and condemneth in the 22. a 23. Verses, saying: Woe vnto them th are mightie to drinke Wine, and to th that are strong to power in strong dri And this hath affinitie with that  Grape which hee noted in the eleue Verse: howbeit exceeding that, in t degrees, whereof the one is, th these persons doo ioyne vnto that ¦ote a kinde of glorie, making brag
their owne strength and abilitie in this xcesse, and deride and mocke them that e weak and not able to keep them com∣nse in this same. The other degree is this, which the ophet also noteth in the 23. Verse, as st incident to those persons: that y iustifie the wicked for a reward, and e away the Iustice of the Iust from n. As such as loue and like them ich resemble them in theyr sinnes, d hate and cōtemne them that reproue m, and be not answerable to their con∣ons: as such, as in their excesse con∣nne all that is good, and commend that ch is abhominable. 12. These, and many other such bit∣ and vnsauorie fruites, did the people of el and Iudah bring foorth and yeeld to Lord, after all his great and bountifull sings bestowed on them, in stead of ete and pleasant fruites; yea, so farreThis is not spokē with∣out admira∣rion. ond all expectation, as it could not cause woonder and admiration. d this doth the Prophet teach in the etition of this demonstratiue Hinne,Hinne. Ecce: olde, as hee looked for Iudgement, and
behold, oppression for iustice; and behold crying: the which hath in it no small em¦phasis, force, and matter of momen As if hee said, that the Vineyard of th Lord, contrarie to the nature of th Vine, and diligence, care and cost of th Lord thereon employed, did bri foorth wilde Grapes; it was a thi most strange and miraculous. Ther¦fore at this, Ieremie also woondreth anIer. ca. 2. 21. expostulateth with them in Gods b¦halfe; thus I planted thee a noble Vine whose plants were all naturall: how then a thou turned vnto mee into the Plants of straunge Vine? that is to say, how is th faithfull Citie become an harlot? ( saith Isayah) how is it, that oppress springeth vppe in the place of Iudg¦ment? and how is it, that there is a cryEccles. 3. 16 in the place of Iustice? yet so it is, as Sa¦mon also witnesseth; I saw vnder the Su wickednesse in the place of iudgement, and i¦quitie in the place of iustice. Heereby it appeareth, not on¦ly that they had no fear of GO at all (to whom they should haue ye¦ded some better fruites had they fear
him): but also that most horrible was eyr ingratitude, deseruing to bee erly cast off from his loue and de∣ht. 13. Now, as no man beholding theyr gratitude and wickednesse can but dis∣e them, and condemne them, as wor∣e of destruction for the same: so let bee warie, that we fulfill not theyr asure of iniquitie; by our like requitalls ll those good things which God in his e and mercie hath giuen vs: but let daily indeuour to answere the expec∣on of our most louing and mercifull er; let vs bee perfect as hee is perfect; y as hee is holy; and fruitefull to him all good workes (to his honour and rie) as hee hath beene, and yet is d and gracious vnto vs in all things.
CHAP. XIII. The Lords appellation and his reques of Iudgement in these words: Now therefore ô Inhabitant of Ierusale and man of Iudah: iudge I pray yo betweene mee and my Ʋineyard Verse. 3. WE haue heard before on the on part, how the Lord shewed him selfe towards the people of Isr¦el and Iudah; namely as a good husban or diligent Vinitor to his Vineyard: a thereon what he expected of them, nam¦ly that they would bee fruitefull in goo workes, as is the good Vine in Grap▪ Then on the other part, wee haue hear how much this Vineyard deceiued th Lords hope and expectation, namely  this; that when he looked for Iudgement, yeelded him oppression: & when he looke for Iustice, it yeelded a crying; it broug forth nothing else but wickednesse an iniquitie; that vineyard which yeelde
the Vinitor sowre Grapes & noisome uites. And all this the Lord yet behol∣eth and suffereth, being slowe to anger, nd of great long suffering, waighting for e amendment of the people. 2. But now the vngodly, beeing ofThe wicked think all is safe & well, if God pro∣ceed not to punish thē by and by when they offend him. Gen. 4. and and reprobate mindes, hauing their nsciences seared with hre yrons, think at all is safe and sure inough: for they erswade as Cayn did when hee had killed s brother Abel, that the bloud of the or oppressed, crieth not to the Lord for ngeance against thē; nor think they that e grashoppers wil sing of their iniuries in e fieldes: nor doo they beleeue that the ord seeth thē, & that he will be auenged  them for al their sins: yea, they imagin, at god who is gentle, mercifull, and wil∣g to expect their amendment, is very ell pleased with whatsoeuer they doo. ut yet thus saith the Lord (whichPsal. 50. ey little regard) Thou thinkest wickedly, at I am like thee: but I will reproue ee, and set in order before thee, that which hou hast done. Againe: Is not this laid vp inDeut. 32. 34. 35. ore with me? and sealed vp among my trea∣res? yea vengeance and recompence are
mine, their foote shall slide in due time, for th day of their destruction is at hand, and th things that shall come vpon them make haste for the matter is not so forgotten nor neg∣lectedEccles. 12. as they imagine, nor will the Lord omit to call them and the matter into an examination and reckoning, and co¦straine their owne consciences to beare witnesse, and to condemne theyr guiltie soules. 3. But whom hath the Lord madeThe vngod∣ly are made Iudges of their owne case. Iudges of the cause betweene him and his people? Surely hee maketh not an ex∣quisite choise of this or that friend, or of this or that especiall Iudge: but he appea∣leth euen to the consciences and know∣ledge of them, who had so egregiously abused his goodnesse, and maketh them Iudges as they are wont to do, which are most assured of the truth and sufficiencie of their causes, the which being manifest, can neither be concealed, nor denied by their very aduersaries. And this is a sure Argument of the goodnesse of the Lords cause, that he ap∣pealeth to the consciences of his aduersa∣ries, & willeth them to giue sentence, whe∣ther
the matter be not so, as he hath de∣ared it vnto them? Therefore he sayth:Verse 3. ow therefore, ô Inhabitant of Ierusalem, d thou man of Iudah, iudge (I pray you) tweene me and my Vineyard. 4. Thus Nathan the Prophet appea∣d not to any other Iudge, then to Dauid mselfe, as he pleaded the case of Vriah; d he drew in Dauid to pronounce the2. Sam. 12. . ntence of condemnation against him∣fe, which sayd; As the Lord liueth, the en that hath done this thing shall surely e. And thus, when Christ had propo∣d a Parable of the like Argument to e Princes, Priests, and Rulers of the wes, he affixed to the same, as it were a quest of their owne iudgement in the use, saying: Therefore when the LordMath. 21. 40. f the Vineyard shall come, what shall he o to those husbandmen? and they whom e Parable reproued, gaue the sentence ying: He will cruelly destroy those wicked es, and will commit his Vineyard vnto o∣hers, which shall yeeld him the fruites there∣f in their seasons. Neither can the con∣cience refuse to be both an vpright wit∣esse, and an accuser, and condemner of
the sinfull soule, euen against it selfe, espe¦cially there, where the things are mani∣fest: therefore he goeth no further fo iudgement in the cause, then to the inha∣bitor of Ierusalem, and the man of Iudah. 4. Some would, that by this Inhabitor of Ierusalem, and man of Iudah, should be ment the Lord Christ, because the Pro∣phet sayth not Inhabitors, and men: but,The inhabi∣tor of Ieru∣salem, and man of Iu∣dah: by this some vnder∣stand Christ thou inhabitor, and thou man: as also, for that Christ was the spirituall head and in∣habitor of Ierusalem, the chiefe man of the tribe of Iudah, and the Sonne of God, to whom the Father had committed all Iudgement. Neither may we thinke o∣therwise, but that he shall be the Iudge of this matter, and of those persons in the generall Iudgement. But yet, it is plaine, that the Lord in this place ap∣pealeth by the Prophet to the Iewes themselues. And in that he speaketh in the singular number, thou inhabitor of Ierusalem, and thou man of Iudah, his purpose was thereby not to craue iudge∣ment as simply of them all together, butHe appea∣leth to e∣uery one particularly. particularly of euery one of them. Nei∣ther would he that only one of them
should be Iudge of another: but that also uery one of them, singularly should en∣r into his owne heart, his own consciēce, nd examine himselfe, and iudge of him∣elfe in this case. 5. Neyther did the Lord doubt any hing to commit this iudgement to euery ne of them, the cause being indeede so st and so honest of his part, and so ma∣ifest and well knowne to euery one of hem, as could neither be reproued by ny of them, nor denyed. Therefore ayth he) I come now for iudgement in is cause to thee, euen to euery singular erson of Iuda and Ierusalem: requesting hee, to discerne betweene me and my ineyard. Such a thing we haue also in he prophesie of Hoseah, where the LordHoseah. 6. 4. sketh of Ephraim, and Iuda iudgement, n these words: O Ephraim, what shall I o vnto thee? O Iudah, how shall I intreate hee? 6. Surely, this could not but pierce heir consciences, and compell them to giue sentence in the cause, not onely ge∣nerally,Yoni. Iniquitas mea. Gen. 4. 13. but singularly, as Cayn did, saying: My sinne is greater then I can beare: he
sayth not, that mans sinne, or such mens faults; but looking into himselfe, and iudging himselfe, he sayth; mine owne sinne: the burthen whereof oppresseth my conscience, which acknowledgeth, that for the same a greater punishment is due vnto me then I am able to sustaine: if he iested not at Gods threatnings, as some do thinke: or, as King Dauid did, who in the assured hope of mercie vpon his heartie repentance, confessed and sayd, I haue sinned: Who? euen I: But thou art a King, a Prince, a Magistrate, the head of the people, a man of Au∣thoritie, and canst thou sinne? or at the least, wilt thou acknowledge and con∣fesse thy sinnes vpon the words of Na∣than a Prophet? a Minister? an inferior? a subiect? yea, my conscience testifieth against me, and I must accuse and con∣demne my selfe of sinne against God; and of the abuse of my authoritie which I haue from the Lord. And this is the re∣quest of Iudgement on the Lords be∣halfe, by the ministerie of his Prophet, his Minister, his Seruant.
CHAP. XIIII. . The Lords complaint against his vn∣kind people in these words: viz. hat could I haue done more to my Vine∣yard that I haue not done to it? Why haue I looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it bringeth forth wild grapes? vers. 4. AFter that the Lord had appealed to the iudgement of the people, tou∣ching the case betweene him and em, and obtained audience, he openeth e whole matter; and first, he doeth not ly repeate his manifold benefits be∣owed on them, but also cleareth him∣lfe of all fault which peraduenture they ould haue cast on him, and then bothAn action of vnkind∣nesse com∣menced by God against the Iewes. ommenceth his Action of ingratitude gainst them, and proueth the same to heir faces. Therefore he sayth, verse 4. hat could I haue done any more to my ineyard, that I haue not done vnto it? Why aue I looked that it should bring forth rapes, and it bringeth forth wilde grapes?
As if he said: ye cannot say, that ye wan¦ted any thing which of my part shoul haue bene done for you: wherefore the haue yee so recompenced mee? wha moued you to vse mee so? are yee no too ingratefull against me?  Lo, in thi we see not only a very patheticall com∣plaint of the Lord against this people of Israel,  but also the reason of the same. 2. These two points the Prophet H∣seyHosah. 6. combineth, when he saith in the Lord behalfe: O Ephraim, what shall I do vnto1. A com∣plaint. 2. The cause thereof. thee? O Iudah, how shall I intreate thee? By Ephraim, he meaneth the house o Israel: by Iudah, the Iewes. This is the complaint: he addeth a reason thereof, saying: Your goodnesse is like a morning cloude, and like a deawe that quickly goeth away: whereby he noteth their incon∣stancie and deceitfulnesse. This com∣plaint is also very patheticall, as if the Lord had striued with himselfe to haue vttred something more, then he could in words expresse. And this doeth the manner of the speech by interrogationThe man∣ner of the speech. or expostulation fortifie, hauing in it
indeed a more emphasis and force, then he had onely sayd, in a playne affir∣ation; I am not able to do any more en I haue done for Ephraim: nor to treate Iuda better then I haue intrea∣d him. I know not what more I should ue done for my Vineyard, then I ue done. In this sort speaketh the ord in Ieremy, 31. 20. saying: Is E∣hraim my deare sonne, or pleasant child? though he would say, No, no: for he th dealt vnfaithfully with me. And us sayth the Lord againe, clearing him∣fe, Ierem. 2. 5. What iniquitie haue your hers found in me, that they are gone re from me, and haue walked after va∣tie, and are become vayne? as if he yd: None at all. 3. And here, the Lord expostula∣g with the house of Israel, seemeth reuiue and call into remembrance,The Lord puts them in mind of his owne goodnesse towards them. at wonders and workes, what bene∣es and blessings hee had wrought, ne, and bestowed on an vnkinde d ingratefull people. As if he would ue sayd: O house of Israel, and men of dah, consider well & remember, what I
haue done for you: haue I not powr forth many blessings and benefites o you? haue I not done and wrought man strange and wonderfull workes amon you? yea, and such, as none else could do did not I make choyce of thee for m selfe before all the nations vnder the he¦uens? when thou diddest wallow in thEzek. 16. 6. miserie, vile and contemptible, did not looke vpon thee, pitie thee, and promis thee life? did not I spread my skirts o thee, and couered thy filthinesse? did no I sweare vnto thee, and made a couenan with thee? did not I wash thee with wa¦ter, and annoynted thee with oyle: an clothed thee, and shooed thee, and gir thee about, and decked and adorned the with gold, siluer, and fine linnen, and silk and broydred worke? did not I feede thee with fine flower, and honey, and oyle, and made thee beawtifull? and did not I for thee all things else, either plea∣sant, profitable, or conuenient euery way? And was this of thy goodnesse  was it not rather of my loue and mercie▪ 4. Againe call to mind and consider, ô house of Israel, and man of Iudah, wha
I haue done: did not I make choyce ofThe Lord sheweth how proui∣dent and carefull he was of his Vineyard. he Place, as strong, plentifull, and plea∣nt for my Vineyard? did I not hedge e same about with my grace, and diuine rotection? did I not cast out the stony arted Canaanites before thy face, and  things that might hurt or annoy thee? d I not plant in thee the pleasant Sorec d best plants, and stored thee with ly, zealous, and godly men? did not ith cost and care build a Tower in the ddest of thee? haddest not thou a emple for my worship, and noble ngs and Princes, and many mightie rkes in the middest of thee for thy bet∣ beawtie, glorie, and defence? did ot make a Wine-presse therein, and red thee with the burthens of the ophets, and admonitions, and com∣ts, and comminations, and exclama∣ns, and exhortations, and all things else the health of thy Soule, to stirre thee and enable thee to be fruitefull and nkfull? . Well, after all these tokens of my e and mercie towards thee: did not I e for grapes and expect good fruites?
yea, I stayd and wayted from time God puts them in mind of his owne good expectatiō. time, to see if thou wouldest yet at leng bring forth any good and pleasant fruit vnto me: for as I am mercifull, of lon suffring, and would with all mine hear rather wayte for the repentance of a si¦ner, then hastely to condemne and de∣stroy him, if there may be hope there of: so I haue stayd and wayted for the to yeeld me good fruites: I looked fo grapes, that is to say, for Iudgement, a Iustice: I hoped that thou wouldest per¦forme those duties which in my La I had prescribed thee to performe: so I formed thee for my selfe, to shew forIsa. 43. 21. my prayse. 6. But after all those blessings aHere the Lord char∣geth them with ingra∣titude. The cause of his com∣plaint. Isa. 43. 21. tokens of my loue, what hast thou yee¦ded me to answere my loue, and satisf mine expectation? Thou hast not cal¦led vpon mee (ô Iacob) but thou ha wearied mee (ô Israel.) Thou hast n brought me the sheepe of thy burnt o¦frings, neither hast thou honoured m with thy sacrifices, &c. but thou ha laden me with thy sinnes, and weari mee with thine iniquities. Thy fath
hath sinned, and thy teachers haue ansgressed against mee: and thou hast eelded mee in steed of grapes, wilde rapes: that is, for Iudgement and Iu∣ce, oppression, and a crying: wic∣ednesse, and iniquitie, Eccles. 3. 16. mos. 5. 7. Thou hast brought forth to mee for liberalitie, couetousnesse: r sobrietie, dronkennesse: for repen∣nce, impenitencie: for loue, enuie: r chastitie, filthie lust: for long-suf∣ing, hastie reuenge: for humilitie,They had no reason to behaue themselues so towards the Lord. de: for mercie, crueltie: for iustice, urie: for iudgement, oppression: for odnesse, naughtinesse. And why hast ou so done? what reason hath moued ee to behaue thy selfe so towards e? 7. Thus did the Prophet Nathan in  name of the Lord vpbrayd Dauid  King, and he sayd: Wherefore hast2. Sam. 12. 9. u despised the commandement of the Lord  God to do euill in his sight? And thus Sa∣el charged and vpbrayded Saul, and d: Thus and thus hast thou done: Where∣e hast thou not obeyed the voyce of the1. Sam. 15. 19 rd? And in this sort, Moses charged andDeut. 32. 6.
expostulated the old Israelites, saying▪ D ye so reward the Lord, ô ye foolish nation a vnwise? But why haue yee done thus what can yee alleage for your selues t iustifie your selues in this point? Surel ye are wholy inexcusab fore me, an as naked as Adam was a his fall, ney∣ther are ye able with fig leaues to coue your filthinesse and shame. 8. Thus are they accited, and draw to the barre of Gods iudgement, a hardly charged vpō the Lords complain They stand arraigned in the open Ses¦ons before the eyes of all the world, wit guilty consciences and trembling heart and find no reason to excuse thēselues  vnkindnes, nor any way to escape eith the sentence of cōdemnation, or the exe¦cution of that iudgemēt which is denou¦ced against them for such their monstro ingratitude, and well worthy: for why di they so requite the Lords goodnesse, t yeeld him wild grapes, when he require and expected fruites answerable to h loue, wisdome, cost, care and diligenc They had no reason at all so to decei his hope, to frustrate his expectation, a
behaue themselues so frowardly to∣ards him, as they themselues cannot oose but in their consciences graunt, d with their tongues confesse the same fore God, and all his holy Angels. CHAP. XV. The Lords sentence and commination, viz. d now I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, verse 5. Orasmuch as the house of Israel, and the Iewes, would not be moued at all to the performance of their dutie, hich was, that they should haue walked the way of the Lord, being fruitfull in od works) either by the consideration his benefits, or his expectation of their od fruites, or by the equitie of his cause hich he referred to their iudgements, or  his wofull moane & patheticall com∣aint of their monstrous vnkindnesse to∣ards him; he proceedeth in his suite a∣inst them, and now (at the length)A comina∣tion. reatneth them with his heauy iudge∣ments
and plagues, the which, he did ful determine to cast on them, except the repented. 2. When Christ in the Gospell ha proposed the Parable of the perfido hubandmen and the Vineyard, to th priests and rulers of the Iewes▪ he there∣vpon asked them, saying: When therefor the Lord of the Vineyard shall come, whThe Iewes out of their owne words are both iudged and condemned shall he do to these husbandmen? and the gaue the sentence of condemnation a∣gainst themselues, saying: He will crully destroy those wicked men, &c. And th Lord replyeth: Therefore I say vno  that the kingdome of God shall be taken fro you, &c. Here our Sauiour hauing gotte of those Iewes the sentence of condemna¦tion▪ against themselues, ratifieth th owne words, and threatneth them with the iudgements of God for their wicked∣nesse: Therefore I say vnto you, &c. S dealeth the Prophet, and sayth in th name of the Lord: And now will I tell yo what I will do to my Vineyard. 3. Indeed there is something purpo∣sedThere is a iudgement denounced, which in the due time shall be executed on the guiltie. to be done, & a worke to be wrough in his time, that the eares of all them th
heare thereof, shal glow, as sayth the Pro∣het, for they haue mocked me & decei∣ed mine expectation (sayth the Lord) erefore shal they also be mocked & de∣iued: they loathed blessings, they shall erfore haue cursings: they contemned ercie, they shal therfore haue seueritie: ey shal be troubled as with a storme in e sea, with a sword in an house, with a oath in a garment, with a rust in yron, ith a fire among thornes: they shall find eir enemies to be as strong as Gyants,  ramping as Lions, as cruell as Beares,  fierce as Tygars; they shall be spoyled d punished; and then, be constrayned  acknowledge their owne vnkindnesse d sinnes against me. And this is that hich Moses prophesied of long before, hereof the Prophets preached in their es, and Christ himselfe confirmed and  eaed on the latter Iewes, which in e due time was also accomplished. 4. By this we may perceiue, that their nnes were not small against the Lord, ho was so mightely prouoked to high ispleasure: and that, as their great nnes moued him to great wrath, so
the end of this wrath is the death of th irrepentant sinner: for as without sinne, there is no displeasure; so without dis∣pleasure, there is no death, no miserie: for man was not subiect either to death or miserie, vntill he had sinned. But thi will appeare the more, if we duely con∣sider,  first who they be which are here threatned to be punished,  and then who he is, which threatneth and punisheth them. 5. But who are threatned to be puni∣shed?1 The Lords owne Vine∣yard is threatned. Amos 3. 1: 2. euen the Vineyard of the Belo∣ued, the house of Israel, the people of the Lord, for they haue rebelled against him: neither doeth the Lord omit both to threaten, and also to beate and punish them for the same. Thus iudgement be∣ginneth at Gods house (as the Apostle sayth) and if it be so, what shall be the end of the vngodlie? S. Paul layeth theThe old Israelites. 1. Cor. 10. case of the old Israelites before the Co∣rinthians, and telleth them, how they are made examples to them that come after. They might haue bene examples to the latter Iewes, had they had grace, and those latter Iewes may be examples for
s. Therefore let vs not be high mindedRo. 11. ut feare, for if God spared not the natu∣ll braunches, neither will he spare vs. if e be polluted with the like abhominati∣s. The Scriptures are stored with these d such like cominations and threats of dgements, not I say, not against the entiles and Heathen people, but against e people of Israel and Iudah, as the sha∣g of a rodde ouer the stubborne ser∣nt and rebellious child. 6. But who threatneth, and who pu∣heth2. God threat∣neth and punisheth his people. the people of God? who durst be bolde to reproue them? to threaten thē?  correct and punish them? The Pro∣et telleth them, that God taketh this ter into his owne hand, and doth both reaten and beate them that bee of his ne house if they offend him, as a Mai∣r his seruant, as a father his child: and at he expresseth in these words: Now will tell you what I will doo to my Vineyard. hese are the words of God, which the rophet speaketh vnto them: and hee th not, I will appoint or command this  that Tyrant, or this or that person to ecute this thing: but I will doo it my
selfe: yea, I will correct and punish my Vineyard mine owne people with rod with stripes. An hard case is it no doubt, when a father shall be cōstrained through the stubborne wickednesse of his owne children, to be seuere & cruell vnto them▪ Yet loe, they, euen they whom hee hath brought vp, haue abused his goodnesse so far, that hee is iustly prouoked to punis and grieue them with seueritie. 7. Thus said the Lord by his Prophet to Dauid▪ Behold, I will raise vp euill against thee out of thine owne house. 2. Sam▪ 12. 11. And Isay saith, that for the sinne of the people, God will take away from Ierusalem and from Iudah, the stay and the strength, a the stay of bread, and all the stay of water, Isa 3. 1. Againe▪ The Lord shall make bald th heads of the daughters of Zion: and the Lor shall discouer their secret parts: Vers. 17. Againe: The Lord shall wash the filthiness off the daughters of Zion, and purge th bloud of Ierusalem out of the middes therof by the spirit▪ of Iudgement, and by the spirit o burning. Isa. 4. 4. Againe, The wrath o the Lord is kindled against his people▪ and hee hath stretched out his hand vpo
them, and hath smitten them. Isa. 5▪ 5. And  saith the Lord himselfe by the Pro∣het Habaouk▪ Chap. 1. 5. I worked worke  your dayes, a worke which ye will not eleeue, if a man would declare it you? ct. 13. 41. And he meaneth his iudge∣ents on the ewes for the contempt of s word, the abuse of his blessings, which  saith e wil himself execute. So he saith  Ieremie▪ against the kings of Iudah: I wilIer. 22. 7. epare a destroy th his weapons for ee.By this euil, he meaneth plagues, not that God is Author of sinne. Amo. 3. 6. 8. And this acknowledged the seruant  Iehram, is hen hee said to Elisha tou∣ing the geat plague of famine that was  Samaria in the slg of the King of A∣m: Behold this euill commeth of the Lord.  King. 33. For there is not euill in a Ci∣ which the Lord hath not done saith Amos: by this euill hee meaneth those lictions and troubles which sell vpon e Cities of Israel and Iudah for theyr nsgressions and were inflicted by the ord himselfe  according  hee before reatned them, saying▪ I will send a e vppon Iudah. and it shall deuoure e places of Ierusalem: Amos. 2. 5.
Againe he saith: I will visit you for al your iniquities: Chap. 3. 2. And the Pro∣phet Isayah in this place vseth the Pro∣nowne and particle, Ego, which bee∣ingEgo. proposed for an Emphasis, addeth to the matter the more vehemence. As in the 15. of Gen. vers. 7. the Lord saith: Euen I the Lord, which haue brought thee out of Vr of the Chaldees. By this it appeareth, that the Lord himselfe both threatneth and punisheth his people for their rebellion and sin, whosoeuer be his executioners. 9. Notwithstanding, the goodnesse of God is seene euen heere also, in two1. Gods good¦nesse ap∣peareth in two things. things: first, that he doth not punish them before hee giueth them warning thereof by his Prophets:  secondly, that he punis them not by & by, but deferreth it as ye and these two poynts he expresseth in those two words:  first he saith; Now I will tell you   secondly, hee saith, What I wil doo: that is to say, what (not now, but) hereafter in the time to come, I will do to my Ʋineyard. 10. Of the first saith the Prophet A∣mos:God giueth warning before he plagueth them that offend him. Surely the Lord will do nothing, but
he reuealeth his secrets to his seruants the rophets. And this mercie did the Lord ew vnto the olde world, when he war∣ed them by Noah, of the plague ensu∣g. And the like he did to Sodome andGen. 6. 13. Gen. 19. omorrah by Loth, but most of all hath is mercie bin declared on the Israelites:  whom the Lord sent his seruants the rophets, from time to time, to admonish em of his displeasure, and to call them  repentance. And in this, he would that e should vnderstand, how loth he is to estroy a sinner, and how willing he is, at he should conuert and liue. There∣re, when we heare those threatnings and monitions denounced and giuen to vs  the Lords Ministers, let vs not con∣mne nor disdaine them, but know, that e Lord by these meanes is willing wee ould vnderstand his pleasure: be admo∣shed to flie those future destructions2. Gods long suffe∣ring in not plaging thē by and by as soone as they offend him. hereof we be warned in the time of his race. 11. In the second, appeareth his most ise deliberation and mercifull long suf∣ring. But what need hath the Lord to dmonish vs before hand of plagues en∣suing?
to stay for our amendment? to d¦ferre to power downe the thunderbol of wrath vpon sinfull and miserable mn▪ Surely, wee may well wonder at this th Lords goodnesse with the Psalmist, whichPsal. 8. 4. H. . 2. 6. said: Lord, what is man, that thou shouldest  mindfull of him? or the sonne of man, that th wouldest consider him? Is not this spoke for our sakes, and a lesson giuen▪ to instruc and each vs? he sheweth that the thoght of the Lord and his waies, are not like ou thoughts, or our waies: but that for hiIsa. 55. names ke, and for his praise, he will defeIsa. 84. 9. his wr, and refraine, as he saith by hi Prophet, to punish offenders. Therefor he is slow to anger, and forbeareth long yet he punisheth men when they offen him, to waight for their repententance and that when soeuer the fruits of our faith appeareth, and we declare our selues such as forsake our wicked wayes and vngodly imaginations, hee is most readie to shewe mercie and to forgiue vs our sinnes. How∣beit,The long suffering & goodnesse of God, should not emboldē vs in sinne. this is not spoken to embolden vs in our sinnes, nor that we thereby presum on his goodnesse: for as he is slow to an¦ger towards them that are cureable by re∣pentance:
so is he of great power towards em that presume & continue obstinate, destroy them. Let vs not therefore pre∣me and sinne more and more, because s goodnesse forbeareth yet to punish : but rather let this his goodnesse leade  to repentance and newnesse of life. 12. To this end the Lord deferred to stroy the old world, after he had giuen em warning thereof by Noah an hun∣ed and twentie yeares: in all the which e, they had space to repent. Thus e Lord made a stay to destroy So∣me, after he had told Abraham thereof, d had warned them by Loth one whole ht. Thus the Lord allotted vnto Ni∣ie fortie dayes: thus the Lord waited  the children of Israel in the wilder∣sse fortie yeares; and after that, in the es of the Iudges, of the Kings, of the ophets; many yeares after hee had rned them, did hee defere to punish em: Hezekiah had the time of his life, d Iosiah, had his life also of respit, fore the Babilonicall captiuitie. Lastly: the latter Iewes hadde fortie res allotted them to repent, after that
Christ had foretold them of their fina desolation: And wished (with all his ha for their returne and amendment; th which, when he found not, he sighed, an thus complained: Oh that my people ha (Psal. 81. 13. 14. their time) hearkened vnto m: and Isra had walked in my waies: I would soone ha humbled their enemies, and turned mine ha against their aduersaries? 13. But notwithstanding this forewa¦ning and the long suffering of the Lord the Vinyard of the Lord, which brough forth wilde grapes, and turned Iudge¦mentThe Iewes considered not of Gods mercie and long suffe∣ring of thē. into Worme-wood, and Iustice in¦to iniurie) would neither acknowledg their vngodlinesse as yet, nor repent o their sinnes, nor regard the Lords mercie but as a froward generation, they resiste the holy Ghost; and as the fathers did, s did the children: and worse also, degene¦rating and declining farther and farthe euery day from the good nature of they heauenly father, through the malice o the diuell▪ to whom they gaue place, an brought forth fruites more agreeable t him, then answerable to the loue an goodnesse of God.
14. Besides all this, when the LordIsa. 22 12. 13. 14. God of hoastes did call them vnto wee∣ing, and mourning, and to baldnesse, and  girding in sackcloth, that is, to repētāce: ehold, they in contempt of his word had y & gladnesse; slaying oxen, and killing eep: eating flesh, and drinking wine: ma∣ng great cheare; saying in dirision of the rophets and their preachings, Let vs eate, inke and be merrie: for they say, to morrow  shall die. Therefore it was meete, that  which had enriched them with bene∣es, should now reproue them, and threa∣ to power out his wrath vpon them. d now let vs heare what is denounced d threatned to be cast on them in the  of their visitation. CHAP. XVI. e Lord threatneth to destroy his people. viz. ill consume, tread downe, and lay waste the Vineyard: Ʋers. 5. 6. He Lord hauing called audience  to his words, and plainly declared
his displeasure against his people for the wickednesse: and therewithall threatne vengeance which was in the due time t be powred forth on them that would no take the benefite of his long suffering, an repēt; he now in certain particulars, shew¦eth both the destruction of the vineyar & the means to further the same. The de¦structiō is displaied in these 3. words, viz.The de∣struction of the vine∣yard. 1. I will take away the hedge. 2. I w breake downe the wall thereof. 3. I will lay waste. The meanes thereof are discerne in the other words conteined in the sam 5. and 6. verse: whereof we will speakei the 2. Chapters following, and God wi In this wee may consider the destructi¦on threatned, and the manner there¦of. 2. There was a time when the Lord saiMalac. 3. 11. 1 A deuou∣ring or con∣suming. Ezech. 33. 27. he would reproue the deuourer, and with¦stand him from hurting the vine: but no he threatneth, that the vineyard shall be de¦uoured or eaten vp: whereby is ment, tha the people should be consumed, some b the sword: some by pestilences: some b famine: some by wilde beast: the four ordinarie plagues which the Lord w
wont to bring vpon this rebellious and thankfull people, according as he had reatned them in Deut. 32. 23. I will nd plagues vpon them: I will bestowe mine rrowes vpon them: They shall bee burnt th hunger, and consumed with heate, d with bitter destruction: I will also d the teeth of Beastes vppon them, with  venome of Serpents in the dust: The ord shall slay them without, and in the ambers feare: both the young man, d the young woman, the suckling withDeu. 23. 21. Isa. 1. 20. man of gray hayre. And this more gely is set forth in the 28. Chap. of the e; where the Lord telleth, that he will se them to be consumed from the land erin he would plant them, if they wold  obey his voyce, to keepe and to do all commandements. Yea, euen as the fire oureth the stubble, so they should be oured & consumed. 3. Of this Ezechiel aketh at large. And that thing might be sooner accōplished, he wold cause, that raim shuld deuoure Manasses, and that anasses also should deuoure Iudah: Thus  Tribe shuld consume an other, & by l broiles they shuld work one anothers
destruction within & among themselu then the which, no kind of contention more perillous and miserable. The H¦stories of the bookes of the Iudg Samuel, the Kings, the Chronicles, an finally, the storie of Iosephus, to¦ching the latter state of the Mach¦bees, and of the Iewes, yeelde vs man lamentable examples of this matter. A hereof was it, that the Psalmist compl¦nethPsal. 44. 11. Psal. 80. 13. to the Lord; Thou giuest vs as shee to be eaten vp, and thy Ʋineyard to b deuoured of the wilde beasts. 4. Next, the Lord saith, that the Vin¦yard shall be troden downe: alluding to th2. A trea∣ding down. breaking in of wilde beasts into a Vin¦yard, which do not only eat and deuour but also tread downe and spoile the vin And this rightly noteth the maner of fo¦raine enemies, which inuade with forc and deuoure & ouerrun both the countr and the people therof. By the which, th Prophet signifieth, that the enemies of I¦rael, which were as yet withstood and r¦sisted by the grace, power and prouiden of God, from inuading and hurting t Israelites, should now at the length ha
entrance, and be able not only to fight  stand most strongly against the Israe∣, but also to constraine them to turne r backes to flie, and fall before m; who should (as God would haue treade downe those rebelllous chil∣n on the ground: thus the Lorde also threatned to doo to them, by oses: Deut. 28. 25. saying: The Lord cause thee to fall before thine enemies: shalt come out one way against them, and flee seuen wayes before them: and shalt attered through all the Kingdomes of the . Againe Verse. 48. Thou shalt serue  enemies which the Lord shall send vpon in hunger and in thurst, and in naked∣▪ and in need of all things: and he shall put ke of Iron vpon thy necke, vntill he haue oyed thee. Againe, vers. 52. hee shall ge thee in all thy Cities, vntill thine high strong walles fall downe, &c. And this the Lord remembred in his ds to Salomon, when hee appeared to after the finishing of the house of god, ng: If ye turne away & forsake my sta∣s and my cōmandemēts which I haue2. Chro. 7. 19. 20. 21. 22. before you, and shall go and serue o∣ther
Gods, and worship them: then wil plucke them vp by the rootes, out of  land which I haue giuen them; and th house which I haue sāctified for my nam wil I cast out of my sight, & wil make it t be a Prouerbe & a ieast among all natiō And this house which is most high, shalb an astonishmēt to euery one that passe by, & shal say: why hath the Lord dealt  this fashiō with this lād, & with this hous and they shal answer, because they forsoo the lord god of their fathers, which brog thē out of the land of Egypt, & caught hol on other gods, & worshipped thē: therfor hath he brought all this euill vpon them▪ 6. Lastly, the Lord in his Gospell Pr¦phesiedLuk. 21. 24. of this thing, and said in plai words; that this people should fall wi the edge of the sword: and should be l away captiue into all nations; and that I¦rusalem should be troden vnder foote  the Gentiles. How these propheticall comminatio of the iudgements of God haue bene pe¦formed in the time and times appointe as sometimes by the Philistins, sometim by the Egyptiās, sometimes by the Assiri
sometimes by the Babylonians, sometimes y the Medes and Persians, sometimes by e Graetians, and lastly by the Romans, the istories of those times truly report. Hereof was it, that the Psalmist partly  the spirit of Prophesie, and part∣ in the bitter sense of those Iudge∣ents, complaineth; saying: Thou ma∣tPsal. 44. 10. & 80. 13. 15. 16. vs to turne our backs from the aduersa∣, and they which hate vs, spoyle vs at their asure. 7. The Lord proceedeth yet one de∣ee3. Awasting of the peo∣ple. farther, and saith of his Vineyard: I l lay it waste. And this word compre∣deth not onely all that which hath e said before, touching the consuming d treading downe of the vineyard; but vtter contempt and neglect therof, by n who had before this, takē regard and e to defend & maintain it: namely, that nceforth the vineyard, that is▪ the Citie  Ierusalem, the land of Iudah, the land of ael, with al the inhabitors thereof, be∣g most sinful & execrable before God, ould be vtterly destroyed, according  the Lord by the same Prophet spea∣th in an other place more plainely:
The Cities shall be wasted without an inhabi∣tor,Isa. 6. 11. 2. and the houses shall be voyd of men, an the land shall be reduced into a wildernesse the Lord shall take men away, and there shal be an vnmeasurable wasting in the midde o the earth. 8. The word signifieth a concauitie and voyd place, a place without any con∣tents, as wasted Desart, and good for no¦thing. Batath. The meaning is, that th land shall be made voyd, desolate Desart and wilde for want of inhabitors, and til¦lers of the same. And herein the Prophe alludeth to that comination in Deut. 28▪ 63. Yee shall be rooted out of the land: an Chapt. 29. 23. The land shall burne wi Brimstome and Salte: it shall not be sowen nor bring foorth, nor any Gras shall growe therein: like as in the ouer¦throwing of Sodome and Gomorah, Ad¦mah & Zeboim, which the Lord ouerthre in his wrath and anger. And thus did th Lord to his ingratefull vinyard in the ap¦pointedIsa. 17. 8. & ca. 3. 30. time: it was deuoured: it was trod down: yea, it was wasted: for why the wra of God was kindled against his people f their abhominations: hee stretched out h
hand vpō them, & smote them, that their ountaines did tremble, their carkasses ere torne in the middes of the streetes, nd their land was layd waste: yea, theEzech. 7. 25 27. & 8. 18. nd became darke (as the Prophet sayth) nd most sorrowfull, and the light was arkned in the heauens thereof; that is, e whole land was ouerwhelmed with most dangerous blindnesse, and a sor∣owfull affliction: then the King mour∣ed, the Prince was cloathed with de∣lation, the hands of the people in the nd were troubled, and there was a ngsome & remedilesse miserie. Then, hen destruction was come vpon them,Hos. 5. 15.  their trouble, they sought peace, but ey found none: they cryed in the ords eares with a lowd voyce, but he eard them not; neither did his eye spare hem, nor did he in mercy pitie them; nor urned he his wrathfull displeasure from hem: but his heauie hand against them was stretched out still, as sayeth the Prophet.
CHAP. XVII. The meanes to further the destruction of the Iewes, declared in these words: I will take away the hedge thereof: I will breake downe the wall thereof: that is, of the Vineyard, verse 5. WHen the Husbandman hath employed his labour, cost, and diligence on his Vineyard, in hope to receiue the timely fruits thereof accordingly, and after some yeares, doeth perceiue that his Vineyard proueth bar∣raine and vnprofitable, and therefore pur∣poseth thenceforth to giue vp his Vine∣yard to the spoyle, and to let that lye waste; he neglecting all care thereof, tea∣reth away his hedges, breaketh down the walls: he doth neither cut it, nor dig it, nor water it, but doth suffer bryers and thornes to grow vp in it, being indeede the meane and occasions that the Vine∣yard is deuoured of beasts, is troden down
and wasted. Euen so, forasmuch as the Vineyard of the Lord was vnfruitfull as ouching such grapes as he required, nei∣her would be corrected to yeeld him the leasant fruits of the feare of God, there∣ore the Lord threatned a destruction to he Vineyard, and the meanes and occa∣ionsThese are Preambles to the de∣struction of the Iewes. Isa. 5. 5. 6. to further the same should be (as the Prophet testifieth) these which follow: hat is to say, The hedge thereof shall be aken away: the wall thereof shall be broken owne: It shall not be pruned, nor digged, ut bryars and thornes shall grow vp, and he Cloudes shall be charged that they rayne o rayne vpon it. 2. Thus seeing that the Lord is minded o giue ouer his Vineyard, the people of Israel, to the spoyle and destruction, for their abhominations, he taketh away and withdraweth frō them again in his wrath∣ful displeasure, all those benefits and bles∣sings y• which before of his loue & mercy he had bestowed on thē, for their beautie, strēgth, preseruation, defence & cōmodi∣tie, making therby an open gap to the ex∣ecution of his iust iudgements. Neither were there any of those pure plants remai∣ning,
being also remoued away, as frō theThe good men were also taken away. Isay. 57. 1. euill which was to come, as the same Pro∣phet sayth: The righteous perisheth, and no man considereth it in his heart: and merci∣full men be taken away; and no man vnder∣standeth that they be taken away from the euill to come. Whereupon, nothing be∣ing left, but only that which was meete for the fier, the Lord would suffer his fierce wrath to fall vpon it and consume it. Thus did he on the old world, whenGen. 7. 16. 17 Noah was embarked in the Arke: thus did he on Sodom and Gomorah, when LotGen. 19. 23. 24. was departed from them: and thus he did on Israel and Iudah, when the choyse plants, I meane the righteous and merci∣full men were taken away: Isa. 3. 1. 2. 3. 3. I will (sayth the Lord) take away theThe hedge, viz. the Lords pro∣tection, is withdrawen from them. hedge of the Vineyard; that is, seeing I haue a full purpose to neglect and giue ouer this rebellious people to spoyle and de∣struction; I will take away from them, not only my lawe wherewith I had boun∣ded them in and kept them in order, but also my mercifull protection and defence of them which hath hitherto ministred vnto them, safetie, prosperitie, and de∣fence:
they shall not any longer taste and enioy the sweetnesse and commoditie of my lawe, defence, and grace, but shall be tterly banished and shut out from the appy possession and sense of the same, o their perpetuall shame and confusion. 4. This hedge was gapped in the timeThe hedge is gapped. f Manasseh the King of Iudah, who ade Iudah, and the inhabitants of Ieru∣alem,2. Chro. 33. 11. to erre and to do worse then the eathen (whome the Lord cast out be∣re the children of Israel). At what time,  for the which cause, the Lord brought on them the Captaines of the hoast of e king of Asshur, which tooke Manas∣h, and put him in fetters, and bound m in chaines, and carried him to Babel. gaine, this hedge was gapped in the2. Chro. 36.  7. 17. yes of Iehoahaz the sonne of Iosiah, at hat time Neco the king of Egypt came to the land of Iudah, and tooke him a∣ay, and condemned the land in an hun∣ed talents of siluer, and a talent of gold. lso there was a wide open gap in the id hedge, in the time of Iehoakim, when Nebuchadnezar the king of Babilon en∣ed and tooke him, and bound him with
chaines to cary him captiue to Babel with the vessels of the Lords house. 5. And in the dayes of Zedekiah, when there was a generall Apostasie of the peo∣ple from the Lord, these gaps were enlar∣ged,The gaps are enlar∣ged. and then the Lord brought in vpon them the King of the Chaldees, who slew their yong men with the sword in the house of their Sanctuary, and spared neither yong man, nor virgin, auncient nor aged, God gaue all into his hand. And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the King, and of his Princes, all these caried he to Babel: and so whensoeuer the hedge was neglected and ruinous, that is, when God with∣drew his defence and mercie from them, sometimes the Medes and Persians, some∣times the Romanes and other enemies, rushed in and inuaded them, to their great griefe and miserie, whereof the Saints were moued to complaine in the behalfe of this distressed people: Why hast thou broken downe her hedge, so thatPsal. 80. 12. all they that go by the way plucke of her grapes? the wilde Boare out of the wood
hath destroyed it: and the wilde beasts of e field haue eaten it vp: that is, now ou hast left off to helpe, succour, and efend vs, both they that hate our reli∣on, and they that disdaine our persons, aue rushed in vpon vs, and deuou∣d vs. 6. Next to the taking away of the dge, he sayth;  I will breake downe theThe wall is broken downe, the benefits of Gods great works are remoued and taken from them. ll also which I haue made. And this is  be referred to the Tower, which, he d before, he had built in the middest of  Vineyard. Now, as by this Tower, is nified (as before it is sayd) sometimes e Citie and Temple of Ierusalem: metimes the Common-wealth, and uernment of Israel: sometimes the eat and wonderfull workes of God, ought for and among this people: metimes that great mysterie of godli∣sse, whereof Paul speaketh, 1. Tim. 3. rse 16. So by the breaking downe  this wall or Tower, is signified, that e Iewes should surely be depriued of  those benefites, which in and through ery of those things were ministred vn∣ them.
And to note the vehemencie of t wrath, and the terriblenesse of the ve¦geance, the Lord sayth not thus: The w shall fall downe, as he sayth elsewhereIsa. 3. 8. The wall shall be broken downe vio∣lently. Ierusalem is fallen, and Iudah is fallen: b he sayth; I will breake downe the wa Parotz. Parotz, the word signifieth, to teare an breake downe any thing with violenc or force, as mightie water-streames d¦fret and breake downe the walles an banks of the earth by the which they  Dauid vseth the same word, 2. Sam. 5. 20 when, comming to Baal Perazim, whe he smote his enemies, he sayd: The  hath torne asunder mine enemies before  like the breach of waters. And Tobiah  the booke of Nehemiah, had that wo when he sayd: He shall breake downe th stony wall. 7. Now, as this is applied to the CitiThe Citie and the Temple. Math. 21. 4. of Ierusalem and the Temple, which a indeede works of great excellencie an moment (as the Disciples sayd to Christ the Prophet Isayah speaketh in man places thereof (as other Prophets do) bu briefely and effectually in the last Chap¦ter of his prophesie; where as we also ma
heare the sound of the breach of this all. A voyce (sayth he) soundeth fromIsa. 66. 6. he Citie: A voyce from the Temple: the oyce of the Lord that recompenceth his nemies fullie. And this is the voyce, hat they are forced to heare, which ould not heare the gentle words of the ords Prophets, and be obedient vnto s word. But of the last and most no∣ble breach of this wall, prophesied our uiour in the Gospell, saying: See yee t all these things? Verely, I say vnto you, re shall not be here left a stone vpon a e, that shall not be cast downe: Math. . 2. Agayne, hee sayth: They shall ke thee euen with the ground, and thy dren which are in thee, and they shall  leaue in thee a stone vpon a stone, Luke . 44: . How this was performed, the Scrip∣es do testifie. First, in the dayes of dekiah king of Iuda, the Lord brought2. Chro. 36. 19.  Caldeans into the Citie of Ierusalem, o the rather at the instigation of the omites, rased and brake downe the l of Ierusalem, and burnt the housePsal. 137. God. And this did Hanani afterward
make report of before Nehemiah; whNeh. 1. 3. at the hearing thereof, sate downe o the earth, and wept and mourned cer¦taine dayes. And last of all, about for¦tie yeares after the death of Christ, th Lord gaue them into the hand of th Romanes, who rased the wall to the fou¦dation, (as Iosephus in his historie repor¦teth)Iosephus. to the horror and feare of all the that heard thereof. 9. Next, as by the Tower is signi¦fiedThe Com∣monwealth of Israel, and the great workes of God, and mystery of godlinesse. those other excellent things,  namely, the beawtifull and well goue¦ned Common-wealth of Israel, the gre works of God done in and for them, a the most notable mysterie of godliness the Prophet comprehendeth all, as  were in these words: The Lord shall t away from Ierusalem and Iudah the staIsa. 3. 1. and the strength, euen all the stay of brea and all the stay of water, the strong ma and the man of warre, the Iudge and th Prophet, the prudent and the aged, th Captaine of fiftie, and the honorable, a the Counseller, and the cunning artifice and the eloquent man. And thus say the Lord: The stone which the bui¦ders
refused, the same is made the head f the corner: But vnto the Iewes he yth; The kingdome of God shall be taken om you. And this began to be verifiedWhen this breach was commen∣ced, furthe∣red and per∣fected. en when Christ sayd: I go away, and  shall dye in your sinnes: Iohn 6. It s furthered, then, when Paul sayd; , wee turne from you to the Gentiles: ct. 13. 46. And it was perfected then, en after the destruction of the Citie  Titus, they were vtterly depriued of  those blessings and commodities both rituall and temporall, to the horrour d example of all them that come af∣. Thus did the Lord breake downe  wall of his Vineyard, and it was den downe.
CHAP. XVIII. Some other meanes to further the d¦struction of the Iewes, noted of the words: viz. It shall not be cut, nor digged: but bryers  thornes shall grow vp. I will also comma the Cloudes, that they rayne no rayne v¦on it. Verse. 6. THe Lord hauing threatned the d¦struction of his vineyard, and she¦ed the manner therof, doth also d¦clare the meanes, whereby the same sh be furthered and effected; as first, by r¦mouing of the hedge: next, by breaki downe of the wall, as I haue therof said i the Chapter before going. Vnto th which, he addeth some other occasio and meanes thereof: as that the Ʋineyar shall not be cut, nor digged: but bryers a thornes shall growe vp, and that the Cloud shall be forbidden to rayne any rayne the n.
2. First the Lord continuing hisIt shall not be cut: viz. nor correc∣ted with due disci∣pline, &c. etaphor, saith: It shall not be cut. The rd Zamar, signifieth a pruning, or pa∣g away of things superfluous, as the cut∣g or pruning of a Vine. As it is said in uit. 25. 3. Sixe yeares thou shalt cut thy e, and gather the fruite thereof. And in this also, as in the former, hee deth to those Husbandmen, that ha∣g no pleasure in their Vineyards, doo lect to pare, prune and cut them: ning (indeed) that he would thence∣h no more correct them in the due or∣ of discipline, as he had done; dispai∣g (as it were) of any profit of his la∣rs. And of this, in the first Chapter, rse. 5. he complaineth, saying: Where∣ should ye be striken any more? for ye fall y more and more: the whole head is sicke,  the whole body is heauie. As if he said: at auaileth it mee to endeuour to a∣nd this people with often corrections d punishments, seeing, the more I cor∣ thē, the worse they proue; as that cor∣t or rottē rooted vine; for frō the roote he top, and from the highest of them,
to the lowest of them, they are polluted and will not beare that good fruite which I expected. Therefore hee sayth again (as that Husbandman which contemneth and giueth ouer his vnprofitable vine¦yard) Ah! I will ease me of mine Aduersa∣ries: Vers. 24. Such words spake the Lo in the olde time, touching that most sin∣full generation before the floud, whom great lenitie, long suffering, and fatherl discipline of the Lord could not perswad to repentance: My spirit (saith he) shall i alway striue with man, because he is but flesh Gen. 6. 3. 3. Truly, as those vines which are noThe incon∣uenience of the want of discipline. pruned, cut, and clensed from their rotte and superfluous branches, in the due an conuenient time, do either soone starue,  become barren: so also doth that gener¦tion either drop to destruction, or becom barren of good workes, which are not ex¦ercised with meete discipline. As likewi those waters do corrupt and stinke, whiA note of Gods neg∣lect of the people, and displeasure. are not moued. Againe, as where the vine is neglecte and not pruned and pared by the Vi¦tor, it argueth the litle regard and delig
e hath of and in the same: so is there not more manifest note of Gods displeasure wards men, and litle care he hath of the eople, then when hee suffereth them to n without controllment or correction. or as he chastiseth thē whom he loueth, nd correcteth them whom he receiueth: he giueth ouer the wicked to their own sts, to be drenched in sinne, and damned death. Ro. 1. 28. 4. Vnto this neglect of the cutting and uning of the vineyard, the Lord addeth, at It shall neither be digged. The wordIt shall not be digged. dere in this place (as it is put passiuely) gnifieth, to be drawen togither by some strument of husbandrie, as the earth is to ridges or heaps, chiefly about Vines, d such kind of heaps, as do in order and rme resemble a flocke of sheepe, fee∣ng heere and there in the pasture. nd heereof is it, that of this Verbe ere is made a Nowne of the same etters, which signifieth a Flocke ofA flock of sheepe. heepe. And this belongeth to the manurance of e vineyard; a kind of husbādry which is roued both so cōuenient and necessarie,
as that without it, the Vine will neither prosper, nor beare fruite. 5. By this kind of digging, is ment theWhat is ment by digging. well disposing and ordering of the peo∣ple, and the timely preparing of them, to the performance of those duties which are of them required. And this is wrought by the instrument of godly instructions, counsels, exhortations, admonitions, and lawes. Neither diffreth this word much in signification frō the husbandry which the Vinitor bestowed on his Wine∣presse, which (as before is sayd) he dig∣ged and made: nor from that (in effect) whereof the sweete Psalmist speaketh to the Lord, saying: Thou hast digged mine eares: Psal. 40. 6. that is, thou hast prepa∣red mine eares to the hearing of thy word, and hast made me obedient to thy law. Wherein Dauid alluded to that riteA ceremo∣ny of the lawe. obserued in the law, Deut. 15. 17. as when a seruant louing his maister, and willing to abide with him (notwithstanding that a freedom be offred him in the seuenth yeare) hath his eare perced through a∣gainst the doore post, by the which, he promiseth obedience and obsequie to his
master. And so indeed the Lord requireth vs, nothing else but faith, and obediēce the word, that we may harken vnto his mandements. But this is not wrought,Who dig∣geth the eares, &c. t by the operation of his spirit: for hee ust digge our eares, and order our minds d bodies; the which if he do not, there not any hope of fruite. This was it, that ah meant, when he prayed, that God uld perswade or allure Iaphet to dwell in e tents of Shem. And this was it, that E∣raim in captiuitie desired, saying: Con∣rt thou me, and I shall be conuerted. Now, hat would followe of that, when as the ord would not bestowe on the Iewes is kind of husbandrie, it is easily percei∣d, which also the Lord letteth not to presse in the words following. 6. And therefore he saith: Bryers andThe fruites of bad hus∣bandrie. ornes shall grow vp, or ascend vp. They e called in the Hebrew Schamor and chaïth: which are translated, Sentes et inae, and they are so called of holding and teining fast, and embracing and twining gither. And these are (indeed) such ings, as both hold fast and choke vp the Vines, whereby they become barren and
starue, and therefore are accounted both vnprofitable and noisome to the husbād∣man and his Vineyard. By these bryer and thorns, are signified, first the GentilesMat. 20. 19. Gentiles. Ezech. 7. 24 and the wicked of the heathen, whom the Lord God threatned to bring into their houses, and to hold them in their possessi∣on: & who also in this displeasure cōceiued against the vineyard, shuld be found most vnprofitable & noisome to the same: yea, and therein manifest themselues enemies to Christ Iesus that best chosen Vine, and aduersaries to his holy Apostles & seruāts the branches of that vine: howbeit, these were both stirred vp, prouoked and permitted thus farforth to inuade the holy land, & therin to afflict & greeue the right good vine with her brāches; I mean Christ with his Apostles, Disciples and seruants, the true Israelites: (who were committed to Pilate, Herod, and other Gentiles to be tormented) but vtterly to deuoure, tread downe and destroy this vngodly and ingratefull people the false Israelites, and counterfeit Iewes, which yeelded such vnpleasant fruites to the Lord. So, whereas the goldly were afflicted and
punished, the vngodly were both pla∣uedThe godly are afflicted but the wic∣ked are pla∣gued. and destroied by those brambles, and hornes; I meane, the Gentiles. As Ezech. . 24. 7. And of this execution to be done y the Gentiles on the vngodly Iewes,Isa. 10. 5. 6. hus saith the Lord by his Prophet: O As∣ur, the rod of my wrath, and the staffe of their ands is mine indignation: I will send him, (meaning Assur) vnto a dissembling nation: (meaning the Iewes) and I will giue him  charge against the people of my wrath to ake the spoyle, and to take the pray, and to tread them vnder foote as the myre in the streete. And this was partly verified in that time, whē the Chaldaeans ascended vp and captiued Israel and Iudah. And partlyLuk. 21. 24. when Ierusalem was troden downe of the Gentiles, in the day of the visitation of the Iewes, according to the words of Christ. 8. Moreouer by those Bryers andAll vngodly persons &c. Thornes (as the fruits of a cursed and waste ground) are generally signified, not one∣ly Ezech. 2. 6 all wicked and vngodly persons: but also all their sinnes, errours, transgressions, and abhominations,
the which are made meete both for theHeb. 6. 8. curse and the fire in the Lords displeasure, as saith the Apostle to the Hebrews: That ground which beareth thornes and bryers is reproued, and is nigh vnto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Neither can wee either seeke for better persons, or hope for bet∣ter fruites, or expect better euents from thence, where the Lord hath iustly with∣drawne his loue, fauour, protection and mercies. And therefore, after that the Lord had fully determined to forsake and giue ouer the house of Israel and Iuda, they were not so euill before, but then were much worse (as were those Gentiles of whom the Apostle speaketh to the Ro∣manes, Chap. 1. Verse, 6.) By the which they were made meete for the fire, as said the Prophet: Wickednesse burneth as a fire, it deuoureth the bryers & the thorns, & will kindle in the thicke places of the Forrest, and they shall mount vp, like the lifting vp of smoke. Isa. 9. 8. And this was verified at what time Nabuzor-adan came to Ierusa∣lem and burnt the house of the Lord, and the Kings house, and all the houses of Ierusalem, and all the great houses (so
stored full with bryers and thornes) with fire. 2. King. 25. 9. 9. Notwithstanding all this, the Lords3. The cloudes are also for∣bidden to drop on the Vineyard. wrath is not tutned away: but his hand is tretched out still: and now at last, that he Vineyard may be without all meanes of recouerie, he addeth to the former an∣ther plague, the which of all other, both rgueth his displeasure conceiued against he Iewes, and his willingnesse to waste nd destroy them. I will also (saith hee) mmaunde the Cloudes, that they rayne no aine vpon it. Although before this, when he Prophet speaketh of the planting, edging and cleansing of the Vineyard, ith the building of the Tower, and ma∣ing the Wine-presse, he seemeth to say othing either of the pruning or of the igging thereof: yet may we not thinke, ut that those things also being so neces∣arie, were done, procured, employed, and erformed on the Vineyard to the vtter∣ost: and that among those things, there was also a timely and sweete distillation of the rayne and shewers on the Vine∣ard to water the same: as it is said in Deut. 11. 11. Being in a land that drinketh
water of the rayne of heauen. For why? th Lord himselfe said: What more could  haue done to my Ʋineyard that I haue no done to it? Verse 4. And this was as need∣full as any of the former, and without the which, the Vine could neither prospe nor growe; but starue and wither a∣way. 10. It was promised in Deut. 11. 14. and 28. 12. vnto them that obeyed the voyce of the Lord, and obserued his com∣maundements, that they should be plen∣teous in goods, in the fruite of their body, in the fruite of theyr cattell, in the fruite of theyr ground: And to that purpose, it is added, The Lord shall open vnto thee hi good treasure, the heauen to giue rayne vnto thy land in due season, the first rayne and the latter. And to this alludeth Zachary the Pro∣phet,Zach. 10. 1. who teacheth the Iewes how they should eschew the plague of famine then threatned them, said: Aske ye of the Lord in the time of the latter raine: so shall the Lord make white Clowdes, and giue you showres of rayne, and to euerie one grasse in the field. But now the case is altred, God
findeth his people rebellious and wicked, d therefore hee will not vouchsafe em his good treasures, to giue them yne in season; nor will make the lowdes to distill and drop, but will com∣aund the Cloudes to rayne no rayne on em. 11. The word signifieth very thicke lowdes, and are so called Yabim, of thick∣sse,Yabim. Thicke Cloudes. as are those which haue in them uch water: such as Salomon mea∣th, when hee sayth: If the Clowdes e full, they will powre foorth rayne vp∣ the earth: Eccles. 11. 3. Howbeit, nei∣er shall one droppe of water fall from ose thicke and full Clowdes, how likely  euer they shew to drop downe showres: cording to that commination in Deut. 8. 23. where Moses saith to the rebel∣us children: Thine heauen that is o∣r thy head shall bee Brasse; and the rth that is vnder thee shall bee Iron: he Lorde shall giue thee for the rayne  the Land, dust and ashes; euen om Heauen shall it come downe vp∣n thee, vntill thou bee destroy∣.
Thus, the Vineyard is threatned to w the timely watering of the Cloudes. B now as the Prophet hath a Metaphor, l vs also in this (as wee haue in the form words) consider what is meant by th Rayne, and by those Cloudes. 12. By the Rayne, is meant the worThe Rayne is the word of God. of God, the which is called the Water  life: as indeed it is, and is more necessar and profitable for the children of God then is the first and latter rayne for th Vineyard; and without the vse of th which, the people do perish, as they tha want the spirituall foode. This is that wa∣ter which droppeth downe from heauen and the which none can Minister with∣out the helpe of the Lord Iesus. The vsThe word engen∣dereth in our soules, fayth. of this water by the operation of the ho∣ly Ghost, engendreth in our soules th faith, whereby we be iustified and prep¦red to euerie good worke. But withou this water, we be barren, and cannot bu starue. And this is that which the Lor threatneth (chiefly on the Iewes) I wi take away from Ierusalem and from Iudah all the stay of bread, and all the stay of water Isa. 3. 1.
13. As by the rayne, is meant the wordThe Clouds are the Pro∣phets, &c. f God: so by the Cloudes, are signified he Prophets and Preachers of this word; ho are called and sent forth to drop the howres of Gods word into the eares of the eople. And this phrase vseth Moses in his lastDeu. 32. 2. 3 ong: My doctrine (saith he) shall drop as e raine, and my speech shall still as the deaw,  the showre vpon the hearbes, and as the eat rayne vpon the grasse. And hee ad∣eth: For I will publish the name of the ord. Here Moses likeneth the word of od, to the rayne or deawe; himselfe to e dropping Cloudes, and the peopleThe hearbs are the peo∣ple to whō the word is preached.  the hearbes and grasse. And such in the me of Micheah the Prophet, were called oppers, which prophesied, to whom the ople then said: drop ye not: that is, pro∣esie ye not. But, They shall not prophesie  them, neyther shall they take shame. Mich.  6. For the Lord will commaund those loudes to leaue off, and not to drop on is vngratefull people, which so well re∣mbleth those dogs & swine, to whom he rbiddeth thē to giue his holy things, & efore whom, hee chargeth them not to
cast the pretious Pearles of his word. To such hee saith: The Kingdome of heauen shall bee taken away from you Mat. 21. 14. As long as these Cloudes be drop∣ping,Whiles the word is prea¦ched, there remaineth some hope of mercie and peace. there remaineth some hope o mercie and life; as then, there remained hope of a glad and ioyfull entertaine∣ment at the supper of the great King, whiles his seruants were in their message busie inuiting the Guestes: But when they contemned this opportunitie, and said to the Prophets, Ye shal not drop on vs: ther worthily followed, not only a famine of bread, and thirst of water, but the hunger and thirst of the word of God; which also drew after it, Warres, Pe∣stilences, plagues, and destructions. Their eies were blinded, their hearts were hard∣ned, and their backs were bowed downe alwaies. 15. As the ministerie and preachingA note of Gods fauor and of his displeasure. of the word of God is a certain note of his continuall care and fauour, as the well applying of a Vineyard with water, argueth the care and delight the Vinitor hath in the same: so the taking away
of the word of God from the people, is  certaine note of his displeasure: and eglect of them, as the small regard he Vinitor hath of that Vineyard, is iscerned, by that hee neglecteth to ater the same. Therefore to expresse e Lords high displeasure conceiued a∣ainst the people of Israel, for their re∣ellion and vnkindnesse towards him, nd to certifie them of their future de∣ation and destruction for the same, e saith, that he will command the Cloudes  raine no raine on them: that is, that his ophets, Apostles and Ministers, shall t thenceforth feede them with the ord of God: neither shall there bee any e of the Lords misteries among thē: whoAct. 13. 46:  Paul and Barnabas testified) did put it m them, and iudged themselues vnworthy euerlasting life: which is (as Christ hath ght vs) to know the onely true God, d whom he hath sent Iesus Christ; ther∣e it was meete also, that God shuld de∣ue thē of this inestimable benefit, that so who had chosen thē from al other nati∣s, beautified them & blessed thē; shuld ect them, deforme them, & curse them:
and that he, which before had prospered, sustained and preserued them in the right vse of his word, should now (in their abuse thereof) alienate them from his delight, and giue them ouer to their enemies hand, to be consumed, troden downe, and wasted, according to his word; to their perpetuall shame, to the instructionIsa. 5. 5. 30. . Chro. 7. 19. 20. of his Saints, and to the euer∣lasting glorie of his most holy name. The end of the second part.
The third Part, Conteyning An application of the Parable. CHAP. I. he loue and mercie of God to England, and his expectation of good fruites. WHen the Prophet I∣sayah had proposed his Parable to the men of Iudah and Ie∣rusalem, & had iudge∣ment in the case, hee afterwarde expoun∣ded the Parable, and pplied it vnto them, saying: Surely the
Vineyard of the Lord of Hoastes, is the house of Israel: and the man of Iudah his pleasant plant: And he looked for Iadgement, but be∣hold oppression! for righteousnesse, but behold a crying! And so, when the Lord in the Gospel, had taken vp the Parable of the perfidious husbandmen against the latter Iewes, especially against their Priests and rulers, and had of them the sentence of condemnation against themselues, hee replied and applied the Parable, saying: Therefore I say vnto you, the Kingdome of heauen shall be taken from you, and shall bee giuen to a Nation which shall bring forth th fruites thereof: Mat. 21. 43. 2. As long as both the former and lat∣terMen are more edy to see and censure the life and cō∣dition of o∣thers, then to note and iudge them selues and their owne. Iewes thought that the Parable poynted not at themselues, but tou∣ched some others, they could yeelde it audience, and giue their censure of the case: as the nature of man is, ra∣ther to prye into the dealings and faults of other men, and to condemne them, then either to see or iudge himselfe. And so long also can we heare this of the Iewes, and consent in iudgement against them, whiles wee thinke it toucheth them one∣ly,
and not our selues aso: wherein ee rightly resmble that couetous an, who beholding wretched Tan∣lus (of whom the Poets tell) to stand  the middes of the water, readie to e thirstie: laughth at his follie, not nsidering the whiles, that his owne se is like his; who hauing his Cof∣s full stuft with store, taketh there∣ no vse at all, but is poore in the midst his plentie. Therefore to him saith the et: And laughest thou at this, thou wretch?Mutat nôie, de to fabula narratur. But change thy name, and than e Fable truly points at thee, And at none other man. 3 But Saint Paul teacheth vs the vse  such examples, when hauing spoken  the olde disobedient Israelites, which e Lord destroyed in the Wilder∣sse, hee turneth to the Corinthians,  whom he then wrote, and thereof ta∣th occasion to instruct and admonish em, saying.
These things verily are our examples, that w1. Cor. 10. 6. 11. should not be lusters after euill things, as they also lusted and perished. Againe: All these things came vnto them for ensamples, an were written to admonish vs vpon whom the ends of the world are come, how God will al∣so plague vs, if we be subiect to the like vices. After this he said vnto them, who then thought themselues so sure as either the Israelites did, or we now doo, enioying so many rare blessings; Wherefore, let him that thinketh he standeth, take heede least hee fall. 4. After this maner, suffer me (I pray▪To English∣men. you) now to turne from the Corinthians, from the Iewes, and from the Israelites, to our selues; and not onely to say vnto my Countrey-men (as Paul did to the Corin∣thians), These be our examples: but also to apply vnto our selues, those parables and examples which doo rightly touch our selues; that wee which thinke our selues▪ safe and sure, may yet be moued to consi∣der the vncertaintie and miserie of our cō∣dition, and beware we fall not as did those Corinthians, those Israelites, and those Iewes, to our destruction.
5. Whatsoeuer is written, is written for ur learning: and these things do as neere∣y touch vs now, as they touched them hen, their case & ours being in all points o comparable: therefore the Preachers nd Ministers of the Lord, haue no lesse ause ministred vnto them now, then had sayah then, to conuert prose into song,  plaine words into parables: for whose mple Sermons are not contemned? hose plaine dealing is not scorned? and ho beleeueth our report? who will hear∣en, but to a song? who will be reproued ithout a parable? Do not men in those eir choyce diets shew themselues sick? ea, and agonized, and ready to dye? O ord God of mercies, conuert vs (we beseech ee) and we shall be conuerted: that thou lso mayst continue fauourable vnto vs, that e may escape thine heauie iudgements, and ue. 6. We cannot deny, but that the LordWe are for∣ced to ac∣knowledge & confesse the good∣nesse of God towards vs. ath loued vs: for he hath bestowed on s so many and so great blessings, as euer e bestowed on the Israelites; yea, and ore then any of the Nations about vs aue receiued at his hand: therefore doth
he expect no lesse of vs, then he did of them. But alas, we do reward him much like as they haue rewarded him; we haue brought him forth wilde grapes, when wee should haue yeelded him good grapes the which will be our vtter con∣fusion and decay, except we speedely re∣pent. For what should cause the Lord to spare vs, when he spared not them, see∣ing our sinnes be as their sinnes were, and God is now, as God was then. But this is that which hath deceiued many a man,Many men deceiue themselues in the trust of mercy when they sinne. when (notwithstanding his sinnes be as the sinnes of others whom God hath pu∣nished before his face) he imagineth, that either God seeth him not, or that he will be more fauorable vnto him, then he was vnto them, and so presumeth on the mercie of God in the time of long suf∣fring, in the which he should rather stand in awe, and repent. 7. Neyther do they feare, as now (being fat and secure) to spurne with the heele against God, and (as ingrate∣full wretches) to dispute as they did in the Prophet, saying: Wherein hath GodMal. 1. loued vs? What benefites hath he powred
forth on vs, beyond that which he hath done to other nations? To whom, as vnto ose, I suffer the Prophet to answere: not Iacob Esaus brother? yet hath heA speciall note of Gods good∣nesse to∣wards vs. 1. In choo∣sing vs. osen Iacob, and reiected Esau. And e not we Gentiles, as are the Spanyards, e Italians, the Graecians, the Barbari∣s? and are not wee of the same flesh d bloud descended from Noah, from Adam? yet, lo, he hath allured vs beforeGen. 9. 27. em, to enter into the Tents of Shem, speake generally of our Nation: for od hath his people of all nations. In word, the Lord hath called vs into  Church, and the fellowship of his ints, by the externall preaching of s word, and made vs the children of s kingdome. Is this no benefite? I any Kings and righteous men haue sired this blessing on their people d countries, which yet they obtay∣ed not in their times: and at this day, ow many thousands are shut out from is heauenly feast, wee may behold,  wee consider the state and condition, ot only of all the world, but of that
part thereof which is called Christian. In respect of whome, (which are as prodigall children estranged from the house of their parents, and sterue for want of foode) we are as those sonnes, who remaining in their fathers house, haue bread enough. Is this no benefite? no blessing? we are too ingratefull, if we confesse it not. 8. Next, the Lord hath giuen vnto vs2. In the goodnesse of the land. Isa. 5. 1. a land, which for fertilitie, pleasure, and all commodities, is neere comparable to that horne of Oyle in Chanaan, and spareth not to yeeld her increase in the due times and seasons of the yeare, if our sinnes and ab∣hominations hinder not the course of Gods graces, in his displeasure. And in this land it hath pleased the Lord (in the aboundance of his mercies) to make his Vineyard, and to renew the face of his Church, which hath bene so shadowed and blemished with the tyrannies, sophi∣stries, heresies, and wicked inuentions of worldly men, whose hearts from their youth are set on mischiefe, and are onely bent to do euill euery day.
9. And this hath he so compassed a∣out with the hedge of his fauour & pro∣ction,3. In fauou∣ring and protecting vs. hauing his eyes euer watchfull ouer  from the beginning of the yeare, vnto the d of the yeare, (as Moses testified theDeut. 11. 12. ord had ouer the children of Israel) that either the beastly wilde Bores, nor the uening Wolues, nor the cruell Beares, or the craftie Foxes, could yet inuade to noy vs. And (surely) hereof is it, that us long we haue enioyed peace, wealth, osperitie and safetie, sitting at home vn∣er our vines and figge trees from Dan to erzeba, as they did all the dayes of Sa∣mon. 10. From this place hath the Lord also4. The ex∣pelling of Antichrist, and his ministers, &c. oted out and expelled the stony hear∣ed Chanaanites, and those bryars and hornes, the which might any way hinder he prosperitie of his Church, or grieue is children, I meane Antichrist, is aboli∣hed, his ministers are obserued, & (how∣oeuer it be, that some Chanaanites shew∣ed themselues vnder the broad leaues of he Vine in the Lords Vineyard) the po∣wer of the Bishop of Rome and his mem∣ers weakened euery way, by the proui∣sion
of those good lawes which it hath pleased her Maiestie by the grace of God to establish in these her dominions. 11. And in this Vineyard, the Lord5 The plan∣ting of good Princes, Magistrates and Mini∣sters in the Realme. hath planted his choyce Sorec, or best Vine, as first and principally our most gratious and excellent Princesse Eliza∣beth, a vine most wholsome, sweete, sauory, and comfortable to vs all: and such a Queene, as, without iust offence to any, may be compared with those best Kings and Princes of Israel and Iu∣dah. Next vnto her, the Lord hath plan∣ted in this Vineyard, many sweete and profitable plants; as namely, the strong man, the man of warre, the Iudge, the Prophet, the prudent, the reuerend, the Captaine of fiftie, the honourable, the Counseller, the cunning artificer, and the eloquent man: and (chiefely) of these, the good Protestant, which to his po∣wer, promoteth the right seruice of God, and holy discipline: whereby the sweete sap of the Vineyard should be wrung forth to the glory of God, and the comfort of his Saincts in the due time.
12. These and many such like bles∣ngs hath the Lord in his mercie powred n vs, to expresse his loue, the which we ay neither deny nor dissemble, except e would shew our selues too ingratefull.The Lord expecteth our good fruits. Miche. 6 6. 7. And what doeth he expect of vs ater l these his blessings? surely, not siluer nd gold, nor burnt offrings, nor calues f a yeare old, nor thousands of Rammes, or ten thousands of riuers of oyle, nor e first borne of our bodies (as sayth the rophet) but he expecteth that, which t men (for the most part) hau not bene ady to yeeld him: he looketh for Iudge∣ent and Iustice: that is, an vpright heart, d true obedience to his lawes in all ings: he expecteth loue, mercy, libe∣itie, humilitie, honestie, faith, and such dly fruites, as that blessed man yeel∣th, whose delight is in the law of his od, and in his lawe doth meditate day d night: Psal. 1. 13. The Lord would, that the Prin∣sWhat he looketh for of the Prin∣ces and Iudges. Iay. 1. 17. and Iudges should do well, seeke dgement, releeue the oppressed, help e fatherlesse, defend the widowes, as s will is: that such onely bee pre∣ferred
and authorized to the same, which are persons couragious, fearing God, dea∣ling truly, hating couetousnesse, such a Iethro willed Moses to choose out & pro∣uideExo. 18. 21. among all the people of Israel: to thi purpose also the Lord would that th Prophets & ministers of his word shouldWhat, of the Pro∣phets and ministers. rule well themselues, rule well their fa∣milies, and rule well the Church, of th which the holy Ghost hath made the ouerseers: that they labour in the word and doctrine, studying and preaching the Gospell vnto all the people of God, as those good & faithfull seruants, whom their Lord hath made rulers of his house, to distribute the portions of foode in du season to them of the house. Moreouer, the Lord would, that euery man shouldWhat is re∣quired of euery man whatsoeuer. (as the Prophet sayth) do iustly, loue mer∣cie, and humble himselfe to walke with his God: for this is good, and this is tha (indeed) which the Lord requireth vs t performe in holinesse and righteous∣nesse before him all the dayes of our life Remember this ô England!
CHAP. II. The ingratitude of England. Gods appel∣lation to the consciences of Englishmen, with his complaint and sentence against them. WE haue heard before how many tokens wee haue had, and yet haue and enioy of the loue of God towards vs; and what he doth dayly looke for to be yeelded from vs vnto him. But what do we expresse towards him? and what do wee yeeld him? surely, whereas he hath declared loue, we de∣clareWhat fruits men yeeld to God. hatred, as such of whom he might say, They haue shewed me hatred for my good will, to the great griefe of my soule. And these be the fruites we bring forth vnto him, as from the euill treasures of an euill heart: in stead of Iudgement, Oppression: in stead of Iustice, a Crying▪ Men yeeld to the Lord for obedience, rebellion: for mercie, crueltie: for true dealing, extortion: for liberalitie, coue∣tousnesse:
for humilitie, pride: for ho∣nestie, filthinesse: for loue, enuie: for faith, infidelitie: for the feare of God, Epicurisme: for Godlinesse, Atheisme: and for all heauenly vertues, all hellish vices: yea, and they also in a great part, which beare Bibles in their hands, flock to Sermons, talke of the Gospell, dis∣pute of Religion, and make glorious shewes of holinesse, doo runne with theeues, partake with adulterers, shake hands with mutherers, and sit with false Iudges: Psal. 50. 2. These be the fruits which men for the most part yeeld now to the Lord. If Moses were yet liuing, he would not dread to reproue them playnely to their faces, for these their abhominations. And Iohn the Baptist, if hee were in these dayes, would not feare to point at them particularly, as he did to He∣rod. But now, it is enough, (if it be not too much) that wee reproue them co∣uertlyMen will not be re∣proued plainely. in parables, as Nathan did, as Dauid, and Isayah did the Princes, Pro∣phets, and Rulers of Iudah: or speake
at randon in generall words of that which should be touched in particulars, if we speake to them at all. If we aduenture farther then this, albeit men are wor∣thely to be reproued, hauing neitherHos. 4. 1. 2. 4. truth, nor mercie, nor knowledge of God: but are giuen to swearing, ling, killing, stealing, whoring, and sinne vpon sinne: yet (as sayd the Prophet, so we may say now) Let none rebuke, nor reproue another: for they are, as they that rebuke the Priest: that is, they will not abide to be reproued: but will rather lame and oppresse the Prophet and Minister, which by the word of God, ndeuoureth to correct and amende hem. 3. But Moses is dead, so is Iohn he Baptist: so is Isayah, so is Nathan: nd all these sinnes and abhominations o raigne from the head to the footeIsa 1. God slee∣peth not, nor will winke at mens sinne▪ as sayth Isayah) and in the whole bo∣ie (as it were) without controlment: nd there is a pittifull crying of the ppressed in euery place, without helpe, ithout succour, without comfort (as
Salomon also sayd, Eccles. 4. 2.) What then? doth the Lord God sleepe there∣fore? and doth he neither heare nor regard it? No, no: but these things are in the eares of the Lord of hoasts; he hea∣reth the cry, regardeth the complaint, and euer watcheth ouer his people to keepe them, and to reproue all their enemies: for The Lord (as Christ wit∣nesseth) will auenge his elect that cry day and night vnto him, and that quickly. In the meane time, the Lord hath not vtterly depriued his Church in the world of some such singular Prophets and Mi∣nisters, as do not omit in his behalfe to expostulate those perfidious and vn∣thankefull persons, and call them to a reckoning at the barre of Gods iustice, howsoeuer they answere for themselues. 4. But, seeing the thing is so mani∣fest, and in all equitie to be graunted,Appellation to mens cōsciences. what should let me (ô England) to ap∣peale to thine owne conscience? the Lord himselfe is contented first to suf∣fer thee to giue the sentence in this case, in the which, thy guiltie conscience
being as a thousand witnesses against thy sinfull soule, cannot choose but condemne thee, as both those former Iewes, to whom the Lord by Isayah ap∣pealed, and also these latter Iewes, to whome appealed Christ, gaue sentence against themselues: or as Ionah, when he fled from the presence of the Lord, and perceiuing that it was for his sinne that both himselfe, with the Mariners, were troubled on the Seas, and was as∣ked what they should do vnto him? He answered (his conscience accusing and condemning him,) Take me, and cast me into the Sea, so shall the Sea be calme vn∣to you: for I know, that for my sake this great tempest is come vpon you. 5. And thus sayth the Lord: O Eng∣land,The Lord complay∣neth, and calleth men into Iudge∣ment. what meanest thou? alas, that I should be moued through thine vnkind∣nesse to complayne against thee. But I pereiue, it is high time, that I both com∣playne, and call thee into Iudgement, seeing thou art neither thankfull to mee for my benefites, nor profitable to my Church in thy fruites.
What! art thou all so forgetfull of my bes? and wilt thou not acknow∣ledge them? Who chose thee? who planted thee? who protected and defen∣ded thee? who cleansed thee? who beaw∣tified thee? who made and appoynted thee to my seruice? to my glory? to my vse? was it not I? Am not I thy Father,Deut. 32. 6. that bought thee, and made thee, and proportioned thee, and exalted thee? And what is the cause (ô England) that thou hast not expressed some tokens of gratitude and kindnesse vnto me? Why hast thou not answered my good ex∣pectation, and yeelded me good fruites? What more couldest thou desire that I should haue done, which I did not for thee? Why hast thou bene so vn∣gratefull, and vsed me after this sort? 6. If thou aske me wherein I finde thee ingratefull? then hearken, and IThe cause of this ex∣postulation and com∣plaint. will tell thee wherein. Hast thou not brought forth wilde grapes, when I ex∣pected good grapes? Hast thou not yeelded me Oppression for Iudgement? and yeelded me a Crying, for Righte∣ousnesse? Is not wickednesse seene in
the place of Iudgement? and iniquitie in the place of Iustice? Is not the place of Iudgement often made an hammer to beate downe the poore afflicted, the fa∣therlesse, the widowes, the innocents? and the place of Iustice, a staffe to stay vp and to defend the bribers, the extortio∣ners, the theeues, the murtherers, the adul∣terers, the flatterers, the blasphemers, and such like? And wherfore hath it bene so? 7. Behold and consider all ye that come by my vineyard, how many bitter grapes it bringeth me forth, & yet could not find in hart to yeeld me any good fruits! Shall I note some particular fruites, though I note not the particular trees that beare them? then harken, and try, and examine the matter, if it be not as I say. I haueThe parti∣culer fruits of this na∣tion and time. found Pride to spring there, where I ex∣pected humilitie, from them that should be humble. I haue found Enuie there, where I required loue, among them that should be charitable. I haue found coue∣tousnes there, where should haue bin libe∣ralitie, euen in thē that should be liberall; lo, is it not so? Againe, I haue seene that
they which should be mercifull, are cruell: they that should be true men, are become theeues: they that should be di∣ligent, are waxen slothfull: they that should be watchfull, are sleepie: they that should be chaste, are lecherous: they that should be harmelesse as Doues, are hurtfull as Vultures: they that should be holy, are prophane: and (to be short) that which should be good, is starke naught; for they be gone out of the way, & become abhominable, neither is there scarce any among them that feareth the Lord; and those few that feare him, are mightily afflicted by the maligne world∣lings. Lo, is it not so? If it be so, as indeed it is, then deny it not; excuse it, and say not that darknesse is light, that sowre is sweet, that euill is good, for feare of that wo: Isay. 5. 8. Thus hath the Lord complained, and hardly charged his vineyard, I meane this our Nation (as he sometime charged the house of Israel, and the men of Iudah) for many sins, many abhominatiōs, the which haue bin, & are dayly wrought against his
Maiestie. Howbeit all these enormities aue not bene perpetrated among vs, for he want either of the preaching of the ord of God, and other his diuine bene∣tes (for they haue bene most plentifully estowed on vs, as it is said before) nor for he want of needfull lawes and politicke roceedings (for nothing hath beene o∣itted in this respect that hath bene ey∣er necessarie or profitable) but they roceed from that bitter roote, which at enuious man hath planted in the Vineyard, there, whereas the good Vine hould stand; and of the negligent regardMat. 21. f them to whom the Lord committed he charge of his Vineyard, who should aue bene most carefull to suppresse those ilde Grapes, and not haue permitted hem to spring vp: and to haue defended nd maintained the good Vine, and not o haue suffered it to starue and wither a∣way. 9. But what meane ye, (my Countrey∣men)It is bootles for men to striue a∣gainst God. 1. cor. 10. 22. what meane ye, that thus you be∣aue your selues towards the Lord God? What? Will ye wilfully prouoke him to an∣ger? Will ye say, that truth is falshood?
that sweete is sowre; that good is bad? Do ye not know, that ye should not temp him, as they did in the Wildernesse? Do ye not consider, that he is a cōsuming fire, into whose hands it is an horrible thing to fall? Is not his voyce a mightie voyce, breaking the Cedars of Lybanus? What,There is both mercy and iustice with the Lord. will ye still vrge on him his mercie, and doo not ye also thinke on his Iustice? What thinke ye of your selues? are y stronger then hee? are yee able to en∣counter with him? alas the feeblenesse of your strength, and greatnesse of your imbecilitie to compare with God? was not Adam ouerthrowne in this conceit? were not the Israelites confounded in the Wildernesse, and the Iewes in Ierusalem? when they made their owne arme their strength, after that the Lord (being dis∣pleased) withdrew his mercie from them? The strength of man (being cōpared with God) is as the strength of an hayre: and therefore when strong Sampson trusted in his hairy locks, hee was confounded by a woman. But the strength of God, is as the strength of Iron: and therefore saith the Psalmist, Thou shalt bruse them with a rod of
Iron: that is, such as seek to resist or striue gainst thy diuine Maiestie. Therefore t vs not prouoke him to anger: for he is ronger then all men, without compari∣n. But let vs heare what the Lord, who  prouoked (indeed) saith to England. 10. Tell me, tell me (saith the Lord)The Lord threatneth England. hat thou hast iustly deserued? shew mee hat I should now doo vnto thee? Art ou mute? wilt thou not answere mee? ell maiest thou put thine hand on thy outh, and graunt to thy guiltinesse and  by thy silence, when thou art not able  answer me one for a thousand. But I wil et tell thee, what I will do vnto thee, and at shortly, except thou repent: that is  say, I wil cause thee to be deuoured and onsumed: yet more, I wil make thee to beGod pow∣reth plagues on thē that wil not repent. oden downe and spoyled: yet more, I il lay thee waste and desolate. And al this e sooner to further & effect in the time ppointed, I will depriue thee of all those lessings and good things, which before  my loue & mercie I bestowed on thee. And thus will I do indeed, except thou mely and vnfainedly repent. 11. If I did once sweare in mine
anger iustly conceiued against my people the children of Israel (when they had pro∣uoked1. Cor. 10. 5. me 40. yeares in the Wildernesse) that they should not enter into my rest, and performed mine oath to their iust de∣struction, when they would not repent: what reason is it, that I should spare thee and not consume, nor tread downe, nor waste thee, which hast had those exam∣ples both of them and of many others (besides the daily admonitions of my ser∣uants) laid open before thee, to instruct, admonish and warne thee? If I haue con∣strained2. Chro. 36. 16. 17. Iosephus. de bello Iudaic. those latter Iewes to couch down vnder the heauie burthen of my fierce iudgements for their great vnthankfulnes to me; what should moue me to vphold, sustaine, and preserue thee? If I haue (be∣yond all expectation) perforce compelled them that be presently neare neighbours and well knowne vnto thee, to drinke of the Cup of my heauie displeasure for their horrible transgressions of my word and of my law, and for their vile abuse of my my∣steries, and Ministers; should I not like∣wise constraine thee, to drinke of the same for the like? yes, yes; and that iustly and
shortly; except thou timely and vnfained∣ repent. 12. Thus saith the Lord God to Eng∣nd:Vnfained repentance hath re∣mission. Thus do the messengers of his grace et preach and publish to England: and is shall the messengers of his wrath in me, execute on England except Englād pent. Albeit England be a Fig-tree, and eare faire broad leaues; yet▪ if it yeeld no igs, it shall be cut downe and remoued  a thing vnprofitable: much rather then all England be reiected, if (in stead of ood fruites) it bring forth (with the vine f Sodome) nothing but vnpleasant and aughtie fruites: yea, if England were as eare to the Lord, as the Apple of a mans ye is to the man, yet will he pull it out, nd cast it from him, without all regard of : if English men continue sinfull and ob∣inate, and will not repent. Thus Christ  the Gospell said to the Iewes: ExceptIsa. . e repent, ye shall all perish: so say the Lords essengers now, to England: because England hath transgressed, & her daugh∣ers are proud, and walke with stretched ut necks, and with wandring eyes, wal∣ing & minsing as they go, and making a
tinkeling with their feet, as did the daugh∣ters of Zion of yore; neither will they be reclaimed: therefore the Lord will be a∣uenged, and shaue the heads of those daughters of England (as he did of those daughters of Zion) and discouer they secret parts, and bring them to shame; except they wisely consider, and timely repent: for now is the Axe laid to the roote of the tree, that euery tree which bringeth not forth good fruite, shall be hewen down and burned in the fire. 14. And to say the truth: there be∣longethWe haue deserued shame and confusion. in right, none other thing vnto vs, but shame and confusion; because wee haue forsaken the Lord, and haue not hearkened to his word, whereby we might walke in his way, to do Iudgement and Iu∣stice: howbeit, seeing that he who desirethGod is mer¦cifull and will not the deathe of a repentant Sinner. not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and liue, hath promised both mercie and life, (through the merite of his sonne) to them that turne vnto him, and yeeld the fruites of repentance: pre∣suming on the fidelitie & assurance of hisLet vs ther∣fore repent and we shal liue. promise; I say thus, and no more: O England, repent with speed, and bring foorth
those fruites which are worthie amendment  life, and thou shalt neither be deuoured, nor oden downe, nor be laide waste: but thou  shalt be encreased: thou shalt be vphol∣den: thou shalt be maintained in prosperitie, and florish for euer. The end of the third part. Psal. 81. 13. 14: that my people had hearkened vnto mee: nd Israel had walked in my waies! I would one haue humbled their enemies, and tur∣ed mine hand against their aduersaries. FINIS.
