A175 11490583 47826
AN ACCOUNT HOW THE Earl of Essex Killed Himself in the Tower of London, The 13th. of July 1683. As it appears by the Coroners Inquest, and the several Informations following. DIEV ET MON DROIT LONDON: Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1683.
THe Information of Paul Bomeny, Ser∣vant to the Earl of Essex, for about Three or Four Years now last past; taken upon Oath the Fourteenth Day of July, An∣no Regni Caroli Secundi Dei Gratia, Angliae, Sco∣tiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, &c. Tricesimo Quinto, Anno{que} Domini, 1683. SAith, That when my Lord came to Ca∣ptain Hawley, which was the Eleventh Instant, my Lord of Essex asked him for a Pen-Knife to Pare his Nails, as he was wont to do; to which this Informant answered, Being come in haste he had not brought it, but he would send for one, and accord∣ingly sent the Footman with a Note for several things for my Lord, amongst which the Pen-Knife was insert∣ed; and the Footman went, and gave the Bill to my Lords Steward, who sent the Provisions, but not the Pen-Knife, and he told the Footman, He would get one the next day. When the Footman was come, my Lord asked, If the Pen-Knife was come? This In∣formant answered, No; but he should have it the next day, and accordingly, he on the Twelfth Instant in the morning, before my Lord of Essex was up, this Infor∣mant sent the Footman home with a Note to the Ste∣ward, in which, amongst other things, he asked for a Pen-Knife for my Lord; and when the Footman was gone, about, or a little after Eight of the Clock, my Lord sent one Mr. Russell, his Warder, to this Infor∣mant, who came, and then he asked him, If the Pen-Knife was come? This Informant said, No, my Lord, but I shall have it by and by; to which my Lord said, That he should bring him one of his Rasours, it would do as well; And then this Informant went and
fetched one, and gave it my Lord; Who then went to Pare his Nails, and then this Informant went out of the Room into the Passage by the Door, on Friday the Thirteenth Instant, and begun to talk with the War∣der, and a little while after he went down Stairs; and soon after came the Footman with the Provisions, and brought also a Pen-Knife, which this Informant put upon his Bed, and thought my Lord had no more need of it, because he thought he had Pared his Nails; and then this Informant came up to my Lords Cham∣ber, about Eight or Nine in the Forenoon on Friday the Thirteenth Instant, with a little Note from the Steward; but not finding his Lord in the Chamber, went to the Close-stool Closet Door, and found it shut; And he thinking his Lord was busie there, went down, and staid a little, and came up again, thinking his Lord had been come out of the Closet; And finding him not in the Chamber, he knocked at the Door with his Finger, Thrice, and said, My Lord? But no body answering, he took up the Hanging, and looking through the Chink, he saw blood, and a part of the Rasour; Whereupon he called the Warder, Russell, and went down to call for help; and the said Russell pushed the Door open, and there they saw my Lord of Essex all along the Floor, without a Periwig, and all full of blood, and the Rasour by him. And this De∣ponent further Deposeth, That the Rasour now shew∣ed to him, at the time of his Examination, is the same Rasour which he did bring to my Lord, and which did lye on the ground in the Closet, by my Lord. BOMENY.
THe Information of Thomas Russel one of the Warders of the Tower, who had the Custody of the Earl of Essex, taken the Fourteenth day of July, Anno Regni Caroli Se∣cundi, Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor', &c. Tricesimo Quinto, Anno{que} Dom. 1683. SAith, That on Friday the Thirteenth Instant, about Eight or nine of the Clock in the Forenoon, he was present when he did hear the Lord of Essex call to his Man Mr. Bomeny for a Pen-knife to pare his nails, and then for a Rasour, which Mr. Bomeny brought him, and then my Lord walked up and down the Room scraping his nails with the Rasour, and shut the outward door; Mr. Bomeny, half a quarter of an hour afterwards, not finding my Lord in his Bed-Chamber, went down stairs again, believing that my Lord was then private in his Closet. Bomeny came up about a quarter of an hour afterwards, and knocked at the door, then called, My Lord, My Lord, My Lord; but he not answer∣ing, peeped through a Chink of the door, and did see the Earl of Essex lying on the ground in the Closet, whereupon he did cry out, That my Lord was faln down sick; and then this Informant went to the Clo∣set-door, and opened it, the Key being on the outside, and then did see my Lord lie on the ground in his bloud, his Throat being cut. Tho. Russell.
THe Information of Robert Sherwood of Fanchurch Street, Chyrurgion, taken the Fourteenth day of July, Anno Regni Caroli Se∣cundi, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor', &c. Tricesimo Quinto, Anno{que} Dom. 1683. SAith, That he hath viewed the Throat of the Earl of Essex, and does find that there is a large Wound, and that the Aspera Arteria, or Wind-pipe, and the Gullet, with the Jugular Arteries, are all divided: Of which Wound he certainly died. Robert Sherwood. THe Information of Robert Andrews of Crutchet Friers Chyrurgion taken upon Oath the Fourteenth day of July, Anno Regni Caroli Secundi nunc Regis Angliae, &c. Tricesi∣mo Quinto, Anno{que} Dom' 1683. SAith, That he hath viewed the Throat of the Lord of Essex, and does find, That it was cut from the one Jugular to the other, and through the Wind-pipe and Gullet, unto the Vertebres of the Neck, both Jugular Veins being also quite divided. Robert Andrews.
Turr' London ss. AN Inquisition Indented, Ta∣ken at the Tower of London, in the County of Middlesex, the fourteenth day of July, in the Five and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of Our Soveraign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. Anno{que} Dom. 1683. before Ed∣ward Farnham Esq Coroner of the said Lord the King, of the Liberty of the Tower of London, upon view of the Body of Arthur Earl of Essex then and there ly∣ing Dead, by the Oaths of Daniel Colwell Esq William Fisher, Thomas Godfel Esq Thomas Hunt, Nathaniel Mountney Esq Thomas Potter, William How, Robert Bur∣goine, Eleazar Wiggins, Thomas Hoggsflesh, Henry Cripps, Richard Rudder, William Knipps, John Hudson, John Kittlebeater, Lancolet Col∣son, Morgan Cowarn, Thomas Bryan, William Thaxton, Richard Cliffe, Zebadiah Richard, William Bayford, and Theophilus Charter, good and lawful men of the Liberty of the Tower of London aforesaid, who being Charged and Sworn to enquire how and in what manner the said Arthur Earl of Essex came to his Death, upon their Oaths say, That the aforesaid Arthur Earl of Essex the Thirteenth day of July, in the said Five and thirtieth Year of his now Ma∣jesties Reign, at the said Tower of London, in the faid County of Middlesex, about the Ninth hour of the same day in the Fore∣noon, not having God before his eyes,
but being moved and seduced by the In∣stigation of the Devil, of his Malice fore∣thought at the Tower of London aforesaid, in the said County of Middlesex, then and there being alone in a Closet, with one Rasour of the value of one shilling, Voluntarily and Feloniously Cut his Throat, and did thereby give himself one Mortal Wound, it being cut from the one Jugular to the other, and through the Wind-pipe and Gullet un∣to the Vertebres of the Neck, both Ju∣gular Veins being also quite Divided; of which said Mortal Wound the said Arthur Earl of Essex instantly Died; and thus the aforesaid Jurors, upon their Oaths say, That the aforesaid Arthur Earl of Essex, in Manner and Form aforesaid, did Voluntarily and Feloniously, as Felo de se, Kill and Murther himself, a∣gainst the Peace of our Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity. In Witness whereof as well I the said Coroner, as the Jurors aforesaid, to this Inquisition have put our Hands and Seals, the Day and Year abovesaid. Vera Copia Examin'cum Originali, Per. E. FARNHAM. FINIS.
