A1984f 99825742 30129
A NEW PROGNOSTIC¦TION FOR THE YEAR O OUR BLESSED LORD 1677. Being the first after Leap-year. Containing the moveable Feasts: the Eclipses▪ the four Quarter of the year: the Changes of the Moon, with the disposition of the weather. The dismal dayes. And the whole known Fair of Scotland. With other observations. Serving most fitly for the most part of the Kingdom of Scotland, b more especially for our City of GLASGOW, where the Pole is elevated 55. deg. 55. min. et-Abedene, by an expert Mathematician. diagram of the sky with cardinal directions and phases of the moon GLASGOW, By Robert Sanders, Printer to the C University, and are to be sold in his Shop, 1677.
Since The Creation of the World — 5626 The general Deludge — 3990 Feigns the first King of Scotland — 1006 The building of Solomons Temple — 2694 Rome was built by Romulus — 2529 The Scots entred Albion — 2095 The building of Edinburgh Castle — 2007 The last destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian 1608 The Christian Faith was received in Scotland 1467 The building of the high Church of Glasgow 479 The first invention of Guns — 297 The inventiō of Printing in Europe, before in China 237 The Colledge of Glasgow was built — 222 The appearing of the new star in Cassiopeia 105 The Gun-powder Treason, November 5. 72 The birth of King CHARLES the second 47 The Duke Hamiltons engagement — 29 The great fire in Glasgow — 25 The last great Plague in London — 25 The great fire in London — 19 The fall of an arch of the bridge of Glasgow, July 7. 1678, 6 Common Notes and moveable Feasts this year 1677. We shall have Fastens-even, which in England is called Shrove-tuesd. Feb. 27 Ash Wednsday on the Morn. Pasch, or Easter — April 15 Whitsunday — June 3 Golden Number — 6 Dominical Letter — G The Epact — 6 ween Candlemas and Fastens-even, are 25, days inclusve.
The Eclipses of this year, 1677. THere will be three Eclipses this years The fu Moon, May the 7. day, 25. min. past 3. in the  the beginning will be at 42. minutes past 1. in the morning. T middle at 25. minutes past 3. The end at 8. min. past 5. So th the whole duration will be 3. hours, 26. min. Digies Eclipsed  and 15. min. So shall the beginning and middle of this Eclipse seen by us. The second will be of the Sun, May the 21. day, 34. minut past 10. morning. The third will be of the Sun, November the 14. day, 5. min. past 1. at night. These two last of the Sun will not be seen by us, fed Austrasibus. A full Description of the four Quarters of the year 1677. THe Spring begins on Friday the 9. of March 40. min. past 9. afternoon, the Sun entring Aries. Summer quarter begins on Sunday the 10. of June, 28. min. past midnight, the Sun entring Cancer. Harvest quarter begins on Wednesday, the 12. day of Septem∣ber. 53. min. past 3. afternoon, the Sun entring Libra. Winter quarter begins on Tursday the 11. day of December, 40 min. past 3. afternoon, the Sun entring Capticorn. The changes of the Moon, with the exact rising and setting of the Sun, and disposition of the Weather, for this year 1677. Xxxi. January begins on Munday. Sun riseth 17. min. before 9 sets 27 min past 3. First quarter on Munday 1. day, 4. in, past 2. morning. Moon on Monday 8. day, 16. m. past 11. at night. Second quarter on Tuesday 16. day, 39. min. past 2 afternoon
unsday 23. day, 30. m. past 5. morning. quer on Tuesday 30. day, 1. min. past 3. afternoon. The New Year begins with frost the first 5. dayes, and to the 12. turbulent winds, with snow; thence to the 16. weather for the season: from the 16. to 22.23.24. frost: thence to the 28. sleety, and to the end of the moneth frost. This moneth set all kind of fruit trees, and quicksets. In the new of the Moon (the wind and whether observed) you may set pease and beans, patsnips, and oats, if the eather proof mild, and the Moon decreasing. If thou be sick, and help wouldst have, The counsel of the Learned crave. If thou hast health, to keep thee so. Fly idleness as deadly foe. The first Fair in the year is S. Naughlans, at the Kirk of Be∣thelny, in Gerry, upon the 7. day. S. Mungo in Glasgow the 13. day a fair: and at Dunkel and Kilwinning the 12. day. Xxviij. February begins on Thursday. Sun riseth 30. min. before 8. sets 30. min. past 4. Full Moon on Thursday 8. day, 17. m. past 2. morning. Second quarter on Wednesday 14. day, 11. m. past 11. at night, Change on Wednesday 21. day, 27. m. past 5. afternoon. The 1.2.3. and 4. dayes fair weather, but cold, from thence to the 10. very good weather for Ducks and geese: from the 10. to the 16. frost: the 16.17. and 18. rain: the 20.21. hard winds: the rest of the moneth temperate. This moneth set totes, with all other kind of plants, cut quick∣sets, sow pease and onions; as in the moneth before, the weather considered, you may now garden for sallet herbs, and such like. Be choice of food in any wise, To keep thee warm also precise: Beware like wise thou let not blood, Except the Learned think it good. The first at Abernethy and Forrec in Murrayland, cal.  S. ides day, On Candlemase day in Bamff, Dunkth Dingal, Dowglas, the 2. day. Valentine day in Linsithgow
the 14. day, and Forfar the 15. holding eight days. Ashwed∣nesday fair begins on Fasten-even, at Lanerk the same day, Vally-field the 24. day. Xxxj. March begins on Thursday. Sun riseth 38. min. before 7. sets 38. min. after 5. First quarter on Thursday 1. day, 50. m. past 9. morning. Full Moon on Friday 9. day, 8. m. past 7. morning. Change on Friday 23. day, 5. m. past 2. morning. First quarter on Saturday 31. day, 59. m. past 5. morning. This moneth begins roughly the first five dayes, the 6, 7 and 8. more sober: thence to the 12. cold showrs, the 13, 14. raw frost: and to the 19. high winds: thence to the 25. kindly weather, to the 28. flying showrs, the the rest pleasant. This moneth in the new of the Moon, grast, set quicksets and vines, cut your hedges and vines already growing: as also you may sow onions, beans and oats, and all manner of garden feed. Now bleed and bathe, if thou desire, And purge also, if need require. Ill humors do in many breed: Provide in time before you need. S. Monence in Aberdene, Dumfermling, Abercherder and S. Marnoch Kirk the first day, at Pertenween the 3. S. Duihes in Tane of Rosi the 9. in Auchertuel and Innerness the 10 S. Causnan the 12. day: S. Patrick in Dumbart an, and at the Kirk of Strageeth and at Kirkadie a fair of horse, neat & sheep, &c. the 16. day; in S. Johnston the 19. Cuthbert in Langron of the Mers the 20 day: Lady-day in Westweems, Bamff, Authtermucht the 25. Midlentron fair at Banchrie, on thursday before Midlentron sunday; Palmsunday at the Kir of Forrig, and in S. Johnston; and Shthursday fair upon thursday before Good-friday at Cewper of Angus, oth wise Morks Cowper a fair in Forres, called S. Markt fr first tuesday after Easter yearly.
Xxx. April begins on Sunday. Sun riseth 53. min. before 6. sets 53. min. past 6. Pull Moon on Saturday 7. day, 38. m. past 6. afternoon. Second quarter on Saturday 14. day, 30 m. past 10. morning. Change on Saturday 21. day, 53 m. past 7 afternoon. First quarter on Sunday 29. day, 10 m. past 12. at night. This moneth begins with sharp cold weather, from thence to the 11. more temperate: the 12.13. strong hard winds: thence to the 19. calm and clear: from the 20, to the 26. dry and windy, with some rain towards the close of the moneth. In this moneth pole your hops, sow barley and artichoaks, bark trees for Tanners, sow hemp and flax, set citrons, melons, and cucumbers, and furnish and replenish your gardens with Summer herbs. Now wholesom baths thou mayst frequent, Let blood also, and not repent: These are good means thee to defend, From griefs the which on thee attend. S. Oles fair at the Kirk of Cruden the first tuesday? at Lesie on tuesday before Easter; in Corstorphine the first tuesday after Easter a fair. S. Donald fair at the Kirk of Auchterless the 17. in Old Aberdene on Skirethursday. S. Mark Evangelist in Dysert the 23. Beltan day the first the 26. a fair at Rugland the 28. continuing four days: at Leven the 29 day, and in Kilreni the 30. day, at Borrowsiounness the first Tuesday after Pasch. Whiles in March, and whiles in April. Skire thursday before Pasch in Old-Aberdene, Glasgow, Dumbartan, Cowper of Angue, Elgin of Murray. Paschs munday in Cowper of Eise Lanerk and Irwing, Low-sunday after Pasch in Killimure, and all the week after at the Seazie f S. Andrews. Xxxj. May begins on Tuesday. Sun riseth 56. min. before 5. sets 56. min. past 7. Moon on Munday 7. day, 25 in. past 3 morning. nd quarter on Sunday 13. day, 20 m. past 5 afternoon.
Change on munday 21. day, 34 m. past 10 morning. First quarter on tuesday 29. day, 9 m. past 1. afternoon. Good weather to the 8.9. day, 12.13. some rain: thence to the 16, 17. reasonable weather: the to the 22, 23, great winds, the end of this moneth summer weather. In the beginning of this moneth you may sow the seed of t¦mer herbs, which could not endure the cold of the fore moneths. You may sow your hemp and flax, weed your gardens, and take away superfluous branches, and moss you gardens. Rise early now this month of May, And walk the fields that be so gay: From surfeiting see thou refrain, Or soon it will procure thy pain. The first day, called S. Philip a fair in the Grange with the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow. Also a fair at New Chur of Kilpatrick free of custome for seven years. Holy Cross day th second Beltan in Monross, Kinrocher: Rude fair in Ellen, & in Peebles the 3. at Ranfrew of horse, neat, sheep, custom fr for 3. years the 9. day: at Carlouk the 10. at Bamff, and at Kir∣kdie a fair of neat and sheep, &c. the 16. da; in Lstie thursday before Whitsunday: Sterling fair ten days before Whitsunday: in Stonehive upon tuesday before Whitsunday with a weekly mercat every thursday. Whiles in May, and whiles in June▪ Whitsunmunday in Glasgow, Dumbartan, Lnerk and Je∣burgh. Whitsuntuesday, called Pardonday, in the Chartrie o Ross, Peterhead, and at the Kirk of Ninians above Kirkadi and Barrowstownness. Trinity munday in Edinburgh and Bchin eight days; in S. Andrews one day, in Burntiland one day. A fair in the Burgh of Linlithgow the first thursday after Whitsunday. Trinity tuesday in Rugland lasting two dayes, Triy thursday in Falkland. Xxx. June begins on Friday. Sun riseth 44. min. before 4. sets 44. min. past 8. Bull Moon on Tuesday 5. day, 45 m. past 10 morning. Last quarter on Tuesday 12. day, 11 m. past 2 morning.
Change on Wednesday 20. day, 15 m. pas 1 morning. Fst quarter on Thursday 28. day, 18 m. past 1 morning. Hot and dry to the 14. day: thence to the nso mer howers, thence to the 19. very hot dry other: thence the 24.25. some thunder and ligning and all the rest of the moneth fair and pleasant sum weather. In this moneth at the full of Moon; gather herbs to keep dry the whole year. Weed your corn fields and gardens set, rosem and gilly-flowers: sow lettice, shear sheep, the Moon increasin Drink new or sweet, caste not at all, For thereby grows no danger small: And to thy self such pastime take, As may in God thee merry make. A fair in Kinross the first tuesday of June. Bernard f  second tuesday: in Stramiglio, Aberdour and Ennerkei ng the 6. A weekly mercat in Forfar, beginning the 8. of Ju of neat, sheep, horse, &c. continuing till the first of Octob. fair in Forgondeny the 10. S. Barnabie in Lawder and Dyse Dowglas, S. Laurence in Grinock the 11. day. S. Marga n. Abernethy: Ceres in Fise the 13. Midsummer on S. Joy in S. Johston five dayes, in Air four dayes; in Wig Bamff and Athelston the 14. in Auchtertueil & Chiskina and Bocklyvie in the Parish of Kippon the 15. Saint. M∣gares in Dumsermling, and at Mossat the 18. day n which place there is a weekly mercat every friday. Ear slon the 19. Methil the 22. day. Midsummer day in Hawi in the South, hard by the river of Teviot, for horse, sheep, ox and at, &c. on the 24. day, together with a weekly mere ay always upon the thursday. Also in Forres, Townyetum the border the 24. day, of horse, neat and sheep, &c, the 24. wil a weekly mercat. In Alathy in Angus, called S. Emagolath 25. S. Peters day at Forfar the 26. holding four dayes. A also in Falkland, Burntiland, Bamff, and Kelso the 26. Gallas∣iels the 9. In Peebleth 9. S. Seriss fair the last tuesday of this moneth. S John Baprist day a fair in Frazerburgh the 4. day. There is also a fair called S. Margarets fair on the thir
tuesday of this month upon the Mains of Keith-hall, someti legdeed Caskiben, continuing the whole week, and to be custom  for two years. Xxxi. July begins on Sunday. Sun riseth 37. min before 4. sets 37. min. past 8. ull Moon on wednesday 4. day, 30 m. past 5 afternoon. First quarter on wednesday 11. day, 40 m. past 1 afternoon, Change on thursday 19. day, 35 m. past 3 afternoon. First quarter on friday 27. day, 56 m. past 10 morning. From the first to the 8. small showers: from thence o the 10 some pleasant weather, the 11, 12. and 13, 14. igh winds with rains the 22.23. fair and hot weather, he end rain. In this moneth play your haying, follow your land for wheat, ull up hemp that is ripe, get rue and wormwood to drive away leas and moths: dry flowers in the shade, and then sun them a ittle for fear of corruption. Perfume thy house with savors sweet, But such as are for purpose meet▪ Abroad as thou in streets dost go. Defend thy self from stinks also. Culross the first day, Abernethy and Auchtermuchty the 1. day. S. Martin of Bulzeon 4. day. Peter fair in Peterhead. The first Tuesday in Dundie a new fair. S. Thomas in Langnewton, midway betwixt Jedburgh and Melros: the 3. day; S. Palladius in Forden of the Merns the 6. S. An∣ew in Glasgow the 7. S. Lawrence at Grinock the 1▪ day. Kilwinning the 12. day. S. Margaret in Frendraught, and Asky fair in Old Deer, both on the 2. tuesday. A fair a Borrowstonness the second wednesday. S. Margaret in Kills∣ure the 13. six days at the Kirk of Forrig; in Tarves the 2 tuesday: in Moffat and Kirkadie▪ fair of horse, neat, & see the 18. Stirling the 20. Mary Magdalen in Linlithgow▪ enwen and Pathhead the 22. in Airth the 24. S. Jame Forfar, Cowper of Fise, Lanerk, Roxburgh, Kinghorn. E in Murray, and in Musselburgh he 25. Possinar fair in Inv∣ary; and Lambmas fair in Turreff, both on the last tuesday▪
last thursday of July a fair in Lesly and at Whitehern ay. S. Christina in Corstorphin a fair the 24. day. Xxxj. August begins on Wednesday. Sun riseth 41. min. before 5. sets 41. min. past 7. Full Moon on thursday 2. day; 18 m. past 9. at night. Last quarter on friday 10 day, 22 m. past 4 morning. Change on saturday 18. day, 5 m. past 7 morning. First quarter on saturday 25. day, 12 m. past 4. afternoon. The first 5. dayes fair: thence to the 10. some very great rain with storm winds: thence to the 17.18. sea∣sonable: thence to the 22.23. cloudy, the end good Har∣vest whether. Reap wheat and rye, cut down your oats, gather garden seeds, sow lettice and other winter beths in the new of the Moon: Use modelate dyet, forbear to sleep presently alter meat, take head of sudden cold after great heat. As burning heat will thee destroys So shivering cold will thee annoy, Let little sleep thee now content: Purge not, nor bleed, lest thou repent. Lambmas day in Atturf three days long and in Melrois, Ennerkiething, S. Andrews, and in Dumbarran the first day. Lawrence fair in Rane the first tuesday, the 2. tuesday at Jed∣burgh, thursday after in Falkland. Martimas fair the 3. tuesday. S. Lawrence in Selkirk, Auchtermuchty, Forres and Carnt wath the 10. In Rane two days before Kilmabug, and at the burn of Campsie. Lindy day in Dundie, Bamff, Merns and Vallyfield: Martimas in Innerness, and Mary day the first at Monymusk the 15. at Rugland the 20. lasting four day. S. Bar∣tholomew Apostle in Linlithgo, Kinkarn of Neil, Clackma∣nan and Peebles the 24. S. Zepherinus in Corstorphin the 26. day  fair. Semarevis day in Forres and Keith the 27. day. S. Johns y in S. Johnston the 29. day. Lnerk a fair the last friday of moneth. A fair in Stranraver in the Reinds of Gaboway, ed St. Johns day; the last friday of August.
Xxx. September begins on Saturday. Sun riseth 29. min. before 6. sets 29. min. after 6. ull Moon on saturday 1 day, 44 m. past 8 afternoon. Last quarteon saturday 8. day, 43 m. past 9. afternoon. Change on Sunday 16. day, 18 m. past 9. in the afternoon. First quarter on Sunday 23. day, 57. m. past 1 at night. Full Moon on Sunday 30. day, 44 m. past 8 afternoon. The first 6. dayes wind and rain, thence to the 12.13. more temperate, from thence to 22.23. some showrs, from thence to the the end of the moneth fair harvest weather. Set artichoaks, sow seeds for winter herbs, about the full of the Moon, the weather being dry: sow wheat and rye, kill bees, make verjuyce, sow parships and carrets, and remove tres every new Moon till February. Raw fruit, though ripe, may sickness bring, Untipe much eat, a dangerous thing, If now a surfeit thou dost take, When others sleep thou must awake. S. Giles in Elgin the first day, Moflat the 2. Skirlin the 4. Latter Lady day in Stirling, Dundie, Bamff, Monymtk and Inverury the 8. in Auchtertueil and Slane the 11. Rude fair in Jedburgh and Innerness the 14. in Forfar a fair the 15. bol∣dins 8. days. A fair at Kirkade, of horse, neat, and sheep &c. the 20. Matthew Apostle in Linlithgow the 21. Rude fair in Garil, Jedburgh, Dumferinling, Dumfries and Athelston 24. at Leven, Langnewton midway betwixt Jedburgh and Melross 27. S. Michel in Frendraught, Haddington, Lesly, Air, S. Andrews, Crief, Kirkubright, Galashiels, and at the Kirk of Forrig, and at Ranfrew, of horse, neat and sheep, cus stome free for three years, the 29. S. Jerom in Bamff the last day. Xxxi. October begins on Munday. Sun riseth 16. min. before 7. sets 16. min. past 5. Last quarter on munday 8. day, 37 m. past afternoon. Change on tuesday 16. day, 2 m. past 11 afternoon. First quarter on tuesday 23. day, 51 m. past 5 morning. Full Moon on tuesday 30. day, 49 m. past 10. morning.
From the first to the 7. hard wind, from thence to the 12.13.14. some rain, thence to the 24.25. fair, the end of this moneth dark cloudy weather. Remove young plants and trees in the new of the Moon, abov the full gather such fruit as you left ungathered the last moneth, cut your rose-trees by once in two years, if you intend to have store of roses. Warm cloaths must now provided be, Also warm meats are good for thee. Have good regard thy feet be dry, Thou shal avoid much harm thereby. The 1, 2, 3. a fair in Sale Preston, the first Tuesday in Dundle a new fair. S. Francis in Abernethy and Vastyfield the 4. Dionyse in Peebles, Earlston, Kirkintillech, Aiton, Auch∣termuchti, Ceres in Fise, Killimure and Moffat the 9. Dalkeith & Tillibol the 10. at Innerkeithing the 12. day, Fenduc at Dunning the 13. in Forgondeny the 15. day, at Musselburgh & Borrowstonness the 16. with two weekly markers the munday and friday. S. Luke in Lawder, Kinross, Rugland the 8. day. Townyetam on the border the 20. of horse, neat, sheep, and a weekly market. S. Irenoa in Corstor∣phin and at the Kirk of Carlouk the 20. with a weekly market every wednesday: and at Linton in [weddal, of horse, neat and sheep, and other merchandise, with a weekly market every wednesday for all time coming, of all sorts of goods and gear, the 20. A fair at new Church of Kilpatrick, of horse, neat, lint, cloath, &c. free of custome for 7. years, 21. Mary Salamin in Stirling and Kelso the 22. A fair at For far and in Linlithgow the 24. in Kilreny and Stramiglio the 2.5. Fowls fair in Pasley and Falkirk the 26. Simon and Jude in Dysert, Falkirk, Cokani, Kirkliston and Hawick the 28. in Alloway the 29. The last thursday of this month a fair in Whithorn holding to days. Xxx. November begins on Tursday. Sun riseth 4. min. before 8. sets 4. min. after 4. st quarter on Wednesday 7. day, 25 m. past noon. Change on Wednesday 14. day, 5 m. past 11 at night. First quarter on Wednesday 21 day, 12 m. past 2 afternoon. Full moon on Thursday 29. day, 46 m. past 1 morning.
From the first in the 8.9. very cold wnt weather, from the 10.17. tough weather, and 21.22. from with snow, and therest of the moneth misty weather. In the new of the Moon remove young Trees, and in the Old of the Moon, set Pease and Beens, sow Parsnips and Cares, make Malt, and salt Martimas Beef. If Rheumes do now molest thy head, It is not ill to sweat in bed. Feed on good meats, if stomach serve, Else seek for that which doth preserve. Hallowday in Edinburgh 8. days, in Falkland, Dumblane, For∣dice the first day: in Alathy the 2. in Kilwinning the 3. at Jedburgh the first tuesday. S. Leonard in Lanerk Forres the 6. Bocklyvie in the Parish of Kippen, of horse, neat, and sheep, and other commodities, and a weekly Market every tuesday the 7, 8. Martin in Dumbar, Melrois, Martinskirk, Strabogy, Cowper of Fife, Hamil∣ton, Culross, Kilmabug the 11. S. Clement in Dundie the 13. S. He∣lens at Grinock the 15. Margaretmas fair in Dumsermling the 16. at Bryak and Peterhead the tuesday thereafter: at Barrowstouness the 18. S. Macharmuch in Tane and Auchtertueil the 22. Burntiland the 23. Maiden fair the 24. Andermas fair in Stradown, and in Frazerburgh the 29. S. Andrew in S. Johnston, Peebles and Chirn∣fide the 30. day. Xxxi. December begins on Saturday. Sun riseth 16. min. before 9. sets 16. min. after 3. Last quarter on friday 7. day, 10 m. past 4 morning. Change on friday 14. day, 8 m. past 10 beforenoon. First quarter on friday 21 day, 23 m. past 1 morning. Full Moon on friday 28 day, 56. m. post 10 at night. This month seems to enter with frost till the 12, 13. from the 13. to the 16. inclining to snow, from the 16. to the 24. dark variable, and all the rest of the moneth frost. This moneth and the next are best to fell great timber in the old of the Moon: uncover the roots of your fruit trees: fallow land for barley: look well to your cattle. Now cold December is come in, The poor mans back is cloathed thin: Then feed and cloath him as you may, The Lord will it threefold repay.
6. S. Nicolas in Aberdene the 7. elly fair▪ and Lady day in Wesiweems the 8. S. Dunstane in Bamff at the Kirk of Dier and Rothemay the 14. S. Guthert in the Grange, within the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow the 17. S. Tho∣mas in Glasgow the 15. and Innerness the 20. S. Johns day in Bamff and Porres, and Levenmouth the 27. day. The Dismal or perillous days of the year. MAsters of Astronomy and Physick that these Arts first sound, tell the most perillous and dangerous days in the year: in which if any man or woman be let blood of wound or vein, they shal die within 21. days following. Or whose falleth into sickness on any of these days, they shall never escape to till they be dead. And whoso taketh any great journey in any of these days to go from home, he shal be in danger to die one he come again. And who so woddeth a wife in any of these dayes, they shall soon be parted, or else they shall live together with much sorrow. And who so beginneth in any of these dayes any great work, it shall never come to good end: and their are the dars following. In Ianuary are eight days, that is to say, the 1. and 2.4.5.10.11.17. and 19. In February three days, the 8.10. and 17. In March are 3. days, the 15.16. and 21. In April are two days, the 15. and 11. In May are three days, the 7.15. and 20. In Iune are two days, the 4. and 7. In Iuly are two days, the 15. and 20. In August are two days, the 19. and 20. In September are two dayes, the 6. and 7. In October is on, the 6. In November are two, the 5. and 19. In Decem∣ber are three, the 6. and 7. and 11. and athers say, the 5. and 16. And whoso will learn the Canicular or Dog-days, which are days of great danger and perst▪ may know they begin the 19. day of Iuly, and continue to the 28. day of August; which season is very perillous to take sickness: and ts also perillous to take drns and medecines, or so let blood: But if it be great need, then it must be before the mst of the day. A farthing a day is sewin pence a moneth: the quarter of a year, one shilling ten pence half penny farthing & the year, sroon shiltung, and seven pence. A penny a day is two shillings fu pence the moneth: the uarter of a year seven shillings seven pnce: the year thirty shillings four pence. Farewel.
What the Thunder signifieth eery Month of the Year. THunder so January, signifieth the same year great winds, plentifull of Còrn and Cattle peradventure. Thunder in ebruary, signisieth that same year many rich men shall dye in great sickness. Thunder in March, signifieth that same year great winds, plenty of Corn, and debate amongst people. Thunder in April, signifieth that same year to be fruitful and mercy, with the death of wicked men. Thunder in May, signifieth that year, need, scarceness, and dearth of Corn, and great hunger. Thunder in June, signifieth that same year, that woods shall be overthrown with winds, and great raging shall be of Lions and Wolves, and so like of other harmful Beasts. Thunder In July, signifieth the same year shall be good Corn, and loss of beasts: that is to say, their strength shall perish. Thunder in August, signifieth the same year sorrow, wailing of many, for many shall be sick. Thunder in September, signifieth the same year great wind, plency of Corn, and much falling out between man and man. Thunder in Octo∣ber, signifieth the same year great wind, and scantness of Corn, Frui, and Trees. Thunder in November, signifieth that same year to be fruitful and mercy, and cheapness of Corn. Thunder in December, signifieth the same year cheapness of Corn, and Wheat, with peace and accord among the people. The Shepherds Prognostication for the weather: with a brief Chronology of divers Memo∣rable Accidents, these last hundred years. IF Rain-water be drunk or suckt up by the earth sooner then ordinary, it signifieth rain to be at hand. If standing water be t any time warmer then it was commonly wont to be, and no Sun∣shine help, it fore-telleth Rain. If any Springs do newly rise or bubble forth, or old Springs flow faster then ordinary, it is a to∣en of much Rain. If Ducks and Drakes do shake and flutter hi wings when they rise, it is a sign of ensuing water. If young
es  agai he ground,  drops of Rain to follow. If in a clear and starry night it lig in the South or South-east, it fore-telleth great store of Wind Rain to come from those pars. If sheep do bleat, play, o wantonly, it is a sign of wet weather. If Swine be seen to bottles of hay o straw to any place, and hide them, it betoke Rain. When Oxen do lick themselves against the hair, it be kneth Rain to follow shortly after. If Oxen or Kine feed a when it rains, it fore-telleth that the Rain shall continue ma dayes after. If Cattle when they do puff or bellow, and do lo up to the sky, it signifieth ensuing Rain. If the heat in Summ be more hot and violen then it wont to be, it is a token of Rain. Dogs guts or entrails  or rumble in his belly, it is a sign of Ra If Sal or powdred Meat be more moist then it is ordinary wont be, it signifieth Rain. The Sky or Element being red or fiery the morning, fore-sheweth Rain to follow. Doves or Pigeo coming later home to their Dove-house in the Evening then ordi∣nary, it is a token of Rain. If Crows or Daws bath themselv in winter, or if they cry yeal along any shore, more then they a commonly wont to do, then will Rain presently follow. T sparkling of a Lamp or Candle, is a manifest sign of ensu Rain. The falling of Soot down a Chimney more then ordinary, the will follow Rain presently. When Ants or Pismires do often run to nests or homes, it manifest token of wet weather. When Hens flutter their wings in the dust, or they flock tog∣ther, seeking to shelter themselves, Rain followeth. When Go∣men, or such as are troubled with any old aches, do seek th joynts to ake, there Rain shortly follows after. And if the Mon seem dark, greenish, foggy, lowring, or d∣kish, or if it appear the third day before, or the third day after new Moon, it is a token of ensuing Rain. When Flies, Gna o Fleas do bite or sting sorer then they were wont to do, or ho about mens eyes or mouths, or of Beasts, it is an evident token Rain. And if Frogs do croak more then ordinary, it is an appare token of Rain. When Toads go from their holes in the eveni it is a token of stormy weather and Rain. FINIS.
