A213 12605204 64250
AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. Blunts late Book, ENTITULED, King William AND Queen Mary CONQUERORS, Now under the Censure OF THE PARLIAMENT. London, Printed in the Year, 1693.
An Account of Mr. BLUNT's late BOOK, &c. ROyal Prerogative is a subject of that nice and tender Quality, that 'tis undoubtedly an unpardonable Presumption for any common unhallow'd Pen to touch. 'Tis not the Pre∣tensions of Zeal and Loyalty that takes up the Pen, that can apologize for the Bold Hand that guides it, any more than Zimri that held up the Ark. If an Examination of the Fountain and Boundaries of Supreme Power fall under any Cognizance, 'tis unquestionably in the Le∣gislative Body. The opening the Cabinet of such Records belongs to their Hands that keep the Key. If therefore the forementioned Pre∣sumption, even simply considered, is an Offence of that high Nature, certainly the Transports of that mad Scribble that outruns all the Bounds of Truth and Reason; and Launches into those unaccountable Mistakes and Fren∣zies, as utterly to destroy the very Fundamen∣tals of the Constitution, must deserve a double Lash. A more notorious Instance whereof has not been matcht in the late Licentious Pam∣phlet
that has made such a Noise in the Town, of which not only the Author but Licenser have fallen under the just Displeasure of our worthy Patriots in Parliament assembled; a Rebuke so proper from 'em, in a Cause where Their own and the Nations Honour is so highly concerned, and which deserved a Re∣premand from no Less a Hand than Theirs. 'Tis the Boldness of that hardened Piece that we presume in some few Remarks to ex∣amine; a Piece which certainly nothing but Infatuation (Infatuation the Pen-man's best Excuse) could dictate. For besides the egre∣gious Unreasonableness of the whole Foun∣dation of that Discourse, 'tis absolutely im∣possible the Author in his Right Wits should ever hope that such a subject on such a Basis should please any thing Living, himself only excepted. For instance; Suppose it in the favourablest Sense, a well-meaning Loyal Harangue, with both these fair Aspects, viz. First, as intended a Court-service to Their Majesties, by fixing the Crown upon their Heads by so formi∣dable a Right and Tenure as That of Conquest. And Secondly, Settling the Peoples Obedience
in a firm and duteous Resignation to the Sovereign Authority; founded on that Claim and Possession: Yet both ways has the Author instead of the least gaining his Point, utterly lost his Aim. For Example, He is so far from caressing Their Majesties in it, that 'tis possibly the coursest and most disrelishing Compliment (to give it no worse Name) he could have pickt them out, in writing them Conque∣rors. That way of Acquiring a Crown being the remotest from their Thoughts from the first Step towards the Revolution, and through the whole Course of their Accesses and Advances to the Throne. The Prince's Declarations all utterly ab∣jured any such Pretension; nor indeed were the Forces he brought over a com∣petent Strength for the least Shadow of such an Attempt. And though 'tis true, several contributing Providences, to our never to be forgotten Happiness, all con∣spired to enable the Gratitude of England to reward their Champion and Deliverer with the Presentation of a Diadem; yet I am certain in his proudest Tryumph (par∣don
the Barbarity of that Epithet) he would have taken it very disdainfully to have been saluted with the Address of the Thief to Alexander, viz. to be Entituled that Greatest of Robbers, however otherwise glo∣rious Name, a Conqueror. No; thanks to Heaven, a softer and gentler Coronation Glory, Oblation and Gift, not Rapine and Violence, incircled that Brow. Non Rapit Imperium Vis tua, sed Recipit. And if after all this, thls doughty Pen∣man has endeavoured to lay so ungrateful a Load upon the Royal Shoulders, he has made the most mistaken Piece of Work on't that Folly and Ignorance could ever be guilty of; at least if intended as a Favour. Nor indeed is his intended popular Ser∣vice herein a much more welcome Obliga∣tion, For First, Here's the whole Glory of England totally eclips'd for ever, when a poor hand∣ful of 14000 Men, such wonderful Victors, could make so intire a Subjection of the little-hearted Great Britain with so much Ease, and so small Trouble.
Tis possible if such a Feather wou'd stick in the Hoilanders Caps, there wou'd not want that Vanity in some of our Hogan Neigh∣bours, that partly in Respect and Favour to their Royal State-Holder, and a little in pride to themselves, would perk up and plume with such a Title, As Third William, the Se∣cond Conqueror. And yet as matters stand, so much to the contrary, and so far from such a Thought, I fancy, there's not the poorest Dutchman, even in his very Ale, but has long since learnt better English; though our Enthusiastick Englishman this sober Au∣thor, has pleased so wilfully and so strangely to forget himself, and his Mother Tongue. This State-Casuist little considers what a Blow he has given to the whole English Ar∣my, provided they are of that opinion as to joyn with him in Glorifying their Majesties with his Attribute of Conquerors. For their Martial Memorials will furnish but a poor homely Record, viz. That 25000 not one of them durst strick a stroke, nay, so many of them run off to the Prince of Orange; for all
this Submission and Desertion, to a Conquer or, is down-right Dread and Terror, no Kindness and Inclination, which are only due to Guests and Friends. 'Tis well for him, that the Parliament by way of Civill Magistracy have taken him into Considera∣tion; for were he under Martial Judgment, I would not run his Gantlet, for twice the honor of being Author of his Pamphlet. Nay the Parliament themselves are not much in his Debt, I mean as to any over great kindness owing for Civilities received from him; for he has made bold to put a damnable Slurre upon the whole Convention of England: For at his rate of Faith, or Front rather; (for we hope he believes better things) they were all very impertinently busy, in bestowing of Imperial Crowns upon the Prince of Orange, when God knows they were his own before. For if he claimed by Conquest, having before that time the whole Power, every Fort, Town, Stengh, &c. thro all England in his hands; and consequently the Universal submission of the Nation in
yeilding all to this to him, the whole Roy∣al Regalia of Conquest being then already his own, the Conventionary Donation was but Triffle and Mimickry: Nay, Their Majesties themselves are a little overseen (if like our Author I may make so bold with them) in Commencing their Anniversary of their Reign from the 13th of February. In short, the Confusions arising from his Hypothesis are too numerous to recite: All that we can think worth Commendation in it is that he has made His Majesty doubly a Conqueror. For First belike he Conquered King James, and then himself: For not∣withstanding all the peculiar claims and pri∣viledges of Conquest, he has intirely waved them all, and has sat down contented with a plain English limited Monarchy, without as∣suming the least Jewel of Conquest for a∣dorning his Diadem. 'Tis true our Author bound himself to a more modest Circle in the notion of Conquest, his position being confined to this narrow Compass. viz. That King William Conquer∣ed
King James, but not the Nation; and that therefore he acquired a Title to all the Rights of King James, but not to any Rights of the Nation. That King James had a Right to Go∣vern this Natton, but by being Conquered he lost that Right, and in short, King William won it. The business therfore of this short Paper is to fadom and examine the depth of this Position, being indeed the Grand Thesis of the whole Book. Now to begin with the Incongruities in the very Foundation of his Discourse: For to Conquer a King and all his Rights, and those Rights being granted to entend to his Govern∣ment of his Kingdom, and yet to make that distinct and wholly separate from the Rights of the Nation, is so near to a contradiction that nothing possibly can be nearer, the Right of Governing over a People being at least their highest and dearest Concern, and the Conquest of that Right, and the Latitudes of Power annext to such a Conquest, being undoubtedly their tenderest and nearest Consideration.
Well, as great as it was, King William con∣quer'd all this, which in every vulgar Ap∣prehension, was conquering as much as King James had to lose; a very fair Prize, let me tell ye, for by Birth-right, and all the ties of Succession, his Right extended to the Su∣preme Administration of three Realms, as far as the Land-Marks of Law reach'd in the Rule and Sway of a limited Monarchy: A goodly Conquest, the Peoples unconquer'd Rights remaining, being only Duty and Obedience to their Soveraign Conqueror accordingly, which how far agreeing with the Circumstan∣ces of Their Majesties Accession to the Crown will soon be examined. If King James his Desertion upon all the Premises suggested by this Author, viz. That, seeing the Peoples Universal Inclination for, an Adherence to the Prince of Orange, Theirs and his Armies total Defection and Revolt, the For∣ces, Strengths, Garisons, all things committed and yielded up to the Prince, and consequently, all the Regalia of Conquest invested in him; and that thereupon, looking upon himself as a van∣quisht
Prince, he fled before the Conqueror, left London, & retired to Feversham in order to make his escape from Subjection, and being there taken Prisoner, attempted, and succeeded in his second escape at Rochester, &c. If all these Premises, I say, Intitule our present Sove∣raign to the Stile of Couquerour; by the same parallel Reasons urged by this Author, I will as strongly prove, that there never was a Change from the Lancastrian to the York, or from the York to the Lancastrian Line, in all the Successions from the Conquest, but every such Change equally might challenge the claim of Conquest. For first, we must take it for granted, (and therein our Author agrees with us) that e∣very possessing Yorkist, or Lancastrian Prince was lawfully King, more especially if his Right was confirm'd by several unbroken Succes∣sions in the same Descent and Family. And if so, undoubtedly, whatever contesting Dis∣pute lay between the red and white Rose, the Non-possessing Family had all their Pretenti∣ons swallow'd, and silenced in the Possessors prevaling Interest and Title.
Hereupon, supposing the possessing Lanca∣strian-Prince dies, as soon as the Breath is out of his Body, the whole Regalia, the Imperial Claims are all, ipso momento, in the nex Lan∣castrian Heir: (for in that Sense the King ne∣ver dies) and therefore, such Heir as right∣fully King, upon the starting up of a York Branch into the Throne, which cannot be done, but as the Prince of Orange's Case, with the total Bent and Byass of the Peoples Inclination or Concession at least. (for what Motives or Reasons perswaded, it matters not) Here's the Lancastrian Right Heir, and as Heir, now rightful King of England dispossest: And whether the Case exactly quadrate in all particulars with that of King James, viz. That the thus Dispossest Abdicates, flies the King∣dom, or absconds in it, at least, he utterly runs before the prevaling Prince, and Volens Nolens, quits all Claim, to the possessing Arm of Power, perhaps more intirely in that point than King James has done. Nay, all this too (to parallel Circumstances yet a little nearer) possibly after tougher & longer Disputes then
the Two Battles urged by the Author for Pre∣liminaries to the Prince's Victory, viz. The Skirmish at Wincanton, where Thirty of the Prince of Orange's Men defeated Seventy Horse, and Fifty Dragoons under Sarsfield; and the other at Reading, where another Party of the Prince's kill'd Fifty of King James's Dragoons. Now, I say, if such Circumstances as these are e∣nough to make the Alienation of the Crown a Conquest, how many Crown'd Heads since First William must write Conquerours! Nay, not in England only; for the whole Chronicles of all Nations would be swell'd with Revo∣lutions that with full as much Reason would fall under that Denomination. For instence, The present King of Portugal may with full as much Right justifie the Title of Conqerour, his elder Brother his Predecessor, being unfor∣tunately Delirious, and thereby guilty of Mis-government, was by the People and the States of the Kingdom, removed, and expell'd from the Throne, and the younger Brother planted in his Seat, and not only made Pos∣sessour of his Brother's Kingdom, but of his Brother's Wife the Queen too.
And what matters the distinction between King James and the Portugal King's Misgovernment,, one through a crazed, and the other a Religious Frenzy, let it suffice both of them were laid aside, both their Subjects aban∣doned and deserted them, both were equally forced to Abdicate, and consequently both their Successors might claim an equal Title of Conquerours, only with a little Advantage on the Portugal's side: For had our Author been his Historian, he must have added one little Jem more to his Diadem, then he has done to King William's, for as belike King William only conquered King James, the King of England, but not the People of England, the Por∣tugal Conquerour, in the like Conquest, out-shot him a whole Bows length, for he conquered both King of Por∣tugal and Queen too. In short, the extravagant Follies, and ridiculous Absur∣dities from such an Hypothesis would be endless, for granting King William was justly entituled Conquerour from that Hour he had King James in his Power, un∣der Restraint and Subjection, as our Author terms it; by the same parity of Power and Subjection, there's ne∣ver a civil Broyl or most unnatural Rebellion, to instance too many, where Kings have been often in the prevail∣ing Subjects Power, but during that Mastery the Sub∣jects, by his way of Reasoning, might stile themselves Royal Conquerours: For though as our Author distingui∣shes in our present Soveraign's Case, by the long recited Plea of Justice in his entring the Kingdom with an Ar∣med Power; yet, in the forementioned Rebellious In∣urrections, the Prevalence os the Sword, whether in a
right or wrong Cause, may equally pretend to Con∣quest: This I am certain the French King makes no such Distinction, and his very Enemies are pleased to write him Conquerour even in the vilest of his Triumphs, the very Towns and Acquisitions he has bought with his Levidores, and Conquest at best, how strong soever a Title, is not the most sparkling Crown Jewel. But to leave this remoter Discourse, I shall come to one intire and utter Confutation of our Author's whole Chain of Argument. The Prince of Orange was not properly the Conquerour of King James even in his own Restriction and Limitation of Conquest, viz. The Con∣querour of King James, but not of England. For Example, after King James had look't upon him∣self as a vanquisht and an abandoned Prince, as he terms it; and therefore, whither out of shame of standing a too critical Enquiry into his Male Administration, or detected Intreagues, refus'd the proffer'd Retreat of Ham House; or out of any other Fear or Motive, deserted his Kingdom, and fled, and escaped into France; yet even then was not the Prince of Orange, in his highest Power, any way King James's Conquerour; for instead of his being Conquer'd, it then lay in the Breast of the whole People and Community of England, in Convention assem∣bled, to have recall'd him back again, (that is, if so minded) to have treated him still, as King of England, to have received and refixt him again on his Throne on such and such Terms and Articles of Security, for better Administration, and future Amendment, if any such could have been hoped or expected, and the Prince all
the while (though invited over by them, as their Deli∣verer) so far from claiming Conquest, or being his own Chooser, by Vertue of any such Pretension; that on the contrary, it lay wholely in the Peoples Breast, how far their Gratitude would reward their Protector of their Religion and Liberties. So that upon the up-shot, If King James was Conquer'd, 'twas by his own fearful or wilful running away from his Kingdom, whereby the People Seizing his quitted, abandon'd, and relinquisht Crown into their own then Rightfull Possession, by such Disertion and Relinquishment, made a generous and grateful Present of it to their most Honour'd Champion, then fully and lawfully empour'd to accept so Glorious a Gift; insomuch, that if, accord∣ing to our Author's Notion, there be any thing of Con∣quership in the Case, to Humour our Author's Fancy, it lies between King James, and the Victorious Conven∣tion; for King William and Queen Mary have the least, or rather no part at all of any such Claim or Challenge. And if there were any such thing as Conquest in the Case, alas, the Conquering blow was not given till the Convention was pleas'd to declare, the Imperial Crown of England was for such & such Causes devolved into theirs and their only Hands, and as such they were pleas'd to dispose it, where and to whom, as their indisputable Will and Pleasure seem'd Meet and Reasonable. So that, to draw Matters towards a Conclusion, our Author has involved himself in the most unaccountable Labyrinth and Confusion, from his Chimerical distinction of Conquering King James, but not the Kingdom of
England, which strictly examin'd, is little more than just nothing. For, How did he Conquer King James? Yes, he frighted his Person out of his Kingdom; (that is, if his own conscious terrifying Faults did not do it for him) but as to his Crown, Title, Kingship, Royal∣ty, those he conquer'd not; all those were purely and wholly the Concession and Grant of the People, and no ways his own Atchivement or Acquisition. So that, to sum up the whole, in stiling our Gracious Sovereigns, King William and Queen Mary Conquerours in our pre∣sent Circumstances, he has given them a Title of neither Honour nor Service, for they hold both by a stronger and fairer Claim, derived from the Original Fountain of Power, the universal Donation of the People under the Possession and Devolution aforesaid, &c. And thus this unhappily started Notion of Conquest-Tenure must not only be an ungrateful Theme to the Nation, as so notoriously derogating from the Glory of their own Act and Deed, the aforesaid Donation of the Crown; but likewise, be a nauseous and irksome Apprehension to the English Peoples Constitution and Kidney, who are not possibly overfond of such a Qua∣lification of Imperial Majesty reigning over them; and therefore, our Author has very unfortunately managed so untowardly an Argument, intended for the indearing and inducing a more Zealous Devotion and Obedience to their Majesties, from so weak and so unattractive an Invitation, as the Title of Conquerours. This Gentleman, take the whole Mass of his Dis∣course together, I must do him that right, has a very
honest Meaning. He has made it his Business to assert the Right of their present Majesties in as vigorous a Manner as the warmest Zeal and Affection could In∣spire, has throughly evinced from his Positions laid down. That King James hath totally lost his Right to these King∣doms; and therfore, if he comes again with an Army, he is to be looked upon by the Subjects with no other Eyes than any other Invader, but is to be resisted by them. Our Fleets and Armies, without any scruple of Conscience to weaken their Hands, may and ought to fight as becomes Valiant Men, in the defence of their present Soveraigns, and their Countrey; and that not only against the French King, but likewise against the late King James, if he should come a∣long with a Fleet, or head an Army against us. But after all, as there is no occasion or want of the Claim of Conquest, either to strengthen their Majesties Interest, or weaken the Pretence of his Enemies, under what Name or Class whatever. All this Duty to the one, and Resistance against the other, are equally, if not more strongly enforced from that softer and gent∣ler Royal Right, invested and lodged in Their present Majesties, from the fore-mention'd clearer Fountain of Power. FINIS.
