B4953 R11759 12646282 65138
Paradice opened, OR THE SECREETS, MYSTERIES, AND RARITIES Of Divine Love, of Infinite Wisdom, and of Wonderful Counsel, laid open to Publick View. ALSO The Covenant of Grace, and the high and glorious Transactions of the Father and the Son in the Covenant of Redemption opened, and improved at large, with the Resolution of divers important Questions and Cases concern∣ing both Covenants. YOU HAVE FURTHER, Several singular Pleas, that all sincere Christians may safely and groundedly make to those Ten Scriptures in the Old and New Testament, that speak of the general Judgment, and of that particular Judgment, that must certainly pass upon them all after Death. With some other Points of high Importance, that tend to the Peace, Comfort, Settlement and Satisfaction of all serious sincere Christians. To which is added a sober and serious Discourse, about the Favoura∣ble, Signal and Eminent Presence of the Lord with his People in their greatest Troubles, deepest Distresses, and most deadly Dangers. Being the Second and Last Part of the Golden Key. By Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel, at Margarets New-Fishstreet. LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry and at the Ship and Anchor at the Bridg-foot on Southwark-side, 1675.
To his honoured Friends, Sir John More, Knight and Alderman of the City of London, and to his good Lady, Mary More, his most affectionate Consort. The Father of all mercies, and the God of all blessings, bless you both with Grace and Peace here, and Glory hereafter. Honoured Friends: CHristian Friendship makes such a knot, that greatIts the saying of Euripides, that a faithful Friend is better than a calm Sea to a weather beaten Mariner. Alexander cannot cut. It was well observed by Sir Francis Bacon, That old wood is best to burn, and old Books best to read, and old Friends best to trust. It was a witty saying of the Duke of Buckingham to Bi∣shop Monton, in Richard the III. his time, Faithful Friends (saith he) are in this age for the most part gone all in pilgrimage, & their return is uncertain. They seem to take away the Sun out of the World (said the Heathen Oratour) who take away friendship from the life of men, and we do not more need fire and water then true Friendship. In this Epistle I shall endeavour so to ac∣quit my self, as becomes a real Friend, a cordial Friend, a faithful▪ Friend, and a Soul-friend, as to your great and everlasting concernments, that it may go well with you for ever and ever. Sir, the points that are handled in this following
Treatise (and in the first part) are of as high, choice, necessary, noble, useful and comfortable a nature, as any that can be treated on by mortal man. The four things which God minds most and loves most, are, 1. His ho∣nour. 2. His worship. 3. His People. 4. His truth. Sure∣ly their souls must needs be of a very sad complexion, who can read the great truths that are here opened and applyed, and not, 1. Dearly love them. 2. Highly prize them. 3. Cordially bless God for them. 4. Seriously pon∣der and meditate upon them. 5. And not frequently and diligently study them, and make a gracious and day∣ly improvement of them. The Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Redem∣ption are a rich Armory, out of which you may furnish your selves with all sorts of spiritual weapons, where∣with you may encounter Satans temptations, wiles, de∣vices, methods, depths, stratagems. Nothing of Sa∣tansEph. 6. 11. 2 Cor. 2. 11. Revel. 2. 24. can stand before the Covenant of Grace and the Co∣venant of Redemption, well understood and well ap∣plyed. In the Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Re∣demption,2 Sam. 23. 5. Isa. 54. 9, 10. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40, 41. Zach. 9. 11. Heb. 13. 20. that is past betwixt God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, you will find many rich and rare cor∣dials, which have a strong tendency to preserve all gra∣cious souls from desponding and fainting, 1. In times of afflictions. 2. In times of temptations. 3. In times of de∣sertion 4. In times of sufferings for Christs sake and the Gospels sake. 5. In times of opposition. 6. And at the time of death and dissolution; There are no comforts nor cordials that can reach the souls of Christians in their deep distresses, but such as flow from these two Cove∣nants, the more it concerns all such Christians to study these two Covenants, and to be well acquainted with them, that so they may the more readily have recourse to such cordials, as their present estate and condition calls for. In these two Covenants you will find much matter, which has a strong tendency, 1. To inflame your▪ love
to God and Christ, and all in the Covenant of Grace.Psal. 116. 1. 9. 16. Psalm 3. 2 Sam. 23. 5. Psal. 103. 17, 8. Psal. 111. 5, 9, 17. Gen. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Galat. 6. 14. 2. To strengthen your faith. 3. To raise your hopes. 4. To cheer your souls. 5. To quiet and satisfy your con∣sciences. 6. To engage you to a close and holy walking with God. 7. To provoke you to triumph in free grace, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. 8. To sit loose from this world. The riches and Treasures that are wrapt up in both these Covenants, are so great, so sure, so durable, and so sutable to all believers, as may well deaden theirRevt 12. 1. hearts, to all the riches and glories of this lower world. In these two Covenants every sincere Christian will find, 1. A special salve for every spiritual sore. 2. A spe∣cial remedy against every spiritual malady. 3. A special plaster against every spiritual wound. 4. A spiritual ma∣gazene to supply all their spiritual wants, and 5. A spi∣ritual shelter under every spiritual storm. In these two Covenants you will find food to nourish you, a staff to support you, a guid to lead you, a fire to warm you, and springs of life to cheer and refresh you. In this Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Re∣demption,'Twas the say∣ing of an emi∣nent Saint on his Death-bed, that he had much peace, and quiet∣ness not so much, from a greater measure of grace than other Chri∣stians had, or from any imme∣diat witness of the spirit, but be∣cause, he had a more clear un∣derstanding of the Covenant of Grace than ma∣ny others, ha∣ving studied it, and preacht it so many years as he had done. you may clearly see the wisdom, counsel, love and transactions between the Father and the Son sparkling and shining, there being nothing under Hea∣ven that contributes more to the peace, comfort, assu∣rance, settlement and satisfaction of sincere Christians than such a sight, the main reason why so many gracious souls are so full of fears, doubts, darkness and disputes about their internal and eternal estates, is because they have no more clear and full understanding of these two Covenants; and if such Christians would but more se∣riously buckle to the study of those two covenants, as they are opened and applyed in the following Treatise, their fears and doubts, &c. would quickly vanish, and they would have their triumphant songs, their mourning would soon be turned into rejoycing, & their complaints into Hallelujahs. Neither do I know any thing in all this world that would contribute more to seriousness, spiri∣tualness, heavenlyness, humbleness, holyness and fruit∣fulness,
then a right understanding of these two Cove∣nants, and a Divine improvement of them. There are many choice Christians, who have alwayes either tears in their eyes, complaints in their mouths, or sighs in their breasts; and O, that these above all others would make these two Covenants their daily Companions! Let these few kinds suffice concerning the following Treatise. Now, Sir John, I shall crave leave to put you and your Lady a little, in mind of your deceased and glorified Father. He is a true Friend (saith the Smyrnean Poet ofPonder upon that Deut. 13. 6. Thy friend which is as thine own soul. old) who continueth the memory of his deceased Friend. When a Friend of Austin's dyed, he professed he was put into a great streight, whether he himself should be wil∣ling to live or willing to dye: he was unwilling to live, because one half of himself was dead, yet he was not willing to dye, because his Friend did partly live in him, though he was dead. Let you and I make the applica∣tion as we see cause; your glorified Fathers Name and Memory remains to this day as fresh and fragant as the Rose of Sharon, among all those that fear the Lord, andCant. 2. . had the happiness of inward acquaintance with him. The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall not; In the Original it is, The memory of the justProv. 10. 7. Mmoria just , So Bat.  benam  servasso, , Plant. If I may but keep a good Name, I have wealth e∣, saith the Heathen.  in benedictionem, shall be for a blessing; the ve∣ry remembring of them shall bring a blessing to such as do remember them. The Moralists say of Fame, or of a mans good Name: Omnia si perdas famam servare memento, Quâ semel amissâ postea nullus eris. i. e. Whatsoever commodity you lose, be sure yet to preserve thatHeb. 11. 1, 39. A good renown is better than a golden Girdle, saith the French Proverb. jewel of a good Name. This jewel among others, your ho∣noured Father carried with him to the Grave, yea to Hea∣ven. There is nothing raises a mans Name & Fame in the World like holyness: The seven Deacons that the Church chose, were holy men, Act. 6. 5. and they were men of good report, V. 3. They were men well witnes∣sed
unto, well testified off, as the Greek word imports.The Persians sel∣dom write their Kings Name but in characters of gold, throughout the Old and New Testament: God has written the Names of just men in golden characters, as I may speak. Cornelius was a holy man, Act. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. and he was a man of good report among all the Nation of the Jews, V. 22. Ananias was a holy man, Act. 9. 10, 20. and he was a man of a good report: Act. 22. 12. Gajus and De∣metrius were both holy men, and of a good report, wit∣ness that third Epistle of John. The Patriarchs and Pro∣phets were holy men, and they were men of a good re∣port, Heb. 11. 1, 2. For by it the Elders obtained a good report, their holyness did eternalize their Names. The Apostles were holy men, 1 Thes. 2. 10. and they were men of good report, 2 Cor. 6. 8. Now certainly it is none of the least of mercies to be well reputed and re∣ported of: next to a good God, and a good con∣science, a good report, a good name is the noblest blessing. It is no great matter, if a man be great and rich in the world, to obtain a great report, but with∣out holyness you can never obtain a good report. Holy∣ness, uprightness, righteousness, will imbalm your names, it will make them immortal. Psalm 112. 6 The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. Wicked men many times out live their names, but the names of the righteous out live them. Holy Abel hath been dead above this five thousand years, & yet his name is as fresh & fragrant as it1 John 3. 12. was the first day he was made a Martyr▪ When a sincere Christian dyes, he leaves his name as a sweet and as a la∣sting scent behind him, his Fame shall live when he is dead: This is verified in your precious Father, who is now a sleep in Jesus, 1 Thess. 4. 14. Now you both very well know, that there was no Christian Friend, that had so great a room in his heart, in his affections, as I had, and you can easily guess at the reasons of it; neither can you forget, how frequently, both in his health, sickness and before his death, he would be prssing of me to be a Soul-friend to you, and to improve all the interest I had in Heaven for your in∣ternalMat. 25. 33. and eternal good, that he might meet you both in that upper world, and that you might both be found
with him, at the right hand of Christ in the great day of the Lord. I know that your glorified Father, whil'st he was on earth, did lay up many a prayer for you in Hea∣ven. My desire and prayer is, that those prayers of his may return in mighty power upon both your hearts, and having a fair opportunity now before me, I shall en∣deavour to improve it for the everlasting advantage of both your souls; and therefore let my following coun∣sel be not only accepted, but carefully, faithfully and di∣ligently followed by you, that so you may be happy here, and blessed hereafter. The first word of counsel is this: Let it be the princi∣pal care of both of you, to look after the welfare of your precious and immortal souls. If your souls are safe, all is safe; if they are well, all is well; but if they are lost, allMat. 16. 26. The Soul is a greater mircle in man, than all the miracles wrought a∣mongst men, saith Augustine. is lost, and you lost and undone in both worlds. Christ that only went to the price of souls, hath told us, That one Soul is more worth than all the world. Chrysostom well observeth, That whereas God hath given us many other things double, viz. two eyes to see with, two ears to hear with, two hands to work with, and two feet to walk with, to the intent that the failing of the one might be supplyed with the other; he hath given us but one soul, if that be lost, hast thou (saith he) another soul to give in recompense for it? Ah Friends, Christ left his Fathers bosom and all the glory of Heaven for the good of souls, he assumed the nature of men for the happyness of the soul of man, he trod the wine-press ofIsa. 63. 3. John 17. Luke 23. 34. Math. 6. 28. his Fathers wrath for souls, he prayed for souls, he payd for souls, and he bled out his heart-blood for souls; The soul is the breath of God, the beauty of man, the won∣der of Angels, and the envie of Devils; 'Tis of an An∣gelical1 Pet. 5. 8. nature, 'tis a heavenly spark, a celestial plant, and of a Divine off-spring. Again weigh well the , the incomparable price, which Christ payed for the redem∣ption of the soul; what are the riches of the East or West-Indies, the spoil of the richest Nations, rocks of1 Pet. 1▪ 18, 19. Diamonds, mountains of gold, or the price of Cleopatra's
draught, to the price that Christ laid down for souls?1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. 1 John 1. 4, 12. Heb. 22. 23. The soul is a spiritual substance, capable of the know∣ledge of God, of union with God, of communion with God, and of an eternal fruition of God. There is no∣thing can suit the soul below God, nor nothing that can satisfie the soul without God, nor nothing that can save the soul but God. The soul is so choice, so high and so noble a piece, that it Divinely scorns all the world in point of acceptation, justification, satisfaction, dilecta∣tion and salvation; Christ made himself an offering forHeb. 9. 11, 12, 13 14. Cap. 10 10, 14 Ga. 4 4, 5, 6. Heb. 2. 8. sin, that souls might not be undone by sin; The Lord dyed, that slaves might live; The Son dyed, that ser∣vants might live, The natural Son dyed, that adopted sons might live; The only begotten Son dyed, that ba∣stards might live; Yea the Judge dyed, that malefactors might live. Ah Friends, as there was never sorrow likeIsa. 53 3. Gal. 2. 20. Christs sorrow, so there was never love like Christs love, and of all his love none to that of soul-love, to say much in a little room. The spiritual enemies, which daily warEph 6. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Heb. ult. Rom. 1. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 23. 27. against the soul; the glorious Angels, which hourly guard the soul, and the precious ordinances, which God hath appointed as means both to convert, and nou∣rish the soul. The soul is capable of a Crown of life; Rev. 2. 10. Of a Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5 4. Of a Crown of righteousness, 2 Tim. 4. 8. Of an incorruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 25. The Crowns of earthly Princes stand asQueen Elisabeth is said to swin to her Crown through a Sea of sorrow. a Sophisters cap, on one side of the head. Many may say of their Crowns as that King said of is, O Crown more noble than happy! In the time of Galienus the Empe∣rour, Anno Christi 260. there were thirty Competitors on foot for the Roman Crown and Throne, who con∣founded and destroyed one another. A Princely Crown is oftentimes the mark for envy and ambition to shoot at: Henry the VI. was honoured with the Crowns of two Kingdoms, France & England, the first was lost through the faction of his Nobles, the other was twice plucked from his head. Earthly Crowns have so many cares, fears, vexations and dangers, that daily attend them
that oftentimes they make the heads and hearts of Mo∣narchsProv. 27. 4. Doth the Crown en∣dure to all gene∣rations. Heb. To generation and generation. ake, which made Cyrus say, You look upon my Crown and my purple robes, but did you but know how they were lined with thorns, you would not stoop to take them up. But the Crowns that immortal souls are capable of, are Crowns without crosses, they are not attended with care of keeping, or fear of losing; there are no evil persons, nor evil spirits, that haunt those Crowns. Darius that great Monarch, fleeing from his e∣nemies, he threw away the Crown of gold from his head, that he might run the faster: but a sincere Chri∣stian1 Pet. 1. 5. is in no danger of losing his Crown, 2 Tim. 4. 8. His Crown is laid up in a safe hand, in an omnipotent hand. Now what do all these things speak out, but the preciousness and excellency of the soul? Once more, the excellency of the case or cabinet, viz. the body, inti∣mates a more than ordinary excellency of this Jewel; the body is of all materials the most excellent; how does David admire the rare texture and workmanship of his body! I am wonderfully made, I was curiously wrought inPsal. 139. 13, 15. the lowest parts of the earth. When curious workmen have some choice piece in hand, they perfect it in private, and then bring it forth to the light, for men to gaze at, so here: The greatest miracle in the World is Man, in whose very body (how much more in his soul) are mi∣racles enow (betwixt head and feet) to fill a volume. One complains, that men much wonder at the highAustin. The Stoick thought, it was better to be a fool in the form of a man, than wise in the shape of a beast. mountains of the Earth, the huge waves of the Sea, the deep falls of Rivers, the vastness of the Ocean, and at the motions of the Stars, &c. but wonder not at all at their wonderful selves. Galen, a prophane Physician and a great Atheist, writing of the excellent parts of mans body, he could not chuse but sing an Hymn to that God, whosoever he were, that was the Author of so excellent and admirable a piece of work; he could not but cry out, Now I adore the God of Nature. Now if the Cabinet be so curiously wrought, what is the Je∣wel that is contained in it? O how richly and gloriously
is the soul embroydered! How Divinely inlaid and en∣amel'd is that! Princes impress their images or effigies upon the choicest mettals, viz. gold and silver: God hath engraven his own Image with his own hand uponGen. 1. 26. Damacen. Angels and Men. The soul is the glory of the Creation, a beam of God, a spark of celestial brightness, a vessel of honour, a bird of Paradise, a habitation for God. The soul is spiritual in its essence, God breathed it in, God hath invested it with many noble endowments, he hath made it a mirrour of beauty, and printed upon it aGen. 2. 7. Heb. 12 9. Eccles. 12. 7. Zach. 12. 1. surpassing excellency. The soul is spiritual in its object, it contemplaces God and Heaven; God is the orb and center where the soul doth fix, God is the Terminus ad quem, the soul moves to him as to his rest: Return to thy rest, O my soul; this Dove can find no rest but in this heavenly Ark, nothing can fill the soul but God, nothing can quiet the soul but God, nothing can satisfie the soul but God, nothing can secure the soul but God, nothing can save the soul but God: The soul being spiritual God only can be the adequate object of it; The soul is spiri∣tual in its operations, it being immaterial doth not de∣pend upon the body in its working; the rich and rare endowments, and the noble operations of the soul speak out the excellency of the soul. The soul (saith one) hathAristotle. a nature distinct from the body, it moves and operates of it self, though the body be dead, and hath no depen∣dence upon, or coexistence with the body; The soul hath an intrinsecal principle of life and motion, though it be separate from the body. And doth not the immor∣tality of the soul speak out the excellency of the soul, a∣gainst that dangerous notion of the souls mortality? Consult the Scriptures in the margin; and seriously andLuke 23. 43. 1 Thess. 4. ult. Phil. 1. 23. Acts 7. 59. frequently think of this one argument (among a multi∣tude of arguments that might be produced, to prove the immortality of the soul) That which is not capable of killing, is not capable of dying; but the soul is not ca∣pable of killing, ergo. Our Lord Jesus proves the minor proposition, that it is not capable of killing, Fear notLuke 12. 4. them
them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. Therefore the soul not being capable of killing, is not in a possibility of dying; the essence of the soul is Metaphysical, it hath a beginning but no end, it is Eter∣nal à parte post, it runs parallel with Eternity; the soul doth not wax old, it lives for ever, which we cannot affirm of any sublunary created glory. To conclude this first word of counsel, what Job saith of wisdom, I may fitly apply to the soul; Man knows not the price there∣of,Job 28. 13, 16, 17. it cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the Saphir, the Gold and Chry∣stal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of sine Gold. O my Friends! it is the great∣est wisdom, policy, equity, and Justice, to provide for your precious souls, to secure your precious souls, for they are Jewels of more worth than ten thousand worlds, all the honours, riches, greatness, and glory of this world are but chips, toyes, and pibbles to these glorious pearls. But The second word of counsel is this, as you would be safe here, and saved in the great day of the Lord; asAct 2. 20.  22. 21.  poth. 1. 15. Jo 13. 15. 2 Cor. 2. 11. you would be happy here, and blessed hereafter, take up in nothing below a gracious acquaintance with Christ, a choice acceptation of Christ, a holy relyance upon Christ, a full resignation of your selves to Christ, and a real and glorious union with Christ; If you do you are lost and undone in both worlds. First, Some take up in a name to live, when they are dead, dead in trespasses and sins, dead God-wards, andRevel. 3 1. Ephes. 2. 1. dead Christ-wards, and dead Heaven-wards, and dead holyness-wards. The Sadducees derive their name from Zeduchim or Zadducaeus, a just man: But the worst Men, saith the Historian, got the best names. The Alcoran of the Turks hath its name from brightness (Al in the Arabick, being as much as Kazan in the Hebrew, to shine or cast forth in brightness) when it is full of darkness and fraught with falshoods. It will be but a poor comfort to any, for the world to commend them as gracious, if
God condemn them as graceless; for the world to com∣mend them as pious, if God condemn them as impious; for the world to commend them as sincere, if God con¦demn them as hypocrites. But Secondly, Some take up in a form Godliness, when2 Timoth. 3. 5. they are strangers to the power, when they deny, yea when they oppose and persecute the power; such Mon∣sters this Age has abounded with, but their seemingActs 13. 45, 50 goodness is but a Religious cheat. Thirdly, There are some that take up in their ReligiousMatth. 9. 22. Luke 18. 12. Cap. 13. 26. Matth. 6. cap. 23. Luke 36. 15. Ezeck. 33. 31, 32. duties and services, in their praying, fasting, prophesying, hearing, receiving; they make a God, a Christ, a Saviour of their own duties & services; this was the undoing and damning sin of the Scribes and Pharisees, and is the un∣doing and damning sin of many thousands in our dayes. Fourthly, There are many that take up in their com∣mon gifts and parts, in a gift of knowledge, and in a giftMath. . 22. Rom. 2. 17. 21. 1 Cor. 12. eb. 6. 45. of teaching, and in a gift of knowledge, and in a gift of teaching, and in a gift of utterance, and in a gift of me∣mory, and in a gift of prayer, and this proves ruinous and destructive to them. Fifthly, There are many that take up in their riches,Prov. 10. 15. Psalm 73. 19. Matth. 20.—26. Divibus i  qui , Rich mens wealth proves an hinde¦rance to their happiness. Eccles. 5. 13. James 5. 1, 2. prosperity and worldly grandure and glory. Prov. 18. 11. The rich mans wealth is his strong City; it is hard to have wealth and not trust to it. Mat. 19. 24. Wealth was ne∣ver true to those that trusted it. There is an utter uncer∣tainty in riches, 1 Timoth. 6. 17. A non entity, Prov. 23. 5, 6. An impotency to help in an evil day, Ze∣phan. 1. 18. An impossibility to stretch to Eternity, unless it be to destroy the owner for ever: There is nothing more clear in Scripture and History, than that riches, prosperity, and worldy glory hath been commonly their portion, who never have had a God for their portion.Luke 16. 25. Rices are called thik clay, Hal. 2. 6. which will sooner break the back than lighten the heart. It was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bavaria, Empe∣rour of Germany: Hujusmodi comparandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent, Such goods are worth getting, and owning, as will not sink or wash away, if a ship-wrack happen. Solus sapiens dives, Only the Wise man is the rich man, saith the Philosopher. Another saith, DivitiaeAustin.
corporales paupertatis plenae sunt, That earthly riches are full of poverty, they cannot enrich the soul; for oftentimes under silken Apparel there is a thred-bare soul. He that is rich in conscience sleeps more soundly, than he that is richly clothed in purple. No man is rich which cannot carry hence, that whichAmbros. lib. 8. Ep. 10. he hath; that which we must leave behind us, is not ours but some others. The shortest cut to riches is by their contempt; it isSeneca. great riches not to desire riches, and he hath most that covets least. If there were any happiness in riches, the Gods would not want them, saith the same Author. When one was a commending the riches and wealth of Merchants: I do not love that wealth, said a poor Heathen, which hangs upon ropes; for if they break, the ship miscarrieth, and then where is the Merchants riches? If I had an Enemy (saith one) whom it was law∣fulLatimer. to wish evil unto, I would chiefly wish him great store of riches, for then he should never enjoy quiet. The Historian observes, that the riches of Cyprus in∣vitedTacitus. the Romans to hazard many dangerous fights, for the conquering of it. Earthly riches, saith one, are an evil Master, a trea∣cherousAugustine. Servant, Fathers of flattery, Sons of grief, a cause of fear to those that have them, and a cause of sor∣row to those that want them. I have read a famous story of Zelimus, Emperour ofThe Turkish Hi∣story. The Poets feign∣ed Pluto to be the God of Riches, and Hell, as if they were inse∣parable, Homer. Constantinople, that after he had taken Egypt, he found a great deal of treasure there; and the Souldiers coming to him, and asking of him what they should do with the Citizens of Egypt, for that they had found great Trea∣sure among them, and had taken their riches? O, saith the Emperour, hang them all up, for they are too rich to be made slaves; and this was all the thanks they had for the riches they were spoiled off. What more con∣temptible
than a rich Fool, a golden Beast, as Caligula called his Father in law Syllanius? Not but that some are great and gracious, rich and righteous; As Abraham, Lot, Job, David, Hezekiah, &c. It is said of Shusa in Persia, that it was so rich that theSaith Cassiederus. stones were joyned together with gold; and that in it Alexander found seventy thousand Talents of gold. If you can take this City (saith Aristagorus to his Soul∣diers) you may vie with Jove himself for riches; the ri∣ches of Shufa did but make the Souldiers the more de∣sperate in their attempt to take it. By these short hints you may see the folly and vanity of those men, who take up in their riches. But Sixthly, Many there are that take up in their ownIsa. 64. 6. righteousness, which at best is but as filthy rags; thisRom. 10. 2, 3. Matth. 5. 20. was the damning sin of the Jews, and of the Scribes and Pharisees; and is the undoing sin of many of the Profes∣sors of this Age. Seventhly, Many there are that take up in their ex∣ternal Church priviledges, crying out, the Temple ofJer. 7. 4, 8, 9, 10, 11. the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, when they have no union nor communion with the Lord of the Temple. These forget that there will come a day, when the Chil∣drenMatth. 8. 12. of the Kingdom shall be cast out. It would be very good for such Persons, to make these five Scriptures their daily companions, Matth. 22. 10, 12, 13, 14. Luke 13. 25, 26, 27 28. Rom. 2. 28, 29. Gal. 6. 15. Jer. 9. 25, 26. That they may never dare to take up in their outward Church priviledges, which can neither secure them from hell, nor secure them of heaven. But Eightly, Many there be that take up in common con∣victions: Judas had mighty convictions of his sin, butMatth. 27. 4, 5. Numb. 23. and Numb. 24. they issued in desperation. Balaam was mightily en∣lightned and convinced, in so much that he desired to dye the death of the righteous; but under all his con∣victions he dyed Christless and graceless. Nebuchad∣nezzar had great convictions, yet we do not read thatDan. 4. 3 1, 32 ever he was converted, before he was driven from the
society of men▪ to be a companion with the beasts of the field; he had strong convictions, 1. by Daniels interpre∣tingDan. 4. 31, 32. of his dream. Dan. 2. 47. 2. He told Daniel, That his God was the God of Gods, and a Lord of Kings, and a reveiler of secrets; and yet presently he fell into gross Ido∣latry, Dan. 3. and strictly commanded to worship the golden Image that he had set up; and as if he had lost all his former convictions, he was so swelled up with pride and impudence, as to say to the three Children, when they Divinely scorned to worship the Image he had set up, What God is there that can deliver you out of my hand? Verse 15. Saul had great convictions, I have1 Sam. 26. 21, 25. sinned, return my son David, I will no more do thee harm, &c. And Saul lift up his voice and wept; and he said un∣to David, Thou art more righteous than I, for thou hast1 Sam. 24. 16, 17, 18, 19. rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil: But these convictions issued in no saving change, for af∣ter these he lived and died in the heigth of his sins. Pha∣raoh had great convictions: And Pharaoh sent, and cal∣ledExod. 9. 27. Cap. 10. 16. for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sin∣ned this time: the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. And again, Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said; I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you: But these convictions is∣sued in no reformation, in no sound conversion, and therefore drowning and damning followed. Cain was under convictions, but went and built a City, and lostGenes. 4. his convictions in a crowd of worldly business. Herod and Felix were under convictions, but they went of,Mark 6. 20. Acts 24. 25. and never issued in any saving work upon their souls. O how many men and women have fallen under such deep convictions, that they have day and night cryed out of their sins, and of their lost and undone Estates, and that they should certainly go to hell, and be damned for ever, so that many good People have hoped, that these were the pangs of the new birth; and yet either merry company, or carnal pleasures and delights, or much worldly business, or else length of time have
wrought off all their convictions, and they have grown more prophane and wicked then ever they were before. As water heated, if taken off the fire, will soon return toAristtle. its natural coldness, yea becomes colder after heating than before, this hath been the case of many under con∣victions: I shall forbear giving of particular instances. But Ninthly, Many take up in an outward change and re∣formation, they have left some old courses and sinful practices, which formerly they walked in &c. and there∣fore they conclude and hope, that their condition is good, and that all is well, and shall be for ever well with them; they were wont to swear, whore, be drunk, prophane Sabbaths, reproach Saints, &c. but now they have left all these practices, and therefore the main work is done, and they are made for ever. I confess sin is that abo¦minableJer. 41. 4. Matth. 1. 2. thing which God hates, and therefore it is a very great mercy to turn from it; to leave one sin is a greater mercy, than to win the whole world; and it is certain that he that doth not outwardly reform, shall never go to heaven; he that doth not leave his sins heJob 22. 23, 26. can never be happy here, nor blessed hereafter, and yet it is possible for a man with Herod to reform many thingsMark  2. Mat. 26. 20, 21. 22 1 Thes. 5. 23. and yet be a lost and undone man for ever as he was. Ju∣das was a very reformed man, but he was never inward∣ly changed, nor throughout sanctified. The Scribes and Pharisees were outwardly reformed, but they were not inwardly renewed. A man may be another man than what once he was, and yet not be a new man, a new crea∣ture. When a sinner is sermon-sick, O! then he will2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Pt. 2. 20, 22. Dst. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. leave his sins, but when that sickness is off, he returns with the dog to his vomit, and with the sow to her wallowing in the mire. Sometimes conscience is like the hand-writing upon the wall, it makes the sin∣ners countenance to change, and his thoughts to be trou¦bled, and the joints of his loins to be loosed, and his knees to smite one against another; and now the sinner is all for reforming, and turning over a new leaf, but
when these agonies of conscience are over, the sinner re∣turns to his old courses again, and often times is two∣fold more a Child of Hell than before. There was aMatth. 23. 15. man in this City, who was given up to the highest wic∣kednesses, on his sick bed conscience made an Arrest of him, and he was filled with such wonderful, horrour and terrour, that he cryed out day and night, that he was damned, he was damned, he was damned; and when he had some small intervals, O what large pro∣mises did he make! what a new man, a reformed man he would be! but when in time his terrors and sick∣ness wrought off, he was seven-fold worse than before. Sometimes the awakened Sinner parts with some sins, to make room for others; and sometimes the Sinner seems to give a Bill of divorce to this sin and that, but it is only because his bodily strength fails him, or be∣cause he wants an opportunity, or because there is a more strict eye and watch upon him, or because the sword of the Magistrate is more sharpned against him, or be∣causeJames 4. 3. he wants fuel, he wants a purse to bear it out, or because some Company, or some Relations, or some Friends lye between him and his sins, so that he must either tread over them, or else keep from his sins; or because he has deeply smarted for this sin, and that his name has been blotted, his credit and reputation stained,Prov. 6. 32, 33, 34, 35. his Trade decayed, his health empaired, his body wa∣sted, &c. By these short hints it is evident, that men may attain to some outward reformation, whose states and hearts were never changed, and who were never ta∣ken into marriage union with Christ. But Tenthly and lastly, many take up in a party, as of old some cryed up Paul as the only deep Preacher, and o∣thers cryed up Apollos as the only eloquent Preacher, and1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. many cryed up Cephas as the most zealous Preacher; We are for the Church of England, say some, we are for the baptized People, say others, we are for the Presbyterian government, cry some, we are for the congregational way, cry others. I have so much ingenuity and charity,
as to judge, that some of all these several parties and per∣swasions are really holy and will be eternally happy, are gracious and will be glorious, are sanctified and will be saved, are now governed by Christ and will be hereafter glorified with Christ. Judas was one of Christs party,Mat. 26. 20. to the 26. (if I may so speak) and yet he had no part nor portion in Christ. Demas was one of Paul's party, and yet he2 Tim. 4. 10. plaid the Apostat, and turn'd an idolatrous Priest at2 Tim. 1. 15. Thessalonica, as Dorotheus saith; And Phygellus and Her∣mogenes were of Paul's party, but were only famous for1 Tim. 1. 19, 20. their recidivation and Apostasie. Hymeneus and Alexan∣der were of Paul's party, but they made shipwrack of faith and a good conscience. The five foolish VirginsMat. 25. 1, 2, 12. were in society with the wise, and were accounted as members of their association, and yet the door of Hea∣ven was shut against them. Many light, slight and vain persons went with the Children of Israel out of the LandExod. 1. 38. Num. 11. 4. of Egypt, even a mixt multitude that imbarkt in the same bottom with them, and yet never arrived at the Land of promise. O my Friends, it is not a mans being of this party or that, this Church or that, this way or that, this society or that, that will bring him to Heaven with∣out1 Pet. 1. 4. He. 1. 2. 1 John 5. 12. a spiritual conjunction with Christ; he that would enjoy the Heavenly inheritance must be espoused to Christ, the heir of all things: For he that hath the Son, hath life, and he that hath not the Son hath not life. This marriage union between Christ and the soul, is set forth to the life throughout that Book of Solomon's Song, though the marriage-union between Christ and the soul,Cant. . 16. 1 Cor. 6. 17. Eccl. 11. 6. be imperceptible to the eye of reason, yet it is real; things in nature work often insensibly, yet really, we do not see the hand move on the dial, yet it moves; the Sun exhales and drawes up the vapours of the Earth insensi∣bly, yet really. Now this marriage-union between Christ and the soul includes, and takes in these following particulars. First, This marriage-union between Christ and the soul does include and take in the souls giving a present
bill of Divorce to all other lovers, Sin, the world andConsult these Scriptures: Hosea 14. 8. Isa. 2. 20. Cap. 30. 22. Psalm 45. 10. Exod. 12. 33. Isa. 59. o. C. 3. 3. Satan: Are you seriously and sincerely willing for ever to renounce these, and be divorced from these? there is no compounding betwixt Christ and them; sin and your souls must part, or Christ and your souls can never meet; sin and your souls must be two, or Christ and your souls can never be one; you must in good earnest fall out with sins, or else you can never in good earnest fall in with a Saviour; the heart must be separated from all other lo∣vers, before Christ will take the soul into his bed of loves; Christ takes none into marriage-union with himself, but such as are cordially willing, that all old former leagues with sin and the world shall be for ever broken and dis∣solved; your cordial willingness to part with sin, is your parting with sin in Divine account; you may as soon bring East and West together, light and darkness together, Heaven and Hell together, as bring Christ to spouse himself to such a soul, as has no mind, no will, no heart to be divorced from his former lovers; 'Tis a foolish thing for any to think of keeping both Christ and their lusts too; it is a vain thing for any to think of sa∣ving the life of his sins, and the life of his soul too; If sin escape, your soul cannot escape; if thou art not the death of thy sins, they will be the death and ruin of thy soul. Marriage is a knot or tye, wherein persons are mu∣tually limitted and bound each to other, in a way of con∣jugal separation from all others, and this in Scripture isProv. 2. 17. called a Covenant. So when any one marries Christ, he doth therein discharge himself in affection and subje∣ction from all that is contrary unto Christ, and solemn∣ly Covenants, and binds himself to Christ alone, he will have no Saviour and no Lord but Christ, and to him will he cleave for ever, Psal. 63. 8. Acts 11. 23. But, Secondly, This marriage-union with Christ doth in∣cludeJohn 1. 12. Acts 5. 31. Coloss: 2. 6. Weigh well these Scriptures: Psalm 12. 3. Psalm▪ 5. 5. Hosea 2. 7. and take in a hearty willingness, to take, to re∣ceive the Lord Jesus Christ for your Saviour and Sove∣raign. Are you willing to consent to the match; 'tis not enough that Christ is willing to enter into a mar∣riage-union
with us, but we must be willing also to en∣terMany can chuse Christ as a Re∣fuge to hide them from dan∣ger, and as a Friend to help them in their need, who yet refuse him as a Husband. into a marriage-union with him. God will never force a Christ, nor force salvation upon us, whether we will or no; Many approve of Christ, and cry up Christ, who yet are not willing to give their consent, that he, and he alone shall be their Prince and Saviour; though knowledge of persons be necessary and fit, yet it is not sufficient to marriage without consent, for marriage ought to be a voluntary transaction of persons; in mar∣riage we do in a sort give away our selves, and elect and make choice for our selves, and therefore consent is a ne∣cessary concurrence to marriage. Now this consent is no∣thing else but a free and plain act of the will, accepting of Jesus Christ before all others to be its Head and Lord, and in the souls choice of him to be its Saviour and So∣veraign; Then a man is married to Christ, when he doth freely, and absolutely, and presently receive the Lord Jesus; not, I would have Christ if it did not pre∣judice my worldly estate, ease, friends, relations, &c. or hereafter, I will accept of him when I come to dye, and be in distress, but now when salvation is offered, now while Christ tenders himself, I now yield up my heart and life unto him. But, Thirdly, This marriage union with Christ includes and takes in an universal and perpetual consent, for all time, and in all states and conditions. There is (you know) a great difference between a wife and a strumpet, a wife takes her husband upon all terms, to have, and to hold, for better and for worse, for richer and for poorer, in sickness and in health, whereas a strumpet is only for hire and lust, when the purse is emptied, or the body wasted and strength consumed the harlots love is at an end, so here: That acceptance and consent which tyes the marriage knot between Christ and the soul, must be an unlimited and indefinite acceptance and consent, when we take the Lord Jesus Christ wholly and entirely, without any secret reservations or exceptions; That soul that will have Christ, must have all Christ, or no
Christ, [For Christ is not divided.] That soul must en∣tertain1 Cor. 1. 13. Rev. 14. 4. Psal. 66. 12. him to all purposes and intents, he must follow the Lamb wheresoever he goeth, though it should be through fire and water, over mountans and hills, he must take him with his cup of affliction as well as his cup of consolation, with his shameful cross as well as his glo∣riousHeb. 2. 3. crown, with his great sufferings as well as his great salvation, with his grace as well as his mercy, with his spirit to lead and govern them, as well as his blood to redeem and justifie them, to suffer for him as well as to2 Tim. 2. 12. Acts 21. 13. Rom. 14. 7, 8. reign with him, to dye for him as well as to live to him. Christianity (like the wind Caecias) doth ever draw clouds & afflictions after it. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus2 Tim. 3. 12. shall suffer persecution, A man may have many faint wishes and cold desires after godliness, & yet escape persecution, yea he may make some assays & attempts, as if he would be godly, and yet escape persecution, but when a man isThe common cry of Persecu∣tors hath been Christianes ad I cns, within the first 300. years after Christ, upon the matter all that made a profession of the Apostles Doctrine, were cruelly murder∣ed. thorowly resolved to be Godly, and sets himself in good earnest upon pursuing after holyness, and living a life of Godlyness, then he must expect to meet with afflictions and persecutions, who ever escapes, the Godly man shall not escape persecution in one kind or another, in one degree or another; He that is peremptorily resolved to live up to holy rules, and to live out holy principles, must prepare for sufferings; All the Roses of holyness are surrounded with pricking Briars: The History of the Ten Persecutions, and that little Book of Martyrs, the 11. of the Hebrews, and Mr. Fox his Acts and Mo∣numents, with many other Treatises that are extant, do abundantly evidence, that from age to age, and from one generation to another, they that have been born after the flesh have persecuted them that hath been born after theGal. 4. 29. spirit, and that the seed of the Serpent have been still a multiplying of troubles upon the seed of the Woman; But a Believers future glory and pleasure will abundant∣ly recompense him for his present pain and ignominy: But such as will have Christ for their Saviour and Sove∣raign, but still with some proviso or other, viz. That they
may keep such a beloved lust, or enjoy such carnal plea∣sures and delights, or raise such an estate for them and theirs, or comply with the times and such and such great mens humours, or that they may follow the Lamb only in Sun-shine weather, &c. these are still Satans bond∣slaves, and such as Christ can take no pleasure nor de∣light to espouse himself unto. But, The third word of Advice and Counsel is this, viz. Put off the old man, and put on the new: Consult the Scri∣pturesCol. 3. 9, 10. Eph. 4. 22, 23, 24. Gal. 6. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 2. in the margin. You must be new Creatures, or else it had been better you had been any Creatures than what you are. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ he is a nw Creature, old things are past away, behold all things are become new. The new Creature includes a new light, a new sight, a new understanding; Now the soul seesPsal. 38. 4. Cant. 5. 10. sin to be the greatest evil, and Christ and holyness to be the chiefest good: When a man is a new Creature he hasCol. 3. 11. a new judgment and opinion, he looks upon God as his only happyness, and Christ as his all in all, and uponProv. 3. 17. the wayes of God as wayes of pleasantness. The new man has new cares, new requests, new desires. O that myActs 2. 37. Cap. 16. 30. soul may be saved; O that my interest in Christ may be cleared, O that my heart may be adorned with grace, O that my whole man may be secured from wrath to1 Thes. 2. ult. come. The new man is a man of new principles, if you make a serious inspection into his soul, you shall find a principle of faith, of repentance, of holyness, of love,Phil. 1. 20. Acts 11. 18. 1 Thes. 4, 9. Phil. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 12. of contentment, of patience, &c. There is not any one spiritual and heavenly principle respecting salvation, but may be found in the new Creature; The new man ex∣periences a new combate, and conflict in his soul: TheGal. 5. 17. Rom. 7. 2. flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit luteth against the flesh. I see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind. The new man experiences a combate in every faculty; Here is the judgment against the judg∣ment, and the will against the will, and the affections against the affections: And the reason is this; because there is flesh and spirit, sin and grace coexistent and co∣habiting
in every faculty of the soul, renewing grace is in every faculty, and remaining corruption is also in e∣very faculty, like Jacob and Esau stugling in the same womb, or like heat and cold in the same water, and in every part of it: The new man also combates with all sorts of known sins, whether they be great or small, in∣ward or outward, whether they be the sins of the heart, or the sins of the life; and besides, the conflict in the new man is a daily conflict, a constant conflict; The new Creature can never, the new Creature will never be at peace with sin, sin and the new Creature will fight it out to the death, the new. Creature will never be brought into a lague of friendship with sin; The new man is a man of a new life and conversation, alwayes a new life attends a new heart, you see it in Paul, Mary Magdalen, Zacheus, the Jaylor, and all the others thatSee 1 John 3. 14. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Psalm 120. 5. Psalm 139. 1. Psalm 42. 4. are upon Scripture record. The new man has new so∣ciety, new company, Psalm 119. 63. I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy pre∣cepts. Psalm 16. 3. My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the Excellent in whom is all my delight. Holy society is the only society for persons of holy hearts, and in that society can no had ra∣ther hae no Companin than a had one. man delight until God renew his heart by grace. Many men be as the Planet Mercury, good in conjuction with those that are good, and bad with those that are bad, these are they that do Virtutis stragulam pudefacere, Put honesty to an open shame. Cloaths and Company do oftentimes tell tales in a mute, but significant language. Tell me with whom thou goest, and I will tell thee what thou art, saith the Spanish proverb. Algerius, an Italian Martyr, had rather be in prison with Cato, than with Caesar in the Senate-house. But to conclude this word of Counsel, the new man walks by a new rule; As soon as ever God has made a man, a new creature, he pre∣sently sets up a new rule of life to walk▪ by, and that is no other but that which God himself sets up for his People to walk by, and that is his written Word, Isa. 8.
20. To the Law and to the testimony. Psalm 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Verse 133. Order my steps in thy word. Galat. 6. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. This rule he sets up for all matters of Faith, and for all matters of fact. The word is like the stone Garamantides, that hath drops of Gold within it self, enriching of every soul that makes it his Rule to walk by. Alexander kept Homers Iliads in a Cabinet, embroidered with Gold and Pearls; and shall not we keep the Word in the Cabint of our hearts, that it may be alwayes ready at hand as a Rule for us to walk by? Well Friends, what ever you do forget, be sure that for ever you remember this, viz. that none can o shall be glorious Creatures, but such as by grace are made new Creatures. But The fourth word of advice & counsel is this, Labour to be more inwardly sincere than outwardly glorious. [ThePsalm 5. 13. Re. 3. 1. 15, 16, 17. Kings daughter is all glorious within.] O labour rather to be good than to be thought to be good, to live than to have a name to live; what ever you let go, be sure you hold fast your integrity: A man were better to let Friends go, Relations go, Estate go, Liberty go, ife go, and all go, than let his integrity go. [God forbid that I shouldJob 27. 5, 6. justifie you, till I die I will not remove my integrity from me, my righteousness I will hold fast, and I will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.] Job is high∣ly and fully resolved to keep his integrity close against all assaults of Enemies, or suspicions of Friends. Jobs in∣tegrity was the best Jewel he had in all the world, & this Jewel he was resolv'd to keep to his dying day. It was ni∣ther good men, nor bad men, nor devils that should baffle Job out of his integrity; and though they all pulled and pulled hard at his integrity, yet he would not lt it go, he would hold fast this pearl of price what ever it cost him. The sincere Christian, like John Baptist, will hold his in∣tegrityMar 6. though he lose his head for it. The very Heathens loved a candid and sincere spirit, as he that wished that
there was a glass in his breast, that all the world might see what was in his heart. Integrity will be a sword to defend you, a staff to support you, a star to guide you, and a cordial to chear you; and therefore above all get∣tings get sincerity, and above all keepings keep sincerity as your crown, your comfort, your life. But The fifth word of comfort and counsel is this, Be true to the light of your consciences, and maintain and keep up a constant tenderness in your consciences; a tender conscience is a mercy more worth than a world: Con∣science is Gods spye in our bosoms, keep this clear andActs 21. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. tender, and than all is well: Act nothing against the dictates of conscience, rebel not against the light of con∣science: You were better that all the world should up∣braid you and reproach you, than that your consciences should upbraid you and reproach you: Beware of stif∣lingJob 27. 5, 6. conscience, and of suppressing the warnings of con∣science, lest a warning conscience prove a gnawing conscience, a tormenting conscience. The blind ManMark 8. in the Gospel, newly recovering his sight, imagined Trees to be Men: And the Burgundians, as Comines re∣ports, expecting a Battel, supposed long Thistles to be Lances; thus men under guilt, are apt to conceit every Thistle a Tree, and every Tree a Man, and every Man a Devil. Take heed of tongue-tyed consciences, for when God shall unty these strings, and unmuzle your consciences, conscience will then be heard, and ten con∣sorts of Musick shall not drown her clamourous cryes. Hearken to the voice of conscience, obey the voice of conscience, and when conscience shall whisper you in the ear, and tell you, there is this and that amiss in the house, in the habit, in the heart, in the life, in the closet; don't say to conscience, conscience be quiet, beActs . 24, 25. still, make no noise now, I will hear thee in a more con∣venient season. The Heathen Oratour could say: A recia conscientia ne latum quidem unguem discedendum,. in Offi. A man may not depart a hairs breadth all his life long from the dictates of a good conscience. Will not this Heathen
one day rise in judgment, against those who daily cruci¦fie the light of their own consciences. But The sixth word of advice and counsel is this, Mak it the great business of your lives, to make sure suchSee my Treatise on Assurance, & there you will find how you may secure some∣thing that will go with you beyond the grave. things as will go with you beyond the grave. Riche and honours, and offices, and all worldly grandure won't go with us beyond the grave. Saladin a Turkish Em∣perour, he was the first of that Nation that conquered Jerusalem, lying at the point of death after many glo∣rious victories, commanded that a white sheet should be born before him to his grave, upon the point of a Spear, with this proclamation: These are the rich spoils which Saladin carrieth away with him, of all his tri¦umphs and victories, of all his Riches and Realms that he had, now nothing at all is left for him, to carry with him but this sheet. It is with us in this world, as it was in the Jewish fields and vineyards, pluck and ea they might what they would while they were there▪ but they might not pocket nor put up ought, to carry with them: Death as a Porter stands at the gate, andDeut. 23. 24. 25. strips men of all their worldly wealth and glory. Athe¦naeus speaks of one, that at the hour of death devoured many pieces of gold, and sewed the rest in his coat, commanding that they should be buried with him. Her∣mocrates being loath that any man should enjoy his goods after him, made himself by Will Heir of his own goods: These muck-worms would fain live still on this side Jordan, having made their gold their God, they cannot think of parting with it, they would if possi∣ble carry the world out of the world: But what saith the Apostle? [We brought nothing with us into this world,1 Timoth. 6. 7. and it is certain (see how he assevereth and assureth it, as if some rich wretches made question of it) we can carry nothing out] nothing but a winding sheet. O how should this alarm us! to make sure our calling and ele∣ction,2 Pet. 1. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Sa. 23. 5. 1 Thess. 5 3. 2 Cor. 1. 12. to make sure our interest in Christ, to make sure our Covenant-relation, to make sure a work of grace in power upon our souls, to make sure the testi∣mony
of a good conscience, to make sure our Son-ship,Gal. 4. 5, 6, 7. Rom. 8. 15, 16. our Saint-ship, our Heir-ship, &c. for these are the on∣ly things that will go with us into another world. In the Marian persecution there was a Woman, who being convened before Bonner (then Bishop of London) upon Acts and Monuments. the trial of Religion, he threatned her that he would take away her Husband from her: Saith she, Christ is my Husband. I will take away thy Child: Christ, saith she, is better to me than ten sons. I will strip thee, saith he, of all thy outward comfort: Yea, but Christ is mine, saith she, and you cannot strip me of him. Assurance that Christ was hers, and that he would go with her beyond the grave, bore her heart up above the threatsHeb. 10. 34. of being spoiled of all. When a great Lord had shewed a sober, serious, knowing Christian his Riches, his sta∣tely Habitation, his pleasant Gardens, his delightful Walks, his rich Grounds, and his various sorts of plea∣sure; the serious Christian turning himself to this great Lord, said: My Lord, you had need to make sure Christ and Heaven, you had need make sure something, that will go with you beyond the grave, for else when you die you will be a very great loser. O my Friends, I must tell you, it highly concerns you to make sure something that will go with you beyond the grave, or else you will be very great losers, when you come to die. God having given you an abundance of the good things, and of the great things of this world, beyond what he has given to many thousands of others. But The seventh word of advice and counsel is this, Look upon all the things of this world, and value all the things of this world now, as you will certainly look upon1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. them and value them when you come to lye upon a sick bed, a dying bed; when a man is sick in good ear∣nest, and when death knocks at the door in good car∣nest, O with what a disdainful eye, with what a wean∣ed eye, with what a scornful eye does a man then look upon the honours, riches, dignities, and glories of this world! If men could but thus look upon them now, it
would keep them from being fond of them, from trust∣ing in them, from doting upon them, from being proud of them, and from venturing a damning, either in get∣ting or in keeping of them. But The eight word of advice and counsel is this, In all places and companies carry your soul-preservatives still about you, viz. A holy care, a holy fear, a holy jea∣lousie,Prov. 4. 23. Cap. 28. 14. Genes. 6. 9. Cap. 39. 9, 10. Psalm 17. 4. Psalm 18. 23. Psalm 39. 1, &c. a holy watchfulness over your own thoughts, hearts, words, and wayes. You know that in infectious times men and women carry their several preservatives about them, that they may be kept from the infection of the times. Never were there more infectious times than now, O the snares, the baits, the infections that at∣tend us, at all times, in all places, in all companies, in all employments, and in all enjoyments, so that if we do not carry our soul-preservatives about us, we shall be in eminent danger of being infected with the pride, ill customes, and vanities of the times wherein we lve. But The ninth word of advice and counsel is this, Live not at uncertainties as to your spiritual and eternal e∣states;See my Box of precious Oint∣ment, in that Glass you may read the state of your souls. there are none so miserable as those that are stran∣gers to the state of their own souls. It is good for a man to know the state of his Flock, the state of his Fa∣mily, the state of the Nation, the state of his Body; but above all to know the state and condition of his own Soul. How many thousands are there that can give a better account of their Lands, their Lordships, their Ri∣ches, their Crops, their Shops, their Trades, their Mer∣chandize, yea of their Hawkes, their Hounds, their Misses, than they can of the esate of their own Souls? O my Friends, your souls are more worth than ten thou∣sandMatth. 16. 26. worlds, and therefore it must be the greatest pru∣dence, and the choicest policy in the world, to secure their everlasting welfare, and to know how things stands between God and your souls, what you are worth for Eternity, and how it is like to go with you in that o∣ther world, whilst a Christian lives at uncertainties as
to his spiritual and everlasting estate, as whether he has grace or no grace, or whether his grace be true or coun∣terfeit, whether he has an interest in Christ or not, a work in power upon his soul or not, or whether God loves him or loathes him, whether he will bring him to Heaven or throw him to Hll: How can any Christian who lives at so great an uncertainty, delight in God, re∣joyceJob 27. 10. Phil. 4. 4. 2 Cor 2. 14. Phil. 1. 23. ever more, triumph in Christ Jesus, be ready to suffer and desirous to die? All men love to be at a cer∣tainty in all their outward concernments, and yet how many thousands are there that are at a marvellous uncer∣tainty, as to the present and future state of their precious and immortal souls. But The tenth word of advice and counsel is this, Set the highest Scripture examples and patterns before you of grace and holiness for your Imitation; In the point of1 Cor. 4. 16. Gen. 12. Cap. 21. Numb. 12. 3. Joshua 1. Psalm 18. 23. Faith and Obedience set an Abraham before you; in the point of meekness set a Moses before you; in the point of courage set a Joshua before you; in the point of upright∣ness set a David before you; in the point of zeal set a Phinehas before you; and in the point of patience set a Job before you; make Christ your main pattern, [Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ.] And next to himJames 5. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 11. 1. set the patterns of the choicest Saints before you for your Imitation; the nearer you come to those blessed co∣piesPrecepta decent, exempla movnt, Precepts may in∣struct, but exam∣ples do perswade that they have-set before you, the more will be your joy and comfort, and the more God will be honoured, Christ exalted, the Spirit pleased, Religion adorned, the mouths of Sinners stopped, and the hearts of Saints re∣joyced: He that shooteth at the Sun, though he shoot far short; yet will shoot higher than he that aimeth at a shrub; it is safest, it is best to eye the highest and worthiest examples. Examples are 1. More awake∣ning than precepts. 2. More convincing than precepts.Heb. 11. 8. 3. More encouraging than precepts; and that because in them we see that the exercise of Godliness, though difficult, yet is possible when we see men subject to like passions with our selve to be so and so mortified, self∣denying,
humble, holy, &c. what should hinder but that it may be so with us also? Such as begin to work with the needle, look much on their sampler and pat∣tern; it is so in learning to write, and indeed in learn∣ing to live also. Observe the gracious conversations and carriages of the choicest Saints, keep a fixed eye up∣on their wise, prudent, humble, holy, and heavenly de∣portment; write after the fairest copy you can find, la∣bour to imitate those Christians that are most eminent in grace. I shall conclude this head with that of the Hea∣then: Optimum est majorum sequi vestigia si rectè praecesseSences. rit, It is best to tread in the steps of those who are gone in a safe and good way before us. But The eleventh word of advice and counsel is this, Be much in the most Spiritual exercises of Religion: There are external excercises, such as hearing, praying, sing∣ing,Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timoth. 4. 8. Matth. 6. receiving, holy conference, &c. Now custom, con∣viction, education, and a hundred other external con∣siderations may lead persons to these external exercises: But then there are the more spiritual exercises of Reli∣gion, such as loving of God, delighting in God, priz∣ing of Christ, complyance with the motions, counsels, and dictates of the Spirit, living in an exercise of grace, triumphing in Christ Jesus, setting our affections upon things above, meditation, self-examination, self-judging, &c. Now the more you live in the exercise of these more spiritual duties of Religion, the more you glorifie God, the more you evidence the power of grace, and the in∣dwellings of the Spirit; and the more you difference and distinguish your selves from Hypocrits, and all unsound Professors, and the better foundation you lay for a bright, strong and growing assurance. But The twelfth and last word of advice and counsel I shall give you, is to make a wise, a seasonable, a sin∣cere, a daily, and a through improvement of all the Ta∣lents that God has entrusted you with. There is a Ta∣lent of time, of power, of riches, of honour, of great∣ness that some are more entrusted with than others are,
the improvement of these is your great wisdom, and should be your daily works: You know you are but Ste∣wards,1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.  and that you must shortly give an account of your Steward-ship: And O that you may make such aLuke 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. faithful, and full improvement of all the great Talents that God has intrusted you with, that you may give up your account at last with joy and not with grief. Some Princes have wished upon their beds that they had ne∣ver reigned, because they have not improved their power for God and his People, but against God and his People; and some Rich men have wished that they had never been rich, because they have not improved their riches for the glory of God, nor for the succour and relief of his suffering Saints. A Beggar upon the way asked something of a honourable Lady; she gave him six pence, saying: This is more than ever God gave me. O says the Beggar, Madam you have abun∣dance, and God hath given you all that you have, say not so good Madam. Well (says she) I speak the truth, for God hath not given but lent unto me what I have, that I may bestow it upon such as thou art: And it is very true indeed, that poor Christians are Christs Alms-men, and the Rich are but his Stewards, into whose hands God hath put his monies, to distri∣bute to them as their necessities require. It is credi∣bly reported of Mr. Thomas Sutton (the fole Founder Church History of ∣tain. of that eminent Hospital commonly known by his name) that he used often to repair into a private Gar∣den, where he poured forth his prayers unto God, and amongst other passages was frequently over-heard to use this expression: Lord thou hast given me a libe∣ral and large estate, give me also a heart to make good use of it; which was granted to him accordingly. Ri∣ches are a great blessing, but a heart to use them aright is a far greater blessing. Every Rich man is not so much a Treasurer as a Steward, whose praise is more how to lay out well, than to have received much. I know I have transgressed the bounds of an Epistle, but love to
your souls and theirs, into whose hands this Treatise may fall, must be my Apology. Sir, If you and your Lady were both my own Chil∣dren, and my only Children, I could not give you bet∣ter, nor more faithful counsel, than what I have given you in this Epistle, and all out of a sincere, serious, and cordial desire and design, that both of you may be hap∣py here, and found at Christs right hand in the great day of Account, Matth. 25. 33, 34. Now the God of all grace fill both your hearts with1 Pet. 5. 1 Gal. 5. 22, . 23. Eph. 1. 3. all the fruits of righteousness, and holiness, and greatly bless you both with all spiritual blessings in Heavenly places, and make you meet helps to each other Hea∣ven-ward, and at last crown you both with ineffable glory in the life to come. So I take leave and rest, Your assured Friend, and Souls Servant, Tho. Brooks:
ERRATA. PAge 3. l. 20. r. eminent. p. 10. l. 2r. r. 2. p. 36. margin. r. propter. p. 38. l. 6. Hebrew, r. Hebrews. p. 48. l. 23. the, r. this. p. 64. l. 6. for Christian, r. Christians. p. 73. l. 9. for works, r. work. l. 21, 22. put in the mar∣gin, Isa. 6. 13. Cap. 8. 18. p. 120. l. 9. for the, r. he. p. 147. l. 37. r. be. p. 155. l. 3. blot out is. p. 166. l 19. blot out to. l. 31. blot out he. 2. Part. p. 17. l. 11. add as. 2. Part. p. 35. l. 29. r. of fr or. 2. Part. p. 37. l. 36. r. he for here. 2. Part. p. 55. l. 34. r. her for their. 2 Part. p. 59. l. 15. all for a. 2. Part. p. 62. l. 1. blot out he. 2. Part. p. 67. l. 27. add the. l. 36. blot out the. 2. Part. p. 70. l. 27. exaltations, r. exultations. 2. Part. p. 75. l. 18. add up. r. this for the. 2. Part. p. 82. l. 29. blot out the. 2. Part. p. 87. l. 20. for at, r. as 2. Part. p. 109. l. 36. r. on the growth. 2. Part. p. 146. l. 22. blot out the. 2. Part. p. 122, l. 34. r. her for their. 2. Part. p. 127. l. 36. pren∣ned, r. pened. 2. Part. p. 130. l. 8. for flesh, r. flesh. 2. Part. p. 192. l. 28. for giving r. laying. 2. Part. p. 176. for Reboim r. Zeboim. 2. Part. p. 208. l. 6. r. of Christ. 2. Part. p. 217. l. 24 blt out of. l. 27. add then. 2. Part. p. 219. l. 22. r. Jer. 14. 8. 2. Part. p. 220. l. 30. blot out but. In the Catalogue. p. 5. l. 37. for matter. r. nature. p. 6. l. 37. for declining r. dealing.
A GENERAL EPISTLE TO ALL SUFFERING SAINTS. To all afflicted and distressed Christians all the world over, e∣specially to those that are in bonds, for the testimony of Christ, in Bristol; and to those that are sufferers there; or in any other City, Town, Countrey or King∣dom whatsoever; and to all that have been deep suffer∣ers in their Names, Persons, Estates or Liberties, up∣on the account of their faithfulness to God, to their Light, to their Consciences, to their Principles, to their Profession, and to Christ the King and Head of his Church, and to all that have been long prisoners to their beds or chambers by reason of age and the common infir∣mities that do attend it, or that are under any other af∣flictive dispensation: And more particularly to my anci∣ent, dear and honoured friend, Mrs. Elizabeth Drink∣water, who has been many years the Lords prisoner, and upon the matter, kept wholly from publick Ordinances, by reason of her bodily weaknesses and infirmities; thoughEzek. 11. 16. in the want of a greater Sanctuary, God has been a lit∣tle Sanctuary to her soul. Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied Dear and Honoured Friends, THe ensuing Treatise about the Signal Presence of God with his people, in their greatest troubles, deepest distresses and most deadly dangers, I present to the service of all your souls. There has not been any Treatise on this Subject, that hath ever
fallen under mine eye; which hath been one great reason to en∣courage me in this present undertaking. I know several holy and learned men have written singularly well upon the Gracious Pre∣sence of God with his People, in Ordinances, and in the Wor∣ship of his House; but I know none that have made it their busi∣ness, their work, to handle this Subject that I have been discours∣ing on, though a more excellent, noble, spiritual▪ seasonable and necessary Sbject, can arely b treated on. There are ten things that I am very well satisfied in, and to me they are things of great Importance in this present day: And the firt is this, viz. That there is no engagement from God upon any of his people,  to run themselves into sufferings wilfully▪ cauesly, groundlely; Chriians must not be prodigal of their blood, for their blood is Christ's; their estates, their names, their liberties, their all, is his; they are not their own, they are bought with a price, and1 Cr. . 2. cap. 7. 23. therefore to him they must be accountable for their lives, liberties, &c. and therefore they had need be very wary how they part with them: We must not step out of our way to take up a Cross. The three Worthies were passive; they did not rush into the fieryD. 2. 2, 21. 28. Wat  er∣ings o many blind Papist▪ run themselves into, out of a supesti∣tious opi of Merit or Satis∣faction; but un∣der all their Pe∣nances they can∣not say we ear in our bodies the marks of our Lord Jesu▪ Crist. Gal. 6. 17. furnace, but yielded themselves to be cast into the fiery furnace; they did not stubbornly oppose nor struggle against their enemies, but patiently and quietly yielded their bodies to the flames: nei∣ther did the Prophets or Apostles step over God's hedge, to make way to their own Sufferings or Martyrdom. No men may, with the Donatists, destroy themselves, rather than they would conform to this or that Religion. No man may have a hand in his own de∣struction, no man may cut his throat with his own hands to avoid a Prison, a Dngeon, a Den, a fiery Furnace. Cyprian tells the Christians in his time, that were ambitious of Martyrdom; Non est in tua potestate, sed in Dei dignatione Martyrium. We may not run our selves into prison without a Mittimus from heaven. If righteousness lead me into prison, a righteous God will stand by me in prison; and in the issue, give me a gracious, or a glorious de∣liverance out of prison. But if I wilfully, causlesly run my self into prison, it will be a righteous thing with God, to leave me to shift for my self in prison. If God should meet a man in prison, and say to him as he did nce to Elijah, What dost thou here Elijah?1 King. 19. 9. Here he is secret∣ly taxed for leav∣ing his station out of too much fear of Jezbel. What dost thou here, O man? is this a fit place for Truth's Champion? If a man cannot readily answer, Lord, I have not run my self into a prison (but 'tis thy self, 'tis thy truth, 'tis thy interest, 'tis thy honour, 'tis my conscience, 'tis duty that has brought me hither) what confusion would attend him. Thilusrius and Theodoret speak of some that would compel men to kill them
out of an affectation of Martyrdom; but this was a mad ambition, but no true zeal. 'Twas an errour in Tertullian, to say that af∣flictions, that sufferings, were to be sought. No man is to make his own Cross, nor Scourges to whip himself; nor to cast himself into a suffering state, so long as God hath left him a plain openAct. 9. 23, 24, 25. Joh. 0. 19, 20. way to escape suffering without sinning; not but that most men are more apt and prone to sin themselves out of smart sufferings, than unwarrantably to run themselves into sufferings; but it is good for every Christian to be upon his Guard, and not run till God sends him. As a Christian must not shn sufferings, so he must not seek them. Secondly, that Afflictions, Sufferings, Persecutions, hath  been the common lot and portion of the people of God, in all theMat. 1. 22. cap. 16. 24. Luk. 21. 1. Joh. 15. 20. Heb. 11. The common cry of Persecutors hath been Chri∣stian a L. Ages of the world; witness the suferings of the Patriarchs, Pro∣phets, Apostles, the Primitive Christians, and the Martyrs of a later date: Abel was persecuted by Cin, 1 Joh. 3. 12. and I∣saac by Ishmael, Gal. 4. 29. and Jacob by sau. That seems to be a standing Law; All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, 2 Tim. 3. 12. A man may have many faint wihes and cold desires after Godliness, and yet escape Persecuti∣on; yea, he may make some esays and attempts as if he would be Godly, and yet escape Persecution: But when a man is th∣roughly resolved to be Godly, and sets himself in good earnest upon pursuing after holiness, upon living a life of holiness, upon growing up in holiness, then he must expect to meet with afflicti∣ons and persecutions. The History of the Ten Persecutions, and that little Book of Martyrs, the 11. of the Hebrews, and Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, with many other Histories that are ex∣tant, do abundantly evidence, that from Age to Age, and from one Generation to another, they that have been born after theGal. 4. 29. Flesh, have persecuted them that have been born after the Spirit; and that the Seed of the Serpent hath been still a multiplying ofGen. 3. 1. troubles upon the Seed of the Woman▪ As there was no way to Paradise, but by a flaming sword; nor no way to Canaan, but through a howling wilderness, so there is no way to Heaven, but by the Gates of Hell; there is no way to a glorious Exaltation, but through a Sea of Tribulation, of Persecution. The way toAct. 14. 21▪ 2. Heaven is not strewed with roses, but fll of thorns and brias, as those of whom this world is not worthy have always experienced.Heb. 11. The Serpentine Brood takes a very great pleasure to be still a re∣presenting the people of God as foolish, hypocritical, precise, proud, schismatical, seditious, factious, and as persons against Order and Government, against good Laws and Customs, as di∣starbers and troublers of the peace. Thus Ahab accounts Elijah,
The troubler of Israel; and Haman laid it to the charge of the1 King. 18. 17. Esh. 3. 8. Eza 4. 15. Jews, that they were disodient to the ing's Laws; and the adver∣saries of the Jews told Artaxerxes the King, that Jerusalem was a rebelious City, hurtful unto Kings and Princes: And the unbeliev∣ing Jews at Thessalonica did as much for the Apostles, they said they were the men that turned the world up sle down: So LutherAct. 17. 6. was called the Trumpet of Rebellion: and Tertulus calls Paul A pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition; , A Pestience, A Batch; foolish Tertulus mis-took the Antidote for the Poyson,cap. 24. 5. the remedy for the disease. Now if so precious a man as Paul (than whom, saith Chrysostom, the earth never bare a better, since it bore Christ) were accounted and called a Pest, a Botch, let not us think much if the choicest Saints in our days are accounted and esteemed as so many Pests and Botches. This is the reward the ingrateful world gives the servants of Christ, for their zeal and faithfulness in the cause of Christ: instead of encouraging them, they load them with ignominious and hateful terms of Re∣bellion and Turbulency, &c. labouring thereby to make them o∣dious, and to enrage the people against them; as the Persecutors of old used to wrap the Christians up in Bears skins and Lyons skins, &c. and then to bait them with Dogs. It is a very great vanity to think of passing to heaven without suffering; the Saints in all Ages have found the way thither paved with troubles, and it would be a foolish, childish thing for any of us to think of find∣ing it otherwise now. Constantine the Great, as piously as witi∣ly, told Acsius the Novation, that if he would not take up withSecrat. Hst. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 10. Persecution, and such like dealing, he must provide him a lad∣der, and climb alone to heaven; we must go to heaven some o∣ther way than the Saints have done of old, except we resolve of going thither through much tribulation, Act. 14. 22. Thirdly, That no person or persons on earth may sinfully shift  off sufferings, or avoid sufferings; there being infinitely more e∣vil in the least sin, than there can be in the greatest sufferings that can befall us in this world; 'tis best, 'tis safest to chuse suffering rather than sinning, as Moses did; so Daniel chose rather to beDan. 6. cast among Lions, than that his Conscience should be a Lyon with∣in him; and the three Children (or Champions rather) who werecap. 3. holily wilful, chose rather to burn in the fiery furnace, than to bow to the Image that the King had set up. He that values peaceJuas and Spira will rather sin than suffer, but whoever suffered more on this ide hell, than they suffered. with God, and peace with Conscience, and the honour of God, and the credit of Religion, the silencing of sinners, and the re∣joycing of the Saints, must chuse to suffer rather than to sin, when storms arise, and troubles and dangers approach, many begin to consult, not how they may glorifie God by suffering, but how
they may provide for their own safety by sinning: Plato knew much of God, but (as Josephus shews) durst not set it down for fear of the people: And Lactantius charges the same upon Tul∣ly; Thou darest not (saith he) undertake the Patrenage of the truth, for fear of the prison of Socrates: And AugustineDe Ci. lib. 6. cap. 10. doth as much for Seneca; he spends a whole Chapter in shewing how he held the truth in unrighteousness; telling us how he re∣verenced that which he reproved, did that which he condemned, and worshipped that which he found fault with. Though these wise men saw the vanity of the Heathenish Deities, and the wor∣ship that was given to them, and looked upon them as utterly un∣worthy of respect from wise and sober men, nay, secretly scorn∣ed and derided them; yet would they not openly declare against them, and that for fear of the people who so much doted upon them: But Daniel's three young Worthies were men of that heavenly gallanty, that they peremptorily resolved upon this, that though they should not be delivered by their God, yet they would not sin against their God, nor so much as demur, delibe∣rate, or take time to consider whether they should suffer or sin; 'twas past dispute with them, brave and noble souls that they were. It is observable that when Paul speaks of his afflictions,2 Cor. 4. 17. his sufferings; he calls them light; but when he speaks of his sin, he speaks of it, as a burden that prest him down, and made him cry out, O wretched man that I am; and to cry out again, we groan, being burthened. Moses his choice is famous, and ce∣lebratedRom. 7. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 2, 4. all the world over; for 'twas not made when he was a child, but when he came to forty years of age; then he pre∣ferredHeb. 11. 25, 26, 27 suffering, not only before sinning, but before all the Ho∣nours, Riches and Pleasures of Egypt; accounting the worst of Christ (viz. Reproaches) better than the best of the world. When Eleazar was promised to be saved from torments and death if he would but make shew of yielding, he couragiously answered, It2 Mac. 6. 24. becometh not our age in any wise to dissemble; whereby many young persons might think that Eleazar, being four score and ten years old, were now gone to a strange Religion. Thus also, one of the seven Brethren, in the name of the rest; We are ready tocap. 7. 2. die, rather than transgress the laws of our fathers; meaning such Laws as God, of old, had given to their Fathers, to be observed by them, and by their Posterity, Age after Age. Polycarpus,Eccl. l. 4. c. 15. when the Governour promised to let him go free if he would de∣ny Christ, answered, I have served him four score and six years, and he never hurt me in any thing; how shall I curse him who hath saved me? And the Governour adding one while promises, another while threatnings Polycarpus thus cuts ol all, why dost
thou make delays? inflict what thou lists. So Galea, Gentle∣man of great Estate, who suffered Martyrdom at St-ang a Italy; being much pressed by his friends to recant, and save his life, he replied, that death was much more tweet to him with the Testimony of Verity, than life with the least deny of truth. Hooper desired rather to be discharged of his Bishoprick, than yield to certain Ceremonies. A man were better dispase all his Friends, all his Relations, yea, all the world than to displease his God, and displease his own Conscience So Cyprian, whenAugustine re∣lates the story. the Emperour, as he was going to execu. told him, that he would give him space to consider whether re not Letter cast in a grain into the fire, than be so miserably in: to which he replyed. In re tam sancta deliberation  There needs no deliberation in this case. The lik e History of France, in the year 1572. presently after  and persi∣dious slaughter and massacre of so man of Protestants by treacherous bloody Papists, Charles th of France, called the Prince of Conde, and prop his cce, ei∣ther to go to Mass, or to die presently, or to r peral im∣prisonment: To which he returned this note answer that by God's help he would never chuse the first: and for eithe of the two latter, he left it to the King's pleasure and God's Providence. Thus you see that the people of God have, when put to it, chose rather to suffer than to sin. But Fourthly, That they shall be sure to suffer with a witness, that  refuse to suffer, or are afraid to suffer, when Christ calls them to a suffering state. No men can suffer so much for Christ, as they shall be sure to suffer from Christ, if through weakness or wic∣kedness they either disdain or refuse to suffer for Christ; Mark 8. 35. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoe∣verThere is no loss but gain, in los∣ing for Christ. shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it. 'Tis a very dangerous thing for men to prefer the safety of their natural lives before the Glory of Christ, the cause of Christ, the Gospel of Christ, and the Profession of his name. 'Tis cer∣tain that the Glory of Christ ought to be more dear and precious to us than our very lives: Christ, for our Redemption and Salva∣tion, freely and readily lays down his life, I lay down my life forJoh. 10. 15. my sheep; and shall we stand with him for ours, when our call is clear, to lay them down for his sake and the Gospel's sake. He that shall attempt to save his life by crossing his light, by shifting off the truth, or by forsaking of Christ, shall lose it. 'Tis a gainful loss to suffer for the truth; 'tis a lossful gain, by time∣serving and base complying with the times, the lusts, the wills, the humours of the men of this Age (in whom the spirit of Cain
and Fsau works so furiously) to provide for our present safety, se∣curity, plenty, peace and ease, &c. either by denying the truth or by betraying the truth, or by exchanging the truth, or by for∣saking the truth Mat. 10. 39. He that findeth his life shall lose it. This is a strange expression, a riddle to the world, a seeming con∣tradiction, such as natural reason can never reconcile. He that1 Tim. 1. 19, 20 findeth his life, that is, redeemeth it with the forfeiture of his Faith, with the shipwrack of his Conscience, makes a loser's bargain; he make more haste than good speed, whilst in run∣ning from death as far as he can, he runs to it as fast as he can: See it in some great instances, when Henry the fourth of FranceFrench History. had conquered his enemies, he turned Papist, and gave this rea∣son of it, That he might settle himself in peace and safety; Ra∣villak, who slew him as he was riding abroad in his Coach to re∣fresh himself, confessed that the reason why he stabbed him was because he was of two Religions; as thus, by his sinful endea∣vours to save his life he lost it. There was one Philbert Hamli inNon ptest qui pa∣ti timet, ejus esse qui pssusest. Tertul. France, having converted a Priest to the profession of the truth, was, together with the Priest, apprehended, and cast into prison at Burdeaux; but after a while, the Priest being terrified with the prison, and fear of death, renounced Christ, and was set at liberty: Whereupon Philbert said unto him, O unhappy and more than miserable man. is it possible, that to save your life for a few days, you should so deny the truth? Know therefore, thoughA Prediction. you have avoided the Corporal fire, yet your life shall not be pro∣longed, for you shall die before me; and you shall not have the honour to die for the cause of Christ, but you shall be an example to Apostates: And accordingly, as he went out of the prison, two Gentlemen, that had a former quarrel with him, met him, and slew him: And thus also, he lot his life by endeavouring sinfully to save it. The Angrognian; that yielded to the Papists,Acts and Monu∣ments, Fol. 885. and complyed with them, that they might sleep quietly in a whole skin, were more sadly and cruelly lndled by the Papists, than those that continued sout couragious and resolute for the truth. Under the fourth Persecution there were some Christians, who for fear of torments and death, denied their faith and sacrificed to Idols, yet did not their bloody Persecutors spare them; and i was observed, that being full of guilt, they went to their deaths with dejected and ill-favoured countenances; so that the very Gentiles took notice of it, and reproached them as base Apo∣states, and as such who were worthy to suffer as evil-doers.  that was Chaplain to Bishop Pdly, refusing to die in Christ's cause with his Master, said Mass against his Conscience, and soon after pined away with sorrow and grief. A Smith in King d∣ward's
the Sixth's days, called Richard Denton, was a forwardActs and Monu∣ments, third Vo∣lume, pag. 960. Professor of Religion; and by his Christian instruction, the hap∣py instrument of the conversion of a young man to the Faith: af∣terwards, in the Reign of Queen Mary, this young man was cast in prison for his Religion; who remembring his old friend, and spiritual father, the Smith (to whom he always carried a reverend respect for the good he had received by him) sent to know whether he was imprisoned also; and finding that he was not, desired to speak with him; and when he came, he asked his advice, whe∣ther he thought it best for him to remain in prison, and whether he would encourage him to burn at a stake for his Religion: To whom the Smith answered, that his cause was good, and that he might with comfort suffer for it, but for my part (said the Smith) I cannot burn: But shortly after, he that could not burn for Re∣ligion, by God's just Judgment, was burned for his Apostacy; for his shop and house being set on fire, and he overbusie to save his Goods, was burnt in the flames. They that will not burn for Christ when he calls them to it, shall burn whether they will or no. He that will not suffer for Christ, shall be sure to suffer worse things from Christ, than ever he could have suffered for Christ: And therefore Doctor Taylor the Martyr, hit the nailIbid. 1382. when he said, If I shrink from God's truth (said he) I am sure of another manner of death than Judge Hales had; who being drawn for fear of death, to do things against his light and Con∣science, did afterwards drown himself. Cyprian, in his Sermon De Lapsis, makes mention of divers, who forsaking the Professi∣on of their Faith, were given over by God, to be possessed by e∣vil spirits, and so died fearfully and miserably; making good that word that is more worth than a world, Joh. 12. 25. He that is here us∣ed of excessive and preposterous love: He that so loveth his life, that out of a de∣sire to save it, he denieth me and my Gospel, so this Greek word is used, Mat. 10. 37. loveth his life, shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal. A man that is sparing of his life when Christ calls for it, doth take the ready way to lose it; and he that doth hazard it for him at his call, is sure to live eternally. Christ approves of no followers, who are not resolved on the loss of what is dearest to them; yea, even of life for his sake; there∣fore doth he mention our life to be hated; which is not to be un∣derstood absolutely, as if it were a sin to love life, as it is the gift of God, or that they should be weary of it; but comparatively, that they should not love it more than Christ, his Word, his Wor∣ship, his Ways. He that resolves to save his temporal life upon any terms, he takes the shortest cut to lose both temporal and eter∣nal life also: (He that loveth his life, shall lose it:) He that pre∣fers the honour and service of Christ above his own life, he takes the surest way to preserve both body and soul unto eternal life;
for he that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal. Though life be sweet, and every creature makes much of it, from the highest Angel to the lowest Worm; yet wo, wo to him that is set upon saving of it when Christ calls upon him to lay it down for his sake, or the Gospels sake. No fool to him that thinks to a∣void a less danger, by running himself into a greater danger; who thinks to save his body, by losing his soul; and to save his temporal life, by losing eternal life. There is no loser to him who by sinful attempts to save his life, shall lose a better life than ever he can save. But Fifthly, Consider, That of old there hath been a very great willingness, readiness, forwardness and resoluteness in the peo∣ple of God, chearfully to suffer for Christ, his Truth, his Go∣spel, his Worship, his Ways, his Ordinances, his interest, his honour: Consult the Scriptures in the margin, and many others of the like import, which all knowing Christians can turn to atDan. 2. 16, 17. Rom. 8. 36. Psal. 44. Phil. 2. 17. Act. 20. 2, 23, 24 cap. 21. 13, &c. Dan. 6. 1 Pet. . 16. Act. 5 41. Act. 7. 55, 56. 2 Cor 1. 3, 4. 5. Acts and Mn. Fol. 857. Medestus Liete∣nant to Julian the Emperour, told him, that when the Christi∣ans suffered they did but deride them; and the tor∣ments (said he) with which Chri∣stians are tor∣mented are more terrible to the tormentors than they are to the tormented. pleasure. To these I shall add a few examples amongst a multi∣tude of those blessed souls, who willingly, readily, chearfully, resolutely, hazarded all for Christ while they were on earth, and are now a receiving their reward with him in heaven: Oh, how my heart leapeth for joy (said Mr. Philpt the Martyr) that I am so near the apprehension of eternal life; I with my fellows were car∣ried to the Cole-house, where we do rouse together in the straw as chearfully (we thank God) as others do in their beds of Downe. Mr. Glover the Martyr wept for joy of his imprisonment: And Mr. Bradford put off his cap, and thanked the Lord, when his Keeper's Wife brought him word that he was to be burnt the next day: and Mr. Taylor fetched a pleasant delightful frisk when he was come near to the place where he was to suffer: Mr. Rogers. the first that was burnt in Queen Mary's days, did sing in the flames: Vincentius laughing at his tormentors, said, that death and tortures were to Christians (socularia & ludiera) matters of sport and pastime; and he joyed and gloried when he went upon hot burning Coals, as if he had trod upon Roses. Fire, Sword, Death, Prison, Famine, are all pleasures, they are all delight¦ful to me, saith Bazil; and in his Oration for Barlaam that fa∣mous Martyr, saith, that he delighted in the close prison as in a pleasant green Meadow; and he took pleasure in the several in∣ventions of tortures, as in several sweet flowers: William Tim. Martyr, in a letter to a friend of his a little before his death, writ∣eth thus; Now I take my leave of you till we meet in heaven, and hic you after, I have tarried a great while for you; and seeing you are so long in making ready, I will tarry no longer for you, you shall find me merrily singing Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath▪
at my journey's end, &c. And when they kindled the fire at the feet of James Bainham, me thinks, said he, you strew Roses be∣fore me▪ when the Prect urged Basil to comply with the Em∣perour,Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 26. Gr. and threatned him with death if he denied; he gave him ths resolute and sout answer; Thou threatnest me with death (saith he) and I would that it would fall out so well on my side, that I might lay down this carcase of mine in the Quarrel of Christ, and in deence of the truth, who is my Head and Cap∣tain: And when the Prect presed him to remember himself, and obey the Emperour; he rejecting all, told him, what I am to day, the same thou shalt find me to morrow. When Chrysostom was greatly threatned by the cruel Empress and others▪ he made this answer: If they keep me poor, I know Christ had not a house to put his head in: If they silence me, and put me out of the Synagogue; so was that poor man that confes∣sedJoh. 9. 22, 24. Act. 5. 40. cap. 12. Eph. 6. 20. Rev. 1. Christ, and the Apostles enjoyned not to speak in the name of Jesus: If they cast me into prison, so was Jeremy, St. Peter and St Paul, and many more: If I am forced to flee my Countrey, I have that beloved Jhn, and that Atlas-like Athanasius, for Precedents of the like nature: Or whatsoever else should be done unto me, I have the holy Martyrs for my fellow-sufferers; and I will never count my life dear unto me, so I may finish my course with joy; but I will, by God's help▪ be ever ready with all my heart, to suffer any thing for the name of Jesus Christ, and for the least jot of his truth. Neither were they only a few choice persons, who willingly, readily, cheerfully and resolutely endured Martyrdom in Christ's Cause; but such multitudes, year after year, month after month,Hier. id Helic. . week after week, and day after day, as that one of the Ancients testifieth; That there was never a day in the year, except the first of January, whereunto the number of five hundred Martyrs at least might not be ascribed: So many, one after another, in oneEuseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 9. day suffered, as the Executioner blunted his sword; and with the pains he took, fainted. That which many of them endured, though to flesh and blood it seemed intolerable; yet with much patience, excellent chearfulness, and divine courage, they endur∣ed it. They were not like bears, halled to the stake; but while Persecutors were sitting on their Judgment-seats, and condemn∣ing some Christians, others leaped in, and professed themselves Christians, and suffered the uttermost that could be inflicted withEuseb. l. c. citat. joyfulness and a kind of pleasantness, singing Psalms as long as their breath lasted. Bucer, in an Epistle to Calvin, tells him, that there were some that would willingly redeem to the Commonwealth the an∣cient
liberty of worshipping Christ with their very lives. True Grace makes a Christian of a very heroick nature; Holy Zeal will make a Christian very ready to endure any thing, or to suf¦fer any thing for Christ, his Worship, his Ways, his Truth. It is a high vanity for any man to think of getting to heaven without suffering; in all the Ages of the world, the Saints have found the way to happiness paved with troubles; and we must not think of finding it strewed with Rose-buds. When Paul and Silas were in prison, their hearts were so fullAct. 16. 25. Paul  his chain whh he did bear for the Gospel sake, and was as proud of it, as a woman of her Ornaments, saith Chrysostom. of joy, that they could not hold; but at midnight, when others were sleeping, they must fall a singing out the Praises of the Most High, they found more pleasure than pain, more joy than sorrow, more comfort than torment in their Bonds; the consolations of the spirit rose so high in their souls, that their prison was turned into a Palace, yea, into a Paradise. Paul was a man that took a great deal of pleasure in his sufferings for Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 10. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: He did not only bear his sufferings patiently, but chearfully also; he often sings it sweetly out, I Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, Cos. 4. 3, 10. Rom. 16. 7. Eph. 6. 20. 2 Tim. 1. 16. &c. not I Paul an Apo∣stle, nor I Paul wrapped up into the third heaven, nor I Paul that have more Gifts, Parts and Learning than others; but I Paul a prisoner, to shew how much he rejoyced in his bonds and suffer∣ings for Christ Chrysostom did not hold Paul so happy for his rap¦pture into Paradise, as he did for his imprisonment for Christ. Oh the sweet looks, the sweet words, the sweet hints, the sweet in-comes, the sweet joggings, the sweet embraces, the sweet influences, the sweet discoveries, the sweet love-letters, the sweet love-tokens, and the sweet comforts that Christians ex∣perience in their sufferings for Christ; in all their troubles and persecutions they may truly say, we have sweet meats to eat,▪ and waters of life to drink, and heavenly honey-combs to suck that the world knows not of: And indeed, when should the torch be lighted, but in a dark night; and when should the fire be made, but when the weather is cold; and when should the Cordial be given, but when the Patient is weak; and when should the God2 Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5. of comfort, the God of all kinds of comfort, and the God of all degrees of comfort, comfort his people, but under their trouble and persecutions; for then comfort is most proper, necessary, sea¦sonable and sutable; and then God will be sure to pour in the oyl of joy into their hearts. But  It is not Paena, but Causa, that commends the sufferer. Sixthly, consider that there is a great truth in that old Maxim, Non poena, sed causa facit Martyrem:▪ 'Tis not the punishment,
but the cause, that makes a Martyr. Let every man look that his cause be good, its not the blood, but the cause, that makes a Martyr. It's no ways meet that I should engage to suffer in every cause; every cause will no more bear a man out in suffering, than every shoulder will bear every burthen, or than every little River will bear every Ship that is of the greatest burthen; one man suffers as a Murtherer, ano∣ther suffers as a Thief, another suffers as an Evil-doer, and another suffers as a busie body in other men's matters; but all such Sufferers are rather Malefactors▪ than Christ's Martyrs: Let none of you suffer1 Pet. 4. 15. as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busi body in o∣ther men's matters: It is but one word in the original, , as Bishops in another's Diocess, as priers into other men's matters, as pragmatical persons that meddle with other men's concernments, without cause or call. It is not suffering for evil doing, but suffering2 Tim. 2. 12. for well doing that carries the Crown: It is not just, but unjust suf∣fering that hath the recompence of reward annexed to it: It is not1 Pet. 3. 14. cap. 4. 14. sufferers for the evil of sin, nor sufferers of the evil of sin; but suffer∣ers of the evil of punishment, for the avoiding of the evil of sin, whoseMr. Bradford to all that profess the Gospel in Lancashire. cause is good. When I consider the cause of my condemnation (said Mr. Bradford) I cannot but lament, that I do no more rejoyce than I do; for it is for God's verity and truth. So that the Condemnation is not a Condemnation of Bradford simply, but rather a condemnation of Christ, & of his Truth: Bradford is nothing but an instrument, in which Christ and his Doctrine is condemned Christ & the Thieves were in the same Condemnation: Sampson and the Philistines in the same destruction, by the downfall of the house: Similis pna, dissimi∣lis causa, saith Augustine▪ Martyrdom is a Crown, as old Age, if it be found in a way of righteousness: Though life be a poor little thing to lay down for that Christ that has done such great things for us, andIsa. 53. Joh. 14. that has suffered such grievous things, & that has prepared such glo∣rious things for us; yet, it is too precious to lay down in any cause, but what is honourable, just & good Luther professed to Spalatine, that he rejoyced with all his heart, that God called him to suffer for soEp. ad Spalat. Fol 287. good a cause, acknowledging himself unworthy of such a favour. It is the goodness of a man's cause that makes him divinely merry with the Martyrs, & to sing in a prison with Paul & Silas: When a man's cause is good, he may call his sufferings the sufferings of Christ, andColos. 2. 24. Gal. 6. 17. his skars and marks; , brands and marks of the Lord Jesus. The Jews have been hated & persecuted for many Ages; first by the Ro∣mans, and since by all other nations, but not for any just or righteous cause, but for their impiety, obstinacy and contempt of Christ & hisMat 22. 2, to 8. cap. 23. 30, 34, 37, 38. Gospel, & for killing the Prophets, & stoning them that were sent a∣mongst them. But gracious persons are endued, not only with reason, but also with spiritual understanding, & divine wisdom, which makes
them well weigh what they do, & what they suffer: Sincere Christi∣ans advisedly endure what they endure for the faith's sake (so fight I1 Cor. 9. 6. not as one that beateth the air) that is, not as a mad man that fighteth with a shadow, not weighing what he doth; but as a man of under∣standing, that doth very well know that I have good cause to do what I do. Persecutors commonly judge suffering Saints to be no better than Sots, Idiots, Franticks, mad, &c. not knowing the goodness of the cause for which they suffer, nor the noble ends which they aim at in suffering, nor the blessed fruits that attend their sufferings. But when may a man safely and groundedly conclude that his cause is good, or that he suffers for well doing, or for a good cause, & as a Christian? Now, to this question I shall give these following answers. First, When a man suffers for doing that which Christ commands,  then he suffers for well doing, then he suffers as a Christian, & then1 Pet. 4. 15, 16. his cause is good. You know there is nothing in all the Scripture that God stands more upon than purity of religion, than purity of worship,James 1. 27. Phil. 3. 3. Joh. 4. 23, 24. than purity of ordinances, in opposition to all mixtures and corrupti∣ons whatsoever. O sirs, the great God stands upon nothing more in all the world, than upon purity in his worship. There is nothing that doesMat. 21. 12, 13. Joh. 2. 15, 16, 17. so provoke and exasperate God against a people, as mixtures in his worship and service; and no wonder, for mixtures in his worship are expresly-cross to his commands, and pollutions in worship do sadly reflect upon the name of God, the honour of God, the truth of God; and therefore his heart rises against them; defilements in worship do sorely reflect upon the wisdom of Christ & the faithfulness of Christ, as if he were not faithful enough nor wise enough, nor prudent norHeb. 3. 4, 5, 6. understanding enough, to order, direct and guide his people in the matters of his worship; but must be beholding to the wisdom, pru∣dence and care of man, of vain man, of sinful man, of vile and unwor∣thy man, to compleat, perfect and make up something that was want∣ing in his worship and service, &c. Now if a man suffers for owning pure worship and ordinances, for standing for pure worship and or∣dinances, and for being found in the practice of pure worship and ordinances, his cause is good, and he suffers as a Christian. But Secondly, When a man suffers for refusing, or for not doing that which Christ condemns in his word, then his cause is good, and he suffers as a Christian, for well doing. Now, in matters of Divine Worship, God condemns all mix∣tures, all inventions and devices of men. The very spirit, life and soul of the Second Commandment lies in these words; Thou shalt not make to thy self any Graven Image. God abhors that men should mix their Water with his Wine,Levit. 10. 1, 2. Ezek. 5. 11, 12. cap. 23. 38, 39. Jer 7. 29, 30. Ezek. 8. 17, 18. Rev. 2. 22, 23. Deut. 4. 2. cap. 12 32. &c. their Dross with his Gold, their Chaff with his Wheat, &c. When men will venture to be so hardy and bold with God, as to defile his Worship with their mixtures, then God is fully resolved to be a swift and terrible witness against them, as you may clearly see by comparing those notable places of Scripture to∣gether in the Margin; there is no sin that does so greatly incense and pro∣voke God to Jealousie and Wrath against a People, as mixtures in his Worship. God can bear with defilements any where, rather than in Worship and Service. God did bear much, and bear long with the Jews
b when they had defiled and corrupted his worship, then God gave them a Bill of Divorce, and scattered them as Dung among the Nations. Now, when a man suffers for refusing to worship God with a mixt worship, or with an invented or devised worship, which Christ in his word doth every where condemn; then his cause is good, and he suffers as a Christian. But Thirdly, they that stoutly and resolutely assert that the blessed  Luk. 10. 25, 26. Scriptures are a sufficient rule to order, guide and direct them in all matters of worship, they have a good cause; and they that suffer upon this account, suffer as Christians, for well doing: Such vain men greatly detract from the sufficiency of the Scri∣pture, who mingle their own or other men's inventions, withEzek 43 8. Divine Institutions; and who set their Posts by God's Posts, and their Thresholds by God's Thresholds. The Precepts and Tradi∣tionsIt is very re∣markable that of old they were to be cut off, that made any thing like the Instituti∣ons and Appoint∣ments of God. Exod. 30. 32, 33, 37, 38. And if some were so served would not the world be in more love, peace, and quietness than now it is. of men, with their Inventions and Additions to the worship of God, are stiled Posts and Thresholds, because the Authors of them do lean and stand so much upon them, and set them in the way to hinder others from the enjoyment of Temple-privileges un∣less they will own and comply with them in their way and mode of worship; but upon all such posts and thresholds that are of men's setting up in the worship of God, you may run and read folly, weakness, rottenness and madness; 'tis only God's Posts, God's Thresholds, God's Institutions, God's Appointments, that have Wisdom and Holiness, Beauty and Glory, written upon them: For men to set up their Posts by God's Posts, and to give their Posts equal Honour and Authority with God's Posts; this is a defiling of the Worship of God, and a prophaning of the name of God, which he will certainly avenge, for he will admit no ri∣val or Proprietary in the things of his Worship. O sirs, the bles∣sedAdero plenitudi∣n Sripua∣rum, Tertul. La∣  fulness of the Scriptures. Scriptures are sufficient to direct us fully in every thing that belongs to the Worship and Service of God, so as that we need not depend upon the wisdom, prudence, care and authority of a∣ny men under heaven to direct us in matters of Worship, 2 Tim. 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is pro∣fitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righ∣teousness: That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnish∣ed unto all good works. The Scriptures are sufficient to inform the ignorant, to confute the erronious, to reform the vitious, and to guide and direct, support and comfort, those that are gracious: Here a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim; here is milk for babes, and meat for strong men; here is comfort for the afflicted, and succour for the tempted, and ease for the troubled, and light for the clouded, and enlargement for the straitned, &c. Oh, how full of light, how full of life, how full of love,
how full of sweetness, how full of goodness, how full of righ∣teousness and holiness, &c. is every Chapter, and every Verse in every Chapter; yea, and every Line in every Verse. The Rab∣bins say, that a mountain of matter hangs upon every word of Scripture, yea, upon every tittle of Scripture. When the peo∣ple of God have been in any outward or inward distresses or trou∣bles, God never sends them to the shp of men's Traditions andNo Histories are comprable to the Histories o the Scripture, 1. For Antiquity, 2. Rarity, 3. Varie∣ty, 4. Brevity, 5. Perspicuity▪ 6. Harmony, 7. Ve∣rity; all which should greatly encourage Chri∣stians to a serious perusal of them. inventions, but he still sends them to the blessed Scriptures, Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not accord∣ing to this word, it is because there is no light (, no morning) in them: cap. 34. 1. Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read;  one of thse shall , none shall want her mae; for my mouth, it hath commanded, and my spirit, it hath gathered them: And in the New Testament, Christ sends his hearers to the Scriptures; Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eter∣nal life, and they are they which testifie of me: The Greek word , that is here rendred search, signifies a strict, narrow, cu∣rious, diligent search; we must search the Scripture, as we would search for Gold, or for some Precious Stones, which we would fin find; we must search the Scriptures, as Hunters seek and search out their Game. The Scripture is so perfect a Rule, that the most specious observances, the most glorious performan∣ces, the most exact worship, is no way acceptable unto God, if not directed in his word. They may have, ,Colos. 2. 23. A shew of Wisdom in Will-worship, to the pleasing of men, not to the honour of God. God gave Moses a pattern forExod. 25. 9. the making of the Tabernacle, and David for the Temple and allHeb. 8 5. things were to be ordered and regulated according to this pattern God hath set us a perfect Rule of Worship in his Word; and no Service pleaseth him, but what is according to this Rule: As ourJoh. 4. 20, 21. 22. Saviour told the woman of Samaria, concerning the Samaritan Worship at Mount Gerazim, and the Jewish Worship at Jerusa∣lem; That the Samaritans worshipped they know not what; the Jews knew what they worshipped, for Salvation was of the Jews: Why so? because the Jews had God's special direction, and ap∣pointment of God's Word for their Worship and Service, which the Samaritans had not. All our Worship must be regulated by God's Will, not our own: Non ex arbitrio Deo servindum, sed ex imperio: Not according to our own fancy, but God's Command and Prescription. I say, of all humane invented Will-worship of God, as Tertullian of the Heathen Worship; Ex religione super sitio compingitur, & eo irreligiosior, quanto Ethnicus paratior: Men in this are no better than laboriously superstitious, taking pains to be irreligious. And so the Apostle sends his hearers to the Scri∣ptures,2 Pet. 1. 19, 20,
as to a surer word than that of the Revelation, all which speaks out the sufficiency of the Scripture, to direct us in all mat∣ters of Divine Worship, and in what ever else may help on the internal and eternal welfare of our precious and immortal souls. That which bred the Popish Religion, Superstition, Idolatry, and Pompous Worship, was men's departing from the word, and not cleaving to the word, as a sufficient rule to direct them in all matters of worship; and what woful mischiefs and miseries have been brought upon the people of the Lord in this Land, and else where, by men that make not the word the rule of their wor∣ship, but cry up an outward pompous worship, I have no mind to enumerate at this time: But how will these vain men that accuse the holy Scriptures of insufficiency, blush, be ashamed, and con∣founded, when in the great day, the Lord shall plead the excel∣lency, and vindicate the Sufficiency and Authority of his blessed Book, in opposition to all the mixtures of men's Traditions with Divine Institutions? Now, they that suffer for asserting the holy Scriptures to be a sufficient rule to order, guide and direct them in all matters of worship, they have a good Cause, and they suf∣fer as Christians, for well doing. But They that are Assertors of the true God, in opposition to the I∣dols  of the Nations, have a good Cause; and they that suffer upon this account, suffer as Christians, for well doing. Upon this foot, the Christians under the Heathen Emperours in the pri∣mitive times, suffered great things; and are there none that suf∣fer this day upon this account by the Romish Powers. But Fifthly, They who assert that God will not bear with mixtures  in his worship and service, but revenge himself upon the corrupt∣ers of his worship, they have a good cause; and they that suffer upon that account, suffer as Christians for well doing. All mix∣turesIsa. 29. 13, 14. Mat. 15. 3, 6, 8, 9. debase the worship and service of God, and makes the wor∣ship a vain worship, as the mixing of water with wine is the de∣basing of the wine; and the mixing of Tin with Silver, or Brass with Gold, is debasing of the Silver and Gold; so for men to mix and mingle their Traditions and Inventions with God's Instituti∣ons, is to debase the worship and service of God, and to detract from the excellency and glory of it. You know that the Kings and Princes of the world have most severely punished such, who by their base mixtures, have imbased their Coyn. And assuredly there is a day a coming, when the King of Kings will most severe∣ly punish all such who have imbased his worship and service, by mixing Humane Inventions and Romish Traditions with his holy Institutions, Rev. 22. 18. For I testifie unto every man that heareth the words of the Prophecie of this book; if any man shall add unto
these things, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written inThere will come a day, when Jews, Turks & Papists shall pay dear for adding to the Scriptures. this book. And no wonder; for what horrible pride, presumpti∣on, stoutness and baseness is it in foolish man, to be so bold with the great God, as to dare to mix any thing of his own with his worship and service, which, according to Divine Institution, is so perfect and compleat. God will never bear it, to see men lay their Dirt upon his Gold, and to put their Rags upon his Royal Robes. Ah Christians, 'tis best to stand up for holy Ordinances and pure worship, in opposition to all mixtures whatsoever. Oh, do not touch a polluted worship, do not plead and contend for a polluted worship, but let Baal plead for Baal; and though all1 King. 18. 21. Rev. 13. 3, 4. 6, 17. cap. 14 9, 11. the world should wander after the Beast, yet do not you wander after the Beast; and though every forehead should have the mark of the Beast upon it, yet do you abhor his mark, and whatever else it be that does but smell and savour of the Beast. 'Tis a ve∣ry dangerous thing for any Mortals to be adding to God's worship and word; there is a horrible curse that hangs over the heads of all such that add or detract from the blessed Scriptures. If fal∣sifiers of Coin are liable unto the Civil Curse of the Law, how much more shall the Anathema of Eternal Damnation be inflicted upon the corrupters of God's word and worship. To them that add thereto, God will add all the Plagues of this book, (to wit, the seven last Plagues) and cast them into the lake of sire and brimsion,Rev. 19. with the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet. Now they that suffer for asserting that God will not bear with mixtures in his Worship and Service, but revenge himself upon the corrupters of his Worship and Service; they have a good cause, and they suf∣fer as Christians, for well doing. But Sixthly, They who are hated, scorned, despised, reproached,  opposed, persecuted, imprisoned, ruined, for their non-compli∣ance1 Pet. 4. 4, 5. Jde 15. Rev. 3. 4. 1 Cor. 7 23. Gal. 1. 10. with the times, and with the wills and lasts of men, and with the worship of the world, and the ways of the world; they have a good cause, and they suffer as Christians, for well doing: And is not this the very case of the people of God this day; for would they (or durst they) comply with the times, and with the wills and lusts of men, and with the worship of the world, and the ways of the world, they should be white boys; and in lead of prisons, might stand in Princes Palaces as well as others; and might eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and live at ease, and grow rich as well as others. But some do not love▪ that we should ei∣ther harp hard or long upon this string; and therefore, Seventhly, They that are assertors of Christ, of the true Mes∣sia,  and his glorious Gospel, and Gospel-ordinances, in oppositi∣on to all such as either deny him or his Gospel, or that make head
against him or Gospel-ordinances, Gospel-administrations, they have a good cause; and if they suffer upon that account, they suffer as Christians, for well doing. The sufferings of the people of God for the first three hundred years, were clearly stated for Christ and the Gospel in common. 'Twas the administration of the Gospel in the whole, and in every part of it, and Gentilism advanced instead thereof, that brought on a warm Persecution. Seeing serious Christians are for pure Ordinances, and pure Ad∣ministrations; and what they have suffered, and do daily suffer upon that account, all that do not wilfully shut their eyes, may easily discern. 'Tis sad when such men's mouths must be stopped, who are qualified, gifted, graced and called, both by God and2 Cor. 4 4. Rev. 14. 6. men, to preach the glorious, the everlasting Gospel: But when the Devil and his Factors have done their worst, the Gospel will get ground by all the opposition that is made against it. Among many other Visions that John had, He saw an Angel fly in theRev. 14. 7, 8, &c. midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth; and to every Nation, and Rindred, and Tongue, and People; saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him, &c. Now mark what next follows; Another An∣gel, saying, Babylan is fallen, is fallen; Babylon the Great is fal∣len. Now, behold the efficacy and power of Gospel-preaching; let but the Gospel be sincerely preached, and Babylon must down. The Devil and Dagon must fall before the Ark of God's Presence;The more wick∣ed men rage, the more the Gospel spreads, as you may see, Act. 5. 40, 41, 42. cap. 8. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12. Act. 11. 19, 20, 21, 26. cap. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 23, 24. Heb. 11. 34, 35, 36 Rev. 2. 10. Act. 16. 23, 24, 25 whatsoever the purposes, projects, pretences, policies, conspi∣racies, combinations, and confederacies, of lewd, superstitious, Atheistical, wicked wretches be, yet they shall never be able to stop the stream of God's Word, dam up the Wells of Salvation, or hinder the free passage of the Gospel, no more than they are able to bind up the Wind in their sists, or stop the Sun from run∣ning its race, or hinder the Clouds from watering the earth. It is true that the faithful Ministers of the Gospel may, by the instru∣ments of Satan, be stocked, stoned, sawn asunder, burned with fire▪ slain with the sword, clap'd up in prison, fettered in chains, plundered, &c yet the Gospel may be, nay is, in lively operati∣on; a light that cannot be put out, a heat that cannot be smo∣thered, a power that cannot be broken; for even then, the coura∣gious and constant sufferings of God's faithful Ministers, and their chearful and patient bearing of the Cross, doth, as by a livelyPil. 1. 7, 12, 13, 14, 17. voice, publish and proclaim the truth of the Gospel for which they suffer; and serves to win many to the Faith of Christ. Paul's bonds fell out to the furtherance of the Gospel. Paul's Iron chain was more famous and glorious all the world over, than all the Golden chains in Nro's Palace. Whatsoever persecuting Popes,
and persecuting Emperours, have attempted against the Gospel.Sculiet. Annal. Christ has turned it all to the furtherance of the Gospel. The Popes Bulls, and the Emperour's Thunderbolts did not amaze and discourage men, but did exceedingly animate and encourage them to own the Gospel, to embrace the Gospel, and to stand up in the defence of the Gospel. Caesar sending the Protestants ConfessionScule. Annal. 274. abroad, to other Christian Princes, as desiring their advice about it, dispersed and spread it more in all parts than all the Lutheran Preachers could have done; for which cause Lther laughs not a little, at the foolish wisdom of the Papists, in a certain Epistle of his to the Elector of Saxony. Julian observing, that the more Ministers and Christians were persecuted, the more they encreas∣ed, he gave over Persecution, and spared those whom he could have wished out of the world: And would it not be the wisdom and the interest of the Persecutors in our days, to write after Ju∣lian's Copy? and if they will not, then let them remember, that it is the most effectual way under heaven, to propagate those truths, opinions, ways, principles, and practices, which their hearts rise and swell against, by laying them in bonds which stand up most eminently in the defence of those truths, opinions, ways, principles and practices. The nature of Man is very curious and inquisitive. Men, as men, are led by common compassion to de∣sire to understand the grounds of men's sufferings. By this means the sufferings, especially the imprisonment, of the Apostles, car∣ried the Doctrine of the Gospel to many places where the Apostles themselves never came, nor perhaps could come; no doubt but the fame of their suffering went faster and farther too, than they could go. But Eighthly, They that are Assertors of any one fundamentalAct. 24. 14. 1 Cor. 11. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Gal. 5. 20. truth, in opposition to error and heresie truly so called, have a good cause; and if they suffer upon that account, they suffer as Christians for well doing. Such were those Christians that suffer∣ed under the Arian Emperours, Constantius, Valens and others; who suffered for maintaining that Christ was coessential, coequal and coeternal with the Father: And such were Wickliff, John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, &c. Are there none this day among us that suffer in their names, in their estates, in their persons, in their liberties, for asserting and maintaining the great truths of the Gospel, in opposition to Socinianism, Arianism, Popery, Will-worship; &c. Are there no Socinian Atheists among us, who deny with open face the God-head of Christ, and of the Ho∣ly Ghost; as if Christ were a constituted God, and not of the same substance with the Father from all. Eternity; not a God by Nature, but by Donation in time? And though God hath raised
up several Champions in this his Israel, to disarm them of all their Subtilties, and to beat them out of all their Trenches; though they were dug as low as hell, yet, how have they put onProv. 27. 22. a brow of brass, and do all they can to bring on a warm Persecu∣tion upon their opposers? But Ninthly, They that plead for the reduction of all Ordinances,  Worship, Church Government, and Discipline, to the primitive pattern and institution, in opposition to all Humane and Antichri∣stian Inventions, Traditions and Innovations in the Worship of God, they have a good Cause; and they that suffer upon that ac∣count, suffer as Christians, for well doing: Surely this is a truth we must live and die by; viz. That no Ordinance, Worship, Government or Discipline is to be held up or maintained in the Church, but what has the stamp of a Divine Institution upon it. The worshipping of God in Spirit and in Truth, is that WorshipJoh. 4. 23, 24. Rom, 1. 9. Phil. 3. 3. which God commands, commends, accepts and rewards: And therefore let us make it our business, our work, our heaven, to keep close to this kind of Worship; Christ will shortly come in2 Thes. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. flames of fire, and vindicate this kind of Worship against all op∣posers. Hold out Faith and Patience a little, and Christ will call all the troublers of his Church and People into the Valley of De∣cision;Joel. 3. 14. Isa. 40. 10. Jer. 21. 5. Ezek. 32. 2. and there, with a strong hand, and with an out-stretched arm, he will plead with them, and with all such as have muddied the Waters of his Sanctuary, and polluted those Silver Streams; and then it will appear whether the outward ceremonious wor∣shiping of God, or the worshiping him in Spirit and in Truth, be the true Worship. Judicious Hooker determines, that in God's Service to do that which we are not to do, is a greater fault, than not to do that which we are commanded. Amongst other reasons, he gives this to our purpose; because in the one we seem to charge the Law of God with hardness only, and in the other, with fool¦ishness and insufficiency; which God gave us as a perfect Rule of his Worship and Service. But Tenthly and lastly, They that are Assertors of those precious10. Privileges, that are the purchase of the blood of Christ, they haveEph. 1. 22, 23. Colos. 1. 18. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. a good cause; and if they suffer upon that account, they suffer as Christians, for well doing. As for instance, First, Christ as Mediator, hath purchased for himself a Head∣ship  and Supremacy over his Church. Now such as stand up for the Headship of the Lamb, against all those that would rob him of his Headship, either at Rome or elsewhere, they have a righ∣teous Cause; and if they suffer upon that account, they suffer as Christians, for well doing. Secondly, He has purchased for his People a Liberty to serve
and worship him without fear, in holiness and righteousness allLuk. 1. 69, 70, 74, 75. Gal. 5. 1. the days of their life. He has purchased for his People a Liberty from the Ceremonies of Moses's Law, which were originally the Commands of God himself; how much more then from all Pa∣ganish and Antichristian Ceremonies. The imposition of traditio∣nal Observances and Ceremonies, is to reduce us under the Jew∣ish Yoke, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear;Act. 15. 10. or to impose them as equally obligatory to Conscience, as Divine Commands; or to impose them as the immediate Worship of God, or as Duties essentially necessary in order to Salvation, Christians justly abhor, as the Tyranny of Rome, as the infring∣ment of Christian Liberty, and as a Violation and making void the Commandment of God; as our Saviour told the Pharisees ofMat. 15. 6. old, That they made the Commandment of God of none effect. The Greek word , signifies to deprive of all Rule and Authori¦ty. They had such a superstitious esteem of their Traditions Ceremonies, &c. that they sought to shoulder God out of his Throne, to devest and spoil him of his Rule and Authority, to ungod him, as it were, by making his Commandment void and in∣valid. Christ reprehends three things in the Jewish Traditions;Chmnt. 1. That they obtruded outward Cleanness on God, instead of the Purity of the heart: 2. That by their Humane Traditions, they made void the Worship of God: 3. That they preferred Hu∣mane Traditions▪ before the Divine Precepts; and were so tak∣en with their Traditions, that they neglected the Divine Precepts; yea, made them altogether vain, as the Papists, and others that are Popishly affected, do this day. They that are the most zealousDr. Fuller Sm. for the introducing of useless Ceremonies in the Church, are usu∣ally the most negligent to preach the Cautions in using them; and simple people, like Children in eating of Fish, swallow bones and all to the danger of choaking: Besides, what is observed of horse-hairs, that lying nine days in water, they turn to Snakes; So some Ceremonies, though dead at first, in continuance of time quicken, get stings, and may do much mischief; especially in such an Age, wherein the meddling of some, have justly awak∣ened the Jealousie of all. Now, whoever shall suffer for assert∣ing of any of the precious Privileges, that are the Purchase of Christ's Blood; they suffer in a Righteous Cause, they suffer as Christians, for well doing. And thus you see how a man may know when his Cause is good, just and righteous; and when he suffers as a Christian, for well doing. But Seventhly, Consider, That it is not enough for a man to have a  good cause, but he must have a clear call; else he may be a suf¦ferer, but no Martyr. Some may have a good Cause, and yet
want a clear Call: Some may suffer for the cause of God, and yet sin in suffering, for want of a Call. Christ calls not all to suf∣fer;Phil. 1. 29. A Priest might enter into a Le∣per's house with∣out danger, be∣cause he had a cal∣ling from God so to do: And we may follow God dry-shod through the Red Sea when God gives a Call. to some it is given, to others it is not given. When a man's Call is clear, his Peace will be sweet, his courage will be high, and his comforts will be strong, though his sufferings be never so great, nor never so long. Though it be a high honour to suffer for the Gospel, yet no man ought to take this honour upon himself but he that is called of God. Christians must take as much heed how they espouse a suffering state, as how they shun a suffering state: I am not to go to prison upon choice, but upon a Call, but upon a Warrant under God's own hand; though it be an argu∣ment of a gracious Spirit, to be always of a ready and forward mind to suffer for Christ: And when he demands who will go. with me? who will bear my Cross? chearfully to answer, I will go Lord, let me bear it: yet should we take heed, that as we hang not back when he says go; so that we run not before he sends us, before he calls us. Quest. But how shall I know when I am called to suffer, when I am called to lay down Life, Liberty and All, for the Professi∣on of Christ and the Gospel? To this I answer; First, When the Truth will sufer, and the Name of God suf∣fer,  and the Gospel will suffer should we decline suffering, then we are called to suer; 'tis our duty to suffer any thing, to suffer the worst of things that the worst of men can inflict, rather than that the Truth should suffer, or the name of God suffer, or the Gospel suffer. Secondly, When the case stands so with us, that we cannot  keep Life, Estate, Liberty, &c. without denying of Christ or the Gospel, or without concealing this precious Truth or that, or without turning our backs upon this Ordinance or that, &c. then we are called to suffer when we cannot preserve our Lives, our Li∣berties, our Estates, without denying of Christ, or the Concerns of Christ, in one degree or another, in one kind or another; then we are called to lay down our Lives, our Liberties, our E∣states, &c. at the feet of Christ, as the Saints and Martyrs of old have done before us. Thirdly, when our way is so hedged up with thorns, that we  must either sin or suffer, when sin and sufferings surround us, soHos. 2. 6. that we cannot get out or come off, but we must either sin or suf∣fer;Dan. 3. 17. then I must, with the three Champions, chuse rather to burn than to bow; and with Daniel to the Lyon's Den, than to omit my duty; and with Moses, chuse to suffer afflictions withHeb. 11. 24, 25, 26 the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season. I may safely and groundedly conclude, that
Christ calls me to suffer, when I must either sin or suffer: When the case stands thus, then I may be confident of the singular Pre∣sence of God with me, the special blessing of God upon me, and a gracious or a glorious deliverance out of all my sufferings. But Fourthly and lastly, When a Christian, to the best of his un∣derstanding,  has seriously weighed all things and circumstances, and is well satisfied in his mind and conscience, that his sufferings will be the exaltation of Christ, the furtherance of the Gospel, the stopping of the mouths of the wicked, the confirmation of those that are strong, and the strengthening and encouraging of those that are weak; then he may safely conclude that Christ calls him to suffer But Eightly, Consider that the Sufferings of the Saints in these days  are light and easie to the sufferings that were inflicted upon theMaccab. 6. 9, 10. cap. 7. 1, 2, 3▪ 4. Euse. . Hist. . 6. Jews in the days of Antiochus; and on Christians, in the times of the ten notorious Persecutions under the Roman Emperours; and to those that have been inflicted upon the Martyrs since: So cruel was the sight of those Tortures which Persecutors inflicted, as exceeds all expression: Constant Christians had their flesh orn from their backs with Rods, Scourges, Whips and Cords, to as their bones lay bare; and the raw parts of their bodies were washed with Vinegar and Salt: They were stretched on Racks, their legs were broken, and so left miserably to perish: They were goared with sharp pricks unde the lowest parts of theirHym. 10. de Rom. Anno. Mart. Laddelacerda computeth forty four several kinds of Torments wherewith the Primitive Chri∣stians were tried. Adv. Sar. cap. 128. nails: their bodies were scraped with thels to death, their backs were fleaed; their skins were pulled over their heads, from the brow to the chin: Their noses, lips, ears, hands and feet were cut off; and they, as Sacrifices, cut in gobbes: Their tongues were cut out by the roots, and pulled out of their jaws: Their eyes were boared, and digged out: Their bodies were rent and pulled in peices by strong boughs forced together by instruments, and let loose when the limbs of the bodies of Martyrs were tied fast unto them: Their limbs were also pulled to pieces with wild horses: Their brains were knocked out with Fullers clubs: Their legs were broken in pieces: They were burnt with fire: They were a long while together parched with hot burning coals: Be∣ing hanged by the heels, and their heads downward, over a soft fire, they were choaked with smoak: They were rosted at the fire, as flesh to be eaten used to be rosted: They were leurely broiled on Grid-irons set over the fire: They were fryed in read hot iron chairs, as in a frying-pan, which annoyed the standers by with a stench: Hot boiling lead was poured down their throats: They clapped fiery plates of Brass upon the most tender parts of
their bodies. A persecuting Tyrant considering the nature of theBasil in 40. Mar. Coc.  Greg. Nyssen de iijd. m, Ora. . Countrey, that it was terrible cold; and the time of the year, that it was Winter, and a night wherein the cold extreamly en∣creased; and that the North Wind then blew there; command∣ed forty Christians to be set slark naked under the open Air in the midst of the City, to freeze to death: Then when they heard that charge; with joy, casting away, even their innermost Vest∣ment, they went on to their death by Cold. They ended theEccl. Hii. . 5. cap. . violence of Libbads, Bears, Wild Boars, and Bulls. Attalus and Alexander were twice baited with Wild Beasts, to be torn in pieces by them (as Eusebius reprts) Attalus escaping the Beats, was reserved to other torments; to be burnt to death in an Iron Chair, heated red-fire hot. Macedonius, Theodulus andSocra. Hist. l. 3. cap. 13. Tatianus were laid upon a Grid iron, and broiled to death. There were many Christians together stopped up in Lakes or Caves,Mag. Cent. 4. cap. 3. Ex Theodre. artificially made close; which Lakes or Ditches, were filled with a company of Dormise, kept hungry, to gaw and feed upon the poor Christians, they being all the while bound hand and oot, that they could not keep of those hunger-starved creatures which were kept without meat also, purposely that they might fasten with the more eagerness upon the bodies of those precious Chri∣stians. They were destroyed with hunger, thirst and cold. SuchEuseb. . Hist. l. 5. c. 1. l. 8. c. 6, 7, . Nieph. l. 7. . 11, 12. as were stistled in prisons, they cast to dogs; setting Watch-men night and day, lest any of them should be buried: And such re∣mainders as were left both of Beasts and Fire, in part torn, and in part burnt, together with the heads and bodies of others, they cast out in like manner, unburied; and committed them some days to the custody of Soldiers. Thus the Barbarous Cruelty ofScemy Beauty of Holiness. pag. 413 414, 415. Persecutors, extended it self as far as it could, beyond the tem∣poral lives of the Martyrs. Ecclesiastical Histories tell us that all the Apostles died violent deaths: Peter was crucified with his heels upwards, Christ was crucified with his head upwards; but Peter thought this was too great an honour, for him to be crucified as his Lord; and therefore he chose to be crucified with his heels upward: And Andrew was crucified by Egeus, King of Edessa: And James, the Son of Zebedec, was slain by Herod with theAct 12. 2. Sword. And Philip was crucified at Hierapolis in Asta: And while Bartholomew was preaching the glad Tydings of Salvation, multitudes sell upon him, and beat him down with staves, and then crucified him; and after all this, his skin was fleaed off, and he beheaded: Thomas was slain with a dart at Calununa in India: And Matthew was slain with a Spear, say some; others say he was run through with a Sword: And James the Son of Alpheus, (who was called the Just) was thrown down from off a pinacle of
the Temple; and yet having some life left in him, he was brain∣ed with a Fuller's club. Lebbeus was slain by Agbarus, King of dessa. And Paul was beheaded at Rome by Nero. And Simon the Canaanite was crucified in Egypt, say some; others say that he and Jude were slain in a tumult of the people. And MattkiasRev. . 9. was stoned to death. And John was banished into Patmos; and afterwards, as some Histories tell us, he was by that cruel Tyrant Domitian, cast into a tub of scalding oyl, and yet delivered by a Miracle. Thus all these Worthies, of whom this world was notHeb. 11. 38. worthy, (except John) died violent deaths; and so through suf∣ferings, entred into Glory. To conclude; Lactantius saith, notLact. l. 5. c. 13. only the men among the Christians, and those of stronger years and hearts▪ but even our Women, and little Children (saith he) have endured all torments, and been too hard for their torment∣ors: No rack, no fire could fetch so much as a groan from them; which the stoutest Thieves and Malefactors among their Persecu∣tors could not undergo; but they would roar and cry out through impatience, and disability to endure them. I suppose that more cruel torments cannot be invented, than of old have been inflicted on Christians: Persecutors have acknowledged, that they wereEsb. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. cap. 1. overcome, and had no more to inflict. Such Totures and Tor∣ments, so couragiously and manfully, have sundry Christians in all Ages suffered; as to them who only heard thereof, they seem∣ed incredible; and to many who were eye-witnesses thereof, they seemed so strange, and beyond admiration, as they thought the Martyrs to be mad, witless and senseless: But the Martyrs had peace, and rest, and quiet within; and the favourable Presence of God so shining upon their souls, that they were encouraged and enabled with a holy and heavenly bravery of Spirit, to bid defy∣ance to their most cruel Persecutors. Now Christians, if you compare your most cruel Sufferings with the Sufferings of the Saints of old, how easie and light will they be found to be? What are mole-hills to mountains, scratches upon the hand to slabs at the heart? no more are your greatest Sufferings, to those that the Saints have met with in former Ages And therefore, though men frown upon you, and threaten you with censures, Imprisonment, Banishment, Confiscation, and all the evil Humane might and cruelty can do unto you, yet be not moved; but account your selves happy, that you have any1 Pet. 4. 14, 15. opportunity to do or suffer any thing, whereby you may testifie that Christ and his Concerns doe lie near your hearts; and whereby you may further his opposed Interest, and bear witness to his de∣spised truth. But Ninthly, Consider that the Saints and Martyrs of old have made
little reckoning or account of their Lives, Liberties, Relations or Estates, when they stood in competition with Christ, or his Truth, Worship. Ways, Ordinances, Interest; or with their Pro∣fession of the Christian Faith, witness that glorious TestimonyHeb. 11. 35. vide Ejtius. that the Apostle gives of them. They would not accept delive∣rance; he means deliverance from death, or preservation of life; this, though offered, they would not accept, namely, on Perse∣cutors terms or conditions; wich was to deny the Truth of God, or renounce their Faith in him. They scorned deliverance upon base terms; and would rather die, than deny Christ or his Truth. This phrase, not accepting deliverance, presupposeth that deliverance was offered to them; otherwise, they could not have rejected it; for their not accepting, was a rejecting. Their Per∣secutors offered them deliverance upon their compliance with their Wills, Lusts. Ways, Worship, &c. This is evident by that which Nebuchadnezzar said to Daniel's three Champions, when they were accused for not worshipping his Idol; which was this, If ye be ready to fall down and worship the Image; he thereby im∣pliesDan. 3. 15. that they should be spared; for he addeth, if you worship not, you shall be cast into a fiery sin nace: And this is further e∣vident in those to whom the Apostle hath reference, viz. the Mac∣cabees.2 Mac. 6. 18, to 31 And this was the common practice of the persecuting Emperours in the Ten Persecutions; and after them, with the Antichristian Persecutors; and more particularly, with the high Persecutors in Qucen Mary's days: But the Christians in those several Ages, had such a mighty presence of God with them, that they chose rather to suffer the worst of deaths, than to pre∣serve their lives by complying with the Wills, Lusts, Ways and Worship of their Persecutors. For ever remember this, that th envy and malice of Persecutors is more against the glorious Truth the Saints profess, than it is against their persons; for let but Christians relinquish the Truth, deny the Truth, reproach the Truth, or oppose the Truth, and presently they shall be white Boys, great Favourites, good Sons of the Church, and what not. That the envy and malice of Persecutors is more against the Truth, than the Professors of it, is most evident, in that they persecute strangers whom they never knew before. It is said of Paul, that if he found any such, he brought them bound: All wasActs 9. 2. fish that was caught in his net. If Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, Child or Cousin, profess the Truth, plead for the Truth, stand up for the Truth; men of persecuting Spirits will prosecute and persecute them to the death: (The Brother shall deliver upMat. 10. 21. Luk. 21. 16. the brother to death, and the father the child; and the children sha. rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death.)
Alphonsus Diarius delivered up his own Brother John at Neoberg,Sleiden lib. 1. 17. Act. and Men. Fl. 1112. Ibid. 1801. in Germany into his enemies hands. So Doctor London made Fil∣mer the Martyr's own Brother witness against him by supplying of him with meat and money, and by telling of him he should never want. So one Woodman was delivered by his own Brother, into his enemies hands. And in the Civil Wars of France (not to men∣tionHist. of Cune. of Trent, Fl. 647. that of England) The Sons fought against their Fathers, and Brothers against Brothers; and even Women took up Arms on both sides, for defence of their Religion. And Philip, King of Spain, could frequently say, that he had rather have no Subjects, than Hereticks, as he called the Protestants: And out of a blind bloody zeal, he suffered his eldest Son Charles, to be murtheredHieron. by the cruel Inquisition, because he seemed to favour the Prote¦stant side. Truth is a Glorious shining Light, that discovers the ignorance and darkness, the wickedness and baseness, the un∣soundness and hypocrisie, the superstition and vain conversation of Persecutors; and therefore they cannot endure this light, they hate this light, and will do all they can to suppress this light, andJoh. 3. 19. those that hold out this light to the world. The  and Mar¦tyrs of old were as willing to die as to dine. Pliny writing to Tra∣jan. 10. Ep. 97. p. 316. the Emperour, declares to him that such was their Zeal and courage in behalf of their God, that nothing could stir them from it; neither the Imperious checks of the potent Emperors, nor the soft language of the eloquent Orators, could draw them from the Faith; but they stedfastly owned it, and constantly persevered in the defense of it, and were ready and willing to lay down their lives for it. When Ignatius was to suffer, 'tis better for me (saithIgnatius. he) to be a Martyr, than to be a Monarch. 'Twas a notable say∣ing of a French Martyr, when the rope was about his fellow; Give me (said he) that Golden Chain, and dub me Knight of that Noble Order. Let (saith Ignatius) Fire and Cross, InvasinEusb Hst. Ecl. l. 3 c. 36. of Beasts, breaking of bones, pulling asunder of members, grind∣ing of my whole body, and what else the Devil can inflict, come,Ibid. l. b. 4. c. 15. so I may hold Jesus Christ. Lueius thanked him that brought him forth to suer, and said, that he should be free from those evil Masters, and go to God, a good Father and King. Germanicus, when he was brought forth to be torn in pieces, and devoed by wild Beasts; (The Governour perswading him to be mindful of his Youth, that he might be spared) of his own accord, incited the Beasts against himself. Sanctus being under Tortures for pro∣fessingEuseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 2. himself to be a Christian, unto every question propounded to him, he answered, I am a Christian; whereby he occasioned his Torments to be continued to death. Can we think that Saint Laurence would have accepted of deliverance; who, lying on a
red hot Grid-iron, over burning Coals, with an invincible spirit, thus said to the Tyrants; Turn the side broiled enough, and see what thy burning fire hath done: And being turned, and through∣ly broiled on the other side, saith thus again; Eat that which is broiled, and try whether raw or broiled be the sweeter. Hyp∣polytus, when he was tied to wild Horses to be pulled asunder, thus prayed; Let them rend my limbs, do thou, O Christ, wrap up my soul. To omit other particulars of the Ancient Martyrs in the Primitive Times; with whose couragious speeches manifest∣ing a contempt of death, of which Volumes might be filled; it is indefinitely recorded of many, who were famous for theirEusb. Hist. Eccl. . 8. cap. 9. Wealth, Nobility, Glory, Eloquence and Learning; that ne∣vertheless, they preferred true Piety and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, before all these: And though they were entreated by ma∣ny of their Kindred and Friends otherwise; yea, and by others in great place, and by the Judge himself, that they would take pity of themselves, their Wives, and Children: Yet would they not be induced and entreated by so many, and great ones, so to be aected with the love of this life, as to forbear the Confession of our Saviour, and to set light by the denyal of him. Thus you see what little reckoning or account the Christians of old have made of their Lives, Liberties and Estates, or whatever else was near or dear unto them, when these things stood in competition with Christ, his Truth, his Worship, his Ways, his Interest; or with their Profession of the Christian Faith. Take a few Instances of a later date. John Huss being at theJohn Huss. stake, a Pardon was offered him if he would recant; to which he answered, I am here ready to suffer death So Hirom of Prague;Hierom of Prague if I had feared the fire (said he) I had not come hither. Francis Camba, a Martyr, in the Diocess of Millain, being much assail∣edFrancis Camba. by his Friends and terrified by his Foes, by no means could be overcome; but gave thanks to God, that he was accounted wor∣thy to suffer a cruel death for the Testimony of his Son: And such were his expressions of joy in his sufferings, that his Persecu∣tors caused his tongue to be boared through, that he might speak no more to the people. Another being offered the King's Pardon,Mrs. Anne Askew if she would recant, gave this resolute answer; I came not here to deny my Lord and Master: By that which she with admirable courage and constancy endured, she verified that which of old, Julitta spake concerning their Sex, viz. We women ought to be as constant as men in Christ's Cause. Another who suffered Mar∣tyrdomWalier Mille. in Scotland, being solicited to recant, made this reply; Ye shall know that I will not recant the Truth; for I am Corn, I am no Chaff; I will not be blown away with the wind, nor burst
with the flail; but I will abide both. Another being the firstMr. John Rogers. Martyr in Queen Mary's days, being solicited to recant, that so he might save his life; boldly replyed, that which I have preach∣ed I will seal with my blood. Another, when a Pardon was setHeper Bishop of Glocester. before him in Box; cryed out, If you love my soul, away with it; if you love my soul, away with it. Another, on the like oc∣casion,Mr. Tho. Hawks, a Gentleman in Essix. gave this resolute answer; If I had a hundred bodies, I would suffer them all to be torn in pieces, rather than abjure or recant. So another spake to the like purpose; So long (said he)Bishop Ridley. as the breath is in my body, I will never deny my Lord Christ, and his known Truth. Another used such a speech to one that ad∣visedFather Latimer. him to spare himself, as Christ did to Peter on the like occa∣sion; Get thee behind me Satan. There are a world of other In∣stances of the like nature, but enough is as good as a Feast. By all these Instances, you may see that Blessed Word verified; (They loved not their lives unto the death.) They were willing toRev. 12. 11. lay down their lives for the Glory of Christ, and for the Truth of Christ: So that , They loved not, is put for , they neglected or contemned, their life; as Brightman hath well observed: They slighted, yea, despised their lives; and rather exposed them to hazard and loss, than to deny Christ, or their ho∣ly Profession. It is a Paraphrase of the constancy of their Faith, even unto Martyrdom for the name of Christ. But Tenthly, Consider, That God puts a great deal of honourPhil. 1. 29. upon suffering Saints, To suffer for Christ is honourable; God will not put this honour upon every one, he puts this honour only upon those that are Vessels of Honour; by Grace God makes men2 Tim. 2. 20, 21. Vessels of Silver and Vessels of Gold, and then casts them into the fire, to melt and suffer for his name; and a higher Glory he cannot put upon them on this side Glory: The Crown of Martyr∣dom is a Crown, that the Blessed Angels, those Princes of Glo∣ry, are not capable of winning or wearing: And O, who art thou? and what art thou, O man, that God should set this Crown upon thy head? Mark at what a rate Peter speaks; (If ye e re∣proached1 Pet. 4. 1 for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of lo∣ry, and of God, resteth upon you; on their part he is evil spoken of but on your part he i glorified:) The very suffering condition of the people of God, is at the present a glorious condition, For the spirit of Glory rests upon them; and therefore they must needs be glorious, yea, very glorious, upon whom the spirit of Glory falls,Rom. 8. 9, 11. Dan. 3. and in whom the Spirit of Glory dwells. What a Glorious Mold and Mettal were the three Children made up of, that were cast into the fiery Furnace; and what a deal of honour and glory did God put upon them in the eyes of all the world. The Apostles
all along accounted their own sufferings, and the sufferings of the Saints for Christ; to be the highest honour and glory that God could put upon them in this world, as will be evident by our com∣paringHeb. 11. 36, 37, 38 2 Cor. 11. 23, to 28 Heb. 10. 32, to 26. the Scriptures in the Margin together. To suffer for Christ is the greatest honour and promotion that God gives in this world, said old Father Latimer; and therefore, when sentence was pro∣nounced against him, he cryed out, I thank God most heartily for this great honour. So Saunders; I am the unmeetest man forAct. and Mn. 1361. Ibid. 1744. this high Office, that ever was appointed to it. So Careless the Martyr, this is such an honour (said he) as the greatest Angel in Heaven, is not permitted to have; God forgive me mine unthank∣fulness, &c. John Nys took up a Faggot at the fire, and kissedJohn Nys. it; Saying, Blessed be the time that ever I was born, to come to this preferment. So when they had fastned Alice Driver with aAlice Driver. chain to the stake to be burnt; Never (said she) did Neck-kerchief become me so well as this Chain. So Balilus the Martyr, whenBalilus. he was to die, requested this favour of his Persecutors, . That he might have his chains bed with him, as the Ensigns of his honour. What are we, poor worms, full of vanities and liesCalvin. (said Calvin) that we should be called to be maintainers of the Truth; for Suerings for Christ are the Ensigns of Heaven∣ly Nobility. To die for Christ is the greatest promotion that GodPhilpot. can bring any in this Vale of Misery unto, said Mr. Philpot the Martyr. A French Soldier, for his zealous Profession of the re∣formedThuan. Hist. l. 11. Anno 1553. Religion, was condemned to the fire with others, only he should have the favour of going to the Stke without a Wyth; but he desired that he might wear such a Chain as his fellows did, e∣steeming this rebuke of Christ more glorious than the Ensigns of St Michael's Order. 'Twas an excellent saying of Prudentius;Prudentius. Their names (saith he) that are written in red letters of Blood in the Churches Calendar, are written in Golden Letters in Christ's Register, the Book of Life. The Passion-days of the Martyrs were anciently called the Natalitia salutis, the Birth-days of Salvation, the Day-break of Eternal Brightness. We count it a great ho∣nourIsa 9 6, 7. Dan. 3. 24, 25. Isa. 43. 2. cap. 63. 9. to have Princes to be our Companions: Christ, the Prince of Peace; and the Angels, those Princes of Glory, are our Companions in all our Sufferings: Such is the honour that God puts upon his Suffering Saints, that nothing shall hinder him from being their Companion in all their Sufferings, in all their afflicti∣ons, in all their Temptations; and this, believe it, is no small honour. I have read, how that in the Primitive times, when someEuseb. Eccles. Hist l. 5. good people came to comfort some of the Martyrs that were in Prison, and ready to suffer, they called them blessed Martyrs: O, no, said they, we are not worthy of the name of Martyrs:
These holy humble hearts thought Martyrdom too high an honour for them. And Luther writing to those which were condemned to death, saith, the Lord will not do me that honour, after all that bustle I have made in the world. In the Primitive times they were wont to call Martyrdom by the name of Corona Martyrii, the Crown of Martyrdom. We read of a Woman-martyr, who hav∣ing her Child in her hand, gave it to another, and offered her self to Martyrdom: Crowns (said she) are to be dealt out this day, and I mean to have one. You see what high and honoura∣ble thoughts the Saints had of their Sufferings in those days; and O, that all suffering Saints would labour to write after that noble Copy that they have left upon Record. But Eleventhly, Consider that suffering Saints do put a great deal  of Honour and Glory upon God, Christ, Religion, and upon God's Truth. Worship and Ways. What a spreading Fame and Glory of God did the Sufferings of the three Worthies scatter all the world over. God is acknowledged and adored by Nebuchad∣nezzar, a Decree is made, That Every People, Nation and Lan∣guageDan. 3. 28, 29. which speak amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a Dunghill, &c. Here God's Glory wonderfully shines out of their Sufferings: Here this poor, blind, Idolatrous Heathen Prince is forced to confess, that there is no God like Israel's God. Basil and Tertullian do well observe of the Primitive Martyrs; that di∣vers of the Heathen seeing their zeal, courage and constancy, glo∣rified God, and turned Christians. Religion is that Phoenix which hath always revived and flourished in the ashes of holy men; and Truth hath never been so honoured: and gloriously dispersed, as when it hath been sealed by the blood of the Saints: This made Julian to forbear to persecute; non ex clementia, sed invidia, not out of piety, but envy; because the Church grew so fast, and multiplied as Nazianzen well observes. We read that some times the Sufferings of one Saint have begot many to the love of the Truth: We read that Cicilia, a poor Captive Virgin, by her gracious behaviour in her Martyrdom, was the means of convert∣ing four hundred to Christ. Justine Martyr was also converted by observing the chearful and gracious Carriage of the Saints in their Sufferings. And so Adrianus seeing the Martyrs suffer rea∣dily and joyfully such grievous torments, asked, why they would endure such misery when they might (by retracting) free them∣selves: Upon which, one of them cited that Text; Eye hath not1. Cor. 2. 9. seen, nor ear heard, neither have entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. Upon the naming of this Scripture, and seeing of them suffer so willingly,
chearfully and resolutely, such a Divine Power took hold of his heart, that he was converted, and afterwards became a Martyr. Now God, and Christ, and Truth, and Religion are never more honoured, than when poor souls are soundly converted. Surely the Crown of Martyrdom, is a Glorious Crown; and every soul won over to God by a dying Martyr, will be as an Orient Pearl, and Precious Diamond in his Crown, of far more value than that Adamant found about Charles Duke of Burgundy, slain by the Switzers, at the Battel of Nantz, sold for twenty thousand Duc∣kets; and placed, as it is said, in the Pope's Tripple Crown. O,A &. 7. 55, 56, 57. what foreasts of Glory, what ravishments of Soul, have many of the Blessed Martyrs had in their sufferings for Christ. Holy Lord, stay thy hand, I can bear no more, said one of the Martyrs; like weak eyes, that cannot bear too great a light. Is it not a high honour to a King to have such Captains and Champions, as will not yield to their Sovereign's enemies, but stand it out to the ut∣termost, till they get the Victory, though it cost them their lives to get it: yet no mortal King can (as Christ doth) put spirit, cou∣rage and strength into a Subject; only we may well conceive and conclude, that such Valourous Soldiers, as are ready to hazard their lives for their Sovereign, serve a good Master. Thus do suffering Christians and Martyrs give Persecutors to understand, that they serve a good Master, and that they highly prize him; who hath done more, and suffered more for them, than their dearest Blood is worth; and who enables them with courage, constancy and comfort, to endure whatsoever, for his names sake, can beRom. 8. 37. inflicted on them; and therein to be , More than Con∣querors, or above Conquerors. How can that be, can a man get more than the Victory? The meaning is, we do over overcome, super superanus; that is, triumph or overcome before we fight; we are famous and renowned Conquerors, we easily conquer, we2 Cor. 2. 14. conquer by those things which are used to conquer us, we beat our enemies with their own Swords, as Julian sometime said, be∣ing confuted by Heathen Learning. Martyr and Piscator expound it thus, we do more than overcome; that is, we obtain a Noble, a famous Victory: And is not this a great honour to Christ, theHeb. 2. 10. Captain of our Salvation The invincible courage of suffering Christians puts life and spirit into others. In an Army valorous Leaders much animate the rest of the Soldiers, and embolden them to follow their Leaders. Now, you know the Church is an Army with Banners; and suffering Ministers, and suffering SaintsCant. 6. 4. are as Leaders; they couragiously and victoriously make the on∣set; and other Christians, by their pious examples are pricked on to follow them so far as they are followers of the Lamb. But
Twelfthly, Consider. That all the Sufferings and Persecutions  that you meet with on earth, shall advance your Glory in Heaven;Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae nolens addit mercedi meae, saith Augustine: The more we suf∣fer with and for Christ, the more Glory we shall have with and from Christ. Rom. 2. 6. the more Saints are persecuted on earth, the greater shall be their reward in heaven. Look, as Persecutions do encrease a Chri∣stian's Grace, so they do advance a Christian's Glory; in Hea∣ven, the Martyrs shall have the highest Degree of Glory; for though God doth not reward men simply for their Works, name∣ly for the merit of them, yet he rewards according to their Works; and proportions the degree or measure thereof, accord∣ing to the kind of work which on earth is done▪ and according to the measure of Grace whereby he enables men to do it. Now, Martyrdom is the most difficult, the most honourable, and the most acceptable Work that on earth can be done; and therefore in heaven Martyrdom shall be crowned with the highest degree of Glory; on this ground, they who set down the different de∣grees of Celestial Glory, by the different Fruits which the good Ground brought forth, some thirty, some sixty, and some a hun∣dredMat. 13. 8. fold; apply the hundred fold, which is the highest andMat. 19. 27, 28, 29 Keep your eye upon the recom∣pence of reward, as Moses did, Heb. 11. 26. and as Christ did, cap. 12 2. as Paul did, Rom. 8. 18. This will work you, 1. To walk more holily, humbly thankfully. 2. To live more chear∣fully and comfor∣tably. 3. To suf∣fer more patient∣ly, freely, reso∣lutely. 4. To fight against the world, the flesh and the devil more stout∣ly and valiantly. 5. To withstand Temptations more stedfastly & strongly. 6. To be contented with a little. 7. To leave the world, Relations and friends more willingly. 8. And to embrace death more joyfully. greatest Degree of Glory, to Martyrdom: Doubtless, God's suffering Servants; and amongst them, especially his Martyrs, shall sit down in the chiefest Mansions, and in the highest Rooms in the Kingdom of Glory: According to the Degrees of our suf∣ferings for Christ, will be the degrees of our Glory: What shall we have, says Peter, (that have suffered so many great and griev∣o ngs for thy name) that have forsaken all, and followed thee? Veriy, says our Saviour, every one that hath forsaken houses, &c. shall receive a hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life: But ye shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. A Christian will never repent of all the hard things that he has suffered for Christ or his Truth, when as every one of his suffer∣ings shall be a sparkling Jewel to give a lustre to his Crown of Glory. Suffering for Christ and Religion is the most gainful kind of Merchandize. Christ is so well pleased with the suffer∣ings of his Saints, that he has engaged himself to make up what∣ever they lose upon his account; yea, to repay all with Interest upon Interest, to a hundred times over. Oh, who would not then turn Spiritual Purchaser. Christ is a noble, a liberal Pay∣master; and no small things can fall from so great a hand as his is: Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righ∣teousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsly, for my sake; Rejoyce, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven; for so perse∣cuted they the Prophets, which were before you. Luk. 6. 22, 23. Bles∣sed
are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company; and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake: Rejoyce ye in that day, and leap for joy; for behold your Reward is in heaven; for in the like manner did their fathers unto the Prophets. They that are now Excommunicated and Anathematized, as notorious, shameful, and abominable offenders; they that are now opposed and perse∣cuted by men, shall at last be owned and crowned by God; yea, and the more Afflictions and Persecutions are multiplied upon them in this world, the greater shall be their recompence in a∣nother world. The Original words () in Matthew, and () in Luke, signifie exceeding great joy, such as men u∣sually express by skipping and dancing: Let your hearts leap, and let your bodies leap for joy, for great is your reward in hea∣ven.Act. and Mon. Fol. 613. A Dutch Martyr feeling the flame to come to his beard; said he, what a small pain is this, to be compared to the Glory to come. Hellin Stirk, a Scotch woman, when her Husband wasIbid. 1154. at the place of Execution, she said to him, Husband rejoyce, for we have lived together many joyful days; but this day, in which we must die, ought to be most joyful to us both, because we must bave joy for ever; therefore I will not bid you good night, for we shall suddenly meet within the Kingdom of Heaven. The subscription of Mrs. Anne Askew to her Confession, was this;Ibid. 1130. written by me Anne Askew, that neither wisheth for death, nor feareth his Might; and as merry as one that is bound toward ∣ven. Oh how my heart leapeth for joy (said Mr. Philpot) that IIbid. 1670. am so near the apprehension of eternal life! God forgive me mine unthankfulness and unworthiness of so great Glory; I have so much joy of the reward prepared for me most wretched sinner, that though I be in a place of darkness and mourning, yet I can∣not lament; but, both night and day, am so joyful, as though un∣der no Cross at all; yea, in all the days of my life, I was never so merry, the name of the Lord be praised therefore for ever and ever. The same Author, in a Letter to the Congregation, saith,Ibid. 1663. Though I tell you that I am in Hell in the judgment of this world, yet assuredly, I feel in the same the Consolation of Heaven; and this loathsome and horrible Prison, is as pleasant to me, as the Walks in the Garden in the King's Bench. Thus you see, that1 Pet. 1. 8. suffering Saints have had a Heaven before hand; they have had an exuberancy of joy, such as no good could match, nor no evil over∣match. Bernard speaking of Persecutors, saith, that they areBernard. but his Father's Gold-smiths, who are working to add Pearls to the Saints Crown. It is to my loss, saith Gordius the Martyr, ifGordius. you abate me any thing of my present Sufferings. Sufferings for
Christ are the Saints greatest Glory (crudelitas vestra, gloria no∣stra) your cruelty is our glory, say they in Tertullian, and the hard∣er we are put to it, the greater shall be our reward in heaven. Chrysostom hit the nail when he said, if one man should suffer allChrysostom. the sorrows of all the Saints in the world, yet are they not worth one hours glory in heaven. By the consent of the School-men,The School-men. all the Martyrs shall appear in the Church-triumphant, bearing the signs of their Christian wounds about them, as so many speak∣ing testimonies of their holy courage, that what here they en∣dured in the behalf of their Saviour, may be there an addition to their glory. O Christians, all your Sufferings will certainly en∣crease your future Glory; every affliction, every Persecution, will be a grain put into the scale of your heavenly Glory, to make it more weighty in that day, wherein he will richly reward you for2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18 every tear, for every sigh, for every groan, for every hazard, and for every hardship that you have met in the way of your duty. For light Afflictions, you shall have a weight of Glory; and for a few Afflictions, you shall have as many joys, pleasures, de lights and contents, as there be Stars in Heaven, or Sands on the Sea shore; and for Momentary Afflictions, you shall have an e∣ternal Crown of Glory. If you have suffering for suffering with Christ on earth, you shall have Glory for Glory with Christ in heaven. Ah Christians, your present sufferings are but the seeds of your future Glory; and the more plentiful you sow in tears;Psal. 126. 5, 6. the more abundant will be your Harvest of Glory. Christ our General, the Captain of our Salvation, promises a Crown, (Rev 2. 10) and a Throne, (cap. 3. 21.) to all his afflicted and perse¦cuted ones; which are the greatest rewards that a God can give, or that man can crave. It troubled one of the Martyrs when he was at the sake, that he was going to a place, where he should be for ever a receiving of Wages for a little work. But Thirteenthly and Lastly, Afflictions, Sufferings, Persecutions,  will discover what mettal men are made of. All is not Gold thatMat. 13. 2 Tim. 1. 15, 16. 1 Tim. 1. 19, 20. 2 Tim. 4. 10, 14, 15, 16. Mat. 13. 20, 21. glisters: Many there be that glister, and look like Golden Chri∣stians; but when they come to the fire, they prove but dross: he is a Christian more worth than the Gold of Ophyr, who remains Gold when under fiery Tryals. The stony ground did glister and shine very gloriously, for it received the Word with joy for a sea∣son; but when the Sun of Persecution arose upon it, it fell away. Men that in times of Liberty and Prosperity embrace the Word, will in times of Persecution distrust the Word, reject the Word, and turn their backs upon the Word, if it be not rooted in their Understandings, Judgments, Wills, Affections and Consciences:
Men may court the Word, and complement the Word, and ap∣plaud the Word, and seemingly rejoyce in the Word; but they will never suffer Persecution for the Word, if it be only received into their heads, and not fast rooted in their hearts: The house built upon the Sands was as lovely, as comely, as goodly andMat. 7. 26, 27. as glorious a house to look upon, as that which was built upon the Rock; but when the Rain of Affliction descended, and the Floods of Tribulation came, and the Winds of Persecution blew, and beat upon the house, it fell, and great was the fall of it. No Professors will be able to stand it out in all Winds and Weathers, but such as are built upon a Rock; all others will sink, shatter and fall when the Wind of Persecution blows upon them: As sure as the Rain will fall, the Floods flow, and the Winds blow, so sure will an unsound heart give out when tryals come; no heart but a sound heart, will hold out bravely when Suferings come; no heart but a sincere heart, will bear the brunt of Persecution.Dan. 3. 17, 18. The three Worthies, Shadrach, Meshh and Abednego, would rather burn than bow, they would rather suffer than sin, which was a evident proof of their sincerity and ingenuity; they would be Non-conformists, though Court, City and Countrey cryed up Conformity, which was a sure argument of their integrity. Hy∣pocrites have heart enough for themselves, but none for God. If they see their Names, Estates or Carnal Interest any way touch∣ed, they are all on fire, and ready to be burnt up with the flames of their own zeal; but they can see the Name, Truth and Interest of God assaulted and torn in pieces, and never stir: in their own Concerns, they are as if they were all heart; but in the cause ofHos. 7. 11. God, they are as if (with Ephraim) they had no heart at all. O, its sad that men should have a heart for themselves, and none for God; that they should have courage in their own cause, and none in his. As the soul is the glory of the body, so integrity is the glory of the soul. A sincere Christian, with Job, will rather letJob 27. 5. all go, than let his integrity go; he will sooner let the blood b pressed out of his veins, and his soul out of his body, than his in∣tegrity out of his soul. O, how bravely did the Primitive Chri∣stiansEpist. 97. p. 316. carry themselves as to this Matter. Pliny writing to Trajan, declares to him that such was their zeal and courage in the behalf of their God, that nothing could stir them from it; neither the Imperious checks of the Potent Emperours, nor the soft language of the eloquent Orators, could draw them from the Faith; but they stedfastly owned it, and constantly persevered in the defence of it: But now base unsound hearts will exceedingly shuffle and shif to shake off Persecution; witness those false Teachers, Gal. 6. 12. As many as desire to make a fair shew (or, as the Greek has it,
to set a good face on it) in the flesh, they constrain you to be circum∣cised; only lest they should suffer Persecution for the Cross of Christ. Mark, at this time the Jews, out of zeal to their Law, did sorely persecute those that did either preach or practise any thing contra∣ry to their Law. Now these false teachers set a good face on't, and make a fair shew, as if they were all for carnal Rites and Ceremonies; and they pressed Circumcision upon the Galatians, but not out of any true affection or zeal that they did bear to the Law; but only to procure favour on the one hand, and to avoid and escape the malice and Persecution of the Jews on the other hand. They that were no Jews, to avoid Persecution, would comply with them that were; they would seem to be very earnest for Judaism, but not for Christianism, that so they might escape the fury of the Jews. Unsound hearts will say any thing, and do any thing, and be any thing, to avoid Persecution, and to ingra∣tiate themselves with Persecutors. The Samaritans, so long asJoseph. Hist. lib. 13 the Jewish Religion flourished, and was in honour, caused a Tem∣ple to be built on Mount Garazin, that therein they might not be inferiour to the Jews; and they boasted themselves to be of the Progeny of Joseph, and Worshippers of God with them: But when they perceived that the Jews were cruelly afflicted and per∣secuted by Antiochus Epiphanes, for worshipping of the true God; and fearing lest they should be handled in the like manner, they changed both their Coat and their Note; affirming that they were not Israelites, but Sidonians; and that they had built their Tem∣ple not unto God, but unto Jupiter. Thus you see that times of Affliction and Persecution will distinguish the Precious from theJer. 15. 19. Vile; 'twill difference the counterfeit Professor, from the true. Persecution is a Christian's Touch-stone; 'tis a Lapis Lydius, that will try what mettal men are made of, whether they be silver or Tin, Gold or Dross, Wheat or Chaff, shadow or substance, carnal or spiritual, sincere or hypocritical. Nothing speaks out more soundness and uprightness than keeping close to Christ, his Worship, Truth and Ways, in a day of warm Persecution. To stand close and fast to God and his Interest in fiery tryals, argues much integrity within. These thirteen Particulars are so great Truths written with the beams of the Sun, that no man nor Devil can deny; and therefore I shall make no Apology to the Perse∣cutors of the day, to execuse my writing of this General Epistle; but shall beg hard of God, that it may be so own'd, and crown'd, and blessed from on high, that it may really and fully answer to all those holy and gracious aims and ends that the Author had in his eye, and upon his heart, when he writ it. And thus much for this General Epistle.
Dear Lady, and Sister in the Lord; I Shall now address my self to you in a few lines, and so conclude. I know you have for many years been the Lord's Prisoner. Great have been your Trials, and many have been your Trials, and long have been your Trials; but to all these I have spoken at large in my Treatise called The mute Christian under the smarting Rod, which you have in your hand, which you have read, and which God has greatly blessed, to the support, comfort, quiet and refreshment of your soul under all your Trials; and therefore I shall say no more as to those Particulars: But knowing that the many weaknesses that hang upon you, and the decays of Nature that dayly do attend you, seem to point out an approaching dissolution; I shall at this time give you this one word of Counsel, viz. That every day you would look upon Death in a Scripture∣glass, in a Scripture-dress, or under a Scripture-notion: That is, First, Look upon death as that which is best for a be∣liever;  Phil. 1. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, hav∣ing. Nc Chri∣stus, nec caelum patitur hyperbolen saith one, here it is hrd to hyperbo∣lice. a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better: The Greek is very significant; far, far the better, or far much better, or much more better; 'tis a most transcendent expression: Eccles. 7. 1. Better is the day of death, than the day of ones birth. A Saint's dying day is the day-break of Eternal Righteousness. In respect of pleasure, peace, safety, company, glory, a Believer's dy∣ing day is his best day. I have read of one Trophonius, that when he had built and dedicated that stately Temple at Delphos, he asked of Apollo (for his recompence) that thing which was best for man: The Oracle wished him to go home, and within three days he should have it; and within that time he died. It was an excellent saying of one of the Ancients; That is not a death, but life, which joyns the dying man to Christ; and that is not a life, but death, which separates a living man from Christ. But
Secondly, Look upon Death as a remedy, as a cure;  Death will perfectly cure you of all corporal and spiritualƲltimus morbo∣rum medicus mors diseases at once; the crazy body and the defiled soul, the aking head and the unbelieving heart: Death will cure you of all your ails, aches, diseases and distempers. At Stratford-bow in Queen Mary's days, there was burntAct. and Mon. Fol. 1733. a lame man and a blind man at one stake; the lame man, after he was chained, casting away his crutch, bad the blind man be of good comfort; for death (saith he) will cure us both, thee of thy blindness, and me of my lame∣ness. And as Death will cure all your bodily diseases, so it will cure all your soul distempers also: Death is not Mors hominis, but Mors peccati; not the death of the man, but the death of his sin. Death will work such a cure, as all your Duties, Graces, Experiences, Ordinances, As∣surances, could never do; for it will at once free you fully, perfectly and perpetually from all sin; yea, from all pos∣sibility of ever sinning more: Sin was the Midwife thatPecctum erat ob∣stetrix mortis, &c. mors sepuchrum pec ai. Ambrose de bono mortis, c. 4 brought death into the World, and death shall be the grave to bury sin; and why then should a Christian be a∣fraid to die, or unwilling to die, seeing Death gives him a Writ of ease from infirmities and weaknesses, from all aches and pains, griefs and gripings, distempers and diseases, both of body and soul: When Sampson died, the Philistines also died together with him; so when a Saint dies, his sins die with him: Death came in by sin, and sin goeth out by death; as the worm kills the worm that bred it, so death kills sin that bred it. But Thirdly, Look upon death as a rest, a full rest; a be∣liever's  dying day is his resting day: It is a resting dayRev. 14. 13. Job 3. 13, to 17. 2 Thes. 1. 7. Micah 2. 10. Jer. 50. 6. from sin, sorrow, afflictions, temptations, desertions, dissentions, vexations, oppositions and persecutions. This world was never made to be the Saints rest: Arise, for this is not your resting place; they are like Noah's Dove, they can rest no where but in the Ark, and in the Grave. In the grave (saith Job) the weary are at rest: Upon this very ground, some of the most refined Hea∣thens have accounted Mortality to be a mercy, for they
brought their friends into the World with mournful Ob∣sequies, but carried them out of the world with all joy∣ful sports and pastimes, because then they conceived they were at rest, and out of Gun-shot. Death brings the Saints to a full-rest, to a pleasant rest, to a matchless rest, to an eternal rest. But Fourthly, Look upon your dying day as a reaping  day. Now you shall reap the fruit of all the prayers2 Cor. 9. 2. Gal. 6. 7, 8, 9. Isa. 38. 3. Mat. 25. 31, to 41. that ever you have made, and of all the tears that ever you have shed, and of all the sighs and groans that ever you have fetched, and of all the good words that ever you have spoke, and of all the good works that ever you have done, and of all the great things that ever you have suffered: When Mortality shall put on Immortality,Eccles. 11. 1. 6. you shall then reap a plentiful Crop, a glorious Crop (as the fruit) of that good seed that for a time hath seemed to be buried and lost. As Christ hath a tender heart, and a soft hand, so he hath an Iron memory; he punctuallyMat. 10. 24, 25. remembers all the sorrows, and all the services, and all the sufferings of his people, to reward them and crown them; Rev. 22. 12. But Fifthly, Look upon your dying day as a gainful day,  there is no gain to that which comes in by death; Phil 1.Eccles. 7. 1. Phil. 1. 23. 21. For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain: A Christi∣an gets more by death, than he doth by life; to be in Christ is very good, but to be with Christ is best of all. 'Twas a mighty blessing for Christ to be with Paul on earth, but 'twas the top of Blessings for Paul to be with Christ in heaven. Seriously consider of a few things. First, That by death you shall gain incomparable  Crowns. 1. A Crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10. Jam. 1. 12. 2. A Crown of Righteousness, 2 Tim. 4. 8. 3. An In∣corruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. 4. A Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Now there are no Crowns to these Crowns, as I have fully discovered in my discourse on The Divine Presence; to which I refer you. But Secondly, You shall gain a Glorious Kingdom,
Luk. 12. 32. It is your father's pleasure to give you a Kingdom. But death is the young Prophet that anoint∣eth them to it, and giveth them actual possession of it. They must put off their rags of Mortality, that they may put on their robes of Glory. Israel must first die in Egypt, before he can be carried into Canaan. There is no entring into Paradise, but under the flaming sword of this Angel Death, that standeth at the Gate. Death is the dirty Lane through which the Saint passeth to a Kingdom, to a great Kingdom, to a glorious Kingdom,Heb. 12. 28. Dan. 2 44. cap. . 3. Rev. 19 7. to a quiet Kingdom, to an unshaken Kingdom, to a du∣rable Kingdom, to a lasting Kingdom, yea, to an ever∣lasting Kingdom. Death is a dark short way, through which the Saints pass to the Marriage-supper of the Lamb. But Thirdly, You shall gain a safe and honourable Con∣voy  into that other world, Luk. 16. 22. Oh, in what pomp and triumph did Lazarus ride to heaven on the wings of Angels! The Angels conduct the Saints at death through the Air, the Devil's Region; every gra∣cious soul is carried into Christ's Presence by these hea∣venly Courtiers. Oh, what a sudden change does death make! behold, he that even now was scorned by men, is all on a sudden, carried by Angels into Abraham's bo¦som. But Fourthly, You shall gain a glorious welcome, a joyful  Rev. 4. 8, to 11. Luk. 15. 7, 10. Heb. 12. 23. welcome, a wonderful welcome into heaven. By ge∣neral consent of all Antiquity, the holy Angels and bles∣sed Trinity rejoyce at the sinner's Conversion; but oh, what inexpressible, what transcendent joy is there, when a Saint is landed upon the Shore of Eternity? God and Christ, Angels and Arch-angels, all stand ready to wel∣come the Believer as soon as his feet are upon the thre∣shold of Glory. God the Father welcomes the Saints as his elect and chosen ones, Jesus Christ welcomes them as
his redeemed and purchased ones, and the Holy Spirit welcomes them as his sanctified and renewed ones, and the Blessed Angels welcome them as those they haveHeb. 1. ult. guarded and attended on. When the Saints enter upon the Suburbs of Glory, the glorious Angels welcome them with harps in their hands, and ditties in their mouths. But Fifthly, You shall gain full freedom and liberty from  all your enemies within and without, viz. Sin, SatanLuk. 1. 70, 71, 74, 75. and the World. 1. Death will free you from the in∣dwelling power of sin: In heaven there is no com∣plaints;Rom. 7. 23. as in hell there is nothing but wickedness, so in heaven there is nothing but holiness. 2. Death will freeGal. 5. 17. you from the power and prevalency of sin: Here sin plays the Tyrant, but in heaven there is no Tyranny, but perfect felicity. 3. Death will free you from all provo∣cations, temptations and suggestions to sin. Now you shall be above all Satan's batteries. Now God will makeRom. 16. 20. good the promise of treading Satan under your feet: Some say Serpents will not live in Ireland. The old Ser∣pentRev. 12. 8, 9. cap. 21. ult. is cast out, and shall be for ever kept out of the new Jerusalem above. 4. Death will free you from all the effects and consequents of sin, viz. losses, crosses, sick∣nesses, diseases, disgraces, sufferings, &c. when the cause is taken away, the effect ceases; when the fountain of sin is dried up, the streams of afflictions, of sufferings must be dryed up; the fuel being taken away, the fire will go out of it self. Sin and sorrow were born toge∣ther, do live together, and shall die together. To open this fourth Particular a little more fully to you, consider these four things. First, That death will free you from all reproach and  ignominy on your names. Now Elijah is accounted the1 King. 18. 17. Nhem. 6. 6. Psal. 69. 12. Jer. 15. 10. Troubler of Israel, Nehemiah a Rebel against his King, and David the song of the Drunkards, and Jeremiah a
man of contention, and Paul a pestilent fellow. Hea∣venAct. 24. 10. wipes away all blots, as well as all tears; as no sins, so no blots are to be found in that upper world. The names of all the Saints in a state of Glory are written (as I may say) in Characters of Gold. But Secondly, Death will free you from all bodily infir∣mities  and diseases; we carry about in our bodies the matter of a thousand deaths, and may die a thousand se∣veralAbove all things let us every day think  our last day,  ∣naus. ways each several hour: As many senses, as many members, nay, as many pores as there are in the body, so many windows there are for death to enter in at; death needs not spend all its arrows upon us; a worm, a gnat, a fly, a hair, the stone of a raisin, the kirnel of a grape, the fall of a horse, the stumbling of a foot, the prick of a pin, the pairing of a nail, the cutting of a corn; all these have been to others, and any one of them may be to us, the means of our death, within the space of a few days, nay, of a few hours. Here Job had his Botches, andJob 2. 6, 7. Is 37 21.  8. 5.  20. Ma. 9. 20. Hezekiah had his Boil, and David his Wounds, and La∣zarus his Sores, and the poor Widow her Issue of Blood. Now the Feaver burns up some, and the Dropsie drowns others, and the Vapours stifle others; one dies of an Ap∣poplexy in the head, another of a Struma in the neck, a third of a Squinancy in the throat, and a fourth of a Cough and Consumption of the lungs; others of Ob∣structions, Inflamations, Plurisies, Gouts, &c. We are commonly full of complaints; one complains of this di∣stemper, and another of that; one of this disease, and a∣nother of that; but death will cure us of▪ all diseases and distempers at once. But Thirdly, Death will free you from all your sorrows,  whether inward or outward, whether for your own sinsPsal. 38. 18. 2 Cor. 7. 11. Psal. 119 136. Nehem. 1. 3, 4. or the sins of others, whether for your own sufferings or the sufferings of others. Now, it may be, one shall sel∣dom find you, but with tears in your eyes, or sorrow in
your heart; O, but now death will be the funeral of all your sorrows, death will wipe all tears from your eyes, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away; Isa. 51. 11. But Fourthly, Death will free you from all those troubles,  calamities, miseries, mischiefs and desolations, that areIsa. 57 1. Mh 7. 1 to 7. a coming upon the earth, or upon this place or that. A year after Methuselah's death, the Flood came, and car∣ried away the old world: Augustine died a little before the sacking of Hippo: Luther observes that all the Apostles died before the destruction of Jerusalem: And Luther himself died a little before the Wars brake forth in Ger∣many. Dear Lady, death shall do that for you, which all your Physicians could never do for you, which all your Relations could never do for you, which all Ordi∣nances could never do for you, nor which all your faith¦ful Ministers could never do for you; it shall both in∣stantly and perfectly cure you of all sorts of Maladies and weaknesses both inward and outward, or that respects either your body or your soul, or both. Oh, my dear friend, is it not better to die, and be rid of all sin; to die, and be rid of all temptations and desertions; to die, and be rid of all sorts of miseries; than to live, and still carry about with us our sins, our burdens, and such con∣stant ailments, as takes away all the pleasure and com∣fort of life? Here both our outward and inward condi∣tions are very various; sometimes heaven is open, andLamen. 3 8, 44, 54 55, 56, 57. Psal. 30. 7. 1 Thes 4 17, 18. Isa. 35. 10. sometimes heaven is shut; sometimes we see the face of God, and rejoyce, and at other times he hides his face, and we are troubled: O, but now death will bring us to an invariable Eternity. It is always day in heaven, and joy in heaven. Sixthly and lastly, You shall gain a clear, distinct and  full knowledge of all great and deep Mysteries; the My∣stery1 Cor. 13. 10, 12. of the Trinity, the Mystery of Christ's Incarnation,
the Mystery of Man's Redemption, the Mysteries of Pro∣vidences, the Mysteries of Prophecies, and all those My∣steries that relate to the Nature, Substances, Offices, Or∣ders and Excellencies of the Angels. If you please to con∣sult my String of Pearls, or the best thing reserved till last; with my Sermon on Eccles. 7. 1. Better is the day of death than the day of ones birth; which is at the end of my Treatise on Assurance; both which Treatises you have by you. There you will find many more great and glo∣rious things laid open that we gain by death: And to them I refer you. But Sixthly, Look upon death as a sleep; the Holy Ghost  hath phrased it so above twenty times in Scripture, to1 Cor. 11. 30. cap. 15. 51. Joh. 11. . Mark 5. 39. The Greeks call their Church∣yards Dormito∣ries, sleeping pla∣ces; and the He∣brews -∣im, the house of the living. shew that this is the true, proper and genuine notion of death. When the Saints die, they do but sleep; Mat. 9. 24. The maid is not dead but sleepeth: The same phrase he also used to his Disciples concerning Lazarus, our friend Lazarus sleepeth, Joh. 11. 11. The death of the Godly is as a sleep; Stephen fell asleep, Act. 7. 60. And David fell asleep, Act. 13. 36. And Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. 20. Them which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 Thes. 4. 14. The Saints of God do but sleep when they lay down in the Grave; that which we call death (in such) is not death indeed, it is but the image of death, the Shadow and Metaphor of death, death's younger Brother, a mere sleep, and no more. I may not follow the Analogy that is between death and sleep in the latitude of it, the Printer calling upon me to conclude. Sleep is the Nurse of Nature, the sweet Parenthesis of all a man's griefs and cares. But Seventhly, Look upon death as a departure, 2 Tim. 4.  6. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my de∣parture is at hand. He makes nothing of death: It wasDeut. 32. 49, 50. no more betwixt God and Moses, but go up and die;
and so betwixt Christ and Paul, but launch out, and land immediately at the fair Haven of heaven; Phil. 1. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two having a desire to de∣part, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Paul longed for that hour wherein he should loose Anchor,, sol∣vr Anch ram: Or it may be ren∣dered to return home, or to change roos. t is a similitude a∣ken from those that depart out of an In, to take their journey to∣wards their own Countrey. and sail to Christ, as the Greek word , im∣ports. It is a Metaphor from a Ship at Anchor, im∣porting a sailing from this present life to another Port. Paul had a desire to loose from the shore of Life, and to launch out into the Main of Immortality. The Apostle in this phrase , hath a reference both to his bonds and to his death; and his meaning is, I desire to be discharged and released, as out of a common Goal, so also out of the prison of my body, that I may pre∣sently be with Christ my Saviour in heaven, in rest and bliss. After Paul had been in the third heaven, his con∣stant song was I desire to be with Christ. Nature teach∣eth that death is the end of misery; but grace will teach us that death is the beginning of our felicity. But Eighthly and lastly, Look upon death as a going to  Bed. The Grave is a Bed wherein the body is laid to rest, with its curtains close drawn about it, that it may not be disturbed in its repose: So the Holy Ghost is pleased to phrase it; He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, every one walking in their uprightness.Isa. 57. 2. As the souls of the Saints pass to a place of rest and bliss, so their bodies are laid down to▪ rest in the Grave, as in a Bed or Bed-chamber; there to sleep quietly, until the morning of the Resurrection. Death is nothing else, but a Writ of ease to the weary Saints; 'tis a total cessa∣tion from all their labour of nature, sin and affliction: Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, that they may restRev. 14. 13. from their labours, &c. Whilst the souls of the Saints do rest in Abraham's bosom, their bodies do sweetly sleep in their beds of dust, as in a safe and consecrated Dormitory. Every sincere Christian may, like the wea∣ry
child, call and cry to be laid to bed; knowing that death will send him to his everlasting rest. Now you should always look upon death under Scripture Notions, and this will take off the terrour of death; yea, it will make the King of Terrours▪ to be the King of desires; it will make you not only willing to die, but even long to die, and to cry out, O that I had the wings of a dove, to fly away, and be at rest. At death you shall have an eter∣nal Jubilee, and be freed from all incumbrances. Now sin shall be no more, nor trouble shall be no more, nor pain nor ailments shall be no more. Now you shall have your Quietus est, now the wicked shall cease fromJob. 3. 17. troubling, and now the weary shall be at rest, now allRev. 7. 17. tears shall be wiped from your eyes, now death shall be the way to bliss, the Gate of Life, and the Portal to Pa∣radise. It was well said of one, so far as we tremble at death, so far we want love; it's sad when the contract is made between Christ and a Christian, to see a Christi∣an afraid of the making up the Marriage. Lord (saithAustin. one, I will die that I may enjoy thee; I will not live, but I will die, I desire to die, that I may see Christ; and refuse to live, that I may live with Christ. The broken Rings, Contracts and Espousals, contents not the true Lover, but he longs for the Marriage day. It is no credit to your Heavenly Father, for you to be loth to go home. The Turks tell us that surely Christians do not believe heaven to be such a glorious place as they talk of; for if they did, they would not be so unwilling to go thither. The world may well think that the Child hath but cold welcom at his Father's house, that he lingers so much by the way, and that he does not look and long to be at home: Such Children bring an ill report upon their Father's House, upon the Holy Land; but I know you have not so learned Christ, I know you long with Paul; to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; andPhil. 1. 23. with old Simeon, to cry out, Lord let thy servant departLuk. 2. 29. in peace. That God whom you have long sought and
served, will make your passage into that other world safe, sweet and easie. Now, to the everlasting arms of Divine Protection, and to the constant guidance and lead∣ings of the Spirit, and to the rich influences of Christ's Sovereign Grace, and to the lively hopes of the Inheri∣tance of the Saints in light, he commends you, who is Dear Sister, yours in the strongest Bonds. Tho. Brooks.
Beloved in our Lord, IN the first part of my golden Key, I have shewed you seven several pleas, that all sincere Christians may form up, as to those several Scriptures in the Old and New Testament, that refer either to the great day of ac∣count, or to their particular days of account. In this se∣cond part, I shall go on where I left, and shew you seve∣ral other choice Pleas, that all believers may make in the present case. The eighth Plea that a believer may form up as to theEcles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. Mat. 12. 14. cap. 18. 23. Luk 16 2. Rm. 14 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Hb. 9 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5. ten Scriptures in the margent, that refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular account; may be drawn up from the consideration of the covenant of grace, or the new covenant that all believers are under. It is of high concernment to understand the tenure of the cove∣nant of grace, or the new Covenant, which is the Law you must judge of your estates by, for if you mistake in that, you will err in the conclusion: That person is very unfit to make a Judge, who is ignorant of the Law, by which himself and others must be tryed▪ For the clearing of my way, let me premise these six things; First, premise this with me, that God hath commonly dealt  with man in the way of a Covenant; that being a way that is most suitable to man, and most honourable for man, and the most amicable and friendly way of dealing with man: No sooner was man made, but God entered into Covenant with him, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die theGe. 2. 17. Gen. 9 11. 12, 13, 14, 15. en. 6. 18. Cr. 17. 1, 2. death: & after this, he made a Covenant with the world, by Noah: & after this, he made a Covenant with Abraham: &
after this, he made a Covenant with the Jews at MountExod. 19. Sinai: Thus you see, that God has commonly dealth with man in the way of a Covenant. But, Secondly, premise this with me, All men are under  some Covenant or other; they are either under a Cove∣nant of works, or they are under a Covenant of grace: all persons that live and die without an interest in Christ▪ they live and die under a Covenant of works; such as live and die with an interest in Christ, they live and die under a Covenant of grace. There is but a two-fold standing taken notice of in the blessed Scriptures; the oneRom. 6. 14. I am not of Ca∣mero's mind, that there were three Covenants; but of the Apostles mind, who ex∣presly tells us, that there are two Testaments, and no more, in that Gal. 4. 24. is under the Law, the other is under Grace. Now, he that is not under grace, is under the Law. It is true, in the Scripture you do not read, in totidem syllabis, of the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace: but that of the Apostle, comes near it, Rom. 3. 27. where is boasting then? it is excluded; by what Law? of works? nay, but by the Law of faith: Here you have the Law of works, opposed to the Law of faith; which holds out as much as the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace. The Apostle sets forth this two-fold condition of men, by a very pertinent resemblance, namely, by that of marriage, Rom. 7. 1, 2, 3. All Adam's seed are marri∣ed to one of these two husbands; either to the Law, or to Christ. He that is not spiritually married to Christ, and so brought under his Covenant, is still under the Law, as a Covenant of works; even as a wife is under the Law of her husband, while he is yet alive. Certainly, there were never any, but two Covenants made with man, the one Legal, the other Evangelical; the one of works, the other of grace; the first in innocency, the other after the fall: ponder upon Rom. 4. 13. But, Thirdly, Let me premise this, That the Covenant of  grace was so legally dispensed to the Jews, that it seems to be nothing else, but the repetition of the Covenant of works; in respect of which legal dispensations of it, the same Covenant, under the Law, is called a Covenant of works; under the Gospel, in regard of the clearer manifesta∣tion
of it, it is called a Covenant of grace: But these were not two distinct Covenants, but one and the same Covenant diversly dispensed. The Covenant of grace is the same for substance now to us, since Christ was exhi∣bited, as it was to the Jews, before he was exhibited; but the manner of administration of it is different, be∣cause it is: 1. Now clearer, things were declared then in types and shadows; Heaven was then typed out by the Land of Canaan, but now we have things more plainly2 Cor. 3. 12. Heb. 7. 12. manifested. In this respect it is called a better Testament or Covenant; not in substance, but in the manner of re∣veiling it; and the promises are said to be better promisesHeb. 8. 6. Act. 10. 35. upon the same account. 2. The Covenant of grace, is now more largely extended; then it extended only to the Jews, but now, to all that know the Lord, and thatCols. 3. 11. Nem. 7. 2. Jb 1. 1, 8. Acts 13. 22. Rom. 4 18, 19, 20. chuse him, fear him, love him, and serve him in all nati∣ons. 3. There is more abundance of the spirit, of grace, of light, of knowledg, of holiness, poured out general∣ly  upon the people of God now, than there was in thoseThe word Cove∣nant, in our Eng∣lish tongue, sig∣nifie, as we all know, a mutual promise, bargain and obligation, between two per∣sons; and so like∣wise doth the He∣brew Berith, and the Greek Dia∣theke. A Cove∣nant is a solemn compact or a∣greement, be∣tween two cho∣sen parties, or more; whereby, with mutual, free and full consent; they bind and ob∣lige themselves, one to another. A Covenant is A∣micus status inter∣fderates: so Mar∣tin, a friendly state between Al∣lies. times: Though then some few Saints, had much of the spirit, and much of grace and holiness, both in their hearts and lives; but now the generality of the Saints, have more of the spirit, and more grace and holiness, than the generality of the Saints had in those times. But, Fourthly, premise this with me, that a right notion of the Covenant, according to the Originals of the Old and New Testament, will conduce much to a right under∣standing of God's Covenant. The derivation of the He∣brew word, and of the Greek, may give us great light and is of special use, to shew the nature of the Covenant which they principally signifie, and what special things are therein required: The Hebrew word,  Berith, a Covenant, is by learned men, derived from several roots: First, some derive it from , Barar, to purifie, make clear, and to purge out dross, chaff, and all uncleanness; and to select, and chuse out, and separate the pure from the impure, the gold and silver from the dross, and the pure wheat from the chaff. The reasons of this derivati∣on
are these two: 1. Because, by Covenants open and clear amity is confirmed, and faithfulness is plainly and clearly declared and ratified without deceipt or sophistication be∣twixt covenanters: And things are made plain and clear betwixt them, in every point and article: 2. Because God, in the Covenant of works, did chuse out man espe∣cially, with whom he made the Covenant; and because, in the Covenant of grace, he chuseth out of the multi∣tude his Elect, even his Church and faithful people, whom he did separate by predestination and election from all Eternity, to be an holy people to himself in Christ, Eph. 1. 4. 2. Some derive it from , And verily, the Lord, when he makes a Covenant with any, he doth se∣parate them from others, he looks on them, and takes them, and owns them for his peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. for his peculiar treasure, Exod. 19. 5. and agrees with them, as the chosen and choicest of all others,: The first staff in Zach. 11. 10. is called Beauty, and this was the Covenant; and certainly it must be a high honour for a people to be in Covenant with God; for by this means, God becomes ours, and we are made nigh unto him, Jer. 31. 38, 40, 41. He is ours, and we are his, in a very peculiar way of relation: and by this means, God opens his love, and all his treasures of grace unto us: In his Covenant he tells us of his special care, love, kindness, and great in∣tentions of good to us; and by this means his faithfulness comes to be obliged to make good all his Covenant relati∣ons and engagements to us, Deut. 7. 9. Now in all this, God puts a great favour and honour upon his people. Hence, when the Lord told Abraham, that he would makeGen. 1. 2, 3. a Covenant with him, Abraham fell upon his face, he was a∣mazed at so great a love and honour. Secondly, some derive the word from , Barah, comedit, to eat, because usual∣ly they had a feast at the making of Covenants; in the Eastern Countreys they commonly established their Cove¦nants, by cating and dringing together. Herodotus tells us, that the Persians were wont to contract Leagues and friendship, inter vinum & epulas, in a ful feast, where
whereat their wives, children and friends were present. The like Tacitus reports of the Germans amongst the Greeks and other nations, the Covenanters ate bread and salt together. The Emperour of Russiah, at this day, when he would shew extraordinary grace and favour unto any, sends him bread and salt from his table: And when he invited Baron Sigismond, the Emperour Ferdinand's Ambassador, he did it in this form; Sigismunde, come∣des sal & panem nostrum nobiscum: Sigismond, you shall eat our bread and salt with us. Hence, that Symbol of Pythagoras, , break no bread, is in∣terpretedVde urcium i∣tum pu Busbe∣qium Epist. 1. 11 by Erasmus and others, to mean, break no friend∣ship▪ Moreover the Egyptians, Thracians and Libyans in special, are said to have used, to make leagues, and con∣tract friendship, by presenting a cup of wine one to ano∣ther; which custom, we find still in use amongst our west∣ern Nations. It has been the universal custom of Man∣kind, and still remains in use, to contract Covenants, and make Leagues and friendship by eating and drinking together. When Isaac made a Covenant with Abimelech the King of Gerar, the Text saith, He made him, andGen. 26. 30, 31. those that were with him, a feast; and they did eat and drink and rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to a∣nother. When Jacob made a Covenant with Laban, af∣ter they had sworn together, he made him a feast; andGen. 31. 54. called his brethren to eat bread, saith the Text▪ When David made a League with Abner, upon his promise of bringing all Israel unto him; David made Abner, and the2 am. 3 20. men that were with him, a feast, saith the Text. Hence, in the Hebrew tongue, a Covenant is called , Berith, of ▪ Barah, To eat, as i they should say, an eating; which derivation is so natural, that it deserves (say some) to be preferred before that, from the other signification of the same verb, which is to chuse; of which before. Now they that derive Berith from Barah, which signifies, to eat and refresh ones self with meat: They give this reason, for that derivation, viz. Because the old Covenant of God, made with man in the Creation, was a Covenant,
wherein the condition or Law, was about eating: ThatGen. 2. 16, 17. man should eat of all the trees and fruits, except of the tree of knowledg of good and evil: And in the solemn making and sealing of the Covenant of grace, in Christ, the blessed seed; the publick Ceremony was slaying and sacrificing of beasts; and eating some part of them, after the fat, and the choice parts were offered up, and burn'd on the Altar: For God, by vertue of that Covenant, gave man leave to eat the flesh of beasts, which he might notDu. 12. 7. Gen. 1 29. Gen. 31. 46. do in the state of innocency; being limited to fruits of trees, and herbs bearing seed, for his meat: so also in so∣lemn Covenants between men, the parties were wont to eat together. Thirdly, others derive the word Berith, from , Bara, or , Barah, to smite, strike, cut, or di∣vide (as both these words signifie) the word also signifies to elect or chuse; and the reasons they give for this deri¦vation, are these two: First, because Covenants are not made, but by choice persons, chosen out one by another, and about choice matters, and upon choice conditions, chosen out, and agreed upon, by both parties: Second∣ly, because, in making of Covenants, commonly sacri∣fices were stricken and slain, for confirmation and solemni∣ty: Of old, God sealed his Covenant by sacrifices of beasts slain, divided and cut asunder, and the choice fat, and other parts, offered upon the Altar. And in making of great and solemn Covenants, men in old time, were wont to kill and cut asunder sacrificed beasts; and to passe. 15. 9 10, 17. Je. 34. 18, 19, 20. Lev. 26. 25. weigh well these two Scriptures;  break¦ers may well look pon them, as flaming swords is terrible thun∣der-bolts. between the parts divided, for a solemn testimony, or for the confirmation of the Covenants that they had made. And as learned men have long since observed, that the very Heathen, in their covenanting, used sacrifices, and divided them, passing between the parts; and this they did, as some conjecture, in imitation of God's people: This third is the common opinion, about the Original of this name; and therefore, preferred before all other: So this word , Berith, Covenant, seems to sound as much as , Kerith, a smiting or striking, because of sacri∣fices slain in covenanting. Hence the word Covenant is
often joyned witst , Karath, which signifies striking of Covenant. An example of this beyond all exceptionAnd Riven in Gen. 31. Exerci∣at 135. (saith my Author) is in that sacrifice, wherein God, by Moses, made a Covenant with all the people of Israel, and bound them to obey his Law; the description of it is in Exod. 24. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And Moses wrote all the wards of the Lord, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an Altar under the hill, and twelve pillars according to the twelve tribes of Israel. And he sent young men of the chil∣drenAnciently Coe∣nants were made with blood, to be taken conan y in the covenant, een to the the∣ of blood, & loss of life. of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace-offerings of oxen unto the Lord. And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the Altar. And he took the book of the Cove∣nant and read in the audience of the people; and they said, all that the Lord hath said, will we do, and be obedient. And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words. I shall notRuprtus Am∣brse Cajetan &c. trouble my reader with that mystical and too curious a sence, that some of the Ancients put upon these words: the historical sense is here more fit: For in this Ceremony of dividing the blood in two parts, and so besprinkling the Altar with the one half, which represented God; and the people with the other, between whom the Covenant was confirmed; the old use in striking of Covenants, is observed: For the ancient custom was, that they which made a League or Covenant, divided some beast, and put the parts asunder, walking in the midst; signifying, that as the beast was divided, so they should be, which brake the Covenant: So when Saul went against the Am∣monites, coming out of the field, he hewed two Oxen, and sent them into all the coasts of Israel; expressing the1 Sam. 11. 7. like signification, that so should his Oxen be served, that came not forth after Saul and Samuel: After the same manner, when God made a Covenant with Abraham, and he had divided certain beasts, as God had commandedGen. 15. 12. to the 19. him, and laid one part against another; a smoaking ir∣brand went between, representing God, signifying, that
so he should be divided, which violated the Covenant▪ So in this place, not much unlike; the blood is parted in twain, shewing that so should his blood be shed, which kept not the Covenant. Fourthly, some derive the word Berith, from , Bara, to create; and the reason they give for this derivation is this, because the first state of cre∣ation was confirmed by the Covenant which God made with man, and all creatures were to be upheld by means of observing of the Law and condition of the Covenant; and that Covenant being broken by man, the world, made subject to ruine, is upheld; yea, and, as it were, created anew by the Covenant of grace in Christ. Fifth∣ly, some derive the word Berith, from , Berath, which signifies firmness, sureness, because Covenants are firm and sure, and all things agreed on are confirmed and made sure by them; God's Covenant is a sure Covenant, Deut. 7. 9. The Lord thy God, he is the faithful God (or the God. 31. 31, 23, 35, 6, 37. sl. 19. 7. Rev. 3. 14. Isa. 54. 10. of Amen) which keepeth covenant with them that love him: Psal. 89. 34. My covenant will I not break (Hebrew, I will not profane) nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. All God's precepts, all God's predictions, all God's me∣naces, and all God's promises, are the issue of a most just, faithful and righteous will. There are three things that God cannot do: 1. He cannot die: 2. He cannot lie, Tiius 1. 2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began: 3. He cannot deny himself. Now the derivation of Berith, from the several roots specified, and not from one only, doth give much light to the point under consideration; and doth recon∣cile in one, all the several opinions of the learned, and ju∣stifies their several derivations, without rejecting or offer∣ing any wrong or disgrace to any. Secondly, The Greek name, , Diatheke, A Covenant, or a Testament: By this Greek word, the Septua∣gint, in their Greek Translation, do commonly express the Hebrew word Berith; and it is observeable, that this is the only word, by which, the Hebrew word Berith is rendered in the New Testament: This Greek word Dia∣theke,
is translated Covenant in the New Testament a∣boutHeb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 cap. 1. 4. Luk. 1. 72. Rom. 9. 4, &c. Mat. 26. 28. Luk. 22. 20, &c. twenty times; and the same word is translated Te∣stament, in the New Testament about twelve times: Wherever you find the word Covenant in the New Testa∣ment, there you shall find Diatheke; and wherever you find the word Testament, in the New Testament, there you shall find Diatheke: so that it is of importance for us to understand this word aright. Now this Greek word, , Diatheke, is derived from , Diati∣themai, which hath divers of the significations of the He∣brew words, of which Berith is derived; for it signifies to set things in order and frame, to appoint orders, and make Laws, to pacifie and make satisfaction, and to dis∣pose things by ones last Will and Testament. Now, to compose and set things in order, is to uphold the Creati∣on, to walk by orders and Laws made and appointed, is to walk by rule, and to live, to deal plainly and faithfully without deceipt. To pacifie and make satisfaction, in∣cludes sacrifices and sin-offerings: To dispose by will and Testament, implies choice of persons and gifts; for men do commonly by will, give their best and most choice things, to their most dear, and most choice friends. Thus the Greek which the Apostles use in the New Testament, to signifie a Covenant, to express the Hebrew word Be∣rith, which is used in the Law and the Prophets, doth confirm our derivation of it, from all the words before∣named. And this Derivation of the Hebrew and Greek names of a Covenant being thus laid down, and confirm∣ed by the reasons formerly cited, is of great use. The various acceptation and use of these two names in the Old and New Testament, is very considerable for the opening of the Covenant. First, to shew unto us, the full signi∣fication of the word Covenant, and what the nature of a Covenant is in general: 2. To justifie the divers accepta∣tions of the word, and to shew the nature of every word in particular; and so to make way for the knowledg of the agreement and difference between the Old and New Covenant: here, as in a Christal glass, you may see that
this word Berith, and this word Diatheke, signifie all Co∣venants in general, whether they are religious or civil; for there is nothing in any true Covenant, which is not com∣prized in the signification of these words, being expound∣ed according to the former derivations. Here also, we may see what is the nature of a Covenant in general, and what things are thereunto required: As first, every true co∣venant presupposeth a division or separation: Secondly, it comprehends in it a mutual promising and binding be∣tween two distinct parties: Thirdly, there must be faith∣ful dealing, without fraud, or dissembling on both sides: Fourthly, this must be between choice persons: Fifthly, it must be about choice matters, and upon choice condi∣tions, agreed upon by both: Sixthly and lastly, it must tend to the well ordering and composing of things be∣tween them. Now, all these are manifest by the several significations of the words, from which Berith and Dia∣theke, are derived. And thus much for the word Cove∣nant, according to the Originals of the Old and New Testament. Fifthly, premise this with me, That there was a Co∣venant of works, or reciprocal Covenant, betwixt God and Adam, together with all his posterity: Before Adam fell from his primitive holiness, beauty, glory and excel∣lency; God made a Covenant with Adam, as a publick person, which represented all Mankind. The Covenant of works was made with all men in Adam, who was made, and stood as a publick person, head and root, in a com∣mon and comprehensive capacity: I say, it was made with him as such, and we all in him; he and all stood and fell together: 1. Witness the imputation of Adam's sin to all mankind, Rom. 5. 12. In whom (or for as much as) all have sinned; they sinned nor all in themselves, therefore in Adam, see vers. 14, In him all died. 2. Wit∣ness1 Cor. 15. 47. Deut. 29. 21. Rom. 8. 20, 1. Gal. 3. 10, 13. the curse of the Covenant, that all mankind are di∣rectly under; consult the Scriptures in the margent. Those, on whom the curse of the Covenant comes, those are un∣der the bond and precept of the Covenant; But all man∣kind
are under the curse of the Covenant; and therefore, all mankind are under the bond and precept of the Cove∣nant. Adam did understand the terms of the Covenant, and did consent to the terms of the Covenant; for God dealt with him in a rational way, and expected from him a reasonable service. The end of this Covenant, was the upholding of the Creation, and of all the creatures, in their pure natural estate, for the comfort of man con¦tinually, and for the special manifestation of God's free grace: And that he might put the greater obligation up∣on Adam, to obey his Creator, and to sweeten his autho∣rity to man; and that he might draw out Adam to an ex¦ercise of his faith, love and hope in his Creator; and that he might leave Adam the more inexcusable in case he should sin; and that so, a clear way might be made for God's ju∣stification, and man's conviction: Upon these grounds God dealt with Adam, not only in a way of sovereignty, but in a way of Covenant. But how may it be evidenced, that God entred into a  Covenant of works with the first Adam, before his fall, there being no mention of such a Covenant in the Scri∣pture, that we read of? Though the name be not in the Scripture, yet the thing  is in the Scripture, as will evidently appear, by compare∣ingSocinians call for the word satisfa∣ction, others call for the word sa∣crament, others call for the word Trinity, and o∣thers call for the word Sabbath, for Lords day, &c. and thence conclude against Satisfaction, Sa∣craments, Trini∣ty, Sabbath, for want of express words▪ when the things themselves are plainly and liely set down in other words, in the blessed Scriptures: so it is in this case of God's Covenant with Adam. The vanity and folly of such ways of reasoning, is sufficiently demonstrated by all writers upon those Subjects, that are ound in the faith, &c. Scripture with Scripture; though it be not positively and plainly said in the blessed Scripture, that God made a Covenant of works with Adam, before his fall: Yet, upon sundry Scripture grounds and considerations, it may be sufficiently evinced, that God did make such a Cove∣nant with Adam, before his fall; and therefore, it is a nice cavil, and a foolish vanity, for any to make such a noise about the word Covenant; and for want of the word Covenant, boldly to conclude that there was no such Co∣venant made with Adam, when the thing is lively set down in other words, though the word Covenant be not
expressed; and this I shall make evident by an induction of particulars, thus; First, God, to declare his sovereignty and man's subje∣ction, gave Adam, though innocent, a Law. God's ex∣press prescription of a positive Law, unto Adam, in his innocent state, is clearly and fully laid down, in that Gen. 2. 16, 17. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of every tree of the garden thou maist freely eat: But of the tree of the knowledg of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die: Hebrew, Dying, thou shalt die. Mark how God bounds man's obedience with a double fence: First, he fenced him with a free indulgence, to eat of every tree in the Garden, but one; the less cause he had to be liquorish af∣ter forbidden fruit; but, stolen waters are sweet. Second∣ly, by an exploratory prohibition upon pain of death: by the first, the Lord wooes him by love; by the second, he frights him by the terrour of his justice; and bids him touch and taste, if he durst. The Faederati were God and Adam; God the Creator, and man the creature, made after Gods image and likeness; and so not contrary to God, nor at enmity with him, but like unto God, though far different and inferiour to God in nature and substance. Here are also terms agreed on, and matters covenanted reciprocally, by these parties: Adam, on his part, was to be obedient to God, in forbearing to eat of the tree of knowledg only. God's charge to our first parents was only negative, not to eat of the tree of knowledg; the other, to eat of the trees, was left unto their choice. Eve confesseth that God spake unto them both, and said, ye shall not eat of it: And God speaks unto both of themGen. 3. 2. together in these words; Behold I have given unto you e∣veryGen. 1. 19. herb, and every tree, &c. At which time, also, it is very like, that he gave them the other prohibition of not eating of that one tree; for if God had made that ex∣ception before, he would not have given a general per∣mission after; or if this general grant had gone before, the exception coming, should seem to abrogate the former
grant. The Septuagint seem to be of this mind, that this precept was given both to Adam and Eve, reading thusSo doth Gregory read as the Septu∣agint does, Gr . l. b. 35. moral. . 10 in the plural number; In what day ye shall eat thereof, ye shall die. And though, in the Original, the precept be given in the name of Adam only; that is only, 1. Because Adam was the more principal, and he had the charge of the woman: And 2. Because that the greatest danger was in his transgression, which was the cause of the ruine of his posterity: 3. Because, as Mercerus well observes, Adam was the common name, both of the man and woman; Gen. 5. 2. and so is taken, vers, 15. And God, on his part, for the present, permits Adam to eat of all other trees of the Garden. And for the future (in his explicite threatning of death in case of disobedience) implicity pro∣miseth life, in case of obedience herein. Secondly, the promises of this Covenant on God's part,  were very glorious; First, that heaven, and earth, and all creatures, should continue in their natural course and or∣der, wherein God had had created and placed them, serv∣ing always for man's use, and that man should have the benefit and Lordship of them all. Secondly, As for na∣tural life, in respect of the body, Adam should have had perfection without defect, beauty without deformity, la∣bour without weariness. Thirdly, as for spiritual life, Adam should never have known what it was to be under. 18. 1. . terrours and horrours of conscience, nor what a wound∣ed spirit means, he should never have found the arrows of 6. 4. the Almighty sticking fal in him, nor the poyson thereof drink¦ing up his spirits, nor the terrours of God, to set themselves in array against him; nor he should never have tasted of death: Death is a fall that came in by a fall; had Adam never sinned, Adam had never died; had Adam stood fast in innocency, he should have been translated to glory without dissolution. Death came in by sin, and sin go∣eth out by death: As the worm kills the worm that bred it, so death  sin that bred it. Now, where there are parties covenanting, promising, and agreeing upon terms, and terms mutually agreed upon by those parties,
as here. There's the substance of an express Covenant, though it be not formally, and in express words called a Covenant. This was the first Covenant which God made with man, and this is called by the name Berith, Jer. 33. 20. where God saith, If you can break my Covenant of the day and night, and that there shall not be day and night in their season, vers. 21. Then may also my Covenant with Da∣vid, be broken. In these words he speaks plainly of the promise in the Creation: That day and night should keepGen. 1. 14, 15, 16. their course, and the sun, moon, and stars, and all crea∣tures, should serve for man's use. Now, though man did break the Covenant on his part, yet God being im∣mutable, could not break Covenant on his part, neither did he suffer his promise to fail; but by vertue of Christ promised to man in the new Covenant, he will keep touch with man so long as mankind hath a being on the earth, In this first Covenant, God promised unto man life and happiness, Lordship over all the creatures, liber∣ty to use them, and all other blessings which his heart could desire, to keep him in that happy estate, wherein he was created. And man was bound to God, to walk in perfect righteousness, to observe and keep God's Com∣mandments, and to obey his will in all things, which were within the reach of his nature, and so far as was re∣veiled to him: In the first Covenant, God reveiled himself to man, as one God, Creator and Governour of all things, infinite in power, wisdom, goodness, nature and substance. God was man's good Lord, and man was God's good servant; God dearly loved man, and man greatly loved God with all his heart; there was not the least shadow, or occasion of hatred or enmity between them; there was nothing but mutual love, mutual delight, mutual content, and mutual satisfaction, between God and man: Man, in his primitive glory, needed no Mediator, to come between God and him; man was perfect, pure, upright and good, created after God's own image; and the nearer he came to God, the greater was his joy and comfort: God's presence now, was man's great delight;
and it was man's heaven on earth, to walk with God. But, Thirdly, Consider the intention and use of the two e∣minent  Trees in the Garden, that are mentioned in a more peculiar manner, viz. The tree of life, and The tree of knowledg. The intended use of these two Trees in Pa∣radise, was Sacramental: Hence they are called Symboli∣cal Trees, and Sacramental Trees, by learned writers, both ancient and modern. By these the Lord did signifie and seal to our first parents, that they should always enjoy that happy state of life, in which they were made, upon condition of obedience to his Commandments, i. e. inThe Tree of life was the  and eal which God gave to man, for confirmation of this first Cove∣nant; and it was to man, a Sacra∣ment and pledge of eternal life on earth, and of all blessings needful to keep man in life. eating of the tree of life, and not eating of the tree of know∣ledg. The Tree of life is so called, not because of any native property, and peculiar vertue it had in it self, to convey life; but symbolically, morally and sacramental∣ly: It was a sign and obsignation to them of life, natural and spiritual, to be continued to them, as long as they continued in obedience to God. The seal of the first Co¦venant was the Tree of life; which, if Adam had receiv¦ed, by taking and eating of it, whilst he stood in the state of Innocency, before his fall, he had certainly been esta∣blished in that estate for ever; and the Covenant being sealed and confirmed between God and him on both parts, he could not have been seduced and supplanted by Satan, as some learned men do think, and as God's own words seem to imply, Gen. 3. 22. And now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever. The tree of knowledg of good and evil, was spoken from the sad event and experience they had of it, as Sampson had of God's departing from him, when he lost his Nazaritish hair by Dalilah. The tree of life, was a Sacrament of life; The tree of knowledg, a Sacrament of death: The tree of life, was for confirmation of man's obedience; and The tree of knowledg, was for caution against disobedience. Now if these two Trees were two Sacraments; the one assuring of lite in case of obedience, the other assuring of death in case of disobedience; then hence we may collect,
That God not only entred into a Covenant of works with the first Adam, but also gave him this Covenant under Sacramental signs and scals. But, Fourthly, Seriously consider that a Covenant of works  lay clear, in that Commandment, Gen. 2. 16, 17. which may thus be made evident; 1. Because that was the con∣dition of man's standing and life, as it was expresly de∣clared: 2. Because, in the breach of that Commandment given him, he lost all, and we in him. God made the Covenant of works primarily with Adam, and with us in him, as our head, inclusively; so that when he did fall, we did fall; when he lost all, we lost all. There are five things we lost in our fall; 1. Our holy Image, and so became vile: 2. Our sonship, and so became slaves: 3. Our friendship, and so became enemies: 4. Our com¦munion with God, and so became strangers: 5. Our glo∣ry, and so became miserable. Sin and death came into the world by Adam's fall: In Adam's sinning, we all sin∣ned;1 Cr. 15. 22. Rom. 5. 12. to the end, &c. and in Adam's dying, we all died; as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures in the margent together. In Adam's first sin, we all became sinners by imputation: Adam being an universal person, and all mankind one in him, by God's Covenant of works with him: Omnes il∣le unus homo fuerunt, August. All were that one man, viz. by federal consociation: God covenanted with Adam, and in him with all his posterity; and therefore Adam's breach of Covenant, fell not only upon him, but upon all his posterity. But, Fifthly and lastly, we read of a Second Covenant, Heb.  10. 9. Rom. 9. 4. Gal. 4. 24. Eph. 2. 12. And we read of a New Covenant, Jer. 31. 31. Behold the days come, saithHeb. 8. 6, 7. the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: So Heb. 8. 8. I will make a new covenant, &c. vers. 13. In that he saith a new covenant, he hath made the first old, &c. Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, &c. Now if there be a Second Covenant, then we may safely conclude there was a First; and if there be a New Covenant, then
we may boldly conclude that there was an Old Covenant: A Covenant of Grace always supposeth a Covenant of Works: I know there is a repetition of the Covenant of Works with Adam, in the Law of Moses; as in that ofHeb. 8. 7, 8, 9. the Apostle to the Galatians, The Law is not of faith, but the man that doth these things, shall live in them. The Law requires works, and promiseth no life to those that will be justified by faith. In the first Covenant, threeGal. 3. 10, 11, 12. things are observable; 1. The precept, That continueth not in all things; the precept requires perfect, personal and perpetual obedience: 2. The promise, Live, the man that doth them shall live; live happily, blessedly, chear∣fully, everlastingly: 3. The curse in case of transgression, Cursed is every one, that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the Law, to do them: One sin, and that but in thought, broke the Angel's Covenant,Jude 6. and hath brought them into everlasting chains: So the same Apostle, to the Romans, further tells us, that Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law, that the man that doth those things, shall live by them. Thus it wasRom. 10. 5. with Adam, principally and properly, therefore he was under a Covenant of works, when God gave him that command, Gen. 2. 16, 17. This first Covenant, is called a Covenant of works, because this Covenant required working on our part, as the condition of it, for justifica∣tion and happiness, The man that doth these things, shall live. Under this Covenant, God left man to stand upon his own bottom, and to live upon his own stock, and by his own industry; God made him perfect and upright, and gave him power and ability to stand, and laid no ne∣cessity at all upon him to fall. In this first Covenant of works, man had no need of a Mediator, God did then stipulate with Adam immediately; for seeing he had not made God his enemy by sin, he needed no days-man, toJob 9. 33. Make friendly intercession for him. Adam was invested and endowed with righteousness and holiness in his first glorious estate; with righteous∣ness, that he might carry it fairly, justly, evenly and
righteously towards man; and with holiness, that heEph. 4. 22, 23, 24. In this Scripture, the Apostle speaks plainly of the Renovation of that Know∣ledg, Holiness and Righteous∣ness that Adam sometimes had, but lost it by his fall. might carry it wisely, lovingly, reverentially and holily towards God, and that he might take up in God as his chiefest good, as in his great ALL. I shall not now stand upon the discovery of Adam's Beauty, Authority, Do∣minion, Dignity, Honour and Glory, with which he was adorned, invested and crowned in innocency: Let this satisfie, that Adam's first estate, was a state of perfectPsal. 8. 4, 5, 6. Gen. 2. 20. knowledg, wisdom and understanding; it was a perfect state of holiness, righteousness and happiness; there was nothing within him, but what was desirable and delecta∣ble; there was nothing without him, but what was amia∣ble and commendable; nor nothing about him, but what was serviceable and comfortable. Adam, in his innocent estate, was the wonder of all understanding, the mirrour of wisdom and knowledg, the image of God, the de∣light of heaven, the glory of the Creation, the world's great Lord, and the Lord's great darling: Upon all these accounts, he had no need of a Mediator. And let thus much suffice to have spoken concerning the first Covenant of works, that was between God and Adam in innocency. But, Sixthly, Premise this with me, viz. That there is a  new Covenant, a second Covenant, or a Covenant of grace, betwixt God and his people, express ScripturesH 8. 6 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. prove this, Deut. 7. 9. Know therefore, that the Lord thy God, he is God; the faithful God, which keepeth Covenant and mercy with them that love him, and keep his command∣ments to a thousand generations: 2 Sam. 23. 5. AlthoughSee this 2 Sm. 23. 5. opened in my box of pre∣cious Ointments. pa. 369, 370 371 372, 373, 374. my house be not so with God, yet he hath made with me, an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire; although he make it not to grow: Nehem. 1. 5. I beseech thee, O Lord God of hea∣ven, the great and errible God; that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that love him, and keep his commandments: Isa. 54. 10. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord, that
hath mercy on thee: Jer. 32. 40. And I will make an ever∣lasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: Ezek. 20. 37. And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you in∣toDut. 4. 23. Is. 55. 1, 2, 3. Jer. 24. 7. cap. 30. 22. cap. 31. 31, 33. cap. 32. 38. Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10. the bond of the Covenant: Deut. 29. 12. That thou should∣est enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God; and into his oath, which the Lord thy God maketh with thee to day: Con∣sult the Scriptures in the margent also, for they cannot be applyed to Christ, but to us. But for the further evidenc∣ing of that Covenant, that is between the Lord and his people. Now, that there is a Covenant betwixt God and his people, may be further evinced by unanswerable arguments, let me point at some among many. First, Christ is said to be the mediator of this Covenant,  Heb. 9. 15. And for this cause, he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament; they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance: Certainly, that Covenant, of which Christ is the Testa∣tor, must needs be a Covenant made with us: for else, if the Covenant were made only with Christ (as some would have it) then it will roundly follow, that Jesus Christ is both Testator; and the party, to whom the Testaments and Legacies are bequeathed: which sounds harsh; yea, which, to assert, is very absurd: Since the creation of the world, was it ever known, that ever any man did be∣queath a Testament and Legacies to himself? Surely no▪ Christ is the Testator of the New Covenant; and there∣fore, we may safely conclude, that the New Covenant is made with us. The office of Mediator (you know) is to stand betwixt two at variance: The two at variance, were God and man: Man had offended and incensed God against him; God's wrath was an insupportable burrhen, and a consuming fire; no creature was able to stand un∣der it, or before it: Therefore Christ, to rescue and re∣deem man, becomes a Mediator; Christ▪ undertaking to be a Mediator, both procured a Covenant to pass betwixt God
and man, and also engaged himself for the performance thereof on both parts; and to assure man of partaking of the benefit of God's Covenant, Christ turns the Covenant into a Testament; that the conditions of the Covenant, on God's part, might be as so many Legacies; which be∣ing confirmed by the death of the Testator, none might disannul, Heb. 8. 6. He is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises. The promises of the new Covenant are said to be better in these six respects, 1. All the promises of the Law, were conditional: Do this, and thou shalt live; the promises of the new Cove∣nant are absolute of grace, as well as to grace: 2. In this better Covenant, God promiseth higher things; here God promiseth himself, his son, his spirit, a higher righteous∣ness, and a higher sonship: 3. Because of their stability, those of the old Covenant, were swallowed up in the curse;Rom. 4. 13, 16. Gal. 3. 16. 17. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Cant. 5 16. Col. 1. 19. cap. 2. 3. Isa. 44. 3. Jo 2. 28. Act. 2. 16, 17. Gal. 3. 2. these are the sure mercies of David: 4. They are all bot∣tomed upon faith, they all depend upon faith: 5. They are all promised upon our interest in Christ; this makes the promises sweet, because they lead us to Christ, the fountain of them; whose mouth is most sweet, and in whose person, all the sweets of all created beings do cen∣ter: 6. Because God hath promised to pour out a greater measure of his spirit, under the New Covenant, than he did under the old Covenant; Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus, the mediator of the new covenant. Thus you see that Christ is called, the mediator ef the covenant, three several times: Now, he could not be the Mediator of that Covenant that is betwixt God and himself (of which more shortly) but of that Covenant, that is betwixt God and his people. But Secondly, The people of God have pleaded the Cove∣nant,  that is betwixt God and them, Remember thy Co∣venant:Jer. 14. 21. Luk. 1. 72. Psal. 25. 6. Now, how could they plead the Covenant be∣twixt God and them; if there were no such Covenant; see the Scriptures in the margent. But, Thirdly, God is often said to remember his Covenant,Ponde upon these Scriptures, Psal. 105. 8. Psal. 106. 45. Psal. 111. . Gen. 9. 15. I'l remember my covenant, which is between you and me: Exod. 6. 5. I have remembred my covenant: Lev.
26. 42. I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my co∣venant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham, will I remember: Ezek. 16. 60. I will remember my covenant with thee, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting cove∣nant. Now, how can God be said to remember his Co∣venant with his people, if there were no Covenant be∣twixt God and them? But, Fourthly, the temporal and spiritual deliverances, that  you have by the Covenant, do clearly evidence, that thereGen. 9. 11. Isa. 54. 9. Psal. 111. 9. Isa. 59. 21. is a Covenant betwixt God and you, Zach. 9. 11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein there was no water: These words include both temporal and spiritual deliverances: So that now, if there be not a Covenant betwixt God and you, what deliverances can you expect; seeing they all flow in upon the creature, by vertue of the Covenant, and according to the Covenant? By the blood of the Co∣venant,Luk 16. 24, 25. believers are delivered from the infernal pit; where there is not so much water, as might cool Dives his tongue; and by the blood of the Covenant, they are delivered from those deaths and dangers that do surround2 Cor. 1. 8, 9, 10. them: When sincere Christians fall into desperate distres∣ses, and most deadly dangers; yet they are prisoners of hope, and may look for deliverance by the blood of the Covenant; this does sufficiently evince a Covenant be∣twixt God and his people. But, Fifthly, God has threatned, severely to avenge and  punish the quarrel of his Covenant, Levit. 26. 25. And IDeut. 29. 20, 21, 24, 25. cap. 31. 20, 21. Js. 7. 11, 12, 15. cap. 23. 15, 16. Ju. . 20. 2 King. 18 9, 10, 11, 12. will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant; or which shall avenge the vengeance of the Covenant) &c. consult the Scriptures in the mget. Breach of Covenant betwixt God and man, breaks the peace, and breeds a quarrel betwixt them; in which, he will take vengeance of man's revolt, except there be re∣pentance on man's side, and pardoning grace on his. For breach of Covenant, Jerusalem is long since, laid waste, and the seven golden candlesticks broken in pieces; and many others, this day, lie a bleeding in the Nations,
who have made no more of breaking Covenant with the great God, than if therein they had to do with poor mor∣tals, with dust and ashes like themselves. Now, how can there be such a sin, as breach of Covenant; for which, God will be avenged, if there were no Covenant be∣twixt God and his people. But, Sixthly, The seals of the Covenant, are given to God's  people: Now, to those, to whom the seals of the Cove∣nantI reason, the Co∣veant and the Sls must go to∣gether▪ Were it no a fond and foolish thing in any man, to make a Covenant with e, and to gie the seals to ano∣? In Equity and Justice, the Coenant and Seals must go to the same persons. are given, with them is the Covenant mad, (for the seals of the Covenant, and the Covenant go to the same persons) But the seals of the Covenant are given to believers; Abraham receives the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith; Rom. 4. 11. Ergo, the Co∣venant is made with believers: Circumcision is a sign, in regard of the thing signified; and a seal, in regard of the Covenant, made betwixt God and man: Seal is a bor∣rowed word, taken from Kings and Princes; who add their broad seal, or privy seal, to ratifie and confirm the Leagues, Edicts, Grants, Covenants, Charters, that are made with their Subjects or Confederates. God had made a Covenant with Abraham; and by circumcision, signs and seals up that Covenant. But, Seventhly, The people of God are said, sometimes to  keep Covenant with God, Psal. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his covenant, and his testimonies. Mercies flowing in upon us, through the Covenant, are of all mercies, the most soul-satisfying, soul-refreshing, soul cheering mercies; yea, they are the very cream of mercy: Oh, how well is it with that Saint, that can look upon every mercy, as a present sent him from heaven, by vertue of the Covenant! Oh, this sweet∣ens every drop, and sip, and crust, and crum of mercy, that a Christian enjoys, that all flows in upon him through the Covenant. The promise last cited, is a very sweet, choice, precious promise, a promise more worth, than all the riches of the Indies. Mark, All the paths of the Lord to his people, they are not only mercy, but they are mercy and truth; that is, they are sure mercies that stream
in upon them, through the Covenant: Solomon's dinnerProv. 15. 17. D. 1. 12. John 6. 9. of green herbs, Daniel's pulse, Barley loaves and a sew fishes, swimming in upon a Christian, through the New Covenant, are far better, greater and sweeter mercies, than all those great things are, that flow in upon the great men of the world, through that general providence, that feeds the birds of the air, and the beasts of the field, Psal. 44. 17. Yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant; that is, We have kept Covenant with thee, by endeavouring to the uttermost of our power, to keep off from the breach of thy Covenant, and to live up to the duties of thy Covenant, suitable to that of the Prophet Micah, We will walk in the name of the Lord ourMiha 4. 5. God, for ever and ever. Persons in Covenant with God, will not only take a turn or two in his ways (as Tempo∣raries and Hypocrites do, who are hot at hand, but soon tire, and give in) but they will hold on in a course of ho∣liness,Rev 14. 4. and not fail to follow the Lamb, withersoever heCap. 17. 14. goes, Psal. 103. 17. The mercy of the Lord, is from ever∣lasting, to everlasting: vers. 18. To such as keep his Covenant, &c. All sincere Christians, they keep Covenant with God: 1. In respect of their cordial desires, to keep Covenantem. 1. ult. . 119. 133. Psal. 39. 1, 2. with God: 2. In respect of their habitual purposes and resolutions, to keep Covenant with God: 3. In respect of their habitual and constant endeavours to keep Cove∣nant with God: This is an Evangelical, and incompleat keeping Covenant with God, which in Christ, God owns and accepts; and is as well pleased with it, as he was with Adam's keeping of Covenant with him, before his fall. From what has been said, we may thus argue▪ Those that keep Covenant with God, those are in Covenant with God those have made a Covenant with God; But all sincer Christians, they do keep Covenant with God. Ergo: But, Eighthly ad lastly, The Lord hath, by many choice,  precious and pathetical promises engaged himself to make2 Pet. 1. 4. good that blessed Covenant that he has made with his peo∣ple, yea, with his choice and chosen ones: take a few in∣stances,
If ye hearken to these judgments (saith God toDeut. 7. 12. Israel) and keep and do them: The Lord thy God shall keep unto thee, the covenant and the mercy, which he sware untoUnder the name Jugments, th Commandments, and Statutes of God, are contain∣ed. thy fathers. This blessed Covenant is grounded upon God's free grace; and therefore, in recompencing their obedience, God hath a respect to his own mercy, and not to their merits: So Judg. 2. 1. I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you into the land which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my covenant with you. God is a God of mercy, and his Co∣venant with his people, is a Covenant of mercy; and therefore he will be sure to keep touch with them. So, Psal. 89. 34. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth: As if he should have said, Though they break my Statutes, yet will I not break my Covenant; for this seems to have reference to the 31: vers. If they break my statutes, &c. Though they had prophaned God's Statutes, yet God would not prophane his Covenant, as the Hebrew runs, My covenant will I not break; that is, I will stand stedfastly, to the performance of it, and to every part and branch of it: I will never be inconstant, I will never be off and on with my people, I will never change my purpose, nor eat my words, nor unsay what I have said: So Jer. 33. 20. Thus saith theThat is the order that I have set upon the courses and the Revolu∣tions of day and night. Lord, if you can break my covenant of the day, and my co∣venant of the night, and that there shall not be day and night in their season: vers. 21. Then may also, my covenant be broken with my servant David, &c. It is impossible for any created power, to break off the intercourse of night and day; so, it is impossible for me, to break the Cove∣nant that I have made with David my servant; the day and night shall as soon fail, as my Covenant shall fail: So, Isa. 54. 10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, nei∣ther shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord, that hath mercy on thee: Though great and huge mountains should remove; yea, though heaven and earthPsal. 46. 2. should meet; yet the Covenant of God with his people,
shall stand unmoveable. The Covenant of God, the mercy of God, and the loving kindness of God to his people, shall last for ever, and remain constant and im∣mutable, though all things in the world, should be turn∣ed upside down. So, Psal. 111. 4. The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion: vers. 5. He will ever be mindful of his covenant: God looks not at his peoples sins, but at his own promise; he will pass by their infirmities, and supply all their necessities: God will never break his Co∣venant, he will never alter his Covenant, he will still keep it, he will for ever be mindful of it. The Cove∣nant of God with his people, shall be as inviolable, as the course and revolution of day and night; and more im∣moveable, than the very hills and mountains. From what has been said, we may thus argue: If God hath, by many choice, precious and pathetical promises, en∣gaged himself to make good that blessed Covenant that he has made with his people; then certainly there is a Covenant between God and his people: But God hath, by many choice, precious and pathetical promises, en∣gaged himself to make good his Covenant to his people. Ergo. I might have laid down several other unanswerable arguments to have evinced this blessed truth, That there is a Covenant betwixt God and his people; but let these eight suffice for the present. Seventhly and lastly, premise this with me, viz. That  it is a matter of high importance, and of great concern∣ment,2 Sam. 23. 3, 4. for all mortals, to have a clear and a right under∣standing of that Covenant, under which they are: God deals with all men according to the Covenant, underPsal. 105. 8. sal. 111. 5. 1 r. 11. 28. Gal. 4. 23, 24, 25. which they stand: we shall never come to understand our spiritual estate and condition, till we come to know un∣der what Covenant we are. If we are under a Covenant of works, our state is miserable; If we are under a Co∣venant of grace▪ ur state is happy; If we die under a Covnant of works, we shall be certinly damned▪ If we die under  Coveant f grace, we shall be certainly savd.
'Till we come to understand, under what Covenant we are, we shall never be able to put a right construction, a right interpretation upon any of God's actions, dealings or dispensations towards us: When we come to under∣stand, that we are under the Covenant of grace; then we shall be able to put a sweet, a loving and a favourableRev. 3. 19. Jb 1. 21. Jer. 24. 4, 5. Rom. 8. 28. Heb. 12. 10, 11. 2 Cor. 4. 15, 16, 17, 18. construction upon the most sharp, smart, severe and ter∣rible dispensations of God, knowing that all flows from love, and shall work for our external, internal and eter∣nal good, and for the advancement of God's honour and glory in the world: When we come to understand, that we are under a Covenant of works, then we shall know that there is wrath, and curses, and woes, wrapped up in the most favourable dispensations; and in the greatestPrev. 1. 32. Mal. 2. 2. Deut. 28. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Levit. 26. 14, to the 24. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Heb. 12. 1. outward mercies and blessings that Christ confers upon us. If a man be under a Covenant of grace, and doth not know it; how can he rejoyce in the Lord? how can he sing out the high praises of God? how can he delight himself in the Almighty? how can he triumph in Christ Jesus? how can he chearfully run the race that is before him? how can he bear up bravely and resolutely in his sufferings for the cause of Christ? how can he besiege the throne of grace with boldness? how can he be tempta∣tion proof? how can he be dead to this world; how can he long to be with Christ, in that other world? And if a man be under a Covenant of works, and doth not know it, how can he lament and bewail his sad condition? how can he be earnest with God, to bring him under the bond of the New Covenant? how can he make out after Christ? how can he chuse the things that please God? how can he cease from doing evil, and learn to do well? how can he lay hold on eternal life? how can he be saved from wrath to come? &c. If we are under a Covenant of grace, and do not know it, how can we manage our duties and services with that life, love, seriousness, holiness, spiri∣tualness,Psal. 16. 4. Ames. 8. 5. Mal 1. 13. Hs. 6. 4. cap. 4. 10. Psal. 36. 3. and uprightness, as becomes us? &c. If we are under a Covenant of works, and do not know it, how rare shall we be in religious duties? how weary shall we
be of religious duties? and how ready shall we be to cast off religious duties? By these few things I have been hint∣ing at, you may easily discern how greatly it concerns all sorts of persons, to know what Covenant they are under; whether they are under the first or second Covenant; whether they are under a Covenant of works, or a Co∣venant of grace. Now, having premised these seven things, my way is clear to that I would be at; which is this, viz. That there are but two famous Covenants, that we must abide by; in one of them, all men and women in the world, must of necessity be found; either in the Co∣venant of grace, or in the Covenant of works: The Co∣venant of works is a witness of God's holiness and per∣fection, the Covenant of grace is a witness of God's good∣ness and commisration; the Covenant of works is a standing evidence of man's guiltiness, the Covenant of grace is the standing evidence of God's righteousness; the Covenant of works is the lasting monument of man's impotency and changeableness, the Covenant of grace is the everlasting monument of God's omnipotency and im∣mutability: Now, no man can be under both these Co∣venants at once; if he be under a Covenant of works, he is not under a Covenant of grace; and if he be under a Covenant of grace, he cannot be under a Covenant of works: Such as are under a Covenant of works, they have the breach of that Covenant to count for, they being the Srpentine brood of a transgressing stock; but such as are under a Covenant of grace, shall never be tryed by the Law of works, because Christ their surety hath fulfil∣led it for them; Acts 13. 38, 39. Rom. 8. 2, 3, 4. Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6. But let me open my self more fully thus, That all unbelievers, all Christless, graceless persons, are under a Covenant of works, which they are never a∣ble, safely to live under; should they live and die under a Covenant of works, they were surely lost and destroyed for ever; for the Covenant of works condemns and curses the sinner, Cursed is every one that continueth not in allGal. 3. 10.
things, which are written in the book of the law, to do them; neither hath the sinner any way to escape that curse of the Law, nor the wrath of God reveiled against all unrigh∣teousness and ungodlyness, but in the Covenant of grace;Rom. 1. 18. this Covenant of works the Apostle calls, The law ofRom. 3. 27. Gen. 2. 16, 17. works. This is the Covenant which God made with man, in the state of innocency before the fall: In this Cove∣nant God promised to Adam for himself and his posterity, life and happiness, upon the condition of perfect, perso∣nal and perpetual obedience; and it is summed up by the Apostle, Do this, and live. God having created man up∣right,Gal. 3. 12. Ecl. 7. 29. Gen. 1. 26. 27. after his own image; and so having furnished him with all abilities sufficient for obedience; thereupon he made a Covenant with him for life, upon the condition of obedience: I say, he made such a Covenant with Adam, as a publick person, as the head of the Covenant, and as he promised life to him and his posterity, in case of obedi∣ence; so he threatned death and a curse unto him and his posterity, in case of disobedience; In the day thou eatestGen. 2. 1. Gal. 3. 10. Not only the Co∣venant of Grace, but the Covenant of works also, is an et Co∣nant; and there¦fore, the curse of the Covenant re∣mains upon me unto Eternity. There is an eter∣nal obligation upon the creature he being bound to God, by an e∣ternal Law; and the transgression of that aw, car∣ries with it an e∣ternal guilt; which eternal guilt, brings sin∣ners under an e∣ternal curse. thereof, thou shalt surely die; or dying, thou shalt die. God, in this Covenant of works, did deal with Adam and his posterity, in a way of supremacy and righteousness; and therefore there is mention made only of the threatnings; In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die the death: And it is further observable, that in this Covenant that God made with Adam and his posterity, he did promise unto them eternal life and happiness in heaven (and not eternal life, in this world only, as some would have it) for Hell was threatned in these words; In the day thou eatest there∣of, thou shalt die the death; and therefore, heaven and happiness, salvation and glory, was promised on the con∣trary; we must necessarily conclude, that the promise was as ample, large and full, as the threatning was; yet this must be remembred, that when God did at first enter in∣to Covenant with us, and did promise us heaven and sal∣vation; it was upon condition of our personal, perfect and perpetual obedience, and therefore called a Covenant of works. Do this, and live, was not only a Command,
but a Covenant, with a promise of eternal happiness, up∣on perfect and perpetual obedience. All that are under a Covenant of works, are under the curse of the Cove∣venant, and they are all bound over unto eternal wrath: But the Lord Christ has put an end to this Covenant, and abolished it unto all that are in him, being himself made under it; and satisfying the precept, and the curse of it, and so he did cancel it; As a hand-writing against us, nail∣ingCol. 2. 14. it unto his cross: So that all they that are in Christ, are freed from the Law, as a Covenant; but unto all other men, it remains a Covenant still, and they remain under the curse of it for ever, and the wrath of God abides up∣onJohn 3. 36. them. Though the Covenant of works (as it is a Co∣venant for life) ceaseth unto believers, yet it stands in force against all unbelievers. Now, oh, how sad is it for a man to be under a Co∣venant of works. For, First, The Covenant of works, in the nature of it, re¦quires  perfect, personal and perpetual obedience, under pain of the curse and death; according to that of the A∣postle, As many as are of the works of the Law, are under theGal. 3. 10. curse (presupposing man's fall, and consequently, his in∣ablility to keep it) For it is written, cursed is every one thatDeut. 27. 26. continueth not in all things that are written in the book of the law, to do them: The Covenant of works, therefore, affords no mercy to the transgressors of it; but inflicts death and curse, for the least delinquency; For whosoeverJames 2. 10. shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all: The whole Law is but one copulative; He that breaketh one commandment, habitually breaketh all. A dispensatory conscience keeps not any commandment; when the disposition of the heart is qualified to break e∣very command, then a man breaks every command in the account of▪ God; every one sin, contains vertually, all sin in it: He that dares contemn the Law-giver in any one command, he dares contemn the Law-giver in every com∣mand: He that allows himself in any one known sin, in any course, way or trade of sin; he ss himsel under that
curse, which is threatned against the transgressors of the Law. They that are under this Covenant of works, must of necessity perish. The case stands thus, Adam did break this Covenant, and so brought the curse of it, both up∣on himself, and all his seed, to the end of the world; in his sin, all men sinned. Now, if we consider all men asRom. 5. 12. involved in the first transgression of the Covenant, they must all needs perish without a Saviour, this is the mise∣rable condition that all mortals are in, that are under a Covenant of works. But, Secondly, Such as are under a Covenant of works, their  best and choicest duties are rejected and abhorred, for the least miscarriages or blemishes, that do attend them, or cleave to them: Observe the dreadful language of that Covenant of works; Cursed is he that continueth not in allGal. 3. 10. things that are written in the law of God, to do them. Hence it is, that the best duties of all unregenerate persons, are loathed and abhorred by God; as you may clearly see, byIsa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Jer. 6. 20. Isa. 66. 3. Ams 5. 1. Mic. 6. 6. Mal. 1. 10. comparing the Scriptures in the margent together; the most glorious duties, and the most splendid performances of those that are under a Covenant of works, are loath∣some to God, for the least mistake that doth accompany them. The Covenant of works, deals with men accor∣ding to the exactest terms of strict justice, it doth not make nor allow any favourable or gracious interpre∣tation, as the Covenant of grace doth; the very least failour exposes the soul to wrath, to great wrath, to e∣verlasting wrath. This Covenant, is not a Covenant of mercy, but of pure justice. But, Thirdly, This Covenant admits of no Mediator: There  was no days-man betwixt God and man, none to standHence this Cove∣nant is called by some, Patum a∣mi , a Cove∣nant of friendship between them, neither was there any need of a Mediator; for God and man were at no distance, at no variance; man was then righteous, perfectly righteous; now, the proper work of a Mediator, is to make peace and recon∣ciliation between God and us: At the first, in the state of innocency, there was peace and friendship between God
and man, there was no enmity in God's heart towards man, nor no enmity in man's heart towards God: But up∣on the fall, a breach and separation was made between God and man; so that man flies from God, and hides fromGen. 3. 8, 9, 10. God, and trembles at the voice of God: Fallen man, is now turned Rebel, and is become a desperate enemy to God; yea, his heart is full of enmity against God: TheRom. 8. 7. wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against God; not an enemy, as the Vulgar Latine readeth it, but enmity in the abstract;The word signi∣fies the act of a carnal mind, comprehending thoughts, desire, discourse, &c. , on the words. noting an excess of enmity: As, when we see a proud man, we say, there goes pride; so here is enmity, nothing can be said more; for an enemy may be reconciled, but enmity can never; a vicious man may become vertuous, but vice cannot. There are natural Antipathies between some creatures; as between the Lyon and the Cock, the Elephant and the Boar, the Camel and the Horse, the Eagle and the Dragon, &c. But what are all these Anti∣pathies, to that antipathy and enmity, that is in the hearts of all carnal men against God. Now, whilst men stand under a Covenant of works, there is none to interpose by way of mediation, but fallen man lies open to the wrath of God, and to all the curses that are written in his book: When breaches are made between God and man, under the Covenant of grace; there is a Mediator, to interpose and to make up all such breaches; but under the Cove∣nant of works, there is no Mediator, to interpose between God and fallen man. These three things I have hinted a little at, on purpose to work my reader, if under a Co∣venant of works, to be restless, till he be got from under that Covenant, into the Covenant of grace; where alone lies man's safety, felicity, happiness and comfort. Now, this consideration leads me by the hand, to tell you, Secondly, That there is a Covenant of grace, that all believers, all sincere Christians, all real Saints, are under; for under these two Covenants, all mankind fall. The Apostle calls this Covenant of grace, The law of faith.Rom. . . Now, First, this Covenant of grace is sometimes stiled an everlasting Covenant, Isa. 55. 3. And I will make an ever∣lasting
Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David: You need not question my security, in respect of the great things, that I have propounded, and promised in my word, for the encouragement of your faith and hope; for I will give you my bond for all I have spoken, which2 Sam. 23. 5. shall be as surely made good to you, as the mercies that I have performed to my servant David. The word ever∣lasting, hath two acceptations; it doth denote, 1. Some∣times a long duration; in which respect, the old Cove∣nant, cloathed with figures and ceremonies, is called e∣verlasting, because it was to endure, and did endure aPsal. 105. 9, 10. Heb. 13. 2, &c. long time: 2. Sometimes it denotes a perpetual durati∣on; a duration, which shall last for ever. In this re∣spect, the Covenant of grace is everlasting; it shall never cease, never be broken, nor never be altered. Now, the Covenant of grace, is an everlasting Covenant, in a two∣fold respect. First, x parte faedeantis, in respect of God, who will  never break Covenant with his people; but is their God,it. 1. 2. Psal. 90. 2. and will be their God, for ever and ever; Psal. 48. 14. For this God is our God, for ever and ever; he will be our God, even unto death; I, and after death too: for this is not to be taken exclusively; oh no! for he will never, ne∣verFive times in scri∣pture, i this pre∣ious o  re∣newed, Joh. 1. 5. Deut. 31. 8. 1 King . 57. Gen. 28. 15. That we may be  a preing of it, til we hae  all the  out of . Isa. 66. 11. leave them, nor forsake them; Heb. 13. 5. There are five Negatives in the Greek, to assure God's people, that he will never forsake them: According to the Greek, it may be rendred thus, I will not, not leave thee, neither will I not, not forsake thee: Leave us! God may, to our think∣ing, leave us; but forsake us, he will not. So, Psal. 89. 34. My Covenant will I not break; Heb. I will not prophane my Covenant; nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth, Heb. The issue of my lips I will not alter: Though God's people should prophane his Statutes, vers. 31. yet God will not prophane his Covenant; though his peo∣ple often break with him, yet he will never break with them; though they may be inconstant, yet God will be constant to his Covenant: Isa. 54. 0. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee; neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee: Though huge mountains should remove (which is not probable) or though heaven and earth should meet (which is not likely) yet his Covenant shall stand immoveable; and his mercy and kindness to his people, shall be immutable. This new Covenant of grace, is like the new heavens and new earth, which will never wax old, or vanish away; Isa. 66. 22. But, Secondly, The Covenant of grace is called an everlast∣ing  Covenant: x parte confaederatorum; in respect of the people of God, who are brought into Covenant, and shall continue in Covenant for ever and ever: You have both these expressed in that excellent Scripture; Jer. 32. 40.M. 3. 6. H 2 19. Gen. 17. 7. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them (Heb. I will cut out with them a Covenant of perpetuity) that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but (Heb. and) I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: Seriously dwell upon the place; it shews thatGod will never rcease to pur∣ and follow his Covenant-people with  and blessings ices∣s . the Covenant is everlasting on God's part, and also on our part: On God's part, I will never turn away from them, to do them good; and on our part, They shall never depart from me: How so? I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. That they may continue constant with me; and not constrain me, by their Apostasie, to break again with them; I will so deep∣ly rivt a reverend dread of my self in their souls, as shall cause them to cling, and cleave, and keep close to me forever. In the Covenant of grace, God undertakes for both parts: For his own, that he will be their God; i. e. that all he is, and all he has, shall be employed for their external, internal and eternal good: And for ours, thatJer. 32. 38. we shall be his people; i. e. That we shall believe, love,Ek. 36. 26, 27. fear, repent, obey, serve him and walk with him, as he requires; and thus the Covenant of grace▪ becomes an everlasting Covenant; yea, such a  as hath the sure, o  and . The Covenant of grace,  ment,
which God hath made with sinful man, out of his mere mercy and grace; wherein he undertakes, both for him∣self, and for fallen man; and wherein he engages himself to make fallen man everlastingly happy. In the Cove∣nant of Grace, there are two things considerable: First, the Covenant that God makes for himself, to us; which consists mainly of these branches; 1. That he will be our ult.  9. 1, 17, 18. God; that is, as if he said, you shall have as true an in∣terest in all my attributes, for your good, as they are mine for my own glory: My grace (saith God) shall be yours, to pardon you, and my power shall be yours, to protect you, and my wisdom shall be yours, to direct you, and my goodness shall be yours, to releive you, and my mer∣cy shall be yours, to supply you, and my glory shall be yours, to crown you. This is a comprehensive promise, for God to be our God▪ it includes all, Deus meus & o∣mnia, said Luther. 2. That he will give us his spirit;. 44. . . 31. 33.  2. 28.  14. 16, 20. . . 23.  2. 4.  15. 6. cap. 16. 7. hence the spirit is called, the holy spirit of promise: The giving of the Holy Ghost, is the great promise, which Christ, from the father, hath made unto us: It is the spi∣rit that reveils the promises, that applis the promises, and that helps the soul to live upon the promises, and to draw marrow and fatness out of the promises. The great pro∣mise of the Old Testament, was the promise of Christ; Gen. 3. 16. and the great promise of the New Testament, is the promise of the spirit; as you may see by the Scri∣ptures in the margent: That in this last Age of the world, there may be a more clear and full discovery of Christ, of the great things of the Gospel, of Antichrist, and of the glorious conquests, that are in the last days, to be made upon him; the giving of the spirit, is promised as the most excellent gift. 3. That he will take away the heart. 36. 26. Jr. 2. 40. . 36. 25. Jer. 33. 9, 10. Jer. 32. 41. of stone, and give a heart of flesh; i. e. a soft and tender heart. 4. That he will not un away his ae from us,  doing of us good; and that he will put his fear into our hearts. 5. That he will clese us from all our ilthiness, and fom all our Idols. 6. That he will rjyce ouer us, to do us good. The second thing considerable in the Covenant of Grace,
is the Covenant which God doth make for us, to himself; which consists mainly in these things: 1. That we shallJer. 32. 38, 40. Ezek. 36. 27. Job 17. 9. Prov. 4. 18. Psal. 1. 3. sa 14. 5, 6, 7. Zah. 12. 18. Mal. 4. . Jer. 24. 5. Rm. 8. 28. Luk. 12. 3. Rev. 2. 10. Psal. 84. 11. John 10. 28. See the truth of this fully evi∣denced in 12 par∣ticular, in my box of precious vntnnt. . 364, 365, 366, 367 be his people: 2. That we shall fear him for ever: 3. That we shall walk in his Statutes, keep his Judgments, and do them: 4. That we shall never depart from him: 5. That w shall persevere, and hold out to the end: 6. That we shall grow, and lourish i gre: 7. A true right to the crea∣tures: 8. That all providences, changes and conditions shall work for our good: 9. Ʋnion and communion with Christ: 10. That  sall  Kingdom, a Crown, and glory at last; and wh would w have more: By these short hints 'tis most evident, that the Covenant of Grace, is an en∣tire Covenant, an everlasting Covenant, made by God, both for himself, and for us. Oh sirs! this is the glory  the Covenant of Grace; That whatsoever God rquis of us, that he stands engaged to give unto us; whatever in the Covenant of Grace, God requires on 's put, that he undertakes to perform for man. That this Co∣venant of Grace is an everling Covenant, may be mad further clear from God's denomination, who hath  stiled it an everlasting Covenant. In the Old Testament▪ he frequently calls it, in Heb. , Berith olam, A Covenant of ternity: In the New Testament, he calls it in Greek, , Diatheke Aionis, The eternal Covenant, or the everlasting Covenant. And those whom God has taken into Covenant with himself, they have frequently acknowledged it to be an everlasting Co∣venant, as is evident up and down the Scripture. The Covenant of works was not everlasting, it was soon o∣verthrown by Adam's sin; but the Covenant of grace isIs. 5. 10. D. 9. 24. everlasting: The joy that is wrapped up in the Covenant, is an everlasting joy; and the righteousness that is wrap∣ped up in the Covenant, is an everlasting righteousness; and the life that is rpped up in the Covenant, is an e∣verlastingcap.  life; John, 3. 16. and all the  glory, and salvation that is wrapped up in the  verlsting; the Covenant relation that is  God and his people, is everlasting; and the
Covenant, is everlasting, viz. Jesus Christ yesterday, andHeb. 13. 8. to day, and the same for ever. Though the Covenant, in respect of our own personal entring into it, is made with us now in time, and hath a beginning; yet, for continu∣ance, it is everlasting, and without end; it shall remain for ever and ever. But, Secondly, This Covenant of Grace, under which the  Saints stand, is sometimes stiled a Covenant of life; Mal. 2. 5. My Covenant was with him, of life, and peace; life is restored, and life is promised, and life is setled by the Co∣venant: There is no safe life, no comfortable life, no ea∣sieOmnis vita st pr∣pd eationm Philosophers say that a fly is more excellent than the heaens, because the fly has life, which the hea∣vens have not. life, no happy life, no honourable life, no glorious life, for any sinner, that is not under the bond of this Cove∣nant. All mankind had been eternally lost, and God had lost all the glory of his mercy for ever, had he not, of his own free grace and mercy, made a Covenant of life with poor sinners. A man, in the Covenant of Grace, hath three degrees of life: The first, in this life, when Christ lives in him: The second, when his body returns to the earth, and his soul to God that gave it: The third, at the end of the world, when body and soul reunited, shall en∣joy heaven. Thirdly, This Covenant of Grace, under which, the  Saints, or faithful people of Christ stand, is sometimes  a holy Covenant: Daniel, describing the wickedness of Antiochus Epiphanes, saith, His heart shall be against theDa. 11. 2, 30. holy Covenant; He shall have indignation against the holy Covenant▪ And have intelligence with them that forsake the holy Covenant: So the Psalmist, For he remembred hissal. 5. 42, 43. Heb.  of his liness, that is,  sacred and  Co∣venant, that e had ade with Abraham and is posterity. holy promise, and Abraham his servant; Proise her be∣ing put for Covenant, by a Synechdoche, Luk. 1. 72. To perfrm the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant. The parties interested in this Covenant, are holy; here you have a holy God, and a holy people, in Covenant together: Holiness is one of the principal things that is promised in the Covenant; the Covenant commands holiness, and encourages  holiness, and works souls up to a higher degree of holiness, and sences and
arms gracious souls, against all external and internal un∣holiness:See my Tretise of holiness. Psal. 0. 5. Heb. 3. 1. 1 Thes. 5. 27. 2 Pt. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 3. 5. 1 Cr. 3. 17.  Pet. 2. 9, &c. The Author of this Covenant is holy, the Me∣diator of this Covenant, is holy; the great blessings con∣tained in this Covenant, are holy blessings; and the peo¦ple taken into this Covenant, are sometimes stiled, holy brethren, holy men, holy women; An holy Temple, an holy Priestood, an holy Nation, an holy People; as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures in the margent together: When ever God brings a poor soul under the bond of the Covenant, he makes him holy, and he makes him love holiness, and prize holiness, and delight in holiness, andJb 8. Psal. 20. press and follow hard after holiness. A holy God will not take an unholy person by the hand, as Joh speaks; neither will he allow of such, to take his Covenant into their mouths, as the Psalmist speaks. Fourthly, This Covenant of Grace, under which the  Saints stand, is sometimes stiled a Covenant of peace; Numb. 25. 12. Behold, I give unto him, my covenant of peace: Peace is the comprehension of all blessings and pro∣sperity.Mat. 2. 5. All sorts of peace, viz. peace with God, and peace with conscience, and peace with the creatures flows from the Covenant of Grace. There is 1. An external peace, and that is with men: 2. There is a supernatural peace, and that is with God: 3. There is an internal peace, and that is with conscience: 4. There is an eternal peace, and that is in heaven: Now, all these sorts of peace flow in upon us, through the Covenant of Grace. The He∣brew word for peace, comes from a root, which denotes perfection; the end of the upright man, is perfection of happiness: Hence the Rabbins say, that the holy blessed God finds not any vessel that will contain enough of blessin f Israel, but the vessel of peace: Peace is a very compre∣hensive word; it carries in the womb of it, all outward blessings; it was the common greeting of the Jews,  be unto you: And thus David, by his proxy, salutes Nabl▪ Peace be to thee▪ and thy house. The Ancients were wo to paint Peace in the form of a woman, with a hon of plenty in her hand; The Covenant of Grace is that hand,
by which God gives out all sorts of peace unto us; Isa. 54. 10. Neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee: The Covenant is here called the Covenant of peace, because the Lord there∣in offers us all those things, that may make us compleatly happy; for under this word peace, the Hebrew compre∣hend all happiness and felicity, Ezek. 34. 25. And I will make with them a covenant of peace; the Hebrew is, I will cut with them a covenant of peace: This expreion of cut∣ting a Covenant, is taken from the custom of the Jews, in their making of Covenants: The manner of this cere∣mony or solemnity, Jeremy declares, saying, I will giveJe. 34. 18. the men that have transressed my Covenant, which have not performed the words of the Covenant, which they had struck be∣fore me, when they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof: Their manner was to kill Sacrifices, to cutThis Ceremony, or Solemnity of coenanting. The Romans, and o∣ther Nations us∣ed, some Juge: Te Heatns borrowed this custom  the Jews. But of this before. these Sacrifices in twain, to lay the two parts thus divided in the midst, piece against piece, exactly one over against another, to answer each other: Then the parties Cove∣nanting, passed betwixt the parts of the Sacrifices so slit in twain, and laid answerably to one another: The mean∣ing of which ceremonies and solemnities, is conceived to be this, viz. as part answered to part, so there was an harmonious correspondency, and answerableness of their minds and hearts, that struck Covenant: And as part was severed from part, so the Covenanters implyed (if not expressed) an imprecation or curse; wishing the like dissection and destruction to the parties covenanting, as most deserved, if they should break the Covenant, or deal falsely therein. To this custom God alludes, when he saith, I will cut with them a covenant of peace: And this he did, by making Christ a sacrifice, by shedding his blood, and dividing his soul and body; who is said to be givenIs. 42 6. for a Covenant of the people; that is, to be the medtor of the Covenant between God and his people. So Ezek. 37. 26. Moreover, I will make a Covenant of peace with them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant with them, &c. The word for peace, is Shalom; by which, the Heb ∣derstand
not only outward quietness, but all kind of out∣ward happiness: Others, by the Covenant of peace here, do understand the Gospel, wherein we see Christ, hath pacified all things, by the blood of his cross. And LavaterCol. 1. 20. saith, it's called a Covenant of peace; Quia Christi merito, pax inter Deum & nos constituta est: Not only outward, but inward peace, between God and us, is merited by our Lord Jesus Christ. But, Fifthly, This Covenant of Grace, under which the  Saints stand, is sometimes stiled a New Covenant, Jer.Heb. 8. 8, 13. Heb. 9. 15. 31. 31. Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus, the Mediatour of the new covenant, &c. Now the Covenant of grace is stiled a New Covenant, in several respects: First, in op∣position to the former Covenant, that was old, and being old, vanished away; Heb. 8. 13. It is called a New Co∣venant, in opposition to the Covenant that was made with Adam, in the state of innocency; and in opposition to the Covenant that was made with the Jews, in the time of the Old Testament: 2. To shew the excellency of the Covenant of Grace, new things are rare and excel∣lent things; In the blessed Scriptures, excellent things are frequently called new: As a New Testament, a New Jerusalem, New Heavens, and New Earth, A new name, that is, an excellent name; A new Commandment, that is, an excellent commandment; a new way, that is, an excellent way; a new heart, i an excellent heart; a new spirit, is an excellent spirit; and a new sng, is an excel∣lent song. 3. In rerd of the succession of it, in he room of the former. 4.  of the ation and en∣largement of it, i being in the days of old, confied to the Jewish Nation and Ste▪ and some ew Proslytes that adjoyned themselves thereunto; whereas, now it i pro∣pounded and extended, without respect of persons or places, unto all indifferently, of all people and nations that shall embrace the saith  Christ. 5. Sometimes that is stiled new, which is  from what it was before;
2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature,A new creature has a new light, a new judgment, a new will, new ations, new tght, new pany, new choice▪ new Ld, ew law, new way, new work,  A new crea∣ture is a chaed  t. 1  5. 23. that is, he is not such a man, as he was before; a man must be either a new man, or no man in Christ. The substance of the soul is not changed, but the qualities and operations of it are altered; in regeneration, our natures are changed, not destroyed: This word New, in Scripture, signifieth as much as another; not that it is essentially new, but new only in regard of qualities; a new crea∣ture is a changed creature, 2 Cor. 3. 17. But we all with open face, behlding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord; are changed into the sme image, from glory to glory (that is, from grace to grace.) In this respect also, is the Co∣venant stiled new, not only because it is divers from the Covenant of works, but also because it is divers from it self, in respect of the administration of it; after that Christ was manifested in the flesh, and died, and rose again; from the different administration, it is called old and new: This New Covenant hath not those seals of Circumcision and the Passover; nor those manifold sacrifices, ceremonies, types and shadows, &c. to the observation whereof, the Jews were strictly obliged; but now, all these things are taken away, upon the coming of Christ; and a service of God, much more spiritual, substituted in the room of them: Upon which accounts, the Covenant of Grace is called a New Covenant, 6. It is stiled new, because it is fresh, and green, and flourishing, it is like unto Aaron's Rod, which continued new, fresh and flourishing: All the choice blessings, all the great blessings, all the internal and all the eternal blessings of the New Covenant, are as new, fresh and flourishing, as they were, when God brought your souls first under the bond of the New Co∣venant. But Seventhly, Such things are sometimes iled new, which are strange, rare, wonderful, marvellus, and unusual, the like not heard of before: So Jer. 31. 22. The Lord hath created a new thing in the arth, a woman shall compass a man: As the nt encloseth the , not receiving ought from without, but conceiving and breed∣ing of her slf, by the power of the Almighty, from with∣in.
That a virgin should conceive and bring forth a man∣child, this was indeed a new thing, a strange thing, a wonderful thing, a thing that was never thought of, ne∣ver heard of, never read of, from the creation of the world, to that very day: So Isa. 43. 19. Behold, I will doThe word new, doth intimate some more excel∣lent mercies, than God had former∣ly conferred up∣on his people. a new thing, I will make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert. This was a new work (that is) a wonder∣ful and unusual work, for God to make a plain or free way in the wilderness, where the ways are wont to be uneven, with hills and dales, and obstructed with thickets, and overgrown with brambles and briars, is a strange and marvelous work indeed: In this respect also, the Co∣venant of grace is stiled new (that is) it is a wonderful Co∣venant. O sirs! what a wonder is this, that the great God, who was so transcendently dishonoured, despised, provok∣ed, incensed and injured by poor base sinners, should yet so freely, so readily, so graciously condescend to vile forlorn sinners, as to treat with them, as to own them, as to love them, and as to enter into a Covenant of grace and mercy with them! this may well be the wonder of An∣gels, and the astonishment of men. Eighthly and lastly, it is called a New Covenant, because it is never to be an∣tiquated, as the Apostle explains himself; Heb. 8. 13. But, Sixthly, This Covenant of Grace, under which the  Saints stand, is sometimes stiled a Covenant of Salt, Lev.Salt, they were bound (as by a Covenant) to use in all sacrifices, or it meaneth a sure and pure Cove∣nant. Some, by the salt of the Co∣venant, do mysti∣cally understand, the Grace of the New Testament. 2. 13. Neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the Covenant of thy God, to be lacking from the meat-offering, &c. The salt of the Covenant signifies, that Covenant that God hath made with us in Christ, who seasoneth us, and makes all our services savoury. The meaning of the words, say some, is this, The Salt shall put thee in mind of my Co∣venant, whereby thou standest engaged, to endeavour al∣ways, for an untainted and uncorrupted life and conver∣sation: By this salting (say others) was signified the Co∣venant of grace in Christ, which we, by faith, apprehend unto incorruption; wherefore, our unregenerate estate is likened to a child new born, and not salted; Ezek▪ 16. 4.
Others say, it signifies the eternal and perpetual holiness of the Covenant, between God and man: And some there be, that say, that this salt of the Covenant signifies the grace of God, whereby they are guided and sanctifi∣ed, that belong unto the Covenant of grace. So Numb. 18. 19. It is a covenant of salt for ever, before the Lord, unto thee, and to thy seed with thee: a Covenant of Salt is used for an inviolable, incorruptible and perpetual Cove∣nant.Of old, amity and friendship was symbolized by salt, for its conso∣lidating and con∣serving property, saith Pierias. This Covenant which the Lord made with the Priests, is called a Covenant of Salt; because, as Salt keepeth from Corruption, so that Covenant was perpetu∣al, authentical and inviolable; as anciently the most so∣lemn ceremony that was used in Covenants, was to take and eat of the same salt; and it was esteemed more sa∣cred and firm, than to eat at the same table, and drink of the same cup. This Covenant, in regard of its perpe∣tuity, is here called a Covenant of Salt, that is, a sure and stable, a firm and incorruptible Covenant: So 2 Chron. 13. 5. Ought you not to know, that the Lord God of Israel, gave the kingdom over Israel, to David for ever; even to him,Zanchy's Exposi∣tion of the place, is strange, and far fetched. and to his sons, by a covenant of salt; i. e. perpetual and inviolable, solemn and sure; by this Metaphor of salt, a perpetuity is set forth, for salt makes things last. The Covenant therefore, here intended, is by this Metaphor, declared to be a perpetual Covenant, that was not to be abrogated or nulled: In this respect, these two phrases, a Covenant of Salt, and for ever, are joyned together. Some take this Metaphor of Salt, to be used in relation to their manner of making their Covenant, with a sacrifice; onNumb. 18. 19. but now opened, Lev. 2. 13. which Salt was always sprinkled; and thereby is imply∣ed, that it was a most solemn Covenant, not to be violat∣ed. But, Seventhly, The Covenant of Grace, under which the  Saints stand, is sometimes stiled a sure Covenant, a firm Covenant, a Covenant that God will punctually and ac∣curately perform. In this regard, the Covenant of grace is in the Old Testament, stiled , Shemurah, that is, kept, observed, performed; the word imports care, dili∣gence,
and solicitude, lest any thing be let go, let slip, &c.2 Sam. 23. 5. Deut. 7. 9. 2 Chrn. 6. 14. Psal. 19. 7. Psal. 89. 28. Titus 1. 2. Psal. 13. 11. Isa. 54. 10. See my Box of pre∣cious Ointment, pag. 367, 368, 371 372, 373. God is ever mindful of his Covenant, and will have that singular care, and that constant and due regard to it, that not the least branch of it shall ever fail, as you may clear∣ly see, by consulting the special Scriptures in the margin. Hence it is called the mercy and the truth; Mic. 7. 20. Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob (Heb. thou wilt give, for all is of free gift) and the mercy to Abraham. The Co∣venant is called mercy, because mercy only drew this Co∣venant; it was free mercy, it was mere mercy, it was on∣ly mercy, which moved God to enter into Covenant with us. And it is called truth, because the great God, who has made this Covenant, will assuredly make good all that mercy, and all that grace, and all that favour, that is wrapped up in it: God having made himself a voluntary debtor to his people, he will come off fairly with them, and not be worse than his word. Hence Christ is said toRev. 10. 1. Isa. 54. 9, 10. Jr. 33. 20, 25. The stability of God's Covenant is compared to the unvariable course of the day and the night, and to the firmness & unmoveableness, of the mighty mountains; Isa. 54 9, 10. have a Rain-bow upon his head, to shew that he is faith∣ful and constant in his Covenant: God hath hitherto kept promise with nights and days, that one shall succeed the other; therefore, much more will he keep promise with his people. Hence also, the Covenant is called the Oath, Luk. 1. 73. The oath which he sware unto our father Abra∣ham: You never read of God's Oath, in a Covenant of works: In that first Covenant, you read not of Media∣tor, nor of an Oath; but in the Covenant of Grace, you read both of a Mediator, and of an Oath, the more effe∣ctually to confirm us, as touching the immutability of his will and purpose, for the accomplishment of all the good and the great things that are mentioned in the Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of Grace is incomparably more firm, sure, immutable and irrevocable, than all other Co∣venants in the world: Therefore it is said, God willingHeb. 6. 17, 18. Who shall doubt when God doth swear? who can∣not possibly deny himself, or for∣swear himself. more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise, the im∣mutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lye, we might have strong consolation: , that is, a valiant, strong, prevailing consolation; such
as swalloweth up all worldly griefs, as Moses his serpent did the sorcerers serpents, or as the fire doth the fuel; God's word, his promise, his Covenant, is sufficient to assure us of all the good that he has engaged to bestow upon us; yet God considering of our infirmity, hath bound his word with an oath. His word cannot be made more true, but yet it may be made more credible: Now two things make a thing more credible; 1. The quality of the person-speaking: 2. The manner of the speech; If God doth not simply speak, but solemnly swear, we have the highest cause imaginable, to rest assured, and a∣bundantly satisfied in the word and oath of God: An oath amongst men, is the strongest, surest, most sacred and inviolable bond; For men verily swear by the greater,Heb. 6. 16. and an oath for confirmation, is to them an end of all strife: The end of an Oath among men, is to help the truth in necessity, and to clear men's innocency: O sirs, God dothExod. 22. 11. not only make his Covenant, but swears his Covenant; My covenant (saith the Psalmist) will I not break, nor alterPsal. 89. 34, 35. the thing that is gone out of my lips; once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. This is as great and deep an Oath, as God could take; for his holiness is himself, who is most holy and the foundation of all holi∣ness;See my Treatise of Holiness, pag. 585. to pag. 595. God is essentially holy, unmixedly holy, univer∣sally holy, transcendently holy, originally holy, inde∣pendently holy, constantly holy, and exemplarily holy: Now, for so holy a God, to swear once for all by his ho∣liness, that he will keep covenant, that he will keep touch with his people; how abundantly should it settle and sa∣tisfie them! Ah my friends, hath God said it, and will he not do it? Yea, hath he sworn it, and will he not bring it to pass? Dare we trust an honest man, upon his bare word, much more upon his Oath; and shall we not much more trust a holy, wise and faithful God, upon his word, upon his Covenant, when confirmed by an oath. The Covenant of Grace is sure in it self, it is a firm Co∣venant, an unalterable Covenant, an everlasting Cove∣nant, a ratified Covenant; so that heaven and earth may
sooner pass away, than the least branch or word of hisMat. 5. 18. Covenant should pass away unfulfilled. Let us but cast our eyes upon the several springs, from whence the Cove∣nant of Grace flows; and then we cannot but strongly conclude, that the Covenant of Grace is a sure Cove∣nant. Now, if you cast your eye aright, you shall see, that the Covenant of Grace flows from these three springs. First, From the free grace and favour of God: There  was nothing in fallen man, to invite God to enter into Covenant with him; yea, there was every thing in fal∣len man, that might justly provoke God to abandon man, to abhor man, to revenge himself upon man. It was mere grace that made the Covenant, and it is mere grace that makes good the Covenant: Now that which springs from mere grace, must needs be inexceptionably sure: The Love of God is unchangeable; whom he loves, heJo. 13. 3. Mal. 3. 6. James 1. 17. loves to the end; whom God loves once, he loves for e∣ver; he is not as man, soon on and soon off again, soon in, and as soon out, as Joab's dagger was! Oh no! his love is like himself, lasting, yea everlasting; I have loved thee with an everlasting love▪ Jer. 31. 3. Though we2 Tim. 2. 13. break off with him, yet he abides faithful. Now, what can be more sure, than that which springs from free love,Rom. 4. 16. from everlasting love? Hence the Covenant must be sure. The former Covenant was not sure, because it was of Works; but this Covenant is sure, because it is of Grace, and rests not on any sufficiency in us, but only on Grace. Secondly, The Covenant of Grace springs from the  immutable counsel of God; Heb. 6. 17. God willing, more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise, the immutabi∣lity of his counsel (confirmed it by an oath:) Times are mu∣table, and all sorts of men are mutable, and the love andIsa. 40. 6. Psal. 146. 3, 4. Jer. 33. 14. favour of the creature is mutable; but the counsel of God, from which the Covenant of Grace flows, is immutable, and therefore it must needs be sure. The manifestation of the immutability of God's counsel, is here brought in, as one end of God's Oath; God swears, that it might
evidently appear, that what he had purposed, counselled, determined and promised to Abraham and his seed, should assuredly be accomplished, there should be, there could be no alteration thereof: His counsel was more firm, thanDan. 6. 13. the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not; certainly God's counsel is inviolable; My counsel shall stand, Isa. 46. 10. Psal. 33. 11. The counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations; Prov. 19. 21. Nevertheless, the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. The immutability of God's counsel, springs from the unchangeableness of his essence, the perfection of his wisdom, the infiniteness of his goodness, the abso∣luteness of his sovereignty, the omnipotency of his power; God in his essence, being unchangeable, his counsel also must needs be so; can darkness flow out of light, or ful∣ness out of emptiness, or heaven out of hell? No; no more can changeable counsels flow from an immutable nature. Now, the Covenant of Grace, flows from the immutable counsel of God, which is most firm and in∣violable, and therefore it must needs be a sure Covenant. But. Thirdly, The Covenant of Grace springs from the  purpose of God, resolving and intending everlasting good unto us: Now this purpose of God is sure, so the Apo∣stle, 2 Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of God standeth sure:Our graces are imperfect, our comforts ebb and flow; but God's foundation stands sure. That foundation of God, is his election, which is com∣pared to a foundation; because it is that, upon which, all our good and happiness is built, and because, as a foun∣dation, it abides firm and sure. The gracious purpose of God, is the fountain-head of all our spiritual blessings: It is the impulsive cause of our vocation, justification, glo∣rification, it is the highest link in the Golden chain of sal∣vation; what is the reason that God has entred into a Covenant with fallen man? it is from his eternal purpose: What is the reason, that one man is brought under the bond of the Covenant, and not another? it is from theEek. 20. 37. eternal purpose of God. In all the great concerns of the Covenant of Grace, the purpose of God gives the casting
voice: The purpose of God, is the sovereign cause of all that good that is in man, and of all that external, internal and eternal good that comes to man: Not works past, for men are chosen from everlasting; not works present, for Jacob was loved and chosen before he was born; nor works fore seen, for men were all corrupt in Adam. All a believer's present happiness, and all his future happiness springs from the eternal purpose of God; as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures in the margin together. ThisRom. 8. 28. cap. 9. 11. Eph. 1. 11. cap. 3. 11. 2 Tim. 1. 9. purpose of God speaks our stability, and certainty of sal∣vation by Christ; God's eternal purpose never changes, never alters; Surely, as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed (saith God) so shall it stand: God's purposes are immutable, so is his Covenant; God's purposes are sure, very sure, so is his Covenant: The Covenant of Grace that flows from the eternal purpose of God, is as sure as God is sure; for God can neither deceive, nor be deceived. That Covenant that is built upon this rock of God's eternal purpose, must needs be sure; and therefore, all that are in covenant with God, need never fear falling away; there is no man, no power, no devil, no violent temptation, that shall ever be able to overturn those that God has brought under the bond of the Covenant; Joh. 10. 28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Pet. 1. 5. But, Secondly, Consider that the Covenant of Grace, is  confirmed and made sure by the blood of Jesus Christ,Heb. 13. 20. Heb. 9. 16, 17. The main point which the Apo∣stle intended, by setting down the inviolableness of men's last Wills, after their death, is to prove, that Christs death was very requisite for ratifying of the New Testament: consult these scri∣ptures, Mat. 16. 21. Luk. 24. 26. Heb. 2. 10. cap. 2. 17. which is called the blood of the everlasting Covenant; Christ, by his irrevocable death, hath made sure the Covenant to us. The Covenant of Grace, is to be considered under the notion of a Testament; and Christ, as the Testator of this will and testament. Now, look as a man's will and testament is irrevocably confirmed by the Testator's death. For where a Testament is, there must also, of necessity, be the death of the Testator; For a Testament is of force, after men are dead; otherwise, it is of no strength at all, whilest the Testator liveth: These two verses are added as a proof of the necessity of Christ's manner of confirming the new
Testament, as he did, namely by his death: The Argu∣ment is taken from the common use and equity of con∣firming Testaments, which is by the death of the Testator. A Testament is only and wholly at his pleasure that maketh it, so that he may alter it, or disanul it while he liveth, as he seeth good; but when he is dead, he not remaining to alter it, none else can do it. In the seventeenth verse, the Apostle declareth the inviolableness of a man's last will, being ratified as before, by the testator's death: This he sheweth two ways: 1. Affirmatively in these words; A Testament is of force after men are dead: 2. Negatively, in these words, otherwise it is of no strength. Now from the affirmative and the negative it plainly appears, that a Te∣stament is made inviolable by the Testator's death, so Je∣sus Christ hath unalterably confirmed this Will and Te∣stament; viz. The New Covenant, by his blood andHeb. 9. 15. death; That by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions, that were under the first testament; they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Christ died, to purchase an eternal inheritance; and on this ground, eternal life is called an eternal inheritance; for we come to it as heirs, through the good will, grace and favour of the purchaser thereof, manifested by the last Will and Testament: Hence you read, This is my bloodMa. 26. 28. of the new testament, which is shed for many, for the re∣mission of sins: Again, This cup is the new testament in myuk. 22. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25. blood, which is shed for you. The Covenant is called both a Covenant and a Testament, because his Covenant and Testament is founded, established, ratified, and immuta∣bly sealed up, in and by his blood: Christ is the faithful and true witness, yea, truth it self, his word shall notRev. 3. 14. Joh. 14. 6. Mark 13. 31. pass away. If the word of Christ be sure, if his promise be sure, if his Covenant be sure, then surely his last Will and Testament, which is ratified and confirmed by his death, must needs be very sure; Christ's blood is too pre∣cious a thing to be spilt in vain; but in vain is it spilt, if his Testament, his Covenant, ratified thereby, be altered. If the Covenant of Grace be not a sure Covenant, then1 Cor. 1. 14.
Christ died in vain, and our preaching is in vain, and your hearing, and receiving, and believing is all in vain: Christ's death is a declaration and evidence of the eternal counsel of his father, which is most stable and immutable in it self; but how much more is it so, when it is ratified by the death of his dearest son, In whom all the promises are, yea,2 Cor. 1. 20. and Amen; that is, in Christ they are made, performed and ratified: By all this, we may safely conclude, that the Covenant of Grace is a most sure Covenant, there can be no addition to it, detraction from it, or alteration of it; unless the death of Jesus Christ, whereby it's confirm∣ed, be frustrated and overthrown: Certainly, the Cove∣nant is as sure as Christ's death is sure. The sureness and certainty of the Covenant, is the ground and bottom of bottoms, for our faith, hope, joy, patience, peace, &c. take this corner, this foundation stone away, and all will tumble; were the Covenant uncertain, a Christian could never have a good day all his days, his whole life would be filled up with fears, doubts, disputes, distractions, &c. and he would be still a crying out, Oh! I can never be sure that God will be mine, or that Christ will be mine, or that mercy will be mine, or that pardon of sin will be mine, or that heaven will be mine; Oh! I can never be sure that I shall escape the great damnation, the worm2 Thes. 1. 9. that never dies, the fire that never goes out, or an eternal separation from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. The great glory of the Covenant, is the certainty of the Covenant; and this is the top of God's glory, and of a Christian's comfort, that all the mercies that are in the Covenant of Grace are, the sure mercies of David; and that all the Grace that is in the Covenant, is sure Grace; and that all the glory that is in the Cove∣nant, is sure glory; and that all the external, internal and eternal blessings of the Covenant are sure blessings. I might further argue the sureness of the Covenant of Grace, from all the attributes of God, which are deeply engaged to make it good, as his wisdom, love, power, justice, holiness, faithfulness, righteousness, &c. And I
might further argue the certainty of the Covenant of Grace, from the seals which God hath annexed to it: You know, what was sealed by the Kings Ring, could not be altered; God hath set his seals to this Covenant, hisEst. 8. 8. broad seal in the Sacraments, and his privy seal in the wit∣ness of his spirit; and therefore the Covenant of Grace is sure▪ and can never be reversed: But upon several accounts. I may not now insist on these things. And therefore. Eighthly and lastly, the Covenant of Grace is stiled a  well ordered Covenant, 2 Sam. 23. 5. He hath made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: Oh, the admirable counsel, wisdom, love, care and ten∣dernessRom. 11. 33, 34, 35, 3. 1 C. 2. 7. Eph. 1. 8. cp. 3. 10. Psal. 1 7. 5. Isa. 4. 28. Rev. 7. 12. of the blessed God, that sparkles and shines in the well ordering of the Covenant of Grace! Oh, how comely and beautiful, with what symmetry and propor∣tion, are all things in this Covenant, ordered and pre∣pared! Oh, what head can conceive, or what tongue can express, that infinite understanding that God has mani∣fested, in ordering the Covenant of Grace so, as it may most and best suit to all the wants, and straits, and neces∣sities, and miseries▪ and desires, and longings of poor sinner's souls: Here are it and full supplies for all our spi∣ritual wants; so excellently and orderly hath God com∣posed and constituted the Covenant of Grace. In the Covenant of Grace, every poor sinner may find a suitable help, a suitable remedy, a suitable succour, a suitable support, a suitable supply. The Covenant of Grace is so well ordered by the unsearchable wisdom of God, that you may find in it remedies, to cure all your spiritual dis∣eases;Jer. 33. 8. E. 36. 25. sal. 94. 19. and cordials, to comfort you under all your soul∣faintings; and a spiritual Armory, to arm you against all sorts of sins, and all sorts of snares, and all sorts of tem∣ptations, and all sorts of oppositions, and all sorts of ene∣mies,Eph. 6. 10. to the 18. whether inward or outward, open or secret, subtle or silly: Dost thou, oh distressed sinner, want a loving God, a compassionate God, a reconciled God, a sin-par doning God, a tender hearted God; here thou maist findExod. 34. 5, 6, 7. him in the Covenant of Grace. Dost thou, oh sinner!
want a Christ, to counsel thee by his wisdom, and toRev. 3. 17, 18. cloath thee with his righteousness, and to enrich thee with his grace, and to enlighten thee with his eye-salve, and to justifie thee from thy sins, and to reconcile theeA. 13. 39. 1 Thes. 1. ult. John 10. 28, 29, 30, 31. to God, and to secure thee from wrath to come; and af∣ter all, to bring thee to heaven? here thou maist find him in a Covenant of Grace: Dost thou, oh sinner! want the holy spirit, to awaken thee, and to convince thee of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment▪ or to enlighten thee, and teach thee, and lead thee, and guideEzk. 36. 25, 26, 27. Luk. 11. 13. Eph. 1. 13. thee in the way everlasting; or to cleanse thee, or com∣fort thee, or to seal thee up to the day of Redemption? here thou maist find him in the Covenant of Grace. Dost thou, oh sinner! want grace, all grace, great grace, a∣bundance of grace, multiplyed grace? here thou maist find it in the Covenant of Grace: Dost thou, oh sinner! want peace, or ase, or rest, or quiet in thy Conscience? here thou maist find it in the Covenant of Grace. Dost thou want, oh sinner! joy, or comfort, or content, or satisfaction? here thou maist have it in a Covenant of Grace. Oh sinner, sinner! what ever thy bodily wants are, or whatever thy soul wants are, they may all be sup∣plyed out of the Covenant of Grace: God, in his infi∣nite wisdom and love, has laid into the Covenant of Grace, as into a common store, all those good things, and all those great things, and all those suitable things, that either sinners or saints can either beg or need. Now, the adequate suitableness of the Covenant of Grace, to all a sinners wants, straits, necessities, miseries and desires, does sufficiently demonstrate the Covenant of Grace to be a well ordered Covenant. Look, as that is a well order∣ed Common-wealth, where there are no wholsome Laws wanting to govern a pople, and where there are no wholsome remedies wanting to relieve a people, and where there are no defences wanting to secure a people; so that must needs be a well ordered Covenant, where there is nothing wanting to govern poor souls, or to se∣cure poor souls, or to save poor souls; and such a Cove∣nant
is the Covenant of Grace. I might easily lay down other arguments, to evince the Covenant of Grace to be a well ordered Covenant: As for the right placing of all persons and things in the Covenant of Grace, and from the outward dispensation of it: God reveiled it but gra∣dually: First, he discovered it more darkly, remotely and imperfectly, as we see things a great way off; but after∣wards the Lord did more clearly, fully, immediately, frequently, and compleatly discover it, as we discern things at hand: God did not, at once, open all the riches and rarities of the Covenant to his people; but in the opening of those treasures that were there laid up, God had a respect to the non-age and full age of his people: And from God's dispensing and giving out all the good and all the great things of the Covenant in their fittest time, in a right and proper season, when his people most need them, and when they can live no longer without them; but I must hasten to a closing up of this particu∣lar. Thus you see in these Eight particulars, how glori∣ously the Covenant of Grace, under which the saints stand, is set out in the blessed Scriptures. Concerning the Covenant of Grace, or the new Co∣venant, that all sincere Christians are under; and by which, at last, they shall be judged: let me further say, (besides what I have already said) All mankind had been eternally lost, and God had lost all the glory of his mercyAsa. 1. 1, 2. E. 1. 5, 6, 7. cap. 2. 5. 7. 8. 2 Sam. 7. 21. Rom. 9. 18, 23. Jer. 3, 38. 39, 40, 41. Ezk. 36. 25, 26, 27. Ezek. 16. 1.—10. Surely, if a wo∣man commit A∣dultery, it is a mere act of favour if her husband accept of her a∣gain; Jer. 3. 7. The Application is easie. for ever, had he not, of his own free grace and mercy, made a new Covenant with sinful man. The fountain from whence this new Covenant flows, is the grace of God, Gen. 17. 22. I will make (Hebrew, I will) my cove∣nant: This Covenant is called a Covenant of Grace, be∣cause it flows from the mere grace and mercy of God: There was nothing out of God, nor nothing in God, but his mere mercy and grace, that moved him to enter into Covenant with poor sinners, who were miserable, who were loathsome, and polluted in their blood, and who had broken the Covenant of their God, and were actu∣ally in arms against him: This must needs be of mere
favour and love for God to enter into Covenant with man, when he lay wallowing in his blood, and no eye pi∣tied him, no, not his own. As there was nothing in fal∣len man, to draw God's favour or affection towards him, so there was every thing in fallen man, that might justly provoke God's wrath and indignation against him; and therefore it must be a very high act of favour and grace, for the great, the glorious, the holy, the wise, and the all-sufficient God, to enter into Covenant with such a forlorn creature as fallen man was: Nothing but free Grace was the foundation of the Covenant of Grace with poor sinners. Now, let us seriously mind how this Co∣venant of Grace, or this new Covenant, runs both in the Old, and in the New Testament; Jer. 31. 31. Behold,Though the Co∣venant of Re∣demption made to the fathers, & this which was given after, seem divers, yet they are all one, and grounded on Je∣sus Christ, save that this is called new; because of the manifestati∣ons of Christ, and the abundant graces of the Ho∣ly Ghost, given to his Church un∣der the Gospel: 2 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new cove∣nant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: vers. 32. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt; (which, my covenant, they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord. vers. 33. But this shall be the Covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people: vers. 34. And they shall teach no more, every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of them, unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: For I will forgive their iniquities, and I will remember their sin no more. Now, let us see how Paul doth exegetically explain this New Covenant, in that, Heb. 8. 6. But now hath he obtained a more excellent Ministry; by how much also, he is the Media∣tor of a better Covenant, which was established upon better promises: vers. 7. For if that first Covenant had been fault∣less, then should no place have been sought for the second; but finding fault with them, he saith, vers. 8. Behold, the days come (saith the Lord) when I will make a new cove∣nant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah▪
vers. 9. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. Vers. 10, But this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. vers. 11. And they shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest. vers. 12. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. vers. 13. In that he saith a new covenant, he hath made the first old: NowWhere then is the fire of purgatory, and that Popish distinction of the fault and the pu∣nishment; as for the fiction of Purgatory, it de∣serves rather to be hissed at, than by arguments re∣futed: And to pu∣nish sin in Pur∣gatory, as Popish Doctors teach; what is this, but to call sin tomind and memory, to view and sight, to reckoning and ac∣count; which is contrary to the Doctrine of the New Covenant. that which decayeth and waxeth old, is ready to vanish a∣way. This is the substance of the New Covenant; and thus the Lord did fore-promise it by Jeremiah, and after∣wards expounded it by Paul; some small difference there is in their words, but the sence is one and the same. Now, this Covenant is stiled the New Covenant, because it is to continue new, and never to wax old, or wear away, so long as this world shall continue: Neither doth the holy Scriptures any where reveal another Covenant, which shall succeed this Covenant. If any Covenant should succeed this, it must be either a Covenant of works, or a Covenant of Grace; not a Covenant of works, for that would bring us all under a curse, and make our condition utterly desperate; not a Covenant of Grace, because more grace cannot be shewn in any other Cove∣nant, than in this; here is all grace, and all mercy, here is Jesus Christ, with all his righteousness, mediatorship, merits, purchase: This Covenant is so full, so ample, so large, so perfect, so compleat, and is every way so accom∣modated to the condition of lost sinners, that nothing can be altered, nor added, nor mended; and therefore it must needs be the last Covenant, that ever God will make with man. So, Heb. 10. vers. 16. This is the Cove∣nant that I will make with them, after those days, saith the
Lord; I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them: vers. 17. And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Rom. 11. 26. There shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. The person delivering, is Christ, described here by his office, and by his original; his office, The de∣liverer, the original word, Ruomenos, which Paul useth, signifies delivering by a strong hand, to rescue by force, as David delivered the Lamb out of the Lyon's paw, vers. 27. For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take a∣way their sin. This Covenant concerning the pardon of believer's sins, and their deliverance by Christ, God will certainly make good to his people. Now, from the Covenant of Grace, or the new Cove∣nant,Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. Ma. 12. 14. cap, 18. 23. Luk. 16. 2. Rom. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5. that God has made with sincere Christians, a be∣liever may form up this Eighth Plea, to the Ten Scriptures cited in the margin, that refer to the great day of ac∣count, or to a man's particular account; viz. Oh blessed God, thou hast, in the Covenant of Grace (by which I must be tryed) freely and fully engaged thy self; That thou wilt pardon mine iniquities, and remember my sins no more; so runs the New Covenant: Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more; So again, Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their unrighteous∣ness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more: So Heb 10. 17. Their sins and iniquities will I re∣member no more: Isa. 43. 25. I even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and will not remem∣ber thy sins: Ezek. 18. 22. All his transgressions that be hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: Jer. 50. 20. In thse days, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon themThe New Cove∣nat can neer be broken. 2 Cn. 13. 5. Psal. 89. 34. Is 1. 50. 7. 2 Sam. 22. 5. Heb. 7. 25. 1 Joh. 2. 1, 2. Isa. 54. 10. whom I reserve. Now, Oh holy God, I cannot but ob∣serve that in the New Covenant, thou hast made such ne∣cessary, choice, absolute, and blessed provision for thy poor people, that no sin can disanul the Covenant, or make a final separation between thee and thy Covenant-people.
Breaches made in the first Covenant, were irre∣parable, but breaches made in the New Covenant are not so, because this New Covenant is established in Christ; Christ lies at the bottom of the Covenant, the New Co∣venant is an everlasting Covenant; and all the breaches that we make upon that Covenant, are repaired and made up by the blood and intercession of dear Jesus: Every jar doth not break the marriage Covenant between husband and wife, no more doth every sin break the new Cove∣nant that is between God and our souls: Every breach of peace with God, is not a breach of Covenant with God. That free, that rich, that infinite, that sovereign, and that glorious grace of God, that shines in that Covenant of Grace, tells us that our eternal estates shall never be judged by a Covenant of works; and that the want of an absolute perfection, shall never damn a believing soul; and that the obedience that God requires at our hands, is not a legal, but an Evangelical obedience: So long as a Christian doth not renounce his Covenant with God, so long as he doth not wilfully, wickedly and habitually break the bond of the Covenant, the main, the substance of the Covenant is not yet broken, though some articles of the Covenant may be violated: As among men, there be some trespasses against some particular clauses in Cove∣nants, which, though they be violated, yet the whole Covenant is not forfeited; 'tis so here, between God and his people. And oh blessed God, I cannot but observe that in theHeb. 8. 12. Jer. 31. 34. He is a forgiving. God: Nehem. 9. 31. None like him for that: Mic. 7. 18. He forgives naturally, Exd. 2 2. abundantly, Isa 55. 7. 3. constant∣ly, Psal. 130. 4. Mal. 3. 6. New Covenant, thou hast engaged thy self to pardon all my sins; I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. Here are two things worthy of our notice; 1. The reconcilia∣tion of God with his people, I will be merciful to their un∣righteousness; he will be merciful or propitious, appeased and pacified towards them, which hath respect to the ransome and satisfaction of Christ. 2. That God will pardon the sins of his people fully, compleatly, perfectly; here are three words, unrighteousness, sins and iniquities;
to shew that he will forgive all sorts, kinds and degrees of sins. The three Original words here expressed, are all in the plural number; 1. , unrighteousnesses: This word is by some appropriated to the wrongs and in∣juries that are done against men: 2. , Sinnes; is a general word, and according to the notation of the Greek, may imply a not following of that which is set be∣fore us; for he sinneth, that followeth not the rule that is set before him by God: The third word, , I∣niquities, according to the notation of the Greek, signi∣fieth in general transgressions of the Law. This word is by some, appropriated to sins against God: The Greek word , that is frequently translated iniquity, is a general word which signifieth a transgression of the Law, and so it is translated, 1 Joh. 3. 4. The word iniquity is of as large an extent, as the word unrighteousness; and im∣plyeth an unequal dealing, which is contrary to the rule or law of God: And all this heap of words is to inti∣mate to us, that 'tis neither the several sorts of sins, nor degrees of sin, nor aggravations of sin, nor yet the mul¦titude of sins that shall ever prejudice those souls that are in Covenant with God: God hath mercy enough, and pardons enough for all his Covenant-people's sins, whe∣ther original or actual, whether against the Law, or a∣gainst the Gospel, whether against the light of nature or the rule of grace, whether against mercies or judgments; whether against great means of grace, or small means of grace. The Covenant Remedy against all sorts and de∣grees of sin, doth infinitely transcend and surpass all our infirmities and enormities, our weaknesses and wicked∣nesses, our follies and unworthinesses, &c. What is our unrighteousness to Christ's righteousness, our debts to Christ's pardons, our unholiness to Christ's holiness, our Cr. 1. 30. Phil. 1. 3, 9, 10. Mal. 4, 2. emptiness to Christ's fulness, our weakness to Christ's strength, our poverty to Christ's riches, our wounds to that healing, that is under the wings of the Sun of Righ∣teousness: Parallel to this, Heb. 8. 12. is that noble de∣scriptionExod. 34. 6, 7. that Moses gives of God in that book of Exdus,
The Lord, the Lord merciful and gracious; forgiving iniqui∣ty, transgression and sin: Some, by these three words, do understand such sins as are committed against our neigh∣bour, against God, or against our selves: A merciful God, a gracious God will pardon all sorts of sinners, and all sorts and degrees of sin, by what names or titles soever they be stiled or distinguished: Some by iniquity, do un∣derstand sins of infirmity; and by transgression, they un∣derstand sins of malice; and by sin they understand sins of ignorance: God is said to keep mercy, and to forgive all sorts of sins; as if his mercy were kept on purpose for par∣doning all sorts of sinners, and all sorts of sins! The He∣brew word , Gnavon, that is here translated iniquity, signifies that which is unright, unequal, crooked or per∣verse; it notes the vitiosity or crookedness of nature, it notes crooked offences, such as flow from malice, hatred and are committed on purpose. Secondly, the Hebrew word , from , Pashang, that is here translated transgression, signifies to deal unfaithfully, it notes such sins as are treacherously committed against God, such sins as flow from pride and contempt of God. Thirdly, the Hebrew word , Chataah, generally signifieth sin, but is more especially here taken for sins of ignorance and infirmity: Oh! what singular mercy, what rich grace is here; that God will not only pardon our light, our small offences, but our great and mighty sins: &c. And I cannot, oh dear father, but further observe, that in the New Covenant, thou hast frequently and deep∣ly engaged thy self, that thou wilt remember the sins of thy people no more: Oh my God, thou hast told me six several times in thy word, that thou wilt remember my sins no more: In the New Covenant thou hast engaged thy self, not only to forgive, but also to forget, and that thou wilt cross thy debt book, and never question or call me to an account for my sins; that thou wilt pass an e∣ternal act of oblivion upon them, and utterly bury them in the grave of oblivion, as if they had never been. The sins that are forgiven by God are forgotten by God, the
sins that God remits he removes from his remembrance:Hb. 10. 13, to 19. & cap. 10. 1, to 15. Christ hath so fully satisfied the justice of God for the sins of all his seed, by the price of his own blood and death; that there needs no more expiatory sacrifices, to be offer∣ed for their sins for ever; Christ hath, by the sacrifice of himself, blotted out the remembrance of his peoples sins with God for ever. The New Covenant runs thus, And their sinful errour, (, Lo escar guhod) I willJer. 31. 34. not remember any more; but the Greek runs thus, And their sinful errours and their unrighteousnesses, I will not remem∣berHeb. 8. 12. again, or any more; : Here are two ne∣gatives, which do more vehemently deny according to the propriety of the Greek Language; that is, I will ne∣ver remember them again, I will in no case remember them any more, I will so forgive as to forget: Not that in propriety of phrase, God either remembers or forgets, for all things are present to him; he knows all things, he beholds, he sees, he observes all things, by one eternal and simple act of his knowledg, which is no way capa∣ble of change, as now knowing, and anon forgetting; but its an allusion to the manner of men, who when they forgive injuries fully and heartily, do also forget them, blot them out of mind, or rather (as some think) its an allusion to the manner of the old Covenants administra∣tion in the Sacrifices, where there was a remembrance a∣gainHeb. 10. 1, 2, 3, &c. of sins every year, there was a fresh indictment and arraignment of the people for sin continually: But under this New Covenant our Lord Jesus Christ hath, by one offering perfected for ever them that are sanctified, ChristSee from vers. 5. to vers. 20. hath, for ever, taken away the sins of the Elect, there needs no more expiatory sacrifice for them; they that are sprinkled with the blood of this sacrifice shall never have their sins remembred any more against them: God's not remembring or forgetting a thing, is not simply to be tak∣en of his essential knowledge; but respectively, of his judicial knowledg, to bring the same into Judgment, not to remember a thing that was once known, and was in mind and memory, is to forget it; but this properly, is
not incident to God, it is an infirmity: To him all things past and future, are as present; what he once knoweth, he always knoweth; his memory is his very essence, nei¦ther can any thing that hath once been in it, slip out of it: For God to remit sin, is not to remember it; and not to remember it, is to remit it: These are two reciprocal propositions, therefore they are thus joyned together; I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin noJer. 31. 34. Isa. 43. 25. more: I even I, am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. To re∣member implyeth a four-fold act; 1. To lay up in the mind, what is conceived thereby: 2. To hold it fast: 3. To call it to mind again: 4. Oft to think of it. Now in that God saith, I will remember their iniquities no more; he implyeth, that he will neither lay them up in his mind, nor there hold them, nor call them again to mind, nor think on them, but that they shall be to him, as if they had never been committed; God's discharge of their sins, shall be a full discharge: such sinners shall never be cal∣led to account for them; both the guilt and the punish∣ment of them shall be fully and everlastingly removed. Let the sins of a believer be what they will for nature,Mat. 12. 31. sa. 55. 7. Jer. 31. 12. Ezk. 18. 22. sal. 32. 2. Rom. 4 8. Now, if God will not remember nor mention his peoples sins, then we may safely and roundly in∣fer, that either there is no Pur∣gatory, or else that God severe∣ly punishes those sins in Purgatory which he remem∣bers not. and never so many for number; they shall all be blotted out, they shall never be mentioned more: 1. God will ne∣ver remember, he will never mention their sins so, as to impute them, or charge them upon his people: 2. God will never remember, he will never mention their sins a∣ny more, so as to upbraid his people with their follies or miscarriages: He will never hit them in the teeth with their sins, he will never cast their weaknesses into their dish; when persons are justified, their sins shall be as if they had not been, God will bid them welcome into his presence, and embrace them in his arms, and will never object to them their former unkindness, unfruitfulness, unthankfulness, vileness, stubbornness, wickedness, as you may plainly see in the return of the Prodigal, and his father's deportment towards him; Luk. 15. 20, 21, 22, 23. When he was a great way off: The Prodigal, was but
conceiving a purpose to return, and God met him. The very intention, and secret motions, and close purposes of our hearts, are known to God: The old Father sees a great way off; dim eyes can see a great way, when the Son is the object (his father saw him, and had com∣passion:) His bowels rowl within him; the Father, not only sees, but commiscrates and compassionates the re∣turning Prodigal, as he did Ephraim of old; My bowelsJer. 31. 20. are troubled for him, I will, surely have mercy on him; or as the Hebrew runs, I will, having mercy, have mercy, have mercy on him, or I will abundantly have mercy on him. Look, saith God, here is a poor prodigal returning to me, the poor child is come back, he hath smarted enough, he hath suffered enough; I will bid him welcome, I will forgive him all his high offences, and will never hit him in the teeth with his former vanities. (And ran) The feet of mercy are swift to meet a returning sinner: It had been sufficient for him to have stood, being old, and a Father; but the Father runs to the Son: (And fell on his neck) He cannot stay and embrace him, or take him by the hand; but he falls upon him, and incorporates himself into him. How open are the arms of mercy, to embrace the returning sinner, and lie him in the bosom of love: (and kissed him) Free, rich and soveraign mer∣cy hath not only feet to meet us, and arms to clasp us; but also lips to kiss us; one would have thought that he should rather have kicked him or killed him, than have kissed him: But God is pater miserationum, he is all bowels. All this while the father speaks not one word, his joy was too great to be uttered; he ran, he fell on his neck, and kis∣sed him; and so sealed up to him mercy and peace, love and reconciliation with the kisses of his lips. And the son said unto him; (Father, I have sinned against heaven; and in thy sight) Sincerely confess and the mends is made, acknowledge but the debt, and he will cross the book: (And am no more worthy to be called thy son;) Infernus sum domine, said that blessed Martyr, Lord, I am hell, butMr.  at . death.  and Men. 1374. thou art heaven; I am soil and a sink of sin, but thou art a
gracious God, &c. But the father said to his servants, bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hands, and shooes on his feet: And bring hither theAmong the Ro∣mans, the ring was an ensign of vertue, honour & especially nobili∣ty, whereby they were distinguish∣ed from the com∣mon people. fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry. Here you have, 1. The best Robe: 2. The precious ring: 3. The comely shooes; and 4. The fatted calf. The returning Prodigal hath Garments, and Ornaments, and necessa∣ries, and comfortables; Some understand by the Robe the Royalty, which Adam lost; and by the ring, they under∣stand the seal of God's holy spirit; and by the shooes, the preparation of the Gospel of peace; and by the fatted Calf, they understand Christ, who was slain from the beginning; Christ is that fatted Calf (saith Mr. Tindal theAct. and Mon. Fol. 986. Martyr) slain to make penitent sinners good chear withal, and his righteousness is the goodly rayment to cover the naked deformities of their sins. The great things intend∣ed in this Parable, is to set forth the riches of grace, and God's infinite goodness, and the returning sinner's hap∣piness: When once the sinner returns in good earnest to God; God will supply all his wants, and bestow upon him more than ever he lost, and set him in a safer and happier estate than that, from which he did fall in Adam; and will never hit him in the teeth with his former e∣normities, nor never cast in his dish his old wickednes∣ses. You see plainly in this Parable, that the father of the Prodigal does not so much as mention or object the former pleasures, lusts or vanities, wherein his Prodigal son had formerly lived; all old scores are quit, and the returning Prodigal embraced and welcomed, as if he had never offended. And now, O Lord, I must humbly take lieve to tell thee further, that thou hast confirmed the New Covenant by thy word, and by thy oath, and by the seals that thou hast annexed to it, and by the death of thy Son; and therefore, thou canst not but make good every tittle, word, branch and article of it. Now this New Covenant is my Plea, O holy God; and by this Plea I shall stand; hereupon God declares, this Plea I accept, as holy, just and good; I have nothing to say a∣gainst
thee, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. The Ninth Plea that a Believer may form up as to theEccles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. Mat. 12. 14. cap, 18. 23. Luk. 16. 2. Rom. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. ap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5. ten Scriptures that are in the margin, that refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular account; may be drawn up from the consideration of that Evange∣lical obedience that God requires, and that the believer yields to God. There is a legal, and there is an evange∣lical account; now the Saints, in the great day, shall not be put to give up a legal account; the account they shall be put to give up, is an Evangelical account. In the Co∣venant of works, God required perfect obedience in our own persons; but in the Covenant of Grace God will be content if there be but uprightness in us, if there be but sincere desires to obey, if there be faithful endeavours to obey, if there be a hearty willingness to obey; well, saith God, though I stood upon perfect obedience in the Co∣venant2 Cor. 8. 12. of works; yet now I will be satisfied with the will for the deed, if there be but uprightness of heart (though that be attended with many weaknesses and in∣firmities) yet I will be satisfied and contented with that▪ God, under the Covenant of Grace, will for Christ's sake, accept of less than he requires in the Covenant of works: He requires perfection of degrees, but he will accept of perfection of parts; he requires us to live without sin, but he will accept of our sincere endeavours to do it; though a believer, in his own person, cannot perform all that God commands; yet Jesus Christ, as his surety, and in his stead, hath fulfilled the Law for him: So that Christ's perfect righteousness, is a compleat cover for a believer's imperfect righteousness. Hence the believer flys from the Covenant of works, to the Covenant of Grace; fromLuk. 1. 5, 6. Ma. 28. 20. Act. 24. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 14. 15. Heb. 13. 18. Lex data est ut gratia qureretur gratia data est t lex implereur. August. his own unrighteousness, to the righteousness of Christ. If we consider the Law in a high and rigid notion, so no believer can fulfil it; but if we consider the Law in a soft and mild notion, so every believer does fulfil it, Act. 13. 22. I have found David the son of Jesse, a man aften mine own heart, which shall fulfil all my will; ,
All my wills, to note the universality and since∣rity of his obedience: David had many slips and falls, he often transgressed the Royal Law; but being sincere in the main bent and frame of his heart, and in the course of his life; God looked upon his sincere obedience, as perfect obedience. A sincere Christian obedience is an entire o∣bedience to all the commands of God, though not in re∣spectPsal. 119. 6. Heb. When my eye is to ill thy command∣ments. of practice (which is impossible) but in disposition and affection. A sincere obedience is an universal obedi∣ence: It is universal in respect of the subject, the whole man; it is universal in respect of the object, the whole law; and it is universal in respect of durance, the whole life; he who obeys sincerely, obeys universally. There is no man that serves God truly, that doth not endeavourNumb. 14. 24. to serve God fully: sincerity turns upon the hinges of u∣niversality; he who obeys sincerely, endeavours to obey throughly. A sincere Christian does not only love the Law, and like the law, and approve of the Law, and de∣light in the Law, and consent to the Law, that it is holy, just and good; but he obeys it in part; which, thoughRom. 7. 12, 16, 22. it be but in part, yet he being sincere therein, pressing towards the mark, and desiring and endeavouring to ar∣rivePhil. 3. 13, 14. at what is perfect; God accepts of such a soul, and is as well pleased with such a soul, as if he had perfectly fulfilled the Law: Where the heart is sincerely resolved to obey, there it does obey; an heart to obey, is our o∣beying; a heart to do, is our doing; a heart to believe, is our believing; a heart to repent, is our repenting; a heart to wait, is our waiting; a heart to suffer, is our suffering; a heart to pray, is our praying; a heart to hear, is our hearing; a heart to give, feed, cloath, visit, is our giving, feeding, cloathing, visiting; a heart to walk circumspectly, is our walking circumspectly; a heart to work righteousness, is our working righteous∣ness; a heart to shew mercy, is our shewing mercy; a heart to sympathise with others, is our sympathising with others: He that sincerely desire and resolves to keep the commandments of God, he does keep the command∣ments
of God; and he that truly desires and resolves to walk in the statutes of God, he does walk in the statutes of God. In God's account, and God's acceptation, every believer, every sincere Christian is as wise, holy, humble, heavenly, spiritual, watchful, faithful, fruitful, useful, thankful, joyful, &c. as he desires to be, as he resolves to be, and as he endeavours to be; and this is the glory of the New Covenant, and the happiness that we gain by dear Jesus. And, my friends, it is remarkable, that our inchoate, partial and very imperfect obedience is fre∣quently set forth in the blessed Scriptures, by our fulfillingLuk. 10. 25, 26, 27. of the Law: Take a few places for a taste, Rom. 2. 27. And shall not uncircumcision, which is by nature, if it ful∣fil the Law, judg thee? &c. Rom. 13. 8. He that loveth a∣nother, hath fulfilled the law: (Vers. 10.) Love is the ful∣filling of the Law. Not to love, is to do ill, and to break the Law, but love is the fulfilling of it; Non potest pecca∣ri per illam, quae legis est perfectio; we cannot do ill by thatAm. in . which is the perfection and the fulfilling of the Law. Love is the summ of the law, love is the perfection of the law; and were love perfect in us, it would make us perfect keepers of the Law: Love works the Saints to keep the law in desires and endeavours, with care and study to ob∣serve it in perfection of parts, though not in perfection of degrees; Gal. 5. 14. All the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, thou shalt love thy neighbours as thy self: Gal. 6. 2. Bear ye one anothers burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. Now in this sence that is under consideration, the Saints in themselves, even in this life, do keep the Royal Law. Now, from what has been said, a believer may form up this Plea. Oh blessed God, in Christ my head, I have perfectly and compleatly kept thy Royal Law; and in my own person, I have Evangelically kept thy Royal Law, in re∣spect of my sincere dosires, purposes, resolutions and en∣deavours to keep it: And this Evangelical keeping, in Christ, and in the New Covenant, thou art pleased to ac∣cept of, and art well satisfied with it. I know that
breaches made in the first Covenant, were irreparable, but breaches made in the Covenant of Grace are not so; be∣cause this Covenant is established in Christ; who is still a making up all breaches. Now, this is my Plea, O holy God, and by this Plea I shall stand. Well, saith God, I cannot in honour or justice, but accept of this Plea, and therefore enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. The Tenth plea that a believer may form up, as to the Ten Scriptures that are in the margin, that  refer to the great day of account, or to a man's par∣ticularEcle. 11 9. cap. 12 14. Mat. 12. 14. cap, 18. 23. Luk 16. 2.  14 1. 2 Cor 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 et. 4 5. account, may be drawn up from the considera∣tion of that compact, covenant and agreement, that was so∣lemnly made between God and Christ, touching the whole business of man's salvation or redemption. We may present it to our understanding in this form; God the Father saith to Christ the Mediatour, I look upon Adam and his posterity, as a degenerate seed; a Generation of Vipers, of Apostates, and Back-sliders, yea Traitors and Rebels, lia∣ble to all temporal, spiritual and eternal judgments; yet I cannot find in my heart to damn them all; Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, IHos. 1. 9, 10. will not execute the fierceness of mine anger; for I am God, and not man: And therefore I have determined to shewRev. 7. 9, 10. mercy upon many millions of them, and save them from wrath to come, and to bring them to glory; but this I must do with a salvo to my Law, Justice and Honour. If therefore, thou wilt undertake for them, and become aGal 3. 10, 13. Joh. 17. 2, 6, 11. curse for their sakes, and so make satisfaction to my justice for their sins; I will give them unto thee, to take care of them, and to bring them up to my kingdom, for the manifestation of the glory of my Grace: Well, saith Christ, I am content, I will do all thou requirest with all my heart, and so the agreement is made between thee and me; this may be gathered from the Scriptures in the mar∣gin.Psal. 2 7, 8. 9. sal. 40. 6, 7, 8. Christ the son speaks in both places: In the first he publisheth the decree or ordinance of heaven, touching himself; and bringeth in the Father, enstalling him into the Priesthood, or office of Mediator; for so the Apostle
applieth that Text, Heb. 5. 5. Thou art my son, &c. and also avoucheth this Covenant and agreement in the two main parts of it. First, The condition which he will have performed on  Christ's part, as Mediator; or what Christ must do, asConsider Christ in the capacity of a Mediator, for so only he cove∣nanted with the father, for the salvation of man∣kind. Mediator, He must ask of God; that is, not only verbal∣ly, by prayers and supplications, beg mercy, pardon, righ∣teousness and salvation for poor lost sinners; but also re∣ally by fulfilling the righteousness of the Law, both in doing and suffering; and so by satisfaction and merit, purchasing acceptation for them at his hands: The Fa∣ther engaged so and so to Christ, and Christ reciprocally engaged so and so to the Father; (a considerable part of the terms and matter of which Covenant is set down, Isa. 53. 10. When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, &c.) The Father Covenants to do thus and thus for fallen man; but first (in order thereunto) the Son must covenant to take man's nature, therein to satisfie offended justice, to repair and vindicate his father's honour, &c. Well, he submits, assents to these demands, indents and covenants to make all good; and this was the substance of the Covenant of Redemption. But, Secondly, Let us consider the promise which the father engageth to perform on his part; the son must ask, and the father will give; He will give him the heathen for hisPsal. 2. 8. inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his pos∣session. (An allusion to great Princes, when they would shew great affection to their Favourites, they bid them ask what they will, as Ahasuerus did, and as Herod did) thatEs 5. 3. Ma 6. 23. Isa. 49 6. Mt. 28. 18. al. 2. 10, 11. Psal. 40. 6. 7, 8. is, he shall both be the Lord's salvation to the ends of the earth, and have all power given him in heaven and earth; so that all knees shall bow to him, and every tongue shall con∣fess him to be Lord. In the other Text before mentioned, Psal. 40. Christ declares his compliance to the agreement, and his subscribing the Covenant on his part, when he came into the world; as the Apostle explains it, Heb. 10. 5. &c. Mine ears (saith he) hast thou digged or pierced: Lo, I come to do thy will; as if he had said, oh father, thou
dost engage me to be thy servant in this great work of sav∣ing sinners: Loe, I come to do the work, I here cove∣nant and agree, to yield up my self to thy disposing, and to serve thee for ever; it seems to be an allusion to the master's boring through the servants ear. Exod. 21. 6. Among the Jews only one ear was bored, but in this Psal. 40. 6. Here are ears in the plural number, a token of that perfect and desirable subjection, which Christ, as Media∣tor, was in to his father. But for a more clear, distinct and full opening of the Covenant of Redemption; or that blessed compact between God the father and Jesus Christ, which is a matter of grand importance to all our souls; and considering that it is a point that I have never yet treated of in pulpit or press; I shall therefore, take the liberty at this time, to open my self, as clearly and as ful∣ly as I can. And therefore thus, If you ask me, what this Covenant of Redemption  is? I answer in the general, That a Covenant is a mutual  agreement between parties, upon articles or propositions on both sides, so that each party is tied and bound to per∣form his own conditions. This description holds the gene∣ral nature of a Covenant, and is common to all Covenants, publick and private, divine or humane. But, Secondly, and more particularly, I answer, The Co∣venant  of Redemption is that federal transaction, or mu∣tualThe Covenant of Redemption de∣fined. stipulation that was betwixt God and Christ from everlasting, for the accomplishment of the work of our Redemption, by the mediation of Jesus Christ, to the e∣ternal honour, and unspeakable praise of the glorious grace of God. Or if you please, take it in another form of words, thus, It is a compact, bargain and agreement between God the father, and God the son, designed Mediator; con∣cerning the conversion, sanctification and salvation of the Elect, through the death, satisfaction and obedience of Jesus Christ; which in due time, was to be given to the father. But for the making good the definition I have
laid down, I must take lieve to tell you, That there are many choice Scriptures, which give clear intimation of such a federal transaction between God the father and Je∣sus Christ, in order to the recovery, and everlasting hap∣piness and salvation of his Elect. I shall instance in the most considerable of them. The first is this, Gen. 3. 15. And I will put enmity be∣tweenThe first Proof. thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise its heel. Here begins the book of the Lord's Wars, God's battels:The Scriptures are called the book of the Bat¦tels of the Lord. Numb. 21. . This is spoken of that holy enmity, that is between Christ and the Devil; and of Christ's destroying the Kingdom and power of Satan: For as much then, as the children are partak∣ers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise, took part of the same; that through death, he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. Heb. 2 14. God, by way of threatning, told Satan, that the seed of the de∣ceived woman, should overmatch him at last, and should break in pieces his power and crafty plots; he gives Sa∣tan lieve to do his worst, and proclaims an open and an utter enmity between Christ and him. From this Scri∣pture, some conclude that Christ covenanted from Eter∣nity; to take upon him the seed of the woman, and the sinless infirmities of our true humane nature; and under those infirmities, to enter the lists with Satan, and to con∣tinue obedient, through all his afflictions, temptations and trials to the death, even to the death of the cross. AndPhil. 2. 8, 9. that God the father had covenanted with Christ, that in case Christ did continue obedient through all his suffer∣ings, temptations and trials, that then his obedience to the death should be accounted as full satisfaction to divine ju∣stice, for all those wrongs and injuries that were done to God, by the sins of man; Christ must die, or else he could not have been the Mediator of the new Covenant through death, Heb. 9. 15, 16. But The Second Sripture is that, Isa: 42. 6. The Lord hathThe second Proo called thee in righteousness; and with hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, fr
a light of the gentiles. Thus God speaks of Christ. In this Chapter, we have a glorious Prophecy of Christ our Redeemer; here are four things prophcied of him, 1. The Divine call, whereby he was appointed to the work of our Redemption; vers. 1. Behold my servant whom I up∣hold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the gentiles. Jesus Christ would not, yea, he could not, he durst not thrust himself upon this great work, or engage in this great work, 'till he had a clear call from heaven. 2. Here you have the gracious carriage and deportment of Christ, in the work to which he was called; this is fully set down, vers. 2, 3, 4. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. He shall come clothed with majesty and glory, and yet full of meekness: A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoaking flax shall he not quench; he shall bring forth judgement unto truth. In the words there is a Meiosis, he will not break, that is, he will bind up the bruised reed, he will comfort the bruised reed, he will strengthen the bruised reed: Christ will acknowledg and encourage the least degrees of grace, he will turn a spark of grace into a flame, a drop into a sea, &c. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged. These words shew his Kingly courage and magnanimity. Though he should meet with opposition from all hands, yet nothing should daunt him, nothing should dismay him, no affli∣ctions, no temptations, no sufferings should in the least abate his courage and valour. 3. The Divine Assistance, he should have from him that called him: This is set down in two expressions, vers. 6. I will hold thy hand, I will keep thee. Divine Assistance doth usually concur with a divine call; when God sets his servants on work, he uses to defend and uphold them in the work. 4. The work it self, to which Christ was called: This is expres∣sed under divers phrases, vers. 6, 7. To be a light to the gen∣tiles, to open the blind eys, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and to be a covenant to the people. In these last words, you have two things observable: The first is one
special part of Christ's office; He was given for a covenant. 2. The persons, in reference to whom this office was de∣signed: A Covenant of the people. One end, why God the father gave Christ out of his bosom was, that he might be a Covenant to his people: Christ is given for a Cove∣nant, both to the believing Jews and Gentiles. As he is the glory of the people of Israel, so he is a light to lighten the Gentiles. In this Scripture last cited, you have the fa∣ther's designation and sealing of Christ, to the Mediato¦rial imployment; promising him much upon his under∣taking it, and his acceptation of this office, and volunta∣ryHeb. 5. 4, 5. . 40. 7, 8. Joh. 10. 17, 18. submission to the will of the father in it; Loe, I come to do thy will. And these together amount to the making up of a Covenant between God the father, and his son, for what more can be necessary to the making up of a Co∣venant, than is here expressed▪ But,The Third proof. This Prophey is applied to Christ, . 2. 2. A. 13. 47. Gal. 3. 16. Heb. 3 4 5. And many of the Jews do conses that this pla i to be unerstood of Christ only. . 1. 1, 22. . 2. 10, 11. Heb. 1. . The third Scripture is that, Isa. 49. 1. Listen, Oh Isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far; the Lord God hath called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name. These words are spoken in the person of Christ, he tells us how he is called by his fa∣ther, to be a Mediator and Saviour of his people. Jesus Christ would not take one step in the work of our Redem∣ption, till he was called and commissionated by his father to that work. God the father, who from Eternity, had fore-assigned Christ to this office of a Mediator, a Re∣deemer; did both while he was in the womb, and as soon as he was come out of it, manifest and make known this his purpose concerning Christ, both to men and Angels. Christ did not thrust himself, he did not intrude himself at random, into the office of a Redeemer. No man takesHeb. 5. 4, 5. this honour to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. So Christ took not upon himself the office of a Mediator, a Saviour, but upon a call and a commission from God: The summ is, that Christ took up the office of a Rdeemer by the ordinance of his father, that he might fulfil the work of our Redemption, unto which he was destmated; vers. 2. And he made my mouth like a sharp
sword, in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me; and made me a polished shaft, in his quiver hath he hid me. Christ having avouched his fathers calling of him to the work of man's Redemption, he gives you a relation in this verse, of God's fitting and furnishing of him with abilities suf∣ficient for so important a work; together with his sustain∣ing and supporting of him, in the performance of the same. Here are two similitudes or comparisons: 1. That of a sharp sword: That of a bright and sharp arrow; toSee Eph. 6. 17. Heb. 4. 12. Rev. 1. 16. cap 6. 2. shew the efficacy of Christ's Doctrine. The word of Christ is a sword of great power and efficacy, for the sub∣duing of the souls of men to the obedience of it, and for the cutting off of whomsoever, or whatsoever shall op∣pose or withstand it: Christ was not sent of the father, to conquer by force of arms, as earthly Princes do; but he conquers all sorts of sinners, even the proudest andA. 2. 37, 41. Act. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Act, 16. 29,—35. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 6. stoutest of them, by the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God; (as you may see by comparing the Scri∣ptures in the margin together,) Having spoken of the efficacy of Christ's Doctrine, he tells us that he will takeJoh. 7. 30, 44. Luk. 22. 53. . 27. 62, to 6. and cap. 27. 2,—6. At. 2 23, 24. or as some render the words, thou art my servant to Israel, or for Is∣rael; that is, for Israel's good, for my peoples be∣hoof. Few (saith Sas∣bnt) to this day doe consider Christ's labour in preaching, prayer fasting and suffer∣ing a cruel death for us: for if they did, they would he more affected with love to∣wards him that loved them so dearly. Isa. 6. 13. cap. 8 18, &c. care of the security of his person; In the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and in his quiver hath he hid me. God the father undertakes to protect the Lord Jesus Christ, a∣gainst all sorts of adversaries, that should band themselves against him; and to maintain his doctrine against all ene∣mies, that should conspire to suppress it. God so protect∣ed his dear son, against all the might and malice of his most capital enemies; that they neither could lay hold on him, or do ought, before the time by God fore-designed, was come: Christ was sheltered under the wing of God's protection, till that voluntarily he went to his passion; nei∣ther could they keep him under, when that time was once over, though they endeavoured with all their might to do it. Now, in the the third verse, God the father tells Je∣sus Christ, what a glorious reward he should have for un∣dertaking the great work of Redemption: And said unto me, thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glori∣fied, God having called Christ, set him apart, sanctified
him, and sent him into the world, for the execution of the office of a Redeemer: He doth, in this third verse, encourage him to set upon it, and to go on chearfully, re∣solutely and constantly in it, with assurance of good and comfortable success; notwithstanding all the plots; de∣signs and oppositions, that Satan and his Imps might make against him; vers. 4. Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain; yet sure∣ly my judgment is with the Lord, and my works with my God. In these words, Jesus Christ complains to his father of the incredulity, wickedness and obstinate Rebellion of the greatest part of the Jews, against that blessed word which he had clearly and faithfully made known to them: When Christ looked upon the paucity and small number of those that his Ministry had any saving and powerful work up∣on, he pours out his complaints before the father; not that Christ's pains in his ministry among the Jews, were wholly in vain, either in regard of God that sent him, or in regard of the persons, unto whom he was sent; as if not any at all were converted: Oh no! for some were called, converted and sanctified, as you may see by the Scriptures in the margin: Or in regard of himself, as if any loss or prejudice should thereby redound unto him: Oh no! but in regard of the small, the slender effect, that his great labours had hitherto found; yet surely my judg∣ment is with the Lord. Christ, for the better support and re-encouraging of himself, to persist in his employment, opposeth unto the want of the chiefly desired success of his labours with men, the gracious acceptance of them with God. It is as if Christ had said, although my la∣bour hath not produced such fruits and effects as I indeed desired, yet I do comfort and bear up my heart with this, that my heavenly father knows, that in the office and place wherein he hath set me, I have faithfully done all that could be done for the salvation of poor sinners souls, and for the securing of them from wrath to come: And my work (or reward) with my God, that is, the reward of my work, or my wages for my work, which God will render
unto me, not according to the issue or success of my la∣bours, but according to my pains therein taken, and the faithful discharge of my office and duty therein: What saith Christ, though the Jews believe not, repent not, re∣turn not to the most high, yet my labour is not lost; for my God will really, he will signally reward me: Upon this, God the father comes off more freely and roundly, and opens his heart more abundantly to Jesus Christ, and tells him in the fifth and sixth verses following, that he will give him full, compleat and honourable satisfaction, for all his pains and labours in preaching, in doing, in suffering, and dying, that he might bring many sons to glory, vers. 5. And now, saith the Lord, that formed me from the womb, to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him: though Israel is not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. In this verse, you have a farther encouragement to our Lord Jesus Christ; God the father engaging himself, not only to support him and protect him in the work of his Mini∣stry, but of making him glorious in it, and by it also; and that though his work should not prove so successful among his own people as he desired, yet his Ministry should become very glorious and efficacious upon the Gentiles far and near, throughout the whole world. Je∣sus Christ is very confident of his being high in the esteem of his father, for the faithful discharge of his duty: And that, notwithstanding all the hard measure that he met with from the body of the Jews, that yet his father wouldJoh. 5. 20, 23. cap. 10. 15, 17. Joh. 17. 1, 5. Thil. 2. 9. crown him with honour and glory; and that he would enable him to go through the work that is incumbent up∣on him, and that he would protect him and defend him in his work, against all might and malice, all power and policy, that should make head against him; vers. 6. And he said, it is a light thing, that thou shouldest be my ser∣vant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the pre∣served of Israel: I will also give thee, for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation to the ends of the earth. Thus you see, that God the father still goes on to
shew, that the labours of Christ should be very glorious, not only in the eyes of God, but in the eyes of all the world: Yow know, elsewhere Christ is called the way,Jo. 14. 6. the truth, and the life; and here he is called the light and salvation of the Gentiles. God the father, speaking to Jesus Christ, tells him, that it was but a small matter, a mean thing (Heb. it is too light) for him to have such happy and ample success, as to reduce and win the Jews in comparison of that further work that he intended to ef∣fect by him, even the salvation of the Gentiles, unto the ends of earth. God the father seems to say thus to Jesus Christ, the dignity and worthiness of thy person, thou being the eternal, and only son of God; as also the high office, whereunto I have called thee, requireth more ex∣cellent things, than that thou shouldest only raise up and restore the people of Israel to their right: I have also appointed and ordained thee for a Saviour to the Gentiles, even to the ends of the earth; therefore, though the great∣est par mong the Jews will not receive thee, nor submit unto thee; yet the Gentiles, they shall own thee and honour thee, they shall embrace thee, and give themselves up unto thee. I shall be briefer in the remaining proofs: And therefore, The Fourth Scripture is that, Isa. 52. 13, 14. Behold,The fourth proof The Chaldee Pa∣raphrast, & some Jewish Doctors expound this place of the Mes∣sias. Isa. 42. 1. cap 53. 11, &c. my servant shall deal prudently. he shall be exalted and ex∣tolled, and be very high. The three last verses of this chapter, with the next chapter, do joyntly make up an entire Prophecy, concerning Christ, his person, paren∣tage, condition, manner of life, sufferings, humiliation, exaltation, &c. with the noble benefits that redound to us, and the great honour that redounds to himself. In these two verses you have, 1. The two parties contract∣ing, viz. God▪ the father, and Jesus Christ; Behold my servant, saith God the father; this title is several times given by the father, to Jesus Christ, because he did the father great service in the work of man's Redemption, freeing fallen man from the thraldom of sin and Satan. 2. Both parties are very sure and confident of the event
of the paction, and of the accomplishment of the whole work of Redemption; Behold, my servant shall deal pru∣dently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high. Here are divers terms heaped up, to express in part, the tran∣scendent and unexpressible advancement of Jesus Christ; when men are raised from a mean and low estate, to some honourable condition; when men are furnished with such parts and endowments of prudence, wisdom and under∣standing, as makes them admirable in the eyes of others; and when they are enabled to do and suffer great things; whereby they become famous and renowned far and near, then we say they are highly exalted: Now in all the sere∣spects, our Lord Jesus Christ was most eminently exalted above all creatures in heaven and earth, as is most evident throughout the Scriptures. Thirdly, He tells you of the price, which Jesus Christ should pay for the Redemption of his people, agreed upon by paction, viz. the humbling of himself to the death of the Cross, as you may see in vers. 14. As many were astonied at thee, his visa was so marred, more than any mans; and his form more than the sons of men. This is the speech of the father, to Jesus Christ; his visage was so marred, that the Jews were a∣shamed to own him for their King, and Messiah. The astonishment here spoken of, is such an astonishment, as ariseth from the contemplation of some strange, uncouth and ruful spectacle of desolation, deformity and misery: And no wonder if many were astonished at the sight of our Saviour's condition, in regard of those base, disgraceful and despightful usages, that were offered and done to him, in the time of his humiliation here on earth; when his own followers were so amazed at the relation of them,Mar. 10. 32, 33, 34 when they were foretold of them. Oh sirs! the words last cited, are not so to be understood, as if our blessed Saviour had, in regard of his bodily person or presence, been some strange, deformed or mishapen creature; butIsa. 51. 3. in regard of his outward estate, coming of mean and ob∣scure parents, living in a low despicable condition, ex∣posed to scorn and contempt, and to much affliction,
through the whole course of his life; and more especial¦ly yet, in regard of what he was also in his personal ap∣pearance, through the base and scornful usages, that he sustained at the hands of his malicious and mischievous adversaries, when they had gotten him into their power; besides his watchings, draggings to and fro, from place to place, buffettings, scourgings, carrying his cross, and other base usages, could not, but much alter the state of his body, and impair, yea deface all the sightliness of it: And yet all this he suffered to make good the compact and agreement, that he had made with his father, about the Redemption of his Elect. But, The fifth Scripture is that 53. of Isaiah. This Scripture,The fifth proof. among many others, gives us very clear intimations of a Federal transaction between God the father, and Jesus Christ, in order to the recovery, and everlasting happiness of poor sinners. The glorious Gospel seems to be epi∣tomised in this chapter; the subject matter of it, is the grievous sufferings, and dolorous death of Christ, and the happy and glorious issue thereof: Of all the Prophets, this Prophet Isaiah was the most Evangelical Prophet, andHierom calls him Isaiah the Evan∣gelist. of all the Prophecies of this Prophet, that which you have in this chapter, is the most Evangelical Prophecy. In this chapter, you have a most plain, lively and full de∣scription,In this chapter you have the compact and a∣greement be∣tween God the father and Jesus Christ, plainly as∣serted and prov∣ed. and representation of the humiliation, death and passion of Jesus Christ; which indeed is so exact, and so consonant to what hath fallen our since, that Isaiah seems here, rather to pen an history than a Prophecy: The matter contained in this chapter, is so convictive, from that clear light that goes along with it  that several of the Jews, in reading of this chapter, have been convert∣ed, as not being able to stand any longer out, against the shining light and evidence of it: Out of this chapter, which is more worth, than all the Gold of Ophir, yea, than ten thousand worlds, Observe with me these eight things. First, Observe that God and Christ are sweetly agreed,  and infinitely pleased, in the conversion of the Elect,
vers. 10. He shall see his seed, that is, he shall see them called, converted, changed and sanctified; he shall see his seed, that is, an innumerable company shall be con∣verted to him by his word and spirit, in all countreysPsal. 110. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 23. and nations, through the mighty workings of the spirit, and the incorruptible seed of the word; infinite numbers of poor souls should be brought in to Jesus Christ; whichRev. 7. 9. Heb. 2. 10, 13. he should see to his full content and infinite satisfaction: He shall see his seed, that is, he shall see them encrease and multiply, he shall see believers brought in to him, from all corners and quarters; and he shall see them great∣ly encrease and grow, by the preaching of the everlast∣ing Gospel, especially after his ascention into heaven, and a more glorious pouring forth of the Holy Ghost up∣on his Apostles and others, Act. 2. 37, 41. Act. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Act. 8. No accountants on earth, can count or reckon up Christ's spiritual seed and issue. But, Secondly, observe with me, that in the persons re∣deemed  by Jesus Christ, there was neither weight norExk. 16. 1,—10. worth, neither portion nor proportion, neither inward or outward excellencies or beauties, for which the pu∣nishment due to them, should be transferred upon dear Jesus; for if you look upon them in their sins, in their guilt, you shall find them despisers and rejecters of Christ, vrs. 4. Surely, he hath born our griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. Christ took upon him, not our nature a∣lone, but the infirmities also of it, and became liable to such sorrows, and afflictions, and pains, and griefs, as man's sinful nature is exposed, and subject unto: TheyRm. 8. 3. Heb. 4. 15. are called ours, because they were procured to him by our sins, and sustained by him for the discharge of our sins; unto the guilt whereof, out of love to us, undertaken by him, they were deservedly due. Christ, for our sakes, hath taken all our spiritual maladies (that is, all our sins) upon him, to make satisfaction for them; and as our surety, to pay the debt that we had run into. Christ, in the quality of a pledg for his Elect, hath given full satis∣faction
for all their sins; bearing all the punishments due for them, in torments and extreme griefs, both of bo∣dy and soul. The reason why they so much disesteemed of Christ was, because they made no other account, butYou know they traduced hi as a notorious deceiv∣er, a drunkard, a friend of publi∣cans and sinners, and one that wrought by the Deil. that all those afflictions that befel him, were by God, in∣flicted upon him, for his own evil deserts: They account∣ed him to be one out of grace and favour with God, yea to be one pursued by him, with all those evils for his sins; when the Jews saw what grievous things Christ suffered, they wickedly and impiously judged, that he was thus handled by God, in way of vengeance for his sins: By all which, you may see, that in the persons redeemed by Christ, there was nothing of worth or honour to be found, for which the punishment due to them, should be trans∣ferred upon our Lord Jesus Christ. But, Thirdly, Observe with me, That no sin, nor merito∣rious  cause of punishment is found in Jesus Christ, our blessed Redeemer; for which he should be stricken, smit∣ten and afflicted by God, vers. 5. 9. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. He had done no violence, neither was any deceipt in his mouth. Sin had cast God and us at infinite1 Pet. 1 18, 19. Rom. 3. 25. cap. 5. 1, 10. 2 Ce. 5. 19, 21. Co. 1. 19, 22. distance: Now Christ is punished, that our sins may be pardoned; he is chastised, that God and we may be re∣conciled: Guilt stuck close upon us, but Christ, by the price of his blood, hath discharged that guilt, pacified di∣vine wrath, and made God and us friends. God the fa∣ther laid upon dear Jesus, all the punishments that were due to the Elect, for whom he was a pledg; and by this means they come to be acquitted, and to obtain peace with God. Christ was holy harmless and undefiled; no manHeb. 7. 26. J. 8. 46. cap. 14. 30. 1. J. 3. 5. could convince him of sin; yea, the Devil himself could find nothing amiss in him, either as to word or deed: Christ was without original blemish, or actuall blot. All Christ's words and works were upright, just▪ and sincere; Christ's innocency is sufficiently vindicated; vers. 9. 'Tis true, Christ suffered great and grievous things, but not
for his own sins; For he had done no violence, neither was any deceit found in his mouth: But for ours, Christ had now put himself in the sinner's stead, and was become his surety, and so obnoxious to whatever the sinner had de∣served in his own person; and upon this account, and no other, was he wounded, bruised and chastised. The Lord. Jesus had no sin in him by inhesion, but he had a great deal of sin upon him by imputation; He was made2 Cor. 5. 21. sin, that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteous∣ness of God in him. It pleased our Lord Jesus Christ, to put himself under our guilt; and therefore, it pleased the father to wound him, bruise him, and chastise him. But, Fourthly, Observe with me, That peace and reconci∣liation  with God, and the healing of all our sinful maladies,1 Ths.  . 1 et. 1. 18, 19. Rm. 3. 25. cap. 5. 1, 16. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. & our deliverance from wrath to come, are all such noble favours, as are purchased for us, by the blood of Christ; vers. 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed: Christ was chastised, to procure our peace, by removal of our sins, that set God and us a∣sunder; the guilt thereof being discharged with the price of his blood, and we reconciled to God by the same price; Christ was punished, that we, by him, might obtain per∣fect peace with God, who was at enmity with us, by rea∣son of our sins; by Christ's stripes we are freed, both from sin and punishment. Now, because some produce this Scripture, to justifie that corrupt doctrine of universal Redemption, give me leave to argue thus from it; That chastisement for sin, that was laid upon the person of Je∣sus Christ, procured peace for them, for whom he was so chastised; but there was no peace procured for the repro∣bates,Isa 57. 21. Eph. 2. 14. or those who should never believe, ergo. Further, by his stripes we are healed: Whence I reason thus: the stripes inflicted upon Christ, are intended, and do become heal∣ing medicines for them, for whom they are inflicted; but they never become healing medicines for reprobates, or unbelievers; Nahum 3. 9. There is no healing of their bruise; Ergo. But,
Fifthly, Observe with me, that the great and the griev∣ous sufferings, that were inflicted upon Jesus Christ, he did endure freely, willingly, meekly, patiently, accord∣ing to the Covenant and agreement that was made be∣tween the father and himself; vers. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. This is a very pregnant place, to prove the satisfaction made by Christ's sufferings for our sins. If we look upon the words, as they run in the original, for thus they run; It was ex∣acted, and he answered; that is, the penalty due to God's justice for our sins, was exacted of Christ, and he sustain∣ed the same for us. The Prophet doth not speak of one and the same party, or parties, both sinning and suffer∣ing, or sustaining penalties for their own defaults; but as one suffering for the sins of another, and sustaining grievous penalties, for faults made, and faults committed by other persons. The words rightly read and under∣stood, do sufficiently confirm the doctrine of satisfaction, made to God's justice, by Christ's sufferings for our sins; the penalty due to us was, in rigour of justice, exacted of him, and he became a sponsor or surety for us, by un∣dertaking in our behalf the discharge of it; Christ did voluntarily undertake, and ngage himself unto God his father in our behalf, as a surety, for the payment of all our debts; they were exacted of him, and he answered for them all▪ that is, he not only undertook them, but he also discharged us of them; so we use the word commonly in our English Tongue, to answer a debt, for to discharge it: And this is most true of our dear Lord Jesus, for he answered our debt, and caused our bond to be cancelled,Joh. 19 30. Rom. 4. 25. Cl. . 2. 14. that it might never come to be put in suit against us, either in this, or that other world: Yet he opened not his mouth: this has respect to his patience; for the oppressions and afflictions that he sustained for others, and that in regard of those, by whom he suffered them unjustly, yet was he silent, he neither murmured or repined at God's disposal
of things in that manner, nor used any railing or reviling speeches, against those that dealt so despightfully with him, but carried himself calmly and quietly under them; Christ having an eye to his voluntary obedience and sub∣missionMat. 26. 39, 42. Mark. 14. 36. Joh. 18. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 23. to the will of his father, and agreement thereun∣to; he undertook willingly what his father required of him; and as willingly, when the time came, underwent it, neither hanging back, or opposing ought, in way of contradiction thereunto; when it was by his father pro∣pounded to him at first, nor afterward seeking to shift it off, when he was to perform what he had engaged him∣self unto, by pleading ought for himself, and the releas∣ment of him, from their most unjust proceedings, in whose hands he then was: He opened not his mouth, to confute the slanders, and false accusations of his enemies; neither did he utter any thing to the prejudice of them that put him to death, but prayed for them that crucifiedLuk. 23. 34. Mat. 26. 3. cap. 27. 12, 14. him; He was led as a lamb to the slaughter (properly as an ewe-lamb, or she lamb, the ewe is mentioned as the quiet∣er of that kind, because the rams are sometimes more un∣ruly) and as a sheep that is dumb before the face of her shear∣ers. A lamb doth not bite nor push him that is going a∣bout to kill it; but goeth as quietly to the shambles, or the slaughter-house, as if it were going to the fold, where∣in it is usually lodged, or the field where it is wont to feed. But, Sixthly, Observe with me, That the original cause of  this compact or Covenant between the father and the son, by vertue of which, God the father demands a price, and Jesus Christ pays the price according to God's demands, is only from the free grace and favour of God; vers. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he hath put him to grief. God the father looks upon Jesus Christ; as sustaining our person and cause; he looks upon all our sins, as laid up∣on him, and to be punished in him: Sin could not be a∣bolished, the justice of God could not be satisfied, the wrath of God could not be appeased, the terrible curse could not be removed, but by the death of Christ; and
therefore God the father took a pleasure to bruise him, and to put him to grief, according to the agreement be∣tween him and his son. It must be readily granted, that God did not incite or instigate the wicked Jews, to those vile and cruel courses and carriages of their to Jesus Christ; but yet, that his sufferings were by God prede∣termined for the salvation of mankind, is most evident by the Scriptures in the margin; and accordingly, it pleasedAct. 2. 23. cap. 4. 28. the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief. The singular pleasure that God the father takes in the work of our Redemption, is a wonderful demonstration of his love and affection to us. Seventhly, Observe with me, That it is agreed between  the father and the son, that our sins shall be imputed unto him, and that his righteousness should be imputed unto us, and that all the redeemed shall believe in him, and so be justified; vrrs. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied, by his knowledg (or faith in him) shall my righteous servant justifie many; for he shall hear their iniquities. Or as some render it, He shall see the fruit of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied; That is, Jesus Christ shall receive and enjoy that, as the effect and issue of all the great pains that he hath taken, and of all the grievous things that he hath suffered, as shall give him full content and satisfaction; when Christ hath accomplished the work of Redemption, he shall re∣ceive a full reward for all his sufferings. Christ takes a singular pleasure in the work of our Redemption, and doth herein, as it were, refresh himself, as with the fruits of his own labours. God the father engages to Jesus Christ, that he should not travel in vain, but that he should survive to see with great joy, a numerous issue of faithful souls begotten unto God; you know when wo∣men, after sore, sharp, hard labour, are delivered, they are so greatly refreshed, delighted, gladded and satisfied, that they forget their former pains and sorrow, for joy that a manchild is born into the world. God the father un∣dertakes,Joh. 16. 21. that Jesus Christ should have such a holy seed,
such a blessed issue, as the main fruit and effect of his passi∣on, as should joy him, please him, and as he should rest satisfied in: Certainly there could be no such joy and sa∣tisfaction to Christ, as for him to see poor souls reconcil∣ed, justified and saved by his sufferings and satisfaction; as 'tis the highest joy of a faithful minister, to see souls1 Thes. 2. 19, 20. Gal. 4. 19. won over to Christ, & to see souls built up in Christ: Christ did bear the guilt of his peoples sins, and thereby he made full satisfaction; and therefore he is said here, to justifie many; not all promiscuously, but those only, whose sins he undertook to discharge, and for whom he laid down his life. Christ's justifying of many, is his discharging of many from the guilt of sin, by making satisfaction to God for the same. But, Eighthly, Observe with me, That it is agreed between  the Father and the Son, that for those persons, for whomBesides the Elet, be iterceeds for none. Joh. 17. 9, 10. Jesus Christ should lay down his life, he should stand in∣tercessour for them also; that so they may be brought to the possession of all those noble favours and blessings that he has purchased with his dearest blood; vers. 12. He bare the sins of many, and made intercession for the transgressors, saying, father, forgive them, for they know not what theyLuk. 23. 24. do: For those very transgressors, by whom he suffered, he does intercede; for the article here is emphatical, and seems to point unto that special act, and those particular persons: Not but that these words have relation also, to Christ's intercession for all those sinners that belong to him, and that have an interest in him; which intercessi∣on continues still, and shall do to the end of the world; Heb. 7. 25. But, The Sixth Scripture is that, Isa. 59. 20, 21. And theThe Sixth Proof. redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; my spirit that is up∣on thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, no out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, saith the Lord, from hence forth, and for ever. Out of this blessed Scri∣pture
you may observe these following things: First, the parties covenanting and agreeing, and they are God the father and Jesus Christ; God the father in those words, saith the Lord; and Jesus Christ in those words, The re∣deemer shall come to Zion. Secondly, You have God the father, first covenanting with Jesus Christ, and then with his seed, as is evident in the 21. vers. Thirdly, You have the persons described, that shall be sharers in Redempti∣on mercies, and they are the Sionites, the people of God, the citizens of Zion; but lest any should think that all Zion should be saved, it is added by way of explication, that only such of Zion urn from transgression in Jacob, shall have benefit by the Redeemer: The true Citizens ofRom. 11. 26. Zion, the right Jacobs, the sincere Israelites, in whom there is no guile; are they and only they that turn from their sins: None have interest in Christ, none have re∣demption by Christ, but converts, but such as cast away their transgressions, as Ephraim did his Idols, saying,Hos. 14. 8. what have I any more to do with you. Fourthly, You have the way and manner of the Elect's delivery, and that is, not only by paying down upon the nail, the price agreed on, but also by a strong and powerful hand, as the origi∣nalRom. 11. 26. Isa. 59. 20. Rumends. . imports in the Scriptures cited in the margin. The Greek word that is used by Paul, and the Hebrew word that is used by Isaiah, do both signifie delivering by strong hand, to rescue by force, as David delivered the Lamb out of the Lyon's paw. Fifthly, you have the special blessings that are to be conferred upon the Elect, viz. Redemption, conversion, saith, repentance, reconciliation, turning from their iniquity; all comprehended under that term, the Redeemed. Sixthly, You have the Lord Jesus Christ considered as the head of the Church, from whom all spiritual gifts, viz. sanctification, salvation and persever∣ance do flow and run, as a precious balsom, upon the members of his body: My spirit that is in me (saith God the Father, to Christ the Redeemer) and my word which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth; nor out of the mouth of thy seed, &c. In these words, God
the father engages, that his spirit and word should conti∣nue with his Church▪ to direct and instruct it, and the children of it, in all necessaries, throughout all ages, suc∣cessively, even unto the world's end. But, The Seventh Scripture is that, Zach. 6. 12, 13. AndThe 7. Proof. speak unto him, saying, thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, say∣ing, behold the man, whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord. Even he shall build the temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them bot ow, that the business of man's Redemption was transacted betwixt the father and the son, is very clear from this text. And the coun∣sel of peace shall be between them both, that is, the two persons spoken of, viz. the Lord Jehovah, who speaks, and the man, whose name is the Branch, Jesus Christ: This counsel was primarily about the reconcilation of the riches of God's grace, and the glory of his justice;What ever Soci∣nians say, 'tis most certain, that Reconiliation is not only on the sinner's part, but on God's also. the design and counsel both of the father and the son, was our peace. The counsel of reconciliation, how man that is now an enemy to God, may be reconciled to God, and God to him; this counsel or consultation shall be be∣twixt them bth, that is. Jehovah and the Branch: There were blessed transactions between the father and the son, in order to the making of peace between an angry God, and sinful men; I know, several learned men interpret it of Christ's offices, viz. of his Kingly and Priestly office; for both conspire to make peace betwixt God and man. Now, if you will thus understand the text, yet it will roundly follow, that there was a consultation at the coun∣sel-board in heaven, concerning the reconciliation of fal∣len man to God; which reconciliation Christ, as King and Priest, was to bring about. Look, as there was a counsel taken, touching the creation of mankind, between the persons in the blessed Trinity, Let us make man after our Image; so there was a consultation held, concerningGal. 1. 26. Col. 3. 10. Eph. 4. 24. the restauration of mankind, out of their lapsed condition:
The counsel of peace shall be between them both: Certainly, there was a Covenant of Redemption made with Christ; upon the terms whereof, he is constituted to be a Recon∣ciler and a Redeemer: To say to the prisoners, Go forth, to bring deliverance to the captives, and to proclaim the year of release or Jubile, the acceptable year of the Lord, as it is, Isa. 61. 1, 2. But, The Eighth Scripture is that, Psal. 40. 6, 7, 8. Sacri∣ficeThe eighth proof and offering thou didst not desire, mine ears hast thou o∣pened, burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required. Then said I, lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is writ∣ten of me: I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my heart; Heb. in the midst of my bowels; com∣pared with that, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. Wherefore when he com∣eth into the world, he saith, sacrifice and offering thou wouldst not, but a body hast thou prepared for me: In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin, thou hast had no pleasure: Then said I, lo, I come, in the volume of the book, it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. In these two Scriptures, two things are concluded. 1. The impotency of Legal Sacrifices, vers. 5, 6. 2. The all sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice, vers. 7. There is some difference in words and phrases, betwixt the Apostle and the Prophet, but both agree in sence; as we shall endeavour to demonstrate. Pen men of the New Testament, were not Translators of the Old, but only quoted them, for proof of the point in hand; so as they were not tied to syllables and letters, but to the sence. That which the Prophet speaketh of himself, the Apostle applieth to Christ; say some, this may be readily grant∣ed: For David being a special type of Christ, that may in history and type, be spoken of David; which, in my∣stery and truth, is understood of Christ: But that which David uttered in the aforesaid text, is questionless, utter∣ed by the way of Prophecy, concerning Christ, as is evi∣dent by these reasons. First, In David's time, God required sacrifices and  burnt offerings, and ook delight therein; for God an∣swered1 Chron. 21. 26. 1 Sam. 26. 19. David from heaven by fire, upon the Altar of
burnt-offering; and David himself advised Saul to offer a burnt offering, that God might accept of it. Secondly, David was not able, so t do the will of God,  as by doing it, to make all sacrifices void; therefore, this must be taken as a Prophecy of Christ. Thirdly, In the verse before (namely, Psal. 40. 5.)  such an admiration of God's goodness is premised, as cannot fitly be applied to any other evidence, than of his goodness in giving Christ; in reference to whom, it may be truly said, That eye hath not seen, nor ear heard. neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. 2. 9. Fourthly, These words used by the Apostle, when he  cometh into the world, he saith, are meant of Christ; which argue, that, that which followeth, was an express pro∣phecy of Christ: These things being premised; out of the Texts last cited, we may observe these following particu∣lars, that make to our purpose. First, That the holy spirit opens and expounds the  Covenant of Redemption, bringing in the father and the son, as conferring and agreeing together, about the terms of it; and the first thing agreed on between them, is the price; and the price that God the father stands upon, is blood; and that not the blood of Bulls and Goats, but the blood of his son; which was the best, the purest, and theHb. 10. 4. cap. 9 22. Jh. 10. 11, 15, 17. 18. J. 1. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. noblest blood, that ever run in veins: Now Christ, to bring about the redemption of fallen man, is willing to come up to the demands of his father, and to lay down his blood: The Scripture calls the blood of Christ, , precious blood; Oh! the vertue in it, the value of it; through this Red Sea, we must pass to heaven; Sanguis Christi clavis coeli, Christ's blood is heaven's key:Isal. 116. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the blood of the Saints, and truly, precious in the sight of the Saints, is the blood of Christ: Ʋna guttula plus valet quam coelum & ter∣ra,Luther. One little drop is more worth than heaven and earth. Christ's blood is precious blood, in regard of the dignity of his person; it is the blood of God himself; it is the bloodAct. 20. 28.
of that person, who is very God as well as very man: Christ's blood was noble blood, and therefore precious; he came of the race of Kings, as touching his manhood; but being withal, the soh of God. This renders his no∣bilityIsa. 19. 11. matchless and peerless. It was Pharaoh's brag, that he was the son of ancient Kings; who can lay claim to this, more than Christ? who can challenge this honour, before him? he is the son of the ancientest King in theDan. 7. 9, 13, 2. world, he was begot a King from all Eternity; and the blood of good Kings is precious; Thou art worth ten thou∣sand2 Sam. 18. 3. of us, said David's subjects to him; and therefore, they would not suffer him to hazard himself in the battl: The nobleness of his person, did set a high rate upon his blood: and whom doth this argument more commend unto us, than Christ. And the blood of Christ is preci∣ous blood, in regard of the vertues of it; by this blood, God and man are reconciled, by this blood the chosn of God are redeemed. It was an excellent saying of Leo, The effusion of Christ's blood is so rich and available, thatLeo de ps. srm. 12. c. 4. if the whole multitude of captive sinners would believe in their Redeemer, not one of them should be detained in the Tyrant's chains. This precious blood justifis ourAct. 13. 38, 39. Rm. 3. 24, 25. 1 Jh. 1. 7. 1 Is. 1. 10. persons in the sight of God, it frees us from the guilt of sin, and it frees us from the reign and dominion of sin, and it frees us from the punishments that are due to sin, it saves us, , from that wrath that is to come. Now, were not Christ's blood of infi∣nite value and vertue, it could never have produced such glorious effects; the blood of Christ is precious, beyond all account; and yet, our Lord Jesus did not think it too dear a price to pay down for his Saints: God the father would be satisfied with no other price; and therefore, God the son comes up to his father's price, that our Re∣demption might be sure. But, Secondly, Observe that God rejects all ways of satisfa∣ction  by men: Could men make as many prayers as there be stars in heaven, and drops in the Sea; and could they1 Cor. 13. 3. weep as much blood, as there is water in the Ocean; and
should they give all their goods to the poor, and their bodies to be burnt, as some have done; yet, all this would not satisfie for the least sin, not for an idle word, not for a vain thought; Heb. 10. 5. Sacrifice and offering thou wouldst not; that is, thou wilt not accept of them, for an expia∣tion and satisfaction for sin, as the Jews imagined. The Apostle shews the impotency and insufficiency of legal sa∣crifices, by God's rejecting of them; the things here set down, not to be regarded by God (as sacrifices, offerings, burnt offerings, and sacrifices for sin, together with other legal ordinances, comprised under them) do evidently demonstrate, that God regards none of those things in a way of satisfaction, they are no current price, they are no such pay that will be accepted of in the Court of heaven. Remission of sin could never be obtained by sacrifices and offerings, nor by prayers, tears, humblings, meltings, watchings, fastings, penances, pilgrimages, &c. Remis∣sion of sins cost Christ dear, though it cost us nothing: Remission of sins drops down from God to us, through Christ's wounds, and swims to us in Christ's blood. It was well said by one of the Ancients; I have not whenceAmbros. de Jacob, . lib. 1. cap. 6. pag. 290, 291. I may glory in my own works, I have not whence I may boast my self; and therefore I will glory in Christ; I will not glo∣ry that I am righteous, but I will glory that I am redeemed; I will glory, not because I am without sin, but because my sins are forgiven; I will not glory because I have profited, or because any hath profited me, but because Christ is an Ad∣vocate with the father for me, but because the blood of Christ is shed for me. Certainly, the Popish Doctrine of man's own satisfaction, in part for his sins, is most derogatory, to the blood, and to the plenary and complete satisfaction of Jesus Christ. But, Thirdly, Observe, that nothing below the obedience and sufferings of Christ our Mediator, could satisfie di∣vine Justice, Heb. 10. 5. But a body hast thou prepared me; the Hebrew text, Psal. 40. 7. saith, Thou hast boared through mine ears; but the Apostle follows the Greek Translation, seeing the same sence is contained in both.
Christ having declared what his father delighted not in; he further sheweth affirmatively what it was, wherein he rested well pleased; in these words, but a body hast thou prepared me. In this phrase, A body hast thou prepared me; Christ is brought in, speaking to his father. By body is meant the humane nature of Christ: Body is Synecdochi∣cally put for the whole humane nature, consisting of bo∣dy and soul; the body was the visible part of Christ's hu∣mane nature: A body is fit for a sacrifice, fit to be slain, fit to have blood shed out of it, fit to be offered up, fit to be made a price, and a ransom for our sins, and fit to an∣swer the types under the Law: Pertinently therefore, to this purpose, is it said of Christ, He himself bare our sins1 Pt. 2. 24. Hb. 2. 9, 14, 17. in his own body; and those infirmities, wherein he was made like unto us, were most conspicuously evidenced in his body; and hereby Christ was manifested to be a true man, he had a body like ours, a body subject to manifold infirmities, yea to death it self. That body which Christ had, is said to be prepared by God; the Greek word , which is translated prepared, is a Metaphor from Mechanicks, who do artificially fit one part of their work to another, and so finish the whole. God fitted his son's body to be joyned with the Deity, and to be an expiatory sacrifice for sin. The word prepared implies, that God the father ordained, formed and made fit and able, Christ's humane nature, to undergo, suffer and fulfil that, for which he was sent into the world. God the father is here said, to have prepared Christ a body; because Christ hav∣ing received of his father, the humane nature, out of the flesh and blood of the Virgin Mary, by the power of theMat. 1. 20. Luk, 1. 31. 35. Holy Ghost; here gives up the same unto the service of his father, to do, to suffer, to die, that he might be a sacrifice of expiation for our sins. As for the words of the Psalmist, Psal. 40. 6. Mine ear hast thou opened, Heb. digged open. It is a proverbial manner of speech, where∣by there is implyed, the qualifying or fitting a man unto obedience in service; the ear, or the opening of the ear,Isa. 50 5. Job, 3. 16. being an emblem, or symbol, or a Metaphorical sign of o∣bedience.
Now, St. Paul, following the translation of the Septuagint, and being directed by the spirit of God, expounds this, of God's sanctifying and fitting a body unto Christ; wherein hs was obedient, even unto the shameful death of the Cross: These words, thou hast bor∣ed through mine ears, do import, that Christ, now be∣coming man; gives up himself to be a willing servant of his father, to obey him unto the death of the cross. And it is a similitude taken from the servants of the Hebrews; who, after that they had served their masters six years, would not depart out of their master's service the seventh year, but abide in it continually until death; for a testi∣mony whereof, their ear was bored thorow on the posts of the door; as may be seen, Exod. 21. 6. It is there∣fore, as much as if he should say, thou hast given me a body that is willing and ready in thy service, even unto death. But to conclude this head, the Apostle speaking of disanulling the sacrifice of the Law, he uses this word body, to set out a sacrifice, which should come in stead of the legal sacrifices, to effect that which the legal sacri∣fices could not effect. But, Fourthly, Observe that Christ our Mediator freely and  readily offers himself to be our pledg and surety; Then said I, lo, I come, to wit, as surety, to pay the ransome, and to do thy will, O God: Every word carrieth a special emphasis; as, 1. The time, Then; even, so soon as he perceived that his father had prepared his body for such an end; then without delay, this speed implyeth for∣wardness and readiness, he would lose no opportunity: 2. His profession in this word, said I; he did not close∣ly, secretly, timorously, as being ashamed thereof, but he maketh profession before-hand: 3. This note of observa∣tion, Lo; this is a kind of calling Angels and men to wit∣ness, and a desire that all might know his inward intenti∣on, and the disposition of his heart; wherein was as great a willingness, as any could have to any thing: 4. An offering of himself, without any enforcement or compulsion, this he manifesteth in this word, I come:
5. That very instant set out in the present tense, I come; he puts it not off to a future and uncertain time, but even in that moment, he saith, I come: 6. The first person twice expressed, thus, I said, I come; he sendeth not another person, nor substituteth any in his room; but he, even he himself in his own person, cometh. All which do a∣bundantly evidence Christ's singular readiness and wil∣lingness, as our surety, to do his father's will, though it were by suffering, and by being made a sacrifice for our sins. God's will was the rule of Christ's active and pas∣sive obedience: Jesus Christ, our only Mediatour and surety, by free and ready obedience and death, did make a proper, real and full satisfaction to God's justice, for the sins of all the Elect. Christ hath, by his death and blood, as an invaluable price of our redemption, made sure the favour of God, the pardon of our sins, and the salvation of our souls: Christ hath freed his chosen from all tem∣poral, spiritual, and eternal punishments, properly so cal∣led; so that now, the mercy of God may embrace the sinner, without the least of wrong to his truth or justice. But, Fifthly, Observe that Jesus Christ our surety does not  only agree with his father, about the price that he was to lay down for our redemption, but also agrees with his fa∣ther, about the persons that were to be redeemed, and their sanctification; Heb. 10. 10. By the which will (that is, by the execution of which will, by the obedience of Christ to his heavenly father) we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all: Jesus Christ agrees with the father, that all those shall be sancti∣fied, for whom he has suffered and satisfied. The ver∣tue, efficacy and benefit of that which ariseth from the a∣foresaid will of the father and of the son, is expressed un∣der this word, sanctified: To pass by the notation, and divers acceptations of this word, sanctified, let it suffice to tell you; It is not here to be taken, as distinguished from justification or glorification, as it is else where taken; but1 Cor. 1. 30. cap. 6. 11. so as comprising under it, all the benefits of Christ's sacri∣fice,
In this general and large extent, it is sometimesHeb. 10. 14. cap. 2. 11. A. 26. 18. taken; only this word, sanctified, here gives us to under∣stand, that perfection consisteth especially in holiness; for he expresseth the perfection of Christ's sacrifice under the word, sanctified, which implyeth a making holy; thisEccles. 7. 31. was that special part of perfection, wherein man was made at first; and whereunto the Apostle alludeth, whereEph. 4. 2. he exhorteth, To put on that new man, which after God, is created in righteousness and true holiness; for this end, Christ gave himself even unto death, for his Church, that he might sanctifie it. The principal thing under thisEph. 5. 25. word, sanctified, in this place is, that Christ's sacrifice mak∣eth perfect; in this respect, Christ's sacrifice is here op∣posed to the legal sacrifices, which could not make per∣fect: So that Christ's sacrifice was offered up, to do that which they could not do; for this end, was Christ's sa∣crifice surrogated in the room of the legal sacrifices; now this surrogation had been in vain, if Christ's sacrifice had not made us perfect, if the dignity of his person that was offered up, and his almighty power, and unsearchable wisdom, and other divine excellencies of his be duly weighed, we cannot but acknowledg, that as his sacri∣fice is perfect in it self, so it is sufficient to make us per∣fect also. Christ's body was given up as a price and ran∣som, and offered up as a sacrifice for our sins; and that we might be sanctified and made holy, Christ, by the of∣fering of his body once for all, has purchased of his fa∣ther, grace and holiness for all his redeemed ones: Christ agrees with his father, that he will lay down an incomparable price for his chosen ones; and then he fur∣ther agrees with his father, that all those shall be sanctified, for whom he has laid down an invaluable price. The will of God the father was, that Jesus Christ should have a bo∣dy, and that that body of his should be offered up, that his Elect might be sanctified and saved: Now, to this Christ readily answers, Loe, I come to do thy will. From what hath been said from Psal. 40. compared with Heb. 10. we may very safely and roundly conclude, that it is
most clear and evident, that there was a Covenant, com∣pact or agreement between God the father and Jesus Christ, concerning the Redemption of fallen man. This I shall more abundantly clear up, before I have said all I have to say about the Covenant of Redemption, that is under our present consideration. But, The Ninth Scripture is that, Psal. 89. 28. My mercyThe 9. Proof will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him; with whom? why with our dear Lord Je∣sus, of whom David was a singular type. There are ma∣ny passages in this Psalm, which do clearly evidence, that its to be interpreted of Christ; yea, there are many things in this Psalm, that can never be clearly, pertinently and appositely applied to any but Jesus Christ; for a taste, see vers. 19. I have laid help upon one that is mighty, migh∣ty to pardon, to reconcile, to justifie, to save, to bring to glory, suitable to that of the Apostle, Heb. 7. 2▪ 5. He is able to save unto the uttermost, that is, to all ends and purposes, perfectly, compleatly, fully, continually, per∣petually: Christ is a thorow Saviour, a mighty Saviour, Isa. 63. 1. Mighty to save; there needs none to come af∣ter him, to finish the work which he hath begun, vers. 19. I have exalted one, chosen out of the people; which is the veryAd plenum, E∣mus, ad pse um Stpulensis. title given to our Lord Jesus, Isa. 42, 1. Behold my ser∣vant whom I uphold, mine elect (or chosen one) in whom my soul delighteth: vers. 20. I have found David my servant. Christ is very frequently called by that name, as being most dearly beloved of God, and most highly esteemed and valued by God, and as being typified by him both as King and Prophet of his Church, vers. 10. With my holySe Jer. 3. 9. Hos. . 5. Ex. 34. 23. oyl have I anointed him; suitable to that of Christ, Luk. 4. 18. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath a∣nointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; and therefore we need not doubt of the excellency, authority, certain∣ty and sufficiency of the Gospel, vers. 27. I will make him my first born, higher than the kings of the earth; Christ is the first born of every creature, and in all things hath the preheminence: vers. 29. His seed also, will I make to en∣dure
for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven; This isClos. 1. 18. It cannot be un∣derstood of Da∣vid's seed, for So∣lomon's Throne was overthrown. chiefly spoken of Christ and his Kingdom: The aspecti∣ble heaven is corruptible, but the Kingdom of heaven is eternal; and such shall be Christ's seed, throne and king∣dom, vers. 36. his seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me: Christ shall see his seed, he shall pro∣long his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands. And his throne as the sun before me; that is,Isa. 53. 10. perpetual and glorious, (as the Chaldee explaineth it, shall shine as the sun:) Other Kingdoms and Thrones have their times and their turns, their rise and their ruines, but so hath not the Kingdom and Throne of Jesus Christ; Christ's dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shallDan. 7. 13, 14. not pass away; and his Kingdom, that which shall not be destroyed. I might give further instances out of this Psalm, but enough is as good as a feast. Now, saith God, I have made a Covenant with him; so then there is a Covenant that God the Father hath made with Christ the Mediatour; which Covenant, the father engages to the son, shall stand fast, there shall be no cancelling or disa∣nulling of it: God the father hath not only made a Co∣venant of Grace with the Saints in Christ (of which be∣fore,) but he has also made a Covenant of Redemption (as we call it for distinction sake) with Jesus Christ him∣self, My Covenant shall stand fast with him; that is, with Christ, as we have fully and clearly demonstrated▪ But The Tenth Scripture is that, Zach. 9. 11. As for thee,And thou also, died with the blood of thy Co∣venant, when I ave sent out thy prisoners out of the Cistern in which there are no waters. Trem. also, by the blood of thy Covenant (or whose Covenant is by blood) I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. Here God the father speaks to Christ, with relation to some Covenant between them both; and what Covenant can that be, but the Covenant of Re∣demption. All the temporal, spiritual and eternal deli∣verances which we enjoy, they swim to us through the blood of that Covenant, that is passed between the father and the son: by vertue of the same blood of the Cove∣nant, wherewith we are reconciled, justified and saved,
were the Jews delivered from their Babilonish captivity: The Babilonish Captivity, thraldom and dispersion, was that waterless pit, that dirty dungeon, that uncomfort∣able and forlorn condition, out of which they were deli∣vered, by vertue of the blood of the Covenant, that is, by vertue of the blood of Christ, figured by the bloodExod. 24. 8. sa. 7. 20. Heb. 13. 20. that was sprinkled upon the people, and by vertue of the Covenant confirmed thereby. Look, as all the choice mercies, the high favours, the noble blessings that the Saints enjoy, are purchased by the blood of Christ; so they are made sure to the Saints by the same blood; by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners: Whatever desperate distresses, and deadly dangers, the people of God may fall into, yet they are prisoners of hope, and may look for deliverance by the blood of the Cove∣nant. By these ten Scriptures, it is most cleare and evident, that there was a Covenant, a compact and agreement be∣tween God the father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, con∣cerning the work of our Redemption. Christ's being cal∣led the surety of the better Covenant, shews that there wasHeb. 7. 22. a Covenant between God the father and him, as there is between a creditour and a sutety; Christ gave bonds (as it were) to God the father, and payed down the debt up∣on the nail, that breaches might be made up between God and us, and we restored to divine favour for ever. But for the further clearing up of the Covenant of Re∣demption, I shall, in the second place, lay down these propositions: And The first is this, That the Covenant of RedemptionThe First Propo∣sition. differs from the Covenant of Grace. 'Tis true, the Co∣venant of Redemption is a Covenant of Grace, but 'tis not properly that Covenant of Grace, which the Scri∣pture holds out in opposition to the Covenant of works; which I shall thus evidence: 1. The Covenant of Re∣demption differs from the Covenant of Grace, in regard of the Federates; in the Covenant of Redemption, 'tis God the father and Jesus Christ, that mutually covenant;
but in the Covenant of Grace, the confederates are God and believers. 2. In the Covenant of Redemption, God the father requires of Jesus Christ, that he should suffer, shd his blood, die, and make himself an offering for our sins: In the Covenant of Grace, God requires of us, that we should believe and embrace the Lord Jesus. 3. In the Covenant of Redemption, God the father has made many great, precious and glorious promises to Jesus Christ As, sit on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot∣stool:He. 1. 13. Isa. 53. 10. And he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands: And Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheri∣tance,Psal. 2. 8. and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession:Heb. 1. 5. Psal. 84. 11. Ezek. 36. 26, 27. And, I will be to him a father and he shall be to me a son: But in the Covenant of Grace, God promises to us Grace and glory, holiness and happiness, both the upper and the lower springs. 4. The Covenant of Redemption betwixt God and Christ, secures the Covenant of Grace betwixt God and believers; for what God promises to us, he didTit. 1. 2. before the foundation of the world, promise to Jesus Christ; and therefore, if God the father should not make good his promises to his Saints, he would not make good his promises to his dearest son, which for any to imagine, would be high Blasphemy. God will be sure to keep touch with Jesus Christ; and therefore, we may rest fully assured, that he will not fail to keep touch with us. 5. The Covenant of Redemption is the very basis or bottom of the Covenant of Grace: God made a Covenant with Christ the spiritual David, that he might make a Cove∣nantPsal. 89. 3 4. R. 11. 26, 27. with all his Elect in him; he made this agreement with Christ, as the head, and on this is reared up the whole frame of precious promises, comprised in the Co∣venant of Grace, as a goodly building upon a sure foun∣dation. But, The second Proposition is this, God the father, in or∣derThe Second Pro∣position. to man's Redemption and Salvation, stands stiffly and peremptorily upon compleat satisfaction; without full sa∣tisfaction, no remission, no salvation: Satisfaction God
will have to the utmost, though it cost Christ his life and blood: Man is fallen from his primitive purity, gloryRom. 8. 32. and excellency, and by his fall, he hath provoked divine justice, transgressed God's righteous Law, and cast a deep dishonour upon his name; the case standing thus, God is resolved to have ample satisfaction, in the reparation of this honour, in the manifestation of his truth, and in the vindication of his holiness and justice. All the attri∣butes of God, are alike dear to him, and he stands as much upon the advance of his justice, as he does upon the glory of his Grace; and therefore he will not remit one sin, yea, not the least sin, without entire satisfaction: In this God the father is fixt, that he will have an offering forIsa. 53. 10. 1 m. 2. 6. sin, in an expiatory and propitiatory way; a price and a ransom he will have paid down upon the nail, or else the captive sinner shall-never be released, pardoned, saved: Now, lost man being wholly uncapable of giving such a satisfaction to Divine Justice, Christ must give it, or fal∣len man must perish for ever. Sin and sorrow, iniquity and misery, always go hand in hand; The wages of sin isRom. 6. 23. Rom. 1. 32. death; Every sinner is worthy of death; They which com∣mit such things, are worthy of death: If God be a just and righteous God, then sin cannot absolutely escape unpu∣nished; for it is but a just and righteous thing with God, to punish the sinner, who is worthy of punishment: It is a righteous thing with God (saith the Apostle) to recompence2 Thes. 1. 6. tribulation to them that trouble you. And as God cannot but be just, so he cannot but be true; and if he cannot but be true, then he cannot but make good his threatnings against sin and sinners: The word is gone out of his mouth. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surelyGen. 2. 17. die; And the soul which sins, shall die. Look, as thereEk. 18. 4. is not a promise of God, but shall take place in time, so there is not a threatning of God, but shall take place in time: The faithfulness of God, and the honour of God is as much concerned in making good of terrible threat∣nings,2 Pet. 1. 4. as they are concerned in making good of precious promises. God has given it under his own hand, That
he will by no means clear the guilty; And that the soul thatExod. 34. 7. Ezek. 18. 20. Rom. 2. 6. sinneth, shall surely die; And that the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him; And that he will render to every man according to his deeds: And will God abrogate his own laws, or will he dare men to sport and play with his threatnings? Will not every wise and prudent Prince, look to the execution of their own Laws; and shall notIsa. 40. 28. Isal. 147. 5. that God who is wonderful in wisdom, and whose un∣derstanding is infinite, see all his Laws put in execution against offenders? surely yes. Thus you see, that God stands upon full satisfaction, and will admit of no treaty of peace with fallen man without it: Now, sorry man is never able, either by doing or suffering, to compensate, and make God amends for the wrong and injury, that he has done to God by his sin; and therefore, one that is a∣ble, by doing and suffering, to give compleat satisfaction, must undertake it, or else we are lost, cast and undone, in both worlds. Concerning that full and compleat sa∣tisfaction, that Jesus Christ has given to God's enraged Justice, I have in part discovered already, and shall say more to it, before I close up the Covenant of Redempti∣on. But, The third Proposition is this, The business transactedThe Third Pro∣potion. between those two great and glorious persons, God the father, whose greatness is unsearchable, and Jesus Christ,sal. 145. 3. Rev. 1. 5. who is the prince of the kings of the earth; was the redem∣ption and salvation of the Elect; our everlasting blessed∣ness was now fresh in their eyes, and warm upon theirLuk. 15. 30. hearts, how lost man might be found, and how fallen man might be restored, and how miserable man might be made happy, how slaves might be made sons, and howEph. 2. 12.—17. enemies might be made friends, and how those that were afar off, might be made nigh, without the least prejudice to the honour, holiness, justice, wisdom and truth of God; was the grand business, the thing of things, that lay before them. Upon the account of the Covenant, compact and agreement, that was between the father and the son, it is, that Christ is called the second Adam; for1 Cor. 1. 5.
as with the first Adam, God plighted a Covenant concern∣ing him and his posterity, so also he did indent with Jesus Christ, concerning that eternal Redemption, that he wasHeb. 9. 12. to obtain and secure for his seed. For the clearing of this, let us a little consider of the excellent properties of that Redemption that we have by Jesus Christ. First, 'Tis a great Redemption, the work of Redem∣ption  was a great work; the greatness of the person em∣ployed in this work, speaks out the work to be a great work: This was a work too high, too hard, too great for all the Angels in heaven, and all the men on earth to un∣dertake; none but that Jesus, who is mighty to save, was. ever able to bring about the Redemption of man. Hence Christ is called the deliverer, And their redeemer is mighty, Prov, 23. 11. Isa. 24. 6. And his redeemer, the Lord of hosts: Isa. 47. 4. As for our redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name: Isa. 49. 26. And thy redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob: Jer. 50. 34. Their redeemer is strong, the Lord of hosts is his name. Again, the great and invaluable price, that was paid down for our Redemption, speaks it out to be a great Redemption; the price that we are bought with 6. 19, 20. cap. 7. 23. is a price beyond all compute; 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. For as much as ye know, that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation; But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot. Christ was a Lamb, 1. for harmlesness, 2. for patience and silence in afflictions, 3. for meeknessIsa. 32. 7. . 11. 19. and humility, 4. for sacrifice; this Lamb was without blemish, that is, free from actual sin; and without spot,. that is, free from original sin: That the most absolute and perfect purity of Christ, prefigured in the Lambs of the Old Testament, that were to be sacrificed, might be better expressed; the Apostle calls him a lamb withoutEph. 5. 27. Neither God nor Christ could lay down a reat price: All things in heaven an earth, are  be compared 1 this blood, to this prie. blemish, and without spot. The price that this Lamb with∣out a spot has laid down, is sufficient to pay all our debts; 'tis a price beyond all compute; All the Silver, Gold, Pearl, Jewels in the world, are of no value, in respect of this price; a price in it self infinite, and of infinite value.
Among the Romans, the goods and estates, which men had gotten in the Wars, with hazard of their lives, were called (peculium castrense) or a Field-purchase: O! how well then may the Elect be called Christ's peculium ca∣strense, his purchase, gotten not only by the jeopardy of his life, but with the loss of his life and blood. Again,J. 10, 11, 15. 17 18. . 20. 28. if you compare the work of Redemption with other great works, you must necessarily conclude, that the work of Redemption is a great work. The making of the worldGe. 1. 3 6, 9, 11, 14, 20, 24. was a great work of God, but yet, that did but cost him a word of his mouth, a let it be; he spake the word, and it was done; he said, let there be light, and there was light, &c. but the work of Redemption cost Christ's dearest blood. Much matter of admiration doth the work of Redemption afford us: The work of Creation is many ways admirable, yet not to be compared with the work of Redemption; wherein the power, wisdom, justice, mercy, and other divine attributes of God, do much more shine forth; and wherein the redeemed reap much more good, than Adam did by his creation; which will evi∣dently appear, by observing these particular differences. First, In the Creation, God brought something out of  nothig; but in the work of Redemption, out of one con∣trary he brought another; out of death he brought life: This was a work of far greater power▪ wisdom, mercy; death must first be destroyed and then life brought forth. Secondly, In Creation, there was but a word, and  thereupon the work followed; in Redemption there was doing and dying: The work of Redemption could be brought about by none but God; God must come down from heaven, God must be made man, God must be made sin, God must be made a cuse, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13. Thirdly, In the Creation, God arrayed himself with  Majesty, power, and other like properties, fit for a great work; in the work of Redemption, he put on weakness, he assumed a nature subject to infirmities, and the infir∣mities of that nature; he did as David did when he fought against Goliah, he put off all armour, and took his staff in
his hand, and drew near to the Philistine: 1 Sam. 17. 39, 40. Fourthly, In the work of Creation, there was nothing  to withstand God, to make opposition against God; but in the work of Redemption, there was justice against mer∣cy, wrath against pity; death and he that had the power of death, was vanquished: Heb. 2, 14, 15. Colos. 2. 14. 15. Fifthly, By Creation, man was made after God's image,  like him; Gen. 1. 26, 27. by Redemption, man was made a member of the same mystical body, whereof Christ is the head: Eph. 1. 22, 23. Sixthly, By Creation, man received a natural being;  by Redemption, a spiritual. Seventhly, By Creation, man received a possibility to  stand; by Redemption, a certainty of standing, and im∣possibility of falling: Joh. 10. 28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Jer. 33. 40, 41. Eightly, By Creation, man was placed in an earthly  Paradise; but by Redemption, he is advanced to an heaven∣ly Paradise. Thus you see how the work of Redemption transcends the work of Creation. Again, the works of Providence are great, very great, in the eye of God, of Angels, of men; but what are the work of Providence, to the works of Redemption? for, in order to the accomplishment of that great work, Christ must put off his Royal Robs, take a journey from heaven to earth, assume our nature, do and die, &c. Again, the work of Redemption by Christ, will be sound a great work, if you will but com∣pare it with those Redemptions that were but Types of this: Israel's Redemption from their Egyptian Bondage, and from their Babilonish Bondage, were very great Re∣demptions, that were brought about by a strong hand, a mighty hand, and an out-stretched arm, as the Scripture speaks: But alas, what were those Redemptions, to our being redeemed from the love of sin, the guilt of sin, the dominion of sin, the damnatory power of sin; and to our being redeemed from the power of Satan, the curse1 Ts. 1. . of the Law, Hell and wrath to come. Lastly, the great
things that are wrapped up in the womb, in the belly of Redemption, speak out our Redemption by Christ, to be a very great Redemption; in the womb of this Redem∣ption, you shall find reconciliation, justification, adopti∣on. eternal salvation, &c. and are not these great, very great things? surely yes. But, A Second excellent Property of that Redemption that  we have by Christ is this, that its a free and gracious Re∣demption. All the rounds in this Ladder of Redempti∣on are made up of free, rich and soveraign grace; though our Redemption cost Christ dear, as has been before hint∣ed, yet, as to us it is most free; Eph. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blod, the forgiveness of sins, ac∣cording, this word properly signiies a delive∣rance, which is brought to pass by ing of a ran and price  Mat. 20. 28. 1 r 6. 20. 1 . 1. 18. to the riches of his grace; that is, according to his exceeding great and abundant grace, Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus; our Redemption is from the free love and favour of God. It was free grace that put God the father upon finding out a way for the redemption of lost sinners; It was free Grace that put God upon providing of such a surety, as should undertake the work of Redemption, as should carry on the work of Redemption, and as should accom∣plish and compleat the work of Redemption: And it was free grace that moved God the father to accept of what Christ did and suffered, in order to the bringing about of our Redemption; and it is free Grace, that moves God to make an application of this Redemption, to the souls of his people. Ah poor souls, the Lord looks not nei∣therIsa. 52. 3. for money nor moneys worth from you, towards the purchase of your Redemption; and therefore, always look upon your Redemption, as the mere fruit of rich Grace. But, The Third excellent Property of that Redemption,  that we have by Jesus Christ, is this, it is a full and plen¦teous Redemption, Psal. 130. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. Christ redeems us from all sin, and from allTit. 2. 14. Hos. 13. 14. the consequences of sin; he redeems from death, and
from the power of the grave; he redeems us from theRom. 7. 6. Gal. 4. 5. Gal. 3. 13. Law, and from the malediction of the Law: Christ took that off, he was made a curse for all that believe on him; he did not only stand in the room of eminent believers, but he stood in the room of all believers, and endured the wrath of God to the uttermost, for every one that believ∣eth on him: Every believer is freed from a cursed estate, by the least faith; every degree of true faith makes the condition to be a state of life, and passeth us from death and condemnation; There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: And Christ redeems us from this pre∣sentRom. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 4. Rev. 14. 3, 4. 1 Thes. 1. 10. Luk. 1. 71, 74. evil world, and from the earth, and from among men, and from wrath to come, and from the hands of all our enemies. Jesus Christ hath gone thorough-stitch with the work of our Redemption; Christ does not his work by halves, all his works are perfect, there is no defect or flaw in them at all: Christ does not redeem us from some of our sins, and leave us to grapple with the rest; he doth not work out some part of our Redemption, and leave us to work out the rest; he doth not bear the heat and burden of divine wrath in part, and leave us to wrestle with other parts of divine wrath: O! no, Christ makes most complete work of it; he redeems us from all our iniqui∣ties, he delivers us out of the hands of all our enemies; he paysHeb. 7. 25. all debts, he cuts all scores, he delivers from all wrath, he takes off the whole curse, he saves to the uttermost, and will settle us in a state of full and perfect freedom, when grace shall be turned into glory; in heaven our Re∣demption shall be entire and and perfect. The Fourth excellent Property of that Redemption,  that we have by Jesus Christ, is this; It is an eternal, a permanent, a lasting, yea, an everlasting Redemption: Heb. 9. 12. Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eernal redemption for us. Redemption is in ge∣neral,Exod. 6. 6. a freeing one out of thraldom: Now this is done three ways: 1. By interceding and pacifying wrath, Thus the Prophet Oded procured Redemption for the Captives2 Chron. 28. 9, &c.
of Judah, by his intercession. 2. By force and might: Thus Abraham redeemed his brother Lot, and the people thatGen. 14. 16. were captives with him, by overcoming their enemies. 3. By ransom, or paying a price; Thus an Hebrew thatLevit. 25. 48, 49. was sold a slave to a stranger, might be redeemed by one of his brethren; the last of these is most agreeable to the notation of the several words, which in the three learned languages, do signify to redeem; though the last be e∣specially intended: In that, mention is made of a price, namely Christ's blood; yet the other two are not altoge∣ther exempted, for Christ hath all those three ways re∣deemed his people: This will more clearly appear, if we duly weigh the distinct kinds of bondage in which weMa. 6. 12. Eph. 2 3. Heb. 2. 143 5. were, by reason of sin; 1. We were debtors to Divine Ju∣stice, 2. We were children of wrath, 3. We were slaves to Satan: 1. As debtors, Christ hath paid a ransom for us: 2. As children of wrath, Christ makes intercession for us: 3. But though Divine Justice be satisfied, and di∣vine wrath pacified, yet the Devil will not let his captives go, therefore Christ, by a strong hand, wrests us out of Sa∣tan's power, and destroys him that had the power of death,Heb. 2. 24, 25. that is, the devil. The Ransom which Christ paid, was the ground of man's full and eternal Redemption; for by satisfaction of justice, way was made to pacifie wrath, both which being accomplished, the Devil lost his right and power over such as he held in bondage. This Re∣demption is a full freedom from all misery, and compris∣eth under it reconciliation, justification, sanctification and salvation: By this Redemption, divine justice is satisfied, wrath pacified, grace procured, and all spiritual enemies vanquished. The perfection of this Redemption, is hint∣ed. in this word eternal; the eternity here meant, hath a special respect to the continual duration thereof, without end; yet also it respecteth the time past, so as it looks backward and forward. It implieth a vertue and effica∣cy, from the beginning of the world, for Christ was a lamb slain from the foundation of the world: Christ him∣selfRev. 13. 8. Rev. 1. 8. is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which
is, and which was, and which is to come. Now, that which is spoken of the person of Christ, may very well be applied to our Redemption by Christ. This Epithete Eternal, is here added to Redemption, in opposition to the legal purifications, which were momentary and tem∣porary: They had a day, and endured no longer than the time of reformation. On this ground, by just and necessary consequence, it followeth; that the Redempti∣on wrought by Christ, is absolutely perfect, and that there is no need of any other. This being eternal, all that have been, all that shall be redeemed, have been, and shall be redeemed by it; and they who are redeemed by it, need no other means. The liberty whereinto Christ Jesus brings the Elect, is permanent and lasting, it abides irre∣moveable and unchangeable to all Eternity. The Jews which had sold themselves to be servants, were to be set free at the Jubilee, yet the Jubilee lasted but for one year;Levit. 25. therefore the same persons might afterwards become bondmen again. But this acceptable year of the Lord'sIsa. 61. 2. cap. 63. 4. redeemed, is an everlasting year, it shall never end; there∣fore they shall never be subject to bondage any more. It is observable, that when the Lord would comfort the Jews, with hopes of a return from Babilon, he usually an∣nexed Evangelical promises, respecting the deliverance of poor sinners from the slavery of Satan, whereof that cap∣tivity was a Type; some of which promises do plainly express the perpetuity of that spiritual freedom, which they shall enjoy: Take a taste, Isa. 35. 10. And the ran∣somed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion, with songsSee also, Jer. 32. 39. Ezek. 37. 25 26, 27, 28. cap. 39. 29. and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away: Isa. 51. 6. Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoak, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein, shall die in like manner; but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished: Isa. 60. 19, 20. The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness, shall the moon give light unto thee; but the
Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw it self; for the Lord shall be thine everlast∣ing light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended: Jer. 31. 11, 12. For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ransom∣ed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. There∣fore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all. But, The Fifth excellent Property of that Redemption that  we have by Jesus Christ, is this, viz. It is an enriching Redemption, it is a Redemption that makes men rich in spiritual blessings in heavenly places: There are many choiceEph. 1. 3. and rare spiritual benefits, that wait and attend on Re∣demption, that go hand in hand with Redemption. AsRom. 5. 1. cap. 3. 24, 25. reconciliation, remission of our sins, justification of our persons, adoption, sanctification, full glorification; we have some fore-tastes of it in this life; here we have the first fruits of the spirit, but in the morning of the Resur∣rection,Rom. 8. 23, 30. we shall reap the whole harvest of glory. It's called, by way of eminency, the salvation of our souls:1 Pet. 1. 9. Redemption and the noble benefits attending on it, are Salvation begun; but in heaven, this shall be salvation consummate. Redemption is a rich Mine, containing a Mass of Treasure, that cannot be valued; could we dig into it, could we pry into it, we might find variety of the choicest Jewels and Pearls; in comparison whereof, all the riches of the Indies, all the Gold of Ophir, and all the precious Jewels, and most orient Pearls that are in the world, are no better than dross. I have read of Tiberius the Emperour that passing by a place where he saw a cross lying in the ground upon a Marble stone, and caus∣ing the stone to be digged up, he found a great treasure under the Cross: But what was this treasure, but a great nothing, to that treasure that is wrap'd up in our Redem∣ption by Christ. What the Lord said once, to his anoint∣ed Cyrus, a temporal deliverer of his people; the same he hath spoken, and much more to his Anointed Jesus, the
greater Saviour and Redeemer of his Church; I will give thee, the treasures of darkness, the hidden riches of secretIsa. 43. 3. See my Treatise called, The Ʋn∣searchable Rues of Christ. places. There are unsearchable riches in Jesus Christ; in him are riches of Grace, of all Grace; in him are riches of justification, and riches of sanctification, and riches of consolation, and riches of glorification: Would you share in the best of riches, would you share in the most durable riches, would you share in soul riches, would you share in heavenly riches? O! then secure your interest in the Redemption that is by Jesus Christ. But, The sixth (and last) excellent Property of that Re∣demption,  that we have by Jesus Christ, is this, viz. It is a Redemption, sweetning Redemption; it is such a Redemption, as sweetens all other Redemptions; 'tis Redemption by Christ, that sweetens our Redemption out of this trouble and that, out of this affliction and that, out of this danger and that, out of this sickness and that, out of this bondage and that. Redemption by Christ, is like that tree which Moses cast into the bit∣terExed. 15. 25. waters of Marah, that made them sweet: This wa∣ter became sweet for the use and service of the Israelites, for a time only, and remained not always sweet after, as appears by Plinies Natural History; who makes mentionPlin. Natural Hi∣story, . 6. cap. 29 of those bitter waters, in his time: But the Redemption that we have by Jesus Christ, does for ever sweeten all the bitter trials and afflictions that we meet with in this world. The Jewish Doctors say, that this tree was bitter, and they give us this note upon it; That it is the manner of the blessed God, to sweeten that which is bitter, by that which is bitter. I shall not dispute about the truth of their notion; but this I may safely say, that it is the manner of the blessed God, to sweeten our greatest troubles, and our sharpest trials, by that Redemption that we have by Jesus Christ. And thus you see the excellent properties of that Redemption that Jesus Christ, by Covenant or compact with his father, was engaged to work for us. But The Fourth Proposition is this, viz. That the blessed  and glorious titles that are given to Jesus Christ, in the
holy Scriptures, do clearly and strongly evidence, that there was a Covenant of Redemption passed between God the father and Jesus Christ. He is called a Mediatour of the Covenant of reconciliation, interceding for, and pro∣curing of it; and that not by a simple intreaty, but by giving himself over to the father; (calling for satisfaction to justice, that reconciliation might go on) for paying a compensatory price, sufficient to satisfie divine justice for the Elect▪ There is one God, and one Mediatour between1 Tim. 2. 5, 6. God and man (to wit, God incarnate) the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all (to wit, his Elect chil∣dren) to be testified in due time. Let me glance a little up∣on the words, One Mediatour between God and men; in the Greek, it is one Mediatour of God and men; which may refer, either to the two parties betwixt which he deals, pleading for God to men, and for men to God, or to the two natures, Mediatour of God having the di∣vine nature, and of men, having the humane nature upon him; one Mediatour, not of Redemption only (as the Papists grant) but of intercession too: we need no other master of requests in heaven, but the man Christ Jesus; who being so near us, in the matter of his incarnation, will never be strange to us, in the business of intercession. A ransom, the Greek , is a counter price, such as we could never have paid, but must have remained, and even rotted in prison, but for our all-sufficient surety and Saviour: The ransom that Christ paid, was a real te∣stimony of his Mediatorship betwixt God and man, where∣by he reconciled both. The man Christ Jesus; Paul speaks not this to exclude his divinity, from this office of Media∣torship, for he is God manifested in the flesh, and God hath1 Tim 3. 16. Act. 20 28. purchased his Church by his own blood: But to shew, that in his humane nature, he paid the ransom for us, and that as man, he is like unto us; and therefore, all sorts andHeb. 2. 10. ranks of men have a free access by faith unto him, and to his sacrifice. He is also called a Redeemer, I know thatJob. 19. 25. my redeemer liveth. The word Redeemer in the Hebrew is very emphatical, Goel, for it signifieth a kinsman, near
allied unto him; one that was bone of his bone, and fleshSome read the words thus, I know, that my kinsman, or he that is near to me liveth. Ruth 3. 9, 12, 13. cap. 4. 4, 5. of his flesh: Christ is of our kindred by incarnation, and redeems us by his passion. The words are an allusion to the Ceremonial Law, where the nearest kinsman was to take the wife, and buy the land; we were Satan's by na∣nature, but Christ our brother, our kinsman, hath re∣deemedJoh. 20. 17. us by the price of his own blood, and will deliver us from hell, and bring us to the inheritance of the saints1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. los. 1. 12. in light; and therefore deserves the name of a Redeemer. Jesus Christ is near, very near, yea nearest of kin to us;Eph. 5. 30. he is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, and blood of our blood: For as much as the children are partakers ofHeb. 2. 14 flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same. Now 'tis evident by the old Law of Redemption, that the near∣est kinsman was under a special obligation to redeem; as you may see by comparing Ruth 3. 12, 13. with cap. 4. 4, 5. Boaz was a kinsman, and had right to redeem; yet, because there was a nearer kinsman, he would not engage himself, but upon his refusal: If thou wilt redeem it, re∣deem it; but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell me, that I may know; for there is none to redeem it besides thee, and I am after thee. Now Jesus Christ is nearest of kin to us, and therefore, upon the strictest terms and Laws of Redem∣ption, he is (Goel) our Redeemer. If we consider Jesus Christ as a kinsman, a brother, we must say, that he had not only a right to redeem us; but that he was also, un∣der the highest obligation to redeem us. There is a dou∣ble way of redeeming persons: 1. By force and power, thus when Lot was taken prisoner by those four Kings thatGen. 14. 14, 16. came against Sodom; Abraham armed his servants, and by force and power redeemed them  we were all Satan's prisoners, Satan's captives, but Christ our nearest kinsman,2 Tim. 2. 25. our brother, by spoiling principalities and powers, rescues us out of that Tyrant's hand. 2. There is a Redempti∣onCols. 2. 15 by price or ransom, to redeem is to buy again, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price, cap. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price; the word price is added, not by a Pleonas∣mus, but , to intimate the excellency and
dignity of the price wherewith they were bought, which was not silver or gold; but the precious blood of Christ, as1 Pet. 1. 18, 19 of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot: Ye are bought with a price, that is, ye are dearly bought, by a price of inestimable value, but of this before. Again, sometimes Christ is called the surety of a better covenant. By so muchHeb. 7. 22. was Jesus made a surety of a better Testament, so called from the manner of the confirmation of it, viz. by the death of Christ. Look, as Christ was our surety to God, for the discharge of our debt (the surety and debtor, in law, are reputed as one person) so he is God's surety to us, for the performance of his promises: The office of a sure∣ty being applied to Christ sheweth, that he hath so far en∣gaged himself for us, as that he neither can nor will start from his engagement: You shall as soon remove the earth, stop the Sun in his course, empty the Sea with a cockle∣shell, make a world, and unmake your selves, as any power on earth, or in hell, shall ever be able to hinder Christ, from the performance of the office of a surety. A perfect fulfilling of all righteousness, according to the tenour of the Law, is required of man: Now Christ our surety, by a voluntary subjection of himself to the Law,al. 4. 4. Mat. 3. 15. and by being made under the Law, he hath fulfilled all righteousness; and that he did this for us, is evident by that phrase of the Apostle, Rom. 5. 19. By the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous: The contents of the Law must be accomplished by our surety, or else we canGal. 3. 10. 13. never escape the curse of the Law; there must be a trans∣lation of the Law from us in our persons, unto the per∣son of our surety, or we are undone, and that for ever. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, and hathRom. 10. 4. made us just by his obedience, we are made the righteous∣ness2 Cor. 5. 21. of God in him: Our surety became subject to the Law, that he might redeem us that were obnoxious to the Law. Again, full satisfaction for every transgression is required of man: Now Christ our surety, hath made satisfaction for all our sins, He was made a curse for us; and by thatGal. 3. 13. means he hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law: To
exact a debt which is fully satisfied, is a point of injustice; now Christ our surety, having made full satisfaction for all our sins, we need not fear to stand before the face of God's justice. A debtor that hath a surety that is able and willing to pay his debt, yea, who hath fully paid it, need fear no colours. This Title, a surety of a better Co∣venant, does necessarily import a blessed Covenant be∣tween Jesus Christ and his dear father, to whom he freely and readily becomes surety for us; for what is suretiship, but a voluntary transferring of another's debt upon the surety, he obliging to pay the debt for which he engag∣eth as surety. Thus you see by the blessed and glorious Titles that are given to Jesus Christ in the Scriptures, that there was a Covenant of Redemption past between God the father and Jesus Christ. But, The Fifth Proposition is this, That the work of our  Redemption and Salvation, was transacted between God the father and Jesus Christ, before the foundation of the world: This federal transaction between the father and the son, was from eternity; upon this account, the LordRev. 13 8. God loved his people, and pro∣vided for them, and contrived all their happiness before they were, yea, before the world was. Jesus is said, to be the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, because that it was agreed and covenanted be∣tween God the father and Jesus Christ, that he should, in the fulness of time, be made flesh, and die for sinners; and therefore it was said to be done from the foundation of the world. Though Christ was not actually slain, but when he suffered for us upon the Cross, yet he was slain from the beginning; in God's purpose, in God's decrees, in God's promises, in the sacrifices, in the faith of the e∣lect, and in the martyrs; for Abel, the first that ever died, died a Martyr, he died for Religion. This compact betwixt the father and the son, bears date from Eternity; this the Apostle asserts, 2 Tim. 1. 9. who hath saved us and calledThe Grace here spoken of, cannot be understood of in Grace, un¦less we will say, that it could be inf into us bere, either the world was, or we were in it. us with an holy calling; not according to our works, but ac∣cording to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. Here is grace giv∣en us in Christ Jesus, before the world began: But what grace was that which was given us in Christ Jesus, before
the world began? doubtless it was the Grace of Redem∣ption, which God in his purpose and decree, had given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. The Scri∣pture last cited does clearly shew, that God the father and Jesus Christ dealt together about the Redemption of souls, before the world began; and that all our everlasting con∣cernments were agreed on, and made sure between them; so that Titus 1. 2. gives the same sound, In hope of eter∣nal life; which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began. How was this life promised before the world began, but in this Covenant of Redemption, wherein GodThe whole busi∣ness of our salva∣tion was first transacted be∣tween the father and Christ, before it was reveiled to us; Joh. 6. 27. The Apostle Pe∣ter, speaking of our Redemption by the precious blood of Christ, saith, That Christ was fore-ordain∣ed (thereunto) before the foun∣dation of the world. 1 Pet. 1. 20. the father promised and engaged to Jesus Christ, that he would give eternal life to all his seed? So the Apostle tells us, He hath chosen us in him (that is, in Christ) before the foundation of the world. There was an eternal contriv∣ance, compact, covenant or agreement between God the father and Jesus Christ, concerning the sanctification, holiness and salvation of the Elect. God agrees with Christ, about the everlasting happiness of his chosen, be∣fore the world began. So Joh. 10. 16. And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also, I must bring. Why must he bring them home? how was he bound, how was he engaged to bring home his other sheep, that he puts a must upon it? them also I must bring: Doubtless, it was from this Covenant and agreement which he had made with God the father, wherein he had engaged him∣self, to bring home all his Elect. Christ takes a great deal of pains to bring home his sheep; being bound in the Co∣venant of Redemption, to present all that are given him by charter, blameless before the father; therefore, saithColos. 1. 22. he, I bring them, and I must bring them; the matter not being lest arbitrary, even in respect of his obligation toPsal. 2. 7. Act. 15. 18. Act. 2. 23. Eph. 1. 9. Prov. 8. 22,—32. God the father. Certainly the Decree, Covenant and agreement between God the father and Jesus Christ, a∣bout the whole way of Redemption, about all things be∣longing to the salvation of the Elect, to be brought about in due time; was fixed and setled before the world be∣gan. Ponder seriously on this, it may well be a load-stone
to draw out your hearts more than ever, to love the fa∣ther and the son, and to delight in the father and the son, and to act faith upon the father and the son, and to long to be with the father and the son, and all your days to ad∣mire at the love of the father and the son; who have from eternity, by compact and agreement, secured your souls and your everlasting concernments. But, The Sixth Proposition is this, That God the father had  the first and chief hand in this great work of saving sin∣ners, by vertue of this Covenant of Redemption, where∣inHeb. 2. 10. he and his son had agreed to bring many sons to glory: Weak Christians many times have their thoughts and ap∣prehensions more busied and taken up with the love of the son, than with the love of the father; but they must re∣member, that in the great and glorious work of Redem∣ption, God the father had a great hand, an eminent hand, yea, the first and chief hand: God the father first laid the foundation stone of all our happiness and blessedness; his head and heart was first taken up about that heaven-born project, the salvation of sinners, Isa. 28. 16. Therefore, thus saith the Lord God, behold, I lay in Zion for a founda∣tion, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation; (Heb. I am he that foundeth a stone in Zion.) It is God the father that hath long since, laid Christ as a sure foundation, for all his people to build their hopes of happiness upon; it is he that first laid Christ the true cor∣ner-stone,Rom. 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 6. Isa. 53. 10. whereby Zion is for ever secured against death, hell and wrath: Hence 'tis said, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; that is, God's Eternal Decree a∣bout the work of our Redemption and salvation, shall be powerfully, faithfully and compleatly executed by Jesus Christ; who, by his word and spirit, shall communicate unto all his Elect, the fruit of his death, to life and salva∣tion.Jeb 23. 24. This is a full place a∣gainst all Socini∣ans, who boldly allert that God removes the curse of the Law, by a free and absolute pardon, without satisfaction. Grotius's Exposition on the place, is but flat and dull. When God saith, I have  a ransom, we are to understand it of a real Ransom, of full pay or satisfaction, and not of a Ransom by favour and acceptation. Again, Deliver me from going down into the pit for
I have found a ransom: The Hebrew word signifies a price paid to redeem a man's life or liberty, I have found a ran∣som, or an atonement, a cover for man's sin: Angels and men could never have found a ransom, but by my deep, infinite and unsearchable wisdom, saith God the father, I have found a Ransom, I have found out a way, a means for the redeeming of mankind, from going down to the infernal pit, viz. the death and passion of my dearest son: But where, O blessed God, didst thou find a Ransom? not in Angels, not in men, not in Legal Sacrifices, not in Gold or Silver, not in tears, humblings and meltings of my people; but in my own bosom: That Jesus, that son of my love, who has layen in my bosom from all E∣ternity, Joh. 1. 18. he is that Ransom, that by my own matchless wisdom, and singular goodness, I have found. I have not called a Council, to enquire where to find a Ransom, that fallen man might be preserved from falling into the fatal pit of destruction; but I have found a ran∣som in my own heart, my own breasts, my own bosom, without advising or consulting with others, I have found out a way how to save sinners with a salvo to my honour, justice, holiness and truth. Had all the Angels in hea∣ven, from the first day of their creation, to this very day, sat in serious Council, to invent, contrive or find out a way, a means, whereby lost man might be secured against the curse of the Law, hell, condemnation and wrath to come, and whereby he might have been made happy, and blessed for ever; and all this without the least wrong or prejudice to the justice and righteousness of God; they could never have found out any way or means to have effected those great things. Our Redemption by a Ran∣som, is God's own invention, and God's only invention. The blessed Ransom which the Lord has found out for poor sinners, is the blood of his own dearest son (a ran∣som which never entred into the thoughts or hearts of Angels and men, till God had reveiled it) which is cal∣led the blood of the Covenant, because thereby the Cove∣nant is confirmed, and all Covenant-mercies assured to us,Joh. 3. 16.
Again, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son: Here is a sic, without a sicut; that sic so, signifies the first∣ness of the father's love, & the freeness of the father's love,1 Joh. 3. 19. Hos. 14. 4. and the vehemency of the father's love, and the admira∣bleness of the father's love, and the matchlesness of the fa∣ther's love. O! what manner of love is this, for God to give his son, not his servant; his begotten son, not his adopted son; his only son, and not one son of many; his only son by eternal generation, and communication of the same Es∣sence; to be a Ransom and Mediator for sinners! God the fa∣ther loving lost man, sent his son to suffer, and to do the office of a Mediator; that through his mediation, he might communicate the effects of his love, in a way a∣greeable to his justice; for God loved the world, and that antecedently, to his giving Christ, and as a cause of it. The design, the project of saving sinners, was first contrived and laid by God the father; therefore Christ says, The son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the father do: God the father sent his son, and God the father sealed his son a commission, to give life to lost sin∣ners, Him hath God the father sealed; that is, made his Commission authentical, as men do their Deeds by their seals. It is a Metaphor taken from them who ratifie their authority; whom they send, that is, approve of them, as it were, by setting to their seal. Christ is to be acknow∣ledged to be he, whom the father hath authorized and furnished, to be the Saviour and Redeemer of lost sinners; and the store-house, from whence they are to expect all spiritual supplies. Look, as Kings give sealed Warrants and Commissions to their ministers of State, who are sent1 King. 21 8. Est. 3. 12. cap. 8. 8. out, or employed in great affairs: So Christ is the father's great Ambassadour, authorized and sent out by him; to bring about the Redemption and Salvation of lost man. And look, as a seal represents in wax, that which is en∣graven on it; so the father hath communicated to him, his divine essence and properties, and stamped upon him all divine perfection, for carrying on the work of Redem∣ption: And look, as a seal annexed to a Commission, is a
publick evidence of the person's authority; so Christ's endowments are visible marks, whereby to know him, and clear evidences, that he was the true Messiah; and of the father's installing him into that office of a Redeemer: So Joh. 6. 38. I came down from heaven, not to do mineSee Joh. 10. 17. cp. 16. 27. own will, but the will of him that sent me: In this verse, Christ declares in the general; that his errand into the world, is to do his father's will who sent him, and not his own; which is not to be understood that, as God, he hath a different and contrary will to the fathers (though, as man, he hath a distinct and subordinate will to his) but the meaning is, he came not to do his own will only (as the Jews alledged against him) but the father's also; and that in this work, he was the father's Commissioner, sent to do what he had entrusted him with; and not as the Jews gave out, that he was one, who did that for which he had no warrant. Christ, in entertaining them that come to him (as in vers. 37.) is not only led thereunto by his own mercy, and bounty, and love towards them, as the reward of all his sufferings; but doth also stand ob∣liged thereunto, by vertue of a Commission and trust laid upon him by the father, and accepted and undertaken by him; therefore he doth mention the will of him that sent him, as a reason of his fidelity in this matter. By what has been said, it is most evident that God the father had th first and chief hand in the great work of our Redem∣ption. It is good to look upon God the father, as the first projector of our happiness and blessedness, that we may honour the father as we honour the son, and love the fa∣ther as we love the son, and value the father as we value the son, & admire the father as we admire the son, and ex∣alt the father as we exalt the son, and cleave to the father as we cleave to the son, &c. I have a little the longer insisted on this propositon, because, commonly we are more ap∣prehensive of the love of the son, than we are of the love of the father; & that I may the more heighten your apprehen∣sions of the father's love, in the great work of Redempti∣on. Ah! what amazing love is this, that the thoughts of the
father, that the eye of the father, that the heart of the father should be first fixed upon us, that he should begin the treaty with his son, that he should make the first mo∣tion of love, that he should first propose the Covenant of Redemption; and thereby lay such a sure foundation for man's recovery out of his slavery and misery. To speak after the manner of men, the business from Eternity lay thus, here is man (saith God the father to his son) fallen from his primitive purity, glory and excellency, into a most woful gulf of sin and misery; he that was once a son, is now become a slave; he that was once a friend, isEh. 2. 12, 13. now become an enemy; he that was once near us, is now afar off; he that was once in favour, is now cast off, heGen. 1. 26, 27. that was once made in our image, has now the image of Satan stamp'd upon him; he who had once sweet com∣munion with us, has now fellowship with the Devil and his Angels: Now, out of this forlorn estate, he can ne∣ver deliver himself, neither can all the Angels in heaven deliver him; now this being his present case and state, I make this offer to thee, O my son: If, in the fulness ofPhil. 2. 7, 8. Isa. 63. 3. Gal. 3. 13. time, thou wilt assume the nature of man, tread the wine∣press of my wrath alone, bear the curse, shed thy blood, die, suffer, satisfie my justice, fulfil my Royal Law; then I can, upon the most honourable terms imaginable, save fallen man; and put him into a safer and happier condi∣tion, than ever that was from whence Adam fell; and give thee a noble reward for all thy sufferings: Upon this Jesus Christ replies, O my father, I am very ready▪ and willing to do, to suffer, to die, to satisfie thy justice, to comply with thee in all thy noble motions, and in all thy gracious and favourable inclinations; that poor sinners may be sanctified and saved, made gracious and glorious,1 Thes. 1. ult. Heb. 10. 10. 14. Psal. 40. 6, 7. holy and happy; that poor sinners may never perish, that poor sinners may be secured from wrath to come, and be brought into a state of light, life and love; I am willing to make my self an offering, and Loe, I am come to do thy will, O God. Thus you see how firstly, and greatly, and graciously, the thoughts of God have been set at work,
that poor sinners may be for ever secured and saved. But, The Seventh Proposition is this, It was agreed betweenGen. 3. 15. 1 Joh. 3. 8. At. 2. 30. cap. 3. 22. Isa. 7. 14. cap. 9. 6. Dut. 18. 15, 18. Gal. 4. 4. em. 8. 3. the father. & the son, that Jesus Christ should be incarnate, that he should take on him the nature of those whom he was to save, and for whom he was to satisfie, and to bring to glory; Christs incarnation was very necessary in respect of that work of Redemption, that he, by agreement with the father, had undertaken; he had engaged himself to his fa∣ther, that the would redeem lost sinners, and as their sure∣ty, make full satisfaction. By the fall of Adam, God and man was fallen out, they were at variance, at enmity, at o∣penRm. 8. 7. hostility; so that by this means, all intercourse be∣tween heaven and earth was stopped, and all trading be∣tween God and us ceased. Now, to redress all this, and to make an atonement, a Mediatour was necessary; now, this office belonged unto Jesus Christ, both by his father'sHeb. 10 5, 6, 7. ordination, and his own voluntary susception; and for discharge of it, a humane nature was very requisite; there was an absolute necessity that Christ should suffer, partly because he was pleased to substitute himself in the sinner's stead, and partly because his sufferings only could be sa∣tisfactory: But now, unless Christ be incarnate, how can he suffer? the whole lies thus; without satisfaction no Redemption, without suffering no satisfaction, without flesh no suffering; Ergo, Christ must be incarnate. TheJoh. 1. 14. word must be made flesh: And so Heb. 2. 14, 16. For as much then, as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise, took part of the same; that through death, he might destroy him that had the power of death; that is, the devil: For verily he took not on him the na∣ture of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham: 1 Tim. 3. 16. Without controversie, great is the mystery of godliness; God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spi∣rit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. This is only applicable to the person of Christ: He that by his office, is to be Em∣manuel, God with us; he must, in regard of his person,
be Emanuel also, that is, God-man in one person: He that by office, is to make peace between God and man, he must be God-man; he that by office, is to stand and minister between God and men, he must be God andHeb. 2. 17, 18. cap. 4. 15▪ 16. man; that so he might not be only zealously faithful to∣wards God's justice, but also tenderly merciful towards men's errours. Look, as he must be more than man, that he may be able so to suffer, that his sufferings may be meritorious, that he may go through-stitch with the work of Redemption, and triumph over death, Devils, difficulties, discouragements, curse, hell, wrath, &c. (All which, Christ could never have done, had he been but a mere man) So it was requisite that he should be man, that he might be in a capacity to suffer, die and obey, for these are not works for one who is only God: A God only cannot suffer, a man only cannot merit; God can∣not obey, man is bound to obey; wherefore Christ, that he might obey and suffer, he was man; and that he might merit by his obedience and suffering, he was God-man; now such a person, and only such a person, did the work of Redemption call for. That is a mighty Scripture, Phil. 2. 6, 7. Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbe∣ry to be equal with God (here's Christ's pre-existing in the nature of the Godhead, and then after comes his man∣hood) But made hiself of no reputation; (Greek, he em∣ptiedIsa. 53. 6. 9. himself, as it were, of his divine dignity and maje∣sty; he did disrobe himself of his glory, and became a sinner, both by imputation and reputation, for our sakes, for our salvation) and took upon him the form▪ of a ser∣vant, and was made in the likeness of men. All this Christ did upon his father's prescription, and in pursuit of the great work of Redemption. The blessed spirit fitted the man Christ Jesus, to be a meet Mediatour and Redeemer for poor sinners. The spirit formed the nature of man▪Luk. 1. 35. Gal. 4. 4. of the substance of the Virgin, after an extraordinary manner, for the service of the Lord Christ; he sanctined the humane nature which Christ assumed, after such a perfect manner, that it was free from all sin; in the veryLuk. 1. 35.
moment of conception, he united this pure humane na∣ture with the divine in the same person, the person of theHeb. 10. 5. son of God, that he might be a fit head, Mediatour and Redeemer for us. But, The Eighth Proposition is this, viz. That there were commandments from the father to the son, which he must obey and submit to. God the father did put forth his paternal authority, and lay his commands upon his son, to engage in this great work of redeeming and saving poor sinners souls, he had a command from the father what to teach his people, as the Prophet of the Church: For I have not spoken of my self (saith Christ) but the father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, andJoh. 12. 49. what I should speak. Christ declares, that he had receiv∣ed a Commission from the father, who sent him, concern∣ing his Doctrine, and what to say and speak; and that he was perswaded that this Doctrine delivered to him by the father, points out the true way to eternal life; and that he had exactly followed this Commission in preach∣ing, both for matter and mannor. The two words of say∣ingBetween saying and speaking, there is this dif∣ference (saith à Lapide) that to say, is to teach and publish a thing gravely; to speak, is familiar∣arly to utter a thing. and speaking, may be taken comprehensively, point∣ing out all the ways of delivering his commission, by set and solemn preaching, or occasional conferences, and the whole subject matter of his preaching, in precepts, pro∣mises and threatnings, and so it will port that his com∣mission from the father was full, both for matter and man∣ner, and his discharge thereof answerable: Christ is a true Prophet, who speaks neither more or less in the Do∣ctrine of the Gospel, than what was the father's will, should be delivered to us; For whatsoever I speak, even as the father said unto me, so I speak: Christ keeps close to his Commission, without adding or diminishing; and herein Christ's practice should be every faithful minister's pattern▪ Again, Christ had a command to lay down his life for those that were giu; No man taketh it fromJo. 1. 18. me, but I lay it down of my self▪ I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again; this commundment have I received of my father: The father is so well pleased
with the reconciliation of lost sinners, that he loveth Christ for the undertaking thereof, and is fully satisfied with his suffering for attaining that end; in both these respects it holds good, Therefore doth my father love me, because I lay down my life; vers. 17. The father is pleased with him, that he undertook this service, and is content with his death, as a sufficient ransom: Christ having laid down his life for the Redemption of lost man, did take it again, as a testimony that the father was satisfied with his sufferings. Now, the way of the accomplishment of our Redemption was agreed on betwixt the father and the son, before the accomplishment thereof: Therefore, saith he, this commandment have I received of my father; whichPsal. 40. 6, 7. with Heb. 10. 6, 7, 8. makes it clear that he came into the world fully instruct∣ed about carrying on the work of Redemption: It pleas∣ed Christ to suffer death, not only voluntarily, but in a way of subjection to his father's command, that so the me∣rit thereof might every way be full and acceptable to the father; for this commandment have I received: he was con∣tent to be a servant by paction, that so his sufferings might be accepted for his people, And so when Christ was go∣ing to die, he saith, That the world may know that I love theJoh. 14. 31. father; and as the father gave me commandment, even so I do: arise, let us go hence. As if he had said, power is permitted to Satan and his accomplices, to persecute me to death; that dying for man's Redemption, the world may see the obedience and love I bear to the father, who hath thus determined. All that Christ suffered for the Re∣demption of sinners, was by the order, and at the com∣mand of the father, who did covenant with him, con∣cerning this work: For, as the father gave me a command∣ment, even so do I: In this Scripture, as in a crystal-glass, you may see that Christ did enter the lists in his sufferings, with much willingness and alacrity, with much courage and resolution; that so he might commend his love to us, and encourage us to do the like through him. Therefore, saith he, arise, and let us go hence: I am very free and rea∣dy, by my death and sufferings, to compleat the work
of man's Redemption, according to the Covenant and a∣greement, that long since was made between the father and my self. If Christ should fail in complying with his father's commands about suffering and dying for us, then, not only the breach of Articles, but high disobe∣dience too, might be justly charged upon him; but from all such charges, Christ has bravely quitted himself: There was a special Law laid upon Christ, as he was our Media∣tor; which Law, he was willing and ready to obey, in order to our Redemption. That Christ should die, was no part of the moral Law, but it was a positive special Law laid upon Christ; well▪ this Law he obeys, he com∣plies with, I lay down my life for my sheep; this command∣mentJ. 10, 11, 15, 17, 18. have I received of my father: Christ, as Mediatour, had a command from his father to die, and he observes it; hence God calls him his servant, Behold my servant whomIs. 42. 1. I uphold: And in pursuance of God's Royal Law, will and pleasure, he takes upon him the form of a servant; and frequently▪ proclaims before all the world, that he came to do the will of him that sent him. Again, God the fa∣therPhil. 2. 6, 7. lays a special command upon Jesus Christ, to preserve and bring to glory all those that come unto him: Jesus Christ has not only leave to save the Elect, but a charge to save the Elect; All that the father giveth me, shall comeJoh. 6. 37, 38, 39, 40. Here you have Christ's Commis∣sion to save the Elect, &c. to me; and him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out (where the doubled negatives, in the Original, serve to make the assertion strong, and to carry their faith over all their doubts and fears) For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the fathers will which hath sent me; that of all which he hath give me, I should lose nothing,▪ but should raise it up again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me; that every one which seeth the son, and believeth on him, may have everlaing life; and I will raise him up at the last day. Christ is to be answerable for all those that are given to him, at the last day▪ and therefore we need no doubt, but that he will certainly employ all the power of his Godhead, to secure and save all those that he must be
accountable for. In this blessed Scripture, there are several special things that we may take notice of, that are pat to our present purpose. As first, that it is the great dignity and happiness of the Elect, that they are, from Eternity, given to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, as the reward of his suffe∣rings, to come to him in due time; and that they are given to him in trust, and that he must be account∣able for them, as being given by the father to him.Isal. 24. 1. They were the father's first, not only by the right of Creation, but by particular Election also; and being thus the father's, they are given to Christ, from eternity to be redeemed by him, and as the reward of his sufferings. Again, such as are elected and given to Christ, will certainly, in due time, come to him: Their being given from eternity, produceth their being given, and coming in time; for God is faithful, who will not frustrate Christ of what he hath purchased, and the power that draweth them is invincible and irresisti∣ble; therefore, saith he, All that the father giveth me, shall come to me. Again, Christ, in entertaining them that come to him, is not only led thereunto by his own mercy, and bounty, and love towards them, as the reward of his sufferings, but doth also stand obliged thereunto, by vertue of a commission and trust laid upon him by the father, and accepted and undertaken by him; therefore doth he mention the will of him that sent me, as a reason of his fidelity in this matter. Further, from vers. 39. We may ob∣serve, that the Gospel contains an extract of the dep counsels of God, and of the eternal transactions be∣twixt the father and the son, concerning lost man, so far as is for our good; for he brings out, and reads in the Gospel his very Commission, and some Articles of the Covenant, past betwixt the father and him. Again, the first fountain and rise of the salvation of any of lost mankind, is in the abso∣lute and sovereign will and pleasure of God;
for here he mentions the will of him that sent him, as the first original of all; from whence their giving to Christ, their coming and safety do flow. Again, these whose salvation the father willeth, are given over to Christ, in his eternal purpose, to be brought to him in due time; for so it is here held out. Again, such as are given to Christ by the father, and do in time come to him, are put in his keeping, and he hath a care of them, not to lose the least of them; For this is the will of him that sent me, that ofJoh. 10. 28, 29. all he hath given me, I should lose nothing; wherein the father doth so commit the trust to him, as that he still keeps them in his own hand also. Again, Christ's charge and care of these that are given to him, extends even to the very day of their Resurrection, that there he may make a good account of them, when all perils and hazards are now over, and that he may not so much as lose their dust, but gather it together again, and raise it up in glory, to be a proof of his fidelity; for, saith he, I should lose no∣thing, but raise it up again at the last day; and so death and dissolution proves no loss. Again, from vers. 40. we may observe, That such as are given to Christ, to be under his charge, and to participate of his benefits, are drawn to believe on him: And it is the father's will, and a part of the transaction betwixt him and his son, that faith be the way to partake of these benefits, and not the fulfilling of the impossible condition of the works of the Law; for they who are given to Christ, are expounded to be they who believe on him; and it is the father's will, that such partake of these benefits here mentioned, as of the rest of his purchase. Albeit mortification, holiness, &c. do prepare for the possession of these benefits, and do evidence a right thereunto, and the begun possession thereof; yet it is only faith in Christ, that giveth the rightEph. 2. 6, 7, 8. and title, that so it may be of Grace. Again, it is cove∣nanted betwixt the father and the son, that believers shall be made partakers of everlasting life; for it is explained, that not to lose them, vers. 39. is that they may have ever∣lasting life, for the further assurance of believers, of their
eternal happiness; it is also covenanted, that they shall have this life in present possession, in the earnest, and first fruits thereof; for they have everlasting life even here, and before their raising up: They have everlasting life; 1. in prmisso, 2. in pretio, 3. in primltiis; he stands al∣ready on the battlements of heaven, he hath one foot in the porch of Paradise. Again, Christ having given an earnest-penny of salvation, will not suffer it to be lost, by any difficulty or impediment in the way, but will carry believers through all difficulties, till he destroy death and the grave, and raise up their very dust, that in body and soul, they may partake of that bliss; and that he may make it manifest, that death and rotting in the grave doth not make void his interest, nor cause his affection to cease. Therefore it is added, And I will raise him up at the last day. Thus you see, that God the father did lay his commands upon his son, to engage in this great work of redeeming and saving poor sinners souls, &c. In the third place I shall shew you, that the manner or  quality of the transaction between God the father and Jesus Christ, was by mutual engagements and stipulati∣ons; each person undertaking to perform his part, in or∣der to our recovery and eternal felicity; we find each person undertaking for himself by solemn promise: The father promiseth that he will hold Christ's hand, and keep him, Isa. 42. 6. God the father engages himself to direct and assist Christ, and to keep him from miscarrying; and that he will give him all necessary strength and ability, for the execution of his mediatory office, and work wonders by him and with him, according to that word, My fa∣ther hitherto worketh, and I work: and the son engagesJoh. 5. 17. himself, that he will obey the fathers call, and not be re∣bellious, Isa. 50. 5. I was not rebellious, neither turned a∣wayExod. 3. 11, 13. cap. 4. 1, 10, 13. back; that is, I did not hang back, as Moses once and again did; nor refuse to go when God sent me, as onceJon. 1. 3. Jon. s did, but I offered my self freely and readily to my father's call; there was no affliction, no opposition, no persecution, no evil usage that I met with in carrying on
the work of Redemption, that did ever startle me, or dis∣courage me, or make me flinch or shrink back from that great and blessed work that I had undertaken: I was duti∣ful and obedient to the calls & commands of my father, in all things that he required of me, or set me about. Now the father & the son being thus mutually engaged by promise one to another in honour and faithfulness, it highly con∣cerned them to keep one another close to the terms of the Covenant that was made between them, and accordingly they did; for God the father peremptorily stands upon that compleat and full satisfaction, that Christ had promised to give to his justice; and therefore, when the day of pay∣ment came, he would not abate Jesus Christ one penny, one farthing of the many ten thousand Talents, that heMat. 18. 24. was to pay down upon the nail for us; Rom. 8. 32. God spared not his own son; that is, he abated nothing of that full price that, by agreement with his father, he was to lay down for us; other fathers give their all, to spare and redeem their children; but the heart of God the father is so fully and strongly set upon satisfaction, that he will not spare his son, his own son, his only son, but give him up to death, yea, to an accursed death, that we might beMauritius, who died most mise∣rably. spared and saved for ever. I have read of a Roman Em∣perour, who chose rather to spare his money, than to re∣deem his souldiers, being taken prisoners: But to redeem us God would not spare, no not his own son; because no money nor treasure would serve the turn, but only the blood, yea, the heart-blood of his dear son; 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. And as God the father keeps Christ close to the terms of the Covenant, so Jesus Christ keeps his father close to the terms of the Covenant also, Joh. 17. 4, 5. I have glorified thee on the earth (saith Christ to his father;) I have finish∣ed the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O fa∣ther, glorifie thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was: O my father, I have finished the work of Redemption; but where's the wages, where's the glory, where's the reward that thou hast promised me. There was nothing committed to
Christ by the father, to be done on earth for the purchas∣ing of our Redemption, but he did finish it; so that the debt is paid, justice satisfied, and sin, Satan and death spoiled; so that nothing remains, but that Christ be glo∣rified according to the promise of the father to him. The summ of Christ's petition is this, that since he had finish∣ed the work of Redemption, that therefore the father, according to his engagement, would advance him to the possession of that glory that he enjoyed from all eternity. Now, for the clearing of this, we must consider, that as Christ was from Eternity the glorious God, so we are not to conceive of any real change in this glory of his Godhead; as if, by his estate of humiliation, he had suf∣fered any diminution; or by his state of exaltation, any real accession were made to his glory, as God: But the true meaning is this, That Christ having (according to the paction past betwixt the father and him) obscured the glory of his Godhead for a time, under the veil of thePhil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. form of a servant, and our sinless infirmities, doth now expect (according to the tenour of the same paction) af∣ter he had done his work, to be exalted and glorified, and openly declared to be the son of God; the veil of his estateRom. 1. 4. of humiliation, though not of our nature, being taken a∣way. It is further to be considered, that however this eternal glory be proper to him as God, yet he prays to be glorified in his whole person, Glorifie me; because, not only his humane nature was to be exalted to what glory finite nature was capable of, but the glory of his Godhead was to shine in the person of Christ, God-man, and in the man Christ, though without confusion of his natures and properties. Christ did so faithfully discharge his trust, and perfect the work of Redemption, as that the father was engaged by paction to glorifie him; and accordingly Christ, God incarnate, is exalted▪ with the father in glo∣ry and majesty; so that believers may be as sure that all things necessary for their Redemption are done▪ as it is sure that Christ is glorified. But, In the fourth place let us seriously consider of the
Articles, agreed on between the father and the son; let us weigh well the promises that God the father makes to Je∣sus Christ, and the promises that Jesus Christ makes to the father, for the bringing about our reconciliation and Redemption, that so we may the more clearly see, how greatly both the heart of the father, and the heart of the son is engaged in the salvation of poor sinners souls. Now there are Seven things, which God the father promiseth to do for Jesus Christ, upon his undertaking the work of our Redemption. First, That he will give him the spirit in an abundant  measure; The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spi∣ritsa. 11. 12. of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledg and of the fear of the Lord: God the father fits Jesus Christ for the work of Redem∣ption, by a large effusion of the Graces and gifts of the spirit upon him: The spirit of the Lord shall not only come upon Christ, but rest and abide with him; the holy spirit shall take up in a more special, yea, singular manner, its perpetual, and never interrupted or eclipsed residence with him, and in him. God the father promises, that Christ shall, in his humane nature, be filled with all the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, that he may be as an everlasting treasure, and as an overflowing fountain to all his people. So, Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I up∣hold, m elect in whom my soul delighteth: I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles: So Isa. 61. 1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me: So Joh. 3. 34. God giveth not the spirit by measure unto him. Christ, as Mediator, is endued with the spirit, for the discharge of that office; and though Christ as man, hath not an infi∣nite measure of the spirit (though indeed in that person, the fulness of the Godhead dwells, as being God also) for that were to be no more man, but God: Yet the gifts and graces of the spirit, are poured out upon the man Christ, in a measure far above all creatures; for thoughCelos. 2. 10. every believer be compleat in him, yet, for what is inhe∣rent Cer. 12. 4. Eph. 4. 7. in him, they have but some gifts of the spirit; but
Jesus Christ had all sorts of gifts: They had gifts for some particular uses, but he had gifts for all uses; they have a measure of gifts which are capable of encrease, he above measure, so much as the humane nature is capable of; which, though it be finite in it self, yet it cannot be mea∣sured nor comprehended by us: So much is imported in that, God giveth not the spirit by measure to him, being understood of his manhood. Though (as we said) if weCeles. 1. 19. cap. 2. 3, 9. speak of his person, he hath the spirit infinitely, and with∣out measure. This fulness became Christ as man, that he might be a fit temple for the Godhead; and as a Me∣diatour, that he might be the universal head of his Church, and store-house of his people; that from him, as from a common person, spiritual root or principle, the Holy Ghost, with his gifts and graces, might be communicat∣edPsal. 68. 18. to us: He received gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them; of his ful∣nessJoh. 1. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 45. we receive grace for grace. The first Adam was a liv∣ing soul, but the second Adam is a quickening spirit. In the man Christ Jesus there is a Treasury, and fulness of grace and glory for us; he is the Lord-keeper of all our lives, of all our souls, of all our comforts, and of all2 Tim. 1. 12. our graces; and he is the Lord-Treasurer of all our spi∣ritual, durable and eternal riches; we lost our first stockProv. 8. 18. by the fall of Adam; God put a stock into our own hands, and we soon proved Bankrupts, and run out of stock and block: Now, since that fatal fall, God will trust us no more; but he hath, out of his great love, and noble boun∣ty, put a new stock of grace and glory for us, into theIsa. 9. 6. Heb. 7. 25. Colos. 2. 3. hands of Jesus Christ, who is mighty, who is able to save to the uttermost, and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledg. Christ was more capable by in∣finite degrees, of the fulness of the holy Ghost, than mere men were or could be; and his employment being, also, infinitely beyond the employment of men; the measure of the Holy Ghost's fulness in him must needs be, accor∣dingly, beyond all measure. Hence, by way of Empha∣sis,Joh. 1. 15. Luk. 32, 33. Act. 3. 22, 23. Christ is called the anointed one of God: The Kings,
Priests and Prophets among the Jews (who were anoint∣ed) were in their unction, but types of Christ, who is the great King, Priest and Prophet of his Church; and anointed above them all; yea, and above all the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers and Believers, under the New Testament ministration. In Christ there is all kind of grace, and it is in him in the highest and ut∣most degree, that he might be able to manage all his of∣fices, and finish that work which God gave him to do; andJoh. 17. 4. God hath filled him with his spirit, that he might succes∣fully bring about the Redemption and salvation of sin∣ners. But, Secondly, God the father promiseth to invest Jesus  Christ with a three-fold office, and to anoint him andIsa. 61. 1, 2, 3. cap. 33. 22. furnish him with what ever was requisite for the discharge of those three offices, viz. his prophetical, priestly and kingly offices; Christ never forced himself into any of these offices, he never intruded himself into any one of∣fice, he never run before he was sent, he never assumed any office, till his father had signed and sealed his Com∣mission:Jh. 6. 27. Whatever Jesus Christ had acted, without a Commission under his father's hand, had been invalid and lost, and God would, one day, have said to him, who hath required this at thy hand. In order to our spiritualsa. 1. 12. A  was a King  a   a Priet a  was 2 King  but never et all ti in a∣ny but in Christ alone. and eternal recovery out of sin and misery, it was abso∣lutely necessary, that whatever Christ did act as a Priest, Prophet or King, he should act by the authority of his father, by a Commission under the Broad Seal of heaven; Heb. 5. 5. so also, Christ glorified not himself, to be made an high priest, but he that said unto him, thou art my son. These two conjunctions () so also, being joyn∣ed together, are notes of a reddition, or later part of a comparison, which is the application thereof; this appli∣cation may have reference, either to the general proposi∣tion, thus, As no man taketh this honour unto himself; so also, nor Christ: Or to the particular instance of Aaron, thus, As Aaron took not to himself that honour; so, nor Christ; both tend to the same end: The High Priesthood
was an honour; for Christ to have taken that to himself, without a Commission from his father, had been to glo∣rifie himself, by conferring glory and honour upon him∣self. This negative, that Christ glorified not himself, is a clear evidence, that Christ arrogated no honour to him∣self; Christ would not arrogate honour to himself, but rather wait upon his father, that he might confer upon him what honour he saw meet: Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest; but his father glorified him, in ordaining or commissionating him to be the High Priest: In short, to be made an High Priest, is to be de∣puted or appointed, and set a part to that function: And thus was our Lord Jesus Christ made an High Priest; he had never undertaken that office, had he not been ordain∣ed to it by his father. But that you may see Christ's three∣fold commission, to his three-fold office; Consider, First, That God the father promiseth to Jesus Christ,1. Heb. 2. 17, 18. Psal. 110. 4. an excellent, royal and eternal Priesthood; Heb. 7. 21. For those priests were made without an oath, but this with an oath, by him that said unto him, the Lord sware and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Mel∣chisedek. Among the Jews, in the times of the Old Te∣stament, they had an High Priest, that was in all things, to stand between God and them; and in case any sinned, to make an atonement for them: Now, look as the Jews had their High Priest, so the Lord Jesus-Christ, he was to be, and he is, the Apostle, and the High Priest of our Christian profession, as Aaron was of the Jews profession. The Priestly office of Jesus Christ is erected and set up, onHeb. 3. 1. By the way you may take notice that the whole body of Anti-christianism, is but an invasion upon the Priestly office of Christ: What is the Popish Mass, (that unbloody sacrifice) but a derogation from the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, once upon the Cross; and so a derogation from his Priestly Office? What are all those Popish Penances and satisfactions injoyned, but a derogation unto the satisfaction of Christ; and so unto the Priestly office of Christ? What is all their praying to Saints and Angels, but a derogation unto the intercession of Christ; and so unto the Priestly office. God deputes Christ to his Priestly office, as God and man; yet Papists say, that Christ is a Priest only in his humane nature. God saith to his son, Thou art a priest; yet they make many Priests: God makes his Son a Priest for ever, yet they substitute others in his room: God gave Christ to offer up but one sacrifice, and that but once; but they, every day, offer up many sacrifices in the Mass: God gave Christ to offer up himself; but they offer up bread and wine, upon pretence that its the body and blood of Christ: Christ's sacrifico was a bloody sacrifice; but they stile theirs an unbloody sacrifice. purpose for the relief of poor distressed sinners. The
work of the High Priest, is to make reconciliation for the sins of the people: In the times of the Old Testament, the High Priest made an atonement for the people; in case any man had sinned, he brought a sacrifice, & his sins were laid upon the head of the sacrifice: Once every year, the High Priest did enter into the holy of holies; and with the blood of the sacrifice, did sprinkle the Mercy-Seat, and laid the sins of the people upon the head of the Scape-Goat, & so made an Atonement for the people; as is clear in that, Levit. 16. 14. He shall take of the blood of the Bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger, upon the Mercy-seat eastward, and before the Mer∣cy-seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger, seven times: And at vers. 21. Aaron shall lye both his hands up∣on the head of the live Goat, and confess over him all the ini∣quities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions, and all their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat; and shall send him away, by the hand of a fit man, into the wilderness; and so he shall make an Atonement. This was the work of the High Priest, in case any had sinned, to make an Atonement and satisfaction (by the way of Type) for the sins of the people. The main scope of the Apostle in that, Heb. 7. is to advance Christ his Priesthood above the Levitical Priesthood; in order to which, he premiseth this, That those priests were made without an oath; vers. 20: The Apostle's third Argument to prove the excellency of Christ's Priestood above the Levitical, is taken from the different manner of instituting the one and the other: Christ's institution was more solemn than the Levites; their institution was without an oath, Christ's instituti∣on was with an oath: The Argument may be thus framed, That Priesthood which is established by an oath, is more excellent than that which is without an oath; but Christ's Priesthood is with an oath, and theirs without; Ergo, It is here taken for granted, that Christ was most solemnly in∣stituted a Priest, even by an oath; yea, by the oath of God himself; which is the greatest, and most solemn man∣ner of institution that can be. God's oath imports two things; 1. An infallible certainty of that which he swear∣eth:
2. A solemn authority and dignity conferred upon that which he instituted by oath. Great and weighty matters of much concernment, use to be established by oath; hereby it appeareth, that Christ's Priesthood is a matter of great moment, and of much concernment: This will appear the more evident, if we consider the per∣son who was made Priest, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ, who was the greatest person that could be; Heb. 7. 28. therefore he is fitly called a great high priest, Heb. 4. 14. Or if we consider the ends of Christ's Priesthood, which were very weighty, and that in reference both to God and man: To God, for the manifestation of his perfect justice, infinite mercy, almighty power, unsearchable wisdom, and other divine attributes, which never were, nor ever can be so manifested, as in and by Christ's Priesthood: To man, that God's wrath might be averted, his favour procured, man's sin purged, and he freed from all evil, and brought to eternal happiness. Or if we consider the benefits of Christ's Priesthood, which are answerable to the foresaid ends. Jesus Christ was appointed and made by the father, The Apostle and High Priest of the Churches pro∣fession: Heb. 3. 1, 2. Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling; consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus; who was faithful to him that appointed him. Christ had a divine call to the execution of all those offices, which he sustained as our Mediator; he did not run before he was sent, he did not act without a Commission and Warrant, he was lawfully constituted by him who had power, to undertake that great charge he hath over the Church; this we shall find asserted of all his three offices. As for his Priestly office, he was made a Priest by an immediate call and ordination from God: Heb. 5. 4, 5, 6. The scope of the Apostle, is to set out the excellency of Christ's Priesthood, by comparing it with the Levitical; His Priesthood had a concurrence of all things necessary to the Levitical; and it had many ex∣cellencies above that. Now, among other things requir∣ed in the Priesthood of Aaron, this was one, there must
be a divine regular call; this was in the Priesthood of Christ; He was called of God, an high priest, after the orderPsal. 110. 4. The Hebrew is, Thou a Priest, &c. i. e. Thou shalt be a priest for ever; it being the manner of the Hebrew Tongue, some∣times for brevity sake, to leave out a word, which is to be understood and supplied. of Melchisedek: that Psal. 110. 4. is God's sure and irre∣vocable promise to Christ, touching that excellent and e∣ternal Priesthood, whereby the recovery of his seed, was to be meritoriously obtained. This Priestly office of Christ is sure, because it is confirmed by God's oath (of which before) as well as his promise. The promise makes it sure, the oath doubly sure, irrevocable: And certainly, the Lord neither can nor will ever repent himself of this promise and oath. The Priesthood of Christ is the most noble part of all his mediation; in the Priesthood of Christ, and in that especially, lies the latitude and longitude, the profundity and sublimity of God's love towards us; and in respect of this especially, is the whole mystery of our Redemption by Christ called, , the magnificent works of God. Christ as man, and as Media∣tor between God and man, was, by his father, deputed unto his Priestly office: Concerning the dignity and ex∣cellency of Christ's Priestly office, above the Levitical Priesthood, I have spoke elsewhere. But, Secondly, God the father promises to Jesus Christ, to  make him a Prophet, a great Prophet, yea, the Prince of Prophets. Christ is a Prophet, , in way of e∣minency and excellency, above all other Prophets; he was the chief, the head of them all: Christ was made a Prophet by an immediate call and ordination from God. Christ, in respect of his Prophetical office, can plead the authority of his father; he can shew a Commission for this office, under his father's own hand; Deut. 18. 18.Vide Act. 3. 22. and p. 7. 37. Deut. 18. 15. Isa. 61. 1. I will raise them a prophet, from among their brethren, like unto thee; and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command them. Christ does not raise himself up to the Prophetical office, but God the father raises him up to this great office: He was anointed of God to preach glad tidings; weigh that, Isa. 42. 6, I will give thee for a light to the gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from their prison, and them
that sit in darkness, out of the prison-house. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath anointedLuk. 4. 21. me, to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, &c. Thus you see, that this Prophetical dignity of Christ, that he is the grand Doctor of the Church, is built upon the Authority of his ather, who hath authorized and commissionated him toChrist displaces all Rabbies, by assuming this ti∣tle to himself, one is your Doctor and Master, even Christ, Mat. 23. that great office, Isa. 50. 4. The Lord hath given me the tonge of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in seaso to him that is weary: He wakeneth morning by morning,  wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned. Thus you see th God the father promiseth to invest Christ with a Proptick office; for the opening the eyes of the blind, &c. This great Prophet is richly furnished with all kind of knowledg; In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledg; they are hid in him as gold and silver are in suo loco, as the Philosopher speaks, hid in the veins of the earth: Treasures of knowledg, that is, precious know∣ledg, saving knowledg; Treasures of knowledg, that is, plentiful knowledg, abundance of knowledg; Treasures, that is, hidden and stored knowledg, was laid up in him. All the Angels in heaven, and all the men on earth, do not know all that is in the heart of God; but now Je∣sus Christ, who lies in the bosom of the father; he knowsJoh. 1. 1. all that is in his father's heart; all those secret mysteries, that were laid up in the bosom of eternity, are fully known to this great Prophet of the Church; Joh. 5. 20. The father loveth the son, and sheweth him all things that himself doth, by a divine and unspeakable communication. God the father shews to Jesus Christ all things that he doth; God's love is communicative, and will manifest it self in effects, according to the capacity of the party beloved; so much appeareth in that unspeakable love of the father to the son; The father loveth the son, and sheweth him all things, &c. Or communicateth his nature, wisdom and power, for operation with him; which is expressed in terms taken from among men, because of our weakness; and ought to be spiritually, and not carnally conceived of.
And therefore these terms of the father's shewing, and the son's seeing, are made use of to prevent all carnal and gross conceptions of this inexpressible communication from the Father, and participation by the Son. In the blessed Scripture, Jesus Christ is sometimes called (the) Prophet, and (that) Prophet; because he is one that came from the bosom of the father, and lives and lies i the bosom of the father, and understands the whole mid, will, heart, counsels, designs, ways and workings of the father. Jesus Christ is anointed by God the father, o be the great Prophet and teacher of his Elect; and acrd∣ingly Jesus Christ has taken that office upon himself  the father has laid a charge upon Jesus Christ, to teah and instruct all those that he has given him, in his whole mind and will, so far as is necessary to their salvation, edifica∣tion, consolation, &c. Moses was faithful as a servant, butHeb. 3. 2, 5, 6. Christ as a son. Christ cannot be unfaithful in his Pro∣phetical office; those that God the father hath charged him to teach and instruct, he will teach and instruct, in the great things of their peace; and no wonder, for the knowledg that is communicated to Jesus Christ, the great Prophet of his Church, is not by Dreams, or Visions, or Revelations of Angels (as to the Prophets of old) but by a clear, full, intimate view, and beholding of the God∣head, the fountain of all sacred knowledg; Rev. 5. 6. And I beheld, and loe, in the midst of the throne, and of theThe Lamb stands because, 1. Pre∣pared to perfect the work of Re∣demption: 2. To help: 3. To judg: 4. To intercede. four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a lamb as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth: The Lamb slain opens the Prophecies, and foretells what shall befall the Church, to the end of the world, The discovery of the secrets of God in his word, are the fruit of Christ slain, ascended and anointed, as the great Pro∣phet of the Church. The Lamb wanted neither power nor wisdom to open the seven seals, and therefore he is said to have seven horns and seven eyes: Seven is a num∣berDan. 7. 24. Isa. 35. 5. Mat. 28. 18. Colos. 2. 3, 9. of perfection. Horns signifie power, eyes signifie knowledg or wisdom; both joyned together, argue a ful∣ness
and perfection of power and wisdom in Christ; so that we have here a lively representation of the three fold office of Christ: His Sacerdotal or Priestly office in the Lamb as slain, his Royal or Princely office in the horns, and his Prophetical office in the eyes. But, Thirdly, God the father promises to make him a King,  yea, a mighty King also: The Kingly office speaks might and power. Christ is a King above all other Kings, he is a King, higher than the Kings of the earth; he is thePsal. 89. 27. Rev. 1. 5. Rev. 17. 14. prince of the kings of the earth; he is Lord of Lords, and ki of kings. I remember Theodotius the Emperour, and aner Emperour did use to call themselves the vassals of of Christ; and 'tis most certain that all the Emperours, Kings and Princes of the world, are but the vassals of is great King. Christ is not only King of Saints, butRev. 15. 3, 4. Rev. 12. 5. Dan. 7. 17. he is also King of Nations: There was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom; that all people, nations and lan∣guages should serve him: God, by promise, hath givenPsal. 2. 8. him the heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession. The Monarchs of the world have stretched their Empires far; Nebuchadnezzar's king∣dom in Strabo, reached as far as Spain; The Persians reached farther, Alexander farther than they, and the Ro∣mans farther than them all; but none of all these has sub∣duedRom. 10. 18. Rev. 11. 15. Mat. 28. 18. Joh. 3. 35. 1 Cor. 15. 27. the whole habitable world, as Christ has and will: All power is given unto him, both in heaven and in earth: The fa∣ther loveth the son, and hath given all things into his hand; and the father, also, hath put all things under his feet. The Government of all the world is given to Jesus Christ as God-man. All the Nations of the earth are under the Government of Christ; he is to govern them, and rule them, and judg them, and make what use he pleases of them, as may make most for his own glory, and the good of his chosen. Now God the father promiseth to investMy King, in a peculiar way, De∣creum, Scrium, Promulgatum. Jesus Christ with this Kingly office; Psal. 2. 6. Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. These words are spoken by God the father, of his son Jesus Christ: In a promissory way, God the father anoints Jesus Christ, as
Zion's King; and therefore it cannot but be the highest madness, folly and vanity, for any sort or number of men under heaven, to seek or attempt to pull that King of Saints down, whom God the father hath set up: Christ rules for his father, and from his father, and will so rule in despight of all the rage and wrath malice and madness of men and devils; yet have I set my king, Heb. I have a∣nointed. Where the sign of Christ's inauguration, or en∣trance into his Kingdom, is put for the possession and en∣joying thereof: Christ was anointed and appointed by his father, to the office and work of a Mediator, and is there∣fore here called his King. There is an Emphasis in the word (I) Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion:Isa. 40. 15, 17. I, before whom all the nations of the earth are b as  drop of a bucket, and as the small dst of the  I, before whom all nations are as nothing. yea, less than nothing; I, by whom Princes rule, and Nobles, evenPrv. 8. 16. all the Judges of the earth; I that rule the Kingdoms of men, and give them to whomsoever I will, andDan. 4. 17. who set over them the basest of men; I that change times and seasons, and that remove Kings, and setDan. 2. 21. up Kings; I, that can kill and make alive, save and dan,Dut. 32. 39. bring to heaven and throw down to hell; I am he that hath set up Christ as King, and therefore let me see the Nation, the Council, the Princes, the Nobles, the Judges, the Family, the person, that dare oppose or run counter∣cross to what I have done. Again, the Lord, in a pro∣missory way, approves and establisheth this King by a firm decree; Psal. 2. 7. I will declare the decree; not the secret decree, but the decree manifested in the word. I, the son of God, will, by my everlasting Gospel, proclaim my father's counsel, concerning the establishment of my Kingdom; I will declare that irrevocable decree of the father, for the setting up of his son's Sceptre, contra gen∣tes, point blank, opposite to that decree of theirs, vers. 3. The Decree of God, concerning the Kingly office and au∣thority of Christ, is immutable, and in effect, as irrevo∣cable (so much may be collected out of the propriety of
the word ) as those things are, that are most irrevo∣cable in the course of nature. Again, the Lord, in a pro∣missory way, extends the dominion of Christ to the Gen∣tiles, and to the uttermost parts of the earth; vers. 8. So far should the enemies of Christ be from ruining his King∣dom, that God the father promiseth that all the inhabi∣tants of the earth should be his, and brought into subjecti∣on to him: not only the Jews, but all the inhabitants of the earth shall be subjected to Christ's Kingdom (the elect he shall save, and the refractory he shall destroy.) He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river, even to he ends of the earth. Again, the Lord, in a promis∣sory way, declares the power, prevalency and victory of Christ over all his enemies: vers. 9. Thou shalt break them with ard of iron, thou shalt dash them in pieces like a pot∣ters vessel: This signifies their tter deruction, so that there is no hope of recovery; a Potters vessel, when it is once broken, cannot be made up again. This Proverb▪ also, signifies facility in destroying them. As for such that plot, bandy and combine together against the Lord Jesus Christ; he shall as easily, and as irrecoverably, by his almighty,  and unresistible power, dash them in pieces, as a Potter brks his vessels in pieces: Jer. 19. 11. I will break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again: So Isa. 30. 14. And be shal break it as th breaking f the ptter's vessel▪ that is broken in pieces, he shal not are▪ so that there shall not be found in the tings f it▪  herd to take re from the hearth, or to ake water withal out of the it. The Jews, you know, were Christ's obstinate  and he hath so dad them in pieces that they  scattered abroad all the world over. Th  hath de ano∣ther promise, that Christ  King it; Psal. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And no wonder, when we  that God the father hath called Christ to the Kingly  the Sceptre is given into his  Crwn is put upon his head, and the Key of Gove  laid upon his shoulder by God himself; Isa. 22. 22. it is written
thus of Eliakim, The key of the house of David, will I lay upon his shoulder; So he shall open and none shall shut and he shall shut and none shall open. Now, herein was thisRev. 3 7. precious soul a lively figure and type of Christ: The words of the Prophecy are applied to Christ, in his adver∣tisement to Philadelphia; and the sence is this, that look as Eliakim was made Steward or Treasurer under Heze∣kiah, that is, the next under the King in Government all over the Land, to command, to forbid, to permit, to reward, to punish, to do justice, and to repress all dis∣order; of which Authority, the bearing of a key on the shoulder, was a badge: So Christ, as Mediator, under his father, hath Regal power and authority over his Church, where he commands in chief, as I may say, and no man may lift up his hand or foot without him; he hath the key of the house of David upon his shoulder, to prescribe, to inhibit, to call, to harden, to save, and to destroy at his pleasure; such a Monarch and King is Christ, neither hath any such Rule and Soveraignty beside him. And if you look into Dan. 7. 13, 14. you may observe, that af∣ter the abolishing of the four Monarchies, Christ's Monar∣chy is established by the Ancient of days, giving to Jesus Christ dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations and languages should serve him; and his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed: Christ did not thrust himself into the Throne, as some have done; nei∣ther did he swim to his Crown through a Sea of blood, as others have done; nor yet swam he through a Sea of sor∣row to this Crown, as Queen Elizabeth is said to do; no, he stayed till authority was given him by his father. But, Thirdly, God the father hath promised, that he will  give to Jesus Christ assistance, support, protection, help, and strength to carry on the great work of Redemption. God the father promises and covenants with Jesus Christ, to carry him through all dangers, difficulties, perplexi∣ties, trials and oppositions, &c. that he should meet with
in the accomplishing our Redemption; upon which ac∣counts, Jesus Christ undertakes to go through a Sea of trouble, a sea of sorrow, a sea of blood, and a sea of wrath; Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mineChrist is  Lord, but in the work of Redem¦ption, e was the father's serant. elect in whom my soul delighteth: Vers. 4. He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth; and the Isles shall wait for his law. Vers. 6. I the Lord have cal∣led thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee: What's that? why, I will support, strengthen and preserve thee with my glorious power; I will so hold thy hand, that thou shalt not be discouraged, but finish that great work of Redemption, which, by agreement with m, thou hast undertaken. God the father agreed with Jesus Christ, about the power, strength, success and assistance that he should have, to carry on the work of Redemption; all which God the father made good to him, till he had sent forth judgment unto victory: As Christ himself ac∣knowledgeth,Isa. 49. 1, 2, 3. saying, Listen, O Isles, unto me, and heark∣en ye people from far; the Lord hath called me from the wmb, from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name: And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword, in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a po∣lished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me: And said unto me, thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. The work of Redemption was so high, so hard, so great, so difficult a work, that it would have broken the hearts, backs and necks of all the glorious Angels in heaven, and mighty men on earth, had they engaged in it; and there∣foreJ. 17. 2. God the father engages himself to stand close to Jesus Christ, and mightily to assist him, and to be singularly present with him, and wonderfully to strengthen him in all his Mediatory Administrations; upon which accountsM. . 11. Luk. 22. 43. Celes. 2. 15. Jesus Christ despises his enemies, bears up bravely under all his sore temptations and trials, and triumphs over prin∣cipalities and powers. And certainly, if Chrst had not had singular support, and an Almighty strength from the Godhead, he could never have been able to have bore up under that mighty wrath, and to have drunk of that
bloody cup that he did drink off. Now, upon the ac∣count of God the father's engaging himself, to own Christ, and stand by him in the great work of our Redemption: Jesus Christ acts faith against all his deepest discourage∣ments, w he should meet with in the discharge of his Mediatory office, as the Prophet tells us; The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded; there∣foreIs. 50. 7, 8, 9. have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is near that justifieth me, who will con∣tend with me: From the consideration of God's help, Je¦sus Christ strengthens and encourages himself in the exe∣cution of his office, against all oppositions: God's pre∣sence and assistance, made Jesus Christ victorious over all wrongs and injuries: Jesus Christ knew that God the fa∣ther would clear up his innocency and integrity, and this made him patient and constant to the last, But, Fourthly, God the father promiseth to Jesus Christ,  that he shall not labour in vain, and that the work of Redemption shall prosper in his hand, and that he will give a blessed success to all his undertakings, and crown all his endeavours. He shall see his seed, and he shall see the travail of his soul. Another promise of the father,  1. 53. 10. . 49. 6, 7, , 9, 10, 11, 12. . 4. 3. to the son, you have in that, Isa. 55. 5. Nations that know thee not, shall run unto thee: The Gentiles that never heard of Christ, nor ever were acquainted with Christ, nor ever had any notice of Christ; when Christ calls, they shall readily and speedily repair unto him, and submit un∣to him: Christ shall one day see and reap the sweet and happy fruit of his blood, sufferings and undertakings; the pleasure of the Lord shall, certainly, prosper in his hand. Christ's sufferings were as a woman's travail, sharp though short: Now, though a woman suffers many grievous pains and pangs; yet, when she sees a man child brought into the world, she joys and is satisfied: So when nations shall run to Christ, he shall see his seed, and be satisfied. God the father promiseth that Jesus Christ shall have a nu∣merous spiritual postrity, begetting and bringing many thousands to the obedience of his father; Nations shall run
unto thee: And this shall fill the heart of Jesus Christ with abundance of joy and comfort, contentment and satisfa∣ction; when he shall see the fruit of his bitter sufferings, when he shall see abundance of poor filthy, guilty, con∣demned sinners pardoned, justified and accepted with hisPsal. 63. 5. father; His soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fat∣ness. The numerous body of believers past, present and to come, that God the father had promised to Jesus Christ was the life of his life. That's a sweet promise, Psal. 110. 2. Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies; they that will not bend, must break; those that will not stoop to his government, shall feel his power: Thy people (the peo∣pleJoh. 17. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Luk. 1. 57. 1 Cor. 3. ult. of God are Christ's five ways; 1. By donation: 2. By purchase: 3. By conquest: 4. By covenant: 5. By com∣munication) shall be willing in the day of thy power, (Heb. willingnesses in the abstract and in the plural number, as if the Holy Ghost could not sufficiently set forth their ex∣ceeding great willingness to submit to all the Royal com∣mands of the Lord.) All Christ's Subjects are Volunteers, free hearted, like those Isles that wait for God's Law;Isa. 42. 4. cap. 56. 6. Zach. 8. 21. And the inhabitants of one city shall go to ano∣ther, saying, let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts: I will go also. From the womb of the morning, thou hast the dew of thy youth. Here's the success of Christ's office promised, both in the victorious subduing of his enemies, and in the chearful willingness of his subjects, and in the wonderful numerousness of his people brought over to him, even like the innumerable drops of the morning dew. Another promise of that great and compleat success, that God the father hath made for Jesus Christ, in his Mediatory office, you have in that, Isa. 49. from the 6. verse to the 14. verse: Christ shall have a people gathered to him, and a seed to serve him, Because he hath made his soul an offering for their sins: The multitude of sinners brought over to Jesus Christ, is the product of the satisfaction which he hath made for them, and the trophies of the victory that he hath got, by dying the death of th Cross. Thus you see that God
the father hath not only engaged himself by compact, to preserve Jesus Christ in his work, but he hath also made to him several precious promises of preservation, prote∣ction and success, so that the work of Redemption shall be sure to prosper in his hand: And to make these glori∣ous promises the more valid and binding, God confirms them solemnly by an oath; Heb. 7. 21. This Priest (Christ) was made with an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord sware and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever. God the father foresaw from everlasting, that Jesus Christ would so infinitely satisfie him, and please him, by his in∣carnation, obedience and death, that thereupon he swears. But, Fifthly, God the father promiseth to Jesus Christ, Rule  Dominion and Sovereignty. This Sovereignty and RulePsal. 2. 8, 9. is promised to Jesus Christ, in Isa. 40. 10. His arm shall rule for him, He shall sit in judgment in the earth, and the Isles shall wait for his law: Isa. 42. 4. not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also, the people of divers countries and na∣tions shall willingly and readily receive and embrace his doctrine, and submit to his Laws, and give up themselves to his rule; Mic. 4. 3. He shall judge among many nations, that is, rule, order, command and direct, as a Judge and and Ruler among many nations. The Conquests that Christ shall gain over the Nations, shall not be by swords and arms; but he shall bring them to a voluntary obedi∣ence, and spiritual subjection, by his Spirit and Gospel; Joh. 3. 35. The father loveth the son, and hath given all things into his hand; that is, God the father hath given the rule and power over all things in heaven and earth, to Jesus Christ. In carrying on the Redemption of sin∣ners, as the matter is accorded betwixt the father and the son, so the redeemed are not left to themselves, but are put under Christ's charge and custody; who has pur∣chased them with his blood; God the father having giv∣en him dominion over all that may contribute to help, or hinder his peoples happiness, that he may order them so as may be for their good. And this power he hath, as
God, with the father; and as man and Mediatour, by do∣nationMat. 8. 18. cp. 2. 3. and gift from the father; and thus every believer's happiness is most firm and sure, all things being wisely and faithfully transacted between the father and the son,Cols. 1. 19. cap. 2. 1. As long as Jesus Christ has all power to defend his peo∣ple, and all wisdom and knowledg to guide and govern his people, and all dominion to curb the enemies of his people, and a commission and charge to be answerable for them; we may roundly conclude of their eternal safe∣ty, security and felicity. But, Sixthly, God the father promiseth to accept of JesusIsa. 49. 5. Christ, in his Mediatory office, according to that of Isaiah, Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord; that is as if he had said, notwithstand∣ing the infidelity, obstinacy and impenitency of the great∣est part of the Jews; yet my faithful labour and diligence in the execution of my Mediatory office, is, and shall be, greatly accepted, and highly esteemed of by my heavenly father. Artaxerxes the King of Persia lovingly accepted of the poor man's Present of water, because his good will was in it; and put it into a golden vessel, and gave him the vessel of Gold; accounting it the part of a truly no∣ble and generous spirit, to take in good part small pre∣sents offered with an hearty affection: Oh, how much more will God the father kindly accept of Jesus Christ, inJerm saith, that the Jews cursed Christ in their Synagogues three times a dy; they so greatly abhor∣red the name Je∣sus, that they would not pro∣nounce it; but if they did unawars happen▪ to pro∣nounce it, then they would pu∣nish themselve with a blow on their faces, &c. his Mediatory office; vers. 7. Thus saith the Lord the Re∣deemer of Israel, and his holy One, to him whom man despis∣eth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rul∣ers; Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship, be∣cause of the Lord that is faithful, and the holy one of Israel, and he shall chuse thee. God the father comforting of Christ, tells him, that though he were contemptible to to many, yea, to the Nation of the Jews, and used basely like a servant by their Princes, Herod, Annas, Caiphas, and Pontius Pilat; yet other Kings and Princes should see his dignity and glory, and submit to him, and honour him, as the Saviour and Redeemer of the world. God the father chose Jesus Christ to his servant, and to be a
Mediator for his Elect; he designed him to that office of being a Saviour, both to the Jew and Gentile, and ac∣cordingly he accepted of him; Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salva∣tion have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritage: Here you see that God the father still goes on to speak more and more comforta∣bly and encouragingly to Jesus Christ; for he tells him, that he will be at hand to hear, and help, and assist him; and he tells him, that he will preserve him both in hisThis Jerom ap∣plies to the time of Christ's hang∣ing on the Cross, he cried out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me; for God made it appear that he heard him, and forsook him not, in that he raised him from the dead, &c. See Heb. 5. 7. person, and in the execution of his office; and he tells him, that he will accept of his person, and of his services, and of his suits, and intercession, for himself and his peo∣ple. So Mat. 3. 17. And lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: The voice from heaven was doubtless the voice of his father, in that he saith, This is my beloved Son, my natural son, by eternal and incomprehensible generation; and there∣fore dearest to me and most acceptable with me; my judg∣ment is satisfied in him, my love is settled upon him, and I have an inestimable value for him; and therefore I can∣not but declare my approbation and acceptation, both of him and his work; I am well pleased in him, I am infi∣nitely pleased in him, I am only pleased in him, I am at all times pleased in him, I am for ever pleased in him; I am so well pleased in him, that, for his sake, I am fully appeas∣ed with all them whom I have given him, and who come unto him: Joh. 6. 37, 38, 39, 40. But, Seventhly, God the father promiseth, highly to exalt  Jesus Christ, and nobly to reward him, and everlastingly to glorifie him: And nations that knew not thee, shall runIsa. 49. 4, 5, 6. Isa. 40. 10. unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee: These are the words of God the father to his son, promising of him to set such a Crown of glory upon his head, as should make the na∣tions of the world run unto him. God the father made Christ glorious in his birth, by the Angel's Doxo∣logy,
Glory be to God on high; in his baptism by his speak∣ingLuk. 2. 1, 14. Mat. 3. ult. cap. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Rm. 1. 4. Act. 1 9, 10, 11. of him from heaven, as his beloved son; in his trans∣figuration on the mount, in his resurrection, and in his ascension into heaven: So Isa 53. 12. Therefore will I di∣vide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he hath poured out his soul unto death; and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgres∣sours. The meaning is this, I will impart, saith God the father, to my son, such honour, glory, renown and riches after his sufferings, as Conquerours use to have; and he shall have them as a glorious reward of all his conflicts with my wrath, with temptations, with persecutions, with reproach, with contempt, with death, yea, and with hell it self. The words are a plain allusion to Con∣querours in War, who are commonly exalted and great∣ly rewarded by their Princes, for venturing of their lives, and obtaining of Conquests, as all Histories will tell you: And indeed, should not God the father reward Jesus Christ for all his hard services, and his matchless suffer∣ings, he would express less kindness to him, than he has done to heathen Princes; for he gave Egypt to Nebuchad∣nezzar as his hire, for his service at Tyre; and to Cyrus,Ezek. 29. 18, 19. Isa. 45. 1, 2, 3. he gave hidden Treasure: But alas, what were their ser∣vices to Christ's services, or their sufferings to Christ's sufferings? I have read of Cyrus, how that in a great ex∣pedition against his enemies, the better to encourage his souldiers to fight; in an Oration that he made at the head of his Army, he promised upon the victory, to make e∣very foot-souldier an horse-man, and every horse-man a Commander; and that no officer that did valiantly,Cols. 2. 14, 15. should be unrewarded: And will God the father let the son of his dearest love, who has fought against all infer∣nal powers, and conquered them, go without his reward? surely no. So in Psal. 2. 7. I will declare the decree, the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee: David was God's son by Adoption and ac∣ceptation,Psal. 9. 26▪ 27. Prov. 8. Heb. 1. 5. but Christ was his son; 1. By eternal Genera∣tion▪
2. By hypostatical union; and so God had one on∣ly son, as Abraham had one only Isaac, though otherwise he was the father of many nations; some by this day do understand the day of Eternity, where there is no time past nor to come, no beginning nor ending, but always one present day: Others by this day, do understand it of the day of Christ's incarnation, and coming into the world; some again, do understand it of the whole time of his manifestation in the world, when he was sent forth as a Prophet to teach them, and was declared evidently to be the son of God, both by his miracles and ministry,Jo. 1. 14. and by that voice that was heard from heaven; This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: Others do un∣derstand it of the day of Christ's Resurrection (and with them I close) for this seems to be chiefly intended; part∣ly because it seems to be spoken of some solemn time of Christ's manifestation to be the son of God, and he was declared to be the son of God with power, according to theRom. 1. 4. spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead; that is, by the power and force of the Deity, sanctifying and quickening the flesh, he was raised from the dead, and so declared mightily to be the son of God; but mainly be∣cause the Apostle doth clearly affirm, that this was in Christ's Resurrection: He hath raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm; Thou art my son, thisAct. 13. 32, 33. day have I begotten thee. In the day of Christ's Resurre∣ction, he seems to tell all the world, that though, from the beginning, he had been hid in the bosom of his father,Jh. 1. 18. and that though in the Law he had been but darkly sha∣dowed out; yet in the day of his Resurrection, they might plainly see that he had fully satisfied Divine Justice, finished his sfferings, and compleated the Redemption of his Elect; and that accordingly, his father had arrayed him with that glory that was sutable to him. Before the Resurrection, the Godhead was veiled under the infir∣mity of the flesh; but in the Resurrection, and after the Resurrection, the Godhead did sparkle and shine forth2 Cor. 13. 4. very gloriously and wonderfully; least the humane na∣ture
of Christ, upon its assumption, should shrink at the approach of sufferings, God the father engages himself to give Jesus Christ a full and ample reward, And to exalt him far above all principality and power, and to put all thingsEph. 1. 21, 22.  il. 2. 9. Name is put for person, and bow∣ing of the knee, a bodily ceremony, to express in∣ward subjection. Estius, . under his feet, and to make him head over all things to the Church: And to give him a name above every name; that at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow; and all because (to give satisfaction to his father) he made himself of no re∣putation, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; that is, to his dying day: He went thorough many a little death, all his life long, and at length under∣went that cursed and painful death of the Cross; upon which account, the father rewards him highly, by exalt∣ing him to singular glory, and transcendent honour. Look that as the assumption of the humane nature is the high∣est instance of free mercy, so is the rewarding thereof in its state of exaltation, the highest instance of remunera∣tive justice. Oh, how highly is the humane nature of Christ honoured, by being exalted to a personal union with the Godhead; though vain men may dishonour Christ, yet the father hath conferred honour upon him as Mediator, that it may be a Testimony to us, that he is in¦finitely pleased with the Redemption of lost man. Al∣though Christ be in himself, God all-sufficient, God blessed for ever, and so is not capable of any access of glory; yet it pleased him to condescend so far, as to obscure his own glory under the veil of his flesh, and state of humiliation, till he had perfected the work of Redemption; and to ac∣count of his office of Mediator, and the dignity accom∣panying it, as great honour conferred upon him by the fa∣ther:Jl. 8. 54. And it is observable that Christ, having finished our Redemption on earth, he petitions his father to ad∣vance him to the possession of that glory that he enjoyed from all eternity; And now, O father, glorifie thou me,Joh. 17. . with thine own self; with the glory which I had with thee, before the world was. Now, for the clearing up of this Text, we are to consider, that as Christ was from all E∣ternity, the glorious God, the God of glory; so we are
not to conceive of any real change, in this glory of hisJesus Christ is true God, and was infinitely glorious from all eternity, for he had glory with his father, before the world was; and therefore he was no upstart God, and of a lat∣er standing▪ as the Arians and Ma∣hoetans make of him. Godhead; as if, by his estate of humiliation, he had suf∣fered any diminution, or by his state of exaltation any real accession were made to his glory as God. But the meaning is this, That Christ having (according to the pa∣ction past betwixt the father and him) obscured the glory of his Godhead for a time, under the veil of the form of a servant, and our sinless infirmities, doth now expect (according to the tenour of the same paction) that after he hath done his work as Mediator, he be highly exalted and glorified in his whole person, that his humane nature be exalted to what glory finite nature is capable of; and that the glory of his Godhead might shine in the person of Christ, God-man, and in the man Christ Jesus. Thus you see the promises, the encouragements and rewards, that God the father sets before Jesus Christ. And let thus much suffice, concerning the Articles of the Covenant on God's part. In the last place, let us seriously consider of the Articles of the Covenant on Christ's part; and let us weigh well the promises that Jesus Christ has made to the father, for the bringing about the great work of our Redemption; that so we may see what infinite cause we have to love the son as we love the father, and to honour the son as we honour the father, and to trust in the son as we trust in the father, and to glorifie the son as we glorifie the father, &c. Now, there are six observable things on Christ's part, on Christ's side, that we are to take special notice of, &c. First, Christ having consented and agreed with the fa∣ther  about our Redemption, accordingly he applies him∣self to the discharge of that great and glorious work; by taking a body, by assuming our nature; Heb. 2. 14. For as much then, as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same: He who was equal with God, did so far abase himself, as to take on him the nature of man, and subjected himself to all manner▪ of humane frailties (so far as they are freed from
sin) even such as accompany flesh and blood; and this is one of the wonders of mercy and love, that Christ our head should stoop so low (who was himself full of glory) as to take part of flesh and blood, that he might suffer for flesh and blood; vers. 16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham: Christ assumed the common nature of man, and not of a∣ny particular person. The Apostle doth here purposely use this word seed, to shew that Christ came out of theGen. 46. 26. Exod. 1. 5. Heb. 7. 5. 1 King. 8. 19. loins of man, as Jacob's children and their children are said to come out of his loins, and as all the Jews are said to come out of the loins of Abraham, and as Solomon is said to come out of the loins of David; in a man's loins his seed is, and it is a part of his substance: Thus it shew∣eth that Christ's humane nature was of the very substance of man, and that Christ was the very same that was pro∣mised to be the Redeemer of man; for of old he was foretold under this word seed, as The seed of the woman,Gen. 3. 15. Gen. 12. 18. Rom. 9. 7. Heb. 11. 18. 2 Ram. 7. 12. Joh. 8. 58. the seed of Abraham, the seed of Isaac, the seed of David; This word, he took on him, as it setteth out the humane nature of Christ, so it gives us a hint of his Divine Na∣ture; for it presupposeth that Christ was before he took on him the seed of Abraham. He that taketh any thing on him, must needs be before he do so; is it possible for him that is not, to take any thing on him? Now Christ, in regard of his humane nature, was not before he assum∣ed that nature; therefore that former being must needs be in regard of his divine nature, in that respect he ever was, even the eternal God; being God, he took on him an hu∣mane nature. Christ's Eternal Deity shines in this 16. verse, and so does his true humanity; in that he took up∣on him the seed of man, it is most evident that he was a true man; Seed is the matter of man's nature, and the very substance thereof. The seed of man is the root, outIsa. 11. 1. Luk. 1. 35. of which Christ assumed his humane nature: The humane nature was not created of nothing, nor was it brought from heaven, but assumed out of the seed of man. The humane nature of Christ never had a subsistence in it self.
At or in the very first framing or making it, it was united to the Divine nature; and at or in the first uniting it, itCrean fundi∣ur, & inundn∣do creatu. was framed or made. Philosophers say of the uniting of the soul to the body, in creating it it is infused, and in infusing it it is created. Much more is this true, con∣cerning the Humane nature of Christ, united to his Di∣vine. Fitly therefore is it here said, that he took on him the seed of Abraham. So Joh. 1. 14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us: The Evangelist having proved the Divinity of Jesus Christ, comes now to speak of his humanity, incarnation and manifestation in the flesh, whereby he became God and Man in one person. Flesh here signifies the whole man in Scripture; ye all know that man consisteth of two parts, which are sometimes called flesh and spirit, and sometimes called soul and body; Now by a Synecdoche, either of these prts may b put for the whole: And so sometimes the soul is put for the whole man, and sometimes the body is put for the whole man; as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures in the Mar∣ginAl. 27. 37. Gen. 6. 27. Rm. 12. 1. cap. 3. 20. Christ put him∣self into a low si leprous suit of ours, to expiate our pride and robbery in reach∣ing after the Di∣ty, and to heal  of our spiritual Leprosie; for if  had nt assum∣ed our flesh, he had not saved us. Nzianz. together. Christ did assume the whole man, he did assume the soul as well as the body, and both under the term Flesh. And indeed, unless he had assumed the whole man, the whole man could not have been saved; if Christ had not taken the whole man, he could not have saved the whole man: Christ took the nature of man, that he might be a fit Mediator; if he had not been man, he could not have died; and if he had not been God, he could not have satisfied. So great was the difficulty of restoring the Image of God in lost man, and of restoring him to God's favour, and the dignity of sonship, that no less could do it, than the natural son of God, his become∣ing the son of man, to suffer in our nature; and so great was the Father's love and the Son's love to fallen man, as to lay a foundation of reconciliation betwixt God and man, in the personal union of the Divine and Humane nature of Christ; so much is imported in those words, the word was made flesh. The person of the Godhead that was incarnate, was neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost,
but the Son, the second Person, for the Word was made Flesh. There being a real distinction of the Persons, that one of them is is not another; and each of them having their proper manner of subsistence, the one of them might be incarnate, and not the other; and it is the Godhead, not simply considered, but the Person of the Son, subsisting in that Godhead, that was incarnate. And it was very convenient, that the second or middle Person (in order of subsistence) of the blessed Trinity, should be the Re∣conciler of God and man; and that he by whom all thingsCeles. 1. 16, 17. Heb. 1. 2, 3. were made, should be the Restorer and Maker of the new World; and that he who was the express Image of his Fa∣ther, should be the Repairer of the Image of God in us. Oh the admirable love and wisdom of God that shines in this, that the second Person in the Trinity is set on work to procure our Redemption! Though reason could never have found out such a way, yet when God hath revealed it, reason, though but shallow, can see a fitness in it; be∣cause there being a necessity that the Saviour of man should be man, and an impossibility that any but God should save him; and one Person in the Trinity being to be incarnate, it agrees to reason, that the first Person in the Trinity should not be the Mediator; for who should send him? he is of none, and therefore could not be sent: There must be one sent to reconcile the enmity, and ano∣ther to give gifts to friends; two proceeding Persons, the Son from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son: Accordingly the second Person, which is the Son, he is sent upon the first errand, to reconcile man to God; and the third person, the Holy Ghost, he is sent to give gifts to men so reconciled; so as to reason, it is suitable, and a very great congruity; that God, having made all things by his Son, should now repair all things by his Son; that he that was the middle Person in the Trinity, should become the Mediator between God▪ and man; that he that was the express Image of the Father's Person, should restore the Image of God, defaced in man by his sins. Ah Christians, how well does it become you
to lose your selves in the admiration of the wisdom of God, in the contrivance of the work of our Redemption! For the Son of God to take on him the nature of man, with all the essential properties thereof, and all the sinless infirmities and frailties thereof, is a wonder that may well take up our thoughts to all Eternity. And Christ took the infirmities of our nature, as well as the nature it self: To shew the truth of his Humanity; he had a nature that could hunger and thirst even as ours do, and to sanctifie them to us; and that so he might sympathize with us, as a merciful and faithful High Priest; and that we mightHeb. 2. 16, 17, 18. cap. 4. 15, 16. confide the more in him, and have acces to him with boldness. By reason of the personal union of the two na∣tures in Christ, he is a fit Mediator betwixt God and man,Act. 20. 28. his sufferings are of infinite value, being the sufferings of one who is God, and who is mighty to carry on the workIsa. 63 1. He. 7. 25. of Redemption, and to apply his own purchase, and re∣pair all our losses. Oh, what an honour has Jesus Christ put upon fallen man, by taking the nature of man on him! What is so near and dear to us as our own nature? and lo, our nature is highly preferred by Jesus Christ, to a Union in the Godhead; Christ now sits in heaven withAct. 1. 9, 10, 11. our nature, and the same flesh that we have upon us, only glorified. It is that which all the world cannot give a sufficient reason, why the same word in the Hebrew, Ba∣shar, should signifie both Flesh, and Good Tidings; Divi∣nity will give you a reason, though Grammar cannot; Christ's taking of flesh upon him, was good tidings to all the whole world, therefore no wonder if one word signi∣fie both. Abundance of comfort may be taken from hence to poor souls, when they think God hath forgotten them, to consider, is it likely that Christ who is Man, should forget man, now he is at the right hand of the Father, cloathed in that nature that we have; when we are troubl∣ed to think it is impossible God and man should ever be reconciled, let us consider that God and man did meet in Christ, therefore it is possible we may meet, what hath been may be again; the two natures met in Christ, there∣fore
God may be reconciled to man; yea, they therefore met, that God might be reconciled to man; he was made Immanuel, God with us, that he might bring God and us together; when a man is troubled to think of the cor∣ruptious of his nature, that is so full of efilements, that it cannot be sanctified perfectly, let him withal think, that his nature is capable of Sanctification to the full. Christ received Humane nature which was not polluted, his na∣ture is the same, therefore that nature is capable of sancti∣fication to the uttermost. Oh sirs! if Christ, the second Person in the Trinity, did put on man, how careful should men be to put on Christ! Put you on the Lord Jesus, saithRe 13. 14. the Apostle. If Christ assumed our Humane nature, how should we wrestle with God, to be made partakers of the Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these we may be made partakers of the Divine Nature. If Christ became thus one flesh with us, how zealous should we be to become one spirit with Christ; 1 Cor. 6. 17. Even as man and wife is one flesh, so he that is joyned to the Lord, is one spirit: Was the word made flesh? did Christ take our nature? yea, did he take our nature at the worst, after the fall? what high cause have we to bless his name for ever, for this condescention of his! Should all the Princes of the world have come from their Thrones, and have gone a begging from door to door, it would not amount to so much as for Christ to become Man for our sakes: hrist took our nature, not in the the integrity of it, as in Adam before his fall; but in the infirmities of it, which came to it by the fall: What a mazing love was this! For Christ to have taken our nature as it was in Adam, while he stood clothed in his integrity, and stood right in the sight of God, had not been so much as when Adam was fallen, and proclaimed Traytor: As Bernard saith, Quo pro me vilior, eò mihi charior, Domine: Lord, thou shalt be so much the more dear to me, by how much the more thou hast been vile for me. Here is conde∣scention indeed, that Christ should stoop so low to take Flesh, and Flesh with Infirmities. But
Secondly, Jesus Christ promiseth to God the Father,  that he will freely, readily and chearfully accept, under∣take and faithfully discharge his Mediatory office, to which he was designed by him, in order to the Redemption and Salvation of all his chosen ones: Consult the ScripturesCompare Psal. 40. 6. to the 11. with Heb. 10. 5. to the 11. and Isa. 1. 1, 2, 3. Lu▪ 4. 18, 19. 20. A. 13. 23. cap. 7. 22. Heb. 10. 1, 14. in the Margin, they having been formerly opened; and in them you will find, that Christ did not take the office of Mediatorship upon himself; but first the Father calls him to it, and then the Son accepts it: Christ glorified not himself, to be made an High Priest; but he that said un∣to him, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: He called him, and then the Son answered him, Lo, I come. God the Father promiseth, that upon the payment of such a price by his Son, such and such souls should be ransom∣ed and set free from the curse, from wrath, from hell, &c. Jesus Christ readily consents to the price, and pays it down upon the nail at once, and so makes good his Mediatory office. It pleased the glorious Son of God, in obedience to the Father, to humble himself, and obscure the glory of his Godhead, that he might be like his bre∣thren, and a fit Mediator for sympathy and suffering, and that he might engage his life and glory for the redeeming of the Elect, and lay by his Robes of Majesty, and not be re-assumed till he gave a good account of that work, till he was able to say, I have finished the work that thou gav∣est me to do. Christ very freely and chearfully undertakes to do and suffer whatever was the will of his Father, that he should do or suffer for the bringing about the Redem∣ption of Mankind. Christ willingly undertakes to be his Father's Servant in this great work, and accordingly he looks upon his Father as his Lord, Thou art my Lord; thatIsa. 50. 5, 6, 7. Psal. 16. 2. is, thou art he, to whom I have engaged my self, that I will satisfie all thy demands, I will fulfil thy Royal Law, I will bear the Curse, I will satisfie thy Justice, I will humble my self to the death of the Cross, I will tread thePsal. . 8. Isa. 6. . Wine▪ press of my Father's Wrath, I will fully discharge all the Bonds, Bills and Obligations, that lie in open Court, against any of those whom, by compact, thou hast givenColos. 2. 13, 14, 15
me; let their debts be never so many, or never so great, or of never so long continuance, I will pay them all▪ there is no work so high, nor no work so hard, nor no work so hot, nor no work so bloody, nor no work so low, in which I am not ready to engage, upon the ac∣count of my chosen: Loe, I come, I delight to do thy will; yea, thy law is in my heart: Christ freely submits, not only to the duty of the Law, but also to the penalty of the Law; not only to do what the Law enjoyns, but also to suffer what the Law threatens; the former heGal. 4. 4. 5. makes good by his active obedience, and the lter by his passive obedience. This was the way wherein the Fa∣ther, by an eternal agreement with his Son, would 1. 2. have the salvation of lost sinners brought about; and ac¦cordingly Jesus Christ very readily complies with his Fa∣ther's will and way. Christ, as Mediator, had a com∣mandJoh. 10. 18. from his Father to die, which Command▪ he rea∣dily closes with; Joh. 10. 11. I am the good shepherd, the good shepherd layeth down his life for the sheep: vers. 15. I lay down my life for the sheep: vers. 17. I lay down my life, that I might take it again: vers. 18. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my self; this commandment have I received of my father. Christ was content to be a servant by paction, that so his sufferings might be accept∣ed for his people; and certainly, whatever God the ¦ther put Jesus Christ upon in his whole Mediatory work, that Jesus Christ did freely, fully and heartily comply with. Loe, I come, And I have finished the work that thou gavestJ. 17. 4. me to do: And had not Christ been free and voluntary in his active and passive obedience, his active and passive o∣bedience would never have been acceptable, satisfactory or meritorious. To go further to prove it, would be to light a candle to see the sun at noon. But, Thirdly, Jesus Christ promises and engages himself,  that he will conside, depend, rely and trust upon his Fa∣ther for help and for assistance to go through his work, with a notwithstanding all the wrath and rage, all the ma∣lice and oppositions that he should meet with from men
and Devils; Heb. 2. 13. And again, I will put my trust in him: Christ's confidence in his Father, was one great en∣couragement to him, to hold out in the execution of his office; and his confidence in God speaks him out to be a true man, in that, as other men, he stood in need of God's aid and assistance; and thereupon, as others of the sons men (his brethren) he puts his trust in God. The Greek Phrase used by the Apostle, carryeth Emphasis; it impli∣eth. Psal. 18. 2. Isa. 8. 18. trust on a good perswasion, that he shall not be disap∣pointed; it is translated Confidence, Phil. 1. 6. word for word it may here be thus translated, I will be confident in him: The Relative Him hath apparent reference to God, so as Christ himself, being man, rested on God to be sup∣ported in his works, and to to be carried thorough all his undertakings, till the Top-stone was laid, and the work of Redemption accomplished. Christ had many great and potent enemies, and was brought to very great straits,Psal. 18. 3, 4, 5. Isa 8. 18. Mat. 27. 43. yea, he and his were for sgns and wonders in Israel; yet he fainted not, but put his trust in the Lord; yea, his greatest enemies gave him this Testimony, that he trust∣ed in God; and though they spoke it in scorn and derisi∣on, yet it was a real truth. Christ's confidence in his Fa∣ther was further manifested by the many Prayers, whichHeb. 5. 7. time after time, he made to his Father. Another proof of Christ's confidence in God's assistance, even in his greatest plunges, and his sharpest sufferings, the Prophet Isaiah will furnish us with, The Lord God hath opened mineIsa. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. ear (saith the Prophet) and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not he confounded, therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is near that justifieth me, who will contend with me? let us stand together: Who is mine adversary? let him come near to me. Behold, the Lord God will help me, who is he that shall condemn me? loe, they all shall wax old as a garment: The moth shall eat them up. Christ as Mediator, trusted
God the Father, to carry him through all difficulties and oppositions, till he had compleated the great work of his Mediation: Christ strengthens and encourages himself in the execution of his Office, against all hardships and oppositions, from his confidence and assurance of God's aid and assistance; and by the same eye of Faith, he looks upon all his opposites, as worn out and weathered by him. Christ's Faith, Patience and Constancy gave him victory over all wrongs and injuries. So Isa. 49. 5. My God shall be my strength: Christ is very confident of his Father's assistance, to carry him thorough that work that he had assigned him to: Christ, in the want of comfort, never wanted faith to hang upon God, and to call him his God; My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?Mat. 27. 46. As man he re out, My God, my God, &c. when a God, he promis∣eth Paradise to the penitent thief Hilary. Christ was never forsaken, in regard of the Hypostatical Ʋnion; the Union was not dissolved, but the Beams, the Influence was restrained: Nor in regard of his Faith; for though now he was sweltering under the wrath of God, as our Surety, and left in the hands of his enemies, and desert∣ed by his Disciples and dearest friends, and under the loss of the comforting and solacing presence of his Father; yet, in the midst of all, such was the strength and power of his faith, that he could say, My God, my God. Christ, before the world began, having promised and engaged to theTit. 1. 2. Gal. 4. 4. Isa. 63. 3. Gal. 3. 13. Rom. 8. 3, 4. Father; that in the fulness of time he would come into the world, assume our nature, be made under the Law, tread the Wine-press of the Father's wrath, bear the Curse, and give satisfaction to his Justice. Now upon the credit of this promise, upon this undertaking of Christ, God the Father takes up the Patriarchs, and all the Old Testament-believers to Glory. God the Father resting upon the promise and engagement of his Son, ad∣mits many thousands into those ons above, beforeJoh. 14. 2, 3. Christ took Flesh upon him. Now as t Father, of old, hath rested and relyed on the promise and engagement of Christ; so Jesus Christ doth, to this very day, st and stay himself upon the promise of his Father, that he shall, inIsa. 3. 10. due time, see all his seed, and reap the full benefit of that
full Ransom that he has paid down upon the nail, for all that have believed on him, that do believe on him, and that shall believe on him. Christ knew God's infinite Love, his tender Compassions, and his matchless Bowels to all those for whom he died: And he knew very well the Covenant, the Compact, the Agreement, that past between the Father and himself; and so trusted the Fa∣ther fully, in the great business of their everlasting hap∣piness and blessedness, relying upon the love and faithful∣ness of God, his love to the Elect, and his faithfulness to keep Covenant with him. As the Elect are committed to Christ's charge, to give an account of them; so also is the Father engaged for their conversion, and for their preservation being converted: As being not only his own,Joh. 6. 37. Isa. 53. 11. given to Christ out of his love to them; but as being engaged to Christ, that he shall not be frustrate of the re∣ward of his Sufferings, but have a Seed to glorifie him for ever. Therefore doth Christ, not only constantly preserve them by his Spirit, but doth leave, also, that burden on the Father; Father, keep those whom thou hast given me: Joh. 17. 11. But Fourthly, Jesus Christ promises and engages himself to  his Father, that he would bear all, and suffer all that should be laid upon him; and that he would ransom poor sinners, and fully satisfie Divine Justice by his blood and death; as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in theIsa. 5. 5, 6. Joh. 10. 17. 18. cap. 15. 10. Luk. 24. 46. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 10. I have opened these Scriptures already. Margin together. The work of Redemption could ne∣ver have been effected by silver or gold, or by prayers or tears, or by the blood of Bulls or Goats; but by the second Adam's obedience, even to the death of the Cross. Re∣mission of sin, the favour of God, the heavenly Inheri∣tance could never have been obtained, but by the proci∣ous blood of the Son of God. The innocent Lamb of God was slain, in typical prefigurations, from the begin∣ning of the world; and slain in real performance, in the fulness of time, or else fallen man had layen under guilt and wrath for ever: The heart of Jesus Christ was strong∣ly set upon all those that his Father had given him, and
he was fully resolved to secure them from Hell and the Curse, whatever it cost him; and seeing no price would satisfie his Father's Justice below his Blood, he lays down his life at his Father's feet, according to the Covenant and Agreement of old, that had past between his Father and himself. But Fifthly, The Lord Jesus Christ was very free, ready,  willing and careful to make good all the Articles of the Covenant on his side, and to discharge all the works a∣greedJoh. 12. 49, 50. cap. 17. 6. on for the Redemption and Salvation of the Elect: Joh. 17. 4. I have finished the work that thou gavest me to do. There was nothing committed to Christ by the Fa∣ther, to be done on earth, for the purchasing of our Re∣demption, but he did finish it; so that the Debt is paid,Colos. 2. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 14. Justice satisfied, and sin, Satan and death spoiled of all their hurting and destroying power. By the Covenant of Redemption, Christ was under an obligation to die, toDan. 9. 24. satisfie to Divine Justice, to pay our debts, to bring in an everlasting Righteousness, to purchase our Pardon, andHeb. 9. 12. to obtain eternal Redemption for us; all which, he com∣pleated and finished, before he ascended up to glory: AndAct. 1. 9, 10, 11. without a peradventure, had not Jesus Christ kept touch with his Father, had not he made good the Covenant, the Compact, the Agreement on his part, his Father would never have given him such a welcome to heaven as he did, nor he would never have admitted him to have sat downHeb. 1. 3. Rom. 8 34. Cols. . 1. Hb. 8. 1. cap. 10. 12. 1 et. 3. 22. on the right hand of the Majesty on high, as he did. The right hand is a place of the greatest honour, dignity and safety, that any can be advanced to: But had not Jesus Christ first purged away our sins, he had never sat down on the right hand of his Father. Christ's advancement is pro¦perlyMat. 26. 64. Act. 7. 56. of his Humane Nature; That Nature, wherein Christ was crucified, was exalted; for God being the Most High, needs not be exalted; yet the Humane Na∣ture, in this exaltation, is not singly and simply consi∣dered in it self, but as united to the Deity; so that it is the Person consisting of two Natures, even God-man, which is thus dignified: For as the Humane Nature of
Christ is inferiour to God, and is capable of advancement; so also is the person consisting of a Divine and Humane Nature. Christ, as the Son of God, the second Person of the sacred Trinity, is, in regard of his Deity, no whit inferiour to his Father, but every way equal; yet he as∣sumed our nature, and became a Mediator betwixt God & man; he humbled himself, and made himself inferiour to his Father; his Father therefore hath highly exalted him,Phil. 2. 8, 9. and set him down on his right hand. If Christ had notEph. 1. 20. expiated our sins, and compleated the work of our Re∣demption, he could never have sat down on the right hand of God; Heb. 10. 12. But this man, after he had of∣fered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God. This verse is added in opposition to the former, as is evident by the first Particle () But in the for∣mer verse it was proved, that the Sacrifices which were offered under the Law, could not take away sins: This verse proveth, that there is a Sacrifice, which hath done that that they could not do. The Argument is taken from that Priest's ceasing to offer any more Sacrifices, af∣ter he had offered one; whereby is implyed, that there needed no other, because that one had done it to the full; sin was taken away by Christ's Sacrifice, for thereby a Ransom was paid, and satisfaction made to the Ju∣stice of God for man's sin, and thereupon sin taken a∣away: Now, sin being taken away, Christ sits down on the right hand of his Father. Look, as the humiliation of Christ was manifested in offering a Sacrifice, so his exal∣tation, in sitting at God's right hand, was manifested, af∣ter that he had offered that sacrifice. This phrase, Set down, is a note of dignity and authority; and this dignity and Authority is amplified by the place where he is said to sit down, viz. on the right hand of God; and this ho∣nour and dignity is much illustrated by the continuance thereof, which is without date; For ever sat down on the right hand of God. It is an Eclipse of the lustre of any glory, to have a date and a period: The very thought that such a glory shall one day cease, will cast a damp upon
the Spirit of him that enjoys that Glory: Christ's con∣stant sitting at the right hand of his Father, is a clear evi∣dence, that he has finished and compleated the work of our Redemption. Christ could never have gone to his Father, nor never have set down at the right hand of his Father, if he had not first fulfilled all Righteousness, and fully acquitted us of all our iniquities; Joh. 16. 10. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father. The strength of the Argument lies in this, Christ took upon him to be our Surety, and he must acquit us of all our sins, and sa∣tisfie his Father's Justice, before he can go to his Father, and be accepted of his Father, and sit down on the right hand of his Father: If God had not been fully satisfied, or if any part of Righteousness had been to be fulfilled, Christ should have been still in the grave, and not gone to heaven; his very going to his Father, argues all is done, all is finished and compleated. But Sixthly, Christ having performed all the conditions of  the Covenant on his part▪ he now peremptorily insists up¦on it, that his Father should make good to him and his, the conditions of the Covenant on his part; Christ hav∣ing finished his work, looks for his reward; Father,Joh. 17. 4, 5. says he, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thow gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorifie thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee, before the world was: There was a mostThis transaction between the fa∣ther and the son, is worthy of our most dep, seri¦ous and frequent meditation. blessed transaction between God the Father and God the Son, before the world began, for the everlasting good of the Elect; and upon that Transaction depends all the good, and all the happiness, and all the salvation of God's chosen; and upon this ground, pleads with his Father, that all his members may behold his glory; Joh. 17. 24. Father, I wil that they also which thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory: Fa∣ther, I will; not only I pray, I beseech, but I will; I ask this as my right, by vertue of the Covenant betwixt us; I have done thus and thus, and I have suffered thus and thus, and therefore I cannot but peremptorily insist
upon it; that those that I have undertaken for, be where I am, that they may behold my glory: (For though Glory be a gift to us, yet it is a debt that is due to Christ.) It is a part of Christ's joy, that we should be where he is; Christ will not be happy alone, as a tender father, he can enjoy nothing, if his children may not have part with him. The greatest part of our happiness that we shall have in heaven, lies in this, that then we shall be with Christ, and have immediate communion with him. Oh sirs! the great end of our being in heaven, is to behold and enjoy the glory of Christ: Christ is very desirous, and much taken up with his peoples fellowship and com∣pany; so that before he removes his bodily presence from them, his heart is upon meeting and fellowship again, as here we see in his prayer before his departure; and this he makes evident from day to day, in that, until that time of meeting come, two or three are not gathered in his name, but he is in the midst of them; to eye their behaviour, toMat. 18. 20. hear their suits, to guide their way, to to protect their persons, to chear their spirits, and to delight in their pre∣sence: He delights to walk in the midst of the seven goldenRev. 2. 1. Mat. 5. 14, 16. Psal. 68, 16. candlesticks; the Golden Candlesticks are the Churches, which are the light of the world; and excel all other so∣cieties, as much as Gold doth other Metals: And he de∣sires to dwell in the low and little hill of Zion; Zion is his resting place, his chosen place, his dwelling place; Psal. 132. 13. For the Lord hath chosen Zion, he hath desired it for his habitation: Vers. 14. This is my rest for ever: Here will I dwell, for I have desired it: Christ chose Zion for his love, and loves it for his choice; and accordingly, he he delights to dwell there. The Lamb stands on MountRev. 14. 1. Zion: Christ is ready prest for action; and in the midst of all Antichrist's Persecutions, he hath always a watchful eye over Mount Zion, and will be a sure life-guard to MountIsa. 4. 5, 6. Zion; he stands readily prepared to assist Mount Zion, to fight for Mount Zion, to communicate to Mount Zion,Isa. 8. 18. and to be a refuge to Mount Zion; and no wonder, for he dwells in mount Zion. Now, if Christ take so much delight
to have spiritual communion with his people in this2 Cor. 6. 16. I will dwell in them. The words are very significant n the Original, , In ill in-dwell in them; so the words are; there are two ins in the Original, as if God could never hae enoughe▪ ∣munion with them. 2 Tr, 1. 10. world, no wonder that he can never rest satisfied, till their gracious communion with him here, issue in their perfect and glorious communion with him in heaven: And certainly the glory and happiness of heaven to the Elect, will consist much in being in Christ's company, in whom they delight so much on earth; to follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, to enjoy him fully, and to be al∣ways in his presence, is the heaven of heaven, the glory of glory; 'tis the sparkling Diamond in the Ring of Glo∣ry. The day is coming, wherein Believers shall be com∣pleatly happy, in a sight of Christ's glory, when he shall be conspicuously glorified and admired in all his Saints, and glorified by them; and when, all veils being laid a∣side, and they fitted for a more full fruition, shall visibly and immediately behold and enjoy him; therefore is their condition in heaven described, as consisting in this, that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me. hus I have glanced at Christ's solemn demand on earth, for the full accomplishment of that blessed Compact, Cove∣nant, Agreement and Promises that were made to him, when he undertook the office of a Mediator; and now is in heaven, he appears in the presence of God for us, as a. 9. 4. Lawyer appears in open Court for his Client; opens the case, pleads the cause, and carries the day. The Verb, , translated to appear, signifieth conspicuous∣ly to manifest: It is sometimes taken in a good sense, viz. to appear for one as a Favourite before a Prince, or as an Advocate or an Attourney before a Judge, or as the High Priests appeared once a year in the Holy of Holiest, toExod. 30. 10. make atonement for the people: Christ is the great Fa∣vourite in the Court of glory, and is always at God'sRom. 8. 34. right hand, ready on all occasions, to present our petiti∣ons to his Father, to pacifie his anger, and to obtain all1 Jo. 2. 1. noble and needful favours for us: And Christ is our great Advocate, to plead our cause effectually for us. Look, as in Humane Courts, there is the Guilty, the Accuser, the Court, the Judge, and the Advocate, so it is here;
Heaven is the Court, Man is the guilty Person, Satan is the Accuser, God is the Judge, and Christ is the Advo∣vocate: Now, look as the Advocate appeareth in the Court before the Judge, to plead for the guilty, against the accuser; so doth Christ appear before God in heaven, to answer▪ all Satan's objections and accusations, that he may make in the Court of heaven against us; He ever lives to make intercession for us: Heb. 7. 25. The verb , translated intercession, is a compound, and signi∣ies to call upon one; it is a judicial word, and importeth a calling upon a Judge, to be heard in this or that, againstA. 25. . Rm. 11. 2. cp. 8. 34. another or for another; so here Christ maketh intercessi∣on for them. The Metaphor is taken from Attorneys or Advocates, who appear for men in Courts of Justice; from Counsellers, who plead their Clients cause, answer the Adversary, supplicate the Judge, and procure sen∣tence to pass on their Clients side. This Act of making Intercession, may also be taken from Kings Favourites, who are much in the King's presence, and ever ready to make request for their friends: But remember, though this be thus attributed to Christ, yet we may not think, that in heaven Christ prostrateth himself before him, or maketh actual prayers; that was a part of his humiliati∣on, which he did in the days of his flesh; but it implyetheb. 5 7. a presenting of himself a Sacrifice, a Surety, and one that hath made satisfaction for all our sins, together with ma∣nifesting of his will and desires, that such and such should partake of the vertue and benefit of his Sacrifice; so as Christ's intercession consisteth rather in the perpetual vi∣gour of his Sacrifice, and continual application thereof, than in any actual supplication. The intendment of this Phrase applyed to Christ, to make intercession, is to shew, that Christ being God's Favourite, and our Advocate, continually appeareth before God, to make application of that Sacrifice, which once he offered up for our sins. Christ appears in the presence of God for us; 1. To present unto his Father himself, who is the price of our Redemption: 2▪ To make application of his Sacrifice to
his Church time after time, according to the need of the several members thereof: 3. To make our persons, prayers, services and all good things acceptable to God. But Seventhly and lastly, The whole Compact and Agree∣ment  between God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ about the Redemption of poor sinner's souls, was really and solemnly transacted in open Court; or, as I may say, in the High Court of Justice above, in the presence of the great publick Notary of heaven, viz. the Holy Ghost; who being a third Person of the glorious Trinity of the same Divine Essence, and of equal power and glory makes up a third Legal Witness with the Father and the Son. They being (ater the manner of Kings) their own Wit∣nessesSo the King write,  me∣. This 1 Joh. 5. 7. is a very clea Proof and Testi∣mony of the Tri∣nity of Persons, in the Unity of the Divine s∣sence, they are ll one in ssence and Will. As if three lamps were lighted in o chamber, albeit the lamps be di∣ers, yet the lights annot be s ▪ so in the  there is a distruction of Persos   ∣pheiy of nature. also, 1 Joh. 5. 7. For there be three that ear record in heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one: Three, 1. In the true and real distin∣ction of their Persons; 2. In their inward Properties, as to beget, to be begotten, and to proceed; 3. In their se∣veral offices one to another, as to send and to be sent: And these three are one, one in Nature and Essence, one in Power and Will, one in the act of producing all such acti∣ons as, without themselves, any of them is said to act; and one in their Testimony, concerning the Covenant of Redemption, that was agreed on between the Father and the Son. Consent of all parties, the Allowance of the Judge, and publick Record, is as much as can be desied to make all publick Contracts authentick in Courts of Ju∣stice; and what can we desire more, to settle, satisfie and assure our own souls, that all the Article, of the Cove∣nant of Redemption shall, on all hands, be inly made good, than this, that these three heavely Witnesse, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Gst, do all agree to the Articles of the Covenant, and  Wit∣nesses to the same Covenant? Thus you see▪ that there was a Covenant of Redemption made with Christ▪ up∣on the terms whereof he is constituted to be a ; to say to the prisoners, go forth, to bring deliverae to the
captives, and to proclaim the year of release (or Jubile) the acceptable year of the Lord; as it is, Isa. 61. 1, 2. I have been the longer in opening the ovenant of Redemption, partly because of its grand importance to all our souls, and partly because others have spoken so little to it, to the best of my observation▪ and partly because I have ne∣ver before handled this Subject, either in the Pulpit, or the Press, &c. Now, from the serious consideration of this Compact, Covenant and Agreement, that was solemnly made be∣tween God and Christ, touching the whole business of man's Salvation or Redemption, I may form up this tenth Plea, as to the ten Scriptures that are in the Margin, thatEccles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. Mat. 12. 14. cap. 18. 23. Luk. 16. 2. Rom. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5. Isa. 53. 6. Rm. 5. 6▪ 8. Gal. 2. 20. refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular day of account. Oh blessed God! I have read over the Articles of the Covenant of Redemption, that were a∣greed on between thy self and thy dearest Son; and I find by those Articles, that dear Jesus has died, and satisfied thy Justice, and pacified thy Wrath, and bore the Curse, and purchased my pardon, and procured thy everlasting favour: And I find by the same Articles, that whatever Jesus Christ acted or suffered, he did act or suffer as my Surety, and in my stead and room. Oh Lord! when I look upon my manifold weaknesses and imperfections, though under a Covenant of Grace, yet I am many times, not only grieved, but also stumbled and staggered; but when I look up to the Covenant of Redemption, I am cheared, raised and quieted; for I am abundantly satis∣fied, that both thy self and thy dear Son, are infinitely ready, able, willing and faithful to perform whatever in that Covenant is comprized; by these things men live,Isa. 38. 16, 17. and in these is the life of my spirit: men may fail, and Friends may fail, and Relations may fail, and Trade may fail, and natural strength may fail, and my heart may fail, but the Covenant of Redemption can never fail, nor thePsal. 73. 24, 25. Federates, who are mutually engaged in that Covenant, can never fail, and therefore I am safe and happy for ever; what though my sins have been great and hynous, yet
they are not greater than Christ's satisfaction, he did bear the Curse for great sins as well as small, for sins against the Gospel as well as for sins against the Law, for omis∣sions as well as for commissions; assuredly, the Covenant of Redemption is a mighty thing, and there are no migh∣ty sins that can stand before that Covenant: If we look upon Manasseh, in those black and ugly colours that the1 King. 21. 1, to 16 Holy Ghost paints him out in, we must needs conclude that he was a mighty sinner, a monstrous sinner; and yet his mighty sins, his monstrous sins could not stand before the Covenant of Redemption; the greatest sins are finite, but the merit of Christ's Redemption is infinite: All the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea, there remained not so much as one of them, there was not one of themExod. 14. 28. Psal. 106. 11. left alive to carry the news; the high and the low, the great and the small, the rich and the poor, the honoura∣ble and the base, were all drowned: The Red Sea of Christ's blood drowns all our sins, whether they are great or small, high or low, &c. though my sins be as scarlet,Isa. 1. 18. my Redeemer will make them as white as snow; though they be as read as crimson, they shall be as wool: There is not one of my sins, for which Jesus Christ hath not sufferedEph. 1. 7. Colos. 1. 14. and satisfied; nor there is not one of my sins, for which Jesus Christ hath not purchased a pardon, and for which he hath not made my peace; though my sins are innu∣merable, though they are more than the hairs of my head,Psal. 4. 12. or the sands on the sea-shore, yet they are not to be nam∣ed in the day wherein the merits of Christ, the satisfacti∣on of Christ, and the Covenant of Redemption is men∣tioned and pleaded: Be my sins never so many; yea, though they might fill a Roll that might reach from East to West, from North to South, from earth  heaven, yet they could but bring me under the Curse, now Christ my Surety, that he might redeem me from the Curse, hathGal. 3. 13. taken upon him the whole Curse: I know there is no summing up of my debts, but Christ has paid them all; woe had been to me for ever▪ ad Christ left but on n∣ny upon the score, for me to pay. As I have multiplied
my sins, so he has multiplied his pardons; Christ has can∣celledIsa. 55. 7. all bonds, and therefore it is but justice in God, toCols. 2. 13, 14, 15, Jo. 3. 24. give me a full Acquittance, and to throw down all bonds as cancelled, saying, Deliver him, I have found a ransom. Oh God, though my sins are very many, and very great, yet if thou dost not pardon them, the innocent blood of thy dearest Son will lie upon thee, and cry out against thee; for he therefore died, that my sins might be pardoned, so that now, in honour and justice, thou art obliged to pardon all my transgressions, and remember mine iniquities noIsa. 43. 25 Dan. 9. 24. more. Now this is my Plea, Oh holy God, which I make to all those Scriptures that respect my last account, and by this Plea I shall stand, well, saith God the Father, I accept of this Plea, I am pleased with this Plea, thyEk. 18. 22. sins shall not be mentioned, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. I▪ shall now make a little improvement of what has been said as to the Covenant of Redemption, and so draw to a conclusion. First, This Covenant of Redemption, as we have o∣pened  it, looks sadly and sowrly upon those that make so great a noise about the Doctrine of Universal Redemption. The Covenant of Redemption extends it self, not to eve∣ryMat. 24. 16. Luk 12. 32. Rom. 9. 11, 12. cap . 5. 6. 7, . Rom. 8. 39, 40. man in the world, but only to those that are given by God the Father to Jesus Christ. 2. It looks sadly and sowr∣ly upon those that make so great a noise about Gods chus∣ing or electing of men, upon the account of God's fore∣seeing their faith, good works, obedience, holiness when our election is merely of grace and savour, and flows on∣lyD. 7. 6, 7. 8. ap▪ 33. 1. Rom. 9 11.  1. 9. Eph. 1. 4. Rom. 8. 29 30.   . 1. 1 P. 1. 2. from the good will of h that dwelt in the bush, and faith, good works, holiness, sanctification, are the fruits and effects of Election, as the Scripture every where tells us; and as has been made evident in my opening the graci∣ous terms of the Covenant of Redemption, but because I have, in another place, treated of thse things more large∣ly, a touch here may suffice. But Secondly. How should this Covenant of Redemption  spirit, animate and encourage all the Redeemed of God,
to do any thing for Christ, to suffer any thing for Christ, to venture any thing for Christ, to part with any thingMark. 8. 34. 35, 38 Heb. 10. 34. cap. 11. for Christ, to give up any thing to Christ, who, accord∣ing to the Covenant of Redemption, hath done and suf∣ferred such great and grievous things, that he might bring us to glory, that are above all apprehensions, and beyondHeb. 2. 1, 1. all expressions, who can tell me what is fully wrapped up in that one expression, viz. That he poured out his soul un∣to death: Let us not shrink, nor saint, nor grow weary under our greatest sufferings for Christ, when sufferings multiply, when they are sharp, when they are more bit∣ter than Gall or Wormwood, yea, more bitter than death it self, then Remember the Covenant of Redemption, and how punctually Christ made good all the Articles of it on his side, and then saint and give out if you can: Well may I be afraid, but I do not therefore despair, for I thinkAustin. upon, and remember the wounds of the Lord, saith one: Nolo vivere sine vulnere, cum te video vulneratum; Ob my God, as long as I see thy wounds, I will never live without wound, saith another: Crux Christi clavis Paradisi; TheDamasn. Cross of Christ is the Golden Key that opens Paradise to us, saith one: I had rather, with the Martyrs and Consessors, have my Saviour's Cross, than, with their Persecutors, the worlds Crown; the harder we are put to it, the great∣er shall be our reward in heaven, saith another: Gardius the Martyr hit the nail, when he said, it is to my loss if youChrysostm. abe me any thing in my sufferings: If you suffer not for Religion, you will suffer for a worse thing, saith one:Vnmis. Never did any man serve me better than you serve me, said another to his Persecutors: Adversus gentes, gratias agimus quod à molestis dominis liberemur, We thank you for delivering us from hard Task-masters, that we may enjoy more sweetly the bosom of our Lord Jesus, said the Martyrs: 'Twas a notable saying of her, Ecclesia totum mundum convertit sanguine & oratione; the Church converteth the whole world by blood and prayers: They may kill me, said Socrates of his enemies, but they cannot hurt me; so may the redeemed of the Lord say; they may take away my
head, but they cannot take away my Crown of life, of righteousness, of glory, of immortality. The Lacede∣moniansRev. 2. 10. 2 lim. 4. 8. 1 Pe. 5. 4. 5. were wont to say, it is a shame for any man to fly in time of danger; but for a Lacedemonian, it is a shame for him to deliberate: Oh, what a shame is it for Christians, when they look upon the Covenant of Re∣demption, so much as to deliberate whether they were best suffer for Christ or no. Petrus Blesensis has long since observed, that the Courtiers of his time suffered as great trouble, and as many vexations, for vanity, as good Chri∣stians did for the truth; the Courtiers suffered weariness and painfulness, hunger and thirst, with all the Catalogue of Paul's afflictions; and what can the best Saints suffer more? Now, shall men that are strangers to the Cove∣nant of Redemption, suffer such hard and great things for their lusts, for very vanity? and will not you, who are acquainted with the Covenant of Redemption, and who are interested in the Covenant of Redemption, be ready and willing to suffer any thing for that Jesus, who, ac∣cording to the Covenant of Redemption, has suffered such dreadful things for you, and merited such glorious things for you? But Thirdly, From this Covenant of Redemption, as we have opened it, you may see what infinite cause we have  to be swallowed up in the admiration of the Father's love in entring into this Covenant, and in making good all the Articles of this Covenant on his side: When man was fallen from his primitive purity and glory, from his holi∣nessGod so loved his Son, that he gave him all the world for his possession, Psal. 2. 8. But he so loved the world, that he gave Son and all for its Re∣demption. Ber∣nard and happiness, from his freedom and liberty, into a most woful gulf of sin and misery; when Angels and men were all at a loss, and knew no way or means, whereby fallen man might be raised, restored and saved; that then God should firstly and freely propose this Covenant, and enter into this Covenant, that miserable man might be saved from wrath to come; and raised and settled in a more safe, high and happy estate than that was, from which he was fallen in Adam: Oh, what wonderful, what amazing love is this! Abraham manifested a great deal of
love to God, in offering up of his only Isaac; but GodGen. 22. 12. has shewed far greater love to poor sinners, in making his only Son an offering for their sins; for 1. God loved Christ with a more transcendent love, than Abraham couldJoh. 10. 18. Heb. 10. 10, 12. love Isaac: 2. God was not bound by the commandment of a superiour to do it, as Abraham was: 3. God freely and voluntarily did it, which Abraham would never have done without a commandment: 4. Isaac was to be offer∣ed after the manner of holy Sacrifices, but Christ suffer∣ed an ignominious death, after the manner of Thieves: 5. Isaac was all along in the hands of a tender Father, but Christ was all along in the hands of barbarous ene∣mies: 6. Isaac was offered but in shew, but Christ was offered indeed and in very good earnest: Is not this an excess, yea, a miracle of love? 'Tis good to be always a musing upon this love, and delighting our selves in this love. But Fourthly, From this Covenant of Redemption, as we  have opened it, you may see what signal cause we have to be deeply affected with the love of Jesus Christ, who roundly and readily falls in with this Covenant, and who has faithfully performed all the Articles of this Covenant; had not Jesus Christ kept touch with his Father as to e∣very Article of the Covenant of Redemption he could ne∣ver have saved us, nor have satisfied Divine Justice, nor have been admitted into heaven. That Jesus Christ might make full satisfaction for all our sins, He was made a curseGal. 3 13. for us, whereby he hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law: All his sufferings were for us. All that can be de∣sired of God by man, is mercy and truth; mercy in re∣gard of our misery, truth in reference to God's promises: That which moved Christ to engage himself as a Surety for us, was his respect to God and man: To God, for the honour of his Name; neither the mercy, nor the truth, nor the justice of God had been so conspicuously manifest∣ed, if Jesus Christ had not been our Surety: To man, and that to help us in our succourless and desperate estate. No creature either would or could discharge that debt,
wherein man stood obliged to the justice of God. This is a mighty evidence of the endless love of Christ, this is an evidence of the endless and matchless love of Christ: We count it a great evidence of love, for a friend to be surety for us, when we intend no damage to him there∣upon; but if a man be surety for that, which he knoweth the principal debtor is not able to pay, and thereupon pur∣poseth to pay it himself; this we look upon as an extra∣ordinary evidence of love: But what amazing love, what matchless love is this, for a man to engage his person and life for his friend, when as skin for skin, and all that a man hath, will he give for his life; and yet, according to the Covenant of Redemption, Jesus Christ has done all this and much more for us, as is evident, if you will but cast your eye back upon the Articles of the Covenant, or con∣sult the Scriptures in the Margin. If a friend, to free aJ. 2. 4. Jo. 1. 11, 15▪ 17 18, 28▪ Rm. 5. 6,  Eph. 1. 5, 6, 7,  2. 13, 14, 15 Heb. 2. 13, 1, 15. captive, or one condemned to death, should put himself into the state and condition of him whom he freeth; that would be an evidence of love beyond all comparison. But now, if the dignity of Christ's person and our unworthi∣ness, if the greatness of the debt and kind of payment, and if the benefit which we reap thereby be duly weighed, we shall find these evidences of love to come as much be∣hind the love of Christ, as the light of a candle cometh short of the light of the Sun. Christ's Suretiship, ac∣cording to the Covenant of Redemption is and ought to be a prop of props to our faith: It is as sure a ground of confidence that all is well, and shall be for ever well be∣tween God and us, as any the Scriptures does afford; by vertue hereof, we have a right to appeal to God's Justice, for this Surety hath made ful satisfaction; and to exact a debt which is fully satisfied, is a point of injustice. Christ knew very well what the Redemption of fallen man would cost him, he knew that his life and blood must go for it, he knew that he must lay by his Robes of Majesty, and be cloathed with flesh, he knew that he must encoun∣terSlus Amo nesit difficultates. men and Devils, he knew that he must tread the Wine∣press of his Father's wrath, bear the Curse, and make him∣self
an offering for our sins, for our sakes, for our salvati∣on; yet, for all this, he is very ready and willing to bind himself by Covenant, that he will redeem us, whatever it cost him. Oh, what tongue can express, what heartEph. 3. 18, 19. Look where thou wilt, thou art sur∣rounded with flames of his love; and it were strange if thou shouldest not be set on fire, if not, sure thou must needs be a Dia∣bolical Salaman∣der, say Cuanus. can conceive, what soul can comprehend, the heights, depths, bredths and lengths of this love! Oh blessed Jesus, what manner of love is this! that thou shouldest wash a∣way my scarlet sins, in thine own blood! that thou should∣est die, that I may live! that thou shouldest be cursed, that I might be blessed! that thou shouldest undergo the pains of hell, that I might enjoy the joys of heaven! that the face of God should be clouded from thee, that his e∣verlasting favour might rest upon me! that thou shouldest be an everlasting Skreen, betwixt the wrath of God and my immortal soul! that thou shouldest do for me beyond all expression, and suffer for me beyond all conception, and gloriously provide for me beyond all expectation! and all this according to the Covenant of Redemption! what shall I say? what can I say to all this? but fall down before thy grace, and spend my days in wondering at that matchless, bottomless love that can never be fathomed by Angels or men. Oh Lord Jesus (saith one) plusquamBrnard. mea, plusquam meas, plusquam me; I love thee more than all my goods, and I love thee more than all my friends, yea, I love thee more than my very self: 'Tis good to write after this copy. But The Eleventh and last Plea that a Believer may form  up, as to the ten Scriptures that are in the Margin, thatEccles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. at. 12. 14. cap. 18. 23. Luk. 16. 2. Rom. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Hb. 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5. refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular account, may be drawn up from the consideration of the Book of Life; out of which all the Saints shall be judged in the great day of our Lord; Rev. 20. 11. And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them. Vers. 12. And I saw the dead small and great, stand before God: And the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the
dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. Vers. 13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it: And death and hell deli∣vered up the dead which were in them: And they were judg∣ed every man according to their works. Vers. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death. And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire. In the 11. verse, John describes the Judge with his preparation, in the 12. verse, he de∣scribes the persons that should be judged, and then he de∣scribes the process and sentence, and lastly he describes the execution of the sentence; viz. the casting of the repro∣bates into the Lake of fire, and the placing and fixing of the Elect in the heavenly Jerusalem; vers. 13, 14, 15. In the five last verses cited, you have a clear and full description of the last General Judgment, as is evident by the native Context and Series of this Chapter: For hav∣ingRev. 2. 1, 2, 3. Jude vers. 6. spoken of the Devil's last Judgment, which by Jude is called The judgment of the great day: It is consentane∣ous therefore, to understand this of such a Judgment, whereby he is judged. And indeed, the expressions are so full, and the matter and circumstances so satisfying and convincing, that they leave no place for fears, doubts or disputes. This Scripture that is under our present consi∣deration, runs parallel with that, Dan. 12. 1, 2, 3. and several other places of Scripture, where the day of Judg∣ment is spoken of; and let him that can, shew me at what other Judgment, all the dead are raised and judged; and all Reprobates sent to hell, and all the Elect brought to heaven, and death and hell cast into the Lake; all which are plainly expressed here: He shall be an Apollo to me, that can make these things that are hero spoken of, to a∣gree with any other Judgment than the last Judgment. Let me give a little light into this Scripture, before I im∣prove it, to that purpose for which I have cited it. And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it. a lively description of the last Judgment, A Great Throne: Great, because it is set up for the General Judgment of all,
for the universal judgment of the whole world: Before this Throne all the Great ones of the world must stand, Popes, Emperours, Kings, Princes, Nobles, Judges, Prelates, without their Mitres, Crowns, Sceptres, Roy∣al Robes, Gold chains, &c. And before this Throne, all other sorts and ranks of men must stand. And he that sits upon this Throne, is a great King, and a greatRev. 1. 5. cap. 17. 14. Rev. 19. 16. All the thrones of the Kings of the earth, with Solo∣mon's Golden Throne, are but petty Thrones to this Throne; yea, they are but foot∣stools to this Throne; and therefore upon this single ground it may well be called a great Throne. God above all Gods; he is Prince of the Kings of the earth, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Upon all which accounts, this Throne may well be called a great Throne. And 'tis called A White Throne, because of its Celestial Splendor and Majesty, and to shew the uprightness and Glory of the Judge: The white colour in Scripture, is used to represent purity and glory; here it signifies, that Christ the Judge shall give most just and righteous Judg∣ment, free from all spot of partiality. From whose Face the heaven and the earth fled away. The Splendor and Majesty of the Judge is such, as neither hea∣ven or earth is able to behold or abide the same; how then shall the wicked be able to stand before him? Au∣gustine understands it, for the future renovation of heaven and earth; and here he acknowledgeth an , for the heaven and the earth fled not before, but after the Judgment; to wit, saith he, The Judgment being finish∣ed then shall this heaven and earth cease to be, when theHysterosis is, when a thing is before put down, which should come after; or contrariwise. Aug. lib. 20. de. C. D. c. 14. 1 t. 3. 12. new heaven and earth shall begin; for this world shall pass away by a change of things, not by an utter destruction: The heaven and the earth shall flee away; that is, this shape of heaven and earth shall pass away; because they shall be changed from vanity, through fire, that so they may be transformed into a much better and more beautiful e∣state; according to that which the Apostle Peter writeth, The heaven shall pass away with a great noise, and the ele∣ments melt with heat; but we expect new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. How this passing away, r perishing of heaven and earth, shall come to pass, there are divers opinions of learned men: Some think, that the substance or essence it self of the world,
shall wholly perish and be annihilated: Others are of o∣pinion, that only the corruptible▪ qualities thereof shall perish and be changed, and the substance or essence re∣main: There shall be a renovation of all things, say most, and that only the fashion of the world, that is, the out∣ward form and corruptible qualities shall be destroyed; and so the earth shall be found no more as it was, but shall be made most beautiful and glorious, being to be deliver∣ed into the glorious liberty (as far as 'tis capable) of the sonsRom. 8. 19, 20, 21, 22. of God; being to be freed from corruption and bondage: (And with these I close.) The summ of the 21. verse is, That the Creature shall not be always subject to vanity, but shall have a manumission from bondage; of the which deliverance, three things are declared; First, who, the Creature, that is, The World: Secondly, From what, from Corruption, which is a bondage: Thirdly, Into what estate, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Some here note, the time of the deliverance of the Crea∣ture, namely, when the children of God shall be wholly set free; for though they have here a freedom unto righ∣teousneess, from the bondage of sin, yet they have not a freedom of glory, which is from the bondage of misery: But others take it for the state it self which shall be glori∣ous, not the same with the children of God, but propor∣tioned according to its kind with them; for it is most suitable to the liberty of the faithful, that as they are re∣newed, so also should their habitation, And as, when a Noble man mourneth, his servants are all clad in black; so it is for the greater glory of man, that the Creatures, his servants, should in their kind, partake of his glory. And whereas some say, that it is deliverance enough for the creature, if it cease to serve man, and have an end of vanity, by annihilation: I affirm, it is not enough, be∣cause this 21. verse notes, not only such deliverance, but also a further estate which it shall have after such deliver∣ance; namely, to communicate in some degree, with the children of God in glory. Certainly, the Creatures in their kind and manner, shall be made partakers of a far
better estate, than they had while the world endured; because that God shall fully and wholly restore the world, being fallen into corruption through the transgression and sin of Man-kind. And this doth more plainly appear by the Apostle's opposing subsequent liberty against for∣mer bondage; which, that he might more enlarge, he calleth it not simply, freedom or liberty, but liberty of. If any shall en∣quire, what shall be the particular properties, works and uses of all & every creature, after the last Judgment. I an∣swer, 1. That as to these things, the word is silent, and 'tis not safe to be wise, above what is written: 2. Here is place for that which Tertuian calls, a learned Igno∣rance. Glory, as it is in the Greek Text; meaning thereby, ac∣cording to the phrase and propriety of the Hebrew tongue, glorious liberty, or liberty that bringeth glory with it; under which term of glory, he compriseth the excellent estate that they shall be in after their delivery from their former baseness and servitude. As for those words of the sons of God, to which we must refer the glorious liber∣ty before mentioned; they must be understood by a cer∣tain proportion or similitude, thus; that as in that great day, and not before, God's children shall be graciously freed from all dangers and distresses of this life whatsoever either in body or soul; and on the other side, made per∣fect partakers of Eternal Blessedness; so the Creatures then, and not before, shall be delivered from the vanity of man, and their own corruption, and restored to a far better estate, than at present they enjoy: which also, may further appear by the words the Apostle useth, setting glorious liberty, deliverance and freedome, against ser∣vile bondage and slavery. Chrysostome reads , for the glorious liberty of the sons of God; as if the end or final cause of their deliverance were pointed at, namely, that as God made the world for man, and for man's sin sub∣dued it to vanity: So he would deliver it and restore▪ it for men, even to illustrate and enlarge the glory of God's children. I could, by variety of Arguments, prove, that this deliverance of the Creature, that our Apostle speaks of; shall not be by a reduction into nothing, but by an alteration into a better estate: But I must hasten to a close. Vers. 12. And I saw the dead small and great, stand before God. The Judge, before whom all do appear, is
our dear Lord Jesus, who hath the keys of hell and death inRev. 1. 18. Act. 17. 30, 31. his hands; and who is designed and appointed by God the Father, to be the Judge of quick and dead; he hath Authority, and a Commission under his Father's hand, to sit and act as Judge. Here you see, that John calleth the Judge absolutely God, but Christ is the Judge; therefore Christ is God absolutely; and he will appear to be God in our nature, in that great day. The Parties judged who stand before the Throne, are 1. Generally, the dead, all who had died from Adam, to the last day; he calls them the dead after the common Law of Nature (but then raised from death to life by theEph 2. 5. Colos. 2. 13. power of God) he speaks not of men dead in sins and trespasses, but of such as died corporally, and now were raised up to judgment. But shall not the living, then, be judged? Oh, yes! For we must all appear before the Judg∣ment-seat2 Cor. 5. 10. Rom. 149, 10. of Christ: That he may be Judge of the quick and the dead; and be Lord, both of the dead and the living: Under this phrase, the dead, are comprehended all those that then shall be found alive: By the dead, we are to un∣derstand the living also, by an Argument from the lesser. If the dead shall appear before the Judgment-seat, how much more the living? But the dead alone are named, either because the number of the dead, from Adam to the last day, shall be far greater than those that shall be found alive on earth in that day; or because those that remain alive, shall be accounted as dead; because they shall be1 Cor. 15. 52. changed in the twinkling of an eye. Secondly, he de∣scribes them from their age and condition, for the words may be understood of both, Great and small; which takes in all sorts of men, Tyrants, Emperours, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Lords, &c. as well as Subjects, Vassals; Slaves, Beggars; rich and poor, strong and weak, bond and free, old and young, all and every one, without exception, are to be judged; for the Judgment shall be universal, no man shall be so great, as to escape the same; nor none so small, as to be excluded; but every one shall have justice done him, without respect of persons; as that great A∣postle
Paul tells us, We must all appear before the Judg∣ment-seat2 Cor. 5. 10. of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad. I am no admirer of the School-men's noti∣on, who suppose that all shall be raised about the age ofLum. lib dist. 44 33. which was Christ's Age; but do judge that that per∣fection, which consisteth in the conforming them to Christ's glorious body, is of another kind, than to re∣spect either age, stature, or the like. Stand before God; that is, brought to Judgment; theJoh. 3. 18. guilty standing ready to be condemned, and the Saints standing ready, in Christ's presence, to be absolved and pronounced blessed. And the books were opened. Christ the Judge being set on his Throne, and having all the world before him, the books are opened: 1. In the general, the books are said to be open: 2. Here is a special book for the Elect, The book of life was opened: 3. Here you have sentence passed and pronounced, according to what was written in these books, and according to their works: And the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. Here the Judicial Process is noted by imita∣tion of Humane Courts, in which the whole Process is wont to be drawn up, and laid before the Judge; from whence the Judge determineth for or against the person, according to the Acts and Proofs that lie open before him. The Equity, Justice and Righteousness of Christ the Judge, that sits on his white Throne, is set forth by a Me∣taphor taken from Humane Courts; where the Judge pronounceth sentence according to the written Law, and the Acts and Proofs agreeing thereunto: All things areHeb. 4. 13. Rev. 1. 14. naked and bare before him, whose eyes are as a flame of fire. But to shew that the Judgment shall be as accurate and particular in the trial, and just and righteous in the close; as if all were registred and put on Record, nothing shall escape or be mistaken in its circumstances, but all things shall be so cleared and issued beyond all doubts and dis∣putes, as if an exact Registre of them had been kept and
published; in all which, there is a plain allusion unto the words of Daniel, speaking thus of this Judgment, TheDan. 7. 10. Judgment was set, and the books were opened: We find six several books mentioned in the Scripture. First, The Book of Nature, that is mentioned by David▪  Psal. 139. 16. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my members were written; which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. 'Tis a Metaphor from curious work men, that do all by theThe world saith Clemens Alexan∣drious is De Scri∣ptura, the first Bi∣ble that God made for the in∣struction of Man. Book, or by a Model set before them, that nothing may be deficient, or done amiss. Had God left out an eye in his common place Book (saith one) thou hadst wanted it: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy work: The Psalmist looks upon that great Volume of heaven and earth, and there reads in Ca∣pital letters, the Prints and Characters of God's glory. This Book (saith one) was imprinted at the New Jeru∣salem, by the finger of Jehovah; and is not to be sold, but to be seen, at the sign of Glory, of every one that lifts up his eyes to heaven. In this Book of nature which is made up of three great leaves, Heaven, Earth and Sea, God hath made himself visible, yea, legible; even his e∣ternal power and Godhead: So that all men are left with∣outRom. 1. 20. excuse. Out of this Book, the poor blind Gentiles might have learned many choice lessons; as, First, that they had a maker: Secondly, That this Maker being be∣fore the things made, is eternal, without beginning or ending. Thirdly, That he must needs be Almighty, which made all things out of nothing; and sustained such a Mass of creatures: Fourthly, The order, variety and distinction of creatures, declare his marvellous Wisdom: Fifthly, In this Book they might run and read the great goodness, and the admirable kindness of God, to the sons of men; in making all the creatures for their good, for their service and benefit: Sixthly and lastly, In this Book they might run and read, what a most excellent, what a most admirable, what a most transcendent work∣man God was: What are the Heavens, the Earth, the
Sea, but a sheet of Royal Paper, written all over with the Wisdom and Power of God? Now, in the great day of account, this Book shall be produced to witness against the Heathen World, because they did not live up to the light that was held forth to them in this Book; but cruci∣fied that light and knowledge, by false ways of worship, and by their wicked manners; whereof the Apostle gives you a Bead-roll or Catalogue, from vers. 21. to the end of that 1. of the Romans. But Secondly, there is the Book of Providence, wherein. all particulars are registred, even such as Atheists may count trivial and inconsiderable; Mat. 10. 30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbred: And where is their number summed up? even in the Book of Providence. The three Worthies were taken out of the fiery furnace,Dan. 3. 27 with their hairs in full number, not one of them singed: Paul encouraging the Passengers to eat, who were in fear and danger of death; tells them, that there should not anAct. 27. 34. hair fall from the head of any of them: And when Saul1 Sam. 14. 45. would have put Jonathan to death, the people told him, That there should not a hair of his head fall to the ground. Christ doth not say, that the hairs of your eye lids are numbred, but the hairs of your head, where there is the greatest plenty, and the least use. Though hair is but an excrement, and the most contemptible part of man; yet every hair of an Elect person, is observed, and registred down in God's Books, and not one of them shall be lost. Nor the Holy Ghost doth not say, the hairs of your heads shall be numbred, but the hairs of your head are all num∣bred, God has already booked them all down; and all to shew us that special, that singular care that God takes of the smallest and least concernments of his chosen ones. This Book of Providence God will produce in the great day, to confute and condemn the Atheists of the World; who have denied a Divine Providence, and whose hearts have swelled against his Government of the world, ac∣cording to the counsels of his own heart. But Thirdly, There is the Book of men's afflictions, this
some account an entire Book of it self; Psal. 56. 8. Thou tellest my wandrings; put thou my tears into thy bottle, areThe Septuagint, for my wandrings or flitings, have , my Lfe; to teach us, saith one, that our life is but a flitting. they not in thy book? God told all those weary steps that David took, in passing over those two great Forrests, when he fled from Saul; or thou cypherest up my flittings, as the words may be read; whilst David was hunted up and down like a Partridge, and hushed out of every bush, and had no certain dwelling place; but driven from post to pillar, from one Countrey to another: God was all this while a noting down, and a numbering of his flit∣tings, and a bottleing up his tears, and a booking down his sighs; Put thou my tears into thy bottle, Heb. my tear; that is every tear of mine; let not one of them be lost, but kept safe with thee, as so much sweet water. God is said in Scripture, to have a Bag and a Bottle, a Bag for our sins, and a Bottle for our tears; and Oh, that we would all labour to fill his bottle with our tears, as we have filled his bag with our sins; and certainly, if the white tears of his servants be bottled up, the red tears of their blood shall not be cast away; if God keep the tears of the Saints in store, much more will he remember their blood to avenge it; and though Tyrants burn the bones of the Saints, yet they cannot blot out their tears and blood out of God's Register; Are they not in thy book? are they not in thy Register, or Book of Accounts (where they cannot be blotted out by any time or Tyrants?) i. e. yes, certainly they are; thou dost assuredly book them down, and wilt never forget one of them, according to the usual Interrogatory, that was used among the Hebrews, when they affirmed a thing past all doubt. Let the great Nimrods and oppressors of the Saints look to themselves, for God books down all the afflictions, sufferings and per∣secutions of his servants; and in the great day, he will bring in this Book, this Register, to witness against them. Ah sinners, sinners, look to your selves; in the great day of account, the Lord will reckon with you, for every rod that he hath spent upon you; he will reckon with you, not only for all your mercies, but also for all your crosses;
not only for all your sweets, but also for all your bitters; not only for all your cordials, but also for all your corra∣sives: In this Book of Afflictions, there is not only Item for this mercy and that, but Item, also, for this affli∣ction and that, this sickness and that, this cross and that, this loss and that: And will not the opening of this Book of the Saints afflictions and sufferings, and of sin∣ners afflictions and sufferings, be as the hand-writing up∣onDan. 5. 5, 6. the wall, to all the wicked of the earth, in the great day of account? surely, yes; for as they cannot answer for one mercy of ten thousand that they have enjoyed, so they cannot answer for one affliction of ten thousand, that they have been exercised with. But Fourthly, There is the Book of Conscience. Consci∣ence,  saith Philo, is the little Consistory of the soul: Con∣scienceRm. 2. 14, 15. is Mille Testes, A thousand Witnesses, for or against a man: Conscience is God's Preacher, in the bosom: Conscience hath a good memory. (saith one.) The chiefGen. 41. 9. Butler forgot the promise that he had made to Joseph, but Conscience told him of it. Fama propter homines, consci∣entia propter Deum, saith Augustine; A good name will car∣ry it amongst men; but it is a good conscience only, that can acquit us before God. In this great day, the Book of eve∣ry man's Conscience shall be opened for their conviction,The Conscience is a Domestick and true Tribu∣nal, saith Nazi∣anzen. wherein they shall read their guilt in legible Characters; for that is a Book of Record, wherein men's actions are entred: and although now it be shut up close, and sin∣ners will, by no means, be brought to look into it; and though many things that are written in this Book, seem to be so greatly obliterated and blotted, that they can hard∣ly be read: Yet, in that great day of Accounts, God will refresh and recover the lustre of those Ancient Writ∣ings; and sinners, in that day, shall find, that Conscience hath an Iron Memory. In the last day, God will bring the Book of Conscience out of the Rubbish, as they did the Book of the Law, in Josiah's time; and the very lay∣ing open of this Book before sinners, will even put them besides their wts, and fill them with unspeakable horrour
and terrour; and be a hell on this side hell unto them: In this Book they shall find an exact account of every vain thought they have had, and of every idle word they have spoke, and of every evil action they have done; and Oh, what amazement and astonishment will this fill them with! By the Books, in this, Rev. 20. 12. Origen doesComm. ad. Rom. 14. understand the Books of Conscience, which now are hid, not from God, but from most men; for the hidden things of the heart are not now known; but then they shall be opened, and manifested to the Consciences of every sin∣ner, so as there shall be no place, no room left for anyAmbr. in Psl. 1. excuse or Plea. Ambrose saith, that the Books that are here said to be opened, are the Books of men's Consciences, and God's Omniscience. Oh, what dreadful challenges and accusations will every sinner be forced to read out of this Book of Conscience, in the great day: Oh, how, in that great day, will all wicked men wish, that they had followed the counsel of the Heathen Orator, when he said, A recta conscientia ne latum quidem unguem disce∣dendum:Ci.  Ossic. A man may not depart an hairs breadth, all his life long, from the dictates of a good Conscience. The Book of God's Omniscience takes in all things past, present and to come, as if he had kept a Diary of every man's thoughts, words and actions. But Fifthly, There is the Book of Scripture; and of all  Books, this Book is the most precious Book. The Book of the Creature, is but as the Inventory of the Goods; the Book of the Scripture, is the evidence, and convey∣ance, and assurance of all good to us. The Book of Scri∣pture, is the Book of the Statutes and Ordinances of the King of Heaven, which must be opened and consulted, and by which all must be judged in the great day; Jam. 2. 12. So speak ye; and so do, as they that shall be judgedJam. 23, 25. by the law of liberty; i. e. by the Gospel of Jesus Christ, by the whole Word of God, registred in the blessed Scri∣ptures. Now, the whole Word of God is called the Law of Liberty; because thereby we are born again, to a new spiritual life, and so freed from the Bondage and Slavery
of sin and Satan. Our Lord Jesus Christ, in his proceed∣ingsLet the Word be President in all Assemblies and Judgments, saith Beza. In the Ni∣cene Council Cen∣stne caused the Bible to be set upon a Desk▪ a Judge of all controversies: the Word shall be the Judge of all men's Estates at last▪ every man shall stand or fall according as he holds weight in the Ballance of the Sanctuary. in the great day of Account, will judge us by the Scriptures, and pass everlasting sentence upon us, accord∣ing to the tenour of the Scriptures. At the great and gene∣ral Assizes, Christ will try all causes by the Word of God, and pass Judgment upon all sorts of persons according to the Word; Joh. 12. 48. He that rejecteth me, and receiv∣eth not my words, hath one that judgeth him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. The persons that are to be judged in the great day, are not be∣lievers in Christ, they are not receivers of Christ; but such as reject his person, and receive not his Doctrine. He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him; &c. However the rejecters of Christ may e¦scape Judgment for a time; yet, they shall never be able to escape the Judgment of the last day; they shall assured∣ly, they shall unavoidably be judged in the last day: Though the rejecters of Christ had none to witness against them, yet the Word of the Lord shall be more than a thousand witnesses against them in the great day: The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. The Word of the Lord is so sure and infallible a word, that Christ's Sentence in the great day (when hea∣ven2 Pet. 3. 7, 10, 11, 12. and earth shall pass away) shall proceed according to the Verdict and Testimony thereof; For the word that I have spoken, shall judge him in the last day: Christ will pronounce then, according to what it saith now; and that as well in favour of Believers, as against unbelievers.Ad. 17. 31. Look, as Christ himself is ordained to be the Judge of quick and dead; so the Word, the Doctrines which he hath de∣livered, will be the rule of all his Judicial proceedings, both in acquitting the righteous, and condemning the wicked. By the Books in this, Rev. 20. 12. AugustineLib. 20. De C. Dei c. 14. and Beda saith the same with Austin. understands the Books of the Old and New Testament, which shall then be opened; because, according to them the Judge will pronounce sentence; Rom. 2. 16. When God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according
to my Gospel, which promiseth heaven and happiness to all be∣lievers. The Sentence of the last day shall be but a more manifest declaration of that Judgment, that the Lord, in this life, most an end, hath passed upon men. Heathens shall be judged by the Law of Nature, pro∣fligate Professors by the written Law, and the WordMar. 16. 16. preached: Believers by the Gospel, which saith, He that believeth, shall be saved; He that believes, shall notJoh. 3. 15, 16. 36. cap. 5. 24. Paeus. 2 Cor. 8. 12. perish, but have eternal, life; He that believeth on the Son, hath everlasting life; He that believeth, shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. Christ shall, in the great day, give Sentence accord∣ing to the Doctrine of the Gospel, which saith, If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. The Jesuits report of a Student at Paris, who coming to Confession, and not being able, for tears and sobbings, to speak, was willed by his Confessor, to write down his sins, which he did; and when the Confessor received it, the writing vanished, and there remained nothing but the white and clean paper; this say they, was by a miracle, because of his great con∣trition. Let the credit of this story, be upon the re∣porter; but upon the credit of the Word of God, if we believe: really, savingly, and repent unfeigned∣ly, all our sins shall be blotted out; and a Book of  clean paper (in respect of sin) shall be presented to theGod neither needeth nor useth Books to judge by, but this is spo∣ken after the manner of men. Mordecai's name was Registred in the Chronicles of Persia, Ejih. 6. 1, 2 3. And Iamerlane had always, by him a Catalogue of his best Ser∣vants, and their good deserts, which he daily perused. Judge. But Sixthly, and lastly, There is a Book of Life, Rev. 20. 12. And another book was opened, which is the book of life: the Book of Life, is the Book of all those that were elected and redeemed to life, through Christ Jesus. This Book of Life containeth a Register of such particular persons, in whose Salvation, God from all Eternity, determined to have his mercy glorified; and for whom Christ merited Faith; Repentance, and
perseverance, that they should repent, believe, and be finally saved. The book of life shall be opened; that is to say, the Decrees of God will be then published and made known, which now are sealed up in his breast, and locked up in his Archives. Then it will be seen who are appointed to life, for the glorifying of God's free, rich and Soveraign Grace; and whom he purposed to leave in their sins, and to perish for ever, for the exaltation of his Justice. 'Tis called A Book of Life; not that God hath need of a Book, but to note the certainty of Predestina∣tion; viz. that God knows all and every of the Elect, even as men know a thing which, for memory's sake, they set down in writing. This Book of Life shall be opened in the great day, because then it shall appear, who were Elect, who Reprobates; who truly believed in Christ, who not; who worshipped God in spirit and in truth, and who not; who walked with God as Noah, and who not, who set up God as the object of their fear; who not; who followed the Lamb whither ever he went, and who not; who were sincere, and who not; who preferred Christ above ten thousand worlds, and who preferred Barrabas before Jesus; and their Farms, and their Oxen, and theirMat. 25. 32. Swine, yea, their very Lusts, before a Saviour, a Re∣deemer;Ezek. 9. 4, 6. who are Sheep, and who are Goats; who are Sons, and who are Slaves; who have mourned for their own sins and the sins of the time, and who they are that have made a sport of sin, &c. Of this Book of Life, you read often in Scripture; Phil. 4. 3. And I intreat thee also, true yoke-fellow, help those women which laboured with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow-labourers, whose names are in the book of life. Vorstius thinks it a speech taken from the custome of soul∣diers or Cities, in which the chosen Souldiers or Citizens, are by name written in a certain Book or Roll. This Book or Roll is called here The Book of Life, because there∣in are written all the Elect, who are ordained to Eternal Life, Rev. 3. 5. He that overcometh, the same shall be
cloathed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life: In this Book of Life, all the just that live by faith, are written. The Elect are certain ofJoh. 10. 28, 29, 30 31. eternal life, they shall never perish, nor none can ever pluck them out of the Father's hand, nor out of Christ's hand. God is said to have Books Metapho∣rically,The Holy God, by an Ambrpe∣patheria speaketh to our capacity, for he doth all things without the help of Books. he needs no Books to help his Memory, he does all things by his infinite Wisdom, Eternal Fore∣knowledge, Counsel, Government and Judgment; but thus men cannot do; for whatsoever is done in their Councils, Cities, Families, Contracts, &c. for memory's sake, is set down in writing; that so, as there is occasion, they may look it over, and call to mind such things as they desire: Mark, not to have our names blotted out of the Book of Life, is to have them always remain therein; that is, to enjoy Eternal Glory; and what can the soul desire more? The names of the Elect are written in the Book of Life; they do not obtain Salvation by chance, but were elected of God to life and happiness, before the Foundation of the World. Now, their names being once written in the Book of Life, they shall never, never be blotted out of that Book. In the Book of Predestination, there is not one blot to be found; the Salvation of the Elect, is most sure and certain; Rev. 13. 8. And all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. The names of the Elect are said to be written in the Book of Life, by an usual Metaphor, for we com∣monly write down the names of such as are dear un∣to us, that we may continually remember them: So God having, in his Eternal Council, elected some to Salvation, hath written their names in the Book of Life; as our Saviour tells us, Rejoyce, because yourLuk. 10. 20. names are written in heaven. Some understand the Metaphor of the Sonship of the Elect; so that to
be written in the Book of Life, shews that they are heirs of Glory; for we know that such are to in∣herit, whose names are written in the last Will and Testament of men. Of this Book of Life, you may further read, Rev. 17. 8. Rev. 20. 15. Rev. 21. 27. Rev. 22. 19. Now, from this Book of Life, that shall be open∣ed, in the great day, when the other Books shall be opened (as hath been shewed) every sincere Christian may form up this Eleventh Plea, as to the Ten Scri∣ptures that are in the Margin, that refer to the greatEccles. 9. 11. cap. 12. 14. Mat. 12. 14. cap. 18 23. Luk. 16. 2. Rom. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Hb. 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. . 5. Dan. 9. 24. Coles. 2. 14. day of account, or t man's particular account. Most Holy and Blessed Lord! cast thine eye upon the Book of Election, and there thou wilt find my name written: Now, my name being written in that Book, I am exempt from all condemnation, and in∣terested in the great Salvation; my name being writ∣ten in the Book of Life, I am secured from coming into the Judgment of Reprobation or Condemnation; Joh. 5. 14. Revel. 21. 27. Jesus Christ, who hath written my name in the Book of Life, hath made up my acounts for me; he hath satisfied thy Justice, and pacified thy Wrath, and born the Curse, and purchas∣ed my Pardon, and put upon me an everlasting Righ∣teousness, and given me my Quietus est; he has crost out the black lines of my sins, with the red lines of his blood; he has cancelled all the Bonds, wherein I stood obliged to Divine Justice. I further plead, O Blessed Lord! That there is an immutable Connexi∣on betwixt being written in this Book of Life, and the obtaining of Eternal Life; and if the Connexion be∣twixt being written in this Book of Life, and the ob∣taining of Eternal Life were not peremptory, what reason could there be of opening this Book, in the day of Judgment. The Book of Life is a Book of Sovereign Grace, upon which lies the weight of my Salvation, my happiness, my all; and therefore, by that Book I desire to stand or fall. Well, saith the
Lord, I cannot but accept of this Plea, as holy, ho∣nourable, just and righteous; and therefore, enter thou into the ioy of thy Lord, inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee: Mat. 25. 21, 34. Thus, by Divine Aslist∣ance, and by a special, and a gracious hand of Pro∣vidence upon me, I have finished those select and im∣portant Cases of Conscience, which I designed to speak to. Soli Deo Gloria in Aeternum.
