B636 11910849 50829
THE TRAGEDY OF SERTORIUS. ACTED at the Theatre-ROYAL BY Their MAJESTIES Servants. By IOHN BANCROFT, Gent. Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. Horat. LICENSED March 10. 1678/9. ROGER L'ESTRANGE. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes in Russel-street in Covent-Garden. 1679.
TO THE HONOURABLE Capt. Rich. Savage, THIS TRAGEDY OF SERTORIUS IS DEDICATED, BY THE Humblest of his Servants IOHN BANCROFT.
ERRATA. PAge 4. l. 12. r. worthiest, p. 8. l. 4. r. blinds, l. 6. r. from Eancy, p. 9. l. 21. r. pow'r of Love, p. 19. l. 6. r. you Chiefs, p. 20. l. 4. r. the raising of, p. 23. l. 1. r. wait thee on the way, l. 26. Cyllenius like, p. 24. l. ult. r. fram'd for form'd, p. 28. l. 31. r. unconstant Dame, p. 36. l. 2. lose my life, p. 41. l. 5. for of r. or, l. 14. r. the novelty, p. 44. l. 13. r. Takes the Decrees, p. 17. r. warning Gods, p. 54. l. 15. r. The paths, p. 58. l. 16. r. Has hid her self.
Dramatis Personae. Sertorius; Exil'd from Rome, chose head of the Lusita∣nians, in opposition to Sylla. Bebricius; A Lusitanian, true Friend to Sertorius. Tribunius, Captain of Sertorius's Guards. Cassius, A Roman Tribune. Norbanus, Exil'd Roman Senators. Ligurius, Crassus, Decius. Perpenna; General of the Italian Bands: a Villain. Manlius, His Officers. Aufidius, Grecinus, Pompey; A Roman Geneneral, of Sylla's Faction. Aquinius; His Lieutenant. Tow Pontic Ambassadors. A Centurion. Terentia, Wife to Sertorius. Fulvia, Perpenna's. Soldiers, Citizens, Attendants, &c. SCENE Lusitania.
PROLOGUE. AS Cowards pusht into a desperate fight Move slowly forwards like their appetite; Yet when they feel the blows, fill'd with despair, Oft beat the brave, or battel with the Air: So our Gallant forc'd by his Friends to write, Now dreads his Fate which must be known this Night; Storm'd by his Friends they swore him into rage, And forc'd him fight the Hydra of the Stage: Compell'd he sigh'd and said like Phaeton, He aims at Wit, as t'other at the Sun, That he relies on what so oft is told, Fortune assists the brave, and Court's the bold; But if from Fortun's slippery Wheel he's hurl'd From Wits vast Empire to the lower World, Fate was unkind she would no pity show, Be doom'd by her, but doubly damn'd by you.
SERTORIUS. ACT I. SCENE I. SERTORIUS. CEASE, you Celestial Pow'rs, and give that ease, Which to obtain, I, with repeated Pray'rs, The bloud of Hecatombs, and Incense smoke, So oft have fill'd your Heav'ns; and bless the Man Which, from his Infancy to Autumn years, Subject to every blast, has known the Fate Of greatness, or abjected Poverty. Oh, Marius, through what paths Ambition led! But thou'rt no more; and Hell has left behind A Ianus Fury, who, with Sword and Pen, Or Stabs, or to enevitable Fate thrusts on, Doom'd by Proscription, numbers to attend On gastly Death: while Slaughter, big with blood, In Sanguine hue, and a Tyrannick pace, Sweeps, like a Plague; and makes Rome's Senate look Like Sons of Earth, scap'd from Deucalion's flood. Oh, when I call to mind Rome's base neglect, Tho' with this light I bought their Suffrages, Dam'd up for ever in the Marsian War; When Parents, with distended arms, lift up Their crying Infants, while the ag'd bestrid The tops of Houses, fill'd the Heav'n with Shouts, The plaudits of my Triumphs; yet gave way
To deeds ingrate, when Barbarous Sylla spoke, Deny'd the Tribuneship, and Exile made: Yet, not content with miseries, they hurle Repeated Plagues, and hunt me like a Beast. Yet, Gods, be kind, and Sylla's brood shall know, He that, with Patience, can endure like Me, May weather out the Storm, and Victim make The over-daring Fool, who hastes to meet (In Pompey) certain Fate; or Knowledge bought At dear expence. Down, you rebellious wrongs; Incite me not to acts, that misbecome A Roman mind to bear: Take flight, my Soul, Into a Sphere like thy Essential make; That I may scatter into open Air The envious mischiefs which inviron me. SCENE II. Bebricius, Norbanus, Ligurius, Crassus, Decius; to Sertorius. Bebr. HAIL Noble Patriot of a happy State, Blest in the Guardian! Lusitania owes, As to the Gods, from undigested ways Of Brutal living, unto nobler form'd, Her Reformation. Why's obscur'd that brow? What doubts can cause such gloomy fancies rise, As in the hue of melancholy men? Pensive with thought, thou shun'st Society. Nor. Know, brave Sertorius, that we all in thee Wind up our Clue of life: as men devote, To the Infernals, humane Sacrifice. Thy breath, when form'd into a sound, is Law: And not the dead shall, at the day of Doom Call'd to appear, in mightier numbers rise, Hudled to form from out their quiet Urns; Than Lusitania, from her wide extents, Crowd to attend Sertorius God-like call. Lig. Gods glory in thy make, thou man Divine, True Similar to Rome's first Founder made;
Excellent Roman! Patron unto all That's Great, or Good! Not Mars himself on Earth, When Illion Field's Divinities were Arm'd For Troy or Greece, wrought wonders with his Sword Out-doing thine; which Fame as loudly speaks To the Extreams o' th' Universe yet known: Chose out by Fate, Elected by the Gods, To free thy Country from Tyrannick Rule; Tho' to the eye of Mortals Heav'n obscures The mystick Writ, till Fate unloose the hours Which guide the Day to Rome's delivery. Nor. Heav'n own'd thy birth; and pleas'd was mighty Iove, When, in the Characters of Fate, he saw A man so God-like, that should know the change Of Earthly joys, as he of those Divine, When Sons of Earth made War against his Heav'n, And climb'd Olympus; else, in Infant years, weigh'd down with Iron: Under Coepio's charge, When Chance unjustly Crown'd the painted Gauls, Thou swam'st the Torrent of impetuous, Rhine, And liv'd to gain new glories by their spoil. Crass. Fame loudly speaks the Action of that Day, When Celtiberians broke their solemn Vow, And, in Castula, call'd the Gryseans in, To Martyr Rome, in slaughter of her Sons; As angry Pow'rs ruffle their Sky to Storms: Here, Sun-shine; there, upon the Northern Pole, Destroying Flames make big the Elements With Fate inevitable: so did'st Thou; When, in the height of their vain glorious hope, With speed of Hurricanes thy Sword destroy'd; Consum'd the Villains e're a thought could rise, And pluck'd a Laurel from the Victor's brow. Bebr. 'Mongst men, for deeds so great, we court thy Rule; And glory in thee: nay, the Vulgar Crowd Pay adoration to thy just desert; And blaze aloud that Fate attends thy Sword, Edg'd sure by Death: for, when thou heav'st thy arm, So Plagues devast, as thou mak'st void the space;
When throngs of Foes with Javelins fill the Air, And Thunder with the Ratling of their Shields, The frightned blood starts back into the heart, And makes the Soul, with Terror, flye its Seat. Sert. If Gods have form'd me as you say; I live Wholly devoted yours. The Roman name Shall, with her Eagles, take a flight to you; Pearch in your Temples; and a terror be To Rome's ill Genij, which have ruin'd all: That from the Ashes, like the Phoenix,, may Arise a greater, nobler Nation here. Bebr. Worthies of men, when Sylla's bloody hands, Embru'd in Slaughter, threatned Death and Fate; When all the terrors froze us up with fear; Thou sav'dst our Country, and dispers'd the Foe, Did'st Acts beyond belief, secur'd us all: And, with the Thunder of thy mighty deeds, Scatter'd that storm which did obscure our day. Now, fafe in thee, we Sylla's pow'r defie; Covet to Arm, when great Sertorious calls. Sert. Who would refuse to spend his dearest blood When gratitude requires? Oh, Friends, I find The deep impression which your loves have made; Sole help to raise my Soul, with thought deprest. Nor can I fear, thus circled by my Friends, Vain glorious Sylla, who delights in blood: Rapine, and Spoil, wait his Triumphant Car; And, where he comes, like angry Fates, he breaks Handfuls at once, not cuts 'em thread by thread. Fearless of him, all others I despise; And his new Pupil Pompey, big with threats: His School-boy's rage, to call us on to Arms. So the young Huntsmen, fearless of success, Dart distant weapons 'gainst the dreadful Beast, Till some barb'd Pile pierces his tawny side; Lash'd by his tail to rage, he bellows out Destruction, and lays waste the Armed Troop: So , so Arm'd, by our just Cause, we'll on. We fight for Liberty, and for our Gods;
They, for a Tyrant, who contemns all good, Who all the Temples of the Graces shuts; Vertue and Peace are strangers to their breasts: For them we Fight, and they must Crown our Swords. Bebr. Noble Sertorius! Lusitania's Patron! Sert. Rome's Fame shall bow to you; no longer blest; For all her Ornaments, her Arts, her all, To Osca shall be led; the noble youth There Educated in the Roman way; So Habited, when riper years come on: That, in the compass of an Age, the VVorld Shall see Old Rome the shadow of this New. [Sound of Trumpets. SCENE III. Tribunius, Crown'd with Laurel, attended with Aquinius bound, and Prisoners, &c. Trib. Hail, great Sertorius; Hail, thou mighty man, VVhom Gods, in absence, fight for! thus adorn'd, We greet thy Genius; and here offer up These Laureate Wreaths, appropriate to thee. Sert. So Arm'd, so Crown'd, the Roman Senate fought, When the rough Sabines did invade their Rule, Trib. Five Legions fell beneath our conqu'ring Swords, Secur'd by Fate: Nor could Metellus help; His rage was vain. So Surges dash to Air, 'Gainst Rocks opposing. Like the Giants fix'd, We bore his Charge, and prest him fiercely on: When brave Aquinius, to compleat the day, Bedy'd in gore, compass'd with num'rous Foes, Fell, with the number of his Wounds, our Captive▪ So angry Bores their Tushes whet in vain, Fume oft, as oft assay'd, as did their Chiefs When old Metellus sounded the Retreat: And, e're the setting Sun adorn'd the East, And on our Banners darted his bright Rayes, Our Friends, immur'd for many months, were free: Broke was the Roman Camp; and left behind
Engines of War; and mighty heaps of Arms, Forsook by haste, as Trophies we have ta'ne. Sert. The Sword of Justice has a vast extent, Is mov'd by Heav'n, and guided sure by Time, Whose Sythe's not keener; there Astrea views The Crimes of Earth, and pours her vengeance forth: While the just Arms are Crown'd with Victory. What can Aquinius say, to calm our rage? Can Rome's ambition never quiet know? Or must she restless as those Atoms be Which the fierce Winds subject unto their Rule? If so, by blood we must appease the slain; And think our selves, as by the Gods, set forth To kill this second Python of the World. Aquin. Curs'd be the man, that, to the Roman name, Dares blemish Honour with the thought of fear: I superate it; and, like Sylla, am When most endanger'd, most a Roman Chief: Bred in his Cause, and nourish'd in his Arms, Fill'd with the glories of his mighty deeds, He wan me to him. Let severest Fate Speak loud her Doom; to hear I stand unmov'd: For, if I fall, Sylla will 'venge my death; The brave Metellus, or fierce Pompey, shall Offer a Sacrifice to still my Ghost. Sert. Spoke like a Roman; gallantly and bold. But that I scorn to soil my fame with blood, Here thou should'st fall; then let thy Ghost complain To barbarous Sylla for redress: Did he, Sided by Pompey, fenc'd by old Metellus, The two supporters of this lofty Oak, Dare meet me face to face, and stand my Ire; Like angry Iove, I'd rive him to the waist, Spight of his Shields unto his heart convey This fatal Steel. Haste; tell the Boy, I wait To scourge his rashness. Let Metellus know, If he dares meet us, he shall feel again The Thunder of this arm upon his Cask: And need a Shield of Vulcan's tempering, To guard this deadly weapon from his heart.
Sucron's the noble Field of Liberty, Where Death shall glut upon the bodies slain: And all the Furies, gorg'd with Roman gore, Grow fat with Slaughter, and press down the Earth With humane weight. O that it were my Fate To meet this Pompey, Rome's Anteus, now: Like Hercules, I'd grasp him in my arms, And make his Tyrant rue his forward heat! Aquin. Thou shalt be fought with, if not foil'd, Sertorius, The chance of War may leave thee destitute, And us adorn: then, in the brunt of Arms, I'll court thy sight; and on thy Casket pay A Roman thanks, for Liberty and Life. Sert. Guard well the last; for, by our Gods, I swear, Or thee, or I, will measure out the ground If e're we meet. Conduct him on the way, Which gives a birth to Fate, and mighty deeds. [Ex. Aquin. But the Celestial Pow'rs have left their Heav'n, And fill the Temples with their Deities: 'Tis Incense they expect, and Sacrifice. You four Patricians shall attend on me, Clad in the Garb of Numa's Pontifies, VVhile I officiate Maximus to Iove: With heaps of Spice, we'll cloud the Altars round; Seven Heifers offer, beautiful and young, To Iupiter the Stayer. Hence, my Friends; See all things ready for the Sacrifice. [Exeunt, SCENE IV. Sertorius, Bebricius, remain. Bebr. Yet melancholy! when both Gods and Men Strive to out-vye in gifts? Stretch out thy arm, Like angry Iove, to those who envy thee: VVe'll be thy Elements, to execute. Sert. Thy loss, Terentia, does depress my Soul: I grovel in the dark; and, when light comes, Behold the falshood of my flatt'ring Stars. Bebr. VVhen Heav'n is kind, and pours his blessings down,
Not Miser-like, but with a bounteous hand; Who knows, but Fate reserves this to the last, To make invalid all the other gifts? Distrust is worse than Death; and blind the sense: So Night, to the dull Phlegmatick, creates The Aiery nothings which fancy rise; But when the warring Senses rouze the Soul To active heat, streight the Chimoera's fled: Then let not thought, form'd from despair, give birth To Beings far unworthy of your breast. Enter a Souldier. Sert. What means this rudeness, in our privacy? Sould. Some Strangers new arriv'd do beg admittance. Sert. Conduct 'em in. [Ex. Souldier. SCENE V. Cassius, to Sertorius and Bebricius▪ Cass. Art thou Sertorious? Sert. Men do call me so. Art thou a Roman? Cass. View well my face; then judge. Sert. By Heav'n, 'tis Cassius! That noble Roman, who appears to me As the last remedy to dying men; Or life, or death, attend as the effect. When Rome, in Sylla, made me Exile; Thou, In my necessity the only Friend, I left as Guardian to my Life, my Soul; Four Suns have past the Zodiack, since to me They've blest this eye with my Terentia's sight: Say, Cassius, lives she? or to blessed Shades, Doom'd by the Gods to an untimely Fate, Sh' has chang'd for Immortality? Yet hold! [Cassius offers to speak. Dead is the Fatal period of thy words: Night is not more ally'd to Chaos, than This dismal sound, if utter'd, is to Death.
Cass. She lives, Sertorius: lives, to bless thy sight; To banish into Air thy doubts and fears. Sert. I ask no other Heav'n, you Gods, than this; For joys of Paradise, Elizium Shades, Are Fictions to the real bliss she brings. SCEN. VI. Sertorius, Terentia, &c. So breaks the Sun, from out the Artic Pole, And with it Day, banishing Night from thence. Ter. My past misfortunes, whose obdurate Sence Sat heavy here, now vanish at thy sight: Long absence, wing'd by noblest Fire, sets on; And the great extasy of flowing joys Lethe past dangers with the present bliss. Sert. Thou all of excellence! how shall I pay The mighty debt! for, by my life, I swear The Sence of Seeing to the Center moves, And makes a mutiny of thought, within The Organ of my speech. Let me admire; And by my Eye, which greedily delights To meet each glance, judge of the Pow'r Love. Ter. Leave, my Sertorius, this Courtly Stile; And, in such words with which thou won'st my brest, Say I am welcom. Sert. Gods and Men, stand mute, While, both to Heav'n and Earth, Sertorius owns Life, Health, and Happiness, without thy sight Dwindle to nought, and fill an Airy sound: Not absent Gods, from their Etherial Thrones Frightned by Typhon, did with greater joy Again possess their Heav'n, than I my fair. Ter. No Musick of the Spheres could raise my Soul Into a height like this. Gods, on my knees, I offer up my pray'rs of Sacrifice; Contemn the many dangers I have past: Since, from those clouds which vail'd my happiness,
The Sun of comfort ushers on a Calm. Sert. Heav'n has restor'd the Treasure which I soug Given o're, as Shipwrack'd upon Sylla's Rock: While prest with grief, beneath the mighty loss, A happy moment makes me bless the Day, In giving back the All that I admire; For, by thy self, on thy fair hand I swear, I would not change for a Celestial Seat. Ter. And by my life, wound up within thy Fate, [They embrace. The joys of Heav'n, Society of Gods, Are not so charming as thy best-lov'd self. Bebr. Blest Lady, which to Lusitania brings The peace our Country has so often sought, So oft with piles of Incense fill'd the Air, And with the pray'rs of Nations in the Cloud Arriv'd, and gain'd acceptance from the Gods. Sert. Oh, Cassius, this noble man has spoke, At once, her Virtue, and thy Worth. What man Was ever blest like me, from Time and Chance, Through the dark Labyrinths of mistic Fate, To tast of joys like mine, and live? You Gods, Allay the Extasy; which grows so fast, That life, in motion, flags to keep its pace. Ter. I tread on Air; and view around the Days, Which fleet, like Shadows, tho they harbor'd Death▪ Like Prophets, lightned by the Sacred fire, Forget the giddy Chance, and to the God In rapture celebrate the turns of Fate: Thus, blest by Love, I fly into thy arms. Where thy sight mesures, there's the blessed place; And in that Circle joys of Heav'n are found. Sert. I am all Rapture; and will hence remove, To pay the Tribute of an ardent Love; Gaze on those eyes which do these joys create, And view the charming object of my Fate: Then, extasy'd, to greater bliss I'll fly; Contemn the gaudy Mansions of the Sky, And wrapt in thy embrace for ever lye. [Exeunt.
ACT. II. SCEN. I. A Noise of Mutiny. PERPENNA. Perp. HELL, and Confusion! how they rend the Air With endless clamors! Angry Elements, When meeting, cannot form a sound, that bears More horror in't: No voice but cries aloud, Lead to Sertorius! which the Traytress eccho From off the Hills reverberates, and makes No sound but his combat the yielding Air. Oh, giddy Fortune, and uncertain Chance, Upon whose slipp'ry path I've trod so long, Into what Maze you've led me! Must I live To see my self bereav'd of Fame, to plume The Minion that I hate?—Ha! who art thou, That bring'st a terror with thee? SCEN. II. Aufidius, Perpenna. Auf. A Friend, Perpenna: Who bids his General fly; or else submit To lay the Storm, by your consent to march. All arguments are vain; wounds but inflame Their burning rage, and turn into despair What hope could form. Hark how the Tempest roars, As if they meant to force consent from Iove! By strenuous voices so impulse the Air, As make Convulsions in his Starry Orb!
SCEN. III. A confus'd Noise within. Grecinus, Perpenna, Aufidius. Grec. Cease to consider, if you mean to live. So breaks the Sea, through the opposing banks, And with its Torrent headlong rushes Fate: Your Friends are, to their fury, Sacrific'd; No argument but Swords, no speech but Blows, Plead resolution to go on through Fate. SCEN. IV. Repeated Noises. A Centurion to them. Cent. Perpenna, so I was commanded call thee, For the incensed Souldiers swear to chuse, From out the Legions, Chiefs, and form a Head That shall to Osca lead their Warlike Bands. Metellus, and young Pompey, they despise; And to Sertorius fame are Prosetytes: Say, whether Concord to the Armed croud Thou send'st in salutation, or Neglect? Perp. If that my memory fails not, thou art he, When all the Cohorts bent to mutiny In the Apulian fields, killing the Slave Ambitious to be heard, didst lay the Storm: How art thou chang'd! how lost from what thou wert! Those Silver hairs, wain'd in the Roman Camp, Should be example of her Discipline; Not head of factious Slaves against their Lord, Who made 'em what they are. Cent. Thus low, I bow To great Perpenna, as my General. VVhen the rash Croud mov'd with the Face of Death, Lest some Officious Slave, inur'd to noise, Plebeiac sport, wrought up the mischief higher; I took this shape upon me, and must beg
(Hower'e the boldness they compell'd me to Relish your sense) you would give way to join Whom public Fame speaks loud: They all concur, If you resist, to give you bound and chain'd Unto the Lusitanian General. Be speedy, e're the happy hour is fled. Auf. Necessity compels; you must obey. Perp. Did I not fear (for I'm my self secure) My Fulvia's harm, th' insulting Slaves should feel Alcides labors dwelt upon my Sword: But, since ill Chance sits heavy on my Fate, Fly hence, my Friends, use all your art and pow'r, Let Hermes dictate, and the Gods inspire; Take with you this good man, and tell the Throng, Perpenna condescends to lead 'em on: Speak all the taking words that can be thought, And Reign for ever in Perpenna's brest. Cent. Fear not success: this news, like Balm to wounds, Will lay the anguish, and set free their doubt. [Exeunt. SCEN. V. PERPENNA. Perp. VVas there no way to pass the Labyrinth? No subtil Clue the mystic path to find? You partial Gods, why Crown'd you with success? VVas it to add to th' Laurels which he wears? Now, by the juster Pow'rs that war within, And make a Tempest in my Soul, he dyes. Not angry Daemons, to subvert the VVorld To ancient Chaos, and inlarge their Rule, VVrapt in the darkest Clouds too strong for light, The ample Character of Hell's design: Mine greater, more secure. Hypocrisie, Thou smoothest Devil that can Gods beguile, Rule in my brain; and dictate to my sense Mischiefs, excelling Heav'n or Hell to forge.
SCEN. VI. Fulvia, Perpenna. Ful. VVhy all this Tempest, Cneius? Look o're Fate; And, from the Brasen Volumes, rase the hour That threatens ruin. Are you mute at this? Could you, like Hercules, perform anew His Hydra-labour, it were certain hope; But gainst the VVinds and Seas usurping rage, Like Mariners within the giddy Bark, Mix words with Air, and execrate in vain, To great men is ignoble: Ebs and Flows Of Earthly bliss, should to the noble prove Like the fixt Rocks i'th' VVatry Element. Perp. So fir'd Prometheus Image with the Flame Stoln from Apollo's Car, as at this sound Those wave'ring thoughts which mutiny'd within Vapor to Air, as Mysts before the Sun: Thou chid'st my Fair; but with the famed art That Orpheus drew Eurydice from Hell; Thy words, like Charms, make me adore thy form, And pay thee, Mortal, worship that's Divine. Say, thou, my life, and be as Oracle; VVhile thy Perpenna, substitute to thee, Grows with the sound. Ful. Must I then Counsel give, And form the thought that must evade ill Chance? Since Heav'n and thee concurring will it so, Unite Sertorius pow'r, and dissipate Those clouds of Fury which usurp thy Face: Ill Angels hover o're despairing men And breed a mutiny within the Soul; VVhile the good Spirits act in will alone, Sigh out their woes and lose their words in Air, Imperfect sound. None but the wretched feed On abject hope: for God-like men create, From the extreams of ruine, certain bliss.
So the skill'd Sea-man, at vast distance knows VVhen the Salt Surges war the Element: Incluse within the noble Vessel, braves The angry Seas, tho ruffled to a storm. Perp. Oh Fulvia, 'tis the torture of the damn'd To rack with thought of Paradise that's lost; But thou, as when the spangled lights are hid, And all the Heav'ns in darkness are array'd, Mortals distract with fear of endless night, Till the bright Sun does usher in the day: Half dead, twixt doubt and fear, thou giv'st new life, And call'st from exile all my Reason back. There's something thunders in my Ears, revenge, Pierces like Lightning; but has left its fire Fixt in my brest, which like to Aetna burns. Ful. Let it burn on; it is a noble fire; And, in the blaze, let the great Hero fall: Make Lusitania the Funeral Pile, Her Cities, Sructures Temples, perish all, And from the fire let greatness take its birth. Perp. Let me embrace thee, O thou Excellence! VVhose words have rais'd a fury in my brest Prompt to revenge; but yet so form'd, so wrought, That Gods may wonder, and not Fate prevent. Yes, we will meet Sertorius; to his bane; And in a dubious language wrought with guile, Merit belief: till, most secure, he falls. So when Serenity of air by heat Becoms perspicuous, and the azure skye The jarring Element of Fire reflects; Through subtlest wounds the Soul her passage takes And leaves the Body sensless of her flight: So shall Sertorius fall, such is his Fate, No Thunder shall fore-run the deadly flash. Ful. Now thou art worthy of my love, and court'st In Treasure that surmounts a Danae's showr: My soul's transplanted in thy brest, and forms A God-like thought, apt to a Pow'r supream: Seated by thee, I view the lower VVorld.
The brood of Chance, like giddy Atoms reel; VVhile, like the Gods, we scatter, or collect, [Exeunt. SCEN. VII. CASSIUS. Cass. VVhat strange Infection rules within my brest, And Riots in my blood? Not liquid fire, By its first cause fomented, burns more fierce In the Earths Center, than I flame within. 'Twere better, Cassius, to unsheath thy Sword, And open all the fluces of thy life; That, in a deluge to the other world, Thy blood may still the Furies, and thy Soul VVander an Exile in Elizium shades. 'Sdeath, how was it begotten? so impure, I dare not give it name. You Fates unkind, VVhy doom'd you love in so sinister way? Now, my ill Daemon whispers in my Soul I must love on, and live. Ha! see, she coms! SCEN. VIII. Terentia, Cassius. Ter. Are you not well, my Lord, that you retire From the society of Friends? we're now Beyond the barbarous extents of Rome; Forget the base Proscribing City, and W' inhabit, and enjoy a Paradise. What sullen thought can then usurp your brest? If in Sertorius pow'r, or mine, it lyes, Your merit pleads, and Friendship bids command. Cass. Nor you, nor he must grant; the gift's so great, And my ambition swell'd to such a height, None but the only Jewel of his Crown Will calm the rage of warring passions here. (What have I said? what Devil did inspire
With words so killing to my Fame? I'm lost; Hurry'd to ruin, by resistless Charms.) [Aside. Ter. Ransack his Tresury, and call it yours; Did it contain more wealth than India knows: No gift can equal such a Friend as you. Cass. Ah, Madam, you're so excellently good, Plac'd in a Sphere remote, beyond the World; But wretched I, wander in endless night, And hate the Day, which brought my misery. In vain I hope redress; in vain complain Unto the Air; large floods of brinish tears With sighs, commix:—(Heav'n, strike me dumb for ever,) Or I shall tell the Cause of all my griefs; And, with it, bring inevitable Fate! [Aside. Ter. 'Tis wondrous strange! But; Cassius, I must know From what hid Spring these mighty Torrents rise. I always thought you worthy, and would strive, Knew I but how, to ease these fits of grief: You said, a Jewel; can a Toy, like that, Render confus'd the nobleness of mind? Cassius is wiser; and, I fear, has felt The change of quiet, by his Country's change Met some obdurate Fair, inur'd to scorn, Stranger unto your worth. Is't not from thence? Tell me; and, by our Friendship, were she Flint, Harder than Adamant, I'd melt her brest; Infuse into her Soul the pangs of Love, And make her proud to merit such a choice. Cass. (Something I fain would say; but when my words Do croud for utt'rance, they're confus'd and lost. I will—yet I will not—Death here shall rule, E're I the fatal Secret do reveal.) [Aside. Your pity, Madam's ill bestow'd on me, Who labor under the extreams of Fate, Foresee the Goal which I shall ne're arrive, And languish in the sight of Heav'n I wish: Yet, there is somthing, in your words, creates A kind of quiet here, and rest unknown, Allays the mutiny of warring thoughts,
And breaks, like light, thorough my Chaos sense. Ter. Give me your hand; consider as we go; If I am worthy of the secret Cause, Fear not success; I'll be your Advocate: Or, if a Kingdom's loss can buy your peace, Sertorius, to regain a Friend like you, With hands profuse would slight the gaudy Rule, And, in th' extreams of Friendship, prove a Friend. Cass. Upon the utmost rim of Earth I stand; And, the least motion, down the Precipice Headlong I fall, giddy with doubts and fears: I see my Fate, but cannot Fate prevent. [Exeunt. SCEN. IX. Drums and Trumpets. On the one side, Bebricius, with Lusitanians: On the other, Aufidius, with Romans, Crown'd with Garlands, and Olive-Branches in their hands. Aus. Health to Sertorius, Perpenna sends, Union, and Concord, Palms, and Olive-Crowns, Trophies and Spoils, ta'ne from the tawny Gauls: The pledg of Friendship, bonds of Unity. Bebr. A Roman constancy and Faith, commends The great Sertorius; proud of such Ally. Open the Phalanx; sound the voice of War: And fill the Heav'ns with Battel-harmony. SCEN. X. Loud shouts: a Flourish. Lictors, bearing Fasces; Roman Officers; then Sertorius; at∣tended by Cassius, Norbanus, Crassus, Ligurius. Is met in like manner by Perpenna, attended by Manlius, Grecinus, &c. They view each other. Perp. Fame, which to mighty deeds extends her wings, Has, from the Confines of wide-spreading Gaul, To view a Man famous as ancient Gods, Drawn me Perpenna, to admire thy Fate.
Nor find I less than what I sought; a Man, Great as the Founder of Imperial Rome: Who, like a God, does with his presence awe. Give here our Standard, now no more our own; Lictors, your Fasces prostrate at his feet; And all your Chiefs, which own'd me for your head, Pay here Allegiance: for Perpenna vows, By the blest light which guilds the Day, he lives Wholly devoted to Sertorius will. Sert. You make me blush through all my honour'd Scars, Naming my deeds, which are by your's eclips'd; The Starry Light, to Cynthia's Orb compar'd: Believe me, noble Roman, I'm more proud Of this Days honour, by so fam'd a man; That all the glories of my life fall short, When this is nam'd. Bear high the Fasces still, and let the lofty Eagle raise her Crest; For, by the loves and lives of all my Friends, Sertorius bows to so much Fortitude. Perp. Now, by the God which bears the name of War, His mighty Soul's transplanted in thy brest: The Shields of Rome, are forg'd, Metallic dross; Thou only Patriot, exil'd in a Storm Of Brutal rage: Fabius, Camillus, all The noblest Spirits inhabit in thy mind; And, while I praise thy Virtue, thoughts Divine Possess my Brain, and elevate my Soul. Sert. We're Men, Perpenna; Men, by Fate chose out To lanch through all the Terrors of the World; Frail, mortal Men, subject to every Chance: And while we praise our selves, we rob the Gods, Let it suffice I am thy Virtue's Creature: For, by the Gods, I covet to be thine. Bebricius, Cassius, noblest Friends, come on, And, with the Gordian-knot of Friendship, tye [Shouts, and Trumpets, &c. They all embrace. This mighty Union—Now, let Pompey come, Metellus, or the source of Civil War, Sylla, attended with his dire effects;
Like angry Gods, we'l hurl destruction down; Blast all their hopes, and scatter all their pow'r: For Heav'n in this secures the worst of Fate, And marks it out the Raising of our Swords. Perp. Where e're Sertorius leads, so winds break loose; Both Air and Earth suffer Convulsive fits: Not angry Parcae, mounted on a Plague, In greater numbers kill, than where thy Sword Points out the fatal compass, and makes way; Like loudest Bolts forg'd by the Cyclops hands, The mighty-weapons of an angry Iove. Proud to obey the Legions stand; their Chiefs Glow Aetna like, and courage fills the Nerves, While the hot-Will only the Signal waits. Sert. When brave Perpenna leads the coldest Soul With Emulative Virtue Flames, and courts The dismal'st objects, and the sharpest fights; And when the noble Bird of Iove soars high, The Pyes, and flocks of chatt'ring Jayes disperse, Beat on the wing, and court the Mountains womb, And Rocky Cliffs, for Shelter, Give command The Salij enter, to perform those Rites Apt to the will of Heav'n, and lives of Men. SCEN. XI. An Altar discover'd. Enter the Flamen of Mars, attended by the Salij. While Sertorius and Perpenna stand on each side the Al∣tar, is Sung this SONG. In Erebus, and in the lowest shades, Of ancient Chaos, and old Kingdom Night, Where the fierce Element of Fire ne'r fades, Where horrors, and the Terrors of the sight The Pow'rs Immortal, tho secure, affright: Thou, in the Genius of Alcides, Reign'd, And made the God-like Labors soon obtain'd.
Son of Juno, God of War, Who in bloud and death delights, Wbich still adorn thy mighty Car, And fire the brave in fiercest fights: From Thrones Etherial, see, O see, The strictest bonds of unity, Through Death and Wounds offer'd to thee. Here the Incense is lighted on the Altar; Sertorius and Perpenna shake hands over the smoke: the Salij Dancing a Warlike dance, to the honor of Mars. Sert. Bebricius, hast to Osca; Summon all The Roman Orders, to the Sacred place Of Iupiter Feretrius: There assembled, In a full Senate, tell the Conscript Fathers, Sertorius leads their Pow'r to Sucron Fields; And Heav'n indulgent, with a mighty force Whom fam'd Perpenna to their Army joyns, Eager for fight, as famish'd men for food, Hasts to revenge on the Tyrannic Fo. Then, to Terentia thy self address; Say, that Sertorius invocates the hours Swiftly to move the Orb which rules the Day, And fleetest Time counts tardy in his flight, Till the long'd minute ushers my return. Bebr. None more can covet to obey, than I; Tho the great Goddess I adore comes on, Fiercest Bellona, whom in bloud I court: But, such the Magic is which Friendship holds, I'll fly to Osca and neglect the Day. Perp. to Auf. Yet hold thy hasty steps, till Cneius speaks. Bring Fulvia hither, thou my best of Friends, In Battel often try'd, as Gold by fire, But far out-stripping Plutus Mines of Ore. [Ex. Auf. Let me intreat the mighty man of War, [To Sert. When he the weakness of Perpenna knows, That he'd forget the frailty of that man Whose silent hours (if such the Great can know)
Are fetter'd with the Charms of pow'rful Love: Our Patron Mars oft, from his Seat of War, To Revel with the beauteous Queen of Love, Forgets his best-lov'd sound for soft embrace. But see, she coms! now let her beauty plead. SCEN. XII. Fulvia, to them. Sert. By Venus self, there's more than mortal in her! Perpenna cannot err; for joyes he reaps, The Amorous Gods would slight their gaudy Sky, And covet to enjoy her Heav'n of Love. Perp. So Mortals to the Sacred Fane resort, Latona's Son Invoking for success; With greater heat, when Battel calls, go on, As in thy presence: such the pow'rful sway Of Beauty's Empire. Doubtful of my Fate, And from thy Tongue, as from an Oracle, Expect my Doom: Pompey, Metellus, brave The noblest Roman; to whose Fate's ally'd All the remains Perpenna can command. Ful. Absence, my-Cneius, is the Lover's curse; The Rack of Torture: yet, when Honor calls, Thy Fulvia's Rival, sense of Fame grows high, Pleads in thy cause, and for a space keeps down A floud of tears, which take their source from Love. The fate of Lovers should inseperate be; But thou, the killing Terrors to our Sex Mak'st thy Companions; and, in Arms, forget'st Thy sorrowing Fulvia: who, like Niobe, Could weep away the Being that I have. Perp. Give not a birth to thoughts like these, my life; For, when the Trumpet hastens to the Charge, Death broods upon my Sword, till from the Field Spred o're with slain, with Laurel Crown'd I hast To pay the glories at my Fulvia's feet. Thou, as the Tresure of my life, my Soul, Must hence to Osca: this brave Stranger here
And stout Grecinus wait the way. Cass. aside. The envious Gods, which plesure in our pain, Have given the happy minute from my hope. Oh, my Terentia! bloud nor death can lay The mighty anguish that thy eyes have made. Ful. One look, before I go, and that's the last: The tast of parting joys so much increase, That I could gaze my very Soul away. Perp. Such pow'r, the God pointed within that Ray, Has chang'd the thought of Battel to desire, And a few minutes would transform me quite Sert. Sound Drums, and Trumpets; Rise, you noble Souls, Fir'd with the harmony of sounds so sweet: Let corage dictate, and your Swords out-do The angry Fates. To Arms, my Friends; to Arms: Oh, may the Fortune of the Day lay wast The many mischiefs which attend on War, While the kind Gods auspiciously afford A blooming Peace, to Crown the Victor's Sword. [Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. I. FULVIA. NOT subtil Fire, from Iove's Olympus hurl'd In Airy tracts to mortal eyes recluse, Can be more deadly than the Plots I've form'd; The old, the young, the dull Saturnine Soul, And him whose lightness is Silenus like, Wander the pleasant Maze; so form'd by thought, And by the Magic of my beauty Charm'd: So the dull Pilot from the Helm is drawn; Rapt with the Extasy of sound, which bears Inevitable bane, from Syrons Tongues. Greatness, in my Perpenna, 'tis I aim; And, while in Fields he steals the Soldiers hearts, I'll make a greater conquest here at home.
SCEN. II. Bebricius musing, Fulvia. Bebr. Like Travellers, by light delusive led, I've wander'd from my reason, and have trod The mystic Labyrinth of mighty Love. Say then; Bebricius, she be virtuous, good, Stranger to thy requests, and cold as Ice! Let her be so; the coyest may be won: And shall I faint, when Paradise falls short To the blest joys which dwell upon her lips? Ha! she is here! I grow unto the Earth; [Starts. And the unruly Devil promts my Tongue. Had I the Charms that Youth and Beauty bring, The pow'r of Gods, or of their Substitutes; To the Divinities which habit there, And make a Throne Celestial in those eyes, I'd prostrate all, and, with the gift, my self: But, void of these, how shall I frame my speech To merit pity? Say, thou beauteous Creature, If I offend, in saying that I love? For, If I do, the World must err, like me; Worship those Eyes, as Persians do the Sun, And justly Idolize thy excellence. Ful. Bebricius turn'd a Lover, at these years! Does the soft God captive the Man of War? Bebr. Madam, he does; at vast expense he rules; Tributes my being, makes my heart his Seat: Ill Chance, to Camps and Martial deeds inur'd, Has taught my Tongue a harsh unpolish'd way; Yet Truth and Honesty, absent from Courts Where gaudy Birds with borrow'd Feathers wing, Dwells in my language. Possibly you may, For I expect it, use me with neglect; Do more than Daggers points could, wound: But I have said, and wait my Destiny. Ful. Are you then serious? Was not all this form'd,
Invented, to delude the hours away; The tedious hours? For, Since Perpenna's absence, Each day's delay appears an Age to me. Bebr. Ev'n from the first which blest me with your sight, I've felt the pow'r of Beauty in my Brest, Languish'd in Torture, and have hug'd my chain: Morpheus could ne'r close up my eyes with rest, But your Idea Revel'd in my Soul. Ful. Hold, Sir. This dialect does ill becom The Tongue of him I alwaies thought a Friend. Thus far, my Innocence will guard it self; But farther, were a crime that unbefits Perpenna's choice. Leave me, thou wretched man: I will not punish thee with ought, but Love. Bebr. Know, cruel Fair, life without hope is Hell; Wretched, as they who dwell in endless night: I dreaded the ill Fate, which did compel This doom from you. See, thou cruel Woman, And judg, by this, the wondrous pow'r of Love, Ful. What means Bebricius? Bebr. Say, when I am dead, Bebricius Life and Love were so unite. That Death it self fell short to seperate. If there be paths the Soul when banish'd treads, Whether on burning Phlegeton, or Styx; Upon the flaming Shores I'll call on thee, And make thy Spirit lose all mortal bliss, Rack'd with the Sympathy of pains like mine. Ful. Hold, barbarous man. Is't not enough I heard, And in it suffer'd; but thou threat'st my Fame: When vulgar crouds, not promt to judg, speak loud, Enlarge Report, spread wide her Airy wings, With seeming Subjects blazing Infamy? If thou dost love, in death it self, the Soul, Th' essential Seat of the Divinity, Still cares, with danger of the living's fate: And wilt thou wound in death, what living thou Ador'st? Bebr. Rather than suffer pains beyond all speech,
Languish in Torture to Eternity, I'll live to merit: but when stranger thoughts Do find a gentle passage in your brest, Oh, let the memory of your Slave appear A pitying object, suing for relief. Ful. Death waiting on a Lover's words, till now I've been a stranger to; you've ta'ne a way To merit pity: what th' effects may be, I dare not guess; but Time will lighten all. Bebr. So Gods, when mortals doom'd to Shades below, Revoke the Sentence of the sinking Soul, And give a glimps of Heav'n unto their sight, To banish from the thought the fears of Night. [Exeunt. SCEN. III. Cassius, Terentia. Cass. From Fortune's Minion, sorrowing Cassius coms, Where Slaughter gluts upon the Bodies slain, Pastime and sport, to the rough Sons of War; Sensless to me the gaudy feast appear'd; For here, within my brest, I feell a grief That makes a Fiction of the Vulture's gripe: Yet, when Sertorius spoke, with hast I fled, To pay the duty of a Friend and Lover; And felt a kind of ease in his Commands. Ter. Has the indulgent Gods then heard my pray'rs? Lives he, secure of wounds from envious men? Say, noble Cassius, and delight my sense. Cass. None worthy fear; the badges of his Fame, Which mark'd him Hers; then took an Airy flight, Swell'd with the Greatness, mesures out the Earth, And makes the Heav'ns too little for her head. Ter. How has th' Ignoble passion froze my bloud; And, from the height of joyes, hurl'd headlong down Too forward Hope! Gods, is he wounded then? His mind's so great, slighting the honor'd breach, Death, like a Thief, may steal away his life.
Cass. Oh, Madam, doom me not the Harbinger Of woes so killing, 'less within my self: His Fate's beyond the reach of vulgar men; Who suffer, meriting a kind belief, But vanish at his Name: As when the Sun Mounts up Olympus hill, the spangled Lights Shrink in their Beams, and disappear, till Night Calls forth her Ornaments. Ter. Let's hast; let's fly; Add wings unto our steps: forget the name Which breeds Impatience in a Lover's brest. Cass. (To the wide Region of the Air I speak: Like Tantalus, see that which flies my tast, And leaves me Tortur'd with the cruel thought.) [Aside. Ter. Why stay we here, and not attend the Triumph? Press to his sight, and use a Lover's hast. Cass. We, Madam, move within a diff'rent Sphere; A Venus, you; and a dull Saturn, I: Yet willingly, to meet a Friend like him. Swift would the motion be; but all within Is lost, in viewing of an object, hid To vulgar eyes: but, to my Optics, plain As Night from Day. (Her Innocence destroys, Faster than thought can form a glimps of hope!) Ter. You speak a Dialect that's mystic, Cassius; And show the mighty change from what you were: For words confus'd betray an inward grief. Now, by Sertorius, pity rules my brest; And, did not expectation of his sight Raise high my Soul, I should Conjure thee now By the strict bonds of Friendship, to reveal What works this change: for, Cassius, I perceive That words imperfect habit in thy speech. Sometimes, thy bloud flushes upon thy cheeks; Seeming to speak, thou check'st the hasty sound, Changest complexion to the palest hue. Cass. The Gods themselves may, from Divinity, Unfold the Adamantine leaves of Fate; But there the name of Cassius is imprest
So light, that wand'ring Pow'rs the object view, Shunning the Sight, sinks through the mystic Writ. Each hour I languish, and my pain's confin'd To th' Center of my Sense; Racks torture less: Yet, such the will of Heav'n, that I must live, Still view at distance all the Heav'n I wish, Dumb to request a helping, pitying hand, Whose very touch would, by a pow'r Divine, Pass through it's virtue to a bleeding heart. Ter. What God hast thou offended, who should thus Command Megaera to let loose a Snake? But tell me, Cassius; when my Quintus coms, From the tes to the Sylvan croud, Or from the height of Heav'n to th' depth of Hell, Not one we'l leave unsought, or uninvok'd. Cass. Nor Gods, nor Men, did Cassius e're offend, In Honor, or in Virtue: should I loose The stubborn Reins which guide our human will, I might have ease; but on it there attends A greater plague; Death, which gives ease to all, Will leave me restless in my Urn. But see! The Lusitanians croud to wait his sight. Now must this light of mine for darkness change. Ter. Such is the pow'r of Friendship, that I've lost The splendid thought which brings Sertorius home. [Exeunt. SCEN. IV. Sertorius, in Triumph, crown'd with Laurel; attended by Perpen∣na, Aufidius, Manlius, Crassus, Ligurius, Decius. They a∣light from the Chariots. Sert. The Gods the justness of our Cause have shown, And made the Air direct the Darts we flung, While Victory did hover o'r our Arms. Pompey, whose rashness spur'd him on to fight, Thinking that Fortune, which he elswhere found, Lacquy'd him here; but the constant Dae, Viewing the mighty havock that we made, Slighted his youth, and fled unto our Camp.
Perp. Memnius no more shall boast his mighty deeds, Unless in the Infernal Shades, whose Shores Swarm with the wretched Ghosts of Romans slain; That Charon, groaning with the mighty toyl, Calls for more aid of Pluto, and bemoans His endless labor. Where's Rome's General now? Where fled to hide himself? He's bound to bless The gaudy Trappings which adorn'd his Horse, Whose sparkling Gems dazled the barbarous eyes Fix'd on the object; h'had been Captive else: Metellus force came timely to his aid. Sert. It did, Perpenna; else we' had whipt him home, Wailing his loss, unto his Patron Sylla. But, when he views the Slaughter we have made, The num'erous Slain, which ly as Autumn leaves; He'l find destruction waits upon our Swords, And, when he fights with us, he Combats Fate. SCEN. V. Bebricius, and two Ambassadors, to Sertorius, &c. Bebr. Welcom, thou great Triumpher over Rome, Whose Sword chastises her Tyrannic brood; The Hinds of Fortune, when thou sound'st to Arms: See how thy Fame has wing'd, and won the brest Of Mithridates, who thy Friendship courts; That untam'd Prince, made for the Roman Scourge, Whose Empire's spacious, and his pow'r as great. 1. Amb. Hail mighty Warrior! great as Hanibal! Thy Name at distance does such terror breed As when his Camp was in the sight of Rome. The Lord of Kingdoms does, by us, intreat Sertorius to his aid: which if he gains, Pyrrhus, whose deeds were dreadful in the East, Shall prove but Infant to his killing Sword, Inur'd to battel, and to Slaughter bred; Witness the dreadful dayes when it appear'd. Say thou accept'st this offer, it again
Shall act new wonders, and make big the Air: Then, meeting with the sound thy deeds create, Unite into a Terror, dread as Death, And threaten everlasting night to Rome. 2. Amb. If Asia, torn by Siylla from his Rule, Thou wilt give back again to his command; Five thousand Talents of the purest Gold, And forty Sail of well-built Ships of War, Whose Prows are Arm'd with mighty beaks of Steel, Shall plough th' Atlantic Ocean. and be thine: Under thy Banners shall his Subjects march; And Mithridates, proud of thy Ally, Own thee Superior both on Sea and Land. Sert. Tell Mithridates, Cappadocia, And the Bithynian Realms, are his again; But what the Romans won by force of Arms, I cannot in my Honor give away; Or, from that Empire, lop a member off Which Fimbria won: I'll pledge my faith to him As far as Honor will permit, no more; For I will cease to be, e're do a deed That may disgrace the actions of my life. Bebricius, see 'em honorably us'd. If, on the Terms propos'd, your King agrees, Or your Commissions authorize your pow'r, We shall assist him as our Friend: This day We give our selves to plesure; but the next Is for the safety of this Common-wealth. Perp. (Surely the Gods strive to out-vye in gifts; And all Mankind, not worthy of their care, Must climb the Precipice of Fortune's wheel, While blindly here she largely gives away.) SCEN. VI. Terentia, to Sertorius, &c. Sertorius runs to, and embra∣ces her. Sert. More plesure Gods, you by this object give, Than all the glories that I've won in fight!
To know I'm lov'd by thee, exceeds the joyes Of bliss eternal. 'Twas to Heav'n thou pray'dst, And the just Pow'rs could no denial make; From the Olympic Mansions of the Sky, Dropt down a Laurel to adorn my Fair. Ter. Let it find credit in Sertorius brest, That in thy absence, as bereav'd of Soul, My spirit hover'd round about thy head: Still beg'd of Iove, in an Etherial sound, To break the edge of every Sword, that bore Death in it's point. Oh, my Sertorius! now, If tongue can utter, or delight can form, I feel an Extasy above all thought. They seem to discourse with Cassius. Perp. to the Romans. See how the poyson swells, my Roman Friends! Do not their plaudits grow within his brest? By Heav'n, we 'tend, like Slaves, upon this Tyrant, Unworthy notice: while the vulgar croud Shout up his name to Heav'n, and frighten Iove. SCEN. VII. Bebricius, to Sertorius, &c. Bebr. Fulvia, Perpenna, sorrowing thy delay, Has felt the stroke of sickness; but thy sight (So she commanded tell thee) brings her health. Perp. Ha! is she ill? (She has the Signal sent Of her success; but I must hide my joyes!) You Gods, averse to all that's great in me, Why wound you so? Let Triumph, Honor, all Perish within the thought, e're I delay A minute longer. 'Sdeath, my Gall will burst! Aufidius, Manlius, sound the depth of Fate; Take all my wishes with you: from this hour We ether make, or lose all future joyes. [Exit. Bebr. and Cass. whisper to Sertorius. Auf. What makes you study, Crassus? Is't this sight? Or is it that the Croud, neglecting us, Pay all their Vows to him?
Crass. I know not what Tumults within; but yet 'twere not amiss They thank'd us, for the wounds we got in fight. Man. Ligurius! Decius▪ why d'ye bite your lips? Why writh your looks into an angry frown? Lig. 'Twas nothing, Manlius, but a sullen thought. Dec. Mine was the same; but, see, we are observ'd! Sert. You noble Lusitanians, all are bound To pay the glories of the Day to him, The brave Perpenna, who deserves your vows: Not in the VVar of Heav'n, when Godheads Arm'd And shook the mighty Empire of the Sky, Did the Cyclopian bolts out-do his Sword. Terentia, thou, whose longing eyes behold Thy Quintus safety, ought to thank him for't. VVhen bold Aquinius, circled round with Fate, Like the Controller of the Destinies, He forc'd his way: and the ambitious man, Proud of the growing Glories of the Day, Fell from th' usurped Chariot of the Sun. Ter. 'Tis thou, my life, that dost inspire my tongue VVith thanks, as to a saving Pow'r. Oh, where Had thy Terentia been, when Heav'n and Earth, One trembling, t'other Ecchoing with fierce sounds, And Gods impartial throng'd to view the fight, If the barbarity of him thou sav'dst Had made a breach in life? Show me the man, That with an obligation infinite Has freed my fears, and blest my eyes again. Auf. Proud of the honor, fighting by thy side, And glorying in the objects form'd by thee, A servant to thy Fame; Perpenna said, When hasting to embrace whom sickness made A stranger to the splendid Scene, his Fulvia: That nought but all the Tresure of his love Could, in the lucky minute of his life, Cause any separation from his Friend. Sert. VVhat said Aufidius? is Fulvia sick? Can so much beauty temt the Gods to Fate?
Appollo Pythius, minister her health; Summon the followers of the Delphic God, And, with them, tell Perpenna how I grieve At this sinister period of our joyes. Ter. Good Heav'n, defend! what is't I hear? you Gods, Can then Sertorius bow to any Shrine Than what so oft he' has sworn by? am I then Lost in the novelty? So bliss, when reapt, Serves only to delight in absent thought. Sert. By Heav'n, the Vestal fire is not more pure, Than what my heart does offer up to thee, The Altar of thy Love, thy Beauty's Throne; Where thoughts take birth, as Gold by fire Refin'd. Can I in Friendship then commit a crime, Sorrowing that loss which might have been our own? Honor commands a Sympathy in grief: But Love, the noble passion of the Soul, Does in the glass reflect upon it self, And while it views inflames the Element. Ter. Forgive me, Quintus: such 'the tender seat Where Love's enthron'd, such jealousies, such cares 'Tend on the Passion, that we tread the Maze, And wander in the Labyrinth of thought, When the Idea by our Fancy rais'd Proves Rebel, and with Jealousy unites: But now, inlightned by thy words, I feel Joy in thy presence; with thee Sympathize. Sert. Lead forward, Friends, you Sinews of the War, In shape like Men, but in your deeds like Gods; Divide the Spoils, and Reign for ever here: While to the Pow'rs Divine we celebrate Thanks, suting to the Glories we have won; Perfume the locks of the now setting Sun. [Exeunt.
ACT. IV. SCEN. I. Cassius Solus. I FIND my self o'r-pow'r'd, my Reason gon, The Magic of the Soul has left its found; Bereav'd of all the noble Roman, now I walk, and breath pollution to the Air; Such as might well infect the Antidote: But like that Roman, viewing round his Fate, Suddenly down the dreadful Gemonies, Preventing the defame of common hands, Met boldly with his Fate, and brave in death; Thou, Cassius, must at once, (hard Fortune thine!) Be thy Accuser, Judg, and Murderer, In death to wipe the scandal from thy Fame: That, when thy Earthly part's sublim'd with Fire, Thy Spirit rarify'd, may see thy Urn Water'd with tears, and hear thy story told. SCEN. II. Terentia, Cassius. Ter. Trust me, thou Roman, I lament thy Fate, Which hurries thee, in paths obscure to us, Thus to consume: thou seem'st a walking Ghost, And, like a Spirit, covet'st lonely Shades; There breath'st complaints; while thy lamenting Friends Beg, and intreat thou would'st admit of cure: With folded arms, and looks which shoot themselves Into the Earth, thou sigh'st denyal out. Hither I've trac'd thee, and resolve to know If there be Pow'r in Friendship; or the Name But Fiction. Cass. Oh, thou excellently Fair! Yet from that excellence my griefs proceed.
Did I not feel my Fate grasp fast my life; Dumb to my woes, as they by Nature made, I'd sink into my Urn. Ter. Bless me, you Pow'rs! What have I done? what horrid crime committed, To make a Friend wither, with thought, to shade; The gift of Gods in life? Oh, Cassius, tell; That, with the hast of Penitents, I fly Unto the pitying Gods, which hover o'r Their holy Mansions: say what Sacrifice, What Vows, what Incense may atone their Ire; For I shall never tast of peace or rest Till I, the Cause, have quieted thy grief. Cass. White, as the thought of Innocence, thou art; Pure, like the first Creation, from all guilt; That takes it source from the internal frame: Yet, tho attended, circled round with gifts, The only Jewel of Heav'ns Tresury, Such is the violence of head-strong Fate, I covet—(Oh, how th' unwilling Soul, Just on the brink of ruin, all confus'd, Casts a sad look upon her long-lov'd seat, E're for Immortal change she takes her flight!) Ter. Oh, free me, Cassius, from these doubts and fears, Which make a Winter's storm within my bloud. Did I not call upon Sertorius love To raise my Soul, deprest with such a weight, Sure I should sink in Sorrow's vast Abyss, Cass. You have commanded, and I will obey: Free you from this; but fear a second storm, More dreadful, and more just. You call'd on Love! That raises you; but sinks me down to Hell: For what, but Love, could thus effect a change; Transform me from the being that I had? Ter. I am amaz'd! what is't that Cassius means? Cass. But, oh! when, naming Love, I view that face, Like him who, gazing on the works of Heav'n, Lost life in admiration of the Object! Pity me, Fair; tho justly you condemn:
And, when I say 'tis you that I adore, For you thus wither,—and thus lose myself; [Stabs himself. Say, in my death, That Honor to my Friend Held a contest with Love, and master'd it. Ter. Help, help the wretched; who, distract with pain, Has sheath'd his killing Dagger in his brest. Enter her Women. Oh, run, Camilla; call the Sons of Art, To stay this deluge; in which Life does hast To find a passage. Cass. In vain is human help. Let me, in death, Adore; and shoot my Soul, Viewing thy face, into Elizium shdes. Forgive the boldness of my love: tho Death Coms swiftly on; yet, ere the latest blast, Let me intreat you'l to my memory (How-e're you hate me now) be pitiful. SCEN. III. Sertorius, Terentia, Cassius. Sert. Who was't that call'd for help?—Ha! 'tis my self, To bear with patience such a sight as this! Gods, you're unkind; more cruel, than she's false! By Heav'n, She weeps, and baths him with her tears! Oh, the inconstancy of all the Sex; That damns the living, and torments the dead! I will retire from hence; and wish I could Forget I e're had being. Ter. Oh, my Lord, Stay you so long without a helping hand? Sert. Ha! by Heav'n, she'd make a Property of me! Death, Hell, and Furies, 'tis too much to bear. Ter. See here, my Lord, the noble Cassius slain. Sert. What said'st thou? Cassius dying? How the word Has calm'd the passion, at the name of Friend!
So the Earth's vapors, when the Sun appears, Dissolve to Dew. Oh, Cassius! Oh, my Friend! Tell me, how came this wound imprinted here? Cass. Give me your hand; and swear forgiveness to me. Sert. By all the Gods, I do. Cass. Then I shall dy Freed of the bitter anguish of the mind. I have offended, but it was in thought; 'Twas the ill bloud rebell'd within my Veins: But from the sluces I have loos'd the slave, And dy a Roman; yet my Rebel eyes Will fix upon the Object of my Soul, Now plunging o'r the mighty Main of Death. Dyes. Sert. Forbear, thou saucy Tyrant, for a while; If thou want'st Subjects for thy eager maw, I'll give thee thousands, spare me but this one. He's gon, he's gon; the fleeting Soul has past The bounds of life! Night, out of Chaos take The blackest of thy Wardrobe, thrust back day, That all the World may mourn in endless Darkness. Weep on, Terentia: for thy tears, like Balm, Will please his Manes, and allay my grief. Takeup the Body, and erect a Pile Great as a Pyramid: from the blest, look down, And see thy last of Rites. Oh, might there rise Another Phoenix from the Sacrifice. [Exeunt. SCEN. IV. Fulvia, Perpenna. Ful. The angry Fates now croud to serve our will; Lest they should want in mischief, as in pow'r: Ligurius, Decius, are my Proselytes, Greedily swallow up the gilded bait, And hurry on to ruin. But, I fear, Bebricius Friendship will admit no change For, tho he loves, and to the height of passion, In his rough Soul such Honor is imprest,
He'l sooner turn Apostate unto Love Than derogate from him who fills his praise. Perp. Crassus, Norbanus, and Tribunius com; With many more inclin'd unto our Faction. The lightest Souls thou hast already fir'd, While the consid'ering Fools are catch'd by me: Norbanus honor, nor the Tribuneship Which Crassus has, nor fam'd Tribunius charge, Are strong enough against th' assaults I make. Ful. What doom you of Bebricius? Perp. He must dy. Ful. Then, let him dy: but shall he fall, before The Tragedy intended? Perp. Yes, he must: Lest he betray us to that Fiend Sertorius. Ful. I think, 'twere better that you let him fall Associate with the mighty Deity He Idolizes: let 'em mount together; And, erring from the slipp'ry paths of Heav'n, Sink headlong down, into eternal Night. Perp. Retire, my Fair, and invocate of Chance To cease the motion of her giddy Wheel, Till I have fixt the Engins of his Fate. [Exit. Fulvia. Answer me, Iove, in Thunder, if that man To greatness born, by interposing Fate Headlong flung down th' aspiring Precipice, Yet lab'ring to regain the mighty top, Views round the spacious Empire of his toil; Can any guile or fraud as perse his fame Who makes his opposite his step to mount? If thou darst answer me, I wil speak aloud That Romulus, the man thou snatch'd from Earth To Deify, forgetting tyes of bloud, Remov'd his Brother, to secure his Rule. I dare as much, and court thee in my deeds, Tho Ill, yet great, and offer 'em to thee; For thou, with thoughts Olympic fir'st the brave, Lifts 'em from Earth into the middle sky, And points 'em out the Regions of the World:
'Tis thee I invocate; and wish I could (As once unto Lycaon's House thou did'st) Turn all into a Flame, and Nature change. Enter a Servant. Serv. Sir, there are many Gentlemen without That wait admittance. Perp. Go, conduct 'em in: They're the Conspirators. Exit. Servant. SCEN. V. Crassus, Ligurius, Norbanus, Decius, Tribunius; to Perpenna. Trib. Hail, noble Roman! Crass. Hail noble Cneius! Lig. Hail the great Perpenna! Dec. Hail the great Perpenna! Nor. Hail the great Perpenna! Perp. The Omen's well, that, with a mind unite To carry on this great deliv'ering work, We here are met, as at a Signal given: Tribunius, Crassus, and Ligurius, Norbanus, and good Decius, use no speech; But seat your selves. Now, Roman Lords, and Friends, Once great in Fortune, not in emty sound; The all that we enjoy; tho we may feign, Like melancholy men who Reign in thought, Revel in joyes, the meer Idea's form'd From Fancy, wrought into a height by words, But the effect is Air: Can you, my Friends, Tho we may credit, in our fulness, things Which stupid ease creates, be or secure or great? We call our selves a Senate, and beget Thoughts we are truly so. Sertorius says, When barbarous Gaul's sack'd Rome and lay'd it wast, Camillus unto Vei made retreat, Gave out, that Rome it self was thither mov'd;
And, for the confirmation, added this: "Where e're the Senate was, there Rome was still; Alluding to our abject States, to please A few, once Senators, now Exil'd men. Say then, if Cneius may be bold to speak The plainest of his thoughts. Nor. You have, Perpenna. Crass. VV' expect from thee, as from an Oracle. Lig. Speak free, Perpenna; for thou art our Fate. Perp. Say we have fought, and gain'd a Victory, If I may call it so; but which of you, From public hands receiv'd the benefit? Or did the Croud eccho your names from far; Or to your Houses carry you with shouts? If any such be here, then I am mute. Omnes. None; none, Perpenna. Perp. Know you why it was? For great Sertorius, like a boundless Sea, Swallows the many Riv'lets in his Main. VVhich of your Swords cut not as deep as His? I saw you fight, and stood amaz'd at it. VVhat have the Barbarous giv'n you in return For such expense? If praise will cure your wounds, The Soldier's purchase; whether since, or no, They've thought you worthy merit? Trib. VVe all fought: They look'd upon us, rais'd a shout, and cry'd, The Gods reward the noble Roman Chiefs. Perp. I, there it is; the Gods must pay you thanks, VVhile, like a Tyrant, he ingrosses all; And leaves us not our fame. But now I'll hast To search our hidden griefs. Sertorius says Sylla's a Fury; truly, so it seems, For, maugre all opposers, still he Rules; His Fame mounts with the Chariot of the Sun, Rises and sets with his Etherial light: Yet we despise him, and contemn his pow'r, Content with sound, and lull'd with flattery. Is not the beaten Pompey at our walls?
Has not Metellus joyn'd him? nay, has not Sylla threatn'd to be here? yet we sleep, Surrounded with these dangers. Noble Friends, If any of you think I use this speech To alienate your Loyalty; of form Language that bears a bane unto your worths; Speak, and Perpenna shall be ever mute. Lig. Th' hast freed us from the Lethargie, and added Long-absent heat: Go on, thou noble Roman, Who, while we slept, beheld our certain Fate. Perp. This City, which, to Rome, is like a Star In magnitude, unto the Moon at full, He calls New Rome; the Superstitious Croud, Pleas'd with Novelty, count him a God: And pay him Adoration. Don't we find, While we exclaim 'gainst Sylla, Sylla here? Here, in Sertorius? is he not Lord of Rule? Does he not write himself Dictator too? Saves, or destroys? are not his words as Laws? And, tho he Lures us with the name of Friends, Are we not under his Authority? When I consider, noble Romans, Iove Rive me with Thunder, if it irks me not, To see our selves thus, by our selves, deceiv'd. Nor. Thoust read the mystic Character of Fate, And found the number of the Sacred Writ: Now lead the path, remote from Slavery. Perp. I were not, Romans, worthy of your loves, Could I not shun, as well as see the danger. Consider, Friends, now, as your latest choice; For Freedom is't, or Slavery we toil? If Freedom we desire, as I believe No Roman breaths a Soul, or holds a Life Worthy enjoying, without the blessed Name; It must be (pardon me, for Gods command) By bloud: Nay, start not, worthy Roman Friends; We all must suffer, if he lives; if dyes, We've all the World to rove in, or divide The Provinces amongst us. Old Metellus
Will sign our own Conditions; Sylla courts us: Lest, staying in their pow'r, we joyn with Pompey; Whom, well I know that, he both hates and fears. Speak then, my Friends, and ease me from my doubts: If, by my freeness, I am odious grown; This hand, which willingly should aid your cause, Shall ease me of the weight of life I bear. Trib. Oft have I serv'd him, in the fiercest fights, And think no man e're courted more his love; But, since the general good requires his fall, I willingly assent to't. (Crass.) So do I. Nor. And all. Lig. And all. Dec. And all. Perp. Give me your hands. First yours, Ligurius; Now, noble Tribune, yours; honor'd Norbanus; Tribunius, tho last, yet Chief of all. Since Heav'n has put into our hands a Shield, To ward the body from distress, Oh, Friends, Watchful with cares, retiring to the Cave Sacred to Fortune, which in Gaul I found, Off'ring the Sacred Rites, lo, from her mouth This sound was heard: "Awake, thou sleepy man, "And dissipate those heavy clods of Earth; "Whose pitchy vapors do, like Meteors, hang "About thy Soul; Gods have decreed the fall "Of proud Sertorius, and have chose thee out "To free the Romans from their Slavish State: "I'll move before thee, and prepare thy way; "Into their minds instil the lost desire "Of Liberty. This said, the God was mute. By the concurrence, well I know the pow'r That the indulgent Gods unto our Fates By this effect have giv'n. Death is the word; But how, and when, and where, you noble Romans, Shall this great Act which gives us Liberty, By Gods commanded, be by us perform'd? Trib. Fortune has chose thee out to lead us on: Thou, who conversest with a Deity,
In my opinion, ought to be our Head. Crass. Perpenna's thoughtful, wise, and valiant, Bends all his Study for the Roman good; And, in this cause, must lead us forth to act. Nor. Do, noble Cneius; for we're vow'd to thee: Point out the way, tho circled with the Fates, We'd gain the prize, or perish in th' attemt. Perp Secure in all your loves, I dare disclose The secrets of my brest; and form a way Subtil and sure, as what the Gods Decree. What think you, Friends, if that he fall this night, Deluded with a Tale of Victory? I have the Engins ready for the work; The fire is kindled, and the Forge compleat: And we the many hands to batter down This vast Colossus. But, with him, must fall Bebricius; who, with jealous eyes, inspects Into the very marrow of our Plot: The real Argus; and a trusty Villain. Trib. Delay is dangerous; since we are confirm'd, Why should our Swords, ready to act our wills, Grow to the Scabbards? Freedom is the prize For which we fight: now, in the face of Day, The Sun should view the glory of the deed. Perp. Brave Spirit! that's so forward in the Cause, Signal from Heav'n to fan us into flame! But that the Gods decree it otherwise, Blest would my Optics be, to see thy Sword Hew Slavery in pieces. This I've thought; When high in hope, pleas'd with the splendid Tale Of Vict'ry, won from Sylla's Officers: He sups with me to night; and that's his last. The Lusita nian who admires him so As the dull Clown the Thunder-making God, Not knowing that the warring Elements Create the same without the Thund'rer's hands, Must with him fall. Draw all your Swords. Now swear, By all the Pow'rs which sat when Man was made; By all the Beings abstract from those Po'wrs,
Sea, Air, and Fire; by day, and Erebus; And by th' Eternal Flames of Pluto's Realm: When Time the happy minute points out, You Swords cut deep into the Monster's heart. Omnes. We swear. Perp. Methinks, I see the Landscape of his Fate, By angry Daemons, stretch'd to a full length; While the pleas'd Gods their heav'nly Curtins draw, And from the Christal Casements of the Sky With purer light Illuminate the Moon, Pale with the greatness of the glorious deed Which makes an Empire, and subverts a State, And, from my breath, forms the Decrees of Fate. [Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. I. Bebricius, Sertorius. Bebr. IF the Decrees of Iove, in Thunder spoke, Or the sad Character of warring Gods, In ample Prodigies inlarge themselves; You must not hence, unless unto your Fate: Osca, till now, was stranger to these sights, Which fright the vulgar, and confound the wise. Last night, when Horror did in darkness Reign, When Graves gave up their dead to trace the Earth, And the unquiet Ghosts, as robb'd of rest, With horrid Schreams and howlings of the Damn'd, Fill'd every Soul with terror of the change: Our Priests (as when Neptune his Trident struck The angry Element, and call'd the Springs To vomit up a Deluge o're the Earth,) To every Pow'r Divine they Sacrifice; While angry Heav'n in Thunder drowns their Pray'rs And with repeated Storms, does threaten end To the World's frame. Sert. 'Tis strange indeed, Bebricius;
But, if the Gods Decree the final change, Why should we dread what first or last will com? Iove, from the Earth, form'd us to what we are; Infus'd a noble fire within our Souls, Whose heat gave life, and wrought our stupid Sense Unto the glorious actions, which create Envy in Gods, and Honor in us Men, And makes our Fame out-live us in our deeds. Bebr. That Glory is the Soul of noble men Living to merit, justly I believe; But when on Earth, as once was 'gainst the Heav'ns The Beings which from Chaos were produc'd Rose in Rebellion 'gainst the Lord of all: The kinder Gods, by glorious actions won, Speak loud, as far as Fate will give 'em leave, To save the mortal lov'd from sudden harm. Sert. Thou would'st persuade me then, that this portends Danger to me; pointed to me alone? Would'st in my brest infuse I know not what, And make me Subject to an idle fear? Bebr. The Gods declare, that we may shun that Storm Which gathers in the Wind, and threats from far: Not with a Natural war divides the Clouds; But, speaking, forms a Thunder with his voice; Which, did not Fate oppose, would Eccho here The Revolutions known in Skyes above. I, as a Prophet, and by Friendship fir'd, Swell with the object; which my thoughts unravel: And now, the visits, vail'd by Night and shame, Appear at full; made by Perpenna's guile: Crassus, Ligurius, could not shun my sight, Tho wing'd by fear, and muffled with their Cloaks; 'Twas there I hous'd 'em; and am confident A nest of Villains brood within the walls. Sert. It is impossible. Can they, my Friends, Equal in greatness and in pow'r, as when Marius did awe in Rome, contrive the fall Of him who rais'd 'em to that height of pow'r
They now enjoy? Persuade me to believe The melancholy which Norbanus bears Deep in his bloud, promts him to change! Oh, no: They court the lonely places, and do hate Human Society, the joy of Earth! Or that Ligurius lightness in discourse May give occasion to distrust him! I've, In numerous dangers, seen him act as far As the loud-talking Hero of the Field. Tribunius merit rais'd him to that seat Which now he holds; next thee, and my dead Cassius, The man I prize; Can these my best of Friends, Conspire against the man that they divide? Bebr. Pray Heav'n the Nation feel not the effects. This I am sure, There is no good intended; For, when I was devoted unto Love, Admir'd the beauteous creature of her Sex, That Sodom Apple, whose fair outside temts Death in the tast, Plots and contrives like Fate, Has numerous visitants of hot-brain'd youth, Coveting danger for a smile from her; Decius, the chief, who leads the pleasing Maze; While she, adorn'd like Venus, shoots her beams Into their Souls; which in a mighty blaze, As subject Flames commanded by the Winds, Threatens destruction: Can Sertorius think Perpenna ign'orant of this work of Night? No; I have seen him, unconcern'd, behold Such amorous glances, and such liberty, With his fair Wife; that, were it not design'd To lure 'em with the specious bait of Beauty, It were above an honest man to bear. Sert. The ag'd, Bebricius, always look on youth With thoughts of danger and of Jealousy; And, from the gayness (which they think adorns,) That makes 'em light and Airy in their Meen, Take too severe a judgment. Oh, Friend! in Love VVe know not what we say; but if the Sex Command a deed ignoble, then the brave
Shake off the Fetters of the Amorous God, And loath the object which affected change. Bebr. 'Tis fix'd in Fate. Sooner the Adamant, By vernal dew, shall all its hardness lose; Than the lost minute call from hoary Time, VVhose Scythe has cut deep into ignorance. 'Tis not my fault, you Gods; for, as a Friend, And call'd to speak, I've utter'd every thought. Hast then, Sertorius, struggle with thy Fate, Roar like a Lyon catch'd within the Toyl, Neglecting the poor Beast that gave him warning: Then, when inclos'd, I'll summon all my strength; Or set thee free, or perish in the Snare. Sert. Something thou'st said, like Ice, sits chilling here; And the rash thought, tho light as Air before, Now, like a weight hurl'd in som quiet stream, In many circles wreaths th' adjacent floud, And from the bottom raises flakes of Ouze: The clearness of my mind, once void of fear, Thou hast infected with the poys'nous sound. Oh Doubt, that tortur'st more than points of Swords! By Heav'n, these shapes of fear, these dreams of night, Thus I discard, for ever banish hence, And live above the reach of envious men. SCEN. II. Terentia, Sertorius, Bebricius. Ter. Thou must not pass, unless upon my death; VVhich I oppose, to fill the breach of Fate. Can (Oh the cruel question to be made!) Sertorius love, love his Terentia still? If I have pow'r, or if these tears prevail, Oh; let my words find credit in thy brest. Sert. By Iove, my manhood fails; I grow to Earth: Speak and release the Agony thou'st made. Ter. By all the joys of Hymen, all the sweets▪ That wait on Love; nay, by the secret bliss
That happy Souls enjoy, Oh, stir not hence. Swift, as a Pile hurl'd by the Delphic God, Barb'd with destruction, coms our ruin on: Aurelia is no more; I saw her Ghost, The dear remembrance of a Friend and Mother, Thrice cry Curs'd Rome! then, from her eyes, burst forth A floud of tears, which usher'd on her woes: "Sertorius is no more, she often said; "I saw the Fates busy about his life, "The thred expos'd on the immortal Sheers, "And all the lesser Messengers on wing: This spoke, she vanish'd into Air again. Sert. Sure, my Terentia, thou but dream'd the while; And this the product of thy fear! Ter. Oh, no. Scarce recollected, viewing round the space, Too true I found the Vision, which out-fled Report it self: a Messenger arriv'd, VVith Letters, which confirm the fatal chance. Sert. Oh, Mother, art thou com, to warn my Fate? Left the possession of thy quiet Urn, And thy distracted Spirit hovers here? Speak loud, you Gods; for I'm prepar'd for change: VVhy all these horors? is it to amate The wandring Soul, when she her mansion leaves? Loose all your Bolts, bury me quick in Earth, Rather than Rack with sounds exceeding death. SCEN. III. Tribunius, Crassus, Norbanus, Ligurius, Sertorius, &c. Trib. Hail, mighty Lord! Imperial Conqueror! Great in thy deeds, as Phoebus is for light! Give leave, that we attend thee to the Feast: VVhile that Perpenna of the favor proud, Envies the Thrones of Friendship that we have. Sert. I will not go: do not inquire the cause; Let it suffice it is my will.
Trib. 'Tis true That people whisper; here I find it now; Sertorius doubts the constancy and faith Of men, devoted wholly to his Fame; Men, which have sworn in death to follow thee; Men, which have left the Roman State for thee: To ashes turn'd the Tables Sylla sent, With ample restitution, and full honor. I see the hate thou bear'st us, in thy eyes: Oh, would they had the pow'r of Basilisks, To kill the Villain who infected thee! Sert. Mistake me not, Tribunius: I'm not well, And do not like the fierceness of the Air. Trib. Mistake me not, Sertorius; nor believe Thy secret thoughts are hid: I see 'em there, There, in thy eyes; and hear 'em in thy words; And curse my Stars I ever liv'd to hear. Crassus, Ligurius, and Norbanus, com, Draw all your Daggers, and compleat our doom: To live suspected, by the man we love, Is worse than death. Sert. What means Tribunius? Trib. Thou shalt read here, and glut thee with the Character, Writ with these Pens of Steel, upon our hearts. But, Oh! the wretched State of human things! On what false Basis do we build our hopes; Thus subject to the blast of every wind? Know, thou Sertorius, that I hate to live Under the very Igno'miny of thought. Nor. View all these Scars, the badges of my love, Gain'd by thy side, in Battel; call to mind How oft I've interpos'd 'twixt thee and death: This single arm, as glorying in thy sight, Has made a Lane in the opposing Foes. What have I ever don, to merit this? What action, in my life has made a crime? Did I but think my Soul could harbor one Against my Friend, by Heav'n I'd stab that too. Lig. Believe me, General, that I court thy worth,
A Servant to thy Virtue; and this Steel, Hasting to let out life when so revil'd, Shall pierce as deep into a Loyal heart: Nay, I believe, that man, who loves me not, Would be a pledg in Honor for my faith. Bebr. Why nam'st thou me, Ligurius? well thou know'st, When darkness summons all the World to rest, You're waking at Perpenna's, loath all sleep, And there confederate: at such hours of Night, No good can e're be hatch'd; but Treason may. Lig. Thou ly'st, base man. Now, by the Thunderer, Wert thou not safe within this sacred place, Had'st thou as many lives as Hydra heads, I'd kill 'em one by one. From hence it springs, Here takes it Source; and, like a Plague, Infects. Bind me, Sertorius; lead me where no light E're shot its Beams; and, if you find it truth, Invent a Torment new, and terrible, Exceeding all the labors of the Damn'd: But, till I'm justly doom'd, believe my brest, Like Chrystal, casts this poyson in his Teeth. Sert. What thinks Terentia now? how can I doubt Such Friends as these? Com, we will go, my Fair: Banish distrust; and think the Prodigies Were only to amuse, not to Predict. Let not these men know of our inward grief; Apart to Terentia. But bear it with the patience of a God. Ter. Yet there is something dictates in my brest This visit will be fatal; and I see, Like dying men, prospect of mighty things: From fear they cannot com; to me, they seem Like Meteors fix'd, not flying forms of Air. Sert. Com, my Bebricius, do like me, believe Not one of all these Romans can be false. Ligurius, com, forgive the hasty words; Age has its faults, as well as fiery youth: The one must bear th' other's Infirmities. And credit me, such is the great esteem, If in the scope of Rule you cast an eye.
To any part which raises strong desire; Command Sertorius, who no Tresure knows Beyond th' intrinsic value of a Friend. [Exeunt. SCEN. IV. PERPENNA. Perp. I grow in love with mischief; and the Gods, Envying like me, consent unto his fall. If there's a Fury greater than I feel, A subtil Daemon that I have not sought; Let him expand his wings, and habit here. Dull Fools they were that sought eternal Fame By deeds not worthy naming: He that fir'd Diana's Temple; or that stupid Ass Who headlong fell in flaming Aetna's womb, In hopes to cheat the Vulgar, lost himself. I mount a Sphere above 'em. As, in Hell, The lesser Fiends are Slaves unto their Lord, And band the fiery Surges to his will: So I, on Earth, would with this arm controul; And, if the disobedient Clods rebell'd, Find the Connexion of the Globes above, And with this Sword divide the mighty tye, That headlong with its weight it sunk to Hell, And made the Furies groan beneath its Orb; While, from the Region of the Sky, I saw Its mighty dissolution, unconcern'd. SCEN. V. Fulvia, Perpenna. Ful. You seem exalted with success, Perpenna; Tread upon Air, and breath a Soul all fire. Perp. Yes; and behold my Iuno fix'd by me: While the connected Atoms, Statue-like, Know nether life nor motion, till we speak.
Ful. How if, Ixion-like we 'embrace a Cloud? Perp. Why, then that Cloud shall hide us both for ever: Slighting the Earth, we'l put our beings off, And wing for the Society of Gods. I hear the noise of many feet: let's hence, And meet the Victim. [Exeunt. SCEN. VI. A Banquet. At it, Sertorius, Perpenna, Tribunius, Crassus, De∣cius, Ligurius, Norbanus, Bebricius, Attendants. Perp. Such was the time, in the Latean way, When frightned Gods, by Sons of Earth besieg'd, Sat there in Council with Immortal fear, Till all the fainting Pow'rs, by Bacchus fir'd, Forc'd Iove unto his Thunder: Here we sit, While Pompey's Rams are storming at our walls; Whose Blows are Harmony unto our Feast. Sert. It is, Perpenna, and a God-like sound, Enough to sink the fearful into Earth; But we, as seated on a Throne, behold Ruin spread wide the Terror of its wings: They, like Cambyses, rage against the wind, Till weary'd with the object; then we hast, Mounted on Death, give Reins unto the Sword, And glut the Furies with whole Seas of Gore. Perp. When great Sertorius speaks, he should, like Iove, Have Thunder ready; all the Elements Ready to make a second Chaos stand; And all the World, as dreading the fierce change, Becom agast: But, viewing round, I see The Cyclops wanting Bolts for such a work; Nor has old Vulcan captiv'd Time, or yet The fatal Sisters ta'ne 'em to their Sheers. Bebr. Ha! means he me, by Vulcan? captiv'd Time? By Heav'n, my fears I find now are not vain. How dares Perpenna thus abuse the Gods; And in a language strange, unto a Friend,
Dost call the Son of Anthropos a Iove, Yet mock'st his wanting Ministers of wrath? Sert. No more, Bebricius; he is hot with wine: Give him his liberty; he is our Friend. Perp. Let not Sertorius doubt the proof of it. Free men have Liberty; 'tis Slaves have Chains: And well I know Quintus will ne're impose Upon a Roman, what a Roman hates. For Liberty, Sertorius knows, we've fought; And we would do't again, knee-deep in bloud: Let's see that Talker fight, instead of speak; Let Oratory hang upon his Sword; But, till the Field sets forth his mighty worth, Confine that Gall which dwells upon his Tongue. Sert. It is unkind, Perpenna, thus to rate him; He is a worthy man, and bears a Soul Great, as the proudest Roman: I have seen Wonders perform'd where er'e his Sword has com, And death before the blow has made its way: Such worthy actions in my Camp has don, That nether Pompey, nor Metellus, can't When he is nam'd but reverence the sound. Perp. Now, Romans, be you Judges of the change So long I warn'd you of: See, see our Fates; See all the merits that our wounds have got; That now, when Pompey girts us in our walls, He dares prefer this man the only Friend, This gray-beard Villain, who contrives our fall, That when the danger which invades is past, 'Tis he must Lord it o're our Liberties. Trib. Speak thou for me how much I loath a Chain. [Stabs Sertorius. Sert Ha! Sure 'twas deadly. Ho! my Guards, my Guards! Perp. Be not deluded with so false a hope; There's not a Soul that dares but think relief. Bebr. Thou seest I've yet that strength within my arm To turn thy Dagger's point upon thy self. [Here Ligurius is Stab'd by Bebricius, who escapes. There is no safety here: I'll hast away,
And com attended with Revenge e're Day. [Exit. Sert. Oh, Barbarous Vaillains! Treason; help. Perp. 'Tis here, Sertorius, on this point: despair, and dy, Thou base, ingrateful man: had'st thou surviv'd, We'd been thy Slaves; but, thank our Swords, we're free. Sert. Yet I dye pleas'd, to know thy sudden Fate; I see it now before me; view the man: Pompey revenges me. I see these men, That shame the name of Friend to that degree, In so deplorable and lost a state; That their own Souls begin to loath their make, And curse the hour when first they saw Perpenna. Oh, my Terensia! thy Prophetic fear Is now accomplish'd. Oh, uncertain Chance, How subtil are thy ways that Greatness tread! Which guides us on unto our certain Fate, And never leaves us till our life is fled! Perp. Dy, Wizard. Think'st thou that I fear my Fate? No; 'tis on thee I build the mighty frame, And seem a Body second unto Atlas: Thus grasp a Scepter, and thus rule my Stars; Since, by thy death, our Liberty is gain'd. Shout, till your voices burst the Clouds to Air; That with the violence of meeting sounds, The Globe grows giddy, and inconstant Fortune No longer can command her fickle Wheel. Shots, Liberty, Freedom, Liberty! SCEN. VII. Terentia to Perpenna, &c, Ter. Curs'd be the sound for ever; ever curs'd She runs to Sertorius bo∣dy, and kneels by it. The cruel Villains! why is't you delay? Sheath all your murd'rous weapons in my brest? And show your selves Masters in Villany, That know no bounds in bloud. Oh Sertorius, How have the Gods ordain'd our Destinies! [Weeps.
Sert. Terentia, oh— Dyes. Ter. Sertorius; Lord; 'tis thy Terentia calls. He's gon, he's gon; and summon'd me away, To shades remote; which happy souls enjoy: Yet, my Sertorius, stay thee in thy race, Hover a minute o're Terentia's Fate; See with what swiftness I'll pursue thy shade To its Immortal Mansion!—Flow swift, my bloud; Stabs her self. That, from this passage, like a Sea broke loose, My Soul shall mount; still calling, as it flies, Justice from Gods, Revenge for perjur'd men, Quintus, I com: From Earth I now remove, And seek the Ghost of an Eternal Love. Dyes. Perp. Som Devil sure resides within my brest; I ne're knew pity, till I saw this sight: Nor will I now. Remove these Bodies hence: Place 'em within; that, viewing our disgrace, When coward thoughts dare give themselves a birth, Look on the Tyrant, call to mind his deeds; And if the Gods dare put a cheat upon us, We'l wait not Death, but make him 'tend on us. Trib. Farewel, thou noble Roman; we shall meet Goes to Ligu∣rius. In happy shades: while thy blest soul delights In the success that waits upon our Swords. Speak then, Perpenna; shall we sally out, Or send to treat with Pompey? Perp. Noble Friends, It will disgrace the glory of our deeds, Sully our Fame atchiev'd in fiercest War, To lay those killing weapons at his feet Whose edg has forc'd him from the Field retreat. Are not our Legions full? their souls o' fire? This City ours, to back us in the fight? While in their Camp, Famin and Sickness Reigns, Let's out, and chase these Specters from our VValls, That fright us like the shadows of the night, Whose wither'd substance much resembles theirs. Omnes. Lead on, thou Soul of all the noble Romans. Alarms and shout within.
SCEN. VIII. A Roman Soldier, to Perpenna, &c. Perp. What dreadful message dwells upon thy tongue? VVhy thus confus'd? Call back thy frightned sense, And tell us what's the meaning of this sound. Rom. Pompey is entred Osca; all is lost: Bebricius, scaping from the bloudy Feast, Turn'd all into Sedition; for the Croud No sooner heard their lov'd Sertorius dead, Quitting their several stations, op'd the Gates To Pompey's Soldiers, fir'd with strange desire. Both partyes now are one: Bebricius leads The num'erous bands, and has begirt us round. There is no scaping hence with life. Perp. Hence, slave; [Kills him. And preach to Furies, in the other VVorld. 'Sdeath, am I catch'd! betraid by Jilting Fate, VVhen the full Scene of Greatness was in view! It is too late to talk. Com, let our Swords Hew out a passage to our former state: And make the wond'ring Gods call back their Ire, To see how Slaughter does pursue our blows. [Exeunt. SCEN. IX. Fight. After which, Pompey, Bebricius, Lusitanians, Romans: Perpenna, Tribunius, and Norbanus Prisoners. Pomp. Such is the Fortune of Imperial Rome, VVhen-e're her Sons against her do rebel, To turn the lot of ruin on their heads. Thou fear'd Sertorius, Rival to my Arms, Fam'd Soldier once that was, now thou'rt no more; By Heav'n, it grieves me that I meet thee thus: In Battel, to compleat my Victories,
Bowing beneath the keenness of my Sword, Thou should'st have fell, not by a Villain's hand. Bebr. Forgive me, Oh thou Manes, this delay; I only live, to see thy death reveng'd. Pompey. Where was thy sense of Honor, cruel man? Scythia, in falshood, does fall short of thee: Not the contriving Furies of the deep Could e're invent a greater Villany. Perp. Hold, Beardless Boy; thou Novice in a Camp, That oft has fled my Sword, as School-boys Rods: Think upon Sucron Fields, and then be mute. Thou say'st that Hell could not afford a Scene Of greater mischief: I am proud of it. Empire I aim'd at; had it once in sight; Till the curs'd Gods cast in their bar between. In me, 'twas great; but it was base in these: And, if that Chance had blest me with a Throne, Their heads had been the steps to mount upon. Nor. Dog, Son of Night, ingendred of the foam Of Cerberus, and Hell's contagious Dew. Trib. Oh, I could eat my Chains, to com at thee! Perp. Tribunius, please me with a Mask of Death: Knock out thy brains against those Ornaments, And let me see how bravely thou wilt dy. Trib. Blest Fortune!—Take that, Paricide. When Hell's. Snatches a Sword from a Soldier, & kills Perpenna. Capacious Kingdom does confine our Souls, There, in th' Infernal Lake, I'll plunge thee in; Sink with thee to Perdition; and, in pain, Take plesure in thy Conquest. Lead me on; The Gemonies, Tarpeian Rock is bliss, And death, which sets me free, a Paradise. SCEN. X. Fulvia, distracted, to Pompey, &c. Ful. Room, room, you Slaves! 'tis Fulvia coms, your Queen; Bow to the Earth your stubborn knees; shout up Reverberated voices: For I'm grown
Equal with Fame, and fill a mighty space. What means that abject posture? art thou chain'd? Chain'd to a Throne? Why flies not my Perpenna? Hast thou the World of business at thy heels, The Type of Empire? hurl it into Night, And free the Gods from their Eternal doom. Perp. I thank thee, Tyrant, and obey thy pow'r: Thou ne're could'st visit in a better time. Take her away: by my lost hope, this sight Is worse than Hell; and bands my wretched Soul, Like angry Furies in the other VVorld. Ful. He's struck; he's struck: ha! how it streams apace! 'Tis the first present of my Love I make: (Stabbing Bebr. Now, glory of it in the other VVorld. Pomp. Seise on her, Guard: This is a bloudy Night: The Moon hid her self behind a Cloud; And all the Stars, as tho afraid, retire. Bebr. I thank thee; thou hast sav'd me from a deed This hand e're day had don. I feell my end Move swiftly forwards; and a glimmering light Now shuts up day, and makes it ever night. [Dyes. Perp. VVhere were your safe-guards now, you envying Pow'rs? See, how we've snatch'd revenge from out your hands, And breath defiance! Could I pluck from time A minute longer, Pompey, thou should feel There was no safety in Perpennas reach. It pleases me to think, when I am dead The mischief I have don will sfartle thee, And all the VVorld name me a glorious Villain: And, when to Pluto's Region I arrive, The Gods will doubt more from my single Brain, Than all the Furies met against their Heav'n. Oh, Fulvia! Death does hasten me away: I'm now his subject, and I must obey. Dyes Ful. I feel the mighty frame now goes to rack: My heart's divided with the deadly blow, And all my Senses at vast distance roam▪ 'Tending the Soul unto Eternity. Stretch wide your Kingdom, Furies, to receive Her, whom the World could not contain alive▪
For my receptance, let whole Legions wait; That Pluto, wondring at the mighty State, Scorning his Queen, may place me in her Seat. [Dyes. Pomp. Remove the Bodies. To Sertorius Pile Add all the Ornaments that Soldiers boast: Break all your Shields; there all your Ensigns lay; And mourn that loss which sheaths your Swords again. Let him have common Burial. May the Gods Forget his Crimes; while Rome no Equal knows, Nor none contend against her Soveraign pow'r: But to her Vengeance, as the Ire of Heav'n, Wast into former Chaos, and forget That being which they had. Spread wide thy Gates, Oh Guardian Angel of the Gods abode; Let Fame, from Pole to Pole, her Eccho sound: While the whole World, obedient to her Pow'r, Submit to Rome, as to her Emperor. [Exeunt Omnes.
EPILOGUE. By Mr. Ravenscroft. OVR Poet to the learned Criticks does submit, But scorns those little Vermine in the Pit, Who noise and nonsense vent instead of Wit: Those Aierie empty Sparks that know no more Than how to dress and railly with a Whore; Nay all they say to 'em is perfect cant, And Vizord still runs down the weak Gallant: Vext at her Repartee, he stroaks his Wig, And cries, Dam me, you Whore you, I'll unrig: Then cursing her, he leaves her to the rest O'th' Fops— Or tears a Hood and Scarf to make a jeast. Whence have these silly Monsters their pretence, That they should Iudges be of Wit and Sence? These Gnats about a Poets Ears may swarm, But want a Sting to do him any harm. FINIS.
