D1982A 11081051 46297
THE Crying Charge. Ezekiel 22. Now thou Son of man, wilt thou judge, Wilt thou judge the bloody City? yea, thou shalt shevv her all her Abomina∣tions, &c. Printed in the yeer 1649.
To the High Court of Iustice, ap∣pointed for the Tryal of CHARLES STƲART King of ENGLAND. By the Lady Eleanor Douglas. SHEWS, THe Kings consent therewith, how Mervin E. of Castlehaven, Lord Audeley, unmercifully was sentenced to death Easter term 1631. and in May cru∣elly executed a Tower-Hill, accused falsly of two Crimes, what lewdnes could and malice produce; one, Of his being accessary to a Rape committed on Ann his wife, done by a Page, one Broad∣way; and, Of Sodomy (made death H: 8.) committed with an Irish Foot∣man, Fitzpatrick O Donel; which a∣foresaid Lord Audeley indicted of Fe∣lony,
brought to his tryal at westminster, the K. Attorney where shew'd, The King like God, would extend to the priso∣ner all mercy: Likewise the Lo: Keeper that day Lo: High Steward, because the cry was great of Sodom, would see whe∣ther those things were so; the Witnesses whereupon call'd to appear, she a common Whore her husbands accuser, without ever appearing in Court, or taking any Oath, had there contrary to the Law, one of her consorts that said, My Lady upon her Honor saith thus, &c. or, It was true. The other Witness, the Irishman, he a vagrant, had served under the Empe∣ror, although a Papist, had contrary to Law, his Oath taken at the Bar, refu∣sing the Oath of Allegiance; where askt by one of the Judges the maner, confest, Not the act, but somewhat of a foul
nature, &c. what such malice & the like might invent, promised to be the Queens Footman. The Attorney, one not to seek of his Errand, saying, Howsoever, it was an act of Uncleanness; prayed the Court to proceed upon it: My Lords, said he, you have heard this odious Crime, how dark and mysterious 'tis grown; you must be curious there∣fore how you admit of any mitigati∣on: who accordingly his counsel took, &c. Ʋpon which pronounced, Lord have mercy upon thee the prisoner, to lose his life forthwith, of such promised mercy enjoyed the first-fruits. All which undue sinister proceedings by way of humble Petition signified to the K. when perceived to what a low ebb the cry vvas faln and his Chaplains, Deans and others appointed to attend the priso∣ner,
partly by their relation, he thrice in their presence had taken the Sacrament upon it, He was not guilty of those cri∣minals; was pleased by them to let the prisoner know his gracious Answer, He should dye like a Peer of the Realm, be Beheaded, and not Hanged like a common person: whose Servants, his Page the principal, who ought to have suffered, before the accessary; he and his fellow-servant the Footman were brought to their tryal the next Term. In behalf of whom the aforesaid Broad∣way, came up divers Gentlemen of the County to inform the King, able to testifie of the Youths coming home to his Fathers house, more then six moneths afore the time put down by her of the Ravishment, this Broadway come away from his Lords service.
Who at last cast; when upon the Lad∣der so far protested both his Masters in∣nocency that way and his own; taking God to witness, A virgin he came into his service, and a virgin went forth of it. O Donel praying to St. Dennis, cry∣ed out upon some of the Privy Councel that told him, He must speak for the King, and thought not to be served so. And this mans house utterly ruined, chiefly, because had declined Popery, be∣fore his untimely death ever suspected; en∣deavoring to reform his Family, by which means cast himself upon the merciless times. Mervin Earl of Castlehaven, that faithful Martyr, suffering (as it were) between those twain, one on the right hand, the other on the lest, the honor having to be the first entred into
the joy of his Lord; of whom notwith∣standing the worst any in the world could world could say, was, He had the best things in him of any, and the worst: Ʋpon the Scaffold making this his Con∣fession; In the Name of God Amen. I Mervin Earl of Castlehaven, being in my full strength and memory, thanks be given unto my Maker, having been branded and openly accused for change, alteration and doubtfulness of my Faith and Religion; I thought fit, like a Christian man to give satisfaction upon what ground I stand for my be∣lief, and to express it under my hand, for the satisfa∣ction of all charitable people and Christians. First, I do believe in the blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons; one eternal and everlasting God, God the Father, God my Redeemer, and God my Sanctifier. I do relye upon the merit, death and passion of our blessed Savior Christ Iesus, and upon his mediation for the remission of my sins.
I do believe and use with most humble reverence our Lords Prayer, the Creed of the Apostles, and the ten Commandments, as they are set down and allowed in the Church of England. I do believe the Canonical Scriptures, and that they are written by the inspiration of the holy Spirit. And for the rest of my belief, I do refer it to tbe true Orthodox Faith of our Church of England. And from the Articles received at this present in the Church of England, and confirmed by authority of Parliament, I do not differ in any point, renouncing all the Superstitions and Errors taught or believed in the Church of Rome or any other Church; in which Faith I will, God willing, continue to my lives end: In testimony whereof, I have hereunto subscri∣bed my Hand this first of May, 1631. CASTLEHAVEN. Psal. 116. Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. FINIS.
