E1575 23195034 109478
His Majesties Message to both Houses, concer∣ning the Militia. HIs Majesty having received an humble Petition of the Lords and Com∣mons, by the hands of the Earls of Carlile and Monmouth, returns this answer; That his dearest Consort, the Queen, and his dear Daughter, the Princesse Mary, being now upon their departure for Holland, He cannot have so good time to consider of a particular Answer for a matter of so great weight as this is, therefore He must respite the same untill His return. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty: The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons, concerning this Message. May it please Your most Excellent Majesty, YOur humble and loyall Subjects, the Lords and Commons, have, with a great deal of grief, received Your Majesties answer to their just and necessary Petition, concerning the Militia of the Kingdom; which Your Majesty, by a gratious Message formerly sent unto them, was pleased to promise should be put into such hands as Your Parliament should approve of, or recommend unto You the extent of their power, and the time of their conti∣nuance being likewise declared. That being done, and the persons by both Houses nominated, Your Majesty, neverthelesse, referres Your resolution here∣in, to a longer, and a very uncertain time, which (the present dangers and di∣stractions so great and pressing) is as unsatisfactory and destructive, as an abso∣lute denyall. Therefore we once again beseech Your Majesty to take our de∣sire into Your Royall thoughts, and to give us such an answer, as may raise in us a confidence that we shall not be exposed to the practises of those who thirst after the ruine of this Kingdom, and the kindling of that combustion in Eng∣land, which they have, in so great a measure, effected in Ireland; from whence (as we are dayly informed) they intend and endeavour to invade us, with the the asssistance of the Papists here amongst us. Nothing can prevent these evills, nor enable us to suppresse the Rebellion in Ireland and secure our selves, but the instant granting of that our humble Petiti∣on; which we hope Your Majesty will not deny to those who must in the dis∣charge of their duties both to Your Majesty and the Commonwealth, represent unto Your Majesty what they finde so absolutely necessary; for the preservation of both which the Laws both of God and man enjoyn them to see put in execu∣tion, as severall Counties, by their daily Petitions, have desired of us, and in some places, begun already to do it of themselves. Resolved upon the Question, and assented unto, and Ordered, That Master Hollis carry it up to the Lords, to desire their concurrence herein. February 22. London, Printed for Ioseph Hunscott.
