e3615 13016820 96563
An Exact and True Relation of the BEHAVIOUR of EDMUND KIRK, JOHN BENNET, MORGAN KEADING and ANDREVV HILL During their Imprisonment, and at the place of EXECUTION On Friday the 11th. of this instant July 1684. With their Last Dying Words AND SPEECHES AT TYBURN. AT the Sessions in the Old-Baily, on the 2d. and 3d. of July, Nine Criminals re∣ceived Sentence of Death, of which number five were Reprieved, and the other four (Viz) Edmund Kirk, John Bennet, Morgan Reading and Andrew Hill, were this day Executed. Andrew Hill and Morgan Reading, were indicted for Felony and Burglary, for breaking in to the House of his Grace the Duke of Ormond, and of this Fact found guilty, and received Sentence of Death. John Bennet, was indicted for stealing a Mare of the Goods of one Mr Saunders. His Comerade was John Holtham, who with him received Sentence of Death for the same Fact, but hath since received his Majesties most gracious Reprieve. Since the time of Condemnation, they rather appeared concerned at the Punishment than Penitent for the Crime: Till upon Sunday in the Morning they went to Chappell, where after the Prayers of the Church, Mr. Ordinary Preached to them upon the 33th. of Ezek. & the 11th. Ver. Say unto them as I live, &c. In the Afternoon, Dr. Hawkins Minister of St. Bar¦tholomews, whose Text was in Ezek. Chap. 16. Ver 25. Thou hast built the High place &c. During the Sermon, Bennet appeared very penitent, and was observed to weep and often sha his Head, which were the outwards signs of his inward sorrow and contrition. The other two sat very composed, and the good effects they received from the pious dis∣courses of the Preachers was more hoped for, from their, serious Meditation, than by any publick Tokens or Expressions of it. Edmund Kirk, another of the Offenders who this day suffered, was indicted for the Mur∣ther of his vvife Joan Kirk, whose dead body was found in a Field near Paddington by a Mower; her Throat was cut, and her Head and Face miserably beat and bruised. The E∣vidence at his Tryal was plain against him, nor had the Prisoner any thing to say for him∣self that could give the Court or the Jury the least satisfaction to think him innocent: All the time of his imprisonment, he behav'd himself very Penitent, but more especially after Sentence of Death as appears by those Prayers which were writ by his own hand and of his own expression, with a full Account of his Life and Conversation, u these following VVords.
O Lord I most humbly crave thy Assistance in the performance of this work I am about to begin, to shew the World, how the hopes of vain glory, and the allurements of Sin and Satan have prevail∣ed upon my unhappy self, and that by declareing to all Christian People the several ways of my in∣ticeing Sins which have brought me to this shameful death; I may forewarn others from following those nicked courses which will certainly bring e'm to the same miserable end. I was born at Fetcham in the County of Surry, where my Father lived, by name Edmund Kirk, I was his third Son, and he dying in the sixth year of my Age; I was some time after put to Board with Mrs. Nelson of Mucklam in the County aforesaid, where having been with her for the space of one year or there abouts; I was removed to Mr. Gervis a Malt∣man at Easted, with whom I continued the space of six years, who coming to Kingston upon Thames I then went to the Free-School there to one Mr Rowel for two years of that time. Being now near thirteen years of Age, my Ʋncle who lived in London a Hatband-maker, desired I should be with him, with whom I lived a year or more, but not fancying the Trade, I then went to my Brother a Watch-maker where I was about half a year, but not likeing that Trade I removed to my Ʋncle's again as the place of my habitation and refuge when in any necessity: I had not been there above the space of five Weeks, but I fancyed the way or Calling of a Vintner, and was first placed with Mr. Symmons at the Kings Head Tavern near Guild-Hall, where I was five Weeks, and then my Uncle and Brother became bound for me, and I engaged my self for the space of seven years, of which I served him very tru∣ly and honestly four years, and after this time was expired I became a Servant at the Miter Tavern in Kings-street Westminster, where I lived out two years and a half: After I had been about half a year at the Miter, I used to go to the Leg Tavern with some Friends to drink, where Joan Green, (alias) Kirk, who was since my poor wie, then lived, going often thither I observed this woman, and took the opportunity of being acquainted with her: my fre∣quent Visits having now made me familiar with her: I began to feel in my self a more parti∣cular respect and affection for her, which having discovered to her, she accepted of my Love, whereupon I made her a promise to Marry her, which she very soon and willingly embraced. After I had thus given her my promise to Marry her, she used frequently to come to the Miter, and was by her very oten inquiries for me, very troublesome to me, and taken notice of by my Master and Mistress, who asked me for what reason this woman so continu∣ally haunted me, that she took me off of my business, and in the end would prove very prejudicial to me if I did not forsake her company, which they both advised me to, as my friends, who wished me well. Sometime after she left her Service at the Leg and my Mist∣ress hired her into our house, where we lived together for threequarters of a year, and then she went into the Country, and after her coming up to Town, lived at a Merchants house in Thames street. After I had stayed a twelve month longer at the Miter, I went to the Swan at the upper end of Fanchurch Street, where I had not been above three days but she followed me, still urging and pressing me to Marry her as she had done before, so oft∣en that I began to grow weary of her importunities and left that place, and went to the Sun by Crpplegate, where I was a Fortnight but she found me out again and still urged me to Marry her, I told her I could not do it yet with conveniencie to my self and my own business, that I had some Mony in the Chamber of London, which was sixscore Guinnys, and siteen Pound per Annum, which was to come to me, after my Mother in Laws Decease, that if I could not raise enough to set up a Tavern. I would keep a Victualling house. These discourses did not give her that satisfaction I expected from her, but she persisted in pressing me to Marry her presently so that I became discontented, since I could not settle in any place but was still pursued by her, and discomposed in my own thoughts and bu∣siness. I left that place, but hoping I should be more at ease consented to Marry her, which I did within five or six days, and then went to Mr. Hill at the Rose in Pye-Cornr about eight days after I was Married; she being then in Service at a Gentlemans house in Fish-street. On Sunday the 25th. of May, I called upon her at her Masters house, and desired her to go out and walk with me, and when we came into a Field near Paddington I did that Bloody Act, for which I new deservedly suffer. I do confess to all the world, it has been the great trouble and afflictio of my soul, that I should be so Barbarous and Cruel to her, and I cannot but praise the infinite Mercys of Almighty God, who was been pleased to give me time to repent, who had not so much Pitty or Consideration, with me, to allow her one Moments respit to say her prayers in. I first gave her a knock with my Cane which beat her back, and falling down I cut her throat with a small Knife I had in my pocket, without giving her the liberty of speaking one word of Mercy. It was the present instigation of the Devil, that put it into my head at that instant, nor had I, when I call'd her out from her Masters house, any thought of committing; that horrid Murther upon her, which I hope Almighty God will pardon me for. VVHereas the all-searching Eye of God, in whose presence Darkness is Light, has by the sending of his Vengeance upon me meritoriously, and the Terrors of the Lord, which should perswade all men to true Repentance, having seized my very Soul, I
think it equally My Obligation to man, and man kind, and my Duty to my Almighty God; to give a ull account to the World, to prevent the Fatal Entertainment of those Sins, and the subtilty of that Prince of Darkness, which has brought me to this untimely and shameful death, in order that Virtue may have its full value, and Vice, be painted in its proper Colours. I have been guilty of Innumerous heinous Offences and sins of the greatest Magnitude, and those learned from the Evil Company that I constantly frequented, and nourished by letting loose the Reigns to my own ruine: the commands of God were always vile and cheap to me and my ir∣regular life transcendently more eligible and preferable before the least thought of Eternity: So that I confess before God, and the World, that the breaking of the Sabbath, was the fatal bane to my prosperity, and living Christianly here; and may without the great mercy of God prove so hereafter; nor was this the period of my wicked and unchristian life, as I was naturally inclined to all manner of Lewdness that my Age and Stature was capable of, so I added the Whip and Spur to my inordinate affections, and was as industrious to find out suitable Companions, as eager and ready to consent to their Wickedness; hence it is that Drukenness, Lust and Lying, have had the sole Dominion and Rule over me, and my Passion as frequently above my princi∣ples, as my Pride was exalted above all that is called good, so that now I have made a wooful experiment, how fatal it is to live without God in the World, to be destitute of regeneration, a turning from Darkness unto Light, and from the power of Satan, unto the Kingdom of God: As to the Crime I am accused of, I never wanted so much grace as not to confess it, and were I to gain a thousand Worlds to transact it, I should rather refuse them than be perpetually haun∣ted with an evil Conscience which inseperably attends such abominable and hellish crimes; some may perhaps expect that I should mitigate and lesson my Sin, by alledging some inductives that may be proper to that purpose, but as the Fact was barbarous even to the highest degree, so if I had the greatest provocation in the World it could never stand me in any stead or excuse either to God or Man, and therefore it is as needless to apoligize me as Sinful to blame the Inno∣cent, though indeed my Wife had given me perpetual occasions to be passionate, but not to that degree as to be guilty of Murder. O Lord, most Holy, Good and Gracious Everlasting, and Blessed Lord God, how Glorious art thou Lord God; thou art a great God; and a merciful God, and thou hast done for me a thousand times more then I have deserved: I must confess, I have been a great Sinner; I have done those things which I ought not for to have done; and I have left undone those things which I ought for to have done; Lord help me, and strengthen my Faith; Every Minute more and more; those few Minutes, that I have for to live in this World, that when my Soul and Body parts, My Soul may ascend up to Hea∣ven, and he that shed his precious Blood for Sinners if it be his Blessed Well, may make my peace with God. Lord let my sins be covered; forsake me not, because of my Sins, for I have been a great Sinner. I have offended against all thy Holy Laws, I have humbly confest them all. Lord, for Christ Jesus sake forgive me all my Sins: I have confess'd them upon my bended Knees; grant that I may be a warning to others, that they may spend their Sabbath better, walk uprightly and justly and do nothing contrary to Gods Law: Lord receive my everlasting Soul, Jesus keep me from the Torments of Hell; One thing more I Beg Lord, bless my poor Friends that I shall leave behind me, and give them Grace to undergo this trouble: and now I part in peace, I have repented me of all my Sins, and for Christ Jesus sake enable me with all things necessary this day, concluding my imper∣fect Prayer, as Christ himself hath taught me, saying, (our Father which art in Heaven▪ OH that men would consider this in time, how sin will one day change their Countenance, howeer it cometh at first in a flattering form, pretending nothing but Friendship, but in the end will leave a Sting behind it, even a guilty Conscience, terror of mind, and anguish of Spirit. There one let us fly from Sin, as from the biting of a Serpent, that we be not stung therewith unto Eternal Death: (Knowing that the wages of Sin is Death.) O Most Merciful and ever Blessed Lord God; I beseech thee O Lord, look down up∣on me with an Eye of pitty, if it be thy Blessed Will: it is thy infinite Mercy that I am on this side the Grave, and out of Hell. O Lord I have deserved to be cast into Tor∣ments to all Eternity, how have I offended thee, and run into Sin, and thought I could ne∣ver do enough to abuse thy Mercy, pardon the sins that I have commited, wash that Blood from off my Soul: Let not my Soul perish to Eternity. It was an horrid Crime to shed Innocent Blood; pardon that sin, O Lord let not the Blood of that Creature cry for vengeance O Lord, thou hast been Merciful to me, in giving me time to repent: for ought I know, her Soul is undone for ever; Lord forgive me, I new not what I did, forgive my Sabbath breaking, Lyig, Cursing; forgive my Drunkenness, blot them out of thy Book of Re∣membrance, turn them away behind thee: O Lord I have repented of them from my Soul, that ever I should offend a God, so Good, and so Merceiful and Gracious, I do believe on thee, and do wholy throw my self upon thee: I acknowledge it would be just in thee to Damn my Soul, but it would be infinite Mercy in thee to save me; and what free Grace
will it be in thee to pardon me: it is dreadful to loose the Body, but how dreadful will it be to loose the Soul to all Eternity. Lord let it not be in vain that I have had so many instructions, O let me not go down to Hell, let my soul Bless and prrise thy. Name for ever; for what thou hast done for me, thou hast been at work upon my heart, and thou hast helped me to repent (the Lord be praised) Lord I desire to be more and more humble, under the sene of my sins, for they are dreadful. There are many Souls that have not com∣mitted those sins, that are now in Hell; O what Mercy it is, that I am not in those flames, in those devouring Flames. Lord as thou hast spared me here, spare me to Eternity, let not my Soul perish: Lord reveal thy self unto me, make known thy Love unto me; tell me my sin are pardoned tell me that I have an intrest in Christ, before I go hence, and be seen no more; that I might leave some Testimony behind me, that I might tell thy Mi∣nistry what thou hast done for me, and tell thy people what thou hast done for my Soul. Lord this will not be only for my Satisfaction, but for thy Glory. Blessed Lord, pardon the sins that I am Guilty of, and take away this cursed base heart of mine; Break this Rockie Stonie Heart in pieces: the sins of Murther and Drunkenness were in my heart before: I thought no Eyes did see me commit those sins, but thou didst see me, Lord turn my heart to thee, and take away this heart of Stone, and take away this cursed Nature that brought me to these sins, and to this End, and I was in danger of loosing my soul to all Eternity; but Lord, tha I am a great sinner, Christ is a great Saviour, he is able to free me from my sins tho they be never so great; I do believe Lord, I do speak freely from my heart: so far as I know my heart I do believe, it is my grief I can sorrow no more for my sins which have been the cause of my offending thee so long and so much. One drop of thy Blood sprinkled upon my soul will pardon all my sins, Lord cross the black line of my sins with the red line of my Blood, I am not able to answer for one vain thought, much less for all my horrid crimes; Lord save my immortal soul, that I may sing praise to thee to all E∣ternity; thou hast pardoned Manasseth that was a great sinner, and Mary Magdalen and aul that were great sinners, the Thief upon the Cross; and thy Mercies are as great, thy Mercies and thy Love to repenting sinners is not shortned, though my sins are great, yet, thy mercies are greater than my sins; Lord be with me in my Death, then let me have some comfortable assurance of thy Love unto my soul, of the pardon of my sins, do thou be my God and my Guide now, and to all Eternity, Amen. EDMUND KIRK. July the 11th. 1684. This Morning between Nine and Ten of the Clock they were put into two Carts at Newgate; Kirk and Bennet into one Cart, and Hill and Reading into the other; the Cart that Hill and Reading was in went foremost; Reading had a Book in his hand intituled Fry∣ers for the Sick; Hill appeared very Penitent calling uppon God Almighty for Mercy in these Ejaculations Lord hrve mercy upon me, Christ have mercy upnn me, &c. Kirk had a Bible in his hand and seemed yery Penitent, but with a chearful Countenance: Bennet had no Book in his hand nor said any thing. At the place of Execution, they all four went into one Cart, where Mr. Ordinary pray'd with them: Reading declared he dyed a Roman Catholick: Hill blam'd a former Companion of his own Richard Johnson, who had brought him into those leud Courses and pray'd hearti∣ly, but appeared a very ignorant person. Kirk made no Confession, but pray'd the same Prayer which he had penn'd in Prison, and is mention'd before, Viz. O Lord Most Holy, &c. He gave his Bible to his Uncle who was in the Cart with him, for the use of his Daughter E∣lizabeth Kirk: The Cart was drawn away, and they suffered according to Law. Entered according to Order. LONDON Printed by Elizabeth Mallet in Blackhorse-Alley, near Fleet-Briegd
