F2323 R40980 19540387 109090
A FULL and TRUE RELATION OF THE GLORIOUS VICTORY OF THE CHRISTIANS over the TƲRKS. THe Amazing Progresses of the Imperial Arms, being the Present Entertainment of the World, and having as yet had no good Ac∣count of their Source, which was the late Great Victory over the Turks, We presum'd it would not be amiss if we toucht it o'er anew; and the rather for that a most particular Relation being come from one of the Principal Officers that was present in that Action, it will not only rectify several Mistakes that have been committed in most of the other Ac∣counts that have been Publish'd, but give a perfect Idea of that Glorious Battle.
THe Hardships suffered by the Imperialists, as well in going to the Enemies, when they were Encamped under Esseck, as in re∣turning thence, having as it were spent all their Forces, the Duke of Lorrain had no sooner pass'd the Drave again, but that he pre∣vail'd with the Duke of Bavaria to draw near the Danube, where Provisions could not be so scarce as in the Parts whence they came. This was a Course so necessary for the Army, that there was no other way to rescue it from absolute Ruine; the Cavalry, more especially, had been in want of Forrage for above a Month, for having been almost continually in the Moerasses, it had had no o∣ther subsistence than what they afforded. The Turks knowing it's Distress, and being also encourag'd by what had befall'n them near Esseck, they march'd after it. In the mean while, the Imperialists got to Mohatz, where they staid eight whole days to recover themselves of their Fatigues. There the Danube furnish'd them with abundance of Provisions, and their Army being in some wise recover'd, a Council of War was held to consult on what undertaking it should be employed. Herein it was resolv'd that Alba-Regalis should be Besieged, and that they should immediately begin their March to execute this Design. During these Transactions, some Parties of Tartars advanc'd un∣der favour of the Woods, and snapt up our Forragers. The next day they did the same again, and our Spies brought back word that the whole Turkish Army was at hand, and was moving on∣ward with Intention of Beleaguering Ziclos. A Deserter and a Prisoner, taken by a Party, Confirm'd this Report; whereupon a new Council of War was held, the Result of which was to demo∣lish Ziclos and Five-Churches, take the Garrisons thence, and all that was within them, and then to march on to Alba-Regalis, where we were in hopes of making good Lines before the Turks could come up to us. On the 8th of August we left Mohatz to put this Design in Execution, but we had no sooner began our March, but that there appeared a Body of full three thousand Horse, that advanced very near us, which compell'd us to halt. It Skirmish'd in good Order, insomuch as to hinder the Army from getting that day to the place where the D. of Lorrain had design'd to Encamp. Thus it stopp'd within half a League above Mohatz, where the Spies not only Confirm'd the News they had brought the day be∣fore, but further that the Grand-Vizier had so efficaciously repre∣sented to the Grand Signior, that he was in a Condition to fight the Christians, that he had received Orders to give Battle. The
Duke of Lorrain imparted these News to the Elector of Bavariae and the General Officers, who did not Question the Truth of the Information, seeing with what Boldness the three thousand Horse had stopp'd them the day before. Nevertheless they persisted in the Design they had projected, and Orders were given for the continuing the March on the morrow. In the mean while, part of the Night was spent in sending out Parties, and in Clearing our Arms. The Parties gave not any Account on which any Reliance could be had, but a Spye that had been in the Turks very Camp, brought back word, that the Grand-Vizier had caus'd the Orders he had received from Constantinople to be proclaimed throughout the whole Camp, with a promise of rewarding all those that should behave themselves as became them in the Battle. The Imperial Army having renew'd it's March at break of day, it was again disturb'd by a Body of Horse, that did not discontinue Skirting it, and ever and anon coming up to try it's temper. The Duke of Lorrain drew up Forces to receive them, but they made so very Orderly a Retreat, that there was no way to get them to an Engagement. This pass'd on the 9th of the Month, and the Enemies Conduct was still the same on the 10th and 11th, still following the Army that was marching towards Ziclos. At last the Imperialists being come that day near the Hill of Hersan, at the foot of which was formerly a fine Village bearing the same name, but which War has totally ruined, the Duke of Lorrain had notice that the Grand-Vi∣zier after having march'd Day and Night, had made such expe∣dition that he was but a League distant from him, nay that he had possess'd himself of a Wood that was on his way, and wherein he had put some Troups, hoping to fall upon his in the Flank. As nothing was to be neglected with such an Enemy, that since the beginning of the Campagne had exerted such great Skill and Ex∣perience as was not to have been expected in the Turks, it was thought expedient to call a Council of War anew: It was the E∣lector of Bavaria's turn to Command the Vanguard the next day; but as it was dangerous to make such a Movement, it was resolv'd, contrary to what is commonly practic'd in a March, that every one should remain at the Post where he was the day before. We again sent out several Parties, but of few men only, to know exactly whether what was said of the Enemy was true; but the Enemy on his side being not willing to lye still, sent two or three thousand Horse that very Evening, which gave an Allarum to the Camp. As the whole Army stood at their Arms, it was impossible for them to
do any thing, on the contrary they were drove back to the very Thickets, and we durst not push them further, as fearing there might be some considerable Succours behind the Bushes. The Duke of Lorrain to be ascertain'd of this, caus'd Men to climb up to the Hill of Hersan, and they bringing him word that there appeared a great Body beyond the Thickets; some Voluntiers advanc'd to fire their Pistols at them; but not being so advantageously moun∣ted as many of the Turks they went to attacque, they were imme∣diately Surrounded, and their Heads hewn off in the presence of the whole Army. This was done with such fearfull howlings, that it daunted all those that had not yet been Engag'd with those Barbarians. In the mean while, each Man withdrew into his Camp, and as it was not question'd but that there would be a considerable Brush the next day, the Greater part of the Generals spent the Night on Horseback, and towards break of day the Enemies came to Surprize and take away the main Guard. Some Blows were given in this Occasion, but the Imperialists being in a due Posture, they kill'd 5 or 6 Turks for as many of theirs which sell upon the Place. One of those Barbarians who was not yet Dead, having been question'd, said that the Grand-Vizier was there hard by with his Army, consisting of Seaventy thousand Men, that he had been Retrenching himself all the Night, that he had also lin'd the Wood, above mention'd, with more Men, that he pre∣tended he was so advantageously Encamp'd, that he bragg'd he should defeat the Christian Army, without being compell'd to give Battle. Hereupon a Council of War was held a-new, and as the falling back would have been the abandoning of Zyclos and the other Places on the Drave, they agreed to pursue their march to∣wards the former of those Places. The Orders having accordingly been given, the Duke of Lorrain put himself at the head of the Vanguard, which was composed of the Right Wing, and that he might be under Cover from the Enemies that were in the Wood, he left some Dragoons and Battaillons to cover the flank of the Horse. The Enemies lying at watch to take their Advantages, made then a Movement which perplex'd the Duke of Lorrain; He perceiv'd that they were going to fall upon the Duke of Bava∣ria; wherefore he Detach'd Picolomini with his Brigade to go give him Succours. And indeed they began to Skirmish with that Duke, who advancing to encourage his Men by his Presence, a Turk slipt along under savour of the Bushes, and seeing the Elector have a Red-Embroidered Coat on, with a white feather
in his Hat, and thence presuming him to be a Person of Quality, he fancy'd it would be a Brave Exploit in him to kill him. Where∣upon he fired his Fusil at him, but instead of hitting him in the Body, he hit him in the left hand, and this made so much noise that all those that were not far from his Person believed him to be dangerously wounded. Without farther Enquiry this same ru∣mour was immediately spread about his Troups, and this might have been of ill Consequence, had he not shewn himself immedi∣ately to them all. In the mean while, the Army being on its march, and the Van∣guard having pass'd a Bottom, it mov'd up along a furrow, at the Upper End of which there was a Hedge that covered a Plain; Beyond this Hedge were some Turkish Horse, which were to amuse the Duke of Lorrain, while the main Body fell upon the Duke of Bavaria, made a shew as if they meant to come to Blows with him; but having avoided the Battle at the same time they seem'd to of∣fer it: the whole stress fell upon the Duke of Bavaria, who having orders not to Engage, contented himself with standing upon the Defensive. This did still the more Embolden the Infidels, and coming up very close and every other moment to try his Tem∣per, he sent to acquaint the Duke of Lorrain with the Posture of his Affairs, and to ask his leave to fight. The Duke of Lorrain sent him back word to follow the Orders they had agreed on in the Morning, but his Electoral Highness seeing himself still more and more press'd, sent back to tell the Duke of Lorrain, that when they were in a Council of War, they might argue as they pleas'd, but that when the Enemies were pouring upon them the case was very Different; that every other minute there fell-upon him new Battaillons and new Squadrons, which it was impossible for him to stand the Brunt of, by meerly keeping upon the Defensive, that his Men being thereby Exposed, began to murmur at so much prudence; that it was to be feared that after their having suffer'd much, they might take the Course of avoid∣ing the Danger by flight, since possibly they would imagine they might honourably do so, since we led 'em not on to fight. During these Occurrences the Number of the Infidels did visi∣bly multiply, and having slipt along a Wood, they wholly fac'd it, insomuch that when the Imperialists came to pass, they made a Discharge upon them, which laid some of them upon the spot, and compell'd the Rest to halt. To perplex them the more, they appeared at the same time at the Vanguard, but their Design being
to make their utmost Onsets on the side of the Elector of Bavaria; They proceeded no further then to Skirmish, which hindred the Duke of Lorrain from being able to send other Snccours than that before-mentioned to the Reer. In the mean while, as every thing till then had promis'd them the Victory, a Body that had not as yet fall'n on, advanc'd the Duke of Bavaria, with dismal screams and howlings, insomuch that he saw himself thereby forc'd, with∣out staying for the Permission he had to demand to fight, to use his utmost Endeavours to free himself from so great a danger. He made head against them with such Troups as in whom he most Confided, and having caus'd small Field-Pieces to be plac'd at the head of the Battaillons, they were put to so good a use that they kept the Enemies in great Respect. In the mean while, Picolomini, who, as has been said, was sent to the Duke of Bavaria's Succours, thinking him in great Danger, ran to him with his Men, and the Duke seeing him come, Commanded him to drive the Turks from a Bottom, which he had newly passed himself. Picolomini execu∣ted this Order with great Courage, and being seconded by good Fortune, he not only remained Master of the Bottom, but also pursued the Enemies to the very Wood, which they still possess'd, and which was the place of their Retreat. There they perceived that they had unaccountably given way, since he had none to back him; Insomuch that being ashamed of what they had done, they returned to the Charge, and made such havock of the Regiment of Commerci, which was of that Brigade, that in a trice they killed two hundred of it's men. The rest seeing this, betook themselves to flight, and the sooner for that they were all terrified to see these Barbarians, who had cut off the heads of the greater part, which they carried before them, howling at such a rate as was capable of daunting the most Resolute. In this Occasion was it that the Prince of Commerci was wounded with a Launce, and that the Count de Ligneville, the Major of his Regiment was killed, whose Head they cut off as well as the rest. The rest of the Turkish Cavalry, ha∣ving this advantage on it's side, fell then anew with extraordina∣ry fury upon the Duke of Bavaria, who was not a little put to it to stand this first Onset; Nevertheless having of his own Person performed Wonders, and thereby given an Example to others, they all stood firm; Insomuch that after a long and very obstinate fight the Turks began to Buckle; but in such good order, that in turning their backs they seem'd less to Fly then make a Re∣treat. This induced the Elector to consider whether he ought to
pursue them or not; but that held him not long in suspence, they of themselves return'd to the Charge, and that too with so much Resolution and Fury, that had not the Elector commanded Can∣non to be brought, they had been Capable of routing him. But having caus'd it to be charg'd with Cartridges, he dispersed the most daring. An infinite number of Volleys were fired in a trice, and this with so much Success, that we heard the Cries of those that were wounded by them, which did so very much intimidate the rest, that they betook themselves to flight. They retired aside the Wood, which put a stop for some time, apprehending it might be lin'd, and that instead of prosecuting a Victory, we might hazzard the receiving an Affront. In the mean while, the Duke of Bavaria having caus'd it to be view'd, and none of them being there found, we pursued them, but the Pursuit was not long. After we had march'd a very little time we perceived they had entred into Retrenchments, which we could not believe tho' we saw it with our Eyes. These Retrenchments had indeed been made in hast, and we saw they had not had time to compleat them: But as their scituation was advantageous (for they were between a Moerass and a Wood) it was not judg'd convenient to advance further, without first using mature consideration. We perceived it to be the Grand-Viziers Camp, which was confirm'd to us by some Prisoners, who inform'd us that there were still several fresh forces that had not as yet stirr'd out of it. This occasi∣on'd new thoughts, as also for that the head of this Camp was defended by a Battery of twelve Pieces of Ordinance, which began to speak to us in Thunder. It was still further augmented in a Moment, and the Turks fearing that the Imperialists would undertake to force them, notwithstanding so many difficulties, fell to work in our very sight to stop up some Passages that were as yet quite open. Nay, and we perceiv'd a Man with a Tur∣bant all beset with Jewels, and a stately Vestment give his Orders without seeming to be under the least Concern. We judg'd as well by this Character as from the Richness of the things newly mention'd, that if it was not the Grand-Vizier, it was at least a Person of very great Eminency among them. This aug∣mented the Greediness of the Soldiery, who being vex'd that they had fought so long without having got any thing, ask'd why they stopp'd at such small Impediments. The Elector was altogether of the same Opinion, but the General Officers about him having given him to understand that the undertaking to force those Retrenchments without Cannon, would be too great
a venture, several Pieces were brought up, which were plac'd Battery-wise with wonderfull Expedition. The greater part of the Retrenchment being only of Dirt and Mud, having been hereby Levell'd in a trice, all of a Sudden we saw the Cavalry march, without staying for Orders, telling each other that if they could but pass, they were enrich'd for Ever. That of the Turks seeing it coming with so much Resolution grew daunted, and without staying for its coming up, fled cowardly away, a∣bandoning the Infantry to the Discretion of the Conquerors. The Janizaries were startled at the Desertion of their Horse, nevertheless they march'd up to the Breach, which they defended with such Courage as was near a-kin to despair. But the Cavalry having open'd it self a passage thro' other Places, they were quickly Surrounded and put to the Sword. The Rest of the In∣fantry suffer'd very much, and none Escap'd but the most ready at their heels. All the Tents were found in the Camp, which the Elector having entred made directly up to that of the Grand-Vizier, which was observable for its Extraordinary wealth, and for several marks which are peculiar to the Generals of those Barbarians. He found no body in it, nor about it, tho' it was well worth the pains of looking to, as well in regard of its self, as of what it contain'd. In the mean while, the Duke of Lorrain advanc'd, and Com∣plemented his Electoral Highness upon the happy Success of that Day; but having not leisure to enlarge much upon that, he gave Dunewaldt Order to pursue the Runaways, and detach'd Ten thousand Horse for that Expedition. This Gen. found some of the Fugitives on the way, but making directly to the Bridge which the Turks had o're the Drave, he found the main Body had pass'd it, and had broke the Bridge after them. But the shore was all strew'd with Cloaths, and Bodies lay all floating o're the River. Two Bassa's, and several of the Principal Officers were taken Prisoners, with about Eight hundred Common Soldiers, and the Dead ten times as many. The Conquerors got all the Cannon, consisting in Ninety pieces of Ordinance, and twelve Mortar-pieces, with Tents, Camels, Waggons, and Elephants in Abundance, with all other sorts of Booty allmost beyond Imagi∣nation. This Victory cost the Imperialists not above six Hundred Men, as they themselves say, and as others Eighteen hundred. And thus ended that Glorious Day, for which Te Deum was sung in the Camp, at Vienna, Rome, and Venice. ADVERTISEMENT. Modern History, Or the Monethly Accounts of all Considerable Occurrences, Civil, Ecclesiastical, and Military. Sold by R. Taylor
