F2527 12392724 61028
A SERMON PREACHED AT GRAYES-INNE, October 2. 1642. BY THOMAS FVLWAR, Doctor in Divinitie, and Bishop of Ardtfert, in the Kingdome of Ireland. LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1642.
To the worthy Gentlemen, and Inhabitants of the Parish of St. Andrews HOLBORNE. I Hate Ingratitude as Witch∣craft. To witnesse therefore to the world, both your curte∣sie to me, and my thankful∣nesse to you, I give you this Piece, intended for your Pulpit; but be∣ing occasionally called to Grayes-Inne, de∣livered there what you should have heard, and but once; you may please now to see, and often, and in it the reality of my desire to retribute something: You know what S. Peter said to the Creeple, What he had hee gave him: you have been the chiefe preser∣vers of me and mine, since our escape out of Ireland, where we had onely our lives for a prey, and those lives your bounty hath hi∣therto cherished. Which yet, doth not more obliege me, then the loving accep∣tance of my weak indeavours; with which
encouragement I shall chearfully proceed still in my poore labours, and shall think my self amid all my misfortunes very hap∣py, if you shall so esteem of me as I am, and desire to expresse my selfe, Yours in all faire respect, THO: ARTEFERTENSIS.
LUKE 2. 48. Thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing. THE seasonablenesse of this Text, and how it suits our case at this time, I need not spend many words to shew: They are the words of the blessed Virgin to her Son, and imply, and contain in them, The losing of Christ had; The seeking of Christ lost; and the finding of Christ sought. They had enjoyed their Son twelve yeares together, and now it was their hard hap to lose him: Longer have we enjoyed him by farre then they did. We have had him in his Word rightly taught, in his Sacraments duly admini∣stred, and for a signe and confirmation of his blessing upon these, more then fourscore yeares of peace, to the wonder of our friends, and envy of our adversaries: But what shall I say now▪ When the Angel said to Gideon, The Lord is with thee thou mighty man; Gideon answered, O myJudges 6. 13.
Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this evill befaln us? Surely, so may we conclude, God hath now withdrawn himselfe, because Peace, his greatest blessing upon earth, hath now forsa∣ken us: Gideon, and the Israelites groaned then under a forain Enemy; We for want of foes aborad, as if we were ambitious of feud, weary of ease, and thirsty of our neighbours blood, must quarrell one another: Of all plagues upon a Nation, Warre is the sorest; witnesse holy Da∣vid, who rather chose Pestilence, then the sword2 Sam. 24. 14. to destroy him: And of all Warres, Civill is the most destructive, the miseries whereof are next to the torments of hell, which no tongue is able to expresse▪ O then is God with us, when such unnaturall discord is fallen between us? When God was angry, he sent an Evill spiritJudges 9. 23. between Abimelech and the Shechemites, which consumed them both: Here is an Evill spirit now among us, and a flame breaking out, which if not quickly quenched, will consume us root and branch. Our selves are going the way to de∣stroy our selves from being a people upon the Earth. When Christ beheld Jerusalem, he wept overLuke 19. 41. it, and said, O if thou hadst known in this thy day the things which belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eies. He saw their sin, and foresaw their sufferings, and the one as the other caused him to weep: oh! our sins are hideous, and our sufferings will not come short of theirs, if we prevent them not, our state will prove Felo de se,
as your phrase is, and it will be arraigned at Gods Tribunall, as guilty of self-murder. Whom will we spare, that will not spare our selves? and who will pity us, that will not pity our selves? Wee pray every day in our Letany, That God would deliver us from Battell and murder, yet, good Lord, how inclinable are some men, even to that they pray against! Nay, which is more, and I know not whether it be more to be deplored or hated, There are of our Long-robe, whose feetRom. 10.  should be beautifull for the glad tidings of peace they should bring with them, that are preaching in the place of the God of peace for Warre. When the Disciples would have had our Savi∣ourLuke 9. 44 to have fired a Town for their uncourteous refusall of him lodging, he forbad them, and told them, They knew not what spirit they were of; Good Lord, what spirits are these men of, that adde fewell to this fire which flames too hot al∣ready!Luke 10. 5. The Apostles were commanded, that so soon as they entred a house, the first word they should say should be, Peace be to this house: Whose Disciples are these, that have nothing in their mouthes, but Arme, kill, and destroy? Scatter thou the people, saith holy David, that de∣lightPsal 68. 30. Gen. 49. in Warre. Cursed be their rage, for it is fierce, and their wrath, for it is cruell; and into their secrets let my soule never come. We in Ireland have al∣ready smarted under the misery of such Warre, God of his mercy keep it from you here in Eng∣land; But pro quo Orandum, Laborandum; They who sit at the Helme, it is their Office to deale in
matters of State, and seek the best way of atone∣ment, our indeavours must be in another kind, to settle peace above, to shew how to work a recon∣ciliation between our incensed God & us, to standPsal. 106. 23. with Moses in the gap, and pray our selves, and by our devotion enkindle others likewise, that we may all joyntly say, If thy presence goe not with us,Exod. 33. 15. send us not up hence: We are not I hope of the Gadarens minde, to desire Christ to depart ourLuke 8. 37. Coasts, rather with the two Disciples we will say, Domine, mane nobiscum: And if he be gone,Luke 24. 29. as I feare he is, with these two holy Saints here, we will goe in earnest quest of him, seek him, and never give over till we have found him; for so the blessed Maid implies in her speech, Thy Father and I haue sought thee sorrowing. I see that before I was aware, I have divided my Text already, and told you the order how I must proceed in the handling of it: 1. The losing Christ had. 2. The seeking Christ lost. 3. The finding Christ sought. I told you but now, that Moses besought Al∣mighty1. God not to leave his people, but go with them still. Though God be, as himselfe saith, Ego Deus & non mutor, unchangeable, and his de∣lightMalachi 3 6. is to be with the children of men, yet we need not goe farre to see the cause why God that had brought that people with so mighty a hand, and out-stretched an arme from Egypt, would now leave them in the Wildernesse. They em∣bracedJonah 2. 8. lying Vanities, and so forsook their own
mercy; they left him by sin, and he left them by Justice: He had not been true to himselfe, but contradicted his purity, if he had stayed with them that had so trespassed; God will not be, but either where no sin is at all, or where there is sor∣row for sin; for, quem poenitet peccasse, pene est inno∣cens: The people he loved, but their sin he hated, and that drove him away from them. But what sin had the blessed Virgin committed? What evill was she now guilty of, that the joy of her eyes, and the delight of her heart should now leave her? Elizabeth wondred, Vnde hoc quodLuke 1. 43. mater Domini venit ad me? May not we much more wonder that the Lord of that Mother should now absent himselfe from her, of whom though we may not so much dote as our Adversa∣ries, to say she was as innocent as her Son himself, yet we may without offence, I hope, say as the holy Text speaks of Zachary and Elizabeth, thatLuke 1 6. she was just, and walked blamelesly, sine crimine, though not sine culpa; sine querela, though not sine peccato? What cause should this harmlesse soule give? Twelve yeares together she had enjoyed his blest society, over whose infant-yeares so in∣dulgent was her care, as by her paines and travell she made Egypt a Sanctuary to him, which had been a house of Correction to the Israelites; and after her return, never did she wilfully transgresse in ought to displease him, or faile in ought, which should witnesse her dearest affection to him. To the annuall celebration of the Feast she
goes, nor would she goe without him, in whom her life did consist, and during the time of her abode there, he was with her. But at her return, (the word, for sympathy of griefe, will scarce come out) he staies and leaves her. But why did she go to it? she had a continuall Feast, a quiet conscience within her selfe: besides, she had the Lord of the Feast, her Son with her. For no other cause, but because she knew not how to disobey authority: what her Son said afterwards concerning his Baptisme, Suffer it to be so now, for so it becomes us to fulfill all righteousnesse;Math 3. 15. that the Mother now practised: Her son, ne perderet obedientiam, perdidit vitam; and so now his Mother, to shew herselfe obedient, lost him that was dearer to her then her life. What is written, is written for our instructi∣on, and the Saints practise should be, if not our precept, yet our example, and should teach us that publique obedience to Lawes established, is farre more acceptable, then all private sacrifices Sam. 15. 22. whatsoever. Oh how palpably true is that of Solomon; ItEccles . . is better to goe to the house of mourning, then the house of feasting? for here she loseth him, whom she had so long kept with her: For us now to lose Christ at feasts, is no new, nor strange thing, for we commonly lose our selves at them, tur∣ning our laughter into so much folly, as we evenEccles. 1. 1. make of our mirth madnesse. The Minstrels, which I remember Christ onceMat. 9. 23. shut out of doores in the Gospel, we with so
much greedy delight entertain, as their gingling quite hinders us from affording Christ eitherMatth. 9 23. room or audience among us. But for this Inno∣cent Virgin, Full of grace, as the Angell calledLuke 1. 28. her, that she should lose him, is still our wonder. I know sin separates between our God and us; butIsay 59 2. what sin doe we reade of that she offended in? carefull she was of her son in preserving him, and giving him the best breeding that she could; and the best breeding was, that she brought him to the Temple; well might she say then, Fili cur sic fecisti nobis? What offence had she ever given him? wherein had she ever offended him? Is this the requitall of her twelve years care? This the guerdon of her unwearied love & labour, that now when his yeares should yeeld her most con∣tent, he should leave her? Had he been meere man, we might have excused it by the descent of love; The Angels of love come down faster and oftner on the Ladder, then goe up; but being God as man, our wonder is heightned; Hath GodPsal 77. 9. forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut up his loving kindnesse in displeasure? Will he absent himselfe from those that prize nothing so deare as his so∣ciety? He, who though he be provoked every day, yet is loving to all, yea to his enemies: he thatPsal. 145 9. sought out Adam when he ran from him, howGen. 3. comes he thus to his dearest mother? We must with silence lay our hands upon our mouthes, and knowing it was the Lord, conclude, That the reason of his doings may be somtimes secret, but never unjust: He whose chaire is in mans
heart, and sees there as in publique, saw more then we can discern; May be that ardency of af∣fection1. was somewhat cooled by this twelve yeares constant fruition, she did not so highly prize his company as was fitting; What the na∣turall man spake, the Christian finds true, Bene∣ficia carendo, blessings are sooner spied by want, then by enjoying; Now then to set a greater price on his presence, that she should esteeme it according to its value, he is pleased to withdraw: How welcome was the day after that multiplied night to the Aegyptians? and how highly was Iacob pleased with the news of his son Iosephs life, whom he supposed dead? I will goe down and seeGen. 45. 28. him before I die. Besides, she had a greater task then this to un∣dergoe;2. It was prophecied to her, That a swordLuke 2. 35. should pierce through her soul; And that was, when she was to see him hang on the tree, and to lie three daies in the Grave; It did but prick her now onely to prepare her to her greater triall; She must learn to endure a farre longer absence, and must be weaned quite from his bodily pre∣sence. And withall she must be taught that her Son3. had a Father in Heaven, whose businesse he must go about: All the world must be profited, as well as she pleased, and they must be redeemed, as well as she satisfied; therefore as our first Adam said, A man should leave Father and Mother for his Wife,Gen. 2 24. so this our second Adam, to expresse his infinite love to his Spouse, the Church, having left before
his Father in heaven, now leaves his Mother on earth, to initiate that businesse which he must, and will afterwards accomplish, even by the lay∣ing downe of his owne life for their Redem∣ption. But did Christ leave her indeed? did not she rather leave him? Is not he that came to seek thatLuke 19 10. which was lost, now lost himselfe? as Ioseph wasGen. 37. lost while he went to seek his brethren: Did not they leave him at the Feast, and goe away without him? May we not say, (with reverence to her person) here was a kinde of Inouria at best, a lesse care then ought to be? They went away both, and both went by thoughts and suppositi∣ons: We say, Insipientis est dicere, Non putaram; And it was some folly to say, Putaram, if it be true as the Jews say, That the men went a part by themselves, and the women by themselves, so Ioseph thought he was with his Mother, and she supposed he was with his Father. Would they yet travell a whole day without a sight of him, to advance their opinion into a knowledge, and so to have been ascertained he was amongst them? Thus even the best will grow sometimes remisse; Can a Mother forget her childe? It seems she can;Isay 49. 15. the best of Mothers here forgets the best of sons, and so jealous is God of those he loves, as he will not endure the least Act of unkindnesse or undu∣tifulnesse in them: Servants and strangers may goe away with greater errors, when the Son that is beloved shall finde a lash for the least offence: The not beloved ones, wicked and ungodly men,
may run on in sin even till they grow old, and sin like withered leaves shall drop and fall from them before they leave it, and in all that time never meet with a whipping; but those that areZach. 28. deare to God, deare to him as the Apple of his eye▪ his chosen ones, they shall be snibb'd and curb'd, and punished upon the least delinquency; which, howsoever it may seeme grievous for theHeb. 12. 11. present, yet at last they will say with David, It was good for me that I have been afflicted; for thesePsal. 119. 71. afflictions instruct as well as correct, and as they punish, so they teach them their duties. Thus have we seen Christ lost. The Saints in heaven so happily have him, as they cannot lose him, the Bridegroome cannot now be taken from them; the damned in hell have so unhappily lost him, as they can never finde him againe, , a great gulfe there is, which they canLuke 16. 26. never foord to finde such a blisse, onely we that live on earth, can both lose and finde him. It was carelesnesse at worst in them, but our wilfull sins drive him from us; He is a God of pure eyes, andHab. 1. 13. cannot indure to see any pollution; and how doe we wallow in all uncleannesse? He is a holy God and will be sanctified of all that come neare him, orLev. 10. 3. that he comes neare unto, and what haste doe we make to run into all prophanenesse? He is a God of order, and how doe we unhinge all by1 Cor. 14. 40. confusion? He is a God of love, and how full of malice are our hearts? He is a God of peace, and2 Cor. 13 11. we dote upon strife and contention? He rests not but upon the meek and humble, and how doe
we advance our selves even above all that is called2 Thess. 2. 4. God? Let us never flatter our selves, and think these sins and Christ can dwell together; God and1 Sam. 5. Dagon could not be in one house in the old Law, nor God and Belial in one heart in the new. We2 Cor. 6. 15. see the shoales of these sinnes, which have driven him from us; God make us sensible of the want of him, and wanting him, give us grace to seek him as these did; And so I come to the second, The seeking of Christ lost: Thy Father and I have, &c. The night which curtains all things else, like2. a friendly and faithfull counsellor now discovers this want, which the flattering day would not tell them of Then they were so full of discourse and businesse as they had no leisure so much as to think him absent, the fairnesse of the way, and the Company of their friends, did so pleasant their Journey as they scarce minded him, till the day was spent, and they retired to their Inne, and then when they thought to betake themselves to their repast and rest, they perceived that he, with∣out whom they could not rest, was wanting. Oh the happinesse of a silent night retirement! all the day we spend in turmoile in the world, somePsal. 78. 3. wandring, as some of the Jews, in the fields of Egypt, picking straws of folly, things, which mayExod. 5. perhaps please the sense, but I am sure cannot profit the soul, whiles others with the rest of the Jews are busied in making brick, labouring as inHab. 2. 13. the fire for very vanity, and producing onely such
things of which we may aske as the ApostleRom 6. 21. did, What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Others with Ionathan and his Armour-bearer are climbing the steep and dan∣gerous1 Sam. 13. 13. rocks of preferment, whiles others are scratching and wounding themselves even to theLuke 8. 14. quick, with the shiny cares of this world, and all to get that wealth which they know not who shall enjoy; and amidst these things, profit, plea∣sure,Psal 39 6 and preferment, there is no leisure to minde Christ; but when night comes, as cer∣tainly it will come, and wee are plucking off our cloathes, and going to bed, then wee shall finde the want of him whose company before wee little cared for: When any night comes, as there are more nights then one, the night of sorrow, or the night of sicknesse, the Usher of that long-long night of death, and we are left alone, and all those former witch∣crafts of the day, like those Reeds of Egypt,Isay 36. 6. not onely faile us in our need, but pierce our hands, and wound our soules, and our jocond and blithe company, like vermine out of a fal∣ling house, run away from us and forsake us, then wee shall by wofull experience finde, Quam malum & amarum est dereliquisse Domi∣,Ier. 2 19. how evill and bitter a thing it is to for∣sake our God: When affliction nakeds us of all those Figge-leaves, wherewith in the day of prosperity we did dresse and pride ourselves, and denudes us of all sinister and vain thoughts,
and redeeming us out of the throng and noise of the world, delivers us to a solid conside∣ration, whether Christ, which should have been not onely our Companion, but our guide through this Wildernesse of Sinne, and Valley of teares, be with us yea or no, and if not, then we shall think it high time to goe along with these good people here to seek and finde him out. Had the day been lengthened out to that in the dayes of Hezekiah, ten degrees more, I make a questionIsay 38. 8. whether they had yet mist him, or been so hap∣py as to have seen their unhappinesse; but now the darknesse brings that to light, which the dazeling of the day, and Sun-shine before would not let them see, and being now made sensible of their misse, they will not give their eyes anyPsal. 132. 4. sleep, nor suffer the temples of their heads to take any rest, till they have found him; Now they re∣deeme their former carelesnesse by a carefull seeking him; what in their mirthfull journey they lost, their sad and diligent enquiry makes abundance of amends for: It was never truer then now, that Extrema gaudii luctus occupat, Sad∣nesse brings in the Voyder, where mirth layes the Cloth; nay the griefe for their losse, farre resur∣mounts the joy of their Feast; and if they seve∣red before, Ioseph in one company, and Mary in another, and so lost him, they unite now, not failing either in the maine of seeking, which tels us their industry, or in the object of their seeking, Him, and Him alone, which shews their sincerity,
nor in the manner, internall sympathy, both sor∣rowing, and externall agreement, both together, one teaching us unity, the other uniformity; Thy Father and I, &c. These are the branches which now should be shaken; but I shall but gather a berry or two off of each of them, cutting off something, as he in Plutarch, which I should say, not to offend in prolixity, their industry in that they seek, their sincerity in that they seek him, their unity in that they seek him both in sorrow, and their unifor∣mity in that they seek him both together. We are not to learne what it is to seek, when1. we lose any thing wee highly prize; our eyes, and hands, and feet are all imployed: See but theLuke 15. 8. poore woman in the Gospel that had but lost her groat, how diligently shee sought, and swept every corner of her house till she found it; and look upon the good Shepheard, wandring all overIbid. 4. the mountaines to finde his strayed Lambe. In∣deed if Christ bee once lost, he will not readi∣ly be found. What trouble did Saints of old put themselves unto, when God hid his face from them? Thou hidest thy face, saith David, and IPsal. 30. 7. was troubled. Troubled indeed in minde and in body, to get a glimpse of that glorious counte∣nance shine againe upon him. Hee is not easily lost, but by extreame carelesnesse and neglect, but when wee will lose him, hee is not easily to bee found▪ you may see it here, They lost him but one day, and it was the the third day
before they could finde him againe. The first and best happinesse is to keep him, to say as Iacob, Non dimittam te, I will not let theeGen. 32 26. goe unlesse thou blesse mee; but the next to that, is presently to misse him, and upon that misse to seek him with all diligence, and with∣out delay. Wee are all, or would be thought to bee, Generatio quaerentium, A Generation ofPsal. 24. 6. those that seeke God; but wee seek not as weeCant. 3. 1. ought, we seek as shee did in the Canticles, I sought him in my Bed, I sought him, but I found him not. Carelesse, sleight, perfunctory seeking will not doe it; The sluggard lusts,Prov. 13. 4. and his soule hath nothing, saith Solomon, be∣cause hee doth but lust. Bad men though they live the lives of the wicked, yet with Ba∣laamNumb 22. 10. they desire to die the death of the righte∣ous; but desires alone will not availe, and yet I feare such is all the paines wee spend about it. Jesting Pilate asked, Quid est veritas? but heJohn 18. 38. went away not caring to be resolved in a questi∣on which he thought of so small concernment: so there are many, Qui noncurant quaerere, qui tamenBern. cupiunt invenire; cupiunt consequi, & non sequi. If wee seeke him upon the downy Beds of rest and ease, it is impossible we should finde him: Foxes have holes, and birds of the aireMat. 8. 20. have nests, but the Sonne of man hath not whereon to repose his head. Pilate was not sa∣tisfied that onely made it Table-talk: Nor
the woman that sought at her ease, did not finde; Watchman, what in the night? cries theIsay 21. 11. Prophet: The morning comes, and also the evening, O si quaeritis, quaerite; If ye will seek, do it indeed, and to some purpose, and doe it both while ye may seek, and he may be found: There is a time for every thing under the Sun,Eccles. 3. 1. saith Solomon; The time which God allowes us for our seeking, is Primum quaerite, seek himMatth 6 3. frst, while he may be found: for that speech in the Prophet, implies there is a time whenIsay 55. 6. Gen 27. 34. Mat. 27 11. he cannot be found at all; Esau in the Old Te∣stament, and the five foolish Virgins in the New, shew to their griefe that he may be sought when he will not be found. It is true I reade in one place, That Hee is found of them which sought himIsay 65. 1. not; and S. Paul may be instanced in, whom Christ found travelling to Damascus, and neverthinkingActs 9. of it; But that is not to be made a precedent of no more, then because some men have by chance found wherewith to keep themselves all dayes of their lives, others should not labour upon the like hope of the same fortune: But our safest and most warrantable course is pre∣sently upon the first misse of him to seeke him: Seeke and seeke him, cum, not aliud2. in eo, Him for himselfe, and for no other by-respect: The people in the Gospel sought him, but it was for the Loaves wherewith theyJohn 6 26. were fed, and not for love, as himselfe told them; what S. Paul said to his Corinths, Non vo∣stra,1 Cor. 12. 14.
sed vos, not yours, but you, that we must say to Almighty God, Thee, and thee alone, O Lord, doe we seek: Let us comply with Davids Echo, Seek yee my face; Thy face, Lord, saith he, willPsal. 77. 8. I seek: Let Demetrius, and his fellow crafts∣men, if they will, magnifie Diana, because theyActs 19. 25. lived by making her silver shrines; but let Chri∣stians be otherwise minded, and think that god∣linesse1 Tim. 1. 6. is gaine sufficient or them, and so with ho∣ly Iob, trust in God though he should kill them.Job 13. 15. He loves not God at all, that loves any thing besides him; nor doth he seek God at all, who seeks ought but himselfe; and indeed, what need they seek any thing else? for having him, they are sure of all things, , whereof they have need, though peradventure not , which they may fansie a use of: All are1 Cor. 2. 23. yours, for ye are Christs, and Christ is Gods, saith the Apostle. No marvell now if losing such an one, they3. were both sad; which is the third thing, and tea∣ches us unity of affection, according to S. PaulsEphes. 4. 3. advice, to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. How did Iacob mourn for the losse of one SonGen. 37. 35. 2 Sam. 18. 33. in twelve? and how did David lament for his lewd son Absalom? but when the Text speaks of a griefe not to be paralleld, it is as of one mour∣ningJer. 6. 26. for an onely son. Who of us loseth a friend, a child, or a wife with dry eyes? how incompa∣rably deare beyond all these in Christ to a soule?
Let us not prodigally then lavish away our tears for such toyes as these, (for so I may call them in comparison) but reserve them for better purpo∣ses. Fruitlesse is all griefe in the world but this;2 Cor. 7. 10. I do not speak of that worldly sorrow which causeth death, but even that griefe which we may take, for such losses as I spake of can doe us no good; could we shed rivers of teares, it could not revive a dead friend, or recover a lost estate, or an em∣paired health, onely shew how wee love them, asJohn 11. 36. they said of Christ weeping for Lazarus, but not profit us in the thing lost at all. And abundance of teares which may blinde our eyes, if spent for any things here below, makes them more cleare to finde him, who will not be found but in sor∣row; he is vir dolorum, as Isaiah cals him, and soIsay 53. 3. must be sought; In his presence is joy, and at hisPsal. 16 11. right hand are pleasures for evermore: Needs then must there be sorrow and discontents at his ab∣sence, which wee are not sensible of, because wee value him not; but Da Christianum & scit quodAug. dico, he knows that there is no joy to the finding of him, nor no sorrow to that when hee is lost: Blame not these then to be sad, and to goe both together in pursuit of him, which is the last, They went together. I will not trouble you with the signification of4. their names, Mary signifying a bitter Sea, and Ioseph, fruitfulnesse; sorrow for sin past, and fruit∣fulnesse in good works for the future, being the way to finde him; but only commend unto you, Exter∣nall
uniformitie. They lost him when they were asunder, and therefore go together to finde him: and indeed, how should they seek him that is all love and peace, but in love and peace? God theHeb. 13. 20. Father is the God of peace: God the Sonne is theIsay 9 6. Prince of peace: God the Holy Ghost is the Spi∣rit of peace: His Gospel is the Gospel of peace, andGal. 5. 22. his Ministers are, or should be, the Ministers ofRom. 10. 15. peace. Can we think then of seeking him with sword in hand? First goe and agree with thine Ad∣versary,Mat. 5. 24. and then come and offer thy gift, saith him∣selfe in his Gospel; no gift will be accepted from those which are at strife: First make peace one with another, and then we may hope to finde the God of peace, and the peace of God. But it concernes me to speak more of Ecclesi∣asticall peace then Civill; O, for the divisions in the Church, What great thoughts of heart are there!Jud. 5. 15. S. Paul condemned the Corinthians when they said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas:1 Cor. 1. 12. Is Christ divided? saith he: That seamlesse coat ofMat. 27. 35. Christ, which the rude souldiers spared, how is it now rent in pieces by our disorderly divisions? When every one doth in the Church, as it was in the Book of Iudges, quisque quod rectum in oculis,Judg. 17. 6. Every man that which is good in his own eyes: And it was so then and there, because they had no King,—Griefe suffers me not to speak more of this, onely to pray with holy David, and say,Psal. 102. 13. The time is come that thou have mercy upon Sion, yea the time is come. With such words and such grief we may at last finde our lost peace, and serving
God in the Beauty of holinesse, finde Christ as thesePsal. 110▪ 3. did: which is the last of all; The finding Christ3. sought. Thy Father and I, &c. As we must seek Christ while, so where he may be found. Each thing hath , and , as his nunc, so his ubi: All was well hitherto in their seeking, but now we shall finde something was amisse, they sought right for the manner, but wrong for the place: It is no blinde mans workEphes. 1. 18. to seek, The eies of their understanding must be en∣lightened, or it will be to no purpose: They sought him among their friends and kindred: He that consults with flesh and blood (for they are ourMat. 16. 17. kindred) can never finde Christ. It is nor nature nor reason that can bring us to him. Hence the wise Heathen seeking a Deity, in stead of one God found many, and finding many, found none at all; and therefore at Athens there was an AltarActs 17▪ 23. Cant. 3. 2. erected , To the unknown God. That Spouse in the Canticles that sought Christ in her Bed, sought him likewise in the streets, and broad places, but could not finde him: So these, neither in the waies, the fields of pleasure and delight, nor in the streets of Jerusalem, amid the throng and hurry of worldly occasions, till they came to the Temple, and there they found him: God said in his Prophet, Ye shall not seek me in vain; but atIsay 45. 19. last, Laetetur cor quaerentium Deum: for God will notPsal. 105. 3. alway forget the labour and love of those that seek him, but at last they shall finde him as these did, inHeb. 6. 10. the Temple, among the Doctors, and in the mid∣dest of them. 1 The place, 2 The company, 3 and
his posture, of these in one word. Thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary, saith David;Psal. 77. 13. non in penetralibus, non in deserto, saith Christ him∣self,Mat. 24. 26. not in the desert, not in private Chambers. We cannot go without bodies to seek him now, but in Spirit, Seek him with our whole heart, as MosesDeut. 4. 29. said, and so we may finde him on earth, that is, bodily ascended up to heaven: In his Temple, wherePsal. 29 9. every man speaks of his honor; there we shall finde him in our prayers, the publique prayers of the Congregation, and therefore it is called, A houseMat. 21 13. of prayer for all people: We shall finde him in his Word speaking to us, and we shall find him in his Sacraments, wherein he offers himselfe to us; and all these are duties to be performed publiquely, no where, unlesse in case of extream necessity, but in Temples, places consecrate, and set apart for such purposes; Here was Christ found at first, and here he is to be found still, however our fond Sectaries, whose blinde zeale mis-leads them, may think any place good enough to seek Christ in, and so contrary to S. Paul, who puts a flat diffe∣rence1 Cor. 11. 22. between private houses and Churches, will yet confound them, grounding upon words of Christ to the woman of Samaria, misunderstood,John 4. 21, 23. That the time shall come, when they shall neither wor∣ship in Samaria, the Temple built there, nor at Ie∣rusalem, but in Spirit and Truth: What he spake of the worship in Samaria, who worshipped God in the likenesse of a Dove, and so not in Truth, and at Ierusalem, where it was in types and shadows, sa∣crifices, and externall things, even then when the
Substance himself was come, and so not in Spirit; that they misapply, that there should be no Tem∣ples at all; and so they go even there to finde him where Christ said directly he was not, non in pe∣netralibus, non in deserto; and so even despise the Church of God, as S. Paul complained, or if they do1 Cor▪ 11. 22. come to it, how doe they make it a common place, by their prophane and rude demeanour in it? Can we think this pleasing to Christ, that twice whipt the prophaners out of the third Court, in the Jews Temple? At his first Passeover, Ioh. 2. 15 and at his last Passeover, Mark 11. 17. And you must know that it was the third Court into which those buyers and sellers came, and not into the se∣cond, where none but native Jews, much lesse the third, where onely the Priests were admitted, and yet that outward Court would not he suffer to be abused. God in the Old Law joyned the Sabbath and the Temple together, Ye shall keep my Sabbaths,Levit. 26. 2. and reverence my sanctuary; and what God hath joyned we may not put asunder; and yet these menMat. 19▪ 6. that are so carefull in the observation of the one, how violent are they in the neglect of the other? How doe they despise even the most holy place, (if there be in our Churches any place more holy then another) the place where, and the holy Ta∣ble whereon we receive his blessed body and blood,Mal. 1. 7. even that I say as the Prophet complained, is despi∣sed: As those obstinate ones that will not come, should be whipt in, so these abusers of it should be whipt out: And I doubt not, but as this is not the least of our sins, so it is not the least cause of
our sufferings: Which God of his mercy amend and pardon. In the Temple, and among the Doctors.2. As the Temple is the place, so these are the men with whom we shall finde him; not every one, but they that are set apart, , may or canRom. 1. 1. shew where Christ is; If the blinde lead the blinde, you know what will follow. Those FishermenMat. 15. 14. that Christ made Apostles of, hee conversed with three yeares, and miraculously inspired know∣ledge and language into them according to his promise, Dabo vobis os & scientiam; But such mi∣raculousLuke 21. 15. infusion now ceases, and Artisans may not presume to take that businesse upon them. It is observed, that doceo must have two Accusatives: doceo te scientiam: They that take upon them to Teach, and have not the Key of knowledge, as it isLuke 11. 52. called in the Text, may wrest the Scriptures, as S. Peter saith, to their own destructions, but can ne∣ver2 Pet. 3. 16. open them right, or shew Christ. With the Doctors he was then, hearing and posing them, and so he will be still with such as he hath appointed to be sent as Labourers into hisMat. 20. 1. Vineyard, who must with their private endea∣vours, pains, and studies, get knowledge first them∣selves; (The Priests lips should preserve knowledge)Mal. 2 7. and then derive it to others. Sitting with them, and in the midst; which is3. the last. Christ is still observed to be in that place;Luke 2. 7. when he was born, in medio animalium; when hee died, in medio latronum; In heaven, in the mid∣destMark 15. 27.
of the seven golden Candle-sticks; and in theRev. 2. 1. Temple now in the midst of the Doctors; that is his place still: The Pharisees they loved cornersMat. 6. 5. in the streets, and uppermost seats at Feasts: TheLuke 11. 43. morall is, They were byast, partiall, and sinisterly affected people, which Christ loves not; and who∣soever seeks to finde Christ, must goe with an eaven minde, he must be like seasoned timber, nei∣ther warp one way for feare, or another way for hope, nor lean a third way for any private respect, but go on in truth and in sincerity, in unity, and in uniformity, and by such men, and none but such Christ will be found: And peace (which alwaies accompanies him) even abundance of peace willPsal 37. 11. be restored to our Israel, and prosperity to our Sion; Which God of his infinite mercy send. Amen. FINIS.
