F390A R222648 99833796 38274
A FAMOUS VICTORY OBTAINED y the Citisens of Coventry, and the Parliaments Forces, under the Command of the Lord Brooks, and colonell Hambden, against the Kings Army, August 22. Read in the House of Commons upon Wednesday, being the 24. of August. Declaring the manner of the meeting of the two Armies, the Parliaments forces slaying above 80. Cava∣leers, with little losse, and taking captain Legge and others prisoners, with two pieces of Ordnance, divers Waggons, and great store of Ammunition, putting the whole Army of cavaleers to flight. Also the manner of His Majesties forces blowing open the Gates, and how the city was preserved by throwing their Houshold stuffe into the streets, to keep out the horse and divers of the Cavaleers being slaine thereby. Ordered that this be forthwith printed and published John. Brown. Cler. Parl. Printed for R. Wood, August 25. 1642.
A famous Victory obtained by the Trained Band of Coventry against the Cavaleers, August 22. VPon Wednesday the 24. of Austust, information was given to the ho∣nourable House of Commons, of all such eminent passages that hath hap∣pened since his Majesty came to Coventry. viz. That on Saturday last about 9 of the clock in the morning, with an Army con¦sisting of about 17. or 1800. Horse, his Ma∣jesty came to Coventry, which were [the only strength of all his forces that came with him out of Yorkshire. And the Citisens of Coventry having intelligence of drawing neer the said Ci∣ty with a great army, every man that bore arms in the city, together with a∣bout 500. of the trained Bands of the
County presently put themselves into a posture of defence, resolving to spend their lives for the King and Parliament, and in maintenance of the Lawes of the Kingdom, Whereupon the Major and di∣vers of the Aldermen and chief Comman∣ders in the City, met his Majesty at the Gates therof, and shewed their dutifull respect to His Majesty, proffering their service at His feet, expressing their earnest desire to acommodate His Majesty in the maintaining of his just Rights and Pre∣rogative, offering His Majesty free enter∣course into the City with a compleat Guard for the safety of His Royall Per∣son. But he demanded entrance with His whole Army, and caused the Proclamati∣on to be read, proclaiming them traytors that should oppose him therin. But the Cavaleers being impatient of any delay, thinking to have had present admittance made presently an attempt to enter the Gate, but quickly were driven back, and the Gate shut against them. At which his Maj. seethed to be very much moved, and
after some consultation with his General and other Commanders, they planted six pieces of Ordnance against the Gate, and plaid upon it all that day, the Cavaleers thretning to fire the town, or beat it down about their ears, if it were not presently rendred up. But the Citisens hearing that some forces from the Parliament were repairing thither to aid and assist them were resolved to stand it out, although they had not above 3. pieces of Ordnance in the town, and those were unmounted This day being far spent, his Majesty re∣paired to a Knights house neer Dunsmore about 4. miles from Coventry, and on Son∣day morning the Cavaleers began againe to play upon the Gates of the citty, and drove open the South-Gate thereof, and began to march into the city, not doub∣ting but to make a prey therof, thinking it impossible to be withstood; yet wee may see Gods wonderfull hand of pro∣vidence towards us in stirring up the souldiers within the city with such cou∣rage, and true affection to the Parliament,
That at the first entrance of the cavaleers into the Gate they welcommed them with such a voley of shot, that 7. of them were slain, and many more of them hurt, wherupon they were forced to retreat, & the women and others that were unfit to fight, brought a bundance of houshold stuffe, as tables, stools, and other lumber, and threw them in the street, which quick∣ly made the way unpassable, so that the horsemen durst not sally any more into the town, but played upon it with Canon and sometimes came riding up to the walls therof. The L. Brooks, Col. Hollis, Col. Hambden, Col. Fines, and Col. Goodwyn, with their Regiments, both of horse and foot. having intelligence hereof (being at Banhury) marched towards Coventry with all speed, and the Kings Army fearing that they would fall on the backs of them, presently raised their fores from against Coventry, carrying their Ordnance with them, and came to meet the Parliaments Forces, which met on Monday last about
8. of the clocg in the morning uprn Dunsmore Heath, about 4. miles on this side Coventry, which when Col. Hambden and the rest of the commanders percei∣ved, they divided the army (consisting of about 6. or 7000. horse and foot) into 4. squadrons, placing 3. pieces of Ordnance on the right wing, and 3. pieces on the left wing, the Cavaleers with their troops of horse falling on them very furiously, and the other side defended themselves as stoutly, but in a very short time (the ord∣nance of the Parliament forces playing so hot on them) scaled their Horse, and put them in such a combustion, that scarce a man of them knew how to keep their rancks, and being in an exceeding great confusion, there was slaine of the Cava∣leers about 80. men, 9. of them being those that guarded the Kings person, capt. Legg and many others being taken prisoners, also two pieces of their Ordnance were taken, with some waggons and ammuni∣tion; and thus being rooted with the losse of very few of the Parliaments side,
they all dispierced themselves, and so fled for their lives. And although his Majesty at the raising of his Army from before Coventry gave them 3. dayes Respit for the Rendring it up; yet it is thought the Cavaleers will scarce come againe to demand it, for as yet it is not certainly known which way they are gone, many of them being lately fled from Warwick, and it is Reported by some that come out of those parts, that the Earle of Northampton will fly away before the Parliament Forces come thither, although they are not above sixe miles from Warwick. The Sheriffe being Summoned to Raise the power of the County to aid and assist his Majesty appeared not therein, neither came any of that County in to him. But the Country were excee∣dingly terrisied with fear of the Cavaleers, which Ride about pillaging the Country, and are under no Comand; but the Parliament Forces do dai∣ly encrease, and especially in VVarwickshire, who are in great hopes suddenly to suppresse the Rage of the Disturbers of their peace. Ordered by the Lords and Commons, That this be printed and published. John Brown Cler. Parliament. Hen. Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com.
