F520 12029732 52721
AN EXPEDIENT FOR THE KING: OR King Charls his Peace-Offering, Sacri∣ficed at the ALTAR of PEACE, For a safe and well-grounded Peace, the welfare and happiness of all in generall, and every subject in par∣ticular, of this His Kingdom of ENGLAND. Behold! all ye that passe by, stand stil, and see the wonderful Salvation of the LORD, which he hath wrought for the people of this King∣dom, by his servant KING CHARLS. Blessed are the Peace-makers for they shal be called the children of God. Aske of the King, and he shal give you Not Stones, For Bread: Nor Scorpions, For Fish. Studyed and Published for the honour of the King, and his Posterity and the Universall happiness of the whole Kingdom of England. BY RICHARD FARRAR, Esq Printed in the Year, MDCXLVIII.
TO The Kings most excellent Majesty. Most Gracious Soveraign, IT is the saying of Solomon (the pen-man of the Holy Ghost, and the wisest King that ever was) Prov. 21. 1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water; he turneth it whithersoever he pleaseth: I, a poor despicable man, (despicable because poor) do pre∣sume, out of my sincere loyal affection, and duty to Your Majesty, and my earnest desire for the re-uniting of You with Your Parliament and Subjects of this Kingdom, to offer, or rather to sacrifice, my weak Conceptions to Your gracious Acceptance or Refusal. Sir, We are all in an Egyptian darkness, be You but pleased to cause the Sun-shine of your Mercy and Goodness to break out upon Your poor Subjects of this Kingdom, and there is great hope we may soon be delivered from this fearful Confusion whereinto we are faln. For my own part, I be∣leeve, Your Majesties not being conscious of the misery Your poor Subjects are in (in regard of the unkingly restraint You are for the pre∣sent unhappily under) is the cause You cannot be so zealous, as other∣wise you would, to redress it; and that your want of know∣ledg of the present conjuncture of Affairs is that which renders Your People so infinitely miserable, that they are ready every minute to precipitate themselves into the Gulf of Despair. It is said of Almighty God, There is mercy with him that he may be feared, and his mercy is over (or above) all his works: And I beleeve (without least flattery I speak it) that there is abundance of Mercy and Bowels of Compassion with You, towards Your poor Subjects, that You may be both loved and feared; and that Your Mercy will shower it self down
to the amazement & reproach of those that seem not to beleeve it: Did I say, Your Mercy, yea and Your Justice also, even against Your self, in the voluntary clouding of Your own Princely Royalty; and that Prince, who shadows his own Glory (meerly for the good of his Sub∣jects) is a rare Pattern: And the first giver of so great an (unexampled) Example, must needs render himself glorious to all Posterity. Sir, in the first place, I presume (with boldness enough I confess, yet will I not flatter you so much as to say, I beg Your Majesties par∣don for it) to remember you, that Self-Denial is the only way to hap∣piness, Temporal (here,) Eternal (hereafter:) and had it been but a little practised on all hands (by the three Estates of Parliament) at the be∣ginning or budding forth of these unhappy differences, (although Ma∣lice it self cannot but say, that Your Majesty acted Your part, and the very Lepers of Samaria shall one day rise up in Judgment against some and say, that that was a day of good tydings, and they ungratefully held their Peace, In Your abolishing of Monopolies, putting down the Star-Chamber, disannulling the High Commission Court, outing of Bishops from the House of Peers, Regulating the Councel Table, granting of Triennial Parliaments, and continuing of This, not to be dissolved without the consent of both Houses;) Your Majesty and Your People had not felt Gods heavy hand, as You and They have done for these seven years past, and yet do: but for me to presume to tell Your Majesty what Self-Denial is, were a most unpardonable of∣fence: And, yet, for Your Majesty to beleeve that this Peace-Offer∣ing, which You sacrifice to the good and happiness of Your People (in this sad condition Your Majesty is in, and the most miserable one They are plunged into) can be happily begun without Self-Denial (on Your part first, and then all the Peoples part also) is (so far as I can appre∣hend in Reason and Religion) altogether unpossible: and by the sequel of my discourse I doubt not but to make good the Truth of it at the Full. Sir, look into Your own heart, and see whether informer times You were not more Your own (or others who abused you then Your Subjects universally: The word Proprium is of a neer relation, and I doubt whether it sits not as close to the hearts of Kings as of Subjects, which your Majesty well knows is not compatible with Self-Denial. Sir, You are a great Monarch (true) yet You are but a Steward (nomine & re) a Steward of the great House of the Com∣mon-wealth; and one day it shall be said to You, as to the Steward
in the Gospel, (Redde Rationem) Give an Account of thy Steward∣ship; And the Accounts of Kings are of a vast extent. Sir, You are a Sheepherd also, a Sheepherd of a great Flock, (our Saviour calls him∣self a Sheepherd, the great Sheepherd of Israel,) and he tells you, a good Sheepherd will dye for his Sheep; he did so: And S. Paul, Phil. 2. 5. speaking of our Saviour Christ, and there deducing him from all eternity to time, hath these words; Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no reputa∣tion, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross: Wherefore God highly exalted him, &c. And shal I doubt Your Majesty will imitate our blessed Saviour in all you can? I doubt it not: He prayed for his persecutors, (and taught us so to do); He forgave his e∣nemies that crucified him even upon the Cross [Father, forgive them, they know not what they do]; nay he dyed for them, [who dyed, saith the Apostle, for the sins of the whole world:] You are not desired (Sir) to dye out of the world, or to part with Your Soul, by a Sequestra∣tion of it from your body, (for then we were miserable): Let the greatest curse, that ever fell on the head of any man, fall on that head that hath but such a wish or thought in his heart. All you have to do or suffer, is but to part with a sillable or two, from one single word, a few letters cut off from that Monster, as the People call it (although there hath been held out to them, for a long time, a more Prodigious one,) PREROGATIVE, a little paring off some superfluous part of it, will prove Balm from Gilead, to heal the whole Nation of the most Epidemical disease that ever yet seized this poor dying Kingdom. Sir, I shall not need to court you, to what you are so willing, nor to inforce this argument, had I never so much Elocution, as God knows (and Your Majesty doth find) I have none: I wish Your Majesties People were all of my belief, concerning Your Mercy and Justice▪ I flatter not, (I wish the flattery of a Prince were high Treason, and so punished,) and may my soul never enter into rest, if I beleeve not that Your Majesty will grant more (if more with Reason and Religion may be desired) then I have too too audaciously presumed to press in my following Propositions. Sir, It was said in the beginning of this Parliament, (by M. Pym, if I mistake not) that the Parliament would make You a glorious King,
and who knows whether your Majesty, when you were in the head of Your Army at Edg Hill, (or else where) had not some hopes to make Your self a glorious King? And I have been told, that this Army would have perswaded You, when time was, that they (also) would make You a glorious King. Sir, You have failed in Your hopes, They in their promises; and who knows whether, what Your Majesty hoped and sought for, and They promised and performed not, may not yet be done another and a bet∣ter way, if (at least) You will be pleased to take him for your guide (who hath hitherto so miraculously preserved you, and I hope ever wil.) I say (Sir) taking God for Your guide all may be made good, and may (yet) be brought to pass by Your self, not by fighting any more to the hazard of Your Royal Person, and the Persons of your Princely Issue, and of Your Nobility, and the destruction of Your loving Sub∣jects; but by extending and really performing of those two God-like Acts, of Mercy and Justice, without partiality, to all Your People. And this is Via Regia indeed, and well becoming the Majesty of King Charls. And now, Sir, behold how wonderful the ways of God are, (con∣trary to the ways of men) past finding out till himself discover them: You have long layen under the Cross, (restraint to a King is a great Cross, were there no more in it,) You are not free (I dare not say you are a Captive) and yet Your Person (with the power that God hath gi∣ven You over Your self, and the Grace he hath endued you with to serve him must suddenly come forth to the redemption of Your Subjects out of their Captivity, (Captives in their native Country under their fellow Subjects) or they are lost▪ lost for ever. In this Abyss of Exigency, no Expedient can be found to save Your People but the presence of Your sacred Person, armed with Mercy and Justice (Mercy and Justice to your People, and Justice against Your self) nor could You so easily do it (as I beleeve) had not God thus fitted, prepared, and quallified You by the Cross; whereby You have obtained a fellow-feeling of the miseries of Your Subjects: Da∣vid said of himself, It was well for me that I was afflicted. Great Sir, Let Your Engagements and Promises to Your People, for the time to come, (in Your perfecting of this blessed Peace) be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, irrevocable. And so God shall bless You and Your Posterity for ever: So much of good towards his People, so much of honor to himself no King ever
had in his Power to act, as Your Majesty now hath, by the saving of the effusion of so much innocent blood, and perhaps the Kingdom from utter ruin. God, I doubt not, will give Your Maiesty a heart to make a right use of it. And now, Sir, I will presume to set down what Acts of Grace You were pleased to pass this Parliament in Anno. 1640, &c. First, Your Majesty put down Monopolies. Secondly, You put down the Star-Chamber. Thirdly, You disannulled the High Commission Court. Fourthly, You consented to the outing of Bishops from the House of Peers. Fiftly, You Regulated the Councell Table. Sixthly, you granted the Trieniall Parliament. Seventhly, You condescended to the continuation of this, until dis∣solved by the consent of both Houses, &c. This was the Peace-Offering Your Maiesty then sacrificed for the good of your People. May it please Your Majestie, as a second Peace-Offering to your People, to grant these following Propositions. 1. THat you will not break any Priviledg of Parliament; and there∣fore it were fit that the particular Priviledges were set down, that so the King may not intrench upon them in the least. 2. That your Maiesty wil not diminish or intrench upon the liberty of the Subiect, but hold your self strictly to the Laws of the Land. 3. That your Maiesty will not extend your Prerogative in the least beyond the due bounds granted to your Predecessors, or to the preju∣dice of the Persons of your Subiects, or the known Laws of the Land: To which end you desire the particulars and extent of it to be set down, and agreed upon, that so you may the better perform it. 4. That you will grant nothing to any Person out of your Reve∣nue, and this for your Posterities sake; that so by your own good hus∣bandry, you may be the better inabled to reward those you desire. 5. That you will answer no Petition, for matter of profit, to any
Petitioner; but first that you will refer it to two Judges of the Law, to certifie you the legallity of it; and that no Subiect (or the Crown) be any way prejudiced by it; and if your Maiesty be abused in it, the Judg to be highly punished, and if he dye before the discovery, his estate to satisfie it to the Crown. 6. That your Maiesty will protect the person of no Subject for debt, but only your menial servants, and yet not his Goods or Estates neither, but all things, except his person, to be liable to the Law. 7. That your Majesty will give no protection to any person for a∣bove 6. moneths; but not for-their Goods or Estates at all. 8. That your Majesty will demolish all Forts and Castles the Parlia∣ment shall desire within the Kingdom of England. 9. That your Majesty ingage your self, That if you shall assist any forraign Prince, you shall do it out of your own purse and power, not constraining any Subiect, or pressing them any way, but what they shall willingly do of their own accord. 10. That your Majesty wil levy nothing by Tax, or any way, contra∣ry to the known Laws of the Kingdom, but what shall be ordained by Act of Parliament. 11. That your Majesty will confirm the Charter of London, and all Corporations in the Kingdom that shall desire it, not prejudicial to the Universal good of the Kingdom. 12. That your Majesty will sit one day every Term [if you be in the Town] in every Court of Justice, at Westminster, and then to hear the Causes of poor men only, and to lay your severe Charge, that the Poor, the Widow, and the Fatherless have speedy Justice. 13. That your Majesty will pass an Act, That any Judg that shall be found guilty of Bribery, shall die for it, and his skin to be hanged over the Court for ever. 14. That your Majesty wil appoint a Judg in every Court, called the poor
mans Judg, a man esteemed to be an upright man, and your Maiesty to allow him 200. l. per annum. 15. That your Maiesty will appoint in each Court two Lawyers for the poor, who sue in forma pauperis, and your Maiesty to allow them 50. l. per annum, each Lawyer. 16. An Act, That every fifth Cause that shal be heard in any Court, shal be the poor mans Cause, and called on by the Judg for the poor man, that sues in forma Pauperis, and the party that is overthrown by the poor man shall have a fine set upon him for vexing the poor man; and if that the poor man be found a litigious fellow and malicious, he shall be punished as shall be thought fit. 17. That your Maiesty enact a severe Law against Adultery, and a high fine and punishment for whoredom. 18. That your Maiesty cause some order, way or means, by Act or otherwise, for a speedy ending of all suits against those wicked Dilem∣maes of the Law, which are the ruin of thousands, and only the inriching of the Lawyers. 19. That the Commons in the Country, in every Parish, be sold, and the poor allowed it; for many are so poor, they can make no use of the Common. 20. That your Maiesty cause all Acts for the benefit of the Poor, to be put in execution, never more need, never more poor: And upon complaint made to your Maiesty, your Maiesty to redress it. 21. The Excise to be setled for the payment and satisfaction of all Interests, which it will abundantly do, in some years, if it be farmed out, and ordered as in Holland; [the particulars too large to express here] and no bread, smal-beer, flesh or fish, to have any Excise set on them, but to be highly advanced on Tobacco, Wines, Sugar, Spices, and all outlandish commodities, Gold and Silverlace, &c. 22. That Your Majesty promote the setting on foot the great and most necessary Trade of Fishing, as shall be thought best, by Corpora∣tion
or otherwise by free Trade for all men; the imployment of Peo∣ple, breeding up of Mariners, &c. it cannot be imagined how much the Kingdom would be the better for it; often thought on, never set on foot. 23. An Act to be passed for the supply of all Poor, young and old, amongst whom how many thousands of maimed souldiers, and people made miserably poor by these Wars, on both sides; all to be taken care for in a way, or means, which shall be expressed; for the effect∣ing of which the Kingdom shall be at as little Charge as now they are, and ever have been: and this shall be plainly manifested when occasion shall be too large to express here; which will be to the glory of God, the education of young Children, the maintenance of old decrepid people, and a provision for all and every poor man, woman or child in the Kingdom, though bedrid, blind, or lame; so as this course well observed, the reshall not be a Beggar in the Kingdom of England: —A pious Work. 24. That Your Majesty pass a stricter Act, then ever, for the putting down of Alehouses, through the whole Kingdom: one for ten that now is in and about this City, were too much; so numerous they are, that almost every third house in the Suburbs is an Alehouse, Victualing-house, Cooks house, or a Chandler that sells Bear and Ale, which ought to be regulated in a strict manner; so highly is God dishonored by it, the poorer sort undone, and so many thousand idle lustly fellows, and young wenches and boyes bred up in that way, and the most part of the mony gotten by deocit of measure. 25. That your Majesty pass an Act, that those that are not able to sa∣tisfie their Debts, their bodies not to be kept in prison, giving all they have to their Creditors (if less may not serve,) for if this be not done, be∣sides the numberless number of men that now lie and starve in prisons, how many thousands (yea more) who have lived wel, and yet meerly by these Wars on both sides are utterly undone, not able to pay any thing? Shall they lie in a prison, and theirs starve or beg? If this Law be right∣ly enacted, no man shall deceive or cozen not one of twenty shall break, or be Bankrupts; or if they do, they shall gain nothing by it; nor shall any man (as many do) live in prison and not pay his Debts, if he be able, but his estate shall be sold: This Act, rightly ordered, is of a
great benefit to the State, and ought to be done in Reason and Reli∣gion. 26. That all Fees of Lawyers and Physitians, Atturneys, Chirurgi∣ons, and all Fees of all Courts of Justice, be brought to a fit rate: It is a shame, yea and a sin, that a Physitian and a Lawyer should have such great Fees. 27. That the Estates of all Subjects be liable to their Debts, none excepted: this is rational and religious. 28. An Act, that none of Your Majesties Servants be chosen of the House of Commons, nor no servant of a Lord, who takes wages of him. 29. An Act, that no Lord or Person of Honor, or other, shall write his Letters, or use any indirect means to procure any man to be a Member of the House of Commons, but foly left to the Country; and if it shall be proved that any Member hath so tampered, by money or friends, upon discovery to be turned out of the House. 30. That all the Kings Forrests and Chases be so ordered, that the Poor suffer not, but that the King rather suffer himself for the good of the Poor. 31. That your Majesties Ear shall always be open to hear any com∣plaint, and to punish it, against any Officer that you have placed in Court, City, Country, &c. 32. That Your Majesty pass an Act, that henceforth Balletting boxes be used in both Houses as in the State of Venice,) the benefit great, the dispatch sudden; and little partiality will be then expressed, but every man will do as his conscience informs him, without Fear, or for Favour. 33. An Act about Gaming, some most severe Act, for it is the Ruine of the Nobility, Gentry and of the City: It is not hard to pre∣scribe a way to abolish it, so as that no man shall be prejudiced in his Estate; and if any shall break that Law, to be highly punished, to bear
no office in this Kingdom: this may seem but of a small consequence, but it is upon due examination of a great consequence; as the State shall approve, so a further discovery may be made, with the remedies and limits of Gaming. 34. An Act for the calling in, and nulling of all his Majesties Decla∣rations against both Houses of Parliament, or any other person that hath offended or seemed to offend the King; as also a calling in, and nulling of all such as the two Houses have set forth against the King, or his Friends, as shall be agreed on in the Treaty. 35. That all things passed by the Seal, made by the Parliament, be set into a right order, yet so as the Honor of the King Majesty be not touched upon to posterity: This is a weighty matter, and requires the gravest and wisest heads in the Kingdom to settle; and yet it must of necessity be so, in regard of after-questions, I leave it to the Treaty. 36. That during the Treaty (which doubtless, if the People come with equal hearts to Peace, as the King doth upon these Resolutions,) his Majesty will take such order, that none of his Party shal come with∣in so many miles of the Court: or who so doth, shall be by his especial license, and knowledg given to the Parliament, and his Majesty to answer for them, for the not disturbing the Peacè of the Treaty. If your Majesty shall be pleased to add or diminish (as you are free;) This is far from being by me intended other, then to shew the heads of so many necessary things, for the good of the People, which I conceive your Majesty might confer upon your people according to Reason and Religion.
After these voluntary Offers of Your Majesty to Your People, or what You shall please to add, me seems it is very necessary for Your Majesty to make these Demands, and what other You shall be pleased. 1. TO be setled in all your Revenues. 2. To be invested in all your Customs. 3. The Tunnage and Poundage, formerly given to your Ancestors, and your self, to be continued, in liew whereof your Majesty wil main∣tain the narrow Seas from Pyrates, as the Custome was. 4. That the bestowing of all Honors and Offices, throughout the Kingdom, by Sea and Land; all that were formerly your Right, and never heretofore questioned in any Parliament since your Raign, be in your Majesty; and your Majesty to place and displace all persons that are in Office under you, either by Sea or Land, none excepted. 5. That the Court of Wards be again setled and regulated, if need be, or, if in the Treaty it be agreed otherwise, then to give 150000l. per annum, in liew of it. 6. The titles of Honor, of what kind soever, your Majesty hath conferred on any person since the beginning of this Parliament, not to be disputed, but held good, for the Honor of your Majesty. 7. The naming of all Officers of Ireland, in the War for Ireland, if it be a War, to rest in your Majesty. 8. That all your Majesties friends, who have any way adhered to you in these Wars, or otherwise, to possess all their Estates, and no man to lose any part of it, though given away or disposed by Ordi∣nance of Parliament. 9. That the Officers of your Majesties Army, and all the Souldiers Arrears be satisfied.
10. That the Publick Faith be satisfied. 11. That the disbursements for Ireland, made by the City, be sa∣tisfied to them. 12. That if your Majesty find a way or means of your own, not contrary to the Laws, nor opposing the Subject, whereby you can in 7 or 8 years redeem the Bishops Lands, and pay the interest, that the Lands be returned into Your Majesties hands, having first satisfied the Debt and Interest payd for them. 13. That for the Queens Majesty, care be taken for the setling of her Rights and Joyntures, and for the exercise of her Religion, as it ought in Honor and Reason. 14. That the Militia stand as it formerly did, before the beginning of these troubles, (without disputing,) and, if it be thought fit, to strengthen it in the hands of the Sheriffs, more for the Peoples safety, then advantage of the King. Peroratio. SIR, ALL the world now sees that you are the Center of Peace. I therefore the most humble and most unworthy of all your Majesties Servants and Subiects, having a long time, from my very soul, grieved the sad condition of your sacred Person, your Royal Consort, and most Princely and Numerous Issue, the sad and languishing Estate of your Maiesties three Kingdoms, the horrid and dayly bloodshed of your poor Subjects, perpetrated by their own hands, after some earnest prayers to Almighty God (from whom alone cometh every good and perfect gift) to enable me some way to express to your Majesty and the Kingdom, something which might, at least, point out the way to a happy Peace, and a perfect and right understanding between you and your People. It hath pleased God of his infinite goodness and mercy,
after some months study, to open unto me this door or entrance, at least for your Maiesty, if you are so pleased, to pass through into the Temple of Peace; which Temple is only in your Maiesties power to build, and in the power of no mortal man besides: your sacred Majesty must take the pains to lay the first and the last stone in this building; your self must begin and perfect this great work: It is you alone that have found the Art of Oblivion, as well as you have the power to give an At of the highest Oblivion, that was ever read of in the Annals of any Monarch whatsoever. Your Majesties many Declarations to both Houses of Parliament, and to your three Kingdoms, have so deeply seized my soul with belief, that I am confident, your Maiesty will not refuse to do or ofter any thing to your People, in your power, that may con∣duce to a safe and well-grounded Peace, so as that you are not in the least prejudiced in what you are so great a Master of, Reason, and so great a Servant to, Religion; and for this poor Talent which God hath vouchsafed me, and which I here, with my self, most humbly pro∣strate at your Maiesties Feet. I hope you will not find, that in the least, I have been so presumptuous or proved my self such a Traytor to your Reason or Religion, as to have offered any violence, in the least degree, to either of them; If your Maiesty, in the perusal, shall find it so, I know, as an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King to discern good and bad. Therefore Thy Lord, Thy God, shall be with thee, and so shall he for ever pray, who is Your Majesties Most humble and obedient Subject and Servant Richard Farrar.
THE KINGS COVENANT With His PEOPLE. JC. R. Do here in the presence of the blessed Trinity [God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,] profess to all the world, without any Equivocation or mental Reservation, that I now do, and for ever will forget and forgive all kinds of offences against me, either in word or deed, committed by any of my Subjects of England, and contained in the Act of Oblivion; and this of my own free will and desire, I do, that all my People may see and behold the Candor of my Heart: and I do here bury in the grave of Oblivion, all things contained in the Act of Oblivion, in my soul not desiring to remember it, and vowing never to revenge it. So help me God, and the Contents of this holy Book: and this I confirm by the taking of the Sacrament.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of Richard Farrar, Esq Sheweth, THat (as an addition to his former Expedient, for the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom) he is very confident (by the mercy and goodness of God) he can express something more unto His Majesty so convincing in Reason and Religion, whereby there may be a sud∣den and unhoped for happy settlement of the Kingdom; and that (in a way unanswerably Rational and Religious,) for the satisfaction of all Interests (whatsoever,) and of all men, (not wilfully and wick∣edly opposite to Peace,) who have any sparke of Reason or Religion left in their hearts. Your Petitioner doth, therefore, most humbly pray, that he may have free liberty from both Houses of Parliament (upon the score of his own abundant folly) to go to the Isle of Wight, and there to present His Maiesty, in writing, with such particulars as your Petitioner hath long since conceived and prepared, for the sudden and happy setling of the Peace of this unhappy Kingdom; (with∣out further shedding of innocent blood; which hourly cries up to Heaven for vengeance on all hands:) your Petitioner being more confident then formerly (if possible it may be) that he is capable (by the mercy of God, who he believes hath enabled him for this Expedient,) to answer any obiection, whatsoever, that His Majesty shall be pleased to alleadg in opposition to what your Petitioner shall propound to him for a safe and well∣grounded Peace. And the whole Kingdom, with your Petitioner, shal, as in duty they are bound, dayly pray, &c.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT. MY Lords of the House of Peers, and you the Members of the Ho∣norable House of Commons, the Representative Body of the Kingdom of England, since I have taken the boldness (as a Subiect and Servant to His Majesty) to signifie to him what I conceive his du∣ty to be in the setling, or towards the setling, of a safe and well ground∣ed Peace; Give me leave, I humbly pray, to say thus much, at least, that the welfare and happiness of every Member of both Houses, as of the whole Kingdom, lies at the stake, either for good or ill, ac∣cording as God shall move your hearts in the tender and speedy care of the Peace of this Kingdom: and this Peace you can neither well begin, nor happily end, but by following the example of His Majesty, (Regis ad Exemplum, &c.) in taking out and practising a true Self-Denial, of any the least private Interest of your own, either of Honor, Profit, or Revenge; making it subordinate to the publike good and welfare of the Kingdom, your Nurse and Mother, who expects a speedy accompt of you; at the present, she being wounded all over, from head to foot, weltring in her blood, ready to give up the ghost; as God doth like∣wise look for a strict accompt, and will do to all Eternity, of your true and faithful performance of your duty, for the instant Peace and quiet of the Kingdom: To this purpose you were chosen, for that end was your Call by God and Man, and nothing else, but that, ought to have
been, from the beginning to the end, your care and study day and night; but how you have performed this trust in your Endeavours, (and eight years sitting) and what success hath been, let the world, not I, Judg: This I am too sure of; the neglect of many in attending their duty at the Houses, in the beginning, as if they had not been called to any such purpose, as to wait there daily,) the divisions amongst the Members of both Houses, from the first sitting to this present time; and the absenting of others (or worse, the breaking out of the pale of Parliament, which ought on no terms to have been done,) hath been no small cause of the Miseries of this unhappy Kingdom, who hath been still every way wounded by her own unnatural Children: Then, after that the great E∣ruptions, the differences of opinions in Church and State, the setting on foot of Self-Interests of several persons, and those not mean ones, neg∣lecting the Peace of the Kingdom, as if it might have been had with whistling for, or at a beck; all these put together, were no small addi∣tion to our common Calamities: Add to this, the Reproach cast upon Soveraignty, the promulgation of contentions and strifes, the prosecu∣tion of it to a War, and so an engaging of the whole Kingdom on both sides, in it; the taking of a Covenant, not of love I fear, to the extirpation of that Church-Government, that had been so long set∣led by so many Acts of former Parliaments, and the inducing of a new Government, more different in name then in essence, and truly, if right∣ly examined, scarcely differing much in either, at least, not worthy the making of such bloody differences as have been about it, & al this with∣out any good success to the Kingdom, or content to many of your own particular Members, who have varyed, many of them, even from the Covenant they once took, for what ends or Interests I know not. I cannot forget to put you in mind, or remember you also, the several Design, of the Army, and the Grandies thereof, under the Earl of Essex, though they were put to a nonplus in it; nor of the backward∣ness to make Peace, when it might have been, nor of those whose Counsels modelled the new Army, which yet for all their suc∣cesses, (successes, I confess, many great, and high,) had they made right use of them for the settlement of the King and Kingdom as they might, as they ought to have done; who yet not 18. moneths since, when the Army was at Newmarket, it was a question, whether they should have been an Army, or no Army, kept a foot, or disbanded: Nor can I omit their rise again, if not upon the head, yet at least upon the shoulders, both of King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom; what Designs
on all sides, and to what ends, or how the poor Kingdom hath been shaken with this long, and yet terrible Earthquake, through Self-Inte∣rests and Divisions, I press not, but this I must say, If Designs were well meant, and for the good of the Kingdom, (as I hope they were) there was no blessing went along with them, for they have not so well succeeded, as was by some hoped, and by all wished for: And then those yet unhappy Votes, of no Addresses to nor from His Maiesty; which I fear God Almighty is not well pleased with, or rather highly offended at. God never denyed Addresses to him from the greatest Sinner (had he come with true repentance:) to Cain himself, God says, If thou dost well, shalt thou not be accepted? &c. and how amazed would the soul of any man be, (unless he were feared up by a total hardness of heart,) if God should from Heaven tell him, Pray not to me, come not to me with your Addresses, I will not hear you, I will shut my ears, and be deaf to your Prayers! But we all know the con∣trary of God: At what time soever the wicked man forsaketh his wickedness, &c. and who knows whether the scales may not turn, [Let not him boast that puts on his armor, &c.] And then if Addres∣ses were sought and refused; and that the King should say, Did you not hate me, and expell me out of my Fathers house? How is that you come to me now in the time of your Tribulation; as Jephta did to the men of Gilead,) might not this seem to be a just Reproach? or as God in the same Book, Go to the Gods whom you have served: Re∣member what Solomon says, The Wrath of a King is as Messengers of Death; but a wise man will pacifie it: And in another place, The Kings Weath is as the roaring of a Lyon, but his Favour as the dew upon the grass. For your own sakes; for this bleeding Kingdoms sake, proceed to a sudden Personal Treaty with His Majesty: God treats with his greatest Enemies; nay he invites them continually, hourly, and minutely in their consciences, and cries, Return, O Shulamite, Re∣turn, Return▪ And again, How oft would I, and ye would not, O yet, if in this thy day, &c. The sum of all is, (and let it never be sum'd up) what is past (for actions cannot be recalled,) such offences or sins against God or man, may be repented, not repealed; but a wilful continuance in such hor∣rid and bloody wars, as these are, and not to seek and endeavour Peace by all fair means in the world, would prove but a sad story to this age, and to posterity. I hope better things on your part; and my poor aime is, that all things amiss between King and Parliament (for who
can free himself from guilt?) be from henceforth forgotten, forgiven, and amended on all sides, and that by a true and perfect (not coun∣terfeit) Love and Union; to which end I published my poor Expe∣dient for Peace and Safety, in Print, (and I would to God it had an Impression on all those who are opposite to Peace, if there be any such;) which although for the present it be laid aside, (as not worthy a thought) must and shall (if ever a Peace conclude it, and the all-de∣vouring Sword consume us not totally) be made use of. Let the Ho∣norable Houses look, in Reason and Religion, what they can expect more from the King then he doth, if he will do them, as I am confident he will, in these Propositions preceding: can you demand more for the good of the Subject, he will do it; he that will do so much, will refuse nothing in Reason and Religion, and beyond these I know these Hono∣rable Houses will not demand; the honor, and restoring of the King, how many of your selves have fought for, and for the safety of the Kingdom, Priviledges of Parliament, and liberty of the Subject, all have profest, vowed it, covenanted it, sworn it; hold to that, the work is done, (the King doing his part, (as doubtless he will, and I take it for granted,) turn the Tables, (as the Proverb is) and let the Kings Game be yours, yours his, and then in Gods Name, act according to Reason and Religion: Remember the Golden Rule, [Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do that unto them:] and I am confident the King shall be glorious, your selves and the Kingdom happy; and for me, poor wretch, I know you wil censure no worse of me, then that I am an earnest desirer and hunter after Peace, and the publike good, and so he will live and die, who is My Lords, Yours, and the most humble Servant of the KINGDOM, Richard Farrar.
TO THE SYNOD OR THE Assembly of Divines AT WESTMINSTER; AND To all the Clergy of the Kingdom of ENGLAND. SInce I have presumed to speak to his Majesty, the two Honorable Houses of Parliament, and the Army, why should I spare to say something to you, O you sons of Levi! You that take liberty to tell all men of their fanlts, why should not you be told of your own? Sure I am you have as much need (if not more) to be put in mind of Self-Denial, as any profession whatever; and it had been happy for this poor unhappy Kingdom, if you, who profess your selves our shepherds, had practised it a little better then you have hitherto done: The Ac∣compt that you of the Clergy of this Kingdom (for I exempt neither side) are to give to God Almighty at the great day, will, I fear, lie
heavy on you: For, sure I am, had you been (what you would have the world esteem you) the Embassadors of Jesus Christ, and his Mini∣sters, you would never have added so much oyl to this slame, as you have done; but on the contrary, you would have brought the cold water of patience, humility, love and meekness (on all hands) to have quenced it: And this our Saviour (and your Master, as you call him) taught you, and all the world: How the Clergy of this Kingdom be∣haved themselves towards God and the Kingdom, in their duty to both, before the beginning of this Parliament, I leave to God and the world to judg; but how unanswerably, diametrically contrary to the example and precepts of our Saviour, you have demeaned your selves, both in the Pulpit, and in the Press, since these unhappy diffe∣rences between the King and Parliament; and how great Incendiaries and fomenters you have been, needs no witness to testifie: Had the Clergy on the Kings part, and the Clergy on the Parliaments part, plain∣ly and truly (without fear or flattery) told both of them the danger and the devillishness of a War, both for soul and body, the wicked∣ness and unlawfulness of it (on both sides,) and perswaded them both, to love, meekness, and forbearing one another, told the King his own, and the Parliament theirs, and yet nothing but truth neither (according to the Word of God;) I doubt whether it had ever come to a War at all; I am sure they would never have been so forward on either side, as they were; The truth is, (I speak to the hearts of all honest men) the Clergy on both sides (had they been of the mind of Christ and his Apostles) should have preached against it, printed against it; and if that would not have served the turn, should have denyed both King and People the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; (for with what consciences could either side give or take it, in the fury and rage of Blood and War, wherein they were hourly engaged: (I understand it not:) And if that would not have prevailed, they should not have afforded the Word, nor their Prayers in Publick, if they had continued still to persist in Bloody Designs and Self-Interests: and had you of the Clergy proceeded thus far, you had done but your duty to God, the King, and the People; and I am confident both sides would have stood at a gaze, and not have been so forward, as they were, perhaps not at all proceeded to pass through such a Sea of blood, as they have done: and how many of both sides have perished in that red Sea, from this world at the best, (I judg not of the next!) But was this course taken by you (or if by some, for I tax not all) yet I never heard of any; O no,
wo is me, in stead of imitating our Saviour in these three particulars, which all good Christians must imitate him in, in his Life, in his Love, and in his Doctrine, (all of them imitated strictly by the Apostles.) I say, in all these three, the Clergy (generally to our view) have op∣posed our Saviour Christ in a strange manner. First, in his Life, that was poverty and contempt, all along, from the Cradle to the Cross; Yours as full of Glory, Jollity, and Honor, as you can advance it. Secondly, in his Love; he was all Love, he preached it, he practised it; My Peace I leave with you: That was Christs Legacy; How well have you disposed of it? or what execu∣tors are you of this his last Will and Testament? He abrogates the old Law in that particular, where it was said of old, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth &c. But I say unto you, it shall be so no more: You shall love your enemies, &c. And behold I bring you a new Com∣mandment, that you love one another. This was spoken to all the world of Beleevers; much more to you, who profess to be the Em∣bassadors of Christ, as you do: You take Texts out of the Old Testa∣ment in opposition to Christ, [Curse ye Merosh,] and you incourage to fight, and cry, The Cause is good, it is Gods; (I speak to both sides,) yea and you conjure the people to fight in the name of the Lord, tell them they are Martyrs, they cannot miss Heaven, if they dye for the Cause; (such Martyrdom God deliver me from:) The Con∣science, not the Cause, makes a Martyr; and if that be not purged by the blood of Christ, in true Faith and Repentance, though a man suf∣fers Martyrdom for Christ, he is no Martyr: He whom God calls to be a Martyr, he fits him first, and makes him a Martyr to the world, in crucifying the lusts of it and sure, men that fight for power, though Kings, or Subjects for Priviledges & Liberty, are not so wel seasoned with Self-Denial, as is requisite to make a Martyr: And for the Doctrine of Christ, it was humility, Learn of me, for I am humble & meek: OGod! have you of the Clergy practised this humility and meekness? Nay, have you not boldly, to the world, exprest the contrary in most of your conversations? Had there been a Palsie in your tongues, (your tongues set on fire from hell, as the Apostle speaks) and in your hands, this Kingdom had been happy: Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi; Did I say you do? You ever did, and you will do, till the time come that Malachi the Prophet speaks of, (I hope) neerer at hand then you beleeve; were you true Prophets, you would tremble at the Text, and by the Spirit of Prophesie discern the time: Malachi 3. 3.
He shall sit as a refiner, and purifier of Silver; and he shall purifie the sons of Levi: And doubtless, that is not the Reformation that you pretend to; you do but take up the Stone, and turn the other side. It is you that have put us all in a flame: your Tribe hath done, and doth it all the world over: Is there any evil in a Kingdom, or rather this great evil in this Kingdom, and have not you done it? You have either done it, or had the greatest share in doing it, or not hin∣dered it when you might; you seek your own, and not the things of God, God forgive you: why do you not imitate Saint Paul? Be ye fllowers of me, as I am of Christ; if he had erred that way, (which he could hardly do) yet he forbids to follow it; and must we follow you, when you command things contrary to Christ? But great is your Diana, and you voyce her high up; she is (for all your roaring) but an Idol, she cannot stand, she is falling, she is falling. Our Saviour says, He that is greatest amongst you, shall be the least; and he that is least among you in the Clergy, would be greater then the Civil Ma∣gistrate, if he could: Oh the ambition of the Priesthood! (Read the Prophets of old against the Priests: and is not the Priesthood of these times worse? compare them together.) What Aaron before Moses? it was not so of old: Nor will God ever have it so, where his Spirit governs. The Luciferian Pride, Ambition, and Covetousness of the Clergy, is not the least quarrel God hath with this Nation; what will you say, or answer, When God comes to make inquisition for blood? where is the Ʋrim and Thummim, (in Aarons brest-plate it was) purity of Doctrine and Integrity of Life? I fear, it is not to be found in your hearts, in your Doctrine, nor Life. Open your eyes, the time is yet, Repent and amend: Great would be the joy in Heaven for such sinners, more then for any; and great would your glory be here▪ and hereafter. Return, O Shulamite, return, return, and be not ashamed to do it: Your example, on all hands, I am perswaded, (if sincere) would strongly build us up in a better way: A worse then you have taught us, and a worse then we are in, out of hell, is not. If the A∣postle say, Contention, strife, debate, is carnal, earthly, divellish; What is Plundering, Murdering, Ravishing, Robbing, and Confound∣ing? How can a man of God appear in a Pulpit, and not Preach, and speak against it, pray against it, print against it? and lo, you have done the contrary: Shall I praise you? I praise you not. God forgive you, with my soul I beg it.
To conclude, for Gods sake, inform me, I am a poor weak man, What warrant in Religion to Fast for strife, and to give thanks for Victories, and shedding blood? both sides, King and Parliament have done it: God have mercy on them for it. How can you ap∣prove of it, ye sons of Levi? Look into your Consciences, (those Glasses which will not, cannot flatter;) and say, How comes this to pass? Where are you? O God, That I a poor ignorant man am forced to tell you, and the world this! Amend, and that suddenly, Preach love, and practise it; Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall finde so doing; or as the sin now lies at your door, and the whole Kingdom, it is to be feared, will curse you for it: so a heavy, and sad, unexpected punishment here, and hereafter, must happen to you, without Repentance; which God grant, and is heartily prayed by Richard Farrar.
To the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax, Captain General of all the Forces Of the PARLIAMENT, And to the Lievtenant General, and to all the Commanders and Officers, and every Souldier in the Army. NExt to His Majesty, the two Honorable Houses of Parlia∣ment, and the Clergy; I presume to make my address to you, The sons of Mars; I would I could say. The sons of Peace. That which I aym at in this my Discourse, (with a peaceful mind, God knows, not wishing ill to any man, but desiring to have peace with all men) is, to perswade you (in whose hand the power of the Sword is) that you would remember you are English∣men; that we have one Common Mother, (the Kingdom wherein we live) whose bowels are dayly ripped up by this bloody unnatural War. When the Soldiers, in the New Testament, demanded of John, What shall we do? he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsly; and be content with your Wages: If any Soldier now, high or low, Commander or Officer, should demand of me what he should do, I should first answer him as S. John did: but in
regard you are Christians (which those Soldiers were not, nor Jews neither, but Romans) I shall take the boldness to say much more then S. John did there to those Soldiers, and yet no more then our Saviour left in Command. For your Pay, to begin there, God forbid you should not have it at the full, and that quickly; You have ventured hard for it, body and soul: My former Expedient for Peace and Safe∣ty, expresses my desire in that; As for Liberty of tender Consciences, I wrote it not out of Fear or for Flattery; but what I did, and do, beleeve, ought to be: But I must profess I am infinitely afflicted to see the high calamity (like to be greater) which by a most bloody intestine War this poor Kingdom groans under; and fain I would find an Expedient for it, at least I would spend my poor talent, to make some stop of this great issue of blood: And therefore I take this boldness to speak to your Excellency (the General,) and all subordinate Officers of this great Army of the Parliament, (not leaving out all those, who have been, and now are in Arms against you,) for my discourse is to all; but my chief aym and hopes are in you: for I am perswaded it is in your power, next to the King, under God, to procure a sudden Peace, (if you will have it the right way, who dare oppose it?) and so suddenly to still the raging and furious fire of this most unnatural War. If you will but practise that lesson (which I have dictated to his Ma∣jesty, the two honorable Houses, and the Clergy) of Self-Denial, how examplary will ye be to all posterity! and how well will it be∣come you, in the midst of all your strength and power, to decline it? I mean not to lay all down instantly, and let your enemies (who, God knows, I beleeve, are far from desiring peace theright way) cut your throats or subject your selves to them: it were folly in you to trust them, and wickedness in me so to counsel you; but you to begin first (though more powerful) and to desire Peace, and endeavor it: If therefore you will begin as I said] with Self-Denial of all Self-In∣terests, be it honor, or profit, or what ever it be, Peace, I think, may be easily obtained: Why do we fight, kill, and ruine one another? Are not we brethren? May not Treaties end it better then the Sword? Remember, I pray you, what Abner said to Joab, Shall the Sword devour for ever? Knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the end? And God saith, He will not pardon innocent blood; and I am sure, there can be no War where many Innocents [yea those that know not the right hand from the left] do not suffer: God will not be an∣swered by your saying, It is the inevitable fate that accompanies War,
it cannot be avoyded: The question will then be, Who bid you go to War? S. John bid you, Do violence to no man: and Christ he comes but a very little after the Baptist with Forgive your enemies, Away, saith he, with an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, &c. (that is, wrong for wrong:) Bless them that curse you &c. And surely it were the best Christian Courtship to appease all differences by Peace: The blood-thirsty man, saith the Scripture, shall not live out half his days: and if he do grow old in blood here (as few do) yet shall he never see the Lord in the Land of the living, unless he get it with a hearty repentance; and what hope can he have that dyes in a battel, killing, and killed? whose soul in the instant of separation, is wrapped and enveloped with rage, revenge, blood, horrot, and height of fury against his opposite; (as the body, for the most part, at the same time, is environed with dreadful sounds, howlings and shriekings, with fire and smoak, the very Emblem of Hell it self.) And what sayes our Saviour: As the Tree falls, so it lyes: I would to God, every souldier would think of this hourly, and beleive it ever: Suppose, I pray you: A common drunkard (whose practise it is dayly so to be, dyes drunk, by a fall or other accident, as we have had many such fearfull examples;) doe, or can you in any charity hope well of such a soul? shall he be received into the everlasting joyes? the like of A∣dultery or fornication (I speak of a common adulterer and fornicator) whose God is his lust, who dyes in the arms of his Dalilah▪ can you hope well of him? I am sure it is a high presumption so to speak: sure I am his case is Fearfull, and by the Rule of Scripture we may be hold to judge no hapinesse could arrive that soul so dying. The Case is the same with those that dayly fight battells (nay, who long for it if but a little retarded;) if war be unlawfull, (I dispute it not, I take it for granted:) and I am sure by the new Testament utterly condemned: Now, if so, he that dyes killing, and killed (as I said before;) what a most miserable condition is that soul in? for their works, good or bad▪ follow them, saith the scripture: doe they so? in what a state then is that soul in dog'd and clog'd with such deeds of darknesse before, at, & after the expansion of it? what time is there of repentance, when the outward man is in such a Confusion and horror? for battells afford not many quiet and calme slumbers. Sure I am, he that is lives by the mercy of God most strictly, & with S. Paul mortifies himself, and dyes dayly to the world; yet such a soul works out it is salvation with Fear & Trem∣bling, and finds it (not too) scarce well prepared for its seperation. Iudge
then ye Men of war. E. Contra. Remember for Gods sake, for your souls sake, what our Saviour saith, Matth. 24. 48. But if that evil ser∣vant shall say in his heart, my lord delayeth his coming, and shall be∣gin to smite his fellow servants &c. The Lord of that servant shall come in a day that he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him assunder, and appoint him his portion with Hypocrites; there shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth. Our Saviour denonneeth all this woe, but for smiting of a fellow servant: what would he have said, of Plundering, Murdering, Ravishing, ut∣terly ruining the poor, the Fatherlesse, and the widows? This is vio∣lence in a high degree: and how Guilty the Souldiers of this land, (on both sides King and Parliament) have been in all this seven years war, I leave to God to judge; and those to lament it, who have seen and felt it. I know will the common question shall we stand still, and have our Throates cut? I say not so. I know offences must come: [Christ says it] but he likewise saith, woe be to them by whom offences doe come: And the Apostle sayes, have Peace with all men, if it be possible; he doeth not for all that add, but if you cannot have Peace Peacefully, fight, kill, &c. O no, he could not preach such a doctrine: how easy were it to spend sheets of paper to prove this by very texts of Scripture, viz. the unlawfulnesse and wickednesse of war: [yet I am no Anabaptist:] Are the works of war from the Principles of light and love, if so, well and good, happy your souls; if not, and there be self-in∣terest in it, Pride, Malice, Rage, Revenge, Ill yea ill indeed is it with your souls without Repentance; [& no man repents who forsakes not the evill way] I am sure those works come out of the Principle of Fire and darknesse, out of Hell it self. And such a people, such a God. saith the Psalmist. His servants ye are whom ye obey: with the froward thou art Froward, and with the holy thou art holy, saith the Psalmist, speaking of God: God still. But God in his Excellency is Love: for God, saith the Apostle, is Love: and for certain the Children of God are the sons of Peace. My Peace I leave with you, was our Saviours Legacy: To conclude, no man, I say, no Man must doe evil that good may come of it: and I am sure, our war for these eight years hath done no good in Church or state; [though God knows best where a True Church is, and we poor subjects can at the present scarce discern where the state is, involved on all hands with misteries and ruines:] And for any man, be he Emperour or King, State or Republick, I am confident the sin as great, yea greater then great in the eyes
of God, to begin a War: and if the hearts of such were searched (as God can, doth, and will.) it would be found, it is Self-Interest, let them plead and say what they wil; and to fight for Religion, for Re∣formation, be they who they will, they have no true Christian Reli∣gion in them: Religion, by all Kings, since Christs time, hath been made but the stalking horse, to catch up their other ends in the world: With∣out holiness no man shall see God: Is there holiness in War? be not deceived, God will not be mocked. Let the Souldier therefore lay by all Self-Interest; in your Declarations you have professed it, and seek the Peace of the Kingdom, the setling of the King in his just Rights, Him and his Children, the Parliament in their Priviledges, the Subject in their true Liberties from Tyrannical Government, and Arbitrary too; You have promised it, do it; and the King, I beleeve, is ready to per∣form his part: but do it by Love, by Peace; and God shall bless you, and you shall find rest to your souls: but if you proceed to do it by blood, on that you will have a Peace of your own moulding: I pray remember your own words, p. 4. nothing more abhorring to you then a new flame of War: I fear, that will not discover the practise of Self-Denial to be yet embraced of you; and had you all your desires for this world, (as I am confident the Souldiers profession, Kings and Subjects, have rare∣ly, or never obtained their hopes, the reason is, the blood that is by them spilt, which God abhors:) Look upon the King of Swede, see his end, kil'd in a Battel, by one of his own side, it is thought; and see yet how his people fare, and what rest have they, or when are they like to have any?) Yet what shall it profit a man, saith Christ, (beleeve him ye men of War) to win the whole world (thats more then a Kingdom) and lose his own soul? I speak to all who adore and dote on that Heathen God, Mars (War,) rightly interpreted according to the Dialect of the Holy Ghost, by the Apostles, in divers places, the very Devil himself. Now the works of the flesh, saith S. Paul, Gal. 5. 19. are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Ʋncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witcheraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murthers, Drunkenness, Revelings, and such like; of the which I tell you now, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not wherit the King∣dom of God. But the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long∣suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law. And they that are Christs, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts: If we live in the Spirit, let us also
walk in the Spirit: Let us not be desirous of vain-glory, provoking one another, envying one another. You have held out Reformation in Church and State, take heed of Deformation in both, or rather utter ruin of all: where is your Com∣mission to proceed in blood? Learn of me, (saith Christ) for I am humble and meek: Is there meekness in War? He that taketh up the sword, shall perish with the sword, (saith Christ.) I know well, he once asked his Disciples for a sword; he was answered, there were two; he said it was enough, and perhaps thought it too much; he did not bid them use it, nor did he ever make use of it, or command it, but the contrary. You are Subjects, as well as I am; remember you are so: and you are (or were) Servants also to the Parliament, who employed you. Act both parts according to Reason and Religion, and then this bleeding Kingdom shall ow no small share of its happiness to you; but if you fail to do it, assure your selves the end cannot be good: Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Now the God of Peace, and the Peace of God which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in the Fear and Love of God, &c. So prays he, (that beleeves no man should dare to say the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, if he wash his hands in the blood of another, by War.) Who is, My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble Servant Richard Farrar.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Major, The Right Worshipfull the Alder∣men, the Worshipfull the Common Coun∣sel, and every Free-man of the Citie of LONDON. THis great Mtropolis of yours, lifts not up her head so high, but that [having so boldly adventured upon the Clemency of his Sacred Majestie, the patience of the two Honorable houses of Parliament, the Freedom of my speech to the Clergy, the high priests, Scribes and Pharisees of this Kingdom; and the hazard of di∣stasting the Army: An Army, and such an Army, as hath made your proud walls shake at the very sight of it, and for ought I know, or you eithr, the earth-quake  yet past] I may presume to crie aloud in your gates, and to proclaim in your streets, that if any citie in the Christian world, had need to be summoned to Self-Denyall; It is this great citie: whose Inhabitants were grown so proud with prosperity, that they said in their hearts  least, (and too much exprest it in their words and actions) a Babylon did, Revel. 18. 7. Shee said in her heart. I sit a Queen, I am no widow, nd shall see no sorrow, therefore shall her . &c. And did not you, eight or ten years since, sit as a Queen, in your bed of State and rest? but lo, Al∣mighty
God brought war into your gates, and the sword into your Stately Palaces: and your young men felt it: you made but a sport of it at the first, you courted the sons of Mars, and you discovered all your wealth unto them (as Hezekiah did to those that were sent from Babylon, read the place, the 20. Chapter of the second of Kings, be∣ginning at the 1. verse, untill the 20. I pray God, it have no allusion in time to your citie;) and now after seven years Apprenticeship, are you not weary? would you not be made free? Remember those dayes of peace, when every man did eat of his own vine, and sate under his own fig-tree: did you make good use of it? no: you grew wanton with ease, and proud with folly, and therefore God sent war amongst you: your hearts were alwayes various from the wayes of God, and therefore God suffered you to be diversly minded, to make way for your destruction; and now at last, for your wickednesse, hath suffered the spirit of giddinesse and divisions, to be even in the midst of your citie, yea in every corner of it; and it is just with you: for you were so far from Self-Denyall, that you denyed your selves nothing you had a mind to; (I passe by the excesse of pride in apparell, like Princes rather then Apprentises; and for Gluttony and Luxury, the world could not match you: I say nothing of your Epicurisme every way, with your ne∣glect of the poor that dayly beg'd at your doors.) I speak not this to all: I am confident, God hath a Remnant in this Citie, who serve him most faithfully, and who are not onely free from those sins, but dayly lament them in others; who stand in the Gap; and for whose sake this Citie hath stood so long, and doth yet stand: Great hath been your Diana of profit, and you have sacrificed so long at her shryne, out of hope or fear; that if God open not your eyes, and that you suddenly repent, your destruction is at hand: Go into Self-Denyall, or you shall have no peace: lay aside all private and self-interests, that of the Publicke Faith, disbursements for Ireland Bishops Lands, Excise, Custome house &c. and repent; nor upbraid your for wardnesse at the first to help on the work, had it been holy and pious: The end shews plain [now] and it did long since appear, you did it for your own ends; it was fear or hope of profit put you on, not the Zeal of Gods Glory, the Honor of the King, or the good of the kingdom: [I speak not this to all, but to the most; and chiefly to those, whose pri∣vate interests, engage them, now, so hotly in the progresse of a war; that the whole Kingdom is in hazard of utter Ruine:] look into your own hearts, and say, how true or false I speak: if true,
make good use of it, that is, repent and amend; and that not with cast down looks, but humble hearts: You petition for Peace, it is well, (so you did once for War, God forgive you,) but do you desire and pray, that God will give you Peaceful minds one towards the other? Do you endevor it? Have you not (like the rest of the world) Peace in your mouths, War in your hearts? I wish I could forget, that not many years since, you cryed one day, Hosanna and Crucifig the next:) If so, you cannot ; deceive not your selves, nor be you deceived by others, that misguide you: pray to God to open your eyes, you are blind, (your wealth blinds you) you cannot see where your safety lies: Not in your selves, not in your strength, (that is already proved,) not in your wealth, you do but hoord it up for others, unless God give you open and repentant hearts; your safety lies in your Self-Denial, and in your suffering, not your doing; away with all warlike and bloody designs, you will be lost here, and for ever, by them; add not to your former evils, blood to blood; there is no ill so great which you are not guilty of; you have done like the rest of the Kingdom, or rather you were their example: You have sought your own, and not the things of God; nay, you have fought for them more then once. And now it is just with God, to leave you a prey to your enemies. Yet let me tell you, your greatest enemies are not only within your walls, but within your own brests: It is your Treachery to God, and to some body else, hath betrayed you to hourly fears: You look down to the earth, you grovel there; lift up your heads, lift up your hands too, but chiefly lift up your hearts to God, from whom alone must come your salvation. Do all you can for Peace, in a godly way, not by plots and strife: We must not do ill, that good may come of it: This City hath a great account to give, when God shall make inquisition for blood. There is no worldly Coun∣sel, meer worldly, can do you good: God alone must do it, by turning your hearts to him, and to your lawful King, and in your love to your fellow Subjects; but add no more blood to blood. The Militia of good consciences, is better and safer for you, then al your Arms, or the Army, if it were yours; in the day of Trouble you will find it so: If there be any means or power in you, by Prayers to God, Petitions to men, or the opening of your purses in a peaceful way, to procure Peace; forbear not to do it. Sero sapient Thryges. Do it, and that quickly, for Gods sake, for the Kings sake, for your own sake, for the whole Kingdoms sake, delay not to do it; and beleeve me, it is better to give willingly, what you may spare, then to have
all you have taken from you: who can give you a better hope? No man can say, who will be the Victor (if Peace end it not:) You see a Forraign Nation come in already; and perhaps many of you laugh at it in your sleeve, and rejoyce in it: Alas poor abused souls! Do you think you shall not be the Spoil, who ever is the Conqueror? Be not so sottish: There is no party in Arms already, or like to come into Arms, belonging to these three Kingdoms, but hath just cause to upbraid and reproach you; and will certainly ruine you at the last. Nulla Fides, Pictasque viris qui castra sequuntur, Said the wise Poet, and a good Christian knows it to be true; Buy Peace at any rate (but not with a drop of blood, take heed of that:) But first get internal Peace (else never hope for external) and then you are in the way to eternal Peace: And thus he prays you may do (who was the Son of a Citizen of the best rank & quality, and bred up amongst you) and heartily wishes, and would endevor, to his power, for the Peace and welfare of this honorable City; to whom he professes himself (though no Freeman of it) a Servant in a peaceful way, and ever will be, whilest he is Richard Farrar.
THE COVENANT OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND One with another. I A. B. Do here in the presence of the blessed Trinity [God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost] profess to all the world, and that without any Equivocation or mental Reservation; that I now do, and for ever wil, forget and forgive all kinds of offences against me, either in word or deed, and committed by any of my fellow-Subjects of Eng∣land, and contained in the Act of Oblivion, from Anno. 1648. to this present day; and this of my own free will and desire I do, that all my fellow-Subiects may see and behold the Candor of my Heart; and I do here bury in the grave of Oblivion all things contained in the Act of Oblivion not desiring to remember it, and vow never to revenge it. So help me God, and the Contents of this holy Book: and this I con∣firm by taking the Sacrament.
TO THE VVhole Kingdome OF ENGLAND, And to every particular Subject therein. IN order to the Peace of this Kingdom. I published my first Expedi∣ent, for the Peace and Safety of all the People of England: I refer my self to the world, to judg, whether better security can be had or hoped for, then is contained in that Expedient; and in His Majesties Covenant set down in this Book: I have (you see) finished a se∣cond Expedient for the King: But I desire the whole Kingdom not to mistake me, (at least, all that shall read it,) as if I, in the least, intend∣ded that either the Offers which I have set down, from the King to his People, or his Demands from them, should strictly be insisted on in this great work. [Ear be such a presumptuous thought from my heart.] No, they are only heads of a few, (such as in my poor apprehension might usher in more from His Majesty, as doubtless, he will offer and perform all that he can for the good of his People,) and otherwise I intended them not. It will appear to the whole Kingdom, that His Maiesty begins with Self-Denial: Read his second Peace-Offering, [and pass not over the first, which he offered to you all, 1640.] And Faithfully beleeve, that for the good of his People, he will, yet, deny himself more then ever any King did: In the name of God try him;
but still remember, he is your King; and forget not that saying of So∣lomon, Fear God, and honor the King; and give unto Casar that which belongs unto Caesar, and Caesar will give you more, rather then less, then belongs unto you. If the whole Nation, now, will but imitate the King, and begin with Self-Denial, (without which there can be no Peace, no Religion;) How happy shall both Prince and People be! If you are not so minded, (chiefly those who sit at the helm,) do you hope for Peace by a bloody War? Let no man tell me, Peace is the end of War: Be not deceived, my beloved Country∣men, if you keep your old hearts, of Self-Interests, and proceed on to a new War, you will find the greatest destruction that ever Nation did: For, as there is no Peace to the wicked, saith my God, so there is no ho∣liness, but hellishness in War. The Apostle tels you, whence strife and contention proceeds, from below, says he; and do you expect a bles∣sing upon War and blood, from above? That any man should dare to blaspheme God so highly, to pray to God to prosper him in his bloody undertakings, (daub it over with what specious pretence of Privi∣ledg or Liberty you can;) what doth that man less, then pray to God to bless the actions of the Devil within him? Blasphemy worthy the tearing of garments, and for which God will (amongst other sins) sorely visit this Nation. The King must, if he will prosper, begin with Self-Denial, (and that to some purpose too;) so must the two Honorable Houses of Parlia∣ment; the Clergy should begin to all the Kingdom, they have most need, (I will not say they are the most backward;) The Army, great as it is, is under the power of the Lord of Hosts; and (as they have long since in their Declarations promised it) God he expects Self-Denial from them; if not, he will one day deny their entrance into the Eternal Tabernacles of Rest, prepared for those only that deny themselves: Those blessed Mansions are not to be purchased, but by storming of them with Self-Denial: Our Saviour saith, The Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force; (I hope no man thinks Christ meant by force of arms, by killing, plunder∣ing and ruining the bodies and souls of men, women and children;) sure it was meant, by the violence of the good Spirit of God, moving in the hearts of his peaceful Children, the earnestness of whose souls is such, in resisting and opposing the deeds of darkness, and the fiery darts of the Devil, which is in them, in the old Adam, that they have a dayly storming, combat and strife, with all violence within themselves,
to dispossess the old Adam of his strong hold, and then the Kingdom of Heaven so much is it can be in this life is gotten and obtained; for he that gets it not here, shall never possess it hereafter; as the tree falls so it shall lie. The Citie also must go into Self-Denyall, my discourse to them tells them no lesss; And lastly, you the whole Kingdom (under whom the four last are comprehended) must likewise go into Self-Deniall: For all of you in Generall (I exempt not my self) have and do abound with all sorts of sins, yea with the greatest sins, and particularly that of Bloody a fearfull and a crying sin; which how you will answer, when God shall come to make inquisition for Blood; I know not: how will you answer it, you blood, Subjects of this bleeding Nation, who joy and delight in Blood and Revenge, who regard not the cryes and the Teares of those poor Innocents, which your swords make Widows and Orphans? whose cryes (yet) ascend up into heaven, and must (without sudden repentance) bring done a most unheard-of judge∣ment upon this Nation. For you the Subjects of this land (who are not Souldiers,) are equally guilty, in your willing Contribution to bothsides: and how many of you are ruined by your own party, to whom you gave assistance? And it is just with God, it should so be: A Land so defiled with Blood, that professed such purity of Christianity, and hath practised on all hands, the most horrid and barbarous Acts that ever were read of. The Father against the Son, the Son against the Fa∣ther, &c. And doe you expect Peace; by going on in Blood? bleeve no Minister, that preacheth War, lawfull: (Read my Epistle to the Clergy;) when they preach such stuff, that's some of the leaven which those Scribes and Pharisees mingle with their other good Do∣ctrine, and so spoile the whole Lump. Alas! did they not mix some good things with the bad, who would come neer them? Christ taught the contrary, viz. Love one another, (by suffering, never came ill, but much ill by resisting) beleeve Christ and follow his precepts and example: he that teacheth you other, is an Anti∣christ. This Kingdom is highly guilty of all the sins, that all the Prophets denounced judgements against in the old Testament, Israel, Judah, or any other Nation. I shall not need to name them: Prov: 6. 17. God hates hands that shed innocent blood. Isa. 59. 7. Their feet run to evil & they make haste to shed innocent Blood, their thoughts are thoughts of ini∣quity, wasting and destruction are in their paths, the way of peace they know not, &c. read on to the end of the 15. verse: and behold, the Pro∣phet
speaks what we with our eyes have seen, and do see daily acted by Authority, on both sides, in this miserable Land: And now, as if that it were not enough that the Land hath been made drunk with our Blood (and God knows, how much innocent.) The other Element of Water, the Sea, that must be died of a bloody Colour [Preparations on all hands:] And for that sin of oppression of the poor and innocent, never the like that hath been on both sides within these seven years, and yet is. In a word the crie of the sins of this Kingdom is gone up to Heaven, like that of Sodom and Gomorrah, & without sudden repentance, we must expect the like plagues: had there not been, and were there not still, some righteous Lots amongst us, sure we had been destroyed long since; and when those righteous Souls dye away or depart, Gods wrath will suddenly raine done upon us, (without Repentance) to our utter Confusion: Repent therefore and that suddenly, and (as I said before) go into Self-Denyall: be quiet, let no man force you to fight on either side, (much lesss be forward to go your selves, as too many have done, and paid dear for it.] Pray, but fight not, fight against your lusts and worldly corruptions, against all self-interests whatsoever (that's Self-Denyall) and then all will be well: the Peacefull-minded, their prayers, with the Widows and Orphans, if they prevaile not with God to turn the hearts of the wicked, shall at one time or other, prove of such strength, that like the Angel that destroyed the host of Senna∣cherib in one night, so shall Gods Judgements find, hunt out, and destroy the wicked out of the land, who hate the Children of Peace [and laugh at them;] for the Children of God, are the Sons of Peace. What would you have? would you have a King, a good King, & the best of Kings? and would you have Peace? Behold, he brings you the Olive-branch of Peace by his Self-Denyall: he denies, or will deny himself, for your good, as never King did: [were the best of you a King, it would not be found an easy thing; you are Subjects, and yet you cannot part with your petty private Interests, Molehills to the Mountains of those of a King:] Look upon the Kings Picture of Mercy and Love, in my first Expedient, and upon his Covenant in this tract: you are equally fafe with himself. [A better safety then the Militia,] Look every Subject into his own heart, for I write to all,] and deny himself but half as much for a Subject, as the King for a King; and I dare say, we shall have Peace, a blessed and a happy Peace, a Pious Peace, [away with a Politick Peace, it will never hold▪]▪ we shall have a Confident Peace on all sides; away with a Jealous Peace,
a distrusted Peace. Think of no Peace but what comes by the security of Self-Denial, on all hands: it is above all your Militia's, and casts down all Malice: If no Peace must be, till the fearful hearts and guilty consciences of all men be satisfied, then we must never look for Peace. In what a condition are you then in▪ O ye Inhabitants of this Land! I write unto you all: Consider of it. And let those men be branded to all posterity, who will take or receive no security, but what is beyond all history or example, [as this truly is] nay beyond all reason, and thereby render themselves the progeny of Cain himself▪ I say once more, Consider of it. To conclude, if speaking truth to his Majesty, to the Parliament no lye, to the Synod orthodox Divinity, to the Army what Christ him∣self preached: to the City, what their own Consciences know to be true; and to [you] all the Subjects of the whole Kingdom of England (I except none) what you are, most of you, highly guilty of, even by the very Word of God; I say, if This be Treason, I am a Traytor, a Traytor against all, and let me suffer for it; but let my Tryal be at the Judgment-seat of Love, at the Bar of the New Testament, my Saviour my Judg, the Apostles my Jury, and then proceed, I fear not: You have all of you (King, Priests and People) pursued your own ends, your Self-Interests, and you must cast away your Babylonish gar∣ment and wedg of gold; or God, who can do it, will spue you all out, and give this Land to a more deserving People; [Not the Scots or Irish; alas! their Graves must be digg'd before your Funeral be fully solemnized,] or perhaps to some of your poor innocent babes, who are not old, like you, in sins and iniquities; they may perhaps partake of that blessed Peace, you would, but cannot have, so long as you wilfully resist God in your abominable sins of Malice, Envy, Re∣venge, Hatred, Blood-thirstiness, Covetousness, and that which is the Center of all, and contains all the mischief that is, Self-Interest: the only venom that hath of late years poysoned this goodly and once flourishing Kingdom. Christ denyed himself, who should not? The King denies himself, and you will not. Oh beloved Countrymen (I speak to the whole Kingdom, I wish every Ear heard me,) look your selves in this glass that I have here presented you with: it is not of so pure a chrystal as it might have been made, but it will shew you plainly the ugliness of your paint∣ed holiness, and rotten-heartedness to God, your King and fellow-Sub∣jects:
that so by a true Repentance [forsaking the evil and doing the good] you may come to a sight of your grievous sins, of Gods infinite Mercy, of your Kings abundant Love, and your own future happiness, which is uncessantly prayed for at the hand of God, by The greatest Sinner of you all, yet ready to sacrifice himself for a safe and wel∣grounded PEACE, Richard Farrar. Errata. Page 6. line 7. read fought for sought. Pag. 29. l. 36. read that lives. FINIS.
