G1090 12253173 57184
IMPRIMATUR, Geo. Hooper, Rmo Dno Arch. Cant. à Sacris Domesticis. 20. Dec. 1675. ex Aedib. Lambeth.
THE Colledge of Physicians VINDICATED, And the true State of PHYSICK In this Nation Faithfully represented: In Answer to a scandalous Pamphlet, ENTITULED, The CORNER STONE, &c. By Charles Goodall, Dr. of Physick. LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the Bishops head, in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1676.
TO The Right Honourable Sir FRANCIS NORTH Lord Chief Justice OF THE COMMON PLEAS. My LORD, THE address of this short discourse to your Lordship, hath a dou∣ble encouragement; the greatness of the Cause in which it engageth, and the confidence it hath of your Honours Patronage; I mean not, my Lord, so much
from any interest of the Writer, as of the Cause; which concern∣eth no less than the Rights and Priviledges of one of the learnedst Societies in the world. I know your Lordship too well, to think the scale of Justice (when in your hand) capable of being weighed down by favour or affection, be the occasion of it never so moving; nor indeed doth our Cause want it: yet if strictness of Integrity could be any wayes bowed in your Lordship, it would be in regard to Learning and the support of a noble and ingenuous Art, against the barbarous attempts of rude and illiterate Impostors. The Colledge of Physicians have long
since received particular marks of your Lordships favour; which they owe to the great intimacy your Lordship hath had with Nature her self; and the con∣sequent value you must needs put upon all such, whose Industry and parts have recommended them to her familiarity: Whether the Colledge deserve that character no man better understandeth than your Lordship, to whom few or none of their writings or other transactions are probably unknown. And it is their happiness in this juncture of affairs, where so ma∣ny machinations and contrivances are made against them, that the two Chief Justices of this Land
are Men so abundantly accom∣plished in all Learning, that is necessary to the true Stating of the question; both of You being fit to be made the Oracles of Phi∣losophy, as well as Law; and to give a true estimate of the diffe∣rence between an Academick edu∣cation backed with Experience and Industry in practice; and the impudent pretensions of a few broken Trades-men, &c. I for∣bear worse names to them, though never so deserved, nay bestowed upon each other in their own writings; because of the reve∣rence I bear your Lordship, whose ears are not fit to be abused with such language, and whose
inclinations lead you to attend to things and not to persons; con∣sidering not the interest of any particular Man or Society, but of the Nation, which very much depends upon the issue of the con∣troversie managed in this Treatise, by, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and devoted Servant, Charles Goodall.
READER, THE Treatise against which I write, is so mean in it self, that the very answering of it, needeth an Apolo∣gy; for no wise man is in danger of being taken with so scurrilous a Pamphlet, or can think the interest of the Colledge fit to be put in the scale with it; But the greatest part of the world is not wise, and Phy∣sick is so abstruse, as to be above the capa∣city and judgment of the Vulgar, and there∣fore liable to the misrepresentation of Knaves; who with small colour of reason and great clamour, can breed in the common people what esteem of it they please. I have therefore thought it necessary to undeceive the ordinary Readers of that Pamphlet, by giving them as plain an ex∣plication as I could of the State of the
Question; which since it is of a mixt nature, partly relating to the Legality of the Colledges Jurisdiction, and partly to the usefulness or hurtfulness of that power, I have been forced to adventure upon the exercise of more Faculties than One, and to meddle in matters of Law as well as Physick. If I have in the former transgressed the limits of my Profession. I have but fol∣lowed my Adversary, who did it before me; Not, that I expect not, a far better and sounder defence to be made at the Bar, when the Cause is pleaded by men learn∣ed in the Law; But because something was necessary to be said to the People, whose prejudice against the Colledge, as it is easily raised by so weak an accusation as that of my Adversaries; so it will, I doubt not, as easily be taken away, by a plain Narrative of those Laws and Statutes by which the Colledge is firmly established and governed, and of which their leisure or education would not permit them otherwise to take notice.
The later part was more within my Sphere, and therefore more freely handled; yet that also required such plainness and conciseness, as was requisite to inform the Reader without tiring of him; But as short as it is, I hope it is sufficient to make all men understand the real advantages of a regular institution of Methodical practice, and the danger of Em∣pirical administrations. Reader, I will detain thee no longer, but remit thee to the Book it self. Farewel, and be Candid.
THE Colledge of Physicians VINDICATED, AND The True State of PHYSICK in this Nation faithfully represented. ALthough it hath not yet been my happiness to be a Member of the Learned Society of Physicians in London, yet I profess my self an honourer of them, and cannot without indignation be∣hold men of so great worth and abilities in their Faculty, so barbarously assaulted by a wretched combination of ignorant and im∣pudent Empiricks, who being united into a confederacy and fortified by a common stock, dare now attack the Law as well as the Col∣ledge; and purchase from hirelings fit for such turns the suggestion of whatever tricks and mean arts are devisable to elude either the proceedings of Courts, or the Statutes themselves, which the prudence of our
Law-givers have provided in this case. By this means that security, which was there∣by intended for the lives and healths of the Inhabitants of this Nation is endangered, and one of the noblest Professions in the world exposed to the contempt of the vul∣gar; who not being competent Judges of the justice or merits of any cause, much less of one of so high an importance, are notwithstanding most forward in their cen∣sures; and whilst they are entertained with the ridicule of the subject, by degrees do suffer themselves to be cheated into a false opinion. It is therefore high time to undeceive them, and by detecting the legerdemain of these Juglers to take away the venera∣tion and reverence which ignorance other∣wise produceth in such mean capacities towards men, whom but to understand is sufficient to render contemptible. I have for this purpose pitched upon a Pamphlet, entituled, A Corner stone, &c. which whe∣ther written by the Club of Mountebanks, by whom the pretended Author is said to be maintain'd in his Law-suit, or whether the fruit of one mans labour, I know not; but I find it containeth the substance of what all of them have hitherto said against
the Colledge. An Answer therefore to this, may save us the trouble of writing any more upon this Subject; nor need that An∣swer be prolix, if we consider all their ob∣jections are reducible to these three follow∣ing Questions. 1. Whether the Colledge of Physicians be established by Act of Parliament? 2. Whether the proceedings of the Col∣ledge against Empiricks and unlicenced persons be oppressive? 3. Whether Physicians educated in Uni∣versities, and particularly the Colledge of Physicians in London, have been the great hinderers of the Art of Physick, and more especially that of Chymistry?
CHAP. I. FOr the clearing of the first you must know, that in 3 H. 8. the King and Parliament taking into serious con∣sideration the great injury that was done to his Liege people by a great multitude of ignorant persons, as, Smiths, Weavers, Women, &c. who boldly took upon them to practise the noble Science of Physick to the high displeasure of God, great infamy of the Faculty, and de∣struction of many of his Subjects, as the Act more at large expresseth: it was therefore by the Authority of that Parliament en∣acted, That no person should practise Physick, except he were first examined, approved and admitted by the Bishop of London or Dean of Pauls, calling to him or them four Doctors of Physick, &c. This Act continued in force till the 14th and 15th of the same Kings Reign, at which time a Charter that had been granted in the 10th year of the same by the intercession of Cardinal Woolsey and six eminent Physicians, three of which be∣longed to the King's own person (wherein a perpetual Colledge of Physicians was erected and granted in London, and within seven miles of the same, with several privi∣ledges therein specified) was confirmed by
Act of Parliament; in which Act it was ordained, established and enacted, That the said Corporation of the said Commonalty and Fellowship of the Faculty of Physick aforesaid, and all and every Grant and Article and other thing contained and specified in the said Letters Patents, be approved, granted, ratified and confirmed in this present Parliament, and clearly authorised and admit∣ted by the same, good lawful and available to the said Body Corporate and their Successors for ever, in as ample and large manner as may be taken, thought & construed by the same. Now if you please to compare this Act with the Colledge Charter, which is part of the Act it self embodied in it, you will find that all the priviledges therein contained were granted them; Notwithstanding any precedent Statute, Ordinance, Act or proviso in any Act formerly made, pub∣lished or ordained to the contrary: One of which priviledges were as the Patent expresseth it, to have super-visum & scruti∣nium, correctionem & gubernationem omnium & singulorum dictae Civitatis Medicorum uten∣tium Facultate Medicinae in eadem civitate, ac aliorum Medicorum forinsecorum quorum∣cunque facultatem illam Medicinae aliquo modo frequentantium & utentium infra eandem Ci∣vitatem
& suburbia ejusdem sive intra septem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem civitatis, &c. i. e. The oversight and search, correction and go∣vernment of all and every Physician of the said City practising Physick therein; and of all others using the said Faculty of Physick within the said City or Suburbs thereof, or within seven miles of the same. And in ano∣ther part of this Patent 'tis so clear and evi∣dent that the sole power of Licensing Phy∣sicians doth belong to the Colledge, that it plainly tells you in the following words; Concessimus Praesidenti & Collegio seu Commu∣nitati & Successoribus suis, quod Nemo in dictâ civitate aut yer 7. milliaria in circuitu ejusdem exerceat dictam facultatem, nisi ad hoc per dictum Praesidentem & Communitatem, seu Successores ejus admissus sit per ejusdem Praesi∣dentis & Collegii literas Sigillo suo communi sigillatas sub poena centum solidorum pro quoli∣bet mense. i. e. We grant to the President and Colledge or Commonalty and their Successors, that none shall practise Physick in London or within seven miles of the same, unless he be first admitted by the said President and Colledge or their Successors, and obtain their Licence signed with their common Seal, in pain of for∣feiting for every month five pounds. Now let any judicious person compare these two
passages with the Statute made in 3 H. 8. before-mentioned, and I doubt not but he may be fully satisfied that the power which was granted to the Bishops by that Statute was now invested in the Colledge by the 14th and 15th of the same Kings Reign: for 'tis evident that the word Nemo in the Patent is a general Negative, and ex∣cludes all from practising, but such as have procur'd the Colledge Licence. But notwithstanding this plain evidence Mr. Adrian Huyberts desires leave to produce certain circumstances (as he terms them) whereby it may appear questionable whether ever any such Law as that in the 14th and 15th of H. 8. was passed in due form; the reason he urgeth being this; that it doth not appear by any Record that the Royal Assent was given to it, there being neither at top nor bottom of it to be seen Le Roy le veult, the only Signature whereby any thing is known to be a Law. To this I reply, that I very much que∣stion whether ever Mr. H. took the pains to search the Records of the Tower; if he did not, as I have some reason inclining me to believe; I must crave leave to tell him and that by more weighty circumstances than he hath produc'd to the contrary, that
the ipse dixit of his unanswerable Author will pass for an Oracle with none but the Empiricks, for doubtless no rational man can imagine 1. That a Prince so sensible of the great mischief redounding to the Nation by this Mechanical Tribe, and of the great felicity which might be obtained for the publick by establishing a Colledge of grave and learned Physicians, who should admit none to the practice of that noble Science with∣out their approbation; should grant a Char∣ter to them by the special request of persons so often employed about his Royal Person, and so much interested in Him; and yet should take no care of confirming this Pa∣tent by Act of Parliament, when as our Adversaries confess it was offer'd to Him. 2. 'Tis as difficult to imagine that the same Colledge of Physicians in the same Kings Reign, and that but 17. years after, should have several other priviledges gran∣ted them by Act of Parliament (as their not keeping watch or ward, bearing offices, &c.) and that by the name of the President of the Corporation of the Commonalty and Fellow∣ship of the Science and Faculty of Physick in the City of London, and the Commons of the Fel∣lows of the same, &c. if they had not had their
Charter confirm'd by the foremention'd Act. 3. 'Tis yet a greater difficulty to imagine that a Parliament holden in the first of Queen Mary, which was not above 28. or 30. years after the Collegiate Statute was made, should pass another Act in confirma∣tion of this, only on a presumptive evi∣dence that there had been such a One made, when reallyit never had been so in rerum na∣turâ; and that this they did, is very evident; which making much to our purpose, and likewise to the abrogating of the Act made in 3 H. 8. I shall take the pains of transcribing. Whereas in the Parliament holden at Lon∣don on the 15th day of April, in the 14th year of the Reign of our late Soveraign King Hen∣ry the VIIIth and from thence adjourned to Westminster the last day of July in the 15th year of the Reign of the same King, and there holden, It was enacted, That a certain grant by Letters Patents of incorporation made and granted by our said late King, to the Physicians of London, and all Clauses and Articles contain∣ed in the same Grant should be approved, granted, ratified and confirmed by the same Parliament. For the consideration whereof be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parlia∣ment, That the said Statute or Act of Parliament, with every Article and
Clause therein contained, shall from henceforth stand and continue still in full strength, force and effect, any Act, Statute, Law, Custom, or any other thing made, had, or used to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. 4. 'Tis certain that this Act of Parlia∣ment hath been owned as such by all the grave Judges and Lawyers of this Land upon every Trial betwixt the Colledge and the Empiricks. And though in Dr. Bon∣hams Case the Colledge was overthrown, yet it was not for that the Judges question'd the legality of the Act of the 14th and 15th of H. 8. for the Lord Chief Justice Cook, Justice Warburton and Justice Daniel of the Common Pleas Bench, were so far from doubting the Authority of that Act, that they plainly tell us in that very Case, that the Censors had their Authority by Letters Patents & Act of Parliament, which are high matters of Record: and in the 4th of King James there was a recovery upon this Statute against one Gardener; and in the 7th of King Charles the First, there was an∣other recovery in the Common Pleas against one Butler; and in the 8th of the same Kings Reign a Writ of Error was brought in the King-Bench, and there Judg∣ment
affirmed, both Courts owning the Statute of the 14th and 15th of H. 8. where the Colledg Charter was confirmed; and in 1651. there was another recovery in the Common Pleas upon the same Statute against Trigge. And though Mr. H. tell us of one single Judge that would not ad∣mit of the Colledge Patent as established by Act of Parliament in the time of the late Usurper (who could scarcely have af∣fection for a Society of men established by Regal power, of whom several had expres∣sed so great Loyalty to their Soveraign) yet very prudently he omits his reasons, lest we should observe so much of partiality if not bribery in him, that it might justly be suspected that Interest not Judgment obliged him to such an Opinion: but allow Mr. H. what he desires from this instance, doth he seriously think that this is as authentick as the Judgment of all the Judges of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, (which I just now intimated) and the High Court of Parliament in the First of Queen Mary? I am apt to believe he cannot; however if he doth, I am sure he will scarcely per∣swade any other into such an opinion, un∣less it be those of his own Association, who would gladly have it so.
But to give the Gentleman all the advan∣tage he can desire to his circumstantial Argument, that there is not to be seen on the top or bottom of this Roll the Kings Royal Assent, I make a question whether this will carry his Cause; because the Kings Signa∣ture is sometimes endors'd on the back side of the Roll; and if he did really put him∣self to the trouble of searching, I wish he would have informed us whether he found this Roy le veult endors'd upon every single Roll of the other 13. Statutes made in the same Session; for 'tis a little odd to conceive that one poor single Statute in the same Sessi∣on, where 14 were passed, and that not the first or last, but the 5. in order, should be solely question'd; especially seeing Mr. Pulton in the preamble before those Statutes assures us that the King by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons assembled, had ordained, made and enacted certain Statutes and Ordinances in manner and form following, of which number this is One. Mr. H's second circumstance to prove that the Collegiate Patent was never esta∣blished by Act of Parliament, is this; be∣cause he saith, that it doth militate against the Spirit of an English Parliament, the great Sanctuary of publick freedom.
To this I need return no other Answer, but only desire Mr. H. to read over the foremention'd Statutes of 14 and 32 H. 8. and 1 Mar. and then tell me whether the Parliaments of England did not judge without any breach of Magna Charta, that learned and experienc'd men were the fittest to pass a judgment of those brought up in their own profession: and doubtless had Mr. H. understood the nature of humane Societies, and the necessity of Laws for their government, he would not have be∣trayed his weakness and ignorance so much as he hath done in this Argument. In the same page he tells us, that it might be an easie matter to impose upon a Printer a Copy of a Bill instead of a Statute, especially about matters of Physick, whose concerns in those dayes were but in few hands; and the Professors very inconsiderable persons; and that after it had been once printed for a Law, how easie was it for the Lawyers unawares to accept it, and Mr. Pulton to reprint it with∣out further enquiry? To these surmises, I answer, that Mr. H. would have done well to have told us the men that durst impose upon a Printer a Co∣py of a Bill instead of a Statute; or given us an instance of a Printer that was ever
so audacious or adventurous to do it; if he cannot, 'tis strange that he should trouble the world with such idle and wild supposals, that never had any better foundation than in an ill-contriv'd fiction; which doubtless can never obtain greater credit with any judicious man, seeing that all Bills which pass both Houses of Parliament are fairly engrossed and offer'd to the King to Sign, which being done, Copies of those Bills are taken out by the Clerk of the Par∣liament, who diligently and faithfully ex∣amines them with the Printer by the ori∣ginal Records; and then are the Copies of them committed to the Press. Now by this conjecture of Mr. H. both the Clerk of the Parliament and the Printer, or one at least of them, must needs be impos'd upon (as he terms it) But how improbable this is, let any one consider seeing the apparent danger that must needs ensue; it being the custom of Parliament to print all their Acts after every Session, that so all the subjects might understand their duty and the rule they have to steer their actions by; and no doubt but there were some Judges in that Session in the House of Lords, and Lawyers in the House of Commons, who had the Copies of those Acts when printed by them, and
would soon have taken notice of an affront of so high a nature as this, put upon the King and both Houses of Parliament: and though I must confess that a Printer may commit an Erratum in the printing of an Act, which occasions the Judges many times to search the Records of the Tower, as being their only authentick evidence to decide a disputable case; yet surely no pre∣sident can ever be produc'd of a Bill that was printed for an Act, and own'd for such by a Parliament in the same Kings Reign, and confirmed by another about 28. years after, and allowed as such in several Trials by the Judges of both Benches; when in truth it was but a cheat impos'd upon them; especially seeing it was an Act of that na∣ture, which was both publick and penal, and might probably have trials upon it the Term after it was passed, there being at that time so many Aggressors thereof. And as for what Mr. H. tells us as to the state of Physick in those dayes, that it was but in few hands, and those inconsiderable persons. 'Tis manifestly false; for 'tis evident that there was then a great number of the predecessors of Mr. H's society swarming in the Nation, which occasioned that Act
to be made in 3 H. 8. as the preamble tells you; but then we will grant him that they were persons as inconsiderable as the Coblers, Weavers and Trumpe∣ters of our own dayes, that practise phy∣sick to as good purpose as the old Women, Smiths, and other Mechanicks then did; who as that Act specifieth, had no insight into physick nor into any other kind of learning, some of them being so ignorant as they could not read. (a fair description of great part of the Empiricks of our time) But if Mr. H. intended by this expression those that were the true Professors of physick in that age, they were far from inconsiderable persons, as witness Doctor Linacre, Cham∣bre, de Victoria, Halsewell, Frances, Yaxeley, &c. the first of which is particularly mention'd in the Chronicle of that Kings Reign amongst the great men of note of that time. And as for what he saith of Mr. Pultons reprinting this Statute without further en∣quiry, 'Tis such a rude and uncharitable reflexi∣on upon so industrious and worthy a person, that 'tis necessary to acquaint the world with what account that excellent Author hath given of his great faithfulness and in∣dustry
in this undertaking; his words are these; with as great care and industry as I could use, so many of the old Statutes hereto∣fore printed in the English tongue and which are the foundation of proceedings both legal and judicial, have been by me truly and sincerely examin'd by the original Records thereof; and the residue with the Register of Writs being the most ancient book of the Law; the old and new Natura Brevium, the books of Entries, the books of Years and Terms in the Law; the best approved and printed books, and by all such other circumstances as might best give probabi∣lity of truth to the learned. Now certainly Mr. H. if Mr. Pulton was willing to take such vast pains to examine the old Statutes by the Records of the Tower, and the va∣riety of books he here mentions, that full satisfaction might be given to all inquisitive men; he would not without further inquiry print a Bill for a Statute, especially seeing that he might with much more ease satisfie himself and others of the truth of this Sta∣tute, than of those old Satutes he mentions. And though Mr. H. tells us that after this Bill (as he calls it) had been once printed for a Statute, it was an easie matter for the Lawyers unawares to accept it;
To this I answer, that if it were so easie for the Lawyers unawares to accept of a Bill for a Statute; yet methinks the Parliaments of England should not so readily accept it; nor yet the grave Judges and Serjeants of the Law, whose proper study and employ∣ment is to search the Records of the Tower and Statutes of Parliament; I confess I am therefore so charitable to think that he could not entertain such dishonourable thoughts of those so grave and judicious of that Facul∣ty; but must rather intend by that saucy expression the younger and less experienc'd Wits of the Law; but then one would ad∣mire, that they should not have been so hap∣py in their discoveries for near 150 years, as the Castle-Cole Philosophers of our age pretend to be; and truly of all the discove∣ries they have made, since they obtain'd Certificates of their abilities to practise physick, and have converted that noble Art into a contemptible trade, this may bear away the Bell; it being indeed their true Corner-stone, for erecting a new Colledge of Mounte∣banks and petty-Chapmen: but when all is done, I am apt to believe that this Gentle∣man and the rest of his society will find the Lawyers more wary men than they are aware of; and truly it behoves them to
be so, when they are to deal with men of such reaching heads, beyond all of their own faculty, and have made greater discoveries in the Lawyers profession, than any of them can pretend to, though they could have studied the Law from the 15 of H. 8. to the 27 of C. 2. The third circumstance that gives Mr. H. cause to believe the forementioned Act to be no Statute, is this; that in 3 H. 8. there was a Statute that lodged the power of licensing persons in the hands of the Bishop of London, or Dean of Pauls; which as he saith, p. 13. was never repealed by any succeeding Law. To this I need return little other answer, but only desire M. H. to peruse the abroga∣tion of that Statute, in 14 & 15 H. 8. com∣par'd with the latter part of the Letters Pa∣tent, granted by King Henry in the 10 of his Reign; and the First of Queen Mary 9. with those four circumstances mention'd p. 8—10 to which give me leave to add a fifth, it being very pertinent to our present purpose; and that is, the Statute made in 32 H. 8. where the Chirurgeons of London were likewise made a Body Corporate, and had the search, oversight, punishment and cor∣rection of offences committed against Barbery and Surgery. Now let this Statute be com∣par'd
with that made in 3 H. 8. and you will find that all Chirurgeons as well as Physicians were exempted by one and the same Statute from exercising their Art, except they were first examined, approved and admitted by the Bishop of London or Dean of Pauls, upon pain of forfeiting five pounds for every moneth. Now is it probable that the King and Parliament should abrogate the latter part of this Act for the Chirurge∣ons and Barbers in London, and that as far as I can observe unrequested; and yet the former part of that very same Act should still remain in force against the Physicians; when the reason of both was but one and the same? which you may read in the be∣ginning of that Act, as follows, for asmuch as the Science and cunning of Physick and Chirur∣gery is dayly within this Realm exercised by a great multitude of ignorant persons, therefore it was enacted that no Physician or Chirurgeon should practise Physick or Chirurgery without the Bishops Licence, &c. Now I wish that Mr. H. would give us some instances of Chirurgeons (since this Charter of theirs) that have taken Licences of the Bishop, or Dean of Pauls, refusing obedience to their own Cor∣poration, and pleading the Act of 3 H. 8. which they may as justifiably and legally
do, as any that practise Physick by the Bi∣shops Licences, and refuse submission to Col∣legiate establishments; but I am apt to be∣lieve he cannot, and then I will leave it to the judgment of any sober man whether Mr. H. hath not more rudely treated the Faculty of Physick than any other professi∣on; allowing Chirurgeons and Barbers a greater priviledge, than he would Physi∣cians; although a man would have thought that his having been bred an Apothecary, should have taught him better manners to∣wards his Masters; but alas! poor man, he hath been so long vers'd in the Quacking profession, that as far as I can learn by the character he hath given of himself, 'tis a Chronical distemper; so that doubtless had he consulted the Lawyers about justifying his practice against the Colledge, they would rather have advised him to plead prescripti∣on for his doing so, than the abrogated Sta∣tute of 3 H. 8. I wish therefore that the good man would be so kind to himself as se∣riously to read over the Statutes I have men∣tion'd, and consider of the circumstances I have propos'd against his, to prove that the Collegiate Charter is established by Act of Parliament; and then I doubt not but he will leave discoursing so impertinently and
like an Apothecary; if not, I know not what can better help him out of this dan∣gerous malady of his, than a dose of his own Coelestial Liquor, which (as he saith) is suited to all palates and constitutions. But to proceed and give the Gentleman all the scope I can, let me tell him, that in his be∣loved Statute, though the power of licen∣sing Physicians in London was invested in the Bishops hands; yet that of examina∣tion was lodg'd in the Physicians, else 'tis difficult to give a satisfactory reason why the Bishop or Dean are obliged to call to him or them four Doctors of Physick, unless it were upon the forementioned account; which having been (I conceive) seldom or never observed of late, 'tis a question to me, whether any of the Licences given without this material clause be current in Law, if this beloved Act of his were now in full force and power; seeing 'tis plain that in Doctor Bonham's Case the Justices of the Common Pleas gave it against the Col∣ledge for their not pursuing their power given them by the Statute. And then 'tis probable that Mr. H. and most of his Tribe might find it a greater trouble to obtain their Licences, than yet they have done; and would then as little approve of the Bi∣shops
as they do of the Physicians Statute; for 'tis not that they respect one more than the other (they being as truly State-Fana∣ticks as any can be term'd Ecclesiastick ones) but that they hope their Certificates may pass for examination, a test they more hate than Physicians themselves. But how∣ever it be, I am sure it is scarce worth Mr. H's so zealous contending for this Act, seeing that in all points it suits not with his apprehension, that Certificates of the integrity of mens lives, and good success in pra∣ctice are the surest evidence of a mans learn∣ing and knowledge proper for his Faculty; the Act well fore-seeing that the greatest number of Smiths, old Women, and Wea∣vers, might readily procure those testimo∣nials of their ability to practise; and there∣fore as the preamble of that Act tells us, that forasmuch as to the Science of Physick there is required both great learning and ripe experience; it hath made provision of a much better test of mens abilities in that profession, viz. Such as have been edu∣cated in the same Faculty, and by their great learning and experience have arri∣ved to some perfection in that noble and honourable Art.
The fourth Circumstance Mr. H. hath mention'd to prove the Collegiate Statute not confirmed by Act of Parliament, abounds with such manifest contradictions that it needeth not any other confutation, but barely its reading over, which the Reader may find in the 14 pag. of his book.
CHAP. II. SECT. 1. The Second question was this; Whether the proceedings of the Colledge against Em∣piricks and unlicensed persons be oppressive? TO the clearing of this question I have done much already in proving that the Colledge hath been esta∣blished by 3 Acts of Parliament, own'd as such by all the grave Judges and Lawyers of the Kingdom, and therefore acting by those Statute Laws that were made, rati∣fied and confirmed by England's Sovereigns and Parliaments, 'tis very rude if not au∣dacious to term their proceedings according to these Laws, oppression and persecution; as Mr. H. hath done in the title of his book, and in the first page thereof. I shall therefore, for the clearing of this Question, and the full satisfaction of all in∣genious and inquisitive persons, give them
a true and faithful account of the excellent government of this learned Society. After that King Henry the VIII. had constituted a Colledge of Physicians, and granted them power of chusing a President, Elects and Censors; and invested them with power of making Statutes and Ordinances pro salubri gubernatione, super-visu & correcti∣one Collegii & omnium hominum eandem fa∣cultatem in dicta civitate seu per septem millia∣ria exercentium, i. e. for the safe or wholsom government, oversight and correction of the Colledge, and of all men practising Physick in the said City or within seven miles of the same. They accordingly made these follow∣ing Statutes. And first, as to the Electors in the Colledge, Who were by the Letters Patent in num∣ber six, but by the Statute of the 14 & 15 H. 8. were encreased to eight; which number have been ever since continued (and by the by may afford us another argu∣ment of the legality of that Statute) and have the sole power of choosing the Presi∣dent and succeeding Elects; yet this power of theirs is so far from an arbitrary one, that they are by Statutes of their own obliged
to chuse none into that order, but such, Qui gravitate, literis, moribus & aetate caeteris praefulgeant, Doctoratus que gradu insigniantur, & natione sunt Angli, who for gravity, learn∣ing, good behaviour and age do excel the rest, and have taken their Degrees of Doctor, and are English men by birth. And though for∣merly in publick Universities, and when they were admitted into the Colledge, they had given so full and ample testimonies of their great knowledge and experience in their Art; yet notwithstanding are they obliged by Statutes of their own, that whoever is chosen as an Elector shall be again examin'd by the rest; and as if that examination were not a sufficient testimony of their fitness for so great an Office; they do dare fidem that they will give their consent and suffrage to the choice of none as President or Elector, nisi qui gravitatem, eruditionem, mores in∣tegros, aetatem decentem & sincerum animum en rem publicam, & alacritatem ad obeund officia cognita & perspecta habuerit, but he, of whose gravity, learning, competent age, sin∣cere affection to the publick good, and readiness to undergo all Offices, they are sufficiently satisfied.
As to the President: He is yearly chosen out of one of the Elects, and such a person, quem caeteri Electores praesentes aut plurimi pro temporis, rei & personae ratione idoneum judicaverint: whom, either all or the major part of the E∣lectors present shall think most fit for that of∣fice, as to his person and the circumstances of the present time and occasions of the Colledge. His power is great as being the principal Minister of managing the publick and pri∣vate affairs of the Colledge; yet not ex∣travagant or unlimited; he having no power of making or abrogating Laws without the consent and approbation of the rest; and is farther under the obligation of a solemn promise, ut honor Collegii asser∣vetur, statuta ejusdem sine fraude obser∣ventur, omniáque acturum in salutem rei∣publicae. That the honour of the Colledge shall be preserved, the Statutes observed without collusion, and that in all transactions he will have an eye to the good of the Common-wealth.
As to the Censors, They are yearly chosen by the President and major part of the Colledge, being four in number, and those grave and learned men: their Office is to take cognizance of all that practise Physick within London and seven miles of the same, sive nostrates fue∣rint, sive advenae, eosque examinare, cor∣rigere, gubernare, & lite (si opus sit) unà eum Praeside & Thesaurario persequi, eorum medendi rationes inquirere, &c. whether they be English or strangers, and to examine, cor∣rect, govern, and with the assistance of the President and Treasurer to prosecute them at Law, if there be occasion; and to enquire into the manner of their practice, &c. And that they may perform this their Office with the greater faithfulness, they are un∣der the obligation of a solemn Oath, which seeing it may give great satisfaction to all rational and inquisitive persons, how much it may tend to the encouragement of learn∣ing and industry, and the advancement of publick good, I have taken leave to ac∣quaint them with. Jurabunt coram Praesi∣de, se neminem in Collegium admittendum de∣eturos nisi quem, omni seposito affectu, judica∣verint
& literis & moribus idoneum; nec pre∣tio, prece vel gratiâ quenquam hominem ap∣probaturos, &c. They shall swear before the President, that they will admit no man into the Colledge, but whom (laying aside all affecti∣on) they shall judge worthy, by reason of his learning and good manners; neither shall they be drawn to the approbation of any man by re∣ward, entreaty or favour. As to the Candidates of the Colledge (out of which number the Fellows of that Honour∣able Society are chosen) and their Examina∣tion, in order to their admission: None is to be admitted a Candidate, qui non sit in medicinâ Doctor, & natione Bri∣tannus, & medicinam exercuerit per quadrien∣nium, Who is not Doctor in Physick, and an English-man by birth, and hath practised Physick four years. And before this admis∣sion every one whether Candidate or Licen∣tiate is to be thrice examin'd by the President and four Censors of their abilities for the practice of Physick; they having well ob∣served, quòd nullo modo (nisi examinatione prius habitâ) nobis constare possit, quàm sit quilibet idoneus, ut secundum regni leges ad medicinae praxin admittatur, that it cannot ap∣pear
to them by any other means but by exami∣nation, how fit any one is to be admitted, ac∣cording to the Laws of the Kingdom, to the practice of Physick. Their First Examination Is to enquire of their knowledge in the rudiments of Physick, viz. in the Physio∣logical and Anatomical part thereof; which though contemn'd by the ignorant Empi∣ricks of our dayes; yet doubtless will ne∣ver be so by the learned and inquisitive Age we live in, and was so far from being despised in former, that the great Oracle of the Law, the Lord Chief Justice Cook in Dr. Bonhams Case, hath this very expressi∣on; oportet Medicum esse Philosophum; ubi enim Philosophus desinit, Medicus incipit. It behoves a Physician to be a Philosopher; for where the Philosopher ends the Physician be∣gins. Their Second Examination Is in the Pathological part of Physick, where there is a diligent enquiry into the causes, differences, symptoms and signs of Diseases; that so their Nature or Essence
may more easily be discover'd; likewise the great doctrine of Fevers (which di∣stemper puts a period to the lives of most men) is enquir'd into, and many other questions propos'd relating to Pulses, Urines, &c. coincident with these. Their Third Examination Comprehends the method of cure and diae∣tetick part of Physick, especially what relates to the government of Sick and languishing Patients in acute distempers; where are likewise propounded several material que∣stions of a different nature from the former; as what cautions are to be observed in pur∣ging and bleeding? what time of the year and disease they may with the greatest ad∣vantage be made use of? in what distem∣pers? in what persons? &c. which que∣stions if seriously ponder'd by any judicious person, he will readily grant us his suffrage to the usefulness of such an examination, which tends so much to the making men fit to cure their Patients diseases citò, tutò, & jucundè. But here their enquiry doth not rest, they knowing very well the great injury that may be done to the publick by Vomits or Opiates unduely administred (of
which I shall acquaint the world when I come to treat of Chymistry.) and therefore they are diligent to examine the kinds, quantity, use and danger of them, likewise the manner of their operation upon humane bodies; which being throughly and duly understood, they may be tools of excellent use in a wise mans hands. When these Examinations are thus passed, they are obliged to a diligent observation of the Statutes of the Colledge, and never to exhibite or teach any noxious or venenate Medicines, which may occasion miscar∣riage, or tend to the detriment or injury of any person, &c. As to Licentiates, Their Examination is much of the same nature with the Candidates, yet the reason of not receiving them into the government of the Colledge is, as the Statutes mention, Quoniam complures in hâc civitate medici∣nam faciunt, quos inidoneos omnino censemus ut in numerum Sociorum aut Candidatorum adoptentur; vel natione non sint Britanni, vel Doctoratûs gradum non adepti fuerint, vel non satis docti, aut aetate & gravitate provecti fuerint, vel alias consimiles ob causas; & ta∣men
reipublicae inservire & saluti hominum prodesse possunt, saltem in Nonnullis curationi∣bus; ideo de his ordinamus & statuimus ut post examinationes debitas & approbationem Praesi∣dis & Censorum permittantur ad praxin. Be∣cause many practise Physick in this City, whom we think altogether unfit to be admitted into the number of Fellows or Candidates, as being not English-men by birth, or not having taken the degree of Doctor, or not sufficiently learned, or not of a competent age or gravity, or for other such like causes; yet seeing they may be ser∣viccable to the Common-wealth, and procure the health of men, at least in some Cures; we do therefore ordain and appoint that after due examination and approbation of the President and Censors they be permitted to practise. Yet let me acquaint you by the by, that amongst the number of Licentiates that have been admitted by the Colledge, there have been men of great reputation and eminency both for their learning and great success in practice, as well as improvements in Physick: as witness the famous Doctor Wedderburn, Dr. Nurse, Dr. Sydenham; with many other excellent persons of that Profession. And if you please to compare the just before∣mention'd Statute with that made in relati∣on to Candidates, who took their degrees
in foreign Universities, and are therefore obliged to incorporate in one of our own, before they be admitted into the Colledge; you may observe the Colledge, like true∣born English-men, so much concerning themselves for the welfare and honour of their own Countrey, and reputation of the two famous Universities of this Land; that their being foreigners by birth, or non-incor∣porating into one of our own Academies, (though degrees have been taken in others) is a sufficient bar to their being admitted as Candidates; yet not an exclusion of them, from using their Talents of learning and parts for the publick good and interest of the Kings subjects; and therefore are they readily admitted to a share of several of the priviledges of the Colledge, though not to the government thereof. This I hope will encourage several learned and ingenious Physicians to enter themselves as Permissi into this Honourable Society, seeing they have debarred themselves of coming in as Candidates, by reason of their Educa∣tion and taking their Degrees abroad; considering how much it may conduce both to their own honour, and the publick good of the Common-wealth, that no intestine divisions or unhappy factions should be con∣tinued
amongst learned and ingenious men of the same Faculty. As to Empiricks, Though then professed Adversaries, yet their proceedings against them are managed with that prudence and moderation, that they are rather to be commended than cen∣sur'd: they first giving order to their Bea∣dle to acquaint them that they abstain from practice, untill they have passed the approbation of the Colledge, and according∣ly do appoint a particular day and hour for that purpose; to which if they refuse sub∣mission, and do contemn the power and order of the Colledge, then are they ac∣cording to the Statute Laws of the King∣dom proceeded against. As to a Monopoly Which Mr. H. and the rest of his Friends have particularly charg'd the Colledge of Physicians with; it argues either gross ig∣norance of the Statutes of that Society, or want of common honesty: the Colledge having made particular provision against Monopolies in the following Statute; Volu∣mus,
ut omnes, quotquot examinatos tam doctri∣nâ quàm moribus idoneos repererint Censores, ad Medicinae praxin admmittant, ne Collegi∣um nostrum Monopolii accusetur. We will, that all, who have been examin'd and found by the Censors of competent learning and good beha∣viour, should be admitted to the practice of Physick, lest our Colledge should be accused of a Monopoly. As to the rest of their Statutes They principally relating to other Offi∣cers in the Colledge, as Treasurers, Register, &c. and to the management of their pri∣vate affairs, it concerns not me here to take notice of them, nor others to be acquainted with them; only give me leave before I conclude this subject, to tell you, that their encouragements to vertue are so great, and punishment of vice so severe, that I could heartily wish that their example might en∣courage other Societies to the making and observing so good and wholsome Laws, which doubtless would prove the happi∣ness of ours as well as succeeding Ages. And that I may not seem to impose upon the world, or astonish them with Hyperbole's, I will acquaint them with one of their own
Statutes in confirmation of this assertion; statuimus & ordinamus, ut siquis criminis ali∣cujus gravioris ac publici reus, aut vitio aliquo infamis fuerit, ablegetur à Collegio, ne si re∣tineremus talem, videremur aut virtutem con∣temnere, aut eodem morbo laborare: We do de∣cree and order, that if any man be guilty of any great or publick crime, or infamous for any vice, he shall be expelled the Colledge, lest if we should retain any such person, we should seem to contemn vertue, or be guilty of the like our selves. And as they are thus severe in the expulsion of those, whose vices have rendred them notorious; so are they no less ready to encourage learned and vertuous men, assuring us that 'tis one of their prin∣cipal endeavours to incorporate those, qui mores honestos & amabiles habent. And to conclude, for their moral conversation to each others, their manner of consultation in reference to their sick and languishing Patients; with their method of composing all differences that may arise amongst them (much excelling that of Pope Adrian's infal∣lible Chair) I cannot but congratulate the happiness of that great and renowned Soci∣ety, and shall heartily wish that all their pro∣ceedings may prove as successful, as I am sure they are just.
But notwithstanding all this clear evi∣dence of the equity of their Statutes and justice of their proceedings, Mr. H. char∣geth them as oppressive and persecuting; which foul charge (one would have ex∣pected) should have been attended with plain and evident demonstration; which occasion'd me to take the pains very seri∣ously and attentively to view and review his Pamphlet; but all was to little pur∣pose; parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus; for at the long run I could only find a few lines bestowed upon the Reader to acquaint him with a suit at Law commenc'd against him by the Colledge of Physicians; Now whether this was Oppression on the Colledges part, or stubbornness and re∣fractoriness on Mr. H. I will leave it to the judgment of all indifferent persons, who understand the nature of Oppression; which I take to be, as it hath relation to this pre∣sent controversie, an unlawful seizing upon the possessions of others, owning and avow∣ing the doing so; and this by pretending a claim to them; corrupting justice by bribes and gifts, or else over-ruling it by Autho∣rity. But how little the Colledge can be charg'd with this so heinous a crime, and how much Mr. H. with refractoriness, will
be very evident to any person, that pleaseth to peruse the former part of this book, where he may find that the power which they exercise towards Mr. H. and the rest of his companions, is established in them by Act of Parliament, and this not by one single Act but by three successively; in which are declared the penalties that would necessarily ensue upon the violation of them, which Mr. H. so little regards that he tells you that he will be in the seent of the Col∣ledge, and his house shall be open to receive Patients, and furnish them with Medicines; and as if this was not sufficient to discover his resolved opposition to the Laws of the Kingdom, and Statutes of the Colledge, he breaks out into opprobrious and vilify∣ing terms, calling them tipling Commit∣tees, book Doctors, masters of the stage, &c. and chargeth them for managing their Art under a great mystery of iniquity: which mystery I have faithfully acquainted the world with in this Chapter, where their most just, excellent and equitable Government is faithfully represented to the view and judgment of all impartial Rea∣ders; and though these men do so often Cant upon their monopolizing of Physick, 'tis so far from truth, that they frankly
offer to receive all to the practice of that Art, who upon examination appear to be sober and learned; and if their accomplish∣ments will not arrive to so mean a cha∣racter as this, yet if it appears that they may any wayes be serviceable to the Com∣mon-wealth, or promote the welfare of mankind, although but in some cures (as is expressed in their Statutes relating to Li∣centiates) they do readily admit them to practise; which I hope doth sufficiently prove that this worthy Society is so tender of the lives and health of the Kings sub∣jects, that they would discourage none from doing them service, who by a fair ex∣amination appear any wayes qualified for such an undertaking, and without this approbation, how any man is able to satis∣fie others of his own Faculty of his abilities for that employment (wherein the preci∣ous lives of so many men, women and children are concern'd) I do not yet under∣stand.
SECT. 2. Physick no Conjectural Art. BUt Mr. H. being wiser than my self, yea than all men but those of his own tribe, hath found out a better and surer test of Physicians abilities, viz. Certificates of their good success in practice, which, he saith, is the surest evidence of a mans learning and knowledge proper for his Faculty; and there∣fore he strenuously endeavours to discharge Physicians of that employment, because Physick is conjectural, having no certain rules to judge by, &c. and therefore Physicians no competent Judges therein. To this I answer, 1. That success in practice is a more un∣certain evidence of a mans learning and knowledge in our Faculty than examina∣tion; unless this success appear by sufficient circumstance to be the effect of judgment and knowledge; and if so, why should any person accomplished with those abilities
refuse to give a satisfactory account of his proficiency in the Medical Science, to those learned Physicians that are by Law deputed for that purpose? And surely less reason we have of questioning the success of that mans endeavours, who prescribes nothing to his Patients but what is consonant to the rules of reason and Art, than an Empirick's that observes neither; though life and health be not thereby obtain'd, which is not to be at∣tributed to the ignorance or mistake of the Physician, but to divine providence inter∣posing therein; whilst the fortuitous pre∣scription of Medicines (though attended with success) is no wayes to be allowed, nor the person to be better esteem'd, that directed them; and that, because they prescribed those remedies without under∣standing the nature of the disease, or the proper time of their exhibition; which though advantageous to some, may prove ruinous to others, as I have fully satisfied the world in the latter part of this Book re∣lating to the methodus medendi; and though sometimes we will allow that Patients hereby have recover'd, yet seeing it hath been by accident and not by Art, we might probably have seen the same, if the Pati∣ents had solely committed themselves to
Natures regimen, which is usually attended with far greater success than their high ap∣plauded Chymical preparations; especially if managed by the diligent attendance and judicious observation (which were the great Arcana of divine Hippocrates) of a prudent Physician, who is as cautious of discomposing or tumultuating the bloud with Cordials and Elixirs, as of weakning and impoverishing it with too cooling and refrigerating Julips, and therefore rather waits her motions, remembring that golden rule, cunctando res agitur. 2. If success in practice be the surest evi∣dence of a mans learning and knowledge pro∣per for his Faculty, as Mr. H. asserts pag. 9. how comes it to pass that the event of dis∣eases is ever an unequal Judicature, as he tells us out of my Lord Bacon the very page after? who farther saith, as he quotes him, that who can tell, if a Patient die or recover, whether it be by accident or by Art? now pray Mr. H. what becomes of your Certifi∣cates in this case? But to proceed to that part of Mr. H's as∣sertion, viz. the conjecturalness of our Art, from whence he would perswade us that Physicians are no competent Judges, because their Art is conjectural, having no certain rules to judge by.
To this I Answer, 1. If the Art of Physick be Conjectural, why may not Physicians be as good, if not better Conjecturers in their own Art, than any other sort of men? especially seeing they so well understand both the Theore∣tick and Practick part thereof; for surely he that is the best Conjecturer, is the best able to judge what conjectures are most rational, and founded upon the fairest pro∣babilities. 2. If there can be no Judges in Physick, how comes it to pass that Mr. H. so fiercely contends for the Reverend Bishops being so fit for that employment? seeing that accord∣ing to his own assertion, they have no certain rules to judge by. 3. I would gladly know of Mr. H. how Physicians in former Ages were so fit for that employment, but in ours must by no means be allowed; the reason he gives is this, because the Art was then fixed and staked down to certain points, maxims or rules, &c. but how if I should tell him that from his own principles it may fairly be deduced that the same maxims and rules are still re∣maining? for if his notion be true, that
the Colledge hath made no improvement in Physick, and are only to be esteem'd the Sectators of Aristotle and Galen; no doubt but they retain the same maxims they there espoused; although let me tell him (for his better information) that there are several discoveries in the Physiological part of Phy∣sick so clearly demonstrated in our dayes, by those great and renowned Physicians he so much contemns, that we must deny even credit to our senses, if we will not give in our suffrage to the certainty of them; which have been so far from ren∣dring our Art more conjectural, that they have obtain'd the universal consent of all the ingenious of our Faculty; witness the Circulation of the blood, its sanguification by the vital spirits and not by the Liver (as the Ancients and all later Physicians believed, till the incomparable Doctor Glisson discharg'd it of that office) the mo∣tion of the Chyle through the lacteal vessels, discover'd by Asellius; its discharging itself into the common receptacle, and from that through the ductus Chyliferus & valves of the subclavian veins into the mass of blood, happily found out by the industrious Pec∣quet; the Lymphaticks by Dr. Jolive, the Ductus salivales and lachrymales by our
learned countrey-man Doctor Wharton, and that excellent Anatomist Steno, and many others which I shall ere long have occasion to mention; which doctrines had they been discover'd in the dayes of those Greeks and Arabians he talks of, would have been so far from everting all maxims in Physick, that I rather think they would have been engraven in letters of Gold, and the Au∣thors have had Statues erected to their me∣mory. And truly if we well look into the pro∣fession of physick, we shall not find it so Conjectural an Art as Mr. H. pretends; for Medicine strictly so called is very little con∣jectural as to the rules of it, though as to the particular application of those rules to the hîc & nunc of a single patient it may be; but that is no more than is in Divinity and Law, and indeed in all the professions of the world. The errors of a mans life con∣sisting in the ill usage of avowed and un∣doubted principles, and misapplying them to particular instances. But still as to the Theory of our Art as far as it is strictly Me∣dical, it will not be found (as I just now mention'd) so Conjectural as our Adversa∣ries pretend; for as to the subject Physick treats of, 'tis certain and well known to
every one of the Faculty; and the end and design of the same is no less agreed upon on all hands; and for the general description and Diagnosticks of diseases, who ever yet con∣tested about them? it being universally agreed that there are such distempers, as Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Pleurisies, Gout, Stone, Feavers, Quartane Agues, &c. which are so specifically differenc'd by their descriptions and diagnosticks, that not only Physicians but Nurses are able to know them. And for the Pharmaceutick part of Physick, so far as it relates to the use of such remedies, which by experience have been found of great benefit in several diseases of humane bodies, who hath not readily embraced it? I might likewise inform Mr. H. that we are generally agreed as to the Causes of dis∣eases so far as they relate to air, diet, and the rest of the non-naturalia; so that 'tis plain Physicians have had a standing rule to judge by these 2 or 3000 years, nor will they want such a rule to the worlds end. But the matters of debate are of a more remote consideration, and not so truly Me∣dical as Philosophical, I mean the Physio∣logical principles which are borrowed out of natural Philosophy to the building up
of an Art which might in all parts be complete. And though our Adversaries would pre∣tend that these principles are wholly con∣jectural, yet possibly if they be attentively considered, it may be found that our contests as to these, are rather verbal than real; differences about the focus or minera morbi, or it may be about what hypothesis such a humor may be best explicated by; whether Galenical, Spagirical, or Sylvian. I shall therefore endeavour to shew both in Acute and Chronical diseases how little our Art may be esteem'd conjectural from such debates as these. For instance, suppose that the Galenists shall teach us that inter∣mittent Fevers or Agues proceed from ex∣crementitious choler, flegm, or melancho∣ly congested in some minera of the body, and according as those humors do sooner or later tend towards a state of putrefaction and commotion (whereby they are convey∣ed into the blood, and ferment therewith) do cause those febrile paroxysms to return sooner or later. And the Willisians shall tell us, that the Essence of the one consists in a more retor∣rid constitution of the mass of blood, being too much impregnated with Saline and
Sulphureous particles; the other in a more acid and austere one, which being deprived of its sweet and balsamick nature, is apt by reason of its penury of spirits and too great exaltation of its terrestrial and tarta∣reous parts, (consisting of salt and earth) to degenerate into a fluor, and induce a sowr∣ness upon the whole mass: the third in a more debile constitution of blood than the former, insomuch that the greatest part of the nutritious juyce is perverted into a fer∣mentative matter, which occasions the Fits to return so much sooner than in a Ter∣tian or Quartane. And the Sylvians as strongly contend that these Intermittents have their focus in the Pancreas, and derive their original or primary cause from the vitiosity of the pan∣creatick juice, which at different periods according to its various constitution doth discharge its self through its common ductus into the intestines, and there fermenting with an ill affected bile and phlegm doth produce not only the various symptoms that accompany these Agues, but the dif∣ferent species of them. And thus in continued Fevers, the one shall tell you that the putrefaction of the humors in the Veins and Arteries is the im∣mediate cause:
The other, too great an exaltation of the Sulphureous parts of the blood, which imme∣diately breaking forth into an effervescence, procures that distemper we call a Fever. The third shall tell you, that the saliva, bile, and lympha being ill affected and con∣tinually circulating through the heart, do there excite the foremention'd effervescency, which occasions this distemper. And thus in most Chronical affections, as Hypochondriack melancholy, Scurvey, Gout, Rheumatisms, Hysterick affections, Madness, &c. The Sylvians shall tell you that these and many others of the like nature do own their original to a preternatural fermentation of an acid juice or lympha with different sub∣jects; or from diversity of acids fermenting with one and the same subject, from whence they would explicate all the phaenomena of those symptoms that are observable in the foremention'd distempers. The Willisians will no less probably assert, that they proceed, from too great an exalta∣tion of the Saline parts of the blood, which are perverted in some of these distempers into an acid and austere nature; in others, into a sowre and corrosive (so that the ani∣mal spirits, and nervous liquor are there∣with
affected) and in others, into a state of fixed Alkalies, whereby the lixivial parts of the blood being conveyed by the Arte∣ries into several parts of the body, and fer∣menting with the sowre recrements of the nervous juice, do produce some of the fore∣mention'd distempers. And the Galenists shall teach you, that the cause of some of these is an atra bilis, which is sharp like Vinegar or Aqua fortis. Now let any judicious person compare these several Hypotheses, and then tell me whether there be such a difference betwixt them as our Adversaries would pretend to; for seeing they all agree as I before men∣tion'd, as to the description, Diagnosticks, and procatarctick causes of these diseases; to which give me leave to add, Indications for the cure of most distempers, which though explicated by different Hypotheses, yet are so nearly related to one another, that we may find them generally directing but one and the same method of cure; and per∣sisting in the use of Medicines of the like nature, which surely cannot render our Art so Conjectural as Mr. H. would have it. And as for those internal causes of diseases I mention'd; which of the Galenists, Willi∣sians or Sylvians ever doubted the existence
of those acid humors, whereby they would explicate the symptoms of several Chronical affections, which are so far from Conjectural, that there have been se∣veral undeniable demonstrations to prove the truth of them? One of which is men∣tion'd by the learned Doctor Willis in his Treatise de morb. Convuls. p. 116. who had a patient, whose sweat was so corrosive, that like Aqua fortis it would cito exedere & corrumpere lintea; and in his excellent Treatise de morbis Capitis he tells us, usita∣tum est nonnullos saepe laticem quasi vitrioli∣cum oesophagi ac palati tunicas erodentem vo∣mitu excernere. And Skenkius in his ob∣servations as quoted by that great and no∣ble Philosopher Mr. Boyl, gives us an account of the corrosiveness of some juices, which rejected by Urine or Vomit would boyl on brass, fret linnen, and stain silver. And thus I might run through the whole Catalogue of diseases both Acute and Chro∣nical, and satisfie all ingenious Naturalists, how little prejudice our Art suffers by al∣lowing this freedom of Philosophising; for by Physicians comparing these several Hy∣potheses, they may make choice of expli∣cating the nature of diseases by that Hypo∣thesis, which they find most universally
satisfactory; although 'tis certain that our Moderns have ill managed their talents in Physick, if they have not (by enriching our age with so many fresh discoveries) made us Masters of the reason of many of those rules which were gather'd from obser∣vation only and practice by the Ancients, especially considering they have happily found out several humors in the body which our predecessors were unacquainted with; as the Nervous and Lymphatick liquors, Nu∣tritious juices, and other great Anatomick discoveries, whereby they might more se∣curely and unerringly found their Hypothe∣ses, and more happily solve the phaenomena of diseases. And therefore I will not deny that this Age having made so many improvements of the rules that were given by the Anci∣ents, may in some part vary the doctrine concerning Indications and methods of Cure, the greatest part of which improve∣ments I shall anon shew to be the effect of Anatomical discoveries. But this doth not at all invalidate my assertion nor change the main body of practical Medicine, in which the chiefest trials are made by Colle∣giate examinations: that still persisting as much the same, as a house is the same that it
was a 100 years ago, though some ingeni∣ous Artist, by beating out some large win∣dows, bringing pipes of water, and dig∣ging cellars, have rendred it more commo∣dious. And as for those Theories I mention'd, they have not only advanced much the true skill of the present Practisers; but have found that allowance among the learned men of the Colledge, that they tye not any man so strictly in their examinations to the Hypothesis of the Ancients; but are content with such rational accounts of Phi∣losophical questions as his studies have fur∣nished him withal; provided be be vers'd in the practical Theory or general maxims thereof, which I call the rule of physick; nay though in some of them he differs from their opinion, not explicating the consti∣tution of humane bodies, or conjunct causes of their preternatural affections by the doctrine of the four Elements, but instead thereof solidly answers those Physiological questions by the Willisian or Sylvian prin∣ciples, they do not condemn him; the on∣ly thing they sight against, being ignorance and mens impudent reviling of what they so little understand.
SECT. 3. The method of taking Degrees, in the Uni∣versity of Leyden. HAving now performed that part of my task, which relates to those certain foundations upon which our Art is esta∣blished: I shall now make it my endeavour to vindicate the famous University of Ley∣den, with some worthy and ingenious Phy∣sicians, whom Mr. H. hath so rudely trea∣ted; which you may find in the 19. 29. & 30. pages of his pamphlet; although I think neither of them have much reason to take it unkindly at his hands; he having been so audacious as to affront High Courts of Parliament, Kings Bench, and Common Pleas; not sparing the Lawyers, but repre∣senting them as men who would unawares accept of a Bill for a Statute; nor yet Mr. Pul∣ton, one of the most industrious men of our Age; to whom all the subjects in England are highly endebted for his faithfulness and care in collecting the Statute Laws of the Kingdom.
But to our present purpose, and to the giving a faithful relation of the manner of taking Degrees in Leyden, which feather in the Cap Mr. H. so much contemns, as you may see in the foremention'd pages; I suppose be∣cause he was as unwilling to pass an Exami∣nation there, as now he is in England; know∣ing very well that his Certificates would not be accepted by the learned Professors of that University, for the surest evidence of his learning and knowledge fit for his Faculty; and though he is in some hopes that the Statute of 3 H. 8. may do him some ser∣vice here, yet it was to little purpose to plead it there. The method of educating Physicians and taking Degrees in Leyden is after the following manner. When persons have studied some years Philosophy and other Arts for their better accomplishment, they have liberty allowed them of admitting themselves Pupils to any of the Professors in physick of that Uni∣versity, whose office or employment is to read Lectures dayly to their Disciples; and those who are admitted under the practick Professors, do frequently accompany or
meet them at their Hospitals, where are usually a great variety of Patients lying sick of several diseases; the Professor as soon as he comes, feels the Patients pulse, enquires into the Symptoms of their distempers, par∣ticular temperaments, methods of living, &c. and then dlly acquaints his Disciples with all their complaints and the circum∣stances of their Cases: then questions them severally what their Opinions are as to the nature of their Sickness? what Causes they would assign procatarctick or conjunct oc∣casioning them? what prognosticks they would make? and what methods of Cure they would propose? And thus, when they have variously given their judgment; he commends one, reproves another, and en∣courageth all to diligent pains and study in their profession; then candidly delivers his own judgment and prognostick, and directs such remedies as may be most serviceable to the Patients ease and recovery. These Medicines are pen'd by his Disci∣ples, who meet next day together at the Hospital, discourse the Patients and en∣quire of the success of their Professors pre∣scriptions; and then wait his attendance to hear his farther opinion.
And thus are the sick people continually treated until a perfect Crisis attends them; which when it proves mortal, the diseased body is dissected, and a Lecture read there∣upon for the fuller information of the fore∣mention'd Students. Which, how much it may tend to the advantage of all that are educated in such an improving method, I leave to the judg∣ment of others: And could heartily wish that seeing our own Academies have no such publick Hospitals amongst them, that his Majesties Colledge of Physicians would propose a method for obtaining some such laudable custome, for the greater encourage∣ment of all the ingenious in our Faculty, that are educated in our own famous Uni∣versities, and Foreigners too; that no ad∣vantage might be proposed in another Na∣tion, which might not much more happily be obtained in our own. For doubtless this would not only conduce to the greater im∣provement of our Art by uniting the Theo∣retick and Practick part of physick so ad∣vantageously together, that the Students thereof, whilst they are diligently pursuing the one, might not miss of obtaining the other; having daily so many and great ob∣servations afforded them of the treatment
and cure of most acute and chronical dis∣tempers; but would likewise encourage them to make some considerable progress in one of the main desiderata of Anatomy, by the dissection and careful observation of the situation, shape, colour, connexion, substance, &c. of the Brain, Lungs, Liver, Intestines, &c. in such as dyed of the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Con∣sumption, Dropsie, Jaundies, Small pox, Coughs, &c. solicitously examining the preter∣natural constitution of every part in those and other diseases, in order to the better under∣standing of the places affected and the conjunct causes (as hath been very worthily inti∣mated by Mr. Oldenburgh, Transaction n. 107. from the advice of that famous Anatomist Bar∣tholinus) whereby much publick service might be done to posterity by acquainting the world with an exact observation of so great Anatomick discoveries. And if the famous Doctor Glisson, Willis, Sylvius, and some other great men of our Art have me∣rited so much from all learned and ingeni∣ous men for commnnicating their private observations upon several morbid bodies; what might be expected from the Members of the Colledge of Physitians? and how much would the world be endebted to them? if (having obtained the approba∣tion
and consent of the Governors of our publick Hospitals) they would successively take their turns to dissect the bodies of those that dyed of several diseases therein; and diligently observe not only the different morbid impressions, that were made on the several viscera and habits of body, in those that dyed of one and the same disease; but likewise of those that dyed of distinct dis∣tempers? How much this might tend to our present and future benefit, I leave to the judgment of others to determine? Only give me leave to say, that I am apt to think that such a design as this managed accor∣ding to the prudence of the Colledge of Physicians, might not only advance the re∣putation of so noble a Science in this Na∣tion, that is now endeavour'd to be render'd contemptible by the ignorant Empiricks of our dayes; but would give it such a fame throughout Europe; that our own Universities and City of London (as I be∣fore mention'd) might not only obtain the preference of others for the speedy ad∣vancements that might be made in the Art of Physick, but likewise encourage English men and Foreigners to spend their time amongst us, the advantages and improve∣ments being so much greater here, than else∣where to be obtain'd.
But to proceed in acquainting you with the method of taking Degrees in Leyden, which is after the following manner. Whenever any Student hath spent a com∣petent time in that University, or any Fo∣reigner comes over to take his Degree; he first makes his application to the Dean of the Faculty, who examines him one hour in the Theoretick and Practick part of Phy∣sick; and if he finds him not well accom∣plished in either, he interdicts him making any farther progress in order to the taking of a Degree, till he be better fitted for so great an undertaking; but if he gives a full and satisfactory account of his profi∣ciency in both; he is sent to visit the rest of the Professors of that Faculty, who ap∣pointing a convenient time, do all meet together and examine him two hours. And if he be then approved, they give him two Aphorisms of Hippocrates to discourse of next day a quarter of an hour; and then they oppose that explication for three quar∣ters of an hour: after this he is to make and print certain Theses upon what subject he pleaseth, which he sends to all the Pro∣fessors of the University, who meet him at an appointed hour, and are Judges of his abilities in the defence of those Theses
against the four Professors of Physick, who each man in his place acts the part of an Opponent till an hour be spent; then is he admitted by the Dean of the Faculty, having obtain'd the approbation of the Rector Magnificus and the rest of the Pro∣fessors of the University to the Degree of Doctor, and receiveth their diploma as a testimonial of his due performance of all the foremention'd exercises. This in short is the manner of taking De∣grees privately, but if more publickly; the person that takes his Degree is opposed by Non-graduates in that Faculty in their publick Schools, and the Professors of Phy∣sick with the rest of the Professors of the University sit by as Judges. Now how slight soever Mr. H. hath en∣deavour'd to make the taking of Degrees in foreign Universities, yet for this he is to be commended, that he was as cautious of passing an examination there as he hath been by the Colledge of Physicians in Lon∣don. And as for those ingenious and learned Physicians he reflects upon, p. 19. 'tis very well known that several of them have taken their Degrees in our own Universities, and that all of them are ready to pay no small
respect and veneration to the Colledge; and were so far from thinking them unca∣pable Judges of their own Art, that they readily profer'd the examination by Col∣legiate Statutes expected from them; and never had they proposed entring themselves as Honorary Fellows, had not a precedent Act of that Society and encouragement from several of the Members, invited them to it: but after they perceived it ill resented by some and not fairly reported by others; they were so far from encouraging Empi∣ricks in their undue, illegal, and destructive practises, that nothing could have proved a greater motive with some of them to in∣corporate themselves with that honourable and learned Society.
CHAP. III. SECT. 1. The third Question was, Whether Physicians educated in Universities, and particularly the Colledge of Physicians in London, have been the great hinderers of the Art of Physick, and more especially that of Chymistry. THat I may the more fully and satis∣factorily clear this Question, which I esteem to be of the greatest mo∣ment betwixt the Colledge of Physicians and these boasting Empiricks, I will treat particularly of our Art as it hath reference to these three main Pillars, Anatomy, Chy∣mistry and the Methodus medendi, and shew that the Colledge, with those learned and eminent Physicians, who have had their Education in Academies, and are so rudely treated by Mr. H. and his Mercurial Crew,
have been so far from being the hinderers of the Art of Physick in the foremention'd respects, that they have been the principal, if not sole promoters of it. And as to the first, viz. Anatomy. Our Adversaries themselves will allow us in this, the preheminence, not out of any good nature or modesty; but purely from the too great palpableness of their ig∣norance herein: which since it hath fallen to their lot not to be vers'd in, they do what ignorant men use to do with matters of knowledg, viz. take all occasions of con∣temning and slighting it; whereas it is no∣toriously known to all men of skill, that the learned and great Physicians of all Ages, who have been the great Improvers of the Faculty, have principally built on this Foundation. This it were easie to prove historically from Aesculapius downwards to Herophilus, Hippocrates, Polybus, Aristotle, Galen, Avi∣cen, &c. which having fully been done by that great ornament of our University of Cambridge, the learned Doctor Walter Need∣ham in the prefatory speech to his last Reading at Chirurgeons-Hall; where he did likewise prove that all the diagnosticks
of physick and methods of cure in all Ages have been derived out of Anatomy; and although he allowed Chymistry its due value, yet he did sufficiently evince that Pharmacy it self, of which Chymistry is but a part, made up but one of the pil∣lars by which Physick was supported, Ana∣tomy being the other; I need not insist any longer upon the proof of that; but pro∣ceed to acquaint you what hath been done in later Ages; and especially in this, whose happiness in many excellent discoveries hath kindled so ardent a zeal to the com∣pleating of that study, that several eminent Physicians have spent years in the consi∣deration and diligent enquiry into particu∣lar parts, as witness the most ingenious de Graef, who tells you in his Epistle to that excellent piece of his de succo pan∣creat. that he was in the search and study of that, from 63 to 66; and since there would be found (saith he) some carping fellows, quorum genius rixis ac compotationi∣bus magis quam cadaverum dissectionibus in∣dulget (a fair and full description of Mr. H's society) qui me ridebunt, quòd tantum tem∣poris hujus investigationi impendam; whose genius more prompting them to scolding and drinking than to the dissecting of dead bodies,
will scorn me for spending so much time in the investigation of the pancreatick juice; therefore he resolved to comfort himself with the story of Democritus, and the Ab∣deritae as it is reported in Hippocrates, which the Reader may there find very fully and pertinently quoted. And surely he that considers the time that our immortal Doctor Harvey spent upon his books de circulatione sanguinis & generatione animalium, our incomparable Professor Doctor Glisson de Epate, Dr. Whar∣ton, de glandulis, Dr. Willis, de cerebro, Dr. Needham, de formato foetu, Dr. Lower, de corde, Bellinus, de structurâ renum, &c. can∣not imagine that half a years time spent in Anatomy is enough to fit any Physician for pra∣ctice, as Mr. H. asserts p. 15. Which occa∣sions me to think that if the good man had taken his Degree in some foreign Univer∣sity, the Professors might much more likely have dismiss'd him with that proverbial en∣comium than any man I know; accipimus pecuniam & dimittimus asinum: for I can tell him that those learned Professors are so far from embracing that Notion, that they not only have spent great part of their time in acquainting the world with what new Anatomical discoveries they or others have
made, but have also resolved, as one of them frankly tells us, quousque vita mihi supererit, è tenebris eruere conabor; & um vita defecerit, inquirenda relinquam posteris. And whereas Mr. H. is pleased to tell us in the very same page that he is ready to prove, that the Physicians of the Colledge have done nothing in all their Anatomick Thea∣ters, which may conduce to better cure. Let me tell him that this assertion of his, did put me to a stand to consider, whether his impudence or ignorance were greatest; and truly had not this expression proceeded from a man that is much better acquainted with Stages, and more aptly fitted to act the Mountebank with his Coelestial liquor, than those he would advance to that em∣ployment, I think he could not have been so rude to treat learned men in their Pro∣fession, in so sordid and scurrilous a man∣ner. But however I shall undertake to prove for his better information these following assertions. 1. That something hath been done in Anatomy, both by the Ancients and Mo∣derns, which hath conduc'd to the better cure of diseases; and then answer their so much cry'd up objection borrowed out
of Celsus, with some reasons mention'd by a late Author in confirmation thereof. 2. That the Moderns have very much improved the Anatomick part of Physick by their late discoveries; though Mr. H. proffers in publick to evidence, that they have done nothing by it worth a straw, be∣yond what was done by the Ancients; and then vindicate that Noble person M. Boyl, whom he hath so much abused by a false quotation upon this subject, and perverting the sense of that excellent Author. 3. That the greatest Anatomists and Practisers of our Age are, and have been the greatest Chymists.
SECT. 2. As to the first, Anatomy hath conduc'd to the better Cure of Diseases. ANatomy in general hath so far con∣duced to the Cure of diseases that it hath laid the foundations of that noble Art; by teaching us the nature and manner of concoctions, excretions and motions of the bloud and humors; the true and sound constitution of all the several parts, which being compared with those that have been found in morbid bodies so much deviating from the sound ones, have not only given greater light to the discovery of many dis∣eases formerly unknown, but likewise en∣gaged learned men to a diligent invention of appropriate Medicines most likely to pre∣vent and cure those formerly latent distem∣pers. Who would ever have thought of Cancers, Gangreens, Inflations and Drop∣sies of the womb? Inflammations, Ulcers, Scirrhous tumors of the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Sweet-bread, &c. if Anatomy had
not discover'd them? And as for the do∣ctrine of Pulses, there is no man judicious in our Faculty that will not freely acknow∣ledge, that great Indications are to be taken, both for the exhibition of Medicines, and passing prognosticks, from a diligent ob∣servation and exploration of them: how easily may we thereby judge of the strength or debility of our Patients? The indica∣tions or contra-indications for Cordials, Juleps, Phlebotomy, Purgation, &c. All which are of no small moment to the better cure of diseases; but how was it possible to deliver any artificial rules concerning them, till the structure of the Heart and Arteries was understood? And therefore it is that Pliny doth deliver an account of the original of this skill, which he derives from Herophilus that great Anatomist, con∣cerning whom he saith, quod Arteriarum pulsum in modulos certos legesque metricas pri∣mus redegerit, ejusque varietates edocuerit, as was more fully observed in the foremen∣tion'd speech of the learned Dr. W. Needham. And though Mr. H. was so confident as to tell us, that nothing hath been done of late by Anatomy which may conduce to better cure; give me leave to acquaint him with some dis∣coveries which may fully evert this so igno∣rant and ridiculous assertion:
As for instance; since the discharge of the Liver from its sanguifying office, and affixing sanguification to the vital spirits residing in the bloud; it hath been clearly demonstrated that most diseases do derive their original from some ill affections of the mass of bloud, and not from the morbid constitution of the viscera, (which are parts usually but secondarily affected) whereupon our remedies that have been primarily indicated, have had their chief respect to the reduction of the bloud to its due and native Crasis; and not to the ap∣plication of Topicks, to those parts which never give the first occasion to the fore∣mention'd dyscrasie; for these are generally in their healthful, genuine state, until the sanguineous mass doth affix some preter∣natural recrements upon them: wherefore the application of Epithemes, unguents, emplasters, &c. are sound in several of the foremention'd cases not so serviceable as was formerly thought; as particularly in those diseases which were believ'd to derive their original from a calida Epatis intemperies; the primary cure of which depends upon the discharge of those bilious or sulphureous parts of the bloud, by venae-section which are too luxuriant therein; or else upon the redu∣ction
of them to their pristine state, by internal and appropriate remedies; and not upon Topical applications. I might farther discourse of Dropsies, Scurvy, and other distempers of the like nature; which were imagin'd to derive their original from the viscera, but that the judicious Reader by considering that one case I mention'd, may easily be induc'd to believe that in these also the bloud and not the viscera is the primary seat of the disease. I could likewise inform Mr. H. of the great advantages that might accrue to Phy∣sick by that excellent discovery of the cir∣culation of the Chyle with the mass of bloud; it being well known that bloud appearing with its Chyle swimming upon it, hath till of late dayes been taken as Sanious; and consequently the person from whose arm it hath been drawn, being pos∣sessed with the fancy of a Surfeit, may have put himself upon methods of physick to cure a fictitious disease, and thereby laid a foundation for a real one. And doubtless not only this, but many other late Anatomick discoveries might tend very much to the better cure of diseases; as for instance, the commixture of the air with the mass of bloud, which hath been
experimented so absolutely necessary to the maintaining of Animal life; that neither the motion of the bloud nor spirits could be preserved without its continual supply; nay though some time their motion hath been impeded; yet upon a fresh and speedy com∣munication of air to the Heart and bloud, they have both recover'd their pristine state. Which puts me in mind of two excellent observations to this purpose intimated by the ingenious Doctor Thruston in his Trea∣tise de respiratione; who there tells us of an experiment of that accomplish'd Physi∣cian and accurate Anatomist Doctor Croon, who stifling a Chicken till she seem'd quite dead, yet a good while after by blowing air into the Lungs revived it. The second was an experiment perform'd by the no less accurate Anatomist, Doctor Needham, who in a dog dead and opened, after all cessations of pulse, recover'd the motion of the heart meerly by blowing up air into the receptacle of the Chyle, which from thence by its ductus was transmitted into the mass of bloud. Now doubtless from these experiments, and others of the like nature, much might be collected for the improvement of the practick part of our Art; especially in those
cases, where we are apt to be too severe in keeping our Patients from those reviving gusts of air, which probably might tend much more to the depuration of the bloud and refreshment of the animal spirits, than the greatest Cordials that could have been exhibited. Which puts me in mind of what great relief I have seen instantly given to Hysterical Patients in acute diseases by allowing them fresh gales of air. And no less to a young Gentleman in a deep Consumption, who was speedily and even to the wonder of all that knew him, recover'd to a healthful state by riding five or sixscore miles into the countrey to take the Air. And within these few dayes discoursing with the learned Doctor Bradey, Master of Caius Colledge in Cambridge, and an emi∣nent practiser in this Town, upon this subject; he was pleased to acquaint me with a very notable observation in confir∣mation of this assertion, viz. in a Patient of his, who being very highly Asthmatick and Hysterick, and thereby necessitated to keep her bed six winters together, found constant and speedy relief in the paroxysms of the foremention'd distempers, by un∣drawing the curtains of her bed, putting
out the fire in her chamber, and letting in air; and that which was very remarkable, was, that in the greatest of her extremities, if the wind lay in the window, and the casements were opened, she found so great advantage thereby, that not content with what passage Nature had made in her no∣strils for air, she would dilate them with her fingers, that it might be more plenti∣fully conveyed to her Lungs. Which truly is not so much to be wonder'd at, seeing the Atmosphere is so highly impreg∣nated with nitrous particles, which as the Lord Bacon hath well observed, are the only refrigerating Cordials that can be exhibited. And surely if the motion and florid co∣lour of the Arterial bloud do so much de∣pend upon a due commixture of the air; and many diseases and sudden deaths are occasion'd by too great a crassitude, roapi∣ness and coagulation of the bloud; how much might the free admission of air into the rooms of sick and diseased Patients, and it may be (where we durst not allow of their rising) the bare suction of it by some artificial pipe contriv'd for that purpose, tend to their more easie and speedy recovery? And if in high Fevers, deliriums, &c. that excellent Physician Riverius would direct
the strowing the Patients chambers with green herbs, and pouring water out of one tub or pail into another; surely these late experiments may encourage us in several cases to admit of fresh gales of air into those Patients chambers, who are almost parch'd up or suffocated for want thereof. And truly if we consider how many fair and beautiful Ladies, in the prime and flower of their years, are precipitated into Phthisicks and Consumptions, from being too closely mew'd up with their near rela∣tions, lying sick of those distempers; and how many of those afflicted with them, are rendred incurable, and sometimes speedily destroy'd by the inspiration of air so highly vitiated from their own morbid expirations; I cannot imagine but the most ingenious Physicians will allow me, that great im∣provements might be made hereby for the better cure of diseases, if we were as dili∣gent in observation as we have been in spe∣culation, which otherwise is really no bet∣ter, than (as our adversaries term it) the ornamental part of physick. But now 'tis high time to answer their cry'd up objection taken out of Celsus, which is as a late Author hath told us in plain English.
That nothing is more foolish than to imagine that things within a man should be in the same state when he is dying, as they were when he was living; much more when he is actually dead; for, saith he, most diseases lying in the variations of bloud and humors, spirits and ferments of the parts are causes remote from such ocular inspection. And that nothing certain can be concluded from the stagnation of bloud or other humors found in any place or passage of the body after death, is evident in this, that nature upon deaths approach being driven to most violent motions, does extra∣vasate, intravasate, throw blood and humors in and out, here and there, and every where, Cap-a-pee, through the most abstruse and un∣perceivable passages; so that if stagnant or coagulated bloud, or other humors, be found in any part by anatomizing, it cannot be concluded it was so before death. Thus far hath that ingenious Author en∣deavoured to defend so ill a cause; which endeavours had they been employed to better purposes, I doubt not but he might have been more serviceable to himself and the Common-wealth of learning. But seeing his inclinations have engaged him to different apprehensions, I hope he will pardon us that we refuse to give him
our assent to what he hath yet writ on this subject; unless his reasons were more co∣gent or prevailing. For I would gladly have this Author ac∣quaint us, what alteration is made in the body of a healthful man, when he dyeth of a violent death as to those things which we enquire after; I mean as to the viscera and solid parts: do they lose any thing of their figure, connexion, proportion? &c. I confess that they are something alter'd as to their colour, but I hope we may satis∣fie our selves as to the reason of that muta∣tion. Which of the vessels do we then find wanting? The lacteals we acknow∣ledge do then disappear, and the Lympha∣ticks too some time after death, but the defect of these, vivi-section will supply. And as for the rest of the humors (the bloud excepted) they receive no great al∣teration in death, as witness the gall, urine, Lympha, &c. And as for the bloud it self, I hope we may observe both it and its mo∣tion in the dissection of living Animals, and I am sure we may discover its passages even in dead bodies, by injections. And what though we readily allow, that most diseases lye in the variation of the bloud and humours, spirits and ferments; yet our
Antagonist himself is willing to grant us, that the morbid impressions they make upon the several viscera are visible enough; and so are the bloud and humors no less in some diseases, though he is pleased to as∣sert that they are causes remote from ocular inspection; as witness the inflammatory blood that is usually drawn from the arms of Patients in Rheumatisms, Quinsies, Pleurisies, &c. And for the humors, there is enough to be found for the proof thereof in Sylvius and de Graef, who have acquainted the world with what a variety of diseases do owe their original to the preternatural affections of the bile, pituita, Lymphatick liquor and pancreatick juice, all which may easily be obtain'd, and that in some considerable quantity, in living and dead, in sound and morbid bodies. And as for what is said of the extravasa∣tion and intravasation; throwing bloud and humors in and out, here and there and every where, Cap-a-pee, through the most abstruse and unperceivable passages in deaths ap∣proaches. I must confess that I do not well under∣stand this notion, till the Author hath bet∣ter clear'd it: for according to my appre∣hension
the impetuous and disorderly mo∣tion that he would fancy the humors to be in at such a time, should be so far from di∣recting them into those unperceivable passa∣ges, that it should altogether hinder their motion through those fictitious Meanders. And farther let him give me leave to tell him, that I am not of his belief that the bloud and humors are then in such an impetuous motion; the languid pulses of most dying persons affording us a sufficient argument to the contrary; and for my own part (with submission to better judgments) I am apt to think that the disorder that is observed in the body upon the approaches of death, doth chiefly proceed from the tumult of the Animal spirits, which are put into those disorders and irregular motions for want of a due supply of influential spi∣rits, from the mass of bloud; which alas! at that time is so far from being endued with such volatile and luxuriant parts to occasion this motion, that I take it not only to be perverted in its whole crasis, but a weak, confused, and depauperated liquor. And farther as to what is said of extra∣vasation and intravasation in deaths ap∣proaches, 'tis as difficult to believe as all the former, seeing that upon the point of death
we rarely observe maculae or exanthemata, &c. to appear, but usually in the beginning or augmentation of pestilential or malig∣nant diseases; and if at that nick of time, there should be any appearance of extrava∣sated bloud, 'tis as improbable to believe, that it should be again resorb'd for the rea∣sons above-mention'd. And for what he saith, that if stagnant or coagulated bloud or other humors be found in any part by anatomizing, it cannot be con∣cluded it was so before death. I judge it as difficult to imagine as all the rest; for what should hinder my assent from believing that there was a great quan∣tity of aqueous humors in the bodies of Hy∣dropical persons whilest alive, their bellies being so tense and swell'd, though I do not actually see it, till my knife discovers it? And thus if we find the Cystick ductus wholly obstructed by any calculous con∣cretion or viscid bile, so that the gall being replete and turgid can receive no more of its felleous liquor from the blood; which wanting its due separation and discharge, doth gradually so load and saturate it, that it doth not only pervert its constituent prin∣ciples and the animal spirits originated from them, but procure the patients death; shall
I question whether this obstruction of the ductus and distention of the gall, were thus whilst the patient was living? And thus suppose upon some sudden rup∣ture or erosion of any of the vessels of the inward parts, there should be a great dis∣charge of blood into the brain, thorax or abdomen, and the patient immediately dy, shall I question whether this breach was there, or blood extravasated before death ensued? Much more might be said to this purpose, but I shall now proceed no farther in an Anatomical reply to this Author; but only crave leave to tell him, that he hath done his Chymical friends little service in this harangue against Anatomy; for since the spagyrical Analysis of bodies is made by fire and menstrua; 'tis notoriously known that they are so much alter'd thereby, that such divisions do not so much explicate parts as destroy them; or at least to use Helmont's ex∣pression, convert them in alia entia. Whereas the Anatomist doth only by wary incisions still discover the more inward parts as whole and unchanged as may be: and when he cometh to dissect any particular part, as the Liver, Spleen, &c. he first vieweth what he intendeth to dissect, and
still proceeds leisurely to observe the in∣ward vessels, &c. upon their first appearance, whilest they are yet whole; he never in∣juring any thing with his knife, till having sufficiently consider'd it, he thinks fit to destroy it in order to some future discovery of what is beyond it. And to conclude, I appeal to any judici∣ous man, whether with a curious knife he may not discover more of an Animal than he can by Chymical preparation. The second thing that I undertook to prove was this: That the Moderns had very much im∣prov'd the Anatomick part of physick by their late discoveries, &c. For the clearing of this assertion I need not take much pains, seeing 'tis well known to most of our Faculty that there hath been a more satisfactory and true ac∣count given to the world of the constituti∣on, structure and nutrition of humane bo∣dies, &c. witness that excellent and full account which Doctor Harvey hath ac∣quainted the world withal in his Treatise de generatione Animalium: what service
hath he done to the publick by that sur∣prizing and admirable discovery of the cir∣culation of the blood, which hath since been universally embraced, and given him so great a name throughout the world? What service hath the incomparable Dr. Glisson done our Faculty in giving us a more faith∣ful account of the nature of sanguification, bilification, separation of Urine and other humors from the mass of blood, &c. Doctor Willis of nutrition, generation and separa∣tion of the succus nervosus and Animal spi∣rits, with their preternatural affections? How lame and imperfect was our former knowledge of the nature of the saliva and other juices that are conveyed into the mouth, together with their passages; un∣till our famous countrey-man Doctor Whar∣ton, and of late the learned Steno have gi∣ven so full an account of them? Although I am credibly inform'd, that the world is chiefly indebted to the industry of that great Anatomist Doctor Walter Needham, for these later discoveries. Who ever dreamt that the Lungs consisted only of vessels and bladders? that the Liver, Spleen and Reins were conglomerate glandules, untill that expert Anatomist and great Na∣turalist Malpighius acquainted us there∣with?
Who ever imagined that the Testi∣cles of the male should only be a conglo∣meration of vessels; and the female Testi∣cles, Ovaries, until the industrious and learned de Graef discover'd it? Who ever instructed us well as to the operation of Cathartick medicines in humane bodies; or as to the reason of the different colours of the excrements that are observed to be eva∣cuated by them, untill that great Anatomi∣cal light Sir G. Ent the President and Orna∣ment of the Colledge of Physicians? whose learned Pen did likewise in those early times both defend and illustrate the Circulation of the blood in that excellent Apology he made for it against Parisanus; and not only so, but start many other novel doctrines to which we owe many of the more modern Hypotheses; which notwithstanding had never been improved to that height they are now come to, had not he by the fore∣mention'd book, and by his frequent com∣munications to his Philosophical friends given many hints which occasion'd excel∣lent discoveries, of which that of the succus nervosus is not the least, which how far it owneth him for the Author Doctor Glisson doth sufficiently witness in his learned Treatise de Epate.
And for the true conveyance of the Chyle into the mass of blood, which of the Anci∣ents were acquainted there with? 'Tis true, they own'd its discharge through the Me∣seraick veins into the Liver; but were as ignorant of its true passage into the blood, as they were of giving us any clear demon∣stration of the commixture of the air there∣with, which notwithstanding they taught in their Schools as an Ens rationis, having no experimental proof for the truth of this assertion. How much then is the world beholden to the great industry and indefatigable pains of that great Anatomist Doctor Lower, who in that incomparable book of his de Corde (one of the most fertile for clear satisfactory and experimental demonstration, that ever yet hath been printed) hath not only more plainly evinced the true passage of the Chyle through its lacteals, receptacle, and chyliferous ducts, than formerly; but as unanswerably demonstrated that there can be no other, by which it should have its discharge into the mass of blood? And if the Reader pleaseth to peruse those experi∣ments of his, whereby he hath as satis∣factorily proved the commixture of the nitrous particles of the air with the mass
of blood, he may find them as clear and demonstrative as the former. And though the circulation of the blood was happily discover'd by the great Doctor Harvey, yet the velocity of its motion and circulation, was never so clearly and fully evinced as it hath been by Doctor Lower: and how much this may tend to the clearing up of several of the dark and obscure phaenomena of nature; as the speedy passage of liquors from the stomach to the reins, &c. I leave to the ingenious of our Faculty to determine? And doubtless great service he hath done us, in clearing out the nature, origination, conveyance and se∣paration of milk in the breasts of women; a doctrine so much controverted in former ages. And no less service have the learned Doctor Walter Needham and Doctor Lower done us, in their experimental demonstra∣tions of the circulation of the Chyle with the mass of blood some hours before its assimilation: which discovery with many (if not all) of the former, are to be admired, not only for the truth and excellency of their invention, but for their great useful∣ness in physick, as I have before mention'd. Wherefore 'tis apparent that these disco∣veries have not only tended to the better
cure of diseases (as I lately proved) but have likewise been very advantageous in affording us more useful Hypotheses in phy∣sick; for our principles having been more certain and demonstrative, it were very un∣reasonable to conceive that our foundations should not be more firmly laid than the Ancients, who were not acquainted with the distribution and natural motions of the nutritious humor, blood, nervous and Lymphatick liquors, &c. Since the investigation of which the world hath been made happy with the ex∣cellent writings both of foreigners and our own countrey-men. One of which (I mean the learned Doctor Willis) hath satisfied the world so well with his excellent and surpassing abilities in that kind, that his Name as well as his writings will be admired both in our own and suc∣ceedings ages. And if (as Noble Mr. Boyl hath acquain∣ted us) Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato, and diverse others of those (whose wisdom made after Ages reverence Antiquity) did not only esteem the truths of Nature worth studying for, but thought them too worth travelling for, as far as those Eastern countreys, whose wise men were then cryed up for the best Expositors of the obscure book of Nature:
How much reason then have we and the learned world, to bewail our unhappiness in the loss of one of the greatest and clear∣est Commentators thereon? Witness that ingenious explication of the phaenomena of those stupendous cases he ac∣quaints us with in his book de morbis convul∣sivis, &c. and though he frankly confesseth that in his explication of the theory of dis∣eases, he doth not tread in the footsteps of the Ancients, but his Hypotheses are alto∣gether new; yet saith that learned Author, they are such, quae super observatis Anato∣micis fundatae, ac firmiter stabilitae; aegro∣tantium phaenomena quaeque melius solvunt, symptomatum causas aptius declarant, & me∣dendi rationes unicuique affectui magis accom∣modas suggerunt; Which being more firmly founded and established upon Anatomical obser∣vations, do better solve the phaenomena of the sick, more aptly discover the causes of their symptoms, and suggest more appropriate me∣thods for the cure of every affection. And though Sylvius his Hypothesis hath not been so universally embraced by our English Physicians, yet in foreign parts it hath met with no less acceptance from the most learned and judicious of our Faculty, than the foremention'd; his Ternary of
humors being question'd by none of the Anatomists of our dayes; from the depra∣vation and exorbitancy of which, he would derive all the preternatural affections of hu∣mane bodies; but however, whether his Hypothesis be true or not, 'tis known very well to his friends and enemies too, that his success in practice hath given him a reputa∣tion not only in the Low Countryes, but amongst most of the learned men in Europe. Which hath occasion'd your worthy friend M. N. to acknowledg that he hath done the world more service towards the pro∣motion of the Art of Physick, than ever any man did before him in the United Provinces: and how kind and generous he hath for∣merly been to Doctor Willis, in acquainting all the learned of our Faculty, how much they were indebted to him for that excel∣lent Treatise of his de febribus, I shall have occasion ere long to acquaint them with. But if all this will not satisfie Mr. H. of the improvements that our Moderns have made, whereby they have done something more worth than a straw, beyond what the Ancients have done, I would advise him to read over what I have discours'd of in the precedent particular; and what he may find in the latter part of that Section which
treats of Chymistry; and if he can spare so much time from his quacking avocations, I would recommend to his serious perusal that excellent book of Doctor Lower's, called Pyretologia Willisiana; which was written against his countrey-man Meara upon this very matter of contest between my self and him; (which having been printed in the same year that his beloved friend's was printed in, and received no answer to it from its most avowed Adver∣saries for eleven years; methinks it should be own'd for a much more unanswerable book than M. N's. which hath had four satisfactory answers already to it) whereby I should be in some hopes that he might hap∣pily be reduc'd to his wits again, which were unfortunately lost when he wrote this scandalous Pamphlet against the Colledge of Physicians, though he spared not for pen, ink nor paper. And though Mr. H. and some others of his acquaintance would seem to commend the Ancients by this assertion; that our late Anatomists have done nothing by Anato∣my worth a straw, beyond what was done by the Ancients; I take it to be, not out of judg∣ment or skill in them, of which they are generally ignorant; much less out of love
to them, whom they contemn as oft as they are thwarted by them; as witness the principal if not sole design of the foremen∣tion'd book Mr. H. so highly commends, which tells us, that we must proceed by other definitions of the nature of diseases, and in∣dagations of their causes, and invent other remedies and reasons and rules of curation, than what have been delivered by the Ancients, and not confine our selves to their conceptions, aphorisms and inventions, &c and chargeth the Aristotelians and Galenists for superstiti∣ous devotion to their old heathenish authors; and their Sectators as drones of the old me∣thodical Hive; that practise in the ordinary dog-road of Physick, and therefore calls them, the herd of vulgar Methodists; and the old way of practice, lazy; its principles dull, and the bane of our profession, &c. which is a plain demonstration that Mr. H. in this as∣sertion did only use the Ancients as an en∣gine to pull down modern discoveries. Whereas we profess our selves to have a great respect and veneration for them, as having done great things in Physick in their times, for which we and our poste∣rity will own our selves highly obliged, and readily allow the great honour that was due to their names: yet are we not so super∣stitious
as to believe all their doctrines as infallible, or that they had searcht so fully into Natures mysteries, that nothing was left to future industry to discover; and therefore I will be bold to say, that though there hath been so great pains, and much more than I can acquaint the world with, taken to investigate the nature of humane bodies, with the several juices and ferments that are lodg'd in them, yet many things belonging to them are yet unobserved, and others so obscurely and dissatisfactorily de∣liver'd; as may still lay an obligation upon all the ingenious of our Faculty to diligent search and enquiry. Amongst the number of which I esteem the ferment of the stomach, of which I must confess much more hath been ingeni∣ously wrote than demonstratively proved: some conceiving digestion to be caus'd by heat, others by an acid humor from the Spleen; which last opinion hath justly been exploded by our later Anatomists, by reason there are no passages to be found, by which this humor may be conveyed from the Spleen into the stomach, and therefore others have asserted it to have its passage through the gastrick Arteries, and its sup∣ply from the mass of blood, and some from
the Nerves; the Sylvians have asserted that this Stomachical ferment proceeds from the saliva commixed with our aliment in de∣glutition and conveyed into the stomach: and Doctor Willis (of late) from the reli∣quiae Chyli turn'd sowre like leven, and preserv'd in the stomach, which being mixed there with a spirituous liquor, con∣veyed from the Arteries, doth not by disso∣lution alone, but also by fermentation con∣vert our Aliment into a homogeneous Chyle. But notwithstanding all these ingenious conjectures, I must confess that I am no wayes satisfied with them, having never observed any fermentation betwixt the contents of the stomach and lixivial, or volatile Alkalies; which puts me in mind of what that great Philosopher Mr. Boyle hath said to this purpose in the usefulness of his experimental Philosophy, who there tells us, that he hath fruitlesly endeavour'd to discover the stomachical acidity, to which many of our modern Physicians are pleased to ascribe the first digestion of the nutriment of Animals, in the purposely dissected stomachs of ravenous Sea-fishes; in whose stomachs though our taste could not perceive any sensible acidity, yet we found in one of them a couple of fishes
each of them about a foot long, whereof the one, which seem'd but to have been newly devour'd, had suffer'd little or no alteration in the great fishes stomach: but the other had all its out∣side, save the head, uniformly wasted to a pretty depth beneath the former surface of the body, and look'd as if it had not been boiled or wrought upon by any considerable heat; but uniformly corroded like a piece of silver coyn in Aqua fortis. And truly I must be so free to acknow∣ledge to the world, that from these and some other reasons, I began to question the existence of the forementioned fer∣ments; and could not therefore forbear to propose to my self some methods, where∣by I might obtain a greater satisfaction and certainty in this so great yet controverted subject, and have therefore already made some progress in it; but there being so great a number of experiments required to a faith∣ful and due investigation of it; I durst not deliver my opinion herein, till unerring experiments and not conjectures shall en∣courage me to it. In the mean time I am sure that all in∣genious men will allow me, that many things in our Art may still be discovered by future industry; which occasioned the
learned de Graef to use this expression, quod post mille secula indefessis naturae scrutatoribus quaedam invenienda sunt, that after a thou∣sand ages some things will be found out by the diligent and indefatigable searchers of nature: and therefore I think we have more reason to be sorry that no more hath been done in Anatomical discoveries, than to quarrel with men for knowing and doing so much. But now 'tis high time to acquaint the world how unworthily and injuriously Mr. H. and some other of his friends have treated that great improver of learning and encourager of all Arts and Sciences, the honourable Mr. Boyle. The occasion of his quoting him, you may find p. 15. where having told us that Anatomy is, the last part Physicians have to play, or trick to shew, to entertain Spectators and amuse the world, to uphold some repute among such as are ig∣norant, and draw on customers; so that it is wonderful to see how many, even of the nobi∣lity and gentry as well as the citizens, are taken by this sort of trick, the mock-shews of pretended discovery by Anatomy; he endea∣vours to confirm this theatrical harangue against that noble Art by the following quotation. But how little is to be expected
from such Actors, that Honourable Gentle∣man Mr. Boyl tells you, in his book of experi∣mental Philosophy, where he saith, he doth not see wherein by any of those new discove∣ries, any thing hath been done, to better the cure of diseases, and then adds, you may take his word. Now how unjustly he hath abused that noble Author, not only in the unfaithful re∣presenting his design, for which he there discours'd of Anatomical discoveries, but likewise in the false quoting of that passage, that it might serve his purpose; you may observe in the following account; if you please to consult Mr. Boyles second part of the usefulness of experimental Philosophy, p. 222, 223. where disswading from the neglect of useful remedies, because presented by persons that ignore them, and perhaps too, hold opinions contrary to them, he leaves the Reader, to consider what is in the person of the Empirical sect represented by Celsus, which you may there read; and then tells you, that though this sentence ascribes too little to reason, yet there is something in it that deserves to be consider'd, especially since we observe not that the late Anatomical disco∣veries of the motions of the Chyle & Lym∣phatick liquor, by formerly unknown wayes
in newly detected vessels, hath yet made men cure diseases much better than before. Not that I think that Anatomical & Pathological discoveries will not in process of time, (when the Historia facti, shall be fully and indispu∣tably made out, and the Theories there∣by suggested clearly established) highly conduce to the improvement of the The∣rapeutical part of physick; but yet this obser∣vation may make it the more reasonable to be∣ware of relying so much upon the yet disputable opinions of Physicians, as to despise all pra∣ctises, though usually successful, that agree not with them. Thus have I faithfully and fully transcri∣bed what that Noble person hath said of this subject, that all Physicians may take no∣tice how unworthily he is treated by the Empiricks of our dayes, who are as much pleased with any passage they can meet with in that excellent Author, which they fancy may be made serviceable to their de∣signs, as they have been with their confu∣tation of the learned Doctor Willis in the title pages of their books; but I hope that none of our Faculty will ever give credit to any quotation of theirs, without a due examination of the Authors design: for 'tis plain by this account that I have given
of Mr. Boyles quotation, that he hath been so far from discoursing against Anatomy, that he hath spoken as much in the favour thereof as any of our Moderns would have done; and therefore, as if he had foreseen this vile sort of men, that would abuse these excellent passages, he wrote them with so much caution, that one could have scarcely imagin'd, that a man who pre∣tends to cure the poor members of Jesus freely for his sake, durst have been guilty of such apparent and malicious falsehoods, and that to maintain so bad a cause. I shall therefore for the prevention of these Empiricks for the future from quo∣ting any passages out of Mr. Boyl against Anatomy, acquaint the world out of this very book, what a great honour and vene∣ration he hath for this noble Art; where you may find in the first part of it, p. 5. that telling us, that one would think that the conversing with dead and stinking car∣kases (that are not only hideous objects in themselves, but made more ghastly by putting us in mind that our selves must be such) should be not only a very melancholy, but a very hated employment. And yet, saith he, there are Anatomists that dote upon it. And I con∣fess its instructiveness hath not only so recon∣ciled
me to it, but so enamour'd me of it, that I have often spent hours much less delightfully, not only in Courts, but even in Libraries, than in tracing in those forsaken Mansions, the in∣imitable workmanship of the Omniscient Ar∣chitect. And in p. 9. he tells us, that, were we not lull'd asleep by custom or sensuality, it could not but trouble as well as it injures a reason∣able soul to ignore the structure and contrivance of that admirably organiz'd body, in which she lives, and to whose intervention she owes the knowledge she hath of other Creatures. And in the second part of the same book, p. 9. he positively asserts, that since diverse things in Anatomy, as particularly the motion of the bloud and Chyle cannot be discovered in a dead dissected body (where the cold hath shut up and obliterated many passages) that may be seen in one opened alive; it must be very advantageous to a Physicians Anatomical know∣ledge, to see the dissections of Dogs, Swine and other live creatures; which puts me in mind of what a very learned Physician in∣geniously observed, that Dogs, Pigs, and Monkyes, have contributed more to the ad∣vancement of Physick, than this sort of men ever did or are like to do.
But to proceed in a further account of the great estimation that this noble Author had for Anatomy, which you may find in p. 46. of the same book, where he tells you, that not only the dissections of sound beasts may assist the Physician to discover the like parts of a humane body, but the dissection of morbid beasts may sometimes illustrate the doctrine of the causes and seats of diseases. For that this part of Pathology has been very much im∣proved by the diligence of modern Physicians, by dissecting the bodies of men killed by dis∣eases, we might justly be accused of want of curiosity or gratitude, if we did not thank∣fully acknowledge; for indeed much of that improvement of Physick (for which the Anci∣ents, were they now alive, might envy our new Physicians) may, in my poor opinion, be ascribed to our industrious scrutiny of the seat and effects of the peccant matter of diseases in the bodies of those that have been destroyed by them. And in the same page he blames the acute Helmont for not having been a more diligent dissector of beasts. And in the following page he tell us, that here we may also consider, that there are diverse explications of particular diseases, or trouble∣some accidents proposed by Physicians, especi∣ally since the discovery of the bloods circulation,
wherein the compression, obstruction, or irrita∣tion of some Nerve, or distension of some Vein by too much blood, or some hindrance of the free passage of the bloud through this or that particular Vessel, is assigned for the cause of this or that disease or symptome; Now in di∣verse of these cases the liberty lately mention'd, that a skilful Dissector may take in beasts, to open the body or limbs, to make Ligatures strong or weak on their Vessels or other inward parts, as occasion shall require, to leave them there as long as he pleaseth, to prick or apply sharp liquors to any Nervous or Membranous part, and whenever he thinks convenient, to dissect the Animal again, to observe what change his experiment hath produced there: Such a liberty, I say, which is not to be taken in humane bodies, may in some case either con∣firm or confute the Theories proposed, and so put an end to diverse Pathological controver∣sies, and perhaps too, occasion the discovery of the true and genuine causes of the phaeno∣mena disputed of, or of others really as ab∣struse. Now, pray Mr. H. can any unprejudic'd or impartial person read this account Mr. Boyle hath given of his estimation for Anatomy, and yet believe that little is to be expected from it, and that he doth not see where∣in
by any of those new discoveries, any thing hath been done to better the cure of diseases? I am apt to think he cannot; and if so, what reason hath Mr. H. to peruse these passages with blushing Cheeks (if he hath either ingenuity or modesty left him) and come and supplicate pardon of that Noble person, for that injury he hath done him in publick print? The third Assertion was this, That the greatest Anatomists and Practisers of our Age have been the greatest Chymists. For the proof of this, I need not take any great pains; seeing two of our latest Ana∣tomists and greatest Practisers may afford us so clear a testimony to the truth of this Assertion, I mean the eminently learned Doctor Willis and Sylvius; both which excellent Physicians have obtained an uni∣versal reputation throughout the world, for their admirable accomplishments in the Anatomick and practick part of Physick; and how highly they did esteem of Ana∣tomy, their great industry and pains there∣in, with their learned writings drawn
from that fountain, will sufficiently testifie to all posterity; witness that incompara∣ble book of Doctor Willis de Cerebro, with what he hath wrote de ventriculo, intestinis & pulmonibus; and Sylvius his disputationes Medicae; and though a friend of Mr. H. would perswade us that Sylvius his do∣ctrines had not their rise from Academies, but from his own and others Laboratories; yet I believe he will scarcely be credited by any ingenious Physician, that hath been conversant in his writings; for 'tis plain that Anatomy not Chymistry laid the first foundation of his Ternary of humors; by which he and his Disciples ever since have endeavour'd, not only to explicate the phaenomena of all distempers; but as stre∣nuously to defend. And for Dr. Willis, he hath plainly told us that his Pathological discourses are esta∣blished upon Anatomical observations. Now that both these great men were not meanly versed in the Spagyrical Art, I am sure your unanswerable friend will allow us; for as to the latter he hath told us, that he raised most of his doctrines from Chymical experiments, and verified them with pleasant and speedy cures, by joyning the use of plants and minerals together, both
Chymically prepared, which hath rendred him worthy the reading and imitating; and far∣ther saith, that the forementioned doctrines had not their rise from the Ancients, but most of them from Laboratories of his own and others, wrought out of the fire for near forty years toge∣ther, and confirmed by constant practice among the sick; in which work of curing he excel∣led all his Fellows in the most difficult cases. And as to the former, he hath acknow∣ledged to the world eleven years agone in publick print, that he was a Physician in∣deed and Philosopher by fire. The third I shall here name, is that pro∣found Chymist Borrichius, whose affection to Anatomy hath been so great and sur∣passing; that he hath been so far from thinking a year or half a years study suffici∣ent for its attainment; that he hath not only spent vast pains and labour in the dis∣section of humane bodies, but hath expres∣sed even the greatest curiosity of any one in our Age for the advancement of our Art by Anatomick discoveries; and so far was this generous soul, from esteeming it an honour for Paracelsus (whom I hope Mr. H. will own for a Chymist) to be thought an adversary to Anatomy; that his learned Pen hath been particularly en∣gaged
to vindicate him from that aspersion so unjustly cast upon him by Conringius; and therefore he acquaints the world with Paracelsus his great industry in the dissecti∣on of several Animals; and gives this following account of that great estimation, that famous Chymist had for Anatomy, out of his own works; which making much to our present purpose I shall crave leave to transcribe. And first, in his fragment, de peste, he tells us, that Paracelsus taught, Vulnerum curam ex partium laesarum naturâ cognoscen∣dam; that the cure of wounds was to be ob∣tained from understanding the nature of the parts affected. In his 11. Book de morbis verm. he asserts, ex Anatome constare, ver∣mes quandoque piam duramque matrem per∣tudisse & profectam inde phrenesin, vermes item in splene, felle, & pulmonibus genitos, That it doth appear from Anatomy, that Worms have sometimes made their passage through the membranes of the Brain, and from thence a Phrensie hath been occasion'd; and also, that Worms have been generated in the Spleen, Gall, and Lungs. And in his Book, de vit. long. cap. 11. principio, inquit, considerantur partes ejus, & hae ex locali Anatomiâ per locum totius
physici corporis, cum intellectu medullarum, conditionum, usus ligamentorum, formarum ossium, & cartilaginis, nervorum, carnis pro∣prietatum, septemque principalium membro∣rum virtutum, ut quid acturus sis in physico, teipsum intelligas ad hanc regulam; principio oportet probè cognitam habeamus universam rationem atque naturam cùm physici corporis, tum physicae vitae: In the beginning, saith he, are to be considered the parts, and these from local Anatomy, through the several parts of a natural body, with an understanding of the nature of medullary juices, of embalmings, use of the ligaments, shape of the bones, car∣tilages and nerves, properties of the flesh, offices of the seven principal members; that whatever thou dost in physical bodies, thou mayest understand thy self according to this rule; in the beginning it behoves us that we well understand the universal constitution and nature as well of a natural body as a natural life. And further, saith Borrichius, I think it will appear how great Paracelsus was in the Anatomy of beasts from his Book, de pestilit. tract. 1. where he saith, contemplare leonem & felem, quàm omninò Anatome docet utrumque formâ & habitu omni corporis invi∣cem convenire: contemplate the Lion and Cat,
which Anatomy doth teach to be alike in the form and habit of their bodies. And in his History of the Lion; feles, inquit, tam in∣signem habent conformationem cum leonibus, ut fundamentum quasi habere videatur fabula in Alcorano inventa, ubi narratur, quod felis in arcâ prognata sit ex sternutatione leonis. Catts, saith he, have such an exact conformi∣ty with Lions, that the fable invented in the Alcoran may seem to have its foundation from this, which tells you, that the Cat was gene∣rated in the Ark from the sneezing of the Lion. Nay further, in his Book de ulceri∣bus gallicis, prolixe probat usum genuinae Anato∣mes; he largely demonstrates the use of genuine Anatomy; and so far was Paracelsus from being an Adversary to this excellent Art, that Borrichius tells us, quod scripta Para∣celsi fatentur ex Anatomiâ cujusvis medici initium & finem esse, that the writings of Paracelsus do testifie that the beginning and end of every Physician is from Anatomy: and to conclude, he gives us this character of that great Chymist, quod progressus est in Anatome ultra vulgatas Anatomicorum metas, that his proficiency and excellency was such in Anatomy, that he exceeded the ordi∣nary attainments of Anatomists.
Now having thus brought so great a testimony for Anatomy out of the works of the greatest and most applauded Chymists of former Ages and of our own too; I hope Mr. H. will not be so bold for the future, as to speak so contemptibly against that noble Art; And lest he should suspect by this commendation of Paracelsus for Anatomy, that Borrichius was a man who gave not Chymistry its just value and due; let me recommend to his perusal those two incom∣parable books that he hath wrote of that subject, the one de ortu & progressu Chymiae; the other Hermetis, Aegyptiorum & Chymi∣corum sapientia ab Hermanni Conringii ani∣madversionibus vindicata; whereby he must be necessitated to own him; not only as a profound Chymist, understanding the rise, progress, and nature of that Art better than himself and all his companions; but as Master of greater Arcana in Chymistry than any they can reasonably pretend to; yea so great an Antiquary and universal Scholar hath he approved himself by the foremen∣tion'd books, that his learning and worth will be had in estimation by our own and succeeding ages. I might further acquaint Mr. H. with the ingenious Doctor Daniel Cox, a man
better versed in the Art of Chymistry, than any of Mr. H's Society; and yet so far from being an Adversary to Anatomy, that he hath publickly told the world, that no Phy∣sician, who hath any spark of curiosity or sense of his duty, but will endeavour to acquaint himself with these great processes of Nature, the preparation of the food, its distribution; respiration, muscular motion, and generation; to which we may add the exclusion of what is useless or burdensome: and then he can be no longer a stranger to her regular actings, and knows what are most likely to continue them such without interruption: but to attain this knowledge, the Physician must be at the ex∣pence of much money, time and labour, this skill not coming by inspiration, but is the re∣sult of innumerable experiments and observa∣tions, and therefore one dissection of a dead man is not sufficient to inform him, but he converseth with many other Animals living or dead, whereon he makes numerous experi∣ments, which by Analogy and induction he applies to man. Now that this ingenious Physician is no less acquainted with Chymical processes, than Anatomical dissections, I might easily prove by what he hath already acquainted the world withal, as to the great industry
and pains that he hath taken in the investiga∣tion of the nature of vegetables, &c. where∣by (as he hath told us) he can by an easie and genuine method prepare simples so that their whole Crasis shall be preserved entire, their vertues rather heightned than in the least impaired; and as for flowers, he can by a most natural and facile method without so much as the help of culinary fire, convert them into liquors exceedingly spirituous, which may be kept without loss of vertue for many years; nay, without any additament to vegetables than what they may receive from the air, he can procure copiously a Liquor, which rectifi∣ed, is not to be distinguished from spirit of Bloud, Soot, Harts-horn or other Urinous spi∣rits or salts; and mixed with highly de∣phlegmed spirit of Wine, will coagulate into the offa alba. I might likewise mention those excellent Experiments of his, lately communicated to the Royal Society; where he hath at large proved that alcalisate or fixed salts extracted out of the Ashes of vege∣tables, Volatile salts, and Vinous spirits do not differ from each other. And as for Medicines of the higher form in Chymistry, I wish Mr. H. could produce such as that ingenious Doctor is Master of, whose extraordinary effects he hath seen and can witness; as the
Volatile salt of Tartar, Basilius Valentinus his Tincture of Antimony, Tinctura Lilii, Hel∣monts Laudanum, his Aroph Paracelsi; the Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol, its Essential oyl, the tincture of gold, &c. And that I might not seem too tedious upon this subject, I will acquaint Mr. H. at present but with one more, who was no contemptible Chymist, though his Talent lay much more in practise; and for that he hath had an universal esteem from all learned men; who have been conversant in his book de peste: now for what estimation this learned Author Diemerbroeck hath for Ana∣tomy, you may judge by his Epistle to that late Body of Anatomy, that he hath pub∣lished where he tells you, quod Medica Ars sine Anatomicâ vix solidis fundamentis inni∣titur, & haec sine illâ inutilis est. That the Medical Art without the Anatomical is scarce∣ly fixed upon solid foundations, and without it 'tis nothing worth. Now pray, Mr. H. inform us, whether we may not more rationally hope for greater things from these mens labours, who are not less acquainted with the structure of humane bodies and Philosophical improve∣ments, than they are with the Spagyrical Art; than from an Empirical crew of men,
who can pretend to little better education than a Smiths Anvil, or some such Mecha∣nical trade? For 'tis sufficiently proved by the Honourable Mr. Boyle in that incompa∣rable book of his so often mention'd, that the Naturalists knowledge doth highly tend to the advancement of our Faculty in all parts of the Medical Art, which indeed was the principal, if not sole design of the Authors writing that Treatise; to which I shall refer all ingenious persons, not doubting but upon a serious perusal thereof, they will not only clearly discover the utter incapacity of our London Empiricks from making any future pretensions to improve∣ments in Physick; but readily acknow∣ledge the great obligations they owe to our famous Universities and learned Colledge of Physicians in London, from whose foun∣tains have been derived those great disco∣veries both in Nature and Art, relating to the Medical Science, whereby men may more happily be cured of their diseases and enjoy the blessings of a happy and pleasant life.
SECT. 3. As to Chymistry. I Shall in this Section endeavour to shew that Physicians educated in Universities, and particularly Members of the Colledge of Physicians, have been so far from being the hinderers of the Art of Chymistry, that they have been the great Improvers and promoters of it. As to the clearing of this Assertion to the satisfaction of all Impartial Readers; I shall crave leave to acquaint them; that our contest at present with this Empirical tribe of men, is not about the antiquity, excellency, or usefulness of this Art; nor yet about the Arcana majora in that Sci∣ence, which the Ancients did endeavour to perswade the world they were Masters of; for, by the by, let me tell them, that they have exploded their doctrines and principles, which were the very same with Aristotles and Galens (which are so much contemned by Mr. H. and others of his
Society) as may be seen at large in their writings of the Elements in general, and each of them in particular. And as to the great Arcana of the Anci∣ents, the universal by dissolution of Gold, liquor Alkahest, Ferment, grand Elixir, &c. there is none of them I presume, will dare to pretend to them; they being (as I con∣ceive) but bad Commentators upon so ob∣scure and dark a text; it being very well known to all men that have been conver∣sant in their writings, that they affected an Aenigmatical and Hieroglyphical stile, too difficult for these men to unfold. And therefore they have wisely conten∣ted themselves with Authors of a later date and lower form in Chymistry; which had they well understood, they would not have discoursed so contemptibly against the fountains of all good and ingenious litera∣ture and education, viz. the famous Uni∣versities of our own and foreign Countries; nor yet have fancied that a few preparati∣ons stolen out of Faber, Horstius, &c. should have merited such a splendid title as that of Aurora Chymica; nor that Antimonial or Mer∣curial preparations (the most dangerous, venenate and fatal Medicines, if not wisely and faithfully managed both by their Opera∣tors,
and those that exhibite them) should have deserved the estimation of remedies extracted by the Solar rayes; nor that an Infusion of Senna, Elecampane, Liquorice, Guajacum, Coriander and Annise-seeds in Aqua vitae, should have deserved the title of Elixir Salutis: nor a dissolution of Elaterium, Jalapp, Gummi gutta, or the like, in a little Brandy, or Spirit of Wine, drawn from Scurvy-grass; that of a Golden Purging Spi∣rit: nor yet that these Medicines should have suited all palates and constitutions, as they knavishly pretend. For 'tis no difficulty to prove that none of these Medicines (which they would gladly have the ignorant vulgar believe Universal) can cure diseases better, nor yet so well, as the Emetick Infusion which every Apothecary hath in his shop; nor as the Cathartick pills or potions which our Dispensatory doth sufficiently furnish us withal, and every Novice in our Art may easily prescribe: but the cures that are per∣formed by the forementioned remedies, are to be attributed to little else but the method of using them, which they as much con∣temn and ignore as learning it self. And therefore that they might maintain their repute with their ignorant Devotio∣nists,
they have affixed several monster-drop∣sied titles to their pretended Arcana; as Aqua Tetra-Chymagogon; Pilulae Anticachecticae, Pul∣vis Catholicus Emetico catharticus, Elixir Lysi∣ponon, Archei Sedativum & Anodynum, Bezoar∣dick and Anti-odontalgick powders fabricated by Sol and Luna; Panpharmacons, &c. which occasions those poor silly souls to fancy their Authors a form above Physicians, the very names of their remedies being more likely to fright or conjure away their diseases than their medicines. And as for their cures, that are cry'd up and down the streets in printed Bills, and patched on every post; I take them to be of as good credit as their Predecessor's O Dowdes; of which the ingenious Mr. Johnson formerly Operator to the Col∣ledge of Physicians hath given the world an account. And lest his testimony should not please them, or his credit be suspected, as having some dependence upon that learn∣ed Colledge; I shall acquaint them with what characters they have lately given each other in their printed bills; the one charg∣ing the other for an ignorant Dunce that cannot write three lines of true English and sence; for villany and poyson, &c. and for seve∣ral of the Cures that he pretends to have done
in several parts of England, he will prove them forged and lies; the other charging his Adversary for Felony, Burglary and other misdemeanors. And therefore one of the most ingenious of this gang of men, having formerly received an account out of several of the Counties of England, of the apparent, undeniable, and inexcusable tragedies that have been caused by taking these Empirical Medicines; hath told the world in Print, that their Universal remedies are but dange∣rous Venomes; and their Authors but stupid and blockish Philosophers; heteroclite pieces of mortality; as Weavers, Taylors, Botchers, Coblers, &c. who of late having thrown aside their Bodkins and Thimbles, Lasts, Awles, and Shuttles, are become (Asini ad Lyram) like so many Apes in a Carpenters work-room, &c. And lest Mr. H. should be offended with this relation I have given from some of his Brethrens writings, I will be so kind as to acquaint him with the operation of some of their famous, wonderful, and never failing Medicines, (as they term them) which have been attended with the following success. The first is discoursed of by Doctor Wil∣lis in the first part of his Pharmaceutice ra∣tionalis, p. 99. who there gives an account of the exhibition of two doses of a Cathar∣tick
powder from an Empirick to two Boyes; the effect whereof was this, that in one of them the powder wrought no less than an hundred times in the space of forty eight hours; the other it neither purged nor vomited; but in few days his hair fell off, and nails grew black, and in a short time aqueous pustles broke forth in all the habit of his body, which were soon hardned into crusty scabs, which were of so poysonous and venenate a nature, that the poor boy was miserably afflicted with them for above two years before any cure could be obtained; although the most ap∣propriate Medicines were not wanting during that time. The second by Doctor Castle; who in his Chymical Galenist acquaints us, p. 22. that having visited his learned friend Dr. Cox, he told him that he had been lately called to a Citizen of London, who upon taking a Vomit from an Empirick, fell into an Hy∣percatharsis, and out of that into dismal Convulsions, in which in despite of the most proper remedies he dyed. And 'tis not long since that my Apothe∣cary told me, that one of this Tribe being sent for to a poor Hostler in a Fever, whom finding after some dayes treatment in great
want of rest; he sent for a dram of Opium (at least 58 grains too much) with some Diascordium to give this Fellow inwardly; which the Apothecary understanding, re∣fused to supply him with, which caused him to husse like one of the Hectors of the Town, that his learning and skill should be called in question by an Apothecary, though it were to save a mans life. I could likewise acquaint Mr. H. with a Friend and Companion of his, who pro∣mising his Patient a speedy cure, per∣formed it in good earnest; the Physick he exhibited, being of such a deleterious, deadly quality, that its operation was not only incredibly violent; but in a short time it found its passage into the bloud, and from thence for several dayes discharged such large quantities of that noble and vital liquor; that the poor languishing Patient speedily dyed; notwithstanding the most rational and proper remedies that were made use of, by a very great and learned Physician to have prevented his death. And if Mr. H. were as good at an appli∣cation as I find him at a false quotation; I could tell him of a man that served seven years with an Apothecary, and travelled into Holland, Germany, France and Spain;
and thus spent eight and thirty years in laborious pains and travels to gain experience and know∣ledge in Physick above the common sort, and to look into the practise of the best Physicians and Artists of diverse Nations; and then coming into England well furnished with a Celestial liquor, and other remedies which himself and Patients might depend upon; very confidently undertook the Cure of a Gentleman that had for a year or two la∣boured under a pertinacious Jaundice and inveterate Dropsie (though given over by the most eminent and learned Physicians of our Age) promising to carry off the disease without any evacuating reme∣dies; yet after a weeks use of his Arcana, the Patient fell into violent Vomitings and dejections downwards, suffering forty or more evacuations in a short space; which giving some present relief, encouraged the Patient to continue the use of this Gentle∣mans Physick; which after a week or ten dayes time, procuring such another eva∣cuating paroxysm, it very unfortunately proved so high and fatal to the Patient, that he dyed in the Operation; the Physi∣cian by Certificate giving hopes of his re∣covery to the last moment of his life. Now surely Mr. H. had this Traveller been as
studious in his enquiries into the nature and causes of the forementioned distem∣pers, as he hath been into Chymical pre∣parations; he would not have exhibited those medicines so fortuitously; nor yet have passed a prognostick so ignorantly. And to conclude, I will at present trouble Mr. H. but with one story more of this friend of his; and that was of his exhibi∣tion of another of his effectual remedies to a young Virgin, which unexpectedly (as I presume) having the fortune of raising some slight Salivation, he ordered her to swallow her Spittle, which speedily pro∣duced such Symptoms, that both the Pa∣rents of the Child and the learned Physi∣cians that were afterwards sent for, did both judge her poysoned by the medicines exhibited; which proved so indeed; for in a very short space she dyed thereby. Now surely, Mr. H. had the foremen∣tioned person been half so good a Philoso∣pher or Physician as the learned Dr. Wither∣ly, or Dr. Hodges, whom he is pleased to call Novices; (although the former is a person of those excellent accomplishments in his Faculty, that his reputation is great with most persons of Quality in this famous City; and is Physician to his Majesties
own person; the later a person, to whom posterity will own themselves endebted, for leaving behind him so full and complete a History of the late direful London Plague) he would have under∣stood, that when Mercurial or other mine∣ral preparations had put the bloud into a fluor, and impregnated it with sowre and Vitriolick parts, it must needs be very dan∣gerous to swallow that saliva down, which would not only injure the Tone of the Sto∣mach, Intestines and other viscera, but de∣stroy the native temper of the bloud, Ani∣mal spirits and all the other noble juices of the body. And that, Mr. H. this dearly beloved friend of yours, may not for the future by such unjustifiable Arcana, ruine the lives and health of any more of his Patients in this kind, I will acquaint him with the fol∣lowing observation; which was of a poor silly Dog, who unfortunately lapping up a quantity of saliva in a Patients chamber of mine that was Salivated; immediately forsook his victuals, grew languid and weak, pining away to skin and bones, and in a short time dyed. But to proceed according to my former promise; I shall now endeavour to prove
that what advancement hath accrewed to this noble Art of Chymistry, did never own its original to these Adversaries of ours, or any of their Predecessors; but to Physicians of Academick education and Collegiate members. Which certainly is so far from a diffi∣culty to undertake; that whoever hath been acquainted with the learned writings of Mynsicht, Crollius, Faber Beguinus, Hartman, Grulingius, Horstius, Schroderus, Querce∣tan, Zwelfer, Becherus, Langelott, Borri∣chius, &c. (most of which men I hope Mr. H. will own to have been better vers'd in Chymistry than himself or any of his Companions) will give me their assent to so great a truth; which any ingenious person may be satisfied in, who pleaseth to peruse the forementioned Authors; but more especially the admirable Pharmaco∣poeas of the learned Quercetan and Zwel∣fer; the one having acquainted the world with the great improvements, that may be made in the medicinal part of Physick by Chymical Pharmacy; the other no less judiciously correcting the errors of the com∣mon Pharmacopoeias; and substituting re∣medies that might answer the same inten∣tions the Authors expected from their
former compositions, but much more effi∣caciously. And surely he that reads, how learnedly the great Borrichius hath defended this ex∣cellent Art against Cnringius; will not on∣ly admire what he hath written upon that subject, but expect something great in Chymistry from that learned man. And for the famous Langelott, there is none who hath been acquainted with the admirable remedies he hath already discovered, but must acknowledge that he hath been very conversant with Nature even in her greatest secrets. And he that hath read over the famous Becherus his Physica subterranea, will scarcely scruple to allow us, what vast improvements have been already made from these true Adepts of Nature; who having divulged to the world the great familiarity they already enjoy in her palace, what may be expected from them, when they come to be admitted as part of her Cabinet Counsel? Now good Mr. H. do you or any of your friends give us parallel instances of the like improvements that have been made by any of your Society in this Art we contend about, and we will ingenuously give them their due; but for my own part I profess
that I know not of any, neither do I be∣lieve that such instances can be produced, and then what little reason hath Mr. H. to glory of that great spirit that is now up and at work for further and further improvement amongst the working Physicians, as he terms those of his own fraternity? And though he hath taken the pains to transcribe that thred bare story of Querce∣tan and Sir Theodore Mayerne out of that unanswerable book (as he ignorantly calls it, having I perceive never perused the re∣plies to it) Medela Medicinae, in perpetuum rei scandalum, as his friend would have the world believe; yet how little to the pur∣pose, you may observe by the following account. In p. 23. he tells us that in the year 1603. the laborious famous Quercetan and Sir Theodore de Mayerne, were both of them in two several publick Sentences of the Academi∣an Professors, and whole Colledge of Physicians in Paris, printed by their order, condemned, (and in positive terms the whole Art it self of Chymistry) as men not only unworthy to be consulted with by the Physicians of the Col∣ledge; especially Mayerne, declaring him an unlearned, impudent, drunken mad fellow; exhorting all Nations to abominate them both,
and banish them and the like practisers out of their Territories, as Monsters of man∣kind: and threatning all the Fellows of that Colledge, that if they did consult with either of them about any Patient, they should be deprived of all priviledge belonging to their Colledge. Well quoted Mr. H! had you known when you had done well, you would have proceeded no farther in this relation, but I perceive you were near the pitch of one and thirty when you transcribed this story, and then unfortunately all came out, for Children, &c.—witness what follows in the very same page where he tells us; That for all this, the one of those condemned persons became famous in France, the Kings chief Physician, and lived to see that Colledge repent of their folly, and their successors become admirers of those Chymical books and remedies which they had so rashly damned. The other (viz. Mayerne) became Physician to two Kings of England, and two of France, and left a name of great wealth and honour be∣hind him. To this story of your friend's M. N. which I have observed twice quoted by himself, and once by Mr. H. I might return this an∣swer; that Chymistry was then in its in∣fancy
in France, and therefore no wonder that it met with such opposition even from a learned Society; seeing it was not the fate of that Art alone to meet with so ill and unjust entertainment: For Anatomy it self (which is so much damn'd and hector'd against by you and your companions) hath born its share in that kind; witness that ex∣cellent story of Democritus, who was esteemed no better than a mad man by the Senate and people where he lived, for se∣cluding himself from company to investi∣gate the nature and use of the bilis; which occasioned the great Hippocrates by request of the Senate, &c. to come a perilous & trouble∣some voyage by Sea, to undertake his cure; who finding him diligently employed in the dissection of Animals; he commended his industry, admired his wisdom, and ac∣cused his friends of madness in their cen∣sures: which madness how much it hath possessed Mr. H. and the Pseudo-Chymists of our Age, I will leave to the judgment of any judicious person, who hath been con∣versant in their writings. And lest this they should think the only case we can produce, I could tell them of the unkind usage and ill treatment that our immortal Doctor Harvey met with; for
that great invention of his, the circulation of the bloud; for which posterity will both admire and bless him. And if there were need, I might tell him of many more; but though I should, I fear it would be to little purpose; for his and his Brethrens ignorance and confidence do make them more irreconcileable to Ana∣tomy, than the Colledge of Paris ever was to the learned Quercetan and famous Mayern. But to proceed in giving Mr. H. a closer answer; I now would gladly know of him, how much this story is quoted to his pur∣pose; and what it is that he hath so wisely collected from it? For let any judicious man read it, and he may plainly observe that the persons that were thus severely damned (as he terms it) were not Empiricks, but Doctors of Physick, men of Academick education; great Philosophers and Natu∣ralists, (which in Mr. H. and our Adversa∣ries, opinions could make them no better, than idle and formal Speculators, Academian Thinkers, Medicasters and talking Book-Doctors,) only they lived in an age, where∣in other Physicians education and practise had too much prejudiced them against the noble Art of Chymistry; which prejudice
(it seems) by Mr. H's own confession was not so great, but they lived to repent of their folly; and their successors became admirers of those Chymical books and remedies. 'Tis well then, Mr. H. I perceive the Colledge of Paris is now in your favour; for by your own quotation and confession, they are be∣come admirers of those books and medicines they formerly damned: This passage I must own did so much please me when I read it, that I was in some hopes to have found the Colledge of London received into favour in the next page; but no such matter, the man forgetful of what he had quoted but in the page before about the Colledge of Paris, tells us quite another tale, viz. that Corporations of Physick have been the great hinderers of the progress of this Art throughout Europe, and still are: well ob∣served Mr. H! but what testimony have we for this so bold and confident an asser∣tion? the chief that I can find is this, that the Colledge of Paris did damn two learned men, and soundly repented for their pains; which repentance was so serious that it left such an impression upon their posterity, that they admired (as I before mentioned) both the men and their remedies, which their Predecessors so rashly condemned; and yet
they must be quoted upon every occasion as enemies to this Art of Chymistry. But not withstanding these contradictions, which ought to be allowed to a man that makes so little of Academick learning; pray what is all this Harangue to the Col∣ledge of Physicians in London? especially seeing 'tis so well known, that the famous Sir Theodore de Mayerne was so far from be∣ing an Adversary to Corporations of Physick, that he was a member of this learned So∣ciety. But to proceed, I shall further endeavour to clear the truth of my assertion; and see∣ing Mr. H. discovers so much anger against the Colledge of Paris, I will acquaint him out of one of their own Countrey mens writings and an eminent Chymist too, Le Febure, lately Royal Professor to His Ma∣jesty of England, and Apothecary in Ordina∣ry to his Honourable Houshold, and Fellow of the Royal Society; what improvements have been made in this Art by men of Academick education in France, and those whom I presume might be of their Colledge too. And in the first place he tells us, that Phy∣sicians are the fountains from whence all first receive the noble knowledge of true Natural things, and the manner of preparing them
well And that Mr. H. may be assured that he intended not by the name Physicians, any of his Tribe; that like not (as he terms it) that Feather in the Cap; he doth particularly and ingenuously acknowledge his obligations to those learned men, to whom he was so much endebted for his attainmens in Chymical pharmacy. The one was, Dr. Duhan Doctor of Physick and Professor of Philosophy, who promoted him much in his diligent searching into physical verities; yea so eminent was this Doctor in his knowledge in Chymistry, that he tells you, that France suffered much by his untimely death, he designing to publish some writings, that would have much illu∣strated the knowledge of things natural, Me∣dicine and Pharmacy. The second was M. du Clos Doctor of Physick, who did him the favour (as he frankly and ingenuously acknowledgeth) to correct his defaults, and lead him by the hand of his judgment and experience, through all that which he had undertaken in his endea∣vours; to advance the dignity of Pharmacy, which now (saith he) lies bending towards its ruines; if it be not upheld by its true Ar∣ches and pillars; the faithful, learned, ex∣perienced and curious Physicians; nay far∣ther,
he confesseth, that he was endebted to this Doctor for the well-being he had ac∣quired in his Profession. The third was, Mons. Vallot, chief Physi∣cian to the present King of France, from whose unfathomed depths of learning and ex∣perience he yet obtained farther light and knowledge in this Art: So that he owns him, for the true Father and Restorer of Medicine and Chymistry, and tells us, that he could not do less than to let posterity know, how much he stood endebted to the bounty, learn∣ing and sole generosity of this great and illustri∣ous Mecaenas. And to conclude, he frankly tells the world, in that excellent Book of his, called his Com∣plete Body of Chymistry; that he hath given nothing therein, but what hath been received from Physicians, so that 'tis to them only to whom you owe the obligation. But to come nearer home, let me tell Mr. H. that this is not all the evidence that I can produce for the proof of my assertion; for 'tis very well known that the lately mentioned Sir Theodore Mayerne and old Doctor Rugeley were members of the Colledge of Physicians, and persons so emi∣nently skilled in this Art we contest about, that I doubt not but our Adversaries them∣selves
will allow us their suffrage to the truth thereof: And so far was that learned Colledge from discouraging Chymistry in those early dayes, that 'tis very well known, they had a constant Operator employed by them. And for our own time, who is ignorant of the great abilities of several of the members of that worthy Society? witness the excellent Dr. Rugely, Dr. Jonathan God∣dard (who lately dyed) Dr. Merret, &c. the first of which eminent Physicians, is not only a Gentleman of universal learning and accomplishments both of body and mind; but of that profound insight into the Art of Chymistry, that were Mr. H's beloved Helmont now alive, he could give him no less character than I have done. I might farther mention several other members of that worthy Society, and Uni∣versity Physicians too, whose private Labo∣ratories, and continued pains that have been spent in them, for the publick good, and particular benefit of their Patients; might make these men ashamed (if they had any ingenuity left them) to pretend that they are, and have been the great hinde∣rers of the progress of this Art throughout Europe: which is so notoriously false, that
I shall crave leave to acquaint them with what improvements have been made in Chymistry, by one more of the late Fel∣lows of that learned Colledge, and that was the excellent Doctor Willis, who was likewise Professor of Natural Philo∣sophy in the famous University of Oxford, and Fellow of the Royal Society in Lon∣don; who hath not only ingenuously communicated many good medicines, which are scattered up and down his works; but was master of greater Arcana in Chy∣mistry, than any our Adversaries can rea∣sonably pretend to; which any rational man will grant me, that seriously and consi∣deratively readeth over that incomparable book of his de Febribus, and especially the first part of it de fermentatione. Where he hath most judiciously and learnedly acquainted all ingenious Physi∣cians and Naturalists, with the reasons that prevailed with him, to imbrace the Spagy∣rical principles, for the explication of all the difficult phaenomena in Nature, as well as in humane bodies; and very learnedly demonstrated their true existence; which having done, he gives us an admirable ac∣count of the great alterations that are made in the works of Nature and Art, viz. in
the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral king∣doms, from the intestine combination and motion, separation and dissolution of these active principles. And in the ninth Chapter of that Tract, he hath furnished us with such a learned and satisfactory account of the several men∣strua that are most proper, for the solution of all natural bodies; whose vinculum doth chiefly consist in Sulphureous, Saline or Terrestrial parts; that none who readeth him, but must admire him for an acute Philosopher, as well as a profound Chy∣mist: for the knowledge of these doth in∣deed accomplish a Physician for the im∣provement of Chymical Pharmacy; espe∣cially if we add hereto a full understanding of the true nature of Fermentation, Di∣gestion and Circulation, which our Author was no stranger to. And truly I may be bold to say that we may expect far greater attainments in this Art from him, that throughly understands the forementioned operations, than from the whole Club of our London Empiricks; who generally are ignorant, not only of the constitutive principles of those Bodies, they would pretend to analyse; but likewise of their proper Solvents.
And therefore the learned Doctor Willis just before mentioned, hath well acquain∣ted us in his Epistle to that admirable book of his, which he calls, his Pharmaceutice rationalis, what we may expect from this sort of men, where he tells us; Dum mine∣ralia inscitè tractant, eventum quendam in∣certum expectantes, potius quàm aliquid seriò designantes; si forsan productum insolitum ap∣paruerit, cum novo hoc Pharmaco (cujus virtutes prorsus ignotae, saepe aut nullae aut maleficae existunt) morbos statim omnes sana∣turos pollicentur, ipsúmque in quovis casu ad magnam aegrotantis noxam & non rarò perniciem audacter exhibent: adeò securè & temerariè solent carnifices isti de corio humano ludere, dum ad medicamenta ista (in quibus aculeus semper latet venenosus) aut paranda, aut ex∣hibenda nullo consilio, nulliúsque methodi filo, sed mero casu & caeco quodam impetu ducun∣tur: i. e. Whilst they unskilfully handle mi∣nerals, rather expecting an uncertain event, than prosecuting any serious design; if by chance any unusual product doth appear, they straightway promise the cure of all diseases from that new Medicine; whose vertues are altogether unknown; or it may be pernicious, or none at all; and this they boldly exhibite in any case to the great injury of the Patient,
nay it may be to his utter ruine; so rashly and confidently do these Butchers of mankind sport away the precious lives of men, whilst they adventure upon the preparation and exhibition of such medicines as these (in which there is constantly latent some venemous sting) not being directed thereto by any advice or me∣thod, but meerly driven on by chance and blind rashness. But to proceed in a farther account of our excellent Authors attainments in Chy∣mistry, which we may find, if we will take the pains to peruse the second part of the forementioned book, which treateth de febribus, and the third de urinis; where he hath given us an incomparable account of the constituent principles both of humane blood, and urine; from whence he hath rationally and ingeniously deduced such use∣ful Hypotheses, for the explication of the phaenomena of both, in a natural and preter∣natural state; that no Age can paral∣lel. And though some boasting Empiricks, have pretended a confutation of his learned writings in the title pages of their scurrilous books; yet to how little purpose, any in∣genious person may be satisfied, who is willing for his curiosity to lose so much
precious time as to read them over: And therefore our learned Author did very pru∣dently return them no other answer but the following (the most proper that could be contrived for those Adversaries of his, whose writings were stuffed with little else but Billingsgate language) Quandoquidem Empirici nonnulli, arreptâ tam quidlibet im∣pune scribendi, quàm ludendi de corio humano licentiâ; placita mea, quae non satis intelli∣gunt, passim dilacerant, & convellunt; & quò speciosiùs merces suas venditent, libello∣rum titulis me Triumphatum praedicant; hos non aliter quàm silentio & contemptu re∣darguam, utpote quorum scripta & responso in∣digna sunt & spreta exolescent: nec majo∣ris illos aestimo, qui argumentorum loco, tan∣tùm opprobria & convitia ingerentes, debaccha∣ri potius quàm Philosophari videntur. Where∣as some Empiricks having taken the liberty of writing any thing, as well as dallying with the lives of men, do rudely treat those opinions of mine, which they do not well understand; and that their books might more speciously sell, they carry me in Triumph in their title pages: But to these men I shall return no other answer but silence and contempt; whose writings are not worthy of a better, and being contemned will vanish of themselves and be forgotten:
neither have I greater estimation for those men, who do rather rage and rail like mad and drun∣ken sotts; than reason like Philosophers, prin∣ting little else but ill language and revilings. But it may be Mr. H. will not yet allow me (notwithstanding this so clear demon∣stration which I have given of the surpas∣sing abilities of this learned man) that he was so great a Proficient in the Spagyri∣cal Art as himself, or some of his Compa∣nions would pretend to be: But suppose, Mr. H. that I should produce a greater and truer evidence, for the con∣firmation of this assertion, out of that un∣answerable book of your friend's, Doctor Mar∣chamont Nedhams, which you at large have told us p. 23. was written eleven years ago; than you have produced out of the honou∣rable Mr. Boyle against Anatomy, and that without everting the design of the Author or a false quotation; would this be a means to silence your confidence for the future, and make you more wary in railing against Academick education and Collegiate mem∣bers? I confess one would think it should; and therefore out of respect and kindness to you, for some real favours that you have formerly done to some deserving persons; I shall desire you to read over the beginning
of p. 237. of that book called Medela Me∣dicinae, where you will find, that your un∣answerable friend having told the world in the latter part of the page preceeding, that all along that Treatise, he had said little but what was in the language of the best writers of this latter Age, or agreeable to their sense; he there craves leave to make use of one, who is (I may well say) the Ornament of our Nation next to immortal Harvey, by name Doctor Willis, Professor of Natural Philoso∣phy in the University of Oxon; one that hath made himself a Physician indeed, and Philosopher by Fire. And in p. 336. he tells you, that he thought it necessary to give the Reader a taste of Doctor Willis his new Doctrine about Urines, which certainly (saith he) is much more agree∣able to reason than any thing that was ever said before upon that subject, and must needs be abundantly more conducible to the practise of Physick; seeing it directs our judgment not by meer outward appearances and bare observations of old; but by an ac∣commodation of our understandings in the real principles which are in Urines, the same as in mens bodies; from whence doubtless a more certain way of judgment must needs arise, than can be imagined by any
other course that may be taken to judge by Urines, concerning the state of the blood and its diseases. I cannot therefore but re∣commend that Tract of Urines to ingenious Practisers, as a more sure guide than any that they can meet with in former Authors. And in p. 415. of the same book he owneth, that this learned Doctor had the honour of opening the eyes of the world, more than any before him (his acute Helmont not excepted) about the nature of Fevers. Now pray, Mr. H. let me perswade you to take the pains seriously to peruse and consider these passages faithfully quoted out of your unanswerable book, and then let us understand the reason, why you made so bold a challenge, and that in the view of the world, to the whole Colledge of Physi∣cians, as to nominate any one particular of improvement that their Society have made in the Art of Curing since their first incorpora∣tion, &c. seeing that your ingenious friend in that very book you quoted as unanswer∣able, hath told the world that Dr. Willis did understand the nature of Fevers more than any before him, and consequently the Cure: nay further (as I just before quoted) he frankly owneth, that the Doctors principles about Urines were the
same as in mens bodies, which must needs be abundantly more conducible to the practise of Physick, and to judge of the state of the blood and its diseases, than any that were formerly delivered. Now certainly, Mr. H. those doctrines which can acquaint us, with the real con∣stituent principles of the blood, and other humors and recrements of humane bodies, with their various preternatural affections, must of necessity tend to one particular im∣provement, and be abundantly conducible to the practise of Physick; which you by no means will allow the Colledge since their first In∣corporation, but will undertake to prove the contrary, as you have boldly asserted, p. 15. But seeing, Mr. H. by the account you have given of your travels, and your quacking Avocations; I may justly suspect that you have not had time to search into all that hath been written by the learned members of that Honourable Society; I will be so ingenuous for the present, as to ac∣quaint you with another particular of im∣provement, that was made in the Art of curing, by the learned Doctor Glisson, Dr. Bates, and Doctor Regemorter; and that was the Rickets, a disease altogether unknown to the Ancients; it being the Endemial
distemper of our own Nation. And if there were need, I could mention several other improvements in this Art, which have been made by this learned Society, but that Mr. H's desiring an instance but of one, hath prevented my discoursing any further at present on this subject. But to proceed, Mr. H. tells us, p. 28. of ingenious men that were not educated in a Col∣legiate way, who afterwards betaking them∣selves to learn the Art of Physick in the most proper way, which is by labour; have soon outstript the Scholasticks in right knowledge of the materia medica. To this I answer, that Mr. H. had done well, if he had acquainted us with those ingenious men, who by their labour have outstript the Scholasticks in right knowledge of the materia medica, for we know very well that dolus versatur in universalibus: and farther give me leave to tell him, that I am not of his belief, that manual opera∣tion alone will fit any man, (much less those of his mechanical Tribe) for any great improvement in the materia medica; it being very well known, that no person is truly capable of performing any thing great in Chymical pharmacy, who is ig∣norant of the constituent principles of
those bodies he operates upon, or of those to whom his remedies are to be exhibited; and therefore it was one of the chief designs of that noble Author Mr. Boyle in that Treatise of his, so often mentioned, the usefulness of Experimental Natural Philoso∣phy, to shew, how much the Naturalists knowledge might be serviceable to him, in the improvement of all the parts of Physick, and more especially the Pharmaceutical: and surely if labour be the most proper way to advance this Art, the Smiths, Brewers and Colliers may be greater Proficients therein, than Mr. H. or the most learned of his companions; for 'tis certain, they are much more able by labour and pains to obtain it: but the contrary is manifest, by the writings of the learned Quercetan, Zwelfer and other eminent Chymists, who had never been capable of doing half that service in Pharmacy, for which the world is so much endebted to them; had they not been as great Philosophers, as they were Operators. And therefore that excellent Chymist Le Febure hath well observed the two following maxims. 1. That Chymistry doth not meerly consist in the skill of preparing well a remedy, as many do erroneously imagine; but in the using
of it with due circumstances, and respect to the Theorems of Art, which is properly the true Physick. 2. That whosoever meddles with Chymical remedies, without the previous grounds of Theory, can deserve no other name than of an Empirick; since he is altogether ignorant of the internal efficient causes of their effects, and cannot give the physical reasons, why he doth administer such a remedy for such and such disease. And further I can acquaint Mr. H. with several of the members of the Colledge of Physicians now living, who for their ele∣gant and rational prescriptions, and true knowledge of the materia medica, do not only excel Mr. H. and all his Society; but are highly honoured for their admirable and surpassing improvements therein, by all of their own Faculty; as witness the most ac∣complished Dr. Thomas Cox, Dr. Wolf, &c. And though Mr. H. is pleased to tell us, p. 20. that remedies well prepared by Chymi∣cal Art, seem to be as the hands of God reached down from heaven in this latter age, in exceed∣ing mercy to poor man, when his iniquities have so altered the whole scene of diseases, &c. which makes them exceedingly different from what they were in the dayes of Hippocrates
and Galen, and indeed from what they were a hundred years ago, and less; so that the old Art and remedies are insufficient to deal with them. To this I answer, that in my opinion Mr. H's Divinity is as heterodox as his Phy∣sick hath been; for 'tis a little odd to con∣ceive that the iniquities of men should have been the procuring causes of exceeding mercy; I do therefore very much fear, that Mr. H. hath been as great a stranger to his Bible as he hath been to Philosophy; else he might have observed, and that without the help of Spectacles, that all the judgments that God Almighty hath inflicted upon poor man, have been procured by his sins; amongst the number of which Judgments Mr. H. might well have ranked his Chymical re∣medies, which have proved so indeed to some that have made use of them; as I have lately mention'd; and then I am sure they can procure but little commendation to his Art. And as for his discourse of the great alte∣ration of diseases since Hippocrates and Ga∣lens time, from whence he would prove that the old Art and remedies are altogether in∣sufficient; let me tell him, that there are so full and satisfactory Answers given to his
friend upon that subject, that I should in∣jure those learned men, should I now dwell or insist long upon that controversie; and therefore I shall recommend to his perusal those four books which were written against his friend's Medela medicinae ten or eleven years agone: only by the by let me tell him, that 'tis possible that the old Art and remedies may be sufficient to deal with the diseases of our dayes, though much altered from those in former times; but that 'tis Mr. H's and the rest of his Compani∣ons misfortune, that they understand not how to exhibite them, being so great con∣temners of a rational methodical practise; by which I must frankly own, that I have seen far greater cures performed with Chic∣ken-broth, Whey, Milk and Water, &c. than by all their applauded Chymical Ar∣cana. And further for that alteration of diseases they discourse of; I could tell them of a Physician of the learned Colledge they so much decry; who hath done more service to the publick in acquainting the world with a faithful History of the Acute dis∣eases of our dayes, with their specifical dif∣ferences, and happy cures, by the old re∣medies, they so much damn; than they
or any of their Predecessors have done by all their books that ever they printed, or medicines they published. And though we may allow, that the Theories of Fevers and other distempers may possibly of late, by the industry of Collegiate members, have been built upon more solid foundations, than for∣merly; yet this is so far from occasioning us to reject the good old remedies and me∣thods of practise, that Doctor Willis hath well observed, Quod indicationes quaedam, antiquitus receptae, adhuc ratae perstant, erúnt∣que in perpetuum observandae; quia Experi∣entiae primae hujus artis magistrae debentur: that some indications that were of old received, are yet approved, and will for ever be obser∣ved, because they owe their original to experi∣ence, the first mistress of Art. And to the same purpose, he discourseth of the remedies that were used by the Ancients, and no less valued by the Moderns. And no less ingeniously did the learned Doctor Castle acquaint the world in the Epistle to his Chymical Galenist, where he solidly and rationally asserts, that the practical part of Physick being grounded upon experience, doth not so much depend upon the notional; that, this being overthrown, the other must necessarily fall to the ground, the
Fancies and reasonings of Philosophers and Physicians being built upon the practice; and signifying not much more to the Funda∣mentals of the Art of Physick, than pinnacles to the body and foundation of a building, which (though they be blown down) may stand un∣shaken: much of the Therapeutick part of Physick being (as he hath well observed) like Dials and Almanacks, which agree as well with that of Copernicus, as Ptolomy's Hypothesis: Therefore saith he, as the An∣cients made a true use of the light and heat of the Sun, in distinguishing and measuring times and seasons, and managing of their husbandry, though probably they err'd in their notion of his motion round the earth; so did the Physiians no less happily imploy Apollo's Art in the Curing of diseases, though they were ignorant of the true motion of the bloud, and of (the Sun of the Microcosm) the heart. But to conclude this discourse about Chymistry; I would gladly know of Mr. H. why the Chymical mineral medica∣ments set down in the London Pharmacopoeia, are things but of the lowest form in Chymistry, and neglected by knowing men in this Age of improvement? And that because I find upon a serious perusal of them, that the
learned Quercetan and Sir Theodore Mayerne (whom you will own I hope as most emi∣nent Chymists) have been the Authors, Approvers and Defenders of some of them, and have raised so great a reputation to their names by their successful administra∣tions, that they both became eminently famous in our own and foreign Courts and Cities: but now it seems, they are neglected by knowing men in this Age of im∣provement; I confess, I should be very thankful to Mr. H. to acquaint us with those knowing men he boasts of; and of their great improvements in Chymical phar∣macy; for let me tell him, how contem∣ptibly soever he and his companions do think of the London Dispensatory; the best Chymists of them all, would be at a great loss for a key to open most mineral bodies, if they should exclude their proper solvents which are there to be found; And it may be in stubborn and chronical disea∣ses, they might be glad to steal now and then some Chalybeate or Mercurial prepa∣ration out of that contemptible book; and yet rail at it, for affording them that kindness at so dead a lift: and further I might tell them that in acute diseases, there are as efficacious Chymical medicines to
be found in that Dispensatory, as most of their Laboratories will afford: and doubt∣less did any of their Shops or Furnaces sup∣ply them with half so many of those Chy∣mical oyles, Mineral solvents, Diaphore∣tick powders, Chalibeate, Vitriolick, An∣timonial, Mercurial and Anodyne prepa∣rations; Essential and Lixivial salts, with safe and experimental Chymical Emeticks and Catharticks, &c. that are there to be found; we should have had them applauded for Polyacea's, and Panacea's too: some of which, might probably have as well an∣swered the Helmontians primary indication in the cure of diseases, as their singular Arcana of so general use fabricated out of Mercury; it being, as they tell us, the pacifying, indulging and gratifying the Ar∣cheus, the Architectonical contriver of our first being; every Atome of those generous remedies, sending forth lively illustrious beams; with the intuition of which, the Ar∣cheus being wonderfully affected and infinitely delighted, it layeth aside all morosity, melan∣choly, exorbitant passions, and the entertain∣ment of deformed Ideas; by means whereof an Eutaxie, Eucrasie and Symmetrie in the inferior orbs of the Microcosm follows: and others of them, as fully their second prin∣cipal
indication, which is, as they say, the ablation of the inward efficient Cause and the outward occasional irritating matter, by such generous remedies, which taking part with Nature, might help her to conquer evils and exclude the Nosopoietick thorns and briars, those goads in the sides of the Archeus, exti∣mulating it to enormous passions and perturba∣tions, through the Sluce and outlet most patu∣lous and convenient: as an Acid son of Helmont hath lately discours'd in his direct method of curing Chymically. But to proceed, notwithstanding the Lon∣don Dispensatory hath furnished us with the forementioned Chymical preparations, it must not only be hector'd against, but damned by Mr. H. and his Companions; either because it pretends not to teach them the preparations of the Solar, Lunar, Mer∣curial, Saturnal, Jovial, Venereal and Mar∣tial, Metalline Sulphures or Coelestial Li∣quors; or rather, because it hath that un∣pardonable fault accompanying it, viz. its Authority from the learned Colledge of Physicians in London; which will certain∣ly give it a far greater reputation amongst all judicious men, than the Chymical Champion of your cause will give the Apo∣thecaries Laboratory, by telling the world
that since he had found the Company of Apo∣thecaries had erected a Laboratory at their Hall, for supply of their Shops with Medicines of all sorts of the Chymical preparation, he was resolved wholly to refer Patients with bills to receive medicines dispensed by their hands; which new device, though expected to prove advantageous, yet I wish he finds it not (as you prognosticate of the Anato∣mists of our Age) the last part he hath to play or trick to shew, to entertain Spectators, and amuse the world, to uphold some repute among such as are ignorant, and draw on Custo∣mers; and for my own part, I am to apt be∣lieve that this action of his, may be so ill re∣sented amongst his Brethren the Arcana∣mongers of London, that it may occasion some intestine faction in your Empirical Commonwealth, as hath lately been pub∣lickly managed by some of your Tribe; but then 'tis to be hoped that when knaves fall together by the ears—
SECT. 4. The usefulness of Method in the Cure of Diseases. HAving thus far proceeded in the de∣monstration of what I promised; I come now to enter upon some short dis∣course of the methodus medendi; which though our Adversaries, nay it may be our friends may not judge worth the con∣tending for; yet I think fit to give all in∣genious persons an account of the great usefulness, yea necessity of the strict obser∣vation of it; and that because I frequently observe, that the Enthusiastick Pseudo-Chy∣mists of our Age, do so much contemn and decry it; being masters (as they pretend) of such great Arcana in Physick, as will happily Cure diseases without it. I shall therefore endeavour to clear the truth of this assertion, by producing seve∣ral instances both of Acute and Chronical diseases, whose happy Cure is principally (if not solely) to be attributed to the pru∣dent method of the discreet and judicious
Physician; amongst the number of which, I shall first begin with Fevers; they being to be ranked amongst the most Epide∣mical distempers we know of. And in the first place, we will discourse of those, that are generally owned as pu∣trid; in which are constantly observed ra∣tione motûs, four considerable mutations, viz. their beginning, augmentation, state and declination. In the beginning of which putrid Fevers, 'tis usually observed; that the Sulphureous parts of the blood growing too luxuriant, do break forth into a flame; agitating the whole mass in a preternatural manner; whereby its crasis is in danger of being de∣stroyed, its vessels too much distended; and if not timely calmed, affections of the Head and Nerves, with pain and spasms do usually ensue: wherefore in this state of the disease, here are present indications for Phlebotomy to ventilate this mass of blood; for a spare and refrigerating diet; for Emeticks, (if indicated) lenient Ca∣tharticks, Clysters, &c. which many times are no less prosperously than judiciously prescribed; this formidable distemper be∣ing nip't in its bud, it Sulphureous pabulum being extracted by bleeding,
Clysters, &c. or its disorder quieted by a cooling diet. But if notwithstanding the proper appli∣cation of the forementioned remedies, this Febrile flame cannot be extinguished; but it still encreaseth to a higher degree, so that intolerable thirst and inquietude, head∣ache and watchfulness, with delirium and phrensies do continually attend our Pati∣ents: here are fresh indications for repeated phlebotomy, clysters, cooling Julips and decoctions, &c. whereby the spirits may be refreshed, the parched viscera cooled; and if possibly, the motion of the blood so moderated, that it may not injure the head or genus nervosum. In the state of this disease, we are dili∣gently to attend Natures motions; that so we might observe whether a future Crisis may be expected or not; which if it doth appear a perfect and salutiferous one; the febrile heat declines, signs of concoction appear in their urines, and all things prog∣nosticate a speedy and happy recovery: But on the other hand, if Natures attempts be too weak for making a full discharge of that adust, febrile matter, which hath passed its due deflagration, and is fitted for expulsion; we ought then to afford her
some gentle assistance by some mild Dia∣phoretick or lenient cathartick; according∣ly as we observe at that nick of time the tendency of her motions: But if we find, that in this state of the Fever, there is no Crisis; or at best, but an imperfect one at∣tempted by Nature; the Patients pulse be∣ing very weak, and his spirits low; we must then be very cautious of any evacua∣tion by Sweat or Stool, it being not to be attempted without manifest danger of the Patients life: And therefore we should ra∣ther allow her time, and attend her dili∣gently; until the blood being reduced to a more orderly motion, and the spirits re∣cruited, she may gradually make secretion and exclusion of the morbifick matter, in order to the obtaining of her due and na∣tive temper; than encrease the too great and unhappy confusion she is already under, by exhibiting any high Diaphoreticks or Catharticks; this being a time, that nothing of medicine is to be allowed, unless it be some very temperate Cardiack. In the declination of this distemper, an exactness of diet is to be observed; and at length some gentle purgations to be pre∣scribed, to exterminate the reliques of that febrile matter, which probably may be al∣ready
protruded out of the Meseraick Ar∣teries in order to its discharge by the in∣testines; lest it should be again resorbed, and a relapse ensue thereupon; upon which account we do likewise as strictly forbid the Patients over-hasty eating of flesh-meat, until their Urines appear in colour, con∣sistence and hypostasis like to those who are in a healthful state; and then we direct them to begin with broths, and so gradu∣ally to adventure upon a flesh diet. To this purpose hath the learned Doctor Willis acquainted us in that excellent book of his de febribus. Now pray let sober and judicious men consider, what apparent hazards and dan∣gers they must necessarily adventure upon, by employing any, but Physicians well skill'd in their Faculty; seeing 'tis apparent by the foremention'd account of Fevers, (which I have faithfully acquainted them with) what diligence and judgment ought to be made use of in every state of this disease; that so the Patient might happily be restored to his pristine health and temper. But now let us suppose, that in the first attack of this distemper, an Empirick should be sent for, who being ignorant of
its nature, should presently exhibite some of his well rectified spirits of strong liquors, compleat Aqua vitae, Punch, Analeptical and refocillating wines, &c. can any rational man imagine that these hot and fiery me∣dicines, should be any ways proper to bridle the tumult and ferociency of the blood; which being already too much exalted by hot and bilious parts abounding in it, doth rather require a discharge by venae∣section, &c. or attemperating, by cooling medicines; than an advancement to a high∣er pitch of luxuriancy, by the foremen∣tioned Chymical liquors? which doubtless can do no less than inflame and fire the whole mass of blood in a moment: where∣as 'tis evident that Phlebotomy, Clysters, &c. being made use of; or large propor∣tions of Whey and other cooling liquors freely drunk in the first assault of these Fe∣vers, have often prevented their farther encrease: but to expect the like advantage from the forementioned rich and spirituous drinks, would prove as fruitless if not foo∣lish, as to undertake the quenching of an house on fire, by throwing on gunpowder and fire-balls.
Now if this mischief must necessarily attend these Empirical prescriptions, in the first attack of these Fevers; what may we expect from them in their augmentation? I dare assure you, little else but thunder and lightning; phrensies, heart-burnings, Con∣vulsions, &c. especially seeing that the most prudent management of these Fevers in this state of the disease, can scarcely calm the impetuous motion of the inflam∣mable parts of the blood. And if we farther proceed to the State of this distemper, how much sooner may these Empiricks dispatch their poor languishing Patients, whose only security depends upon their precedent management, that so a perfect and salutiferous Crisis might ensue? which if it should not happen, but their universal medicines are made use of, how certainly must the sick bid adieu to their Relations? this being a time, when neither Cathartick or Sudorifick, much less any hot or vinous medicines can be used, without manifest endangering the Patients life. And for the declination; what care must be used for some time, that the Patients eat no flesh-meat or broths made of the same; lest an unhappy relapse should ensue; how
can we then imagine that their spirituous medicines or Aqua vitae's, impregnated with brisk and active vegetables, may then be al∣lowed of? But 'tis possible they will tell me, that they are not without other Chymical pre∣parations, which they use upon such occa∣sions, and in such distempers as we discourse of; viz. their Elixir vivisicans, their pul∣vis Catholicus diaphoreticus, Aurum vitae dia∣phoreticum, Elixir grande Cordiale, &c. which one of the most candid and ingeni∣ous of that Society hath told us, that they are to him (with some others that he hath mentioned) quasi tot medicinae columnae, &c. To this I answer, if this be so, I wish that Mr. H. would tell us, how he durst pretend to the world, that one single me∣dicine should suit all palates and constitutions; and that others of his Tribe should no less ignorantly than confidently engage, that their private Arcana will perform in helping all curable diseases, what in reason may be expected from all other. But give me leave, Mr. H. to tell you, that I very much suspect that neither you nor any of your fraternity do well under∣stand the exhibition of your own remedies; they being rarely to be administred (as I
before shewed) in putrid Fevers; by reason that there are usually contraindications to their exhibition, both in the beginning, augmentation and state of them; lest in the two former they should occasion too violent an ebullition of the blood; and in the later wholly impede her Crisis. For I would have them to understand, that these Fevers are usually but Natures instruments, to discharge the luxuriant and bilious parts of the blood; when they are apt to exceed their due bounds and limits; which if prudently managed by an Artist in the Faculty, she will gradually defla∣grate this morbifick matter, and being over-burdened with it, will both separate and exclude it; and this much more hap∣pily and opportunely, than if she were disordered by any of your Jovial powders, or Solar diaphoreticks; Nature wisely ob∣serving her proper periods and times, when this secretion and exclusion of the recre∣ments of the blood should be made, to the greatest relief and advantage of the Pati∣ent; whereas your medicines (as I before intimated) do usually disturb all her regu∣lar actings, and make a confusion in the very crasis of the blood; and therefore are as wisely administred to cure this sort of Fe∣vers,
before Natures appointed time; (which is usually about the thirteenth or fourteenth day) as they would be to a wo∣man, in expectation of bringing forth a healthful and living child, in five or six months time. Now if these putrid Fevers ought to be managed with so much diligence and obser∣vation; how wofully would these men bungle and miscarry with all their applau∣ded Arcana, when they were called to ex∣hibite them in Fevers specifically different from the former? As for instance, the putrid Fevers of wo∣men in Child-bed, where cooling or heat∣ing remedies are equally dangerous; their proper indications principally allowing the use of Uterines; whereby the blood might be attenuated and disposed to dis∣charge it self by the Iliack and Hypoga∣strick vessels, in order to its necessary depu∣ration. And thus, I might likewise instance in those lacteal Fevers; which usually attend the female sex about the third or fourth day after delivery; which are solely to be ma∣naged by a spare and appropriate diet; and committed to Natures regimen; and though many times the Symptomes that do
accompany this sort of Fevers, are a little troublesome, and it may be frightful too, to the Patients; as heat, thirst, inquietude of the whole body, pain in the back, shoul∣ders, breasts, &c. yet if these be not en∣creased by some over-hasty and undue ad∣ministrations, they usually are freed from them within three or four dayes, by a con∣stant Crisis of Natures own procuring. I might further acquaint Mr. H. with the mischiefs that must necessarily have attended their Coelestial liquors and Stomachical essences in several Fevers that our late dayes have produced (of which the world will speedily have a very full and satisfactory account from that excellent Methodist, the industrious Dr. Sydenham) as particularly the Fevers which did accom∣pany the Small pox, when it was the Epi∣demical distemper of the Town; wherein the forementioned Chymical preparations would have been so far from alleviating or curing those severe Symptoms that did at∣tend them, that they would rather have highly encreased them; amongst the num∣ber of which Symptomes, profuse and violent Sweats would usually (if not con∣stantly) accompany the sick and feeble Pa∣tients, even from their first invasion; and
that though no Medicines were exhibited, or other means made use of, to encrease that disease of the blood, lympha, or nervous liquor. And truly, so much have most of our late Fevers differed from those putrid ones I lately discoursed of; that I doubt not but most observing and unprejudiced Physici∣ans will frankly own, that the foremen∣tioned Sweats were so far from relieving or curing the Symptoms that attended their Patients; that usually more dangerous and mortal ones did speedily affect both head and genus nervosum. Now surely, if our Indications may best be taken from the juvantia and laedentia in Physick, we cannot allow those discharges as critical, which are rarely or never at∣tended with relief to the Patient; but do rather seem to proceed from some strange perversion and fluor of the mass of blood, and other noble juices of the body: and though it must be allowed, that in all me∣thods some must dye; yet doubtless every honest and conscientious Physician is very diligent to observe, to what method of Cure a disease doth most happily and gene∣rally yield; and therefore in Epidemical distempers, that seem to be specifically
different from each other; the advice of the learned Doctor Willis may be thank∣fully entertained, which he giveth us in cases of this nature; Praeter medici cujus∣que privatum judicium, experientia potissi∣mùm medendi rationem suppeditat; cùm enim hae Febres primò grassantur, singuli ferè sin∣gula tentant remedia, & ex eorum successibus unà collatis facilè ediscitur, quali demum me∣thodo innitendum erit; donec ultimò crebro tentamine seu transeuntium vestigiis, via quasi regia & lata, ad hujusmodi affectuum rationem teritur, variisque observationibus monitisque munitur. But to proceed; I would gladly know of Mr. H. and the rest of the Arcana-mon∣gers of this Town, who are apt to believe that all distempers may be happily cured by their strong and Vinous liquors, Diapho∣retick powders, &c. what they would have done in those pestilential and malignant diseases, which could be cured by no other method, but that, which they continually decry and exclaim against; although very powerful Alexipharmick and Diaphoretick medicines had been frequently made use of in the forementioned cases, to little or no advantage. And that they may not charge me with discoursing any thing of my own
sence in these cases; I will acquaint them with my Authors, and some observations that I have read of this kind. The first they may find in the 359 page of Riverius his praxis, where he giveth us an account of a pestilential Fever, that raged in so great violence at Montpelier in the year 1623, that multitudes died of it; And further lie telleth us, that he observed that in all those Patients, quibus parotides superveniebant; which was usually about the ninth or eleventh day of the disease, (there commonly preceeding or accompanying a deli∣rium, stupor, convulsive motions, with un∣equal formicating pulses, &c.) they all died within two dayes after; notwithstanding the frequent exhibition of Alexipharmick medi∣cines, and the diligent application of Topicks; which engaged this ingenious and excel∣lent Physician to think, that these swel∣lings proved so fatal, because the parts af∣fected were not capable of receiving all the morbifick matter; wherefore that which still remained in the blood, killed the Patient; and therefore he thought, that Natures work being begun in those swellings, might be hap∣pily supplied by venae-section or gentle purga∣tion: But these indications seemed to be contra-indicated, by the great imbecillity of
the Patients, who appeared to be even in the agonies of death; yet on the other hand con∣sidering, that it was better to experiment a doubtful remedy in one or two persons, than to leave so many to undoubted destruction: he resolved first to prescribe Phlebotomy to the quantity of three ounces, which blood was very corrupt; and after three or four hours the Patients pulse waxing stronger, it en∣couraged him the day following to prescribe him a lenient purge, which likewise was at∣tended with that good success, that his deplo∣rable Patient was delivered from the jaws of death; and afterwards (saith he) all the sick that had these parotides behind their ears, I first bled several times a little at a time, and the day following purged them, and so all of them who were thus ordered, hap∣pily recovered; not one of them afterwards dying in the whole year, that had those paro∣tides behind their ears. Which observa∣tion this learned and ingenuous Physician thought so necessary to communicate, that he tells us in the forementioned page, in∣signe hoc experimentum silentio praeterire ne∣fas fuisset. And in the fourth Century of his obser∣vations he acquaints us, that in the plague it self, an ingenious Physician having under∣taken
the care of the third part of a City mise∣rably afflicted with that depopulating disease, he prescribed to all his Patients an Emetick potion, whereby he was so happy as to cure al∣most all that were committed to his care, he scarcely losing ten or twelve for his part; when as in the other two parts of the Town, few escaped. And if any of your friends, Mr. H. will take the pains to consult the rest of his ob∣servations in malignant Fevers; they may find him frequently using the Launcet, pur∣gations, &c. even in those cases where violet coloured spots, exanthemata, &c. have appeared. As particularly in a Counsellor who was fifty five years old; who upon the ninth day of his disease fell into ravings and convulsive motions of his hands, with a certain profound sleepiness, and looseness; which Symptoms were likewise attended with exanthemata, &c. yet notwithstanding these direful Symptoms, and the great evacuations the patient had un∣dergone from a Diarrhoea and Cupping glasses; he bled him on the twelfth day to the quantity of four or five ounces; which blood being cor∣rupt and the Patient bearing it well, he bled him the like quantity five hours after; the Patient finding no diminution of his strength
thereby; and thus by the forementioned use of the Launcet and temperate medicines, he gradually recovered his health. Another Patient he mentions in the fourth Century of his observations, p. 79, 80. who upon consultation was ordered to be bled, notwithstanding he had blewish spots broken out all over his body; which gave the Patient great relief, he being in a short time happily cured; And though we find that one of those learned Physicians upon their consul∣tation, did at first oppose Phlebotomy; lest the malignant matter should strike in again; yet upon the others reply, that there was little fear of that, by reason it had been for some dayes protruded into the habit of the body; they both consented to the fore-men∣tion'd remedy. And in his second Century, he tells us of a Citizen extremely weakned with a malig∣nant Fever; whom he undertook to purge with a gentle infusion three or four dayes together, whereby his strength was a little encreased, and by little and little he began to be better; re∣peating his purgations at certain times. And in an Epidemical Fever which raged so violently at Avignion, Bellicadre and other places, that very few escaped, their chief Symptoms being a Cough, pain of the
Head and loyns, frenzies, phthisical affecti∣ons, &c. the remedies that were found effectu∣al, were pectoral medicaments, gentle purga∣tions (not forgetting blood-letting as princi∣pally efficacious) cooling Clysters, Cupping∣glasses, Cordial opiates, &c. Which observations do put me in mind of what an ingenious Licentiate of the Col∣ledge of Physicians acquainted me with, in the late malignant Fevers, that accompa∣nyed the Small pox at Colchester, when it was the Epidemical disease of that Town, viz. that those Fevers were very acute and mortal, being attended with prodigious Sweats, spasms, tremulous motions in the hands, stiffness in their jaws, livid spots in their bodies, &c. and though that observing Physician was a great Helmontian, and did frequently exhi∣bite high Alexipharmicks and Bezoardick Cordials; yet saith he, they signified no more than chips in pottage, the Patients generally dying under the use of them; but at length bleeding was attempted, which cured several, though it were used the eighth or twelfth day of their disease. But to proceed; though in the foremen∣tioned observations we may take notice, that Alexipharmick and Diaphoretick reme∣dies, did not so well answer the seeming
indications for them; but Physicians were necessitated to alter their methods of pra∣ctice: yet how efficacious this Classis of me∣dicines was in the late London pestilential Fever, is as evident, by that account Doctor Sydenham hath acquainted us with, in the second Edition of his book de Febri∣bus; where he telleth us, that after he had Sweat his Patients twenty four hours, he observed that they were so far from com∣plaining of the loss & decay of their strength by that plentiful evacuation they under∣went by Sweating; that they rather ob∣tained more life and vigour thereby: tan∣tum enim abest (saith he) ut se exinde de∣biliores factos quererentur, quin potius quan∣tum supervacanei humoris sudando dejecissent, tantundem novi roboris sibi accrevisse profi∣terentur— And that which was very obser∣vable in these pestilential Fevers was this; that towards the latter end of the foremen∣tioned Sweats, there would break forth fresh ones more natural, genuine, and eo∣pious than the former; and that without the help of Medicines, which were ac∣companied with much more ease and re∣freshment to the Patient, they being alto∣gether critical and eradicative. Now by comparing this last observation
and those mentioned by the eminently learned and famous Diemerbroeck, with those other I just now acquainted the Reader with, we may easily observe what a necessity there is of following that advice of the learned Dr. Willis in cases of this na∣ture, which I lately quoted; and farther how many peoples lives would have been sacri∣ficed to Empirical prescriptions, had they in the forementioned distempers relyed up∣on them, there seeming to be (as I intima∣ted) some specifical difference even amongst these pestilential and malignant diseases, by reason they would not yield to one and the same method of cure, though it was rationally attempted. And though we will allow Mr. H. that Empirical prescriptions are not like to be accompanied with those unhappy and fatal consequences in the distempers we just now discoursed of, by reason they are sometimes of a strengthening & sudorifick nature; which are generally indicated in these diseases; yet how much mischief they are like to be at∣tended with in putrid and other Epidemical Fevers, I have in part shewn already, and shall now take notice of in variolous cases. In which I take the indications for cure to be the very same, that the judicious
Doctor Sydenham hath laid down in his book de febribus, viz. 1. The preservation of the mass of blood, during its time of separation and expulsion, in that exact and equal motion, that the pro∣trusion of the morbifick matter might nei∣ther be too hasty or precipitant, nor yet too dull or sluggish; the first (as he excellently observeth) procuring too often, violent Phrensies, or such profuse Sweats as might occasion the secretion and exclusion of those parts of the blood, which never were in∣tended or designed by Nature for that pur∣pose; the later impeding or hindering the due expulsion of the variolous matter: and therefore in the beginning of this di∣stemper, he is no less fearful of admini∣string too high Cordials, &c. than he is of Bleeding, Clysters, cooling medicines, &c. His second indication is taken, from the time of the expulsion of the variolous pustles, into the habit of body; in which he is very careful that those Abscesses of natures pro∣truding, might be preserved in a due man∣ner, until they arrive to a state of matura∣tion and decidency. And therefore at this time is he as diligently and studiously em∣ployed to prevent the too high ebullition of the blood, lest whilst these pustles are
in their state of crudity, any of their morbi∣fick parts should be resorbed; as he is, that the blood should not grow too languid or weak, lest Nature should be unable to per∣form what is required at her hands. Now seeing 'tis manifest, by this short account I have given of this distemper, what care and judgment ought to be used by every prudent Physician for the Cure hereof; how unfit, yea dangerous must Empirical pre∣scriptions of necessity be in cases of this na∣ture; where too great an exaltation or de∣pression of the mass of blood is alike dange∣rous, and where there may be indications for cooling remedies, or at least for those that are very temperate, as well as for Cordials? But to proceed, we will now discourse of a Chronical distemper, viz. the Scurvy; which some of Mr. H's fraternity do pre∣tend to cure by their golden purging spirits, Spirits of Scurvey-grass, Elixir Salutis, &c. not making any observation as to the diffe∣rent constitutions of the Patients to whom they are exhibited; whereas tis undoubted∣ly true that many Patients, who are afflicted with the forementioned distemper, have the constituent principles of their blood, so much differing from others; either from an here∣ditary
indisposition, or some irregularities in the non-naturals, or the like; that some of them shall have their blood chiefly con∣stituted of dull and torpid parts, and others of hot, adust and bilious; insomuch that 'tis clear and evident, that the remedies which are indicated in one constitution, ought not to be used in the other: for where the dys∣crasie of the blood doth chiefly consist in a saline-sulphureous or impoverished mass, there remedies that are not impregnated with hot, vinous and volatile parts, may be highly serviceable, by reason they do as it were afresh actuate and enliven this flat and de∣praved blood, inspiring it with additional ferments. But then, if this sort of remedies should be exhibited to those scorbutick bo∣dies, whose diathesis of blood, spirits and other humors consist in too hot and nitro∣sulphureous parts; how soon would they upon every light occasion, be hurried into Fevers, violent tumults, heat and disorders of the whole body? the proper indications for medicines in this case, being only for such, as we call mild or temperate; which gra∣dually do calm and quiet the forementioned disorders of the blood, sedate its too fre∣quent and preternatural fermentations, and in process of time so purifie and alter it, that
it shall recover its pristine and native tem∣per. And that I might more fully and satis∣factorily clear the truth of this assertion, I will acquaint Mr. H. what his unanswerable friend hath observed to this purpose, viz. in p. 92. of his Medela Medicinae, where he tells you, that Scurvy-grass, Water-cress, com∣mon Wormwood, Water-mint, Horse-radish, &c. do a world of mischief, and are eminently de∣structive in the Scurvey, where the disease is lodged in a blood and humors full of acidity or acrimony, and abounding with a vitious vola∣tile salt; by reason, they render the salient particles of all sorts, the more capering, turgid and unruly within the veins, and send them a gadding thence about the habit of the body; by which means a foundation is laid for Agues of all sorts, Fevers, Vertigoes, running pains, stitches, Head-aches, Cramps, Convulsions, Griping of the guts, short Breathings, strait∣ness of the Chest, Fluxes of all sorts, Gouts, Hy∣pochondriack and Hysterical passions, Inflamma∣tions, Pleurisies and all diseases of the Lungs. Nay, so full is he in the defence of what I have discoursed of in a disease, which he would perswade the world is no less com∣mon than the Scurvy, (it having (as he saith) so corrupted the frame of Nature, that
even in Countrey-Cottages 'tis a hard matter to find a woman in puris naturalibus) that he tells us, p. 80. of the forementioned book; that the common sort of Receipt-mongers should undertake the management of this Cure, and that the wealthier sort of men should so readily venture their bodies in their hands, shews the blind boldness of the one, and the marvel∣lous indiscretion of the other. I will grant (saith he) that 'tis possible an ordinary man may be ac∣quainted with a method very good and sufficient in general against this disease, and he may do some Cures with it, &c. but that such a man should think himself fit with such a traditional method and the credit of having cured some by it, to undertake the cure in all cases, is terri∣ble to consider, since every rational Pra∣ctiser knows, there is so great a variety in the Pox it self, respecting the nature of the venome, and other qualifications of the body in which 'tis seated, that in a thousand bo∣dies infected, you shall not find two that are alike circumstantiated, or that yield concurrents so alike, as that there will arise thence the like indication for cure in the one as in the other; or that the same method and medicines may be used to one as to another, without prejudice and damage; which frequently happens to be so great, that
instead of curing this disease they exasperate it; and do often precipitate mens bodies into other destroying distempers. I might (saith he) be copious in instances to confirm this from my own observation; but that being not fit to be done, you may see enough in the observations of Hor∣stius, Zacutus, Riverius, &c. in whom you will find (as we say in our English Proverb) what is one man's meat, may be another man's poyson; what cured one of the Pox was de∣structive to another; those wise men ever varying the way and means of curing, according to the nature of the person and disease they were to deal with. Now good Mr. H. do you and the rest of your friends seriously peruse these passages faithfully quoted out of your unanswerable book, and then tell me, what fair defence you can make in telling the world, that your Coelestial liquor will suit all palates and constitutions; that your Spirit of Scurvy∣grass incorporated with its fixed salt, with your Golden purging Spirits, will prevent the Scur∣vy and cure it also, if not of too long continuance; and if so, the later will certainly effect the cure, if the disease be curable; and therefore 'tis commended as beneficial to all persons that travel by land or sea: and that your pills are the most approved remedy for relief of mankind
against all medicable or curable distempers: yea one of your gang hath been so bold and impudent, as in publick print to tell the world, that his Pills are the true tincture of the Sun, and hath dominion from the same light; for as the Sun at its appearance giveth nourishment to all creatures, so do his pills give present relief, comfort and nourishment to all mankind; nay he tells us, that they are the greatest temporal blessing, that ever God be∣stowed upon the sons and daughters of men: and yet his Antagonist hath published to the world; that a Chymist hath made Oath, that he extracted out of a very few of these Pills near half a small vial glass of Quick-silver, which he hath sealed by him. But, Mr. H. that I might farther inform you of what may be done by ordinary me∣dicines well managed by method, I will acquaint you with the following observa∣tions. The first is taken out of the Lord Bacon's Natural History, who tells you, p. 16. that there be many medicines, which by themselves would do no Cure, but perhaps hurt; but being applyed in a certain order one after another, great Cures. I have tryed my self (saith he) a remedy for the Gout, which hath seldom fail∣ed, but driven it away in twenty four hours
space; It is first to apply a pultess, then a bath, and then a plaister; the first relaxeth the pores and maketh the humors apt to exhale; the fo∣mentation calleth forth the Humor by vapours; and the plaister repelleth new humor from fal∣ling: now saith he, The pultess alone would make the part more soft and weak, and apter to take the defluxion and impression of the humor; the fomentation alone, if it were too weak, with∣out way made by the pultess, would draw forth little; if too strong, it would draw to the part, as well as draw from it: the plaister alone, would pen the humor already contained in the part, and so exasperate it, as well as forbid new humor: therefore they must all be taken in order as is said. The second observation shall be of the Cho∣lera morbus, a disease which is oft-times no less violent than mortal; upon which account it may truly be ranked amongst those dis∣tempers the Ancients called extremè pera∣cuti; its Symptoms being often times so violent, that in six or eight hours space, strong, and lusty men have been reduced to spasms and Convulsions, with other as well amazing as surprizing Symptoms; and yet have I seen these per acute and cruel distem∣pers relieved in a few hours space by a reme∣dy of no higher extraction than Chicken
broth; and that although the Patients have been judged both by themselves and all their Relations to have been entring the very confines of death; yet in a few dayes time they have been well and healthful again, and that without the use of any Chymical Ar∣cana. And thus by a no less successful than ra∣tional method, hath the industrious Doctor Sydenham acquainted us with the Cure of that cruel and tormenting disease, the Iliack passion. And I doubt not, but that ere long he will give us an account of several other prospe∣rous methods which he made use of in the Dysentery, Colick, Hysterick affections, &c. which have been attended with so speedy and happy success, that all the effectual re∣medies which Mr. H. obtain'd by his labo∣rious pains and travels, deserve not to come in competition with those Galenical pre∣scriptions methodically administred, where∣by he performed the forementioned Cures; and whatever Mr. H. may think, I am apt to believe that in process of time, that Physician will be universally judged the greatest Artist in his Faculty, who can cure diseases much more speedily, easily, and safely by the judi∣cious administration and methodical pre∣scription
of proper medicines, (though Ga∣lenical) than he that patcheth upon every post his Arcana, or giveth us large commen∣dations of his pilulae in omnes morbos, in eve∣ry printed pamphlet. I could likewise tell Mr. H. that I could acquaint him with a alenical medicine methodically used, which hath been much more successful in the Cure of quartano Agues, than his Coelestial liquor or appropri∣ate remedies, which sometimes have been so violent in ther opertion, that they have endangered the translation of his Patients into a Coelestial Countrey. I might further assure him, that I have seen a medicine so judiciously managed in some diseases accompanied with most vio∣lent, racking, and tormenting pains; that the Patients in a few hours have not only been relieved from those dreadful tortures; but by a methodical use of it, secured from all danger of a relapse; which medicine should it have been used without this due circumspection and method, it would have inevitably ruined and destroyed the Pati∣ents to whom it had been exhibited. I could thus proceed to acquaint all ingenious persons, with what care and observation is made use of by all honest
and conscientious Physicians in the exhi∣bition of their remedies for the relief or cure of all other distempers, which are incident to humane bodies; as Hypochon∣driack Melancholy, Dropsies, Jaundies, Apoplexies, Sanguineous fluxes, &c. who being men of liberal education, and well acquainted with the component parts of humane bodies, and the causes that do or∣dinarily put them into disorders, and pro∣duce that variety of Symptoms which do usually accompany distempers; they do wisely consider, as the learned Doctor Wil∣lis hath well observed; quippe dum mani∣festò liquet, cujusmodi particulae in patiente aut alterandae, aut in motum concitandae; & quales in agente ad opus illud requiruntur, non difficile erit hoc satis aptè designare, ac ad al∣terum illud rite-accommodare. And though, Mr. H. I will not scruple to allow you that some Chymical remedies may be of great value and excellency for their admirable efficacy in the Cure of some distempers; yet doubtless they are not to be used without methods, nor yet, where there are not fair indications for prescribing them; unless we were willing to sacrifice our Patients lives to ignorance and confidence: neither do I understand
wherefore they should be applauded in those cases, where other remedies have been experimented much more powerful and successful in their operation; which occasioned that noble Chymical Philoso∣pher Mr. Boyle to confess, that he never knew any of the vulgar Chymists Essences or Elixirs half so powerful a remedy to stanch blood, as a slight mixture of Hen-bane and white Poppy seeds, beaten up into a stiff Ele∣ctuary with Conserve of Roses; nor ever did he see such wonderful effects against spitting and vomiting of blood, of the most elaborate Chymical preparations, as he had done of a slight Syrup made of the juice of Plantane, Comfrey, &c. But to draw near a conclusion of this discourse, I do very much hope that all ingenious persons who have taken the pains to peruse this Book, and therein observed how much pains and industry, how much learning and judgment is required to the due qualification of an able Physician; will not only gratefully own how much this Nation is endebted to the labours of the famous Universities and learned Col∣ledge of Physicians; whose members have been so indefatigably industrious in every province of Physick, as if they seemed
thereby to tell the world, that they could never rest satisfied, till they had obtained as great a perfection in their Art as it was capable of; but will likewise use their joynt endeavours to detect the folly and knavery of our London Empiricks, whose Elixirs and Panaceas may be truly assigned as more probable causes of the stubbornness and contumaciousness of our late diseases, with their great and main alterations; than the Chimerical Ternary of your unanswer∣able friends, viz. the Pox, Scurvy, and Worms; whereby many of his Majesties subjects have not only been deprived of the Cure of their distempers, but sacrificed their lives to the forementioned detestable prescriptions. 'Tis therefore likewise to be hoped, that our Soveraign Lord the King, who hath been so great an Encourager of all liberal Arts and Sciences, will imitate his Royal Prede∣cessor King Henry the Eighth, in confirming that Charter by Act of Parliament, which out of his Royal bounty he hath lately be∣stowed upon his Colledge of Physicians, whereby the mechanical successors of those old Empiricks, exactly described and cha∣racterized in 3 H. 8. may be prevented for the future, from trying experiments
upon his Majesty's Subjects; to the high displeasure of God, great infamy of the Faculty, and the grievous hurt, damage and destruction of the Kings liege people, &c. Nay further, 'tis to be hoped, that the Chancellors of our Universities, with the grave Judges of our Land, and all other persons of ingenuous or Academick edu∣cations, will be exemplary in the encou∣ragement of this no less famous than wor∣thy Colledge; that so the Laws already made and established by the Parliaments of England, being diligently prosecuted by them, may give some check to their Empirical pride and insolency, as well as their bold invasion of this noble Art of Medicine, whereby so many of the worthy Professors of it have met with no small dis∣couragement. I shall therefore crave leave to conclude this subject with what hath been no less ingeniously than judiciously ob∣served by a very curious and inquisitive person, viz. That if Physicians, who are men of so clear judgments, so unparallel'd for industry, have no more respect or consideration than mean, empty, shallow pretenders; we may have reason to fear, that hereafter persons of so great abilities and liberal education, will
scorn to look towards a Faculty, which though honourable in its own nature, is so low and mean in the esteem of the world; that every person who hath confidence to affirm he is a Physician, although perfectly ignorant of the Rudiments of Physick, shall yet have no less countenance from the publick; than those gal∣lant persons, who after a long courtship have rendred Nature familiar, are acquainted with the causes and Cure of diseases; and who have so deserved of mankind, that I cannot but marshal them next to those divine persons, who also as these, are often slighted and neg∣lected, although of them the world is not worthy. FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT. SInce the writing of the first part of my Book, which relates to the establish∣ment of the Colledge of Physicians by Law, I understood that the Records of the Parliament, in 14 and 15 H. 8. were to be seen at the Rolls Chappel; which in∣gaged me to make a very diligent search into that Act, and the rest which concern∣ed the Colledge of Physicians: where I found upon that Parliament Roll 36 Acts publick and private, whereof 26 were signed at the bottom with Respons. Regis le Roy le veult; and ten others stitched to these on the same Roll, without le Roy le veult: But at the end of the Roll there is affixed a Commission granted by the King to Cardinal Woolsey to Prorogue and Adjourn the Parliament, from Blackfryers to Westminster, and there to continue and hold it; immediately after which Commission we may find, that upon the 13 day of August, about six in the evening, the King being present, the House of Commons was sent for, and Sir Thomas Moore their Speaker
having made a very elegant and learned Speech, he presented the King with a very large Subsidy given by the Commons, as a Testimony of their great devotion to their Prince; which being done, and the Lord Chancellor having (according to the usual custom) privately conferr'd with his Ma∣jesty, he commanded that all those Acts which were made in that present Parlia∣ment for the publick good, should be re∣cited and published. Quibus ex ordine per initia recitatis & lectis singulis publicavit Parliamento respons. secundum Annotationes Regiae voluntatis Declarativas à dors. script. fact. dictus reverendissimus dominus Legatus Cancellar. exhortando & admonendo nomine Regis omnes Dominos & Communes supra∣dictos ut diligenter ordinata Statuta pro bono publico in hoc Parliamento observarent & ab aliis observari procurarent, &c. Now 'tis evident that the Titles of all Bills that were agreed upon by both Houses, were read in the Kings presence, and received the Royal Assent, though it was not ingrossed by the Clerk of the Parliament upon Ten of those Acts which are to be seen in the forementioned Roll, which are but Transcripts of the Original Records; and therefore as far as can be
proved, Roy le veult might be ingross'd at the top or bottom of these Ten as well as the other 26. in the Original Records; But however 'tis plain, that the Form and Essence of a Statute Law doth not consist in the Clerk of the Parliaments engrossing the Royal Assent at the top or bottom of an Act, (that not being done until the Session is over) but in the Clerk of the Crown's pronouncing of it after he hath read the Title of each Act, according to certain instructions given from the King. Now the Clerk having in the audience of Lords and Commons pronounced aloud to every publick Bill le Roy le veult, to every private Bill soit fait comme il est desire, and to every publick Bill the King refuseth to pass le Roy se avisera; 'twas no difficulty for the Judges and Lawyers, Lords and Commoners to know what Acts passed that Session; and that this Act relating to Phy∣sicians did then pass by this Royal Assent, seems very clear; because (as I before inti∣mated in page 8. of my book) a Parlia∣ment within 17 years after in the same Kings Reign owned the Colledge as a Body Corporate, and gave them several privi∣ledges which they maintain, and enjoy to this day; and about 28 or 30 years after,
another Parliament confirmed the 14 and 15 H. 8. with every Article and Clause therein contained, as you may see more at large, page 9, 10. And that the giving the Royal Assent to these two Acts last men∣tioned in 32 H. 8. and 1 Q. M. might not be questioned, you may see it thus ingross'd upon the top of the first, Item alia quaedam Billa formam cujusdam Actus in se continens exhibita est suae Regiae Majestati in Parlia∣mento praedicto, cujus tenor sequitur in haec verba. And then the whole Statute is re∣cited. And at the bottom you will find it thus engrossed, Cui quidem Billae perlectae & ad plenum intellectae per dictum Dominum nostrum Regem ex authoritate & assensu Par∣liamenti praedicti sic respons. est, Soit fait comme il est desire. And at the bottom of the second of the two last mentioned Statutes you will find it thus engross'd, Cui quidem Billae perlectae & ad plenum intellectae per dictam Dominam Reginam ex authoritate Parliamenti praedicti sic respons. est, le Reigne le veult. Now 'tis plain that these Sessions of Parliament were not so long distant from the former, but that some that were in both Houses of Parliament in these two Sessions, might be in that; and therefore would not have own'd the forementioned for an Act,
if they had not heard the Royal Assent given to it? But besides, this Act of Parlia∣ment with some others of the Ten were ever owned as Acts of Parliament: As for instance, an Act that the Sir Clerks of Chancery might marry, an Act concerning Cordwayners, an Act of Tracing Hares, an Act for the Clothiers in Suffolk, an Act for the payment of Custome, an Act for the Ha∣ven or Port of Southhampton; all which, with two or three private ones, were passed by the same authority that the Phy∣sicians was; and if that be invalid, all the former are much more. Nay further, these Acts were publickly printed, and bound up after that Session; which hath been in use ever since Printing hath been common in England; so that they may be found not only in the Rolls Chappel, but in Mr. Pulton's Statute-book, and in old Books that are bound up with Acts of Par∣liament that were made in particular Prin∣ces Reigns, which may be seen at Mr. Millers in St. Paul's Church-yard. But suppose that this Testimony were not sufficient, I would desire Mr. H. to resolve me whether the forementioned Parliaments owning and declaring it as an Act, and the Judges upon several Tryals giving their
opinions for it, and the receiving it as a Record into the Rolls Chappel, be not evi∣dence enough to prove this very Statute an Act of Parliament; for I am credibly informed, that a Record being brought into the Rolls Chappel, and received as such by the Master of that Court, who is termed sacrorum scriniorum Magister, is so far from being question'd, that it is a full and sufficient evidence in any Court.
