G664 13517922 99887
Fitz-Harris his FARWEL TO THE WORLD, OR A TRAYTORS Just Reward▪ FArwell great Villain, and unpittied Lie, Instead of Tears drawn from a tender Eye; Ten thousand Traytors like Fitz-Harris dye. Unhuman Monster, to the World ingrate, An Enemy to the King, the Church and State; Hadst thou been starv'd, 't had been too kind a Fate. His Crimes were horrid, infamous and base. Deserves a total extinct of his Race; Banish his Name unto some dismal place. What's worse than injuring Sacred Majestie, For which he suffered on the fatal Tree; May all men suffer, when Rob'd of Loyalty. England may then be glad, with Triumph sing, When all her Foes are vanisht with a string; The Golden Age from Halcion-days will spring. Those Wolves that Plot Protestant Lambs to Gull, May Heaven obstruct the Engines of their Scull; Give them of Tyburn, good Lord, their Belly full. Giddy-headed Youths have been seduc'd of late, Beyond their Wits, talk of the Affairs of State; Obedience learn to avoid Fitz-Harris Fate.
Those publick Libellers that with Zeal and heat, With some unheard of Novelty dayly Treat; If they write falsly, tie them from their Meat. Tell th' Ambitious, their Fools and strive in vain, To undermine a Crown, King Charles will Reign: To be true and honest, is the safest Gain. I hope to see Justice at Tyburn done, If so, some hundreds may have Cause to run; Give them what they deserve, their Thread is spun. Bid proud petitioners, good Advice approve, Make an Address and in one Body move; With all humility t' gain their Prince's Love. I'de sooner lose a Limb, from th' Monument fly, Endure the worst of Torments till I dye; Then willingly deserve my Kings displeasing Eye. London, on thee all flourishing joys descend, Heaven's blss the Government, and Governors to the end; Unanimous to agree, your Soveraign to defend. The Man that burnt Diana's Temple down, Did it on purpose a Villain to be Crown'd; Mongst Rogues (Damn'd Rogues) he got Renown. How many thousands are there in the Nation, Meer Knaves, but Saints, in private Congregation; Loves Monarchy, with mental Reservation. The Gods rebuke the Error of the Age, Let moderation Tumultuous men asswage; But hang all those against their King engage. Let all dissenting Brothers Love the King, To the Church Unite, 'tis a goodly thing; With Brethren to agree, and with Te Deum fing. Heaven's bless his Majesty, with Plenty, Joy and Peace. To all that love the King Heavens give increase; Confound his Foes to pray I nere will cease. Non est Lex jor ulla Quam Necis Artifficis, Arte perire sua. Richard Gibbs, Norwitch. FINIS.
