h2554 13190201 98371
HOMER HIS ODYSSES TRANSLATED, ADORN'D WITH SCULPTURE, AND ILLUSTRATED WITH ANNOTATIONS, BY JOHN OGILBY, Esq Master of His MAJESTIES Revells in the Kingdom of IRELAND. LONDON, Printed by THOMAS ROYCROFT, for the Author, MDCLXV.
Collegium S.S. et Individuoe Trinitatis in Academia Cantabrigiensi.
TO THE MOST NOBLE PRINCE JAMES, DUKE, MARQUES AND EARL OF ORMOND, EARL OF OSSORY AND BRECKNOCK, VISCOUNT THURLES, LORD BARON OF ARCLO AND LANTHONY, LORD OF THE REGALITIES AND LIBERTIES OF THE COUNTY OF TIPERARY, CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF DUBLIN, LORD LIEUTENANT-GENERAL AND GENERAL GOVERNOUR OF HIS MAJESTIES KINGDOM OF IRELAND, ONE OF THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTIES MOST HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL, OF HIS MAJESTIES KINGDOMS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND, GENTLEMAN OF HIS MAJESTIES BED-CHAMBER, LORD STEWARD OF HIS MAJESTIES HOUSHOLD, LORD LIEUTENANT OF THE COUNTY OF SOMERSET, LORD LIEUTENANT AND LORD HIGH STEWARD OF THE CITY OF BRISTOL, AND KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER: THIS The most Ancient and Best Piece of Moral and Political Learning, is humbly Presented and Dedicated, By the most Obliged, And most Obedient Of His Servants, JOHN OGILBY.
scene from book 1 Ilustrissimo et Potentiss: March: et Com de Genli: Hiberce. Palatii periscelidis Equiti:'f. Principi. Jacobo, Duci Ormond L. Gubernatori Regii Senescallo Aurece Tabulam han LMDDDIO Lib. j.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE FIRST BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. A Court of Gods: Telemachus complains To Pallas. Sutors ryot: Phemius strains. Penelope disgust; Pallas inspires The Prince with Strength and Prudence, then retires. Antinous girds, Telemachus retorts, Eurymachus sides: Night closeth strife and Sports. THAT prudent Heroes wan∣dring, Muse rehearse, Who (Troy being sack'd) coa∣sting the Universe, Saw many Cities, and their va∣rious Modes; Much suffering, tost by Storms on raging Floods, His Friends conducting to their native coast; But all in vain, for he his Navy lost, And they their lives prophanely feasting on Heards consecrated to the glorious Sun;
Who much incens'd obstructed so their way They nere return'd: Joves Daughter this display. All now by Wars and Billows undestroy'd Were safe at home, He only not enjoy'd His dearest Spouse, nor wish'd-for Passage gain'd, Whilst in her Cave Calypso him detain'd, And hop'd to Wed. But when the Circling Sphears Compleated had the Fate-appointed years That he his home and Native soyle should see (Not from intestine broyles and trouble free) The Gods all pittied him; but Neptunes rage, Untill he landed, Vowes could nere asswage: Who now toIt is observ'd by Herodotus, That Neptune was a God brought out of Lybia into Greece, and therefore properly feigned by Homer to delight in the Countreys thereabout. Aethiops distant Regions gon (That verge theThere is great variety of Expositi∣on upon this place amongst the ancien∣test of the Greek Grammarians, Ari∣starchus, Crates, &c. all whose conje∣ctures are produced and refuted by Strabo in the first book of his Geogra∣phy. After which, he thus delivers his own opinion; That as the ancient Grecians called all the more Northern people Scythians, or Nomades; and the Western Celtae, Iberes, or Celt-Ibe∣res, &c. so they called all that liv'd upon the Southern Ocean from East to West, Aethiopians, not those onely which lie South of Aegypt. This he confirms with auctorimes out of Ae∣schylus and Euritides, which are some∣thing obscure by reason those Trage∣dies from whence he borrowed them, are now lost: We shall therefore supply their room with those which are more clear and evident. Aeschylus in his Prometheus, — You shall black people find, where rising Suns First guild the Earth, and swelling Aethiops runs. Ptolomy in his Geography, . There live under the Zodiack from East to West men black of colour, Aethiopians. And in another place he divides Aethiopia into Eastern and Western These Aethiopians then according to Homer  were divided into Eastern and Western by the Arabian or Aegyptian Gulfe: which though Homer never makes mention of, as Aristarchus observed, yet it is not probable, saith Strabo, that he should be ignorant of that Gulfe which is but 1000 Stades distant fro the Mediterranean, and be so well ac∣quainted with Thebes of Aegypt 4000. Stades farther off. rising and descending Sun) At plenteous Tables highly entertain'd, Sate, where his Altars Hecarombs distain'd, Whil'st th' other Gods in Heavens high Palace met, There Jove reminding with no small regret, Aegisthus storie, whom Atrides Son Orestes slew, thus in full Court begun; How fondly Mortals us accuse, that we Both of their crimes and sufferings Authors be, When by their folly they themselves destroy; So Agamemnon new return'd from Troy Aegisthus murther'd, then Espous'd his Wife, Though Hermes him on forfeit of his Life From us forbad; Kill not the King he said, Nor Clytemnestra that Adultress Wed, Lest young Orestes his Revenger come, And these usurped Kingdoms reassume: Yet obstinate he would not us regard, So his fowle crime hath met a due reward. Then Pallas; Thou who rul'st these bles'd abodes, Great King of Kings, and father of the Gods,
Deservedly he fell, and may they all Who murther Princes in like manner fall. But much my bowells for Ʋlysses yern, Who pin'd with grief, remote from his concern, A Sea-guirt Isle, the Navel of the Main, And fairA Nymph the Daughter of Atlas according to Homer, whom others make the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis. She being in love with Ʋlys∣ses detain'd him seven years in the Is∣land Ogygia: though Ovid mentions but six An grave sex annis pulchram fovisse Calypso? Aequoreaeque fuit concubuisse Deae? Suffer'd Ʋlysses much six years t'enjoy Calypso? with a Nymph to sport and toy? Calypsos blandishments detain. Him Atlas Daughter, who Heavens starry rounds Supports, and th' Oceans deepest channels sounds, With charming Beauty, Flattery and Witt, Labours that he his Country might forget; Who rather would, though there he then should dye, Behold his native Smoke ascend the Sky. Hast thou for him, O Jove, no more regret, Who ne'r thy Altars slighted at the , &c. Fleet, That thou offended laist him thus aside? Why me thus taxest thou Heavens King replyd? How should I him forget who so excells Mortals in Prudence and all Virtues else;Their Vessels at great distance from the fight, Did on the briny Oceans Margents lye, The foremost bedded in the sand sate dry. Wals ranging with their Sterns, their streitned Prores, Lay pinched up upon the narrow shores; Like Ladders steps in ranks the Vessels lay, The large-Jawes fringing of the tren∣ding bay. Iliads 14. The word Wals makes it appear e∣vidently that the Fleet was their Camp out of this, Iliad 7. Then Towers and Walls strong Bull∣warks they erect, Which might their Navie and them∣selves protect: Next hung on Gates with Barrs well fortifi'd, Through which the Princes might in Chariots ride, Which they inclos'd with Trenches steep and large, And Pallisadoes to break off the Charge. Who oft this Court with Hecatombs engag'd? But Neptune still forWhose eye Ʋlysses put out with a Fire-brand. Which story is related at large, Odys. 9. Polypheme enrag'd, The Cyclops Prince, whom he on Thosa got, The Nymph compressing in a shady Grot. Though he not kil'd him, yet midst swallowing deeps, Coupt in an Isle, far from his Country keeps. Well; let us now consult how best we may Work his return, and Neptunes wrath allay: Who never sure a War dares undertake Single against us all. Then Pallas spake; O thou great King, and Father of the Gods, If that Ʋlysses shall his own abodes Again behold, let Hermes streight repair To bright Calypso, and your will declare: That she must him discharge without delay, Whilest I with speed descend to Ithaca.
There I, his Son, better to act his part, Shall prudence give and a couragious Heart; So he his House shall of those Sutors rid, And their disorders in full Court forbid; Whose ryots make such havock there and spoyl. Next, him I'll send to Sparta, then to Pyle, To seek his Sire: So he in foraign parts Shall purchase Honour by acquir'd deserts. This said, she fits her golden Talaries, Which her ore Hills and Dales and swelling Seas With fanning Winds through aery Regions bear; Then up she takes her strong and ponderous Spear, With which, descended from so great a Sire, Oft Regiments of Heroes feel her ire. Next stooping from Olympus spiry heights, Transformid to MentesTaphos was a City on the Island Cephallenia near adjoyning to Ithaca, the Country of Ʋlysses: so called from Taphus the Son of Pierelas. — Taphians Prince alights Before Ʋlysses Gate, then makes a stand, A Brazen-pointed Javelin in her hand; Where the proud SutorsIt is not agreed on by the antient Grammarians what this Game was which Penelopes Sutors are seign'd by Homer to recreate themselves with. Some expound the  here by  Dice: but Herodotus doth clearly di∣stinguish between these two, where he saies that the Lydians were the inven∣tors of Dice, and the rest of the Sports except the . Appion, an eminent Grammarian in his time, called by Ti∣berius the Emperour Cymbalum mundi, saies that, according as he received it from Cneso a native of Ithaca, where 'tis probable the Sport might remain in use, 'twas this, The number of the Sutors being 108. they equally divided their Balls, that is 54. on each side, di∣rectly opposite to each other. Betwixt the two ranks remain'd a vacant place in the middle of which they plac'd a mark which they call'd Penelope, the scope which they all were to aime at. They took their turns by lot, and he that hit the Penelope and removing that farther lay in its place, and afterwards should with another hit the Penelope again without touching any of the o∣ther Gamesters men, was acknow∣ledg'd Victor, and took it as a good Omen of obtaining his Mistress. gaming she beheld, Seated on Hides of Bullocks they had kill'd. Heralds with meaner Officers attend, Some in large Vessels Wine and Water blend, Others the boards with pory Sponges dri'd And Tables cover'd, serv'd-up Cates divide. Her first Telemachus, 'mongst the debosh'd Corrivals sitting, saw as she approch'd, Then sadly fancying to himself: Should there His valiant Father suddenly appear Routing them all, how he would spoyl their sport, And soon regain his Honour Wealth and Court: Troubled a Stranger there so long should stand, He rose, and gently took her by the hand, And it disburthening of her Javelin spake; Since you are freely Welcom, please to take
With us, of what supplies our Boards, a share, And when your Spirits, Sir, recruited are, How I may serve you intimate: This said, Up to the Hall the Goddess he convey'd: There 'gainst a Column sets her Launce, where stood Ʋlysses Javelins planted like a wood: Then in a Chair, with a rich Cushion grac'd And a carv'd Foot-stool, he Minerva plac'd; Then sets himself against her, from the rest, That, nor their rude deportments should his Guest Disturb, nor their impertinencies tire, And better so of's Father to inquire: Water to wash their hands a Damsel-sewer Poures forth in Silver from a Golden Ewre, Then spreads the Board, and on pure Manchet sets; The Cook the Table loads with various Cates, With richest Wines Attendants crown the Feast, When to their places the proud Sutors prest. 'Soon as they wash'd, and Bread up Virgins serv'd, All charg'd at once and cut, and each where carv'd; Bowles fill'd and emptied wander here and there: When thirst and hunger satisfied were, Of Songs and Dances they begin to think, Sports highten Banquets more than Meat and Drink. The Herald, Phemius, brings a Harp well strung, Who, though unwilling, play'd and sweetly Sung: When thus Telemachus in Pallas ear; With this our rudeness, Sir, be pleas'd to bear, Songs are their business with a well set Aire, And thus to feast without a Bill of fare; Whil'st on some Shore his Bones lie bleach'd with Rain, Or tumbled are with Billowes through the Main, Whom should they see, rather they'd Wings desire Than large Possessions, Gold, or rich Attire;
But of my Father now remains no hope: If any born under Heaven's glorious cope Should me inform that here he would arrive, Since the time's past, I should not him believe. But tell me, Sir, your Country, stock and name, And how, and why into these parts you came: Whether a stranger, or were heretofore Known to my Sire, since many on that score Visit our Court: He correspondents had Through all these Isles. Then thus Minerva said, I Mentes am Anchialus Son, and reign O're Taphians, Traders through the boysterous Main: Hither I came to Anchor, as we pass AtTemesa was a City of the Brutii in the foot of Italy, now called, as Pontanus conjectures in his History of Naples, Longobuco. That this is the City meant by Homer, not that of Cyprus of the same name, appears, because the Neapolitan Temesa was famous for its veins of Brass, for which Mentes saies he traded thither, at ap∣pears by Ovid in his Metamorphosis, l. 15. Hippotadaeque domos Regis, Temeses∣que metallae. Hippotades Palace, and Temesian Steel. And Statius in his Sylvae, — se totis Temese dedit hausta metaellis, Temese whose Iron mines are drain'd. And Strabo witnesses that the rooms for preparing of Brass remain'd there in his time, though empty. To which may be added the vicinity of this place to Cephallenia, and the great distance of the other. Temese to barter Iron for Brass. Our Vessel in the Rheithran Harbour rides Safe under Neiums Grove from Wind and Tides. I often and thy hospitable Sire Treated each other, this thou mayst enquire Of old Laertes; who, as they report, Absents both from the City and the Court: Where his old Maid, when faint with Toyl and Sweat Pruning his spreading Vines, provides him Meat. I hear the Gods thy wandring Sire impead In his return: For sure he is not dead. Him fierce Men in the navel of the Main, A Sea-guirt Isle, against his will detain. Though I no Prophet am, nor Augurie boast, Know he ere long shall reach his native Coast: Not him from home shall Brazen Fetters keep, Nor raging Billows of the boysterous Deep. Are you his Son? Him you resemble much, Such were his Eyes, his manly Visage such. Me for his Friend Ʋlysses pleas'd to own, Before the Trojan expedition:
But since the Grecian Princes lanch'd their Fleet, We nere injoy'd the happiness to meet. Then he reply'd; my Mother tells me so, Nor Children more of their own Parents know. Would I the Son were of a happy Sire, Who aged might in his own Court expire: But mine the unfortunat'st ere trod the Earth. Then Pallas; Such a Mother brought thee forth, At such a time, that no unworthy Fate Shall thee attend: Sir, please to intimate What means this concourse, why such store of Guests? Is this some treatment, or else Nuptial Feasts? This seems no Club, where each one paies his share, And yet extreamly insolent they are: A sober person ill would brook to view The ruffian pranks of this disorder'd Crue. Then thus the Prince; Whilst here my Father reign'd, Good orders he and plenteous Boards maintain'd, Whom now cross powers, who alwaies mischief plot, Of mortals make the most unfortunate. Nor for his Death should I so much complain, Had at the Trojan Leaguer he been slain, Or scaping Wars and Billowes died at home: Our Princes then erected had his Tombe, Investing me with his Estate and Power; But greedyThe Harpyes were the Daugh∣ters of Pontus and Terra, from whence they were feign'd to have their domi∣nion partly on the Seas, partly on Land. They were Fouls with the faces of Women. Their form is to be seen in Sculpture, in the Church of St. Martin at Venice, frequented as a Ma∣ster-piece to draw these Monsters by, both by Carvers and Painters. That they had Wings, we learn from Aes∣chylus, who mentioning the Furies a∣sleep by Orestes, concludes they were not Harpyes, because they were , without Wings. There is a Coin yet extant of L Valerius, where there is a Harpye represented. Harpyes now his Corps devour, Leaving to me, his most unhappy Heir, In stead of Riches, sorrow and despair. Nor wail I his disasters thus alone, The Gods have giv'n me sufferings of my own: Those Princes who these scattered Isles command, Hellanicus one of the ancientest of the Greek Historians took Duli∣chium here mentioned to have been Cephallenia. But Strabo has manifested that to be a groundless errour: first, because Dulichium was under the command of Meges, the Cephallenians under the command of Ʋlysses. Se∣condly, because if Dulichium had been the same with Cephallenia, Homer would not have said that there went fifty Suitors from Dulichium, and four and twenty from Same, which was a City of Cephallenia. Strabo reckons Dulichium, and that rightly, one of the Echinades, neer the mouth of the river Achelous, in his time cal∣led Dolicha. Dulichium, Samos, and Zacynthus Strand, And Ithaca, my Mother to espouse, Daily addressing, thus molest my House:
Whose sute she not rejects nor grants, and now Would gladly shake them off, but knows not how. Whose ryots wast my Stock; on this pretext, Me they perhaps will tear in pieces next. Much pittying him, then thus Minerva said; Thou want'st alas thy valiant Father's aid, He soon their ranting humours would abate: Could I but see him standing at the Gate As in our Court when first I him beheld, Arm'd with two Spears, a Cask and glittering Shield, New come fromIlus was great Grand-child to Medea, a Lady, famous for her exqui∣site skill in all manner of Poysons. Ilus (for the boysterous Main He plow'd toThere are four Cities of this name. Some of the Antients conceive Homer to mean that of the Thesproti∣ans, others that of the Corinthians, Strabo rather enclines to Ephyra of Elea, because Homer makes Agamede the Daughter of Augias King of the Epeans to have the knowledg of all sorts of Poysons. Ephyre) Poyson to obtain To 'noynt his Barbs, which warie he deni'd, Yet then my loving Father thine supply'd. Should he now enter in that posture here, Bitter would prove their Nuptials, sad their Cheer. But 'tis at the appointment of the Gods, If ever he review his own aboads, Or be reveng'd; yet now consider well How best thou may'st this haughty Crew expell: A Court to morrow early summon, there Require them all thy Pallace to forbear, And if thy mother one must needs Espouse, Let her return to her rich Father's house, There let them Wed, there let her warie Sire After her Dowre, or what ere else, inquire. Next, if I may advise, make ready streight A nimble Vessel of the second Rate; Then saile in quest of thy long absent Sire To Sandy Pyle, of Nestor there inquire: From thence to Spartan Menelaus hast, Who of the scattered Fleet arrived last; Of him perhaps some tidings thou mai'st hear, Make this thy business of the following year:
But hear'st thou of his death, return streight home, Performe his Obits, and erect his Tomb. Then let thy Mother Wed, and last imploy, Thy wits how thou these Sutors mai'st destroy, By force or fraud: And since of age thou art, Leave childish sports, and bravely act thy part. Hast thou not of Orestes heard, whose name His gallant acts through all the World proclaim? He in Aegystus breast, that Regicide Who Agamemnon slew, his Weapon dy'd; Thou art as likely so to purchase Fame: But I expected at my Vessel am, And must aboard with speed: What I advise Be sure to do; when thus, the Prince replies; You counsel like a friend, a Father such Would give a Son, which me concerns so much, That I shall it pursue: Here only stay, Though posting time and business call away; Bathe and repose, till I a Gift prepare, Which thou with joy may'st to thy Vessel bear, And keep as precious Treasure for my sake, Such as lov'd Guests from those that treat them take. Then Pallas; Sir, I should be loath t' offend; What favour you soere for me intend, Reserve till my return, that then I may, Accept your Present, and the like repay. This said, she vanish'd like a Bird, from thence, Giving him courage and a tender sense Of his dear Sire. A while he wondring stood, But when resolv'd this Stranger was some God, He to the Sutors went, who silent at Old Phemius Musick, and attentive sate; He sung the Greeks hard pass, from Ilium hurl'd, By Pallas heavy wrath about the World.
Penelope hears him from Her upper Rooms, And down Stairs with two Maids, attending, comes, Entring the Hall a Veil her Beauty hides, And weeping, thus the sweet Musician chides; Hast thou no other Layes which deeds relate, Of men and Gods which Poets celebrate, Such choose whil'st they Carowse, these but foment Old grief, and work afresh on discontent; Forbear this woful Theam, since I not yet, Can one so honour'd through all Greece forget. Then spake the Prince; Why Mother him d'ye blame Pleasing himself, or tax the Poets Theam? When greatest Jove inspires their sacred Verse, Well he the Greeks misfortunes may rehearse. What most concerns us, most our ears invite; What's new and rare still heighten our delight. My Father not alone his Voyage lost, But many more nere reach'd their native Coast. Look to your house, and your affairs at home, See that your Maids Spin, Card, and ply their Loom: Leave such Disputs to men who understand, And me to Umpire who should here command. This said, astonish'd at her prudent Son, She thence returns by two attended on; And in her Chamber for her Lord did weep, Till Pallas clos'd her Eyes with gentle sleep. When from the Board the proud Corrivals rose, And drowsie hasten to desir'd repose. Then spake the Prince; You that so haunt my house, And vex my Mother, hoping to Espouse, Cease your rude clamor, this disorder curb, Nor this high pleasure with such noyse disturb: But hearken to his heavenly Voice and Lyre. Next I to morrow early you require,
To meet in Counsel, where I shall such Guests Forbid my Court, else-where to make their Feasts: Which if thus warn'd you slight, and not forbear, To ruin me, by all the Gods I swear, If Jove so please, you unlamented shall, Just Vengeance feeling, perish in this Hall. This said, all bit their Lips, his Speech admir'd, That he redress so boldly had requir'd. Antinous then; What God, my little Prince, Inspir'd thee with such pretty Eloquence? Jove not decreed, that thou should'st rule this Land Because thy Father once did us command. Then thus the Prince; I should thy wrath contemn Would Jove confer on me the Diadem: To reign is good, Courts are with plenty stor'd, Princes are serv'd, are honour'd, and ador'd: But there be many great ones here who may, Since that my Father's dead, this Kingdom sway, Yet I a King, shall in this Pallace reign, And, with Paternal wealth, due State maintain. Then spake Eurymachus, Polybius Son, Heaven's pleasure must, Telemachus, be done. But who soere shall fill our empty Throne, Rule thou thy Mansions and enjoy thy owne: None who this I sle inhabits thee shall wrong; But say, what Stranger talk'd with thee so long? Ought know's he of your Sire, or hither comes To pay old Debts, and clear contracted Sums? He staid no time, did company decline; He hath a noble look, and princely Mien. Then thus the Prince: No news of him I hear, I to no Wisard now will give an ear, For whom my Mother to this Countrey sends: This Stranger's one of my Sires ancient Friends,
Mentes, Anchialus Son, who now commands The Taphians, Traders into Foreign Lands. Thus said the Prince, though he the Goddess knew: Then they to Dancing and their songs withdrew; When routed day sought refuge in the West, They to their several seats repair'd to rest. When to his Lodgings built with wondrous art, Which mid'st Ʋlysses Pallace stood apart, Thought-full Telemacus to rest ascends, Whom Euryclea with a Light attends: (Laertes her had purchased of old, At no small rate, for twenty Bullocks sold, Her lov'd he as his Spouse, but nere enjoy'd, His jealous Wives displeasure to avoyd. She up the Prince with much affection bred) Opening the door, down sits he on his Bed, And off with speed his plyant Garments gets, Which up she hanging puts in comely pleats Close by his Bed: Her business thus dispatch'd, The door, pluck'd by a Silver Ring, she latch'd; Whilst plyant Blankets o're himself he laid, Minding his Voyage, and what Pallas said.
scene from book 2 Hustrissimae Domince Doe: Elizabethae Duci∣de Ormond Tabulam hand LMDDDIO Lib: 2.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE SECOND BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Telemachus a Counsel summons; all The Island Princes meet: a frequent Hall: Corrivals charge: sharp Answers and Replies. Eagles disturb the Court: the concourse rise. The Prince (a Vessel with Provision stor'd) And Pallas, like old Mentor, go aboard. NO sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With rosie Fingers daies Port∣cullice drawn, But from his Bed Laertes Grand∣child springs, Puts on his Vest, and 'thwart his Shoulders flings His well hatch'd Falchion, on his Sandals tyes, And forth with a majestick presence hyes. His Heralds then commanding straight to call, The Island Princes to the Counsel-Hall.
Soon as in Court conven'd the Heroes were, In comes the Prince, arm'd with a glittering Spear, It is observable that Telemachus, Prince of Ithaca, has no Guard or at∣tendance to accompany him to the Council: neither do I find in the Po∣ems of Homer, that ever Prince used any but in time of War: though Eustathius thinks, his attendants had forsaken him, for fear of the Suitors. Two Dogs attend, whose face Minerva deck't With Heavenly raies, and a Divine aspect: All who beheld, admire his winning grace, And, whil'st he mounts his Father's Throne, give place. Then first aroseIt is not altogether unusual with Homer, to make the appellative name of a Country, the proper name of a Man: as he does here Aegyptius, which signifies a Native of AEgypt, to be the proper name of a Prince of Ithaca: for so, in his Iliads, he feigns several proper names, as Meon, Dar∣danus, Imbrius, Epens, and the like; all which are properly relative to the native Country of any persons so call∣ed; which in succeeding ages, grew more common: Achaeus the name of a famous Poet, Scytha of a Philosopher, and Carystius an Historian. Aegyptius, a grave Sage, Bow'd with the burthen of unweildy Age: Four Sons he had; one, to the Ilian Plain, Follow'd Ʋlysses fortune, through the Main: Him Polyphemus in his Dungeon kill'd The last, whose Flesh his rav'nous Stomach fill'd. Three more surviv'd; one to the Queen made love, The other did their Father's ground improve. But he, as if he had no other Son, Still mourns his loss, and weeping, thus begun; Me first to hear, you Princes condescend; We never here in Counsel thus conven'd, Since good Ʋlysses sail'd for Ilium. For what then are we summon'd, or by whom? Can any us newly arriv'd inform Of some approaching Foes, impending storm, Or ought else that concerns the publick good? His presence speaks him one of Noble Blood, May Jove succeed his fair Designes. This said, No longer sits the Prince; but highly glad At what he hear'd, amidstThis is spoken, according to the custom of those antient times. And therefore Agamemnon made an Apo∣logy for himself, when he went not in∣to the middle of the assembly, but spake to them from his own feat. the Concourse stands; And when Pisenor had into his hands A Scepter put, t' Aegyptius, the Prince Himself addressing, thus declares his sence; The Man's not far, and you shall quickly see, Who call'd this Court, forc'd by hard Destinie: Not lately he arriv'd, nor can inform Of any Foes approach, or gathering Storm,
Nor ought concerns the publick good relate, My bus'ness all my own, my torn estate By two sad chances: First my Sire I lost, Who like a loving Father rul'd this Coast; Then what is worse, the House that He enjoy'd, Is topsie-turvy turn'd, his stock destroy'd: Our Grandees Sons do daily there resort, And 'gainst her will my dearest Mother court; Waving to visit her rich Father's House, Who might the Contract draw, and her Espouse To one he likes, with a sufficient Dowre; Daily repairing thither, they devoure Fat Beevs, Sheep, Goats, and highly Sup and Dine, Gratis Carrowsing deep on richest Wine. Havock they make, whil'st I a Champion want, Such as my Sire, these Ranters to supplant: Since I'm too weak to charge such wasting swarms, Nurtur'd in Peace, unseen in feats of Arms; But were my strength proportion'd to my mind, Who act such prancks should soon my vengeance find; I'd prop my sinking House. You Patriots, fear Your Neighbours ill reports, the Gods revere, Lest they should punish you, for your neglect, My case condole, and my Estate protect; But I by Jove implore and Themis, who All CounselsEustathius on this place notes that the Statue of Themis, according to some Grammarians, was brought into all publick assemblies, at their be∣ginning, and carried forth at their dis∣solution, to which they will have Ho∣mer here to allude. summons, and dissolves, that You Refrain my House, suffer me there alone, My self and my misfortunes to bemoan. If ere my Father by Hostility, Wrong'd any here, retaliate that on me: Better it were that you such havock made, Devour'd my 'state, then might I be repay'd: For in the City I'de upon you call, Untill you clear'd accounts, and gave me all:
But now my sorrows are on sorrows heap'd: This said, his Scepter down he threw, and wept. All pittying silent sate, nor Answer made, Till thus Antinous rising boldly said; You have not well, young Prince, your business scan'd Thus to asperse us, and our Honour brand: Thy Mother rather blame, we faultless are; Three years she fed our hopes and held us faire, Promis'd her self to all; her Women sent, Us to assure of what she never meant: When her inventions were at lowest Ebb, Then she, forsooth, pretends a curious Web, And thus to all said; Though my Lord be dead, Suspend your suit, and urge me not to Wed, Till this be wrought, which when his sad Fates call Must serve Laertes for hisIt was the custom of the anti∣ents, to have their Funeral garments made while they were yet alive; if either Nature, or any eminent danger, put them in minde of their death. The Mother of Euryalus, lamenting her Son, lost in the War, mentions the Funeral Robe she was before pro∣viding for him. —pressive oculos, aut vulnera lavi, Veste tegens, tibi quam noctes festina di∣esque Ʋrgebam, & tela curas solabar aniles. Virgil l. 9. —nor close thy eyes at rest, Or bathe thy Wounds, and cover with the Vest Which night and day I did for thee prepare, At my Web, curing an old Womans care. Funeral Pall; So shall no Grecian Lady me asperse, That I with nought adorn'd his Funeral Hearse. Thus did the Queen our easy minds perswade, By night unraveling, what by day she made, And held three Summers thus, and Winters on; But when the fourth years gliding sphears begun, One of her Women her designe reveal'd, And busie, her unweaving we beheld. Discover'd thus, her work she finish'd straight; So we reply, and the whole truth relate; Advise thy Mother at her Fathers House With his consent to choose a noble Spouse, For if this tedious game she longer plaies, Hopes height'ning now, now starving with delaies; And thus insists, whom Pallas gave such parts Making a Mistress, in her own great Arts, ThatTyro was the Daughter of Sal∣moneus King of Elis, a beautiful Lady, impregnated by Neptune, in the form of Enipeus. Of whom Ovid, in the E∣pistle of Hero to Leander, Si neque Amymone, neque laudatissima forma Criminis est Tyro fabula vana tui. Nor fair Amymone nor Tyro prove, Vain fables of thy vitious love. TyroMycene the Daughter of I nachus and Melia. Micen, norThe Mother of Hercules, whom she had by Jupiter, in the absence of her Husband. Alcmena ere Could boast like skill, though they so famous were.
Her ill-lay'd Project shall no better take, But that so long of thine we'l havock make, Till Heav'n shall change her mind: True! she may be Renown'd for this, whil'st here we ruin thee, Feasting on thine, and off all business leave, Till one of us she as her Spouse receive. When thus Telemachus; I were accurs'd Should I expell, who me both bore and nurs'd, My Father too may live, nor can I send Her home with all sheIt was an antient law among the Grecians, that the Wife, upon the Death of her Husband, or Divorce, should receive the Portion she brought with her: for which there was securi∣ty given to her friends, upon her Mar∣riage. Demosthenes in his Oration a∣gainst Baeotus, , , , Af∣terwards her Husband being dead, lea∣ving his family, and receiving back her Portion, &c. Wherefore Telemachus makes this his Apology, why he sent not away his Mother to her Fathers house, because the Suitors had not left him wherewithall to return her Por∣tion. brought, nor ought pretend In my excuse to my offended Sire, Nor to the Gods, when imprecations dire, My Mother raging, to sad Furies makes, Cursing her Son, as she his House forsakes; I'll nere propose that motion to her, shall Gain me her hatred, and dislike from all: This if you relish not, my House refrain, Feast elsewhere, or each other entertain; Yet if it better with your humour square, To ruin me and mine, my Board not spare. But I'll implore th' immortal Gods, if ere Great Jove retaliate, unreveng'd that there You all may perish. Thus he said, when Jove, Humane affaires observing from above, Sent from a Hill two Eagles, swift they fly, And cut, with Wings expanded, th' easy Sky; But when they came into the Counsel Hall, They shake their fluttering Pinions, viewing all, And sad, from their own necks and bosomes drew Blood, with their Talons, then to th' right hand flew, And to the Houses and the City bend. All saw, admiring what this might portend: When Alitherses, expert grown by Age, Who well could speak, and best by Birds presage,
Most sober in advice, in Counsel grave, Thus on the Prodigie his judgment gave; You Princes, this concerns the Suitors most, Whom sodain Danger threats; his Native Coast, And friends ere long, Ʋlysses shall injoy: He comes, will them, and many more destroy. You Princes, who this famous Isle possess, Consult before how we may acquiesce; Advise them straight, all Courtship to forbear, His House refrain, that he their lives may spare. I am no idle Prophet, wanting skill, What ere I have foretold, hath happen'd still: When first to Troy, the Grecians steer'd their Fleet. And Sailes with them Renown'd Ʋlysses set, I said, That suffering much, his Friends all lost, He in the twentieth year his native Coast Unknown should reach; which wil prove true. Then said Eurymachus; Thy Children so perswade, Though prediction by Augury was religiously maintain'd, by both Greek and Roman States, yet the more discreet of them seldom took further notice of it, then stood with their own advantage: of which Homer himself has given ample testimony in an ele∣gant Speech of Hector's, Iliad 12. Must I mark Birds when they their wings expand, Leave sure designes upon the Counter∣mand? Let them, for me, to right or left hand fly. Where the Sun riseth, or forsakes the Skie; Joves pleasure we should do without delay, Whom mortals, and immortal Gods, obey: 'Tis a good signe, We for our Country fight. From which last Verse, Q. Fabius Maximus, a Roman Augur, took that Saying of his; whatsoever, is done to the benefit of the Commonwealth, is done optimis auspiciis: whatsoever is acted to its raine, fit contra auspicia. Dotard, at home, lest they should suffer, I On this account can better prophesie: Many Birds fly beneath the glorious Sun, But all not fit to make a Judgment on. Far off Ʋlysses dy'd, would thou hadst there Perish'd with him, and never talk'd so here, And with vain Prophesies his youth incense, Expecting at thy House a recompence: But truth I'll thee foretell, if thou engage The Prince with poys'ning words, provoking rage, It shall prove bad for him, and worse for thee, And thy design shall vain and fruitless be. Dotard, on thee wee'l punishment inflict, Nor can we in our Vengeance be too strict; But this advice I to the Prince commend, Let him his Mother to Icarius send;
There let them wed, there let her wary Sire, After her Dowre, or what ere else, inquire: But we, till then, shall to his House repair, And court the Queen, since none alive we fear; No not Telemachus, although so high He rants, nor yet thy fustian Prophesie, Which thou, fond buzzard, scandalizing Fate, Pratlest to purchase our united Hate: Still we shall haunt his House, there Sup and Dine, Till she with one of us in Wedlock joyn. Her Beauty takes us so, and curious Arts, None else but she can captivate our Hearts. Then said the Prince; Eurymachus I crave, That you, and this Assembly, now would wave Former dispute, and I the like shall do, Since all the Gods, and Greece, our difference know: And me a Vessell of the second Rate, Well man'd, provide, that I imbarking strait, May Sail forPyle, the seat of old Nester, as appears by the following Verses. But there were three Cities of that name in Peloponnesus, each of them, in after ages, challenging to themselves the ho∣nour of having been the seat of Nestors Empire: The one in Arcadia, the o∣ther in Messene, and the last in Triphy∣lia. Strabo attributes it to the last, and proves it at large, out of Homer himself, in the eighth Book of his Ge∣ography. Pyle, and Sparta, to inquire, As duty bids, of my long absent Sire: If any there can tell, or Fame, that Post, Who brings Intelligence from Coast to Coast; Yet if I nothing hear of his return, A year his absence patiently I'll mourn. But of his Death inform'd, and that no more He shall alive behold his native Shore, Due Rites perform'd, I'll rear his Monument, Then match my Mother with her own consent. This sayd he sate, and up old Mentor rose, Whom 'mongst his trustiest Friends Ʋlysses chose His Steward, when for Troy he Anchors weigh'd, And Supervisor of his Houshold made. And thus began; You who our Princes are, Hear with attention what I shall declare:
No more let Kings be pious, mild, nor just; Nor act by Law, nor Reason, but their Lust, Since none Ʋlysses minds, who rul'd this Land, Rul'd, like a Father, with a gentle hand: I these proud Suitors not at all envy, Who, by depraved Counsells, act so high, Vent'ring their Lives his Riches to consume, And thus, as ne'r he would return, presume: But I'm concern'd, that all sit silent here, And none rebuke, nor force them to forbear, Since they a few, and we so many are. Then spake Leocritus, Euenor's Heir, Well such advice might be, old Mentor, spar'd, To force us to forbear, that task were hard; When we with Wine are heightned at a Feast, Should then Ʋlysses, an unwelcome guest, Arrive, and think to drive us from his House, Small joy would find his long-expecting Spouse, Ore-match'd, to see him slain at his return, You counsel ill: Let straight this Court adjourn, Then thou and Halitherses, if you list, Who were his Father's friends, may him assist: But here he long may sit, ere news arrive Of his return, or that he is alive. This said, the concourse rose, and each repairs To his relations, and their own affairs, The Suitors to the Court. The Prince mean while, Down to the Sea-wash'd Margents of the Isle Withdraws alone, soon as his hands he had With salt WavesIt was the constant practice of the Grecians, to purify and cleanse themselves, by washing, before prayer, and Sacrifice. So Chryses in the first of the Iliads. Ʋp with wash'd hands they unbruis'd Barley take, When Chryses thus his earnest prayer did make. Which is not confirm'd only by exam∣ple of particular persons, but by a ge∣neral precept, recorded by Hesiod. To Jove nor any who in heaven com∣mands Early libate before thou wash thy hands. cleans'd, he thus to Pallas prai'd; Hear me, who honour'dst yesterday my roofs, And with thy presence gav'st such ample proofs, Virgin, of thy affection, with commands, That I should seek my Sire in foreign Lands,
The Court, me in my expectations, fails, And the proud Suitors interest prevails. Straight Pallas, like old Mentor, as he pray'd, To him appear'd, and comforting, thus say'd; Thy Father's Principles I shall instill (Thou shalt not coldly act thy part, nor ill) Into thy bosom, and his courage too; Nor shalt thou only speake like him, but do: Thou in thy intended Voyage shalt go on; But if th' art not Icarius Daughter's Son, Of what thou undertak'st thou may'st despaire; Although few Children like their Fathers are, Some better be, but many worse by far. Thou not degenerat'st, but may'st compare With thy great Father: So thou need'st not doubt, Thy enterprise, what ere, to bring about. Let the fond Suitors to Vain projects trust, Since they are neither Politick nor Just, Who little know, their Fate approaching, they Are destin'd all to perish in one day; But I will, as a Father and a Friend, Provide a Vessel, and on thee attend. Now first go home, the Suitors kindly treat, Pure Flower, rich Wine, such good provision get, Put in Borachios up, and Sacks well sow'd, Whil'st I shall raise thee Volantiers abroad; 'Mongst many Ships I'll choose one tight and stanch, And all our Goods aboard to th' Offine Launch. Thus Pallas; Straight Telemachus obey'd, And, with a heavy Heart, hast homeward made; Where stripping Goats, the Princes he beheld, And Porckers dressing in the Portal kill'd, Antinous, smiling, met him in the Hall, And his Hand grasping, thus began to Droll;
My pretty Speaker, rangle now no more, But merry Eat and Drink, as heretofore: Because the Greeks will Rigg thy Ship mean while, That thou mayst seek thy valiant Sire at Pyle. Who thus reply'd; Should I with Ranters Feast Against my will, who privacy love best? Is't not enough, you my Estate destroy, My Stock consume, as still I were a Boy, But now of Age I'll take advice, and learn With Courage how to mannage my concern. I shall attempt, either at Pyle or here, To make you pay large Recknings for your Cheer: Nor shall I loose my Voyage, though I want A Ship, which you were pleas'd they would not grant, Since as a Passenger, I'll leave this Land. Thus say'd, he from Antinous plucks his Hand; They went to Feasts prepar'd, and merry make, Cavill and prate; when thus a proud Youth spake; This Boy will kill us all: Bravoes he'll hire At Pyle, or Sparta, or from Ephyre, dire Poyson Transport; and when we take our rowse, Wine mix'd with deadly Bane shall clear his House. Another say'd; He may a Voyage make, Bad as his Father erst did undertake, And perish far off, on a Foreign Shore, Which rather will incumber us the more, How we his Goods shall share; but we this House, Shall give his Mother, or whom she'll espouse. Thus drolling they their pride and folly vent, Whilst he up to his Fathers Chamber went; Where Gold and Brass congested stood in piles, Along the wall, and Jarrs of severall Oyls, And Vests layd up; a Pipe of richest Wine Lay farther in, whose liquor was Divine,
Kept for Ʋlysse's glad Return from Sea, By Euryclea under Lock and Key. To whom the Prince; Draw next that richer piece, Which for my hapless Sire provided is, Twelve Runlets, Nurse, let them be staunch and sweet, And twenty measures sack of purest Wheat. Do this alone; which, when my Mother goes At night up to her Chamber, I'll dispose; I must to Pyle and Sparta, to inquire, And listen after my long absent Sire. Aloud, this said, she bitterly complain'd: Why wilt thou venture to a Foreign Land, Who art Ʋlysses dear and only Son? So perish'd he, far off in Realms unknown, And now for thee some mischief they'll prepare, Thou once destroy'd, thy Fortunes they will share. Ah! stay thou here, thy Enterprize decline, Nor furrow Billows through the rageing Brine. Then he reply'd; No danger Nurse suspect, That power who me advis'd, will me protect. But Swear, you my departure keep unknown To my dear Mother, till twelve daies are gone, Unless that she of this my absence hears, And so her Beauty wrong, with briny Tears. Then swearing Secresie to his designe, Pure Wheat she sacks, and runlets up rich Wine; But down the Prince, amongst the Suitors went: Whil'st Pallas did another Plot invent, And him resembling, gives about the word, That at Sun-setting all should come aboard, Desiring Noemon to lend his Bark, He kindly grants, and when the Streets grew dark, His Vessel launch'd, where she might ly afloat, And Oars aboard, Yards, Sails, and Tackle brought,
With speed: thus prompted by the Goddess, they Attended at the bottom of the Bay; Then thought she of another quaint device, Herself to Court conveying in a trice, With gentle Sleep, the Suitors there trapanns, And shakes their tottering Goblets from their Hands: With drowsiness surpriz'd, streight all arose, And to the City went, to their repose; Next, like Old Mentor, from Ʋlysses Hall, Thus gives she Prince Telemachus a call; All ready are to go, hoyse Sail and weigh, Hast, lest we lose our Voyage by delay. This said, Minerva from the Threshold leaps, He, following close, reprints the Goddess steps; Soon as he came, where lay their Vessel moor'd, And found them all prepar'd to go aboard; Sirs, our Provision wants your helping hands He say'd, which ready in the portal stands, Neither my Mother nor her Damsels know Of this, but only one: This said, all go As he commanded, nor their bus'ness slip'd, Till they full Sacks and swoln Borachios Ship'd. Before the Prince, aboard Minerva goes, And plac'd together on the Stern, unlose Their Cables, streight all mount, their Bancks assign'd, And Pallas calls a fair and whispering Wind; They raise their Masts, and hoyse their Sails a-trip, Soft Gales give speedy passage to their Ship; Bruis'd Billows thunder, as her course she stood, Cutting rough Furrows through the boyst'rous Flood, Whil'st they loose Cordage fasten to her side, And a Libation for the Gods provide, Hon'ring Jove's Daughter most; then on they Steer'd All Night, untill the blushing Dawn appear'd.
scene from book 3 Illustrissimo Domino: Do Thome Com: de Ossory Subpraefecto Gen: Totius Regni Hibernice Tamuam hanc LMDDDIO Lib: 3.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE THIRD BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Telemachus Lands, Pisistratus invites Him, and Minerva, unto Neptunes rites. Of lost Ulysses, Nestor nothing knows; Day and the Feast concluding, all repose. Nestor, Telemachus his Chariot lends, And, with the Prince, his Son to Sparta sends. WHEN the Sun rose, leaving the ample Floods, To light both Mortals, and Im∣mortal Gods, Guilding th' Opacous Earth, and Heaven's bright Sphere, To Pyle they (Neleus strong built Walls) drew neer: Whose people on the Ocean'sAlthough it might seem proba∣ble, that the Temple and Altar of Nep∣tune, here mentioned, were but the fiction of the Poet, as well as the Sa∣crifice, and the Attendants on it, yet Strabo assures us that there remain'd in his time, the Temple of Neptune, in the district of old Nestor, by the Sea∣side, between the Cities of Lepreus and Samicum, about an hundred Stades distant from each, intended here by Homer. He makes Bulls a Sacrifice peculiar to Neptune, as in the eleventh of his Iliads, , . Joves Altars there with sacred rights we fill'd, Two Bulls for Neptune and Alpheus kill'd, A Heifer next Minerva we present. Signifying by their fury and lowing, the rage and noise of the Sea. Margent hadThat they were black, which were here sacrific'd, relates to the co∣lour of the Sea, by him frequently call'd , &c. which Ho∣mer himself intimates in this place, by the Epithete of Neptune  black hair'd. The nine Bulls relate to the nine Cities, under the command of Nestor, mention'd by Homer in the Boeotia, Who dwelt in Pyle, and those Arene stor'd, And Thryos, where Alpheus you may ford; Who did in Aepy's lofty Walls reside In Cypariss and Amphygen abide; Who Helos, Pteleos, Dorion, where the throng Of Muses silenc'd Thracian Thamyris tongue. And the number of the Attendants on the Sacrifice, to those that waited on Nestor in the Trojan expedition, 500. to each feat here, as 500. to each Ship there. Black Beeves, a Hecatomb, to Neptune pay'd; Up to nine Boards, fivehundred Guests at each Were serv'd nine Steers, all slaughter'd at the Beach,
Whil'st they with furl'd-up Sails for Harbour bore, Then mooring fast their Vessel, leap'd ashore; But Pallas forth Telemachus conducts, And on the Peer safe mounted, thus instructs; Now simpring Modesty and Blushes spare, Since thou hast sail'd to make inquiry, where Thy Father lies, and how he dy'd; let's go And see, if ought of him old Nestor know; Request the prudent King, to tell the truth, Nor ought extenuate, to sooth thy Youth. Then he reply'd; How shall I make address? How him salute? That Language want t' express My self in, at th' Accost, who bashful am, And he a Prince, as great in Age as Fame. Telemachus, the Goddess then replies, Be confident, nor thy own parts despise, Some God shall thee inspire, for I suppose, Thou hast in Jove's Celestial Court no Foes. This say'd, off from the Beach Minerva leaps, He, following close, reprints the Goddess steps, And up they came, where all the Pylean State, Old Nestor, and his valiant Ofspring sate, Whil'st others dress'd their Cates: streight Old and Young About such Guests, so unexpected, throng, Desiring with glad welcomes to sit down; But first Pisistratus, old Nestor's Son, Them to the Board lead up, in either hand, Placing on Skins, upon a bed of Sand Next Nestor and his Brother: Part then brought Of Sacred inwards, and with rich Wine fraught A Golden Bowle, which he to Pallas bore, And thus presents; Sir, Neptune now implore, Since thou hast fortun'd here, a welcome Guest, To celebrate the World-Embracer's Feast;
And when with Prayer th' hast pay'd Libations due, Give him the Cup that he may offer too: Whom I suppose thou need'st not much perswade, T' implore the Gods, all Mortals want their aide. But he's thy junior much, resembling me In Age, therefore I bring this first to thee: Giving the Bowle Minerva as he spoke, With his discretion, extremely took, Rejoyc'd that his respects to her he pay'd Before the Prince, and thus to Neptune Pray'd; Oh thou! great King, whose circling armes are hurl'd Round the vast body of the mighty World, Honour on Nestor, and his Sons bestow, And next, these civil People favour shew, Whose Offerings on thy sacred Altars burn: Last grant this Prince and me a safe return, His bus'ness well effected, for whose sake We hither furrow'd up the briny Lake, Thus Pray'd she, and all Ceremonies done, The Golden Bowle presents Ʋlysses Son: Who in like manner pay'd Libations due, Then Cates well roasted, off with speed they drew, And Messing up, all plentifully fare. When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, To raise Discouse, thus antient Nestor say'd. Our Stomachs, worthy Guest's, now well alay'd, Let us with Table talk, the time awhile, And customary Questions, beguile; Who are you, Sirs, and from what Country come? Trade you abroad, or else asIt may seem strange, that Nestor should entertain his strange Guests with that ignominious, as it is now e∣steemed, title of Pirates. But it does appear by the antient Historians, that both the Islanders, and those of the Continent who bordered upon the Sea, chiefly maintained themselves by the Inrodes, they made into strange Coun∣tries and Towns unfortified, esteeming it the part of base and inferior Spirits to live upon their own labour; and on the other side a token of Valour, and Eminency to live upon Rapine and the spoyls of others. This Thucydides delivers in the Preface to his History, and confirm with this very place of Homer, though but obscurely intima∣ted, where he saies, In the antient Poets when Mariners were interrogated, whether they were Pirats or no, they counted it no dishonour to confess it, nor did they think they had upbraided them, who asked them the question. Pyrats Rome, Your Lives extending, through the boysterous Floods, To seize as lawful Prize, all Foreign Goods? When thus the Prince, embolden'd by the Maid, To ask about his long lost Father, said;
Oh thou! to whom all Greece prime honour pay, Hither we come, from Neian Ithaca, On private, not a publick score; t'inquire, If dead or living be my absent Sire, Ʋlysses, who, with thy especial ay'd, As Fame reports, proud Troy in Ashes lay'd. Who ere there perish'd, by th'insulting Foe, The place, and manner, of their Death we know; But Jove his Pate absconding none can tell, Nor certainly inform us, where he fell. If slaughter'd by the Trojans, in Champaign, Or lost'mongst Billows in the boyst'rous Main; On this account I now, thy Supplyant am, If thou did'st see, or since, by flying Fame, Heard'st his sad Fate, that thou would'st tell the truth, And nought extenuate, pittying my Youth; But sure a hapless Son his Mother bore: I by my valiant Father thee implore, If ere his word he good by action made, Against the Foe in field, or Ambuscade, When worsted Greeks were in their greatest straight That to remind, and all the truth relate. Then Nestor sai'd; Thou mak'st my heart to melt, Recalling all those miseries we felt Under Achilles, Plundring Towns by Sea, Or that sad Leagure, where so long we lay; Where our prime Chiefs we lost: There Ajax lies, Patroclus and renown'd Aeacides, Where toyles and sorrows fell on us so thick, To cast them up would pose Arithmetick; There fell Antilochus, my off-spring, who Well kept his ground, and could as well pursue. Five years should'st thou inquiring, here remain, What hardship there, we suffer'd in Champaign,
Thou might'st the sixth return unsatisfi'd, Nine years all Plots and Stratagems we tri'd, Which Jove scarce ended then: In that sad War, None with thy prudent Father could compare, On all occasions acting best his part At close designing; if his Son thou art. And now I view thee better, I admire, Thou look'st so like, and speak'st so like, thy Sire. Nor need thy blushes thee excuse as young, Who hast his Eloquence and silver Tongue; We ne'r in publick, handling points of State, Thwarted each other, nor in close debate; But of one Judgment jump'd still on the same, Playing the best of a hard Grecian Game. Ilium once sack'd, our Navy Anchors weigh'd, But Jove offended, long our Voyage made. We were not Pyous all, Prudent, nor Just, Hence some for Ryot suffer'd, some for Lust: AndPallas favour'd the Grecians du∣ring the whole Trojan War, nor does Homer give any account whence she was so incens'd against them. The later Poets say that Ajax deflowr'd her Priestess Cassandra, a Virgin and Prophetess. Which dishonour she reveng'd not only on Ajax himself, but the whole nation: and these Virgil follows, Aen. 1. — Pallasne exurere classem Argivam, atque ipsos potuit submergere ponto Ʋnius ab noxam & farias Ajacis Oilei? Illa Jovis rapidum jaculata è nubibus ignem Disjecitque rates, evertitque aequorae ventis: Illum expirantem transfixo pectore flammas Turbine corripuit, scopuloque infixit acuto. —could Pallas burn And sink the Grecian Navy in the Sea For one mans lust, Ajax impiety? She cast Jove's winged lightning from a cloud, Dispers'd their Fleet, with wind the Ocean plow'd. Him breathing flames, which through his bosome broak, Stak'd with a Whirl-wind on a pointed Rock. Pallas'twixt th' Atrides strife begun, Who call'd a Counsel late, at setting-Sun. Heated with Wine, the Greeks divided straight, And, from harsh Language, fell to high debate; Then Menelaus orders all to weigh, And minding home to Plow the Broad-back'd Sea. But Agamemnon, not so pleas'd, denies, Not one must stir before they Sacrifice, That so Minerva's wrath might be appeas'd; Gods once Incens'd are not so eas'ly pleas'd. Thus they contesting made a bitter close, And in divided Factions clamouring rose. That Night our Sleep but little us reviv'd, Whil'st greater sorrows Jove for us contriv'd. Next morn weLaunch, our Goods and Treasure stow'd And with our long-Veil'd Captives leave the road,
The other half with Agamemnon stay, And as their King and General obey; Tenedos, plowing Billows, soon we made, And on the Beach our Offerings duely pay'd For a safe Passage, but this Jove deni'd, And did our Fleet a second time divide. Ʋlysses Squadron on our General's score Sail'd back, and Anchor'd where they rode before: But I, perceiving Jove offended, fled With my whole Fleet, and honour'd Diomed. Us Menelaus found atAn Island in the Aegaean Sea, not far distant from Troy. Lesbos, there Consulting if we should 'boveAnother Island in the Aegaean Sea four hundred Stades distant from Lesbos. Chios Steer ToAn Island distant 60. Stades from Chios. Psyria, or on our Larboard hand, For StormyA Mountain in Ionia, abounding with Trees and wild Beasts, directly over against Chios; so call'd from Mimas a Gyant there buried. Mimas, under Chios stand: Then we great Jove besought, who gave aThe Poet mentions not what sign it was, which has given liberty to the conjectures of the Commentators. But I conceive he meant no more then a favourable gale for their passage to Enboea. sign, Would we be safe, to plowA large Island neer unto Greece now call'd Negropont. Euboean Brine; Thence through swoln Billows, with a favouring Gale, In one short night we toA Port-town in Enboea, but not mention'd by Homer in his Boeotia. Geraestus saile; Where we with Thighs of fatted Bullocks stain'd Strabo mentions the Temple of Neptune at Geraestus, standing in his time. Neptunian Altars, then forsake the Land; The fourth day Diomed at Argos lands, Thence turning straight for Pyle my Navy stands, Nor the same Wind that Jove first sent us fail'd, So I, dear Son, in safety hither sail'd, Nor know who scap'd, or were of life depriv'd; But what I learn'd since I at home arriv'd I shall to thee relate: Pyrrhus, they say, His Navy safe to Phthya did convey. Safe Philoctetes harbour'd his tall Fleet, None lost Idomineus, but to Creet His flying Squadron he in safety Steer'd. How Agamemnon Landed you have heard, And how Aegysthus him supplanting slew, Where he receiv'd Retalliation due,
Slain by Orestes; who his Faulchion dy'd In Blood of that accursed Regicide. Be Valiant thou too, Son, thy Face hath lines, Which speak thee Fam'd to be for bold Designs. Then thus the Prince; Thou who the Glory art Of all the Greeks, he met his just desert, And through the World, Greece shall his Fame divulge; Ah! that the Gods would me so much indulge, That I might take the like revenge on them Who plot my ruine, and my Youth contemn. But th' unkind Pow'rs allow my Sire nor me No happiness, we still must sufferers be. Then Nestor; Truth thou say'st, so all report, That several Princes to thy House resort, Courting thy Mother, melting thy Estate. Is it thy will, or is't thy Peoples hate, Stir'd up byEustathius on this place ob∣serves, that Princes have often been deposed by their Subjects, incited thereto by some Oracle. Oracles? who knows but he Returning, may on them revenged be Alone, or else for him a Party made? Should Pallas thee, as erst thy Father, ayd Against the Trojans, when we suffer'd so. I ne'r saw any God such favour show To Mortal in distress, as she to him; Had'st thou from her like favour and esteem, Soon Nuptial fancies they should lay aside. When thus the prudent Youth to him reply'd; Nestor, What thou hast say'd will never be, For I despaire that happy day to fee, Although revenging Gods with us should side. Telemachus, Minerva then reply'd, How scap'd such words thy Teeth, their Jvory guard, Not Jove from Heaven's high Turrets finds it hard, In exegencies Mortals to relieve, I rather, suffering many woes, would live,
And home returning my Estate injoy, Then that some Stranger there should me destroy; So hapless Agamemnon lost his life, By sly Aegysthus, and his cursed Wife. Nor can the Gods those whom they most esteem, Rescue from Death, nor from the Grave redeem, Who once Arrested, to th' Infernal shade Are hurried hence. Telemachus then said; Mentor, of this sad Argument no more: I fear he nere shall see his Native Shore, Since he is dead. Of Nestor now I'll learn Some other News, waving my own Concern, Who by his years hath much experience gain'd, And, like a God, hath now three Ages reign'd: Great Prince, thou Glory of thy Nation, tell How that Renowned Agamemnon fell, Where then was Menelaus, by what Plot, One in his pow'r, subtill Aegysthus got, So much the better Prince, whether he were At Argos, or in foreign Lands else-where. Then Nestor thus; I shall, most noble Youth, Resolve thee streight, thou hint'st upon the truth; Had Menelaus there arriving found Aegysthus living, he not under ground Had lay'd his Body, but upon the shore, Expos'd for Doggs, and Vultures to devour Far from the City, nor fond Grecian Dames Had pittying Tears shed at his Funeral flames; At Argos he, whil'st we beleagur'd Troy, Indulg'd his pleasure, Courting to injoy His Spouse, fair Clytemnestra: the chast Queen Long time stood out, loathing so fowl a sin: Besides, the King departing, left in trust Her to a learnedThe name of this Bard, or Mu∣sician, the Poet no where delivers. Some Writers call him Chariades, o∣thers Demodocus, or Glaucus. Deme∣trius Phalereus; relates the Story thus; Menelaus and Ʋlysses were sent to consult the Oracle at Delphos. about the Trojan Expedition, at what time were celebrated the Pythian Games, where Demodocus, one of the Scholars of Automedes, was Victor; whom they perswaded to return with them, and whom Agamemnon left overseer of his Queen. Bard, discreet and just,
Whose Fate him to his ruin did beguile: Subtill Egysthus on a desart Isle, Leaves him to Vultures, and wild Beasts a prey: Then she consenting, keeps their Wedding day In her own Court, and th' Altars of the Gods With Hecatombs of fatted Bullocks loads, Their Fanes with Arras grac'd, their Priests with Copes, Proud of a Prize so much beyond his hopes. Whil'st we our constant course from Ilium bend, And with me Menelaus, my dear friend, Untill we neer AthenianA Promontory belonging to the City of Athens, where was the Tem∣ple of Jupiter Suniensis. Sunium drew, WhereAll sudden deaths of Men, the Poet ascribes to Apollo, as of Women to Diana. Phebus, Menelaus Pylate slew, As at the Helm he stood, Phrontis, who best Of Mortals, steer'd a Ship with weather strest. Here, though in hast, his Voyage he deferr'd, Till he his friend with Funeral rites Interr'd; This done, their Squadron through the Ocean glides, Untill they reach steepA Promontory belonging to the Lacedaemonians, where Navigation was counted so dangerous, by reason of the contrariety of winds, that the Asi∣an and Italian Merchants, chose ra∣ther to transmit their Goods over Land, at the Corinthian Isthmus, then trust them to that Channel. Malias Rockie sides; There Jove a dang'rous Passage them design'd, And Waves like Mountains, rais'd with blustring wind, Which them dispers'd; a part for Creta stood, Where theA People on the Island Crete, over against Laconia. Cydonians plant, neer Jardan's Flood: On Cretan Coasts, a Rock with Sea-worn Clifts, His towry scalp above swoln billows lifts, Where Southern gusts rowl on roughA City of Crete, where Epime∣nides was born. Phaestus tydes On the left hand, which a small rock divides. Hither they steer, and hardly death escape, Whil'st all their Fleet, but five, bulg'd on the Cape; Which sail'd for Aegypt's fertile Margents streight, Where with rich Goods their crazy Ships they freight. Mean while Aegystus his dire Plot pursues, Murthers the King, the Queen corrupts, subdues His Realms, and seven years them in slav'ry held, The eighth Orestes the Usurper kill'd;
Whose Obits, and his Mother's Funeral rites, Perform'd, the Greeks he to a Feast invites: And Menelaus landing the same day, A world of Riches brought into the Bay. Then stay not long, nor travel far, lest those Thou left'st behind, thy Goods, to spoile expose, And for this fruitless Voyage thee despise. But go to Menelaus I advise, For he came lately home; whence he again Ne'r hop'd return, driven by a Hurricane, Into a Sea so broad, that Birds might ask, A year to cross o're, and no easie task. But Sail thou hence, or if thou go'st by Land, My Steeds and Chariot are at thy command, And thee my Sons to Sparta shall conduct, Atrides there thee farther may instruct. This say'd, Sun-setting Night her Flagg unfurl'd, Spreading black Ensigns o're the waterie World. Then Pallas; Thou speak'st, Nestor, like a Friend, Now part theIt was an usual Rite among the Gracians, to Consecrate the Tongues of their Sacrifice at the end of their en∣tertainment, mentioned by Athenaeus, and Didymus, by Homer meant only as a Symbol of Silence. Tongues, and Wine with Water blend, To offer Neptune and th' Immortal Gods, That all may then repose in their abodes, Since late it grows and dark; nor is it fit, That long we should at Feasts Celestial sit. This say'd, the Concourse follow her commands. Water the Heralds poure upon their hands; Young men with sparkling wine their Goblets crown'd, They drink about, and still the Bowle goes round. Tongues broil'd on Sacred Flames, all rising up Libations pay, and take their parting Cup: Then Pallas and Telemachus desire They might depart, and to their Ship retire, But Nestor staying them, thus gently chid; Jove and th' Immortal Deities forbid,
That you my House should baulk, and ly aboard, As if our Court no Lodging could afford, Nor ought that Strangers might accommodate; I furnish'd Chambers have, and Rooms for State, Adorn'd with Arras, and rich Tapestry, Ʋlysses Son shall ne'r a Ship-board ly, Whil'st I, or mine survive; who e'r resort, Shall civilly be Treated in our Court. Then Pallas; Nestor thou hast nobly say'd, And may'st Telemachus to stay perswade: But I must down, our Company to cheer, With my wish'd presence, who am Oldest, there: Young men they are, much of the Prince's Age, Who on his friendship's score with him engage. But early I toStrabo, in the eighth Book of his Geography, proves that the Cau∣cones here mentioned, were a People that lived neer Dyme in Elea, not those of Triphylia. She makes this excuse, that she may not accompany Telemachus to Lacedaemon, where the Marriage of Menelaus Daughter was celebrated, she being a Virgin Goddess. Caucones must repaire, To state accounts, which of concernment are: And when thou kindly him hast entertain'd, Lend him your Steeds and Chariot, then command Thy Son to guide the Prince; let him, I crave, Since 'tis your Grant, your fleetest Horses have. Pallas, this sayd, thence like an Eagle flew, Which all the Concourse, struck with terror, view; Then by the Hand the Prince Old Nestor took, And thus to him, admiring, kindly spoke: There's hope of thee, brave Youth, whom Gods instruct, And thus in thy Minority conduct; This of all Pow'rs, who plant the Starrie Sky, Is Pallas, for no other Deity Thy Father so befriended; Virgin! be Propitious to my family and me, And a broad Fronted Heifer, one year old, I'll offer thee, and tip hisIt was one of the Rites among the Grecians, to adorn the Horns of their larger Sacrifices with Gold: which from them descended to the Ro∣mans; for the Senate of Rome decreed that the Decemviri should Sacrifice to Apollo, Graeco ritu, after the manner of the Graecians, an Ox and two Goats with their Horns gilded. Ovid, —blandis indutae cornibus aurum Conciderant istae nivea cervice juvencae. Virgil Aen. 10. Et statuam ante aras aurata fronte ju∣vencam Candentem, pariterque caput cum matre ferentem. Horns with Gold. Thus Nestor Pray'd, and Pallas hear'd his Pray'r, Then home with his Relations did repaire.
There in his Pallace seated, he in Gold Presents them Wine new pierc'd, eleven years old: Pallas Libating, each one chears his Heart With a full Bowle, and thence to rest depart. Under the high Arch'd Portals, Nestor lead Telemachus, unto a curious Bed, Neer him Pisistratus, his Valiant Son, Who yet unmarried, Lodgings had alone. Then he retires to Chambers further in, And a soft Couch prepared by his Queen. No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With rosie Fingers, Daies Port-cullice drawn, But Nestor rose, and down before his Gate, On Nelius Throne of Pollish'd Marble sate, Whose prudence living, match'd th' Immortal Gods, Now dead descended to th' Infernal Floods. There Scepter'd Nestor with his Sons about Him, places took, Thrasymedes first, and stout Perseus, Aretus, Stratius, Echepron, And last Pisistratus his youngest Son; These to a Seat Telemachus convey'd, Next to old Nestor: who thus rising say'd; Pallas let's now Attone, since she our Feast In publick grac'd, as an invited Guest. Let one of you command our Heards-man straight, A Heifer bring to offer at the Gate: And let a second to the Vessel go, And summon all their Company, but two: Larceus a third; our Gold-Smith, who adorns Our Guifts, to guild the sacred Victims Horns, Let all the rest here in their Seats abide, But bid the Damsells all things fit provide, Seats, Wood, and Water: Their old Father, They, As soon as say'd, him Filial duty pay,
From field the Heifer comes, those from the Ship; Ready the Gold-Smith stands the Horns to tip, With Anvil, Tongs, and Hammer; Pallas would Not absent be,For in those times Gold was a rarity for a Princes Closet, not a Sub∣jects Purse. Athenaeus saies, That when Hero King of Syracuse had resolv'd to consecrate a Golden Victory and Tripos to Apollo at Delphos, Greece and Sicily could not afford him matter sufficient, till after long search, he met with some at a Merchant's house in Corinth. Nor does it appear that there was any plenty of Gold in Greece, till the Phocians had Sacrilegiously rob'd the Temple of Apollo, enrich'd with several Monuments of Gold, by the Princes of Lydia, Gyges and Croesus. Nestor gives out the Gold, That such their cost might more the Goddess glad: Stratius the Beast and Echepolus led Out by the Horns, Aretus Water brought, And in 's left Hand with Cakes a Charger fraught: Ready stood Thrasymedes with an Ax, Perseus the Bason holds, Nestor the Cakes, And Pallas supplicating, plucks the Hair Betwixt her Brows, and burns, closing their Prayer: Straight Nestor's Of-spring thence the Barley took, His Ax exalting Thrasymedes strook: The Victim streight, her Nerves dissected fell, The Women shreek, raising a hideous yell. Pisistratus soon cuts the Heifers Throat, Forth, with the Blood, her vital Spirits, float: Which flead, they to the Thighs lop'd off affix A double Cawle, and Lean with Fat commix; Next thinner Steaks, from parts extremer cut, And round the Thighs, about the Altar put, Which Nestor burns with Wood, then powrs on Wine, His Sons brought Spitts, which five in one conjoyn, The Thighs consum'd, they on the inwards feast, And what remain'd, in pieces cut and dress'd. Polycaste, Nestor's youngest Daughter, 'noynts And Bathes the Prince, and Vestments him appoints; Which when put on, he with a Godlike grace, By Antient Nestor, reassumes his place. Soon as the Joynts well roasted were, they drew, And dish'd them up, the Princes streight fall too: Then some arising, powre in Golden Bowls The richer Wine, that cures despairing Soules.
When thirst and hunger satisfied were, Said Nestor; Sons my Chariot streight prepare; Put in my Steeds that he may go: This said, The ready Princes their old Sire obey'd, And to the Teem-Poll his swift Horses joyn: Forth brings a Damsell Viands, Bread and Wine. Up to his place Ʋlysses Off-spring gets, And next Pisistratus, who by him sits. Taking the Whip and Rein, they Pyle forsake, Plying the Lash, their Steeds free mettal shake The jolting Teem, which rattles all the way, Till night's black Regiments secluded day. ToA City of Lania, betwixt Pyle and Lacedamon. Pheras, Diocles Pallace drove they on, His Sire Orchilocus, Alpheus Son; There they all night well treated took repose: But when the rosie-finger'd Morn arose, They joyn their Steeds, and mounted ply the Whip, O're smooth Champain their Horses nimbly trip, Till, the Sun-setting, night her Flag unfurl'd, Hanging her sable Ensign ore the World.
scene from book 4 Illustrissimoe Dominae Doe Emiae Comitissae de Ossory Taulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 4
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE FOURTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Menelaus Nuptials keeps; unlook'd-for Guests, Telemachus and Nestor's Of-spring, feasts. His long and dangerous Voyages relates. Proteus, his Brother's, and Ulysses Fates, Then Ajax tells. A Plot the Suitors lay To intercept Telemachus at Sea. STraight on they drive to Mene∣laus Court, Who now sate Feasting with a great resort Of Friends and Neighbours all invited, where Together with great State solemniz'd were, His Sons and Daughters Nuptials: Her he sent, (At Troy Contracted first by his consent)
With Horse, with Chariots, and a stately Train To Pyrrhus, where in Phthya he did reign. Him, he Alector's beauteous Daughter gave, Bold Megapenthes, gotten on his Slave When Aged grown, for Heaven so pleas'd that he Only, by Helen, hadHomer mentions only the Con∣tract made between Pyrrhus and Her∣mione, by the consent and order of Menelaus; but Sophocles and other Greek Poets speak of a former Con∣tract between her and Orestes, made by their Grand-father Tyndareus, who in revenge of his lost Mistress, slew Pyrrhus at his return. These later Poets, both Virgil and Ovid follow; the first, in his Aeneids, l. 3. Nos patriaincensa diversa per aequora vetae Stirpis Achilleae fastus, juvenemque superbum Servitio enixae tulimus: qui deinde, secutus Ledaeam Hermionem, Lacedaemonios∣que hymenaeos, Me famalam famuloque Heleno trans∣misit habendam. Ast illum ereptae magno inflammatus amore Conjugis & scelerum furiis agitatus Orestes, Excipit incantum, patriasque obtruncat ad aras. We from our Countries flames through all Seas born, Felt the proud Youths, Achilles Of-springs, scorn; Who after, fair Hermione did Wed, And, Fatal still, enjoy'd a Spartan Bed, And me to Helenus his Servant gave. But him Orestes, who did strangely rave For his lost Spouse, impatient did pursue, Surpriz'd, and at his Father Altars slew. The other, in his Epistles. Hermione, Fair like bright Venus.Atheneus observes that Ari∣starchus took these five Verses, where∣with the Feast, with its appendages, is described, out of the 15. Book of the Iliads, and plac'd them here, least the Poet should seem too slightly to pass o∣ver so solemn an entertainment: but with what bad success, he proves after∣ward at length. First, because the Nuptial feast was now over, and Me∣nelaus his Daughter sent away unto Phthia, and himself left alone with Helena: Secondly, because it is a Cre∣an daunce which is here described, not used at Lacedaemon. Thirdly, be∣cause the Language is incongruous, the word  being proper to the Harp, or Voice, not to those that daunce after it: so Hesiod uses it— — And Archilchus Whil'st they treated were In his high Palace, thus with sumptuous Fare, Two Dancers moving 'mid'st th' admiring throng, To a learn'd Bard, who Play'd and sweetly Sung: Telemachus and Nestor's Son drive up, And in the echoing Porch their Chariot stop: Them Eteon, Menelaus Steward, spies, Who with his Royal Master to advise, Hasting to 's presence said; Sir, at your Gate Two Princes, like Jove's Heavenly Issue, waite. Shall we take out their Steeds, and treat them fair, Or let them entertainment seek else where? Who thus incens'd, replies; Art thou a Fool, Or shallow Novice, lately come from School? To raise such doubts; We had not liv'd to see Jove grant a period to our miserie, If we abroad had miss'd like kindness; Go Take out their Steeds, and in the Strangers show. Back with like speed, thus order'd, Eteon comes, Calling to his assistance ready Grooms, Who straight unloose their Steeds, to Mangers tye, Which they with Oats and Barley mixt supply, Their well hung Chariots place against the Wall, The Strangers then conducting to the Hall; Who wondring view his stately Court, which shon Like Titan's beams, and quite eclips'd the Moon; With so much Cost and Art his House he built, His Columns, Walls, and lofty Ceilings gilt:
Their Eyes with Objects feasted, they descend To a warm Bath, fair Virgins them attend: Whom when they had Anoynted, Bath'd, and Dreast In costly Weeds, they Usher'd to the Feast, Placing them nigh the King, a Damsel Sewer To wash their Hands, fills from a Golden Ewer, A Silver Bason, neer a Table brought, And straight with many sav'ry Dishes fraught, And Golden Bowles: Then thus Atrides spake, Giving them kindly his right Hand; Partake Of what you see; and when suffic'd you are, Your Country and your Parentage declare. You seem to be of high extraction, sure From no mean stock you spring, nor yet obscure; Princes you are by your majestick Mein; And his own Dish, this said, a roasted Chine, Before them plac'd, on which they highly fare. When thirst and hunger satisfied were, Telemachus in Nestor's Off-springs eare Thus softly whisper'd; What a House is here? The splendor of this stately Hall behold, How dawb'd with Silver, Ivory, Brass, and Gold, Like Joves own Court that crowns th' Olympick spire, The more I look, the more I still admire. The King orehearing sayd; None must compare Mansions with Jove, his seats immortall are, But with me any may, who eight years tost Through worlds of miseries from coast to coast, 'Mongst unknown Seas, of my return small hope, An Island in the Mediterrane∣an, whither it seems he was driven from Creet. Cyprus, Phenicia, Aegypt,The Commentatours on Homer have been very inquisitive to find out Menelaus's Voyage into Aethiopiae. Cra∣tes supposed that he passed out at the Streights, doubled the Southern Cape, and so arrived thither. Eratosthenes conjectures that in the time of Homer the Streights mouth was an Isthmus, and the Aegyptian Isthmus overflow'd by the Sea, which afforded him a shor∣ter passage. But that is most proba∣ble which Strabo delivers, That he then went to the borders of Aethiopiae when he pass'd up Egypt to the City of Thebes: the borders of Aathiopiae being not far distant from thence in Strabo's time, probably very neer it in Homer's. Aethiop, Sidon,It is most probable that they were the Arabians, lying on the other side of the Gulfe, directly over against Aegypt and Aethiopiae. Erembos found, and Libya, where Their Lambs are horn'd, their Ews teem thrice a year: Whose Lords and Peasants flesh and cheese have store, And all the year the milking Paile runs o'r.
Whil'st I thus Coasting store of Riches got, One, with his Queen conspiring, by a Plot My Brother slew; so that small comfort I Of this my Palace, Wealth, and Realms enjoy. And you perhaps may from your Parents hear What my great Losses, what my Sufferings were. My ransact Court of Jewels, massie Plate, Of Vests, of what or serv'd for use or State, A third of which I rather would enjoy So those were living yet, who dy'd at Troy: For whom so oft disconsolate alone Here sit I sighing, and their Fates bemoan. Now sorrow pleaseth, now sad thoughts I wave; Quickly of griping Woes our fill we have. But more for one, then for them all, I Weep, Whom minding, I neglect repose and Sleep; Ʋlysses, none of all the Grecian Hoast Could parts like him, Prudence, or Valour boast; None like thy Sire 'gainst Troy maintain'd our cause, Nor purchas'd equal Fame, nor like Applause: Yet all his Toyles turn'd to no more account, But that his future should past woes surmount; And I am sceast of Tears a constant rate, Since none knows how or where he met his Fate. His Father, his dear Wife, and only Heir, Whom he an Infant left, like me despair. This say'd, the Prince a briney Deluge sheds, And o'r his Face his Purple Vestment spreads. Him Menelaus knew, and pond'ring sate If he should suffer him to intimate His bus'ness, or his Father mention first: Whil'st thus Atrides to himself discours'd; Forth from her persum'd Chamber Helen came, Like Quiver'd Cynthia, the Forests Dame.
Aerasta plac'd her Chair, Tap'stry well wrought Alcippe, her rich CabinetEustathius observes, that Helenae has not the same Attendants here which she had in the Iliads: it being not consentaneous to honesty, that those should now remain of her Re∣tinue who were conscious of the foule fact of her Adultery. Phylo brought, Alcandra's costly Gift, Polybus Spouse, Who in Egyptian Thebes a stately House Well furnish'd kept; Cups of a curious mould Two, and two Tripods, Talents ten of Gold, He gave the King; to Helen then addrest A Golden Distaff, and a Silver Chest, The edges Gilt, which pleas'd she did accept, And in't her Work, and curious Worsted kept. This modest Phylo bare the Distaff full With segregated streaks of Purple Wool; Well settled on a Foot-stool in her Throne, The Queen to Menelaus thus begun; Know'st thou not who these are, nor from what coast These Strangers come, nor Parentage they boast? I would ghess right, speak truth, and be no Lyer, For still the more I look, I more admire: Since I ne'r any yet beheld, not one, More like, then this, to be Ʋlysses Son Telemachus, whom he then left at home An Infant, when you launch'd for Ilium; And on my sad account a numerous Hoast, Brought with destruction to the Phrygian Coast. Then he; Tis true, him he resembles much, His Hands and Feet, his Face, Hair, Eys were such. Now I recall, when of Sire I spake, And sorrows he had suffer'd for my sake, Tears down his Cheeks in riv'lets dew'd his Breast, And or'e his Face he threw his Purple Vest. When to the King Pisistratus begun; Y' are not mistaken, This, Sir, is his Son, Who modest thought not fit that he before Him, whom like Jove we honour and adore,
A Speech should make: Nestor commanded me Him to attend, who long'd to gain from thee Some grave advice: Many and high affronts At home he suffers, whil'st his Sire he wants; Few are his Friends, desperate his case and sad, And none amongst the people him will ayde. Then spake the King; See I Ʋlysses Son, Who for my sake so much hath undergon? With him I thought, had he who rules the Sky Brought us in safety home, to live and dye, And we in Argos had together dwelt: His Son and Wealth Transported, I had built For him a Court, and fetled in a Town His people, though belonging to our Crown: There He and I would meeting oft discourse, And nothing should us two but Death divorce; But Jove us so much happiness envy'd, Who him, alas! a safe return deny'd. These words awak'd old griefs which long had slept, Helen, Telemachus, Atrides, wept; Nor could Pisistratus from tears refrain, Minding Antilochus byThe Son of Tithonus, Brother of King Priam, and Aurorae; who came out of the East, to the assistance of the Trojans, and was Slain by Ʋlysses. Memnon slain. Who thus; Nestor, renown'd Atrides said, When we, of thee discoursing, mention made, That thou of Mortals most accomplisht art; Therefore spare me, I would no heavy part At Supper act; but when the Sun's approach Gilds Eastern Portals with his bright Carroch, Then I, my Friends and dear Relations dead Reminding, shall a briny deluge shed. To them, descended to the silent World, Tears we as duties pay, andIt was the custom of the Greci∣ans to cut off a lock of their haire, and lay it upon the Coarse of their deceased friends; recorded by Homer in his Iliads, describing the Tuneral of Pa∣troclus, — , . 'Twixt these his Intimates Patroclus bare, Covering his Body with their cut-off hair. And by Sohocles, in the person of Teucer speaking to Eurysaces, , , , . , , , , . Draw neer my Son, and by thy Father stand, And, as a Suppliant, hold thou in thy hand My Tress, this Womans, and thy own bright Hair, So pay rich Offerings with an humble pray'r. So does Orestes at the Tomb of Aga∣memnon, in Euripedes's Electra. — , . I at my Father's Tomb tears shedding stayd, And him the first-fruits of my Tresses payd. Tresses curl'd. My Brother there Antilochus I lost, Not least significant of all that Hoast.
You knew him, Sir, whom never I beheld, Whom few for speed and Martiall feats excell'd. Then said the King; More like some rev'rend Sage Thou speak'st, then one of unexperienc'd Age: Like thy accomplish'd Sire th' art eloquent, We soon find persons out of high Descent, On whom great Jove, Wealth in aboundance powrs, And sends his Birth and Nuptials happy hours. All which he Nestor gave, and that he should Have Sons renown'd, and in his Court grow Old. But let us dry our Tears, and Sorrow wave, Water and fresh supplies of Dishes have; I and Telemachus to morrow shall Early, more private on his Bus'ness fall. This said, with speed obeying his commands, Asphalio Water powrs upon their Hands, They Viands taste, which warm, the Table fraught. Joves Daughter Helen, then her self bethought, Streight sending for a Cordial to compound, Would Rage and Grief both in Oblivion dround; Whoere drinks this commix'd with Wine, though dead He saw his Parents, not one Tear would shed In a whole day, nor him, his Brother more, Or Son would trouble, weltring in their Gore. On her this Med'cine, to appease all woe, Did Polydamna,From this King received its name the antient City Thonis, not far di∣stant from Canobus, as Strabo relates. Aelian sayes, that Menelaus travelling into the Southern parts of Aegypt, left Helena with King Thon, while Queen Polydamna, jealous lest she should be preferred before her, caused her to be sent into the Island Pharos, abounding with Serpents and Venemous Beasts; but withal, pittying her condition, in∣structed her in all sorts of Medicines, which might serve for her defence. Thonus Wife, bestow, Rich Aegypts product: many Simples there Make wond'rous Compounds, some that deadly are; The Natives great Physicians prove, and all From Peon boast their high Original. Infusing this, she said; My dearest Lord, And these young Princes, feasting at our Board, Since Jove dispenceth, who best may and can, What ere makes happy or unhappy Man:
Therefore let us here Feasting take delight In pleasant talk; and somewhat I'll recite, (To reckon all, Arithmetick would pose) Ʋlysses acted, when by pressing Foes You streighten'd were: He like aOn what design he thus enter'd Troy, Homer delivers not: whether to observe the height of the Walls, and the largeness of the Gate; for the better proportioning the Horse, imme∣diately here mentioned: or to steal the Palladeum, as Lycophron writes in his Cassandra: but in which action Virgil allows him Diomedes a compa∣nion, here he is alone. —impius ex quo Tydides, sed enim scelerumque inventor Ulysses, Fatale aggressi sacrato avellere templo Palladium, caesis summae custodibus arcis Corripuere sacram effigiem. Till impious Diomed with Ʋlysses went (The best that ever mischief did invent) And boldly from her sacred Fane con∣vey'd Fatal Palladium, and dire slaughter made. Begger went, Through hostile Troy, his Garments patch'd and rent. Who had no equal at the Grecian Fleet, Almes of the Trojans crav'd, from Street to Street. I found the King, though thus disguis'd, who oft Disarm'd my Questions, meeting Craft with Craft: 'Till him I Bath'd, Anoynted, and did Cloath, And to conceal him, took the solemn Oath; Then he to me discover'd all his Plot, And Slaught'ring many, off in safety got, Slighting the Trojans and their Guards debauch'd, Loud Trojan Ladies mourn'd, whil'st I rejoyc'd Hopeing to see my native Soyle, I wept, That Venus, who Transported me, had kept From my dear Daughter, and my Lord so long, And thee a Prince so worthy I should wrong. Then said the King; Thy Character is true; I far have travell'd, many Heroes knew: But yet amongst them all, I nere beheld, One with Ʋlysses to be Parallel'd: Who such things acted, and so well could Plot, When all our prime Commanders close were shut In that stupendeousThe History of the Trojan Horse is most incomparably deliver'd by Virgil in the 2. Book of his Aene∣ids. Steed, pregnant with fate, Big with destruction of the Trojan State. Thither some God did thee, my Dearest, send, Her Husband, after the death of Paris, according to some writers. Deiphobus inforcing to attend, T' obstruct the Trojan fame: thrice didst thou walk, About the Steed, and likeThis fiction of Homer's is re∣ceiv'd by none of the succeeding Pots: nor can it, for several reasons, be al∣lowed of. their Wives didst talk; Their voyces faining, our prime Leaders didst Call by their names; I sitting in the midst:
Tydides and Ʋlysses heard thee speak, We two would answer streight, or forth would break; But Ithacus, though we so earnest were, Disswaded us and others to forbear; Only Anticlus opens, streight his Chops Ithacus starting up with both Hands stops: So by his strength and prudence saves us all, Till thee from thence Minerva pleas'd to call. Then to the King Telemachus thus sayd; O thou who art most honour'd and obey'd; Yet cruell Death, his courage, strength, nor skill, Could keep off, nor his Breast, though solid Steel. Now, Sir, be pleas'd to grant me my repose, That gentle sleep, grown late, our Eys may close. Helen, this sayd, streight bids them make a Bed, And Purple o're, and Royal Tap'stry spred; Forth went her Damsels with a lighted Torch, The Guests a Herald ushers to the Porch: O're the resounding Gates the Princes lay, Whom Morpheus Golden Fetters bound till day. Atrides thence to Chambers further in Went, where fair Helen lay, her sexes Queen. No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With rosie Fingers days Portcullice drawn, But from his Bed up Menelaus springs, Puts on his Vest, athwart his Shoulders flings His well hatcht Faulchion, on his Sandals tyes, And forth, with a majestick presence, hies: Then sitting by Telemachus thus saies; On what concern hast thou plow'd swelling Seas, To Sparta, publick is't, or private score? The Prince replies; I from my native Shore, Set sail, of thee, Atrides, to inquire, If ought thou know'st of my long absent Sire.
My House stands thwack'd with Foes who me o'rpow'r, And my fair Flocks and stall-fed Beeves devour; Love their pretence, Penelope they woo, But their design us fairly to undo. On this account here I thy Supplyant am, If thou hast seen or heard by flying Fame, Ought of his Death, in pitty of my Youth, Extenuate not, nor yet conceal, the truth. If ever he by Prowess or by Plot, Upon the Trojans Reputation got, When you at Troy were in your greatest straight, Remember that, and truly tell his Fate. Base wretches then, Atrides sighing said, May tumble on an absent Heroes Bed: As in a Lyons Den: a Hinde her Fauns Securing, straies ore Hills and fertile Lawns; Whil'st he returning finds unbidden Guests, And their Blood gusling, on their Entrails feasts: So they, when strong Ʋlysses comes, shall fare, Would Pallas, Jove, and Phoebus, as they were, Then be to him propitious and assist, As when at Lesbos entering the List, He threwKing of the Island Lesbos, who, according to his custome, challeng'd the chief of the Grecians to wrastle with him. Philomelides on his Back, Loud Shouts resounding like a Thunder crack. To these Corrivals he would prove so kind, They soon should sad and bitter Nuptials find. But I'll to answer your desires be plain, Nor shall I heighten ought, decline, or feign, What I from Proteus, the Sea-Prophet had, I shall recount indifferent, good or bad. Long angry Gods in Aegypt me detain'd, Because with slighter Victims I profan'd Their Altars oft; we their commands should keep. It is now part of the Conti∣nent of Aegypt, which in Homer's time was an Isle: the reason whereof is, be∣cause the River Nile, by its continual evomition of dirt has constantly gain'd upon the Sea. Of the same nature is the River Pyramus, which swept along with it so much dirt and sand out of Cataonia, and the fields of Cilicia, that an Oracle declar'd, that in future Ages it should run into the Island of Cyprus. . Swift Pyramus the circulating Sun Shall, carrying Sand, see into Cyprus run. To this place of Homer, Lucan alludes in his tenth Book, thus, Tunc clanstrum pelagi cepit Pharon, insula quondam In medio stetit illa Mari, sub tempore vatis Proteos, at nunc est Pellaeis proxima muris. Then he took Pharos, circl'd with the Main, When Prophet Proteus of old did Reign, But now to Alexandria conjoyn'd. Pharus an Isle amid'st the swelling Deep,
'Gainst Aegypt lies, from whence a nimble Ship May Sail, 'twixt Sun and Sun, with Sails a-trip. There twenty Daies the Gods my NavyIt is a strange mistake of the lat∣ter Commentators, who say, The Ships stay'd in the Port, till the water they had received were pump'd out. We have followed the Ancients, a∣mongst those Strabo, in our Transla∣tion. kept, Nor the least Breese up silver Billows swept, That might conduct us thence, with Sails unfurl'd, O'r moving Mountains, through the watery World; Our Victuals spent, us, in a heavy case, The Nymph Idothea pitty'd, Proteus race; Her I implor'd, she finding me alone, My famish'd people all a Fishing gon, Thus drawing neer me, said; Art thou a Fool, Or to bear Sorrows mak'st this place thy School, And tarriest here, no neerer thy design, Whil'st all thy Friends with want and Famine pine? Who e'r thou art, bless'd Goddess, I reply'd, That in this Sea-wall'd Prison, I abide A gainst my will: But I some God perhaps, Who dwells on steep Olympus Spiry tops, Offended have: Say, since thou all things know'st, What Pow'r thus keepsme from my native Coast, And here so long impedes? She thus replies; The best I may, Stranger, I'll thee advise. HereHe was the Son of Oceanus and Tethys, who is therefore feign'd to be Pastour of Sea-Calves or Horses, be∣cause his Dominions were upon the Maritim Coasts. Proteus, Neptune's Minister of State, The sounder of the Ocean, keeps his seat, Th' Aegyptian Bard, who me they say begot; Him could'st thou seize by some ingenious Plot, He would discover, how with Sails unfurl'd, Thou shoul'dstreturn, plowing the watery World; And, if th' art curious, shew thee by his skill, What chance to thy Domesticks, good or ill, Hath in thy absence happen'd. Then said I, But how shall we secure a Deity, Who will foresee what e'r we shall contrive? Hard 'tis for Mortals, with a God to strive.
I'll shew thee, said she, by what means thou shalt. When Titan bends from arch'd Heavens highest Vault, Then the old Prophet riseth from the Flouds, Cloath'd with grosse Vapours and a Cloak of Clouds, And his Cave ent'ring sleeps,Virgil feigns him carried in his Chariot by these Sea-Horses, Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite rates Caeruleus Proteus magnum qui piscibus aequor Et juncto bipedum curru metitur equo∣rum Green Proteus there in the Carpathian Main, Th' Aegyptian Prophet, through broad Seas he glides; And in his Chariot with Sea-Horses rides. Where observe Virgil calls them bipedes, Homer . Sea-Monsters snore Round him, supinely slumbring on the Shore, Breathing fowle Scents, deriv'd from briney Seas; Early I'll place thee in his dark recesse, But choose to help thee three prime Persons more, And I'll acquaint thee with his flights before; First he will counting, view his Scaly fry, Then down amid'st his quarter'd Life-guardly, As Shepherds use amid'st their Fleecy Sheep; As soon as thou shalt spy the God a-sleep, Then seize on him, besure he not escapes: Nothing is more familiar a∣mong the entient Poets, then his Transformation of Preteus. Virgil, from this place of Homer, thus de∣scribes it in his Georgick, Fit enim subito Sus herridus, atraque Tigris, Squamosusque draco, & fulva cervice Leaena, Aut acrem flammae snitum dabit, atque ita vinels Excidt, ant in aquas tennes dlapsus abibit. A salvage Boar he'l be, a Tigre, Snake, And a huge Lion with a shaggy neck; Or to escape, shall thunder like a flame, Or glide from thee in aswift Crystal stream. The Moral of which fiction, some re∣fer to the Diadems of the Aegytian Kings, which according to their fashi∣on were various, and bore sometimes a Bull, a Lion, a Flame, and the like. See Diodorus Siculus lib. 2. Many o∣ther Mythologies are reckon'd up by Natalis Comes. He'll straight Transform himself in several shapes, To creeping Monsters, Beasts or wild or tame, A swelling River, or devouring Flame: Then graple harder, and him faster keep. But when he questions, as when fall'n a-sleep, His former Shape resuming, then desist, Free the old Heroe, and ask what you list. What angry God thee from thy home detains, Permitting not to plow the Azure Plains. This said, she dives 'mongst soamy Waves, and I Went museing where my Ships lay on the dry; Where taking some repast, when Night arose, On th' Oceans sandy Margents we repose: No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With rosie Fingers Daies Port-cullice drawn, But I, the Gods imploring, chose out three, Valiant and Strong, whil'st four Sea-Calves Skins she Brought newly stript, her Father so to catch, And us expecting bedded on the Beach.
Soon as we came, she placing us within, Threw over each of us a Fishes Skin; But much offensive prov'd our Ambuscade, The slimy Husks a smell so loathsom made: T' embrace a ranck Sea-Monster who'll indure? But she streight thought upon a present cure; Ambrosia she, which Aromatick shuts Foul odours forth, into our Nostrils puts: Till Noon we patient there expecting lay, When shoals of Water-monsters leave the Sea ToThat Sea-Calves are sleepy Animals, is observ'd by the Authors of Natural History. Martial in his Epi∣grams, Dormitis nimium glires, Vitulique marini. Whence among the Aegyptians they were the Hieroglyphicks of drowsy persons, saies Pierius. Elian also notes that they take the Noon-day for their time of rest on the Shore. sleep ashore; old Proteus last comes up, And us Four reckons 'mongst his scaly Troop: Then down he lyes suspecting no deceit, We clamouring charge and seize upon him streight; He skilfull such Conspirators t' evade, Himself at first a shaggy Lyon made, A Serpents form, a Pard's, a Sow's receives, A crystal Stream a Tree with shady leavs; Yet we with patience arm'd, him faster grasp; But when with strugling he begun to gasp, Thus me he question'd; Atreus Son declare What God thee thus advis'd me to ensnare, Your business speak: Then I reply'd; Thou know'st, Then why thus ask'st, thou? on this fatall coast Long I'm detain'd, no hope of favouring Gales To bear me off, my strength and courage fails: Say, since thou all things know'st, what angry God Obstructs my passage through the briny Flood. Thou must, sayd he, before thou art dismist, Great Jove implore, and the supernall List; Nor shalt thou see thy Friends and native Soil, Untill thou offer'st on the Banks ofIt is observable that Homer ne∣ver calls the famous River of Aegypt by the name of Nile, but Aegypt: as And From whence its conjectured, not im∣probably, that the Country received its name. Nile, To them a Hecatombe; with Sails unfurld, Then homewards may'st thou plow the watery World.
This wrack'd my Soul to think that I must back, And such a long and dangerous Voyage take. Then I reply'd; We shall perform the task: But I must yet another Question ask; Are all our Friends arriv'd in safety Home, Which I and Nestor left at Ilium? By Sea who perish'd? who scap'd raging Waves, At home by Friends attended to their Graves? Then he; No farther ask, I'll not reveal Things not for thee to know, or me to tell: Should I, thou wouldst not long from tears refrain: Many are dead, many alive remain: Two Princes onely of that numerous Hoast, Who sail'd from Troy, in their return were lost: One in a Sea-girt Isle his Fates detain, ButAjax the son of Oileus, for there was another Grecian Prince of that name, the Son of Telamon. Ajax he was swallow'd inAjax's Shipwrack Silins Ita∣licus thus describes, Qualis Oïlides, fulmen jaculante Mi∣nerva, Surgentes domuit fluctus ardentibus ulnis. As Ajax, struck with Pallas thunder, storms The rising Billows with his flaming Arms. Pliny in his Natural History relates, that the Story of Ajax struck with a Thunder-bolt, was most exquisitely Painted by Apollodorus the Athenian; and in his time shown at Pergamus for a Master-piece of that Art. the Main, Whom Neptune drove onRocks neer unto Myconus, one of the Cyclades, so call'd from the roundness of them. Gyra, and had sav'd On jutting Rocks, although Minerva rav'd; But that the Impious said, those raging Floods He would escape, in spite of all the Gods. Neptune, straight hearing the blasphemous Wretch, With his huge Hand did up his Trident snatch, And the Gyrean Rock he cleft in twain, Half stood, the other half drop'd in the Main, On which he sitting, under Billows sunk, And perish'd, after he Salt-water drunk. Thy Brother then escap'd by Juno's aid; But when the Malean Mountain he had made, Him much lamenting, a rough Tempest tost To th' utmost confines of the Agrian Coast, Where onceFather of Aegisthus. Thyestes, then Aegisthus dwelt: But then the Gods with him more kindly delt, Changing the Wind, straight home his course he stands, His Native Soyle then kissing as he Lands,
With a full Flood of joyful Tears bedews: When him a Spy, hir'd by Egysthus, views From a high Towr, for Talents two of Gold, There a whole Year he suffer'd Heat and Cold, With speed the news he carries to the Court; Egysthus twenty of the baser sort Hides in his House, provides a Feast, and bids The King, his Chariot sending and his Steeds; Then at the treatment, kills him in his Hall, A Butcher so th' Ox slaughters in the Stall. This sad News pierc'd my heart; down on the Shore Weeping I sate, and wish'd, that I no more Might see the glorious Sun, but there expire. When I with vying Tears began to tire, Said Proteus; Sigh no longer, Atreus Son, Nor dew thy Cheeks, since remedy there's none: But when thy Native Soyle thou shalt obtain, Egysthus thou shalt find alive, or slain Else by Orestes, then erect his Tomb. This said, my sorrow gave fresh comfort room, And thus I said; I know the fates of two, But thou a third to me didst mention, who Pent in an Isle, remains alive or dead; Of him I fain would hear. Then Proteus said; Ʋlysses I, the King of Ithaca, Extremely weeping in an Island saw, By fair Calypso in her Cave detain'd, Not knowing how to reach his Native Land, Since he hath neither Men, Sails, Oars, nor Ship, That may Transport him through the raging Deep. And Menelaus, know, 'tis not thy Fate To dye at home, the Gods will thee Translate To seats of Bliss, the bless'd Elyzian Plains, At the Worlds end, where Rhadamanthus reigns;
Where comes no Winter, Snow, nor Winds, nor Rain, But constant Breezes, rising from the Main, With cooling breath still fainting spirits revive, Thou Helen hast, and dost fromFor Helena was Daughter of Jupiter, and Leda, whom he begot in the form of a Swan. Jove derive. This said, the God beneath the Waves descends, I to our Fleet went musing with my Friends, There taking some repast, when Night arose, On th' Ocians flowry margents we repose. No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn With rosie Fingers days Portcullis drawn, But up our Masts we rear, our Sails unfurl'd, And launch our Vessel to the watery World. The Sailors fettle on acquainted Banks, And sweep the briny Foam in triple ranks: Thence plowing Waves unto the Banks of Nile, There Hecatombs on blazing Altars pile. The Gods appeas'd, next rear'd my BrothersIt was customary among the antient, both Greeks and Romans, to e∣rect honorarie Tombs to their deceas'd friends, when they were absent: where were exhibited the same Solemnities that were usual at the real Funerals. Andromache, lead Captive into Epirus, in Virgil, Selennes tum forte dapes & tristia dona Ante urbem in luco, falsi Simotutis ad undam, Libabat cineri Andromache, manesque vecabat Hectoreum ad tumulum, viridi quem cespite inanem, Et geminas, causam lacrimis, sacrave∣rat aras. By chance sad gifts and annual Rites that day Andromache pay'd his ashes, and im∣plores At Hector's Tomb near feign'd Simois Shores, Before the Town in Consecrated Woods. She rais'd his empty Monument of Sods. When Drusus died in Italy, in his re∣turn to the Forces he led against the Germans, and his body was sent back to Rome, exercitus honorarium ci tumu∣lum excitavit, circa quem deinceps stato die quotannis miles decurreret, Gallia∣rumque civitates publice supplicarent: Sueton, in the life of Claudius Caesar. The like mentions Lampridius in the life of Alexander Severus, Cenotaphi∣um in Gallia, Romae amplissimum Se∣pulrum meruit, He obtain'd a large Sepulchre at Rome, and an Honorary in France. Tomb To keep his Fame, my course thence steering Home; Celestials sent fair Winds which never faild To court our Canvas, till we Sparta saild. But stay with me till twice six days are spent, Then thee a Chariot I'll, and Steeds present, A Golden Cup, that thou mayst mindfull be, (If thou surviv'st great Sir) of mine and me. Then said the Prince; Great Sir, it much may wrong Me and my business here to stay so long; I could a year your sweet discourse admire, My House forgetting, and my absent Sire; But if thou stayst me longer, 'twill afflict My Friends in Pyle, who me ere this expect: Your Presents, Sir, I thankfully accept, But Steeds forThis place Horace relates to in his Epistles, l. 1. Ep. 6. Haud male Telemachus proles patien∣tis Ulyssis, Non est aptus equis Ithacae locus; ut neque planus Porrectus spatiis, neque multae prodigus herbae. Atride magis apta tibi tua dona relin∣quam. Telemachus well reply'd, that no fit place Was Ithaca for Horses, wanting grasse: Therefore your Presents spare, for me unfit. Ithaca none ever shipt; Let in this large Campaign thy gen'rous breed, Wantoning on, on delicacies feed,
Where Lotus springs and Cyperon unset, Store of white Barley, Spelt, and purest Wheat. We have no Chariot-course, our Meadow feeds Scarce shaggy Goats, not ranck enough for Steeds. Our Sea-guirt Isles, with barrenness accurst, Are bad for Horse, and Ithaca the worst. Then smiling, by the hand the Prince he takes, And said; These words noble thy extract speaks, Thou shalt some other have, I well am stor'd, What ere my House or Treasuries afford, What's fairest, richest, or of most esteem: A Silver Goblet with a Golden brim I'll thee present, by Vulcan rarely wrought, Which theSidon was a City in Phoenicia, famous for curiosity in all sorts of workmanship. The name of the Prince, which the Poet mentions not, some Historians deliver to be Sobalus, o∣thers Sethlo. Sidonian King, that Heroe, brought Me, when he feasted in his Royal Court. Whil'st thus they held discourse, a great resort Came to the Palace, Sheep and Wine they brought, And their fairThe Servants of Penelope, whom they familiarly used as their Wives. Wives the Boards with Manchet fraught, And they provided high and plenteous Fare. But at Ʋlysses Gates, the Suitors were At Coyts delighted, or else casting Darts, Acting with no mean insolence their parts; Antinous, and Eurymachus, the best Of all the Suitors, sate there 'mong the rest, To whom came Noeman, Old Phronius Son, And questioning Antinous, thus begun; When, Sirs, Telemachus at home will be, Knows any here? A Ship he had from me, To Sail for Pyle, the Vessel now I need, That I at Elis, where I have a breed Of Mares and Mules, may break one for the Plow. All were amaz'd, they never heard till now He launch'd to Sea, but him suppos'd withdrawn, To see his Flocks, or to Sabalius gon.
Be pleas'd, Antinous said, to tell me true, When went the Prince, and to attend him who. Were they choise Young men, of their own accord, Or Mercenaries, whom he took aboard? That he should venture from his native Shore: And not to trouble you one question more; Hath he your Ship against your will impress'd, Or else consign'd him on his own request? I parted freely with her, he replies; Me how would you or any else advise? When such a person hath an earnest Suit, A shrugg's uncivill, or the least dispute. His company, are Youths of great esteem, Mentor their Chief, or else some God like him! But I admire, their Captain yester-day Early I saw, who long since launch'd to Sea. This said he left them. At the strange report The Suitors gather, and forsake their Sport, Whilst Grief and Anger swells Antinous Breast, His Eyes like fire, thus he his mind exprest; This may prove dangerous, no idle toy; Could we believe a Child, a sawcy Boy, Would hence without our joynt commission slip, And Youths of better ranck to man his Ship? Let him plot mischief, and let Jove destroy His machinations, ere they us annoy. Straight Rigg me forth, with twenty Men, a Bark, And I'll his motion in returning mark; Him in our Bay conceal'd, 'mongstSamos was the name of the Island, afterwards call'd Cephallenia, and also the name of a City in the same Island: near adjoyning to Ithaca. Samian Creeks We'll intercept, whil'st he his Father seeks. This said, the Plot approving, all consent, And rising, straight into the Palace went. This Medon to Penelope convey'd, Who over-heard, when their Design they laid.
Hast to the Queen her careful Herald makes, To whom as soon as enter'd, thus she speaks; Why have they sent thee? must our Maids, aside All bus'ness lay, and Supper straight provide? Ah! would they quit my House, and that this might, Their farewell Banquet be, and last good-night: Who thus at meetings wast my Sons Estate; Did nere to you your Sires renumerate Ʋlysses parts? Mildly with all he dealt, Nor any ere his pond'rous Scepter felt: In publick none he prais'd, nor loud would rate, Like Kings accustom'd, this to love, that hate; But your demeanour cleers your Character, Who for his kinder use so thankless are. Then Medon thus reply'd; Ah would, best Queen, Ingratitude their greatest Crime had been! They to the height of Villany proceed, Your Son to murther (which great Jove forbid!) Returning home, who went to Pyle t'inquire, And Sparta, after his long absent Sire. Trembling, this said, and silent long she stood, Her bright Eys clouded with a briny Flood; At last she said; Why from us did he slip, What forc't my Son t'ascend a nimble Ship, That Horse that scowrs through waves from Coast to Coast? Would he his Name should be for ever lost? Then Medon said; I know not if some God, Or his own Genius through the swelling Flood, Forc't him to Pyle, expecting there to hear, If Dead or Living his dear Father were. This said heSpondans supposes that he left Penelope and went to the Palace of Ʋlysses, and therefore makes two di∣stinct Palaces. But that conjecture is refuted by the Verses immediately following, where Iphthime is sent to Penelope to comfort her , . The phrase in this place, which he mistook, , is not to go to, but to descend down the house. left her; but th' afflicted Queen, As if with Grief she had distracted been, No longer in her Chair her self contains, But on the Threshold sitting, loud complains:
Her Women young and old about her ran With dismal shreeks: thus weeping she began; The Gods on me no common Griefs impose, Besides our Birth-right born to suffer woes: First I a Wise and Valiant Husband lost, His Fame divulg'd through all the Grecian Coast: Now they will kill my Son, and wretches you Nere cal'd me, though you his departure knew, But had I known when he his Anchor weigh'd, For all his haste, he should a while have staid, Or dead he should have left me in the Hall: But one of you should streight Old Dolius call, Whom me my Sire when I came hither gave, Who keeps my Orchard, now no more my Slave, That he might straight to Old Laertes go, And this their dire designment let him know; He would the People with their project fill, How they conspire, Ʋlysses Son to kill. Then Euryclea; Cast me off, or kill, All this, I dearest Madam, knew, and will No longer hide: I Wine and Manchet both Supply'd him with, and took a solemn Oath, Not in twelve daies to make his absence known, Unless you ask'd, or heard the Prince was-gon; Least you with weeping, should your Beauty wrong; But Bathe and dress your self, then take along With you your Maids, and when you are withdrawn, Implore Minerva to preserve your Son, Nor Old Laertes with this news afflict, The Gods his Progeny not disrespect, But one shall still survive his Realm to bless, Who shall this Court and fertil Fields possess; These words her grief asswag'd, her Tears supprest, And Bathing straight, her self she neatly drest.
Then with her Train, hast to her Chamber made, And thus to Pallas, Sacrificing, Pray'd; Jove's Daughter hear, if ere my Lord, the Thighs Of Beevs and Sheep to thee did sacrifice, Remember him; ah! save his Son and mine, Turning on these conspirers their Design. Thus begs she weeping, and the Goddess grants. Mean while the Suitors deaf the Walls with rants: When one thus said; The Queen will now elect 'Mongst us her Spouse, yet not our Plot detect Upon her Son. The said Antinous; Fie, Make no such idle brags, lest any nigh Ore-hear and tell within; no time protract, But rising let's what we agreed on act. This said, He twenty men selects, and strait Looks out a Vessell of the second Rate, And hires one in the Harbour, yare and stanch, Her Masts and Sails brought up, from shore they lanch, Then fit their plyant Oars, their Sails unfurld, In readiness to plow the watery World; And last the Comp'ny went aboard, where they Refresh themselves, and for the Evening stay. Mean while Penelope her Chamber keeps, And musing takes no sustenance, nor sleeps, 'Twixt hopes and sears, how that her guiltless Son, Th' impious may kill, or he the danger shun: A Lyon so suspects the Hunters guile, Whom hedging in they drive upon the Toyl. Such wandring Fancies her from slumber kept, At last, wearied with burthening cares, she slept. The thoughtfull Queen then gentle Morpheus bound, And fretting cares in mild Oblivion drownd; Whilst Pallas fashion'd out an empty shade, And like her Sister fair Iphthima made:
At Phere herKing of Phera a City in Thessa∣ly; the Son of Admetus and Alcestis. Eumelus did Espouse. This straight she sent into Ʋlysses House, Charging to free the Queen from tort'ring fears, From eating grief, and inundating Tears; Entring her Chamber, through the narrow Lock, Drawn near her Bed, these words of Comfort spoke; Dost thou Penelope afflicted sleep? Thou must no longer pensive be, nor weep. Thy Son, who little hath displeas'd the Gods, From Foes shall safe return, and swallowing Floods: Then sweetly slumb'ring in sleeps pleasant Port, Thus spake the Queen; Dear Sister, to our Court Why com'st thou, who before wert never here, Dwelling remote? would'st thou that I should fear And grief shake off, which me so much molest, Mustring fresh parties in my troubled Breast, Who such a Lord and so accomplish'd lost, Through ample Greece admir'd and honour'd most? And now my Son adventur'd to the Seas, Not us'd to Traffick nor hard Voyages, For whom far greater cares my Breast invade, Then for his Father, lest he be betray'd By Land or Sea, of life him to deprive Many conspire ere he at home arrive. When thus the Shadow said; In me confide, Laying all fears and jealousies aside; So great a Goddess looks upon thy Son, Pallas, who pittying thee sent me alone, This to acquaint thee with, and to perswade From fruitless Tears. To whom the Queen thus said; If thou a Goddess hast a Goddess hear'd; Say if Ʋlysses live or be interr'd, His Soul descended to th' Infernal shade? Then to the Queen the Airie Fantom said;
Be he alive or dead, I must not yet Declare, nor answer questions now unfit. This said, it vanish'd, stealing through the Lock, She shakes off drowsie sleep, and comfort took: And whil'st the Vision fled; with Sails unfurl'd, The plotting Suitors plow the waterie World, To kill Telemachus. A Rockie Isle, 'Twixt Ithaca and Samus, which they stile SmallA small Island betwixt C ∣lenia and Ithaca, it retains no na the Italian Charts, though Apolloa  saies, that in his time there was a P there, and a small City call'd Alal¦menae. Aster, lies, for Ambush fitting, they Enter this Port, and him expecting lay.
scene from book 5 Domino Do: Rich Dice Comiti Tussogh Tabulam hanc. Comiti de Arran Baroni de Cloghgreman LMDDDIO Lib:
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE FIFTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Hermes, Calypso bids Ulysses free: Who makes himself a Bark, then puts to Sea. A Storm by Neptune rais'd his Vessel splits: To Land he by a Sea Nymph's favour gets: Naked and tir'd he to a Covert creeps, And hid in Leaves all Night securely sleeps. AƲrora leavingThe Fable of Tithonus, Brother to Prians, being Married to Aurora, according to the Mythologists, signi∣fies no more then that he took a Wise out of the East: to which that Histo∣ry agrees, which delivers him Founder of the City Susa, not far from the river Choaspes, the Seat afterwards of the Persian Emperour. There is no Fable more familiar among the Poets then this. Virgil, in the 4. of his AEneids, Et jam prima novo spargebat lumine terram, Tithoni croceum linquens Aurora cibile Aurera now had early Dawning spread, And weary left Old Tithen's golden Bed. Tithon's golden Bed, Ore Heaven and Earth Daies glorious lustre spread, When Jove and all the Gods as∣sembled sate In Consultation; when much troubled at Ʋlysses danger in the Nymphs aboads, The Court thus Pallas mov'd; Jove, and you Gods, No more let Kings be pious, mild, or just, But let their Will be Law, their Rage and Lust,
Since his own People not Ʋlysses mind, Who Parent-like was to his Subjects kind: He suff'ring in a Sea-guirt Isleremains, Whom fair Calypso in her Cave detains, Despairing to review his Native Coast, That neither can of Friends, nor Vessel, boast Home to Transport him through the foamie Brine; And now his Son to murther they design In his return, who sail'd to Pylet' inquire, And Sparta, after his long absent Sire. How scap'd these words thy Teeth, their Ivory guard, Said Jove? Who here thy bus'ness would detard? Hast not thou lay'd the Plot, Ʋlysses shall Returning be reveng'd upon them all? Fetch back his Son with speed (for well you may) And him in safety to his home convey; So, frivolous the Suitors Voyage make. This said, thus Jove to his Son Hermes spake; Go thou that art the Gods Ambassador, And this our order to Calypso bear. Ʋlysses, say, must reach his own aboads 'Thout man's assistance, or immortal Gods, Him a new Vessel must, the twentieth day, ToIt is agreed on by most of the Antients, that the Island Scheria is that which was after call'd Corcyra, from Cercyra the daughter of Asopus: which lies in the Venetian Gulf, not far distant from Ithaca, now nam'd Corfu. But Apollodorus takes the name of the Isle, as well as the rest of the story, to be a meer figment of the Poets. Scheria and Pheacian Tow'rs convey: Where Silver, Brass, and Vests, they'll him present, More worth then all his Trojan Divident. He must his Wife, and Friends, (thus Fates decree) His Palace, and his Native Country, see. His Father straight obeying, Hermes goes, And buckles on with speed his golden Shooes, With which the Aire he cuts ore Sea and Land, As bornThis whole relation of Mercu∣ries passage, is Translated by Virgil in the fourth Book of his: AEneids, which we have here transcribed to the end we may observe his translation of one phrase in Homer. —Ille patris magni parere parabat Imperio, & primum pedibus talaria nectit Aurea, quae sublimem alis, sive aequora suprae, Sou terram, rapido pariter cum flamine portant. —hinc toto praceps se corpore ad undas Misit: avi similis quae circum littora, circum Piscosos scopulos humilis volat aequorae juxta. Here , he translates rapido parister cum flamine, as if it had been , in which sence the word  is usualy taken in Homer, as,  una cum aurora apparente. But in this place I take it in a different sence and mea∣ning: , for , perinde ac si ventis veheretur, that is, his winged Shooes carried him as swift as the wind. This interpretation of ours is confirm'd not only by the sence of the place, but by the authority too of Eustathius, who expounds it . on th' Winds; then takes his Charming Wand That Mortals lulls asleep, and sleeping wakes. A high Mountain in Macedonia, the feat of the Muses, so called from a certain Heroe of that name. Pieria reach'd, a stoop from Heaven he makes,
Like a Sea Fowle, whose fanning Pinions sweep The furrow'd Visage of the frowning Deep. The God there lighting, leaves the purple Floods, Thence walking, finds her in her own Aboads, Burning sweet Incense in a heap'd-up pile, Which spread a sweet perfume through all the Isle: Whil'st she sung rarely, through her curious frame Her Golden shuttle nimbly went and came. A pleasant Grove her shady Mansion round, With Poplar, Alder, and tall Cypress crown'd, Upon whose Boughs, Birds various built and bred, Hawks, Owles, and Choughs, who on Sea margents fed; A circling Vine which purpling clusters lade, Whose verdant Branches her low Palace shade: Four stately Founts in comely order plac'd, With disembogueing Spouts each other fac'd, Inviron'd with delightful Meads, which round Soft Violets, and pleasant Smallage crown'd: Which if a God, wandring by chance, had seen, He had admir'd and much delighted been. There Hermes wondring stops: when he his eye Had surfeited with strange variety, Straight to her cool Apartment Hermes goes, Calypso him sooner then enter'd knows: Immortal Pow'rs who nere converse, although They far from either dwell, each other know: But not the Nymph he with Ʋlysses found, He sitting on the shore deep sighing, drownd His Cheeks with Tears, his Breast with sorrow swell'd, And restless Seas as restless there beheld. But when Calypso in her Golden Throne Had Hermes plac'd, the Goddess thus begun; Why, my dear Hermes, mak'st thou this address To me, that nere did'st visit my recess?
Lay your commands, your pleasure I'll obey If in my pow'r, if possible I may; But first take some repast. This said, the Board She with brisk Nectar and Ambrosia stor'd. When he had tasted her Celestial fare; Ask you, he said, why hither I repair? Know beauteous Nymph, Joves pleasure I fulfill, He sent me hither much against my will; Who one such vast and swelling Flouds would fly? No City neer, nor sacred Temple nigh, Where pious Mortals on our Altars lay Whole Hecatombs: but Jove we must obey. One of those hapless Chiefs, Nine years imploy'd Beleag'ring Troy, which they the Tenth destroy'd, Whom in return offended Palla's hurld With raging Tempests through the watry World His Friends destroy'd; him with rough Billows drove Upon your Coasts, you must dismiss, saies Jove: 'Tis not his Fate to perish in Exile, He must his Court review, and Native Soyle. She troubled said; You envious Gods delight, In nothing more, then thus to wreak your spight: Who not allow a Goddess in her house, To treat a Mortal, though she him Espouse. So when Aurora withThe Moral of this Fable of Orion being taken away by Aurora, is onely this, That he dying an immature death, before he came to ripeness of age, was buryed presently upon break of day, they not thinking it fit that the Sun should behold so grievous an evil. Eustath. Orion mach'd, Their private meetings you still prying watch'd; Untill her golden BowHomer delivers not the reason why Orion was slain by Diana; but the latter Poets say that he attempted her Chastity, Horace, — et integrae Tentator Orion Dianae, Virginea domitus sagitta. Orion chast Diana strove t' obtain, When by the Virgins Arrow he was slain. Enphorion gives the same reason of his being slain, but different means; for he says that he was stung on the An∣kle by a Scorpion, produc'd to that purpose by Diana, of which he dyed. Diana drew, And with her Shafts him in this Island slew: And so when Ceres did to passion yield, InjoyingJasion was the Son of Jupiter and Electra: he was a Husband-man, and therefore feign'd to be beloved of Ceres: of whom he begat Plutus. Hesiod in his Generation of the Gods, , . Ceres the Goddess with the golden haire, Impregnated by Jasion, Plutus bare. The Thunder-bolt with which he is slain, signifies, according to Eustathius, the extremity of heat and drought in the Summer, by which the hopes of Husband men are frustrated. Ovid in his Metamorphosis acknowledgeth not his death, but makes Ceres com∣plain of his old Age; — queritur veteres Pallanias annos Conjugis esse sui, queritur canescere mitem Jasiona Ceres. Aurora moans her Husbands age, and fair Ceres her Iasions silver hair. Fasion in a thrice Plow'd Field, Jove, soon inform'd, adjudg'd the fact a fault, And slew him with a blazing Thunder-bolt. So I a Mortal Spousing shall be serv'd. On's turnd-up Keel him riding I preserv'd,
When Jove with Lightning, 'midst the raging Sound, His Vessel sunk, and his Associates, dround; Drove on this Coast, by Wind and Billows rage, I lov'd and cherish'd; promis'd him from Age And Death to free. In vain ourselves w' afflict, Great Jove, or any God, to contradict. To quit this Isle, the Ruler of the Skie May him command, but I shall nere, not I, Since we a well-man'd Vessel want, which may Him safe, through th' Oceans broad-back'd Waves, convey; But I'll advise, and best to his avail, How he to's Country may in safety Sail. Hermes reply'd; Keep touch, Jove's anger shun, Nor farther into his displeasure run. This said, the God departs: she not delaies, But straight Ʋlysses seeking, Jove obeys; Whom finding on the Beech disconsolate, With Flouds of Tears lamenting his sad Fate, No hope of getting thence, seven years expir'd, Now with a Goddesses imbraces tyr'd, Inforc'd each night within her shady Grot, To warm her Side, will he, or will he not; Yet all the day plac'd on the Rocky Shores, Viewing the restless Billows, he deplores Himself with Sighs, would rend a Heart in twain: The Nymph thus said; Fie, Sir, no more complain, Save precious time, my int'rest I'll resign, And set thee free; Go, fell some lofty Pine, And make thy self a Vessel, tight and staunch, In which thou may'st to Sea in safety launch: I Bread, Wine, Water will, and Garments find, Thee to supply, and send a prosp'rous Wind. That, if the Gods so please, thou in short time Shalt steer in safety to thy Native Clime.
Some new and quaint device, then he reply'd, Not my dismiss, or would'st I should confide In a small Bark, where Vessells ablest built, Knock at Hell gates, and at Heavens arches tilt, When Tempests rage: against thy will I loth Should be to Sail, unless thou take an Oath Thou hast no Plot. Then said she, with a Smile; For me, thou art too crafty to beguile; I Swear by Heaven and Earth, andSwearing by Styx, an infernal ake, was accounted the most solemn and most rever'd Oath: as Homer in his Iads declares Il. 14. . , — Swear by th' inviolable Stygian Lake, Taking in one band Earth, in th' other Seas, And the fix'd Land with floating Water poise. Which whosoever of the Celestial Gods violated, was interdicted not on∣ly the Table but all society and com∣pany of the rest, for the space of ten years. Hesiod in his Theogenia, , , , &c. What God so ere swears by the Stygian Lakes, That dwells on sleep Olympus crown, and breaks His sacred vow, lies breathless one whole year, Nor comes to Nectar and Ambrosia near. Silent he lies upon an ill-made bed, A dozing Lethargie all ore him spread. After twelve moneths he this hath un∣dergon, Follows the heavier affliction: In nine years more the Gods not him ad∣mit With them in Counsel, nor at Feasts, to sit. Stygian Floods, An Oath nere violated by the Gods; I have no Plot against thee, no design, But am as Cordial as thy cause were mine: My Heart is soft, not Adamant, nor Steel, So I on thy concern compassion feel. The Nymph, this said, before him lightly trips, He, following close, reprints Calipso's steps, Into the Cave a Prince and Goddess goes, Who seats him straight whence Hermes lately rose, Filling his Board with various Humane fare, Then ore against him fills her golden Chair: Renown'd Ʋlysses, Thou, with no small care, Do'st for thy home and Native Soyl prepare; But thou would'st not rejoyce, if thou did'st know What sufferings wait on thee, what woe on woe, Ere thou at home arriv'st: Come! dwell with me, Rule this my Palace, and immortal be. Although thou hanker'st still after thy Wife, And rather would'st injoy her than thy life; Her Beauty, Feature, nor her comely Mein, Not ours eclipse, and if they did outshine, Not with Immortals Mortals must compare. Then thus Ʋlysses did himself declare. Ah my dear Goddess! Tax, Ah tax not me! My Wife that day must not be nam'd with thee,
So far beneath in Beauty and desert: She is but Mortal, thou Immortal art. And if some angry God should rage at Sea, I must with patience bear it as I may. I much have suffer'd, much have undergon In Camps and Seas, and this too may be done. This said, the Sun descending, Darkness hurl'd His Sable mantle over all the World: They to her Caves recess together went, And tedious night in sweet imbraces spent. No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With rosy Fingers Daies Port-cullice drawn, But up he starting puts his Garments on; She her bright Stole, her Veil and golden Zone, Then forth the Nymph thus dress'd in royal Weeds, To hasten her Ʋlysses bus'nes speeds: First in his Hand a Steel edg'd Axe she put, The Pollish'd Heft from smooth-rin'd Olive cut, A sharp Wedg next to him she down convey'd, Where a tall Forrest cast a spreading shade, Whose Poplar, Firr, and Alder, scale the Sky, Which plow Waves lightly, season'd well and dry; When she had shew'd him where the largest grew, The Goddess to her mansion thence withdrew: Whilst he fells Poplar, Fir, and lofty Pine, Twenty fair Trees, then squares by Plumb and Line, When fair Calypso him a Wimble brought, On which he hard to joyn the But-ends wrought, And starting Planchers peggd; a Rudder last, The Helm to answer makes with joyntings fast; What ere materials would a Ship-Write ask, To build a Ship, and well perform his task; Of such and such a Mold his Catch he made; And close his Decks and well clinch'd Planchers laid;
Close lay the jutting Ribbs, the Plancks at length: Next shapes a Mast with Yards of fitting strength A Helm next smooths, for steerage, which he round With Sallow Twiggs 'gainst angry Billows bound; Canvas for spreading Sails Calypso brought, With great and smaller Cordage strongly wrought. So the fourth day his Vessel tight and staunch, He from the Stocks by Rowlers free'd did Launch; The fifth, the Nymph him from the Isle dismist, And Bathing kindly, in sweet Garments drest, Next purest Wine, and Water puts aboard, And him with Cates and good provision stor'd, And sends to wait on him a gentle Gale: Joyful Ʋlysses straight unfurls his Sail, And sitting at the Helm, through swelling Deeps A steady course Steers on, and never sleeps, But gazing, contemplates Heav'ns ample Sphear, The Pleiades, Orion, and the Bear, And watching still Orion, Charles his Wain, Whose Wheels nere dip beneath the swelling Main. Calypso strictly him advis'd to stand, Through briny Billows to the Lar-board hand. Thus seventeen days and nights he onward steer'd, The eighteenth morn Pheacian Hills appear'd, Whose haizy crown not far off he beheld, From the dark Ocean rising like a Shield: When Neptune, him fromThe Geographers finding no such Mountains in Aethiopia, or the Southern parts of the World, suppose them feign'd by Homer in similitude and correspondence to the Mountains so called in Pisidia, which were the most conspicuous and eminent Sou∣therly to those that sail'd in the Euxine Sea; as these must be supposed to be, in respect of Ʋlysses now sailing in the Ocean. Strabo in the first Book of his Geography. Solym's lofty side, Return'd from Aethiop plowing Waves espy'd, Shaking his Tresses, thus th' inraged said; The Court of Gods have other Orders made, I absent, yonder Sails Ʋlysses free, And soon will reach that Land, where Fates decree His Woes must end, which straight I'll contradict, And him before much more then ere afflict.
This said, his Trident taking, he alarms, And from all quarters musters new rais'd storms, Listing swoln Billows, Seas, high Heaven, and Earth, Muffles in Clouds, at once all Winds burst forth; Eurus and Notus, Zephyre, Boreas raves, Tumbling in thwart-plow'd Furrows hide ous Waves. Trembling and pale, Ʋlysses then complains; What miseries for hapless me remains! The Nymph, I fear, spake true, who said, before I should in safety touch my Native Shore, I much should suffer; Ah! what Winds inrage These swelling Waves, and my sad Death presage! Plutarch tells a story of Memmi∣us, the Roman General, that after he had sack'd the City of Corinth, and had made Slaves of all that surviv'd the ruin of their Country, he commanded one of the Youth to write a Verse, who presently writ this Verse of Homer, with which the General was so sur∣pris'd, that he fell a weeping, and set at liberty the Child with all that had any relation to him. Thrice happy you, who on the Trojan Plain Dy'd bravely, in Atrides quarrel slain: Would I had perish'd there, and breath'd my last, When showrs of Spears at me the Trojans cast, As offHomer no where relates the Story of Achilles's death, only hints at it here: but Dares Phrygius deli∣livers it at large thus, Hu Hecuba in facinus andax invitat Achillem, Conjugii factura fidem: venitille, sed arma, Sed comites nulli, solum sibi Nestore natum Jungit, vix gladio cingi memor; omni linquit, Dum miser optatos properat visurus a∣mores. Hecuba's fraud Achilles hither led, Him promising he should her Daugh∣ter wed. He came unarm'd, scarce takes his Sword, by none Accompanied but old Nestors Son; Leaves all behind, no danger fears, nor Life, Hasting to see his so desired Wise. Where before the Altar of Apollo, he was slain by Paris, and an Ambuscade of armed Trojans. Achilles Corps I guarding came; Then they had kept my Obits, and my Fame Divulg'd through all the World: But ah, now I Must here obscure, and unlamented die! Against his Boat, this said, a Billow dash'd, And him ore-board from Helm and Steerage wash'd: Which seconded with a resounding blast, The Yard flyes from the Sayl, and spends his Mast: Nor he his Head could 'bove the Water get, Prest down with surging Waves, and Garments wet. Long struggled he, but up he boy'd at last, And Briny draughts his Stomach easing cast: Yet he his Boat reminds, though out of breath, And in he gets, avoyding sudden Death; Him in the middle plac'd, vast Billows bear, Rais'd by uncertain Gusts, now here, now there; As when th' Autumnal storm through Champaign sweeps Light Thistle-down, which yet in clusters keeps,
So went she tost about 'mong billows rough, Now Boreas her, now Eurus, Zephyre cuff, Bandying his crazy Boat from side to side: She was the Wife of Athamas King of Thebes, who in his madness slew Learchus, the Son which he had by her. Whereupon she, out of im∣patience, taking her other Child in her Arms, cast her self into the Sea. But upon the intreaty of Venus was made a Goddess of the Sea by Neptune, as Ovid writes in the 4. of his Metamor∣phosis, At Venus immeritae neptis miserata labores, Sic patruo blandita sno est; O numen a∣quarum, Proxima cui coelo cessit, Neptune, po∣testas. Magna quidem posco, sed tu miserere meorum Jactari quos cernis in Ionio immenso, Et Diis adde tuis— Then Venus, grieving at her Neece's Fate, Her Uncle thus intreats: O thou, whose State Is next to Joves; great Ruler of the Flood; My sute is bold, yet pitty thou my Blood, Now tossed in the deep Ionian Seas: And joyn them to thy watry Deities. Whence all that were sav'd from Ship-wrack paid their Vows to her with the rest of the Guardians of the Sea, as Lucian in one of his Epigrams testifies, , , . To Glaucus, Nereus, Ino and Meli∣certes, Neptune and Samothracian Deities, Lucillius I, scap'd Ship-wrack, conse∣crate My haire, all that is left of my estate. Leucothoe, Cadmus Daughter, him espide, Who had a Mortall been, but now the Gods Allotted her the honour of the Floods; Pittying Ʋlysses in so sad a plight, She, rising like a Sea-fowl, straight did light Upon his Boat, and said; Unhappy Prince, Why Neptune didst thou so, so much incense, That thus he prosecutes thee, yet he shall Not be thy ruine, should he burst his Gall: Take my advice, thou seem'st discreet, thy Coat Put off, and to the Winds bequeath thy Boat, And thy course, swimming, to Pheacia shape, Those Confines Fate decrees for thy escape; This Ribband ty'd about thy Bosome bear, Then Death it self, nor any danger fear; But soon as thou shalt longd-for Land obtain, Unloose the Charm, and throw into the Main. The Goddess him, this said, her Fillet gave, Then diving hides beneath a foamy Wave. At this Ʋlysses troubled and dismay'd, A deep sigh fetching, to himself thus sayd; Alas! what God contrives this subtle Plot 'Gainst me, perswading to desert my Boat, I'll not obey, since Land I yonder see, Where the Nymph told me should my refuge be, Whilst she together holds, here I'll remain, And all the brunt of Winds and Waves sustain; But when she splits I'll swim, and Death evade. Whilst thus consulting to himself he said, From deep Seas Neptune a huge Billow drew, And charg'd his Vessell, which in splinters flew:
As Chaff dispers'd by blust'ring Tempests born, So his rip'd Pinck divides, in pieces torn: When on a Plancher getting up he strides; Himself then stripping (as on Horse-back) rides, Then wound about him, ties the Ribband fast, And in himself, his hands extended, cast: When Neptune, in this Posture him survey'd, His curled Tresses shaking, thus he said; So swim for life, by ore-grown Billows drove, Till thou arriv'st 'mong People dear to Jove: Yet all thou hast not scap'd. This said, the God Drove on toA City in Eubaea, not that  Achaia, as Strabo observes (Whe notwithstanding there was a Te of Neptunes) which gave the name the Aegean Sea. Aegae, where his Palace stood; But here her Favourite Minerva minds, Stopping the passages of Thundering Winds, Commanding, in their Caverns, all to sleep, Boreas must only smooth the furrow'd deep, Till to Pheacian Shores Ʋlysses came. Two Daies and Nights on bounding Waves he swam, Expecting Death: when the third Morn appear'd, The Winds all hush'd, the Skie from Vapours clear'd, Mounted upon a swelling Billow, he The trending Shore, not distant far could see: So to kind Children their Sires health appears, Who Bed-rid lay, Consumptive many years, By sad Diseases, and their Demon charg'd, At last from all by milder Gods enlarg'd. So to Ʋlysses shew'd the Grove and Land, But Swimming, that he might the Shore ascend Upon his Feet, he hear'd loud Billows roar Amongst the Rocks, and thunder 'gainst the Shore, A great Surf rising with a briny Spry From broken Clifts, retorted, brush'd the Sky. For there no Harbour was, no Port, nor Bay, But Rocks and Stones, guarding the Confines, lay.
Much troubled then he sighing, thus complain'd; By Jove's assistance Land I have obtain'd, Through boyst'rous Waves, yet now no Harbour see shocks, Where I may scape from farther danger free. Each where Waves storm the Coasts with thundring Which hanging Clifts surround, and slipp'ry Rocks, And the deep Ocean neer, not any gap Where I may footing find, and so escape: Me the swoln Surge, Land striving to obtain, Will bruise 'gainst Stones, and I shall strive in vain: But I will farther Swim, perhaps I may Find smoother Shores, and some protecting Bay: Mean while I fear a sudden gust again, May drive me sighing back into the Main: Or Neptune, whom I have offended much, May send a huge Sea-Monster; many such The Ocean breeds. Whil'st thus the Prince discours'd, Him on rough Shores a swelling Billow forc'd, There had his Flesh been rent, fractur'd his Bones, 'Mongst rowling Pebbles and sharp pointed Stones; Had Pallas this not put into his mind: Fast a firm Rock with both Hands he intwin'd, And sighing stuck about her Marble wast, Till over him the swelling Billow past; Which re-advancing charged once again, And swept him sinking back into the Main. Upon the rough-skin'd Polypus so thick, Drawn from his Lodging, brittle Pebbles stick, As in his Palmes, when the retiring shock Of a huge Wave divorc'd him from the Rock. There had, despight of Fate, Ʋlysses dy'd, Had not Minerva from th' orewhelming tyde, Her Favorite rais'd, and on a Billow bore, Where he could see a Beech, and smoother shore.
At last a pleasant Rivers mouth he finds, Free from rough Clifts, safe from disturbing Winds, Then swimming in, thus to theRivers were counted Sacred a∣mong the Ancients, under the prote∣ction of some peculiar God: so was Eridanus the God of a River so nam'd, described thus by Claudian, —ille caput placidis sublime fluentis Extulit & totis lacem spargentia ripis, Aurea roranti micuerunt cornua vul∣tu, &c. Raising his head above his watry banks His golden Horns, reflecting, tip'd the banks With sprinkled light; drops trickling from his Face, He his moist Hair vail'd not with Ozi∣ers base, And vulgar Reeds: fresh Poplars shade his Brows, And Amber from his curled Tresses flows: A Robe his Shoulder hides; Phaethon's wrought there, His blew vest burning in his Fathers Chair. And Tyberis acknowledged for a God by Virgil, Aeneid. 8. Huic Dens ipse loci fluvio Tyberinus a∣moeno, Populeos inter senior se attollere frondes, Visus, &c. The Genius of the place old Tyber here, Amongst the Poplar Branches did ap∣pear. Stream he Pray'd; Who ere thou art great King, thy suppliant aid, And me escap'd, from Neptunes rage defend: The Gods do still poor Wanderers defend. Ah, to thy Votaries petition list! And him who much hath suffer'd now assist. This said, the River levells all his Waves, And in his quiet Bosom him receives; Who scrambling up, on feeble Knees and Hands, At last much swoln with soaking Billow, lands, Drawing short Breath, much Water from his Nose And Mouth distilling down, himself he throws; But when his Soul dislodg'd was repossest, And he recover'd with a little rest, From's Bosom he the Goddess Riband took, And threw into the Sea-descending Brook, Which a swoln Billow carrying to the Main, Straight to the Nymphs fair Hands convey'd again. Leaving the Stream, shelter'mongst Reeds he took, And kissing th' Earth with a deep sigh thus spoke; Ah me what shall I do! what next remains, If I ly here till day, night's cold serenes, Or from the Stream the chiller morning Dew, My weary Body will pinch through and through, If up to yonder shady Grove I creep, I warm at ease'mongst leavy-shrubs might sleep, But if surpriz'd by gentle Somnus may Some Serpents be, or Salvage Monsters prey; On this he pitch'd. The Grove then enters straight, And found a place fitted for his receit, Two twin-born Olives neer the River stood, In prospect skirting the adjacent Wood;
Not into this, Sun, Rain, nor piercing Wind, The Twigs so closely Wove could passage find; Here straight Ʋlysses entring makes his Bed, And store of leaves above and under spread; There two or three might warm in Winterly, Safe from fowl weather and a raging Sky: This Receptacle, the glad Prince receives, Who lying down himself heaps ore with Leaves, As under Ashes One a Brand conceals, Who, far from Neighbours, in the Country dwells, That Fire on all occasions he may keep; So cover'd lay Ʋlysses, whom asleep Minerva casts, closeing his weary eyes, Freeing at once from toyle and miseries.
scene from book 6 Illustrissimae Dominae de Arran Tabulam Dae Marice Comitissae hanc LMDDDIO Lib 6
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE SIXTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Nausicaa's Dream; she to the Fountain speeds, They wash, and spread on drying Plots their Weeds. Loosing their Ball at Play they raise a cry, Which wakes Ulysses; he appears, they fly: Only the Princess stays, his suit receives, And him supply'd with Food, and Rayment leaves. SO slept Ʋlysses free from Toyl and Cares, Whilst Pallas to Pheacian Tow'rs repairs, Who neer the Cyclops inSome Grammarians take it to be an Island neer unto the Country of the Cyclops: but that agrees not with the mind of the Poet: for how could Islanders be endamaged by the Cyclops's, who, according to Homer, us'd no Shipping Others conjecture it to be a City of Sicily, afterwards call'd Camerina, which is more pro∣bable. Hype∣ria dwelt, And oft their rage by Plund'ring In-roads felt, Which Colonie Nausithous commands, In Scheria, planted far from Peopled-Lands, TheirThe Poet has briefly here in two Verses comprehended the whole affaire of setling a Colony. The first part, that is, the fortifying the City, and building Houses for the inhabi∣tants, contains their security and com∣modity, the other speaks their Religi∣on and Justice. Citie Fortifies with Bulwarks round, Builds Houses, Temples, and divides the ground.
But he descending to the Stygian shade, Renown'd Alcinous the Scepter swai'd: Her steps Minerva to his Court directs, Nor ought to haste Ʋlysses home neglects: And straight a stately Chamber enters, where A Virgin slept, as the Immortals, fair, Alcinous Daughter, bright Nausicaa; Two Damsels, like the Graces, neer her lay; The twy-leav'd Doors on Jaums opposing shin'd, Through which the Goddess, lighter then the Wind, Silently stole up to the Princess Couch, Resembling Dymas Daughter, whom she much Accompanying, in estimation had, Her tardyness thus seeming to upbraid; Why bore thy Mother such a sluggard? why Thy richest Garments foul neglected ly? Thy Nuptials neer, when thou should'st all transcend In gorgeous dress, and those who thee attend, For femal arts thy fame spread, far and neer, Which thy Indulgent Parents joy to hear. Let's to the Fountain with the rising Sun, I'll help, that we the sooner may have done: You'll be no Virgin long, a great resort Of Prime Pheacians thee prepare to court. Thy Fathers Chariot ask, in which we may Your Stoles, and Veils, and richest Garments lay: Nor stands it with your Dignity nor Port To walk on Foot, so far off from the Court. This said, Minerva sealesOlympus is a high Mountain in the borders of Thessaly whose top was antiently believed to be above the Re∣gion of the Clouds, and therefore feign'd to be the seat of the Gods: which Lucretius thus describes out of this place of Homer, Apparet Divum numen, sedesque quietae Quas neque concutiunt venti, nec unb∣la nimbis Adspergunt, neque nix acri concreta pruina Cana cadens violat, semperque innubilus aether Integit, & large diffuso lumine redit. Olympick Tow'rs, The blessed seat of Gods, with bitter Show'rs Never infested, where no Tempests blow, Nere cloath'd with crusted Frosts nor fleecy Snow; A cloudless Sky still crowns those bless'd Aboads, Of ever young and never Dying Gods:
The Dawn now blooming with a tender beam, The Princess wakes, much wondring at her Dream; And thence streight goes t'acquaint the King & Queen With her intents, and finds them both within; Her with her Maids spinning rich Wool about A stately Fire, her Father going out To a great Council, where the Princes met, When thus she on her Royall Parent set; Your Chariot order Sir, that streight I may Your Royall Vests down to the stream convay, That there they may be wash'd, 'tis much unfit, You in soyl'd Robes should'mongst our Princes sit. Five Sons dwell in your Court; for two your care Provided hath, three yet unmarried are; They should be neat and clean to dance at Balls, To look to this under my duty falls. Thus said she, not once hinting hopes to wed, But her Design he further sounding said; Ask what thou wilt, 'tis thine; within, who wait? Harness my Mules, bring my best Chariot straight: His word's a Law, the Servants all obey'd, And what the King commanded ready made. The Princess from her Chamber brings a Vest, And puts in her Carroch, the Queen a Chest, With severall Cates and Wine in a Borach, And to her mounting did a Violl reach Of perfum'd Oyl to use when she had wash'd. Taking the Rains her Mules Nausicaa lash'd, They stretch away, not bearing Vests alone, But all the Damsels her attended on. When to the pleasant Fountain they drew near, Where they might wash all seasons of the year; Where cleansing streams like purest Crystal spout; There they alight, and sweating Mules take out,
And on the Margents of the purling Flood, Drove to sweet Grass, their Chariot next unload, And foul Weeds throw into the Crystal Spring, Which in full Troughs they trample in a ring; Each the Buck plying with a tab'ring Foot; All clear from spots, discolouring stains and smut, They their white Regiments in Files and Ranks On pollish'd Pebbles spread, on Sea-wash'd banks, Themselves then Bath'd, Perfum'd, and neatly deck't To Dinner went, where sitting they expect, Untill the Sun whiten their Weeds and dry: When Feasted well, they lay their Chaplets by To play at Ball: amidst her Virgin-train, The Princess first warbled a pleasant strain. So walks Diana ore the Mountain tops, ThroughA Mountain in Peloponnesus, small in compass, but high and steep; part of which being violently thrown down by an Earth-quake almost ruin'd the whole City of Sparta, as Pliny in the 2. Book of his Natural History. From hence was Diana call'd Taygetea. Tayget or theA Mountain in Arcadia, in which there were divers Groves a∣bounding with wild Beasts, as Ovid writes in the 2. of his Metamorphops, Dumque feras sequitur, dum saltus eligit aptos, Nexilibusque plagis Sylvas Eryman∣thidos ambit, Incidit in matrem— Whilst he hunts Beasts, and shady Groves besets, Erymanthian Woods beleaguring with Nets He on his Mother lights — And therefore properly feign'd by the Poet the place of Diana's recreation. Erimanthian Cops, 'Mongst Goats and Deer delighted to resort, The rural Nymphs about the Goddess sport, Whilst joy invades Latona's silent Breast, She by the shoulders taller then the rest. Now ready to return, just when they should Their Mules conjoyn, and up their Garments fold; Minerva then contriv'd a handsom slight Ʋlysses to awake, that so he might The Virgin see must him from thence convey; Who the Ball serving, earnest at her play Unto another, something miss'd her aime; Which she not catching, fell into the Stream: At this they shreek, the cry Ʋlysses wakes, Who to himself, then sitting up, thus speaks; Ah me, who here reside? a Race unjust! Rusticks not rul'd by reason, but their Lust, Or those who, civilliz'd, Celestials fear? That thus a cry of Nymphs invades my ear,
Dwelling in Mountains, or more blest aboads, Mongst Flow'ry Meads, water'd with Crystal Floods: Or are they Men? I'll see. This said, he steals From sheltring shrubs, and with a Branch conceals His modest parts; then up he runs amain, Like a huge Lyon beat with Wind and Rain, Who forc'd by want, his eyes like Beacons, falls On Sheep, Beevs, Deer, breaks Houses, storms high Walls; So to the Virgins drawing neer he shows, Horrid with scurffing Brine and parched Owse. To shelter all dispersed fly, except Alcinous Daughter; she her station kept, By Pallas Instigation bolder made. Ʋlysses here a while consid'ring staid, Should he draw neer, fall humbly at her Knee, Or at some distance move, she pleas'd would be Him to the City to direct, and cloath. The last advice, he first approves on, loth By drawing neer her modesty t' invade. Then thus the King implores the royal Maid; If thou art Mortal or Celestial Blood, Pitty great Queen, but if sprung from a God Who plants the Sky, Diana th' art, Joves race, Such thy majestick Person, Mien, and Face: But if that thee some Earthly Princess bare, Ah! then thrice happy thy relations are; When thee'mongst meaner Stars they see advance, Crowning each Figure in a Courtly Dance: But he's most happy who shall thee Espouse, And conquerer lead triumphing to his House; Since I nere Beauty saw like thine before, Which I the more I view, admire the more: But late at Delos I aThere is frequent mention of this Palm, neer the Altar of Apollo in the Island Delos, so admirable for its height and beauty. Callimachus in his Hymne upon Apollo, speaking of his return upon his anniversary festivals at Delos, . ; , . Phoebus the door strikes with his beau∣tious Foot, The Delian Palm tree nods, perceive you not? Mark how the Swan sings sweetly in the Aire. And Cicero saies, that in his time there was there to be seen a fair Palm, which the Natives believ'd to be that here commended by Ʋlysses. Aut quod Homericus Ulysses Deli se proceram & teneram Palmam vidisse dicit, hodie monstrant candem. At this Palm La∣tona brought forth Apollo, as Homer in one of his Hymns delivers it, , , , . Rejoyce Obless'd Latona that did'st bear King Phoebus, and the beautious For∣rester. Her in Ortygia, in rough Delos him, Leaning 'gainst Cynthus Mountain neer the stream Of Inopus, under a spreading Palm. Which is signified too by Ovid in his Metamorphosis, Illic inclinans cum Palladis arbore Palmae, Edidit invita Geminos Latona noverca Palm beheld, Next PhoebusThis Altar of Apollo was built of the Horns of Goats which Diana slew in Cynthus a Mountain in the Island of Delos, according to Calli∣machus, , , , . Horns of the Cynthian Goats Diana brought From hunting, Phoebus th' Altar built and wrought: With Horns the basis, and did Horns provide Fastning the Altars joynts on every side. Whom Ovid follows in his Epistle of Cydippe's, and admires no less the Structure of the Altar, then the Palm adjoyning, Miror & innumeris structam de corni∣bus aram, Et de qua pariens arbore nixa Dea est. The Altar built with Horns my won∣der bred, And Tree on which she lean'd when brought to Bed. Altar, which like thee, excell'd
With a fair TrainAs he went to Troy: for Lyeo∣phron mentions the arrival of the Gre∣cian Fleet there, in their passage thither, not at their return. I thither came, and such Our dangerous Voyage prov'd, I suffer'd much, Such and so great a maze curdl'd my Blood, Viewing that Plant, the glory of the Wood; As now the strange Astonishment I meet, Fearing my self to prostrate at thy Feet; Last Night I landed here, twenty Days tost With Winds on Waves, from the Ogygian Coast. And now some God inforc'd me on this Shore, Perhaps to make my miseries the more: To see of woes a period I despair, Though great and many my past suffrings are. Pitty me, Madam, pitty most accurst, One that hath felt of Fortunes spight the worst, Since first I thee implore: I know not one That tills these fields, or dwells within yon Town. Shew me the way, and if so well y' are stor'd, A Vest, though torn, to cover me afford, Which Heaven repay thee in a loving Spowse, Obedient Servants, and well order'd House; Which will displease thy enemies to hear, But Musick to thy Friends and Kindreds ear. She thus reply'd; I should be, Stranger, loath To tax thy Folly, Cowardize, or Sloath; Jove where he pleaseth good or ill bestows, And now perhaps accumulates thy woes, Which will with patience thee become to bear: But since thou in this plight art landed here, A Vest thou shalt not, nor what ere else want, That may beseem a woful Supplyant: And I'll conduct thee to our Walls, and tell Who plant these Coasts; here the Pheacians dwell, Alcinous Daughter I, He who now raigns Absolute Monarch ore these fertile Plains.
This saying, thus she calls her Damsels! Stay, Why fly you frighted from a Man away? Suppose you him a Foe, no Mortal shall In hostile manner on these Confines fall: Us far from all commerce the Gods maintain, Guarded with thundring Waves, amidst the Main. This a poor stranger, him it would behove To comfort; such beloved are ofWhence Jupiter had the Epithet of  and Hospitalis, as being the revenger of all wrongs done to stran∣gers, and the protectour of their safe∣ty. Virgil Aeneid. 1. Jupiter, hospitibus nam te dare jura lo∣quuntur, Hunc laetum Tyriisque diem Trojaque profectis Esse velis, nostrosque hujus meminisse minores. O Jove (for thou protect'st all Guests they say) Make to both Nations this a happy day, Which alwaies let posterity Record. Cicero in his Oration for Dejotarus, Si veneno te interemisset, Jovis quidem illius HOSPITALIS numen nun∣quam celare potuisset, homines forasse celavisset: Had he Poisoned thee, he might perchance have conceal'd it from men, but he could never have hid it from the deity of Jupiter HOSPI∣TALIS. Jove. Small gifts to them seem great, bring him some Food, And Bathe him shelter'd in the Crystal Flood. Stop'd with these summons, they each other call, Then plac'd him warm against a sunney Wall, A Shirt, a Vest, and Coat, Ʋlysses brought, And with rich Oyl a golden Vyal fraught: Next, to the pleasant River him conduct; When his attendants thus did he instruct; So favour me to walk aside a while, Till wash'd and sweet I am, with perfum'dPlutarch in his Symposiacal di∣scourses makes this question, why the Poet, who gives peculiar Epithites to all other moist bodies, should particu∣larly give that to Oyl which is com∣mon to all the rest; to wit, moist or liquid. To which is replyed; That as that is most properly called white, which least partakes of any other Co∣lour, so that is most properly called liquid or moist which doth least par∣take of any dry parts; which is the property of Oyl; as he there proves at large, lib. 6. c. 9. Oyl; Me to be naked 'mong so many Maids, Bathing my self, my modesty disswades. Advised thus, they all withdraw abash'd; Whilst he his Neck and ample Shoulders wash'd From froathy Brine, which like dry Scurf lay spread: Cleansing from clotted Owse, his Hair and Head: When he had 'noynted with the rich Unguent, Put on those Garments fair Nausicaa sent, Minerva renders him more tall and fair, Curling in rings like Daffadills his Hair: So shews, bout Silver a gilt border, wrought By one whom Vulcan and Minerva taught: With so much beauty did the Goddess grace His spreading Shoulders and majestick Face. Who walking thence in comely Weeds arrai'd, The Queen admiring, to her Damsels said;
This worthy Person sure at our aboads Had nere arriv'd, contemn'd of all the Gods. Mean seem'd he first when he himself addrest, Resembling now one of the ever blest. I well could be content to be his Bride, If pleas'd he in our Palace would reside: Some Food for him prepare. This said, they set Before Ʋlysses Wine and sav'ry Meat: And he who long had Fasted, highly Feasts, Whilst they their Garments folding up, and Vests Laid in their Chariot, and theirAmongst the antient Grecians and Latines there seem to have been a different use of Horses and Mules: the former were used in Chariots of War, as appears through the whole Iliads; and in publick Races, as in the Olym∣pick and Nemean games: the latter in Chariots for private use and Jour∣neys. Aeschines in his Oration a∣gainst Ctesiphon he let out to them three Chariots of Mules: and Synesius in his third Epistle, , ascending the Cha∣riot led by Mules. Mules put in Thus mounting, to Ʋlysses spake the Queen; Now, Sir, be pleas'd to rise, nor time neglect, And thee I'll to my Father's Court direct; Where the Pheacian Princes thou shalt see: And since thou prudent art, advised be; Follow the tractings of my Chariot Wheels, Till we have past these cultivated Fields; And thou wilt soon unto the City reach, With strong Tow'rs flankerd, and a double Beach; Where narrow entrances on either side Within enlarge, where Vessells Land-lock'd ride: The Forum neer, and Neptunes Temple, all Of Pollish'd Stone, inviron'd with a Wall. There hath our Arcenal in several stores, Magazind, Cordage, Canvase, Masts and Oars. We Bows and Quivers mind not, but stout Ships, Trusting in them, we plow the swelling Deeps. So shun aspersion and the carping Croud, They commonly uncivil are, and proud, Who thus their Verdicts spending us would taunt; What Stranger's this, Nausicaa's Ga-llant? Where found she him? Sure from another World By Fate this Stranger on our Confines hurl'd,
She means to Wed, none us inhabits nigh; Or else some God descended from the Sky, And will at her request a Mortal Wed, None but a Foreiner must enjoy her Bed; She to our Primer Youth, and Nobles shy, Returns for Love some scornful reperty. Thus would they at my reputation strike; And I should spend my censure much alike On any, Parents not consenting, dare Be seen 'mongst Men, before they Wedded are: Do thus, and soon my Father shall transport Thee to thy long-wish'd home, and Native Port. A Path to Pallas Grove and Fountain leads Close by the Road, guirt in with Flowry Meads, My Father's Ground and Orchards there, so neer The Town, that thence you may one hollowing hear: There stay untill thou think'st we are at home, Then with all speed up to the City come; And for the Royal Palace then enquire, Whose Walls not like Pheacian Tow'rs aspire, And the lest Child will shew thee; then walk in, First making thy addresses to the Queen: Leaning against a Column, by the Fire She sits, and Purple spins, Attendants by her: My Fathers Throne and hers almost conjoyn, Who God like feasting, drink delicious Wine: There her Petition; if she condescends, Thou soon shalt see thy Native Soyl and Friends. This said, she lash'd her Mules, and guids the Reins, They Print with Iron-shood-Hoofs the dusty Plains, They soon Ʋlysses and her Maids out-strip, She not till Night indulgent to the Whip: When Pallas Fane they reach'd, Ʋlysses stay'd, And thus devoutly to the Goddess Pray'd;
Hear me Jove's Daughter, to my Prayer ah! list, Who me so late 'gainst Neptune didst assist, And brought alive to the Pheacian Shore. The Goddess heard her Supplicant implore, But yet for him not publickly appear'd, Because her Uncle's anger much she fear'd, Who raging would not be appeas'd, before Ʋlysses landed on his Native shore.
scene from book 7 Honoratissimo Domino Do: Johanni Boteler Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib 7.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE SEVENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Alcinous Garden, Palace, where unseen Ulysses makes addresses to the Queen: The Cloud dispersing, he appeareth; all Are struck with admiration through the Hall. The pittying King harkens to his request: All promise fair; Arete knows his Vest. THus to his Patroness Ʋlysses pray'd, Whilst to the Palace came the royal Maid. Entring, her Brothers round a∣bout her prest, Took out her Mules, and carried in the Vest. She to her Chamber went, where her old Maid A fire, Eurymedusa, kindled had, Whom in her prime they fromThough the Poet makes the Island of the Phaeacians a kind of Ʋto∣pia, yet from this place Eustathius ob∣serves that the true position of it might be ghess'd at, Apirus here being the proper name of the Country afterward call'd Epirus. Apira sent, And did t' Alcinous a choyce Guift present,
Born in a Vessel through the boyst'rous Main, Where, worship'd as a God, the King did Reign: She bred his daughter; who her Chamber air'd, Nor to keep neat and handsom labour spar'd. Whil'st on Ʋlysses going, Pallas shrouds Her Minion in a Cloak of Sable Clouds, Lest the affrontingThe vulgar sort of People are prone to use opprobrious and contu∣melious words against strangers, as having no Commerce or society with them: King Danaus tells his daugh∣ters, who fled with him out of Aegypt into Greece, among the rest of his in∣structions, Aeschylus Supplic. All men are ready Strangers to abuse: And easy we opprebrious language use. Wherefore Venus shrouds the Trojans in a Cloud, as Minerva her Ʋlysses, when they were to pass through Car∣thage, Virgil. At Venus obscuro gradientes aere sepsit, Et multo nebulae circum Dea fudit amictu: Cernere ne quis cos, neu quis contingere psset, Motirive moram, aut veniendi poscere causas. But Venus with black Mists them walk∣ing shrouds, And covers with a Cloak of sable Clouds, Lest any should or touch them, or dis∣cern, And by delaies their cause of coming learn. Rout should on him set, Roughly examine, and as evilly treat. No sooner he into the City gets, But him Minerva like a Virgin meets, Bearing a Pitcher; when Ʋlysses said; Direct me to the Palace, pretty Mayd, Where Reigns Alcinous, who these Realms commands; I a poor Stranger come from forein Lands, Know none who in this Town or Country dwell. Then said Minerva; Sir, that can I well, My Father lives close by, but I desire For your own good, of none else to inquire; Since we to Travellers that come from far, Uncivil and Inhospitable are: For we boast Ships plow Brine, as Birds the Skies On Wings divide, or nimbler Fancie flies. This said, away before she nimbly trips, He, following close, reprints the Goddess steps, And through the City went, unseen of proud Pheacians, hid with an obscuring Cloud: Where he their Port and stately Ships admires, Their Forum, Bull-warks crown'd with lofty spires. But when they to the Royal Palace came, This is the Court said the Celestial Dame, And thou shalt find our Princes Feasting there, Venture amongst them boldly, and not fear: Courage all bus'ness aids. When thou art in, Thou shalt behold Arete first, our Queen.
She and the King of one extraction are, To Neptune, Peribe Nausithous bare, Eurymedon's youngest Child, who Gyants swai'd; But he his People and himself destroy'd, Rhexenor and Alcinous he begot, Rhexenor, only Son, Apollo shot, Who left one Daughter in his royal House, Out of this Genealogie it ap∣pears that Arete, was both the Wife and Niece of Alcinous: Which Spon∣danus would have observ'd, he having no where else found mention of Marri∣ages in those Relations. But whoso∣ever shall peruse the Orations of De∣mosthenes, and the rest of the Greek Orators, shall find such Marriages o have been frequently practised by the Grecians. Arete, whom her Uncle made his Spouse: They both Admirers of each other are, Nere such a loving, nere a happyer, pair. Her Children with her are, and People took, And on the Queen, as if some Goddess, look. Who when she through the City drives her Coach, With joyful acclamations all approach, And their affections with loud shouts proclaim, Nor are her Virtues gloss'd by flatt'ring Fame; She hears debates, their Causes too disputes, Chides the Litigious cutts of tedious suits. If her thou please, and once she condescends, Thou soon shalt see thy Country and thy Friends. This said, the bright-ey'd Virgin thence departs, And fertile Scheria, crossing Seas, deserts, Flying toA Town in the district of A∣thens, celebrated for the famous Vi∣ctory the Athenians obtain'd there over the Medes and Persians. Marathon's Athenian Port, There entringThe King of Athens. Erectheus royal Court. But on he going, stop'd with some Dispute, Ere he on Brazen Pavements set his Foot: For all the House shon like the radiant Moon, Or glorious lustre of the Sun at Noon. The inward Court conducting to the Hall, Inviron'd with a high and Brazen Wall, A Saphire Turret crown'd the Golden Doors, Which hung on Silver Jaumes o're Brazen Floors; The Silver Threshold had a Golden edge, On each side Dogs, which Vulcan from the Wedge
Had Anvil'd out of Silver, mixt with Gold, Immortal Guards, and never to be Old: Seats round the Walls were Canopi'd in state, Where all the Year their Princes Feasting sate. Where Golden Boys each held a blazing Torch, Lighting them to the Altars through the Porch: Fifty fair Damsels bak'd, or busy at Their Looms, with Shuttles nimbly running, sate, Like unto Poplar, leaves; the Oyl distills, And liquor'd work grows moyst on shining quills: So much as the Pheacians all out-strip, In steering through the watery World a Ship; As much their Women at the Web excell, And had in Pallas Arts no Parallel. Close to the Gates, well hedg'd on either side, A stately Orchard was, four Acres wide: There pregnant Trees to Heav'n high fore-head shoot Loaden with Pears, and store of blushing Fruit, Olives and Figs, green, budding, ripe appear, Cherish'd with Western Breizes all the Year, Peach succeeds Peach, Pears, Apples, bloom'd and big, Grapes, after Grapes, a green and mellow Figg; Whilst here, Vines ripen, there, ripe clusters load The yielding Branches, ready to be trod. Amongst these were two Silver Fountains; one Through all the Alleys of the Orchard run, The other through his Palace gliding down, First serves his House, and after serv'd the Town: Such was Alcinous Court. With gazing tyr'd, When he enough these wonders had admir'd, He ventures in, and found them turning up ToAthenaeus in his first Book notes that the antients at the end of their en∣tertainments, when they went to their rest, used to sacrifice to Mercury, as being the President of Sleep: which custom was after wards altered. Jupiter (the God of Marriage) succeed∣ing in his room. watchful Hermes a Libation Cup, Which, when they go to rest, they him present Through all the Palace. On Ʋlysses went
Veil'd in a Cloud, untill he came unseen, Where sate Alcinous and his beauteous Queen: Then kneeling, on her knee his hand he laid, When straight dissolv'd the circumfused Shade, All silent, wonder'd, with amazement struck, Beholding him, who thus imploring spoke; Thou who renown'd Rhexenor's Daughter art, I, who have acted long a woful part, To thee and royal Spouse a Suppliant come, And all these Princes Feasted in this Room: Long may you live and Bless'd, and may your Race, When dead, injoy your Honours, Wealth, and Place: But me with speed send to my Native Soyl, Who, far from Friends, indur'd much wo and toyl. This said, down on the Ashes neer the Fire He sate, whil'st the Spectators all admire: At last Echenius, an antient Lord, Of all the eldest, sitting at the Board, For Eloquence, and much experience, fam'd, The silent Princes thus discreetly blam'd; Uncomely 'tis, Alcinous, and unfit, On th' un-sweptBecause that was in the pro∣tection of Vesta, a Goddess highly re∣verenc'd and worship'd by the Anti∣ents. Tully lib. 2. De nat. Deorum, Vestae nomen sumptum est a Graecis: ea est enim quaillis 'Eiz dicitur, visque ejus ad aras & focos pertinet. The name Vesta is borrowed from the Greeks, which they call 'Eiz, whose protection is over Altars and Fires And that this was the custom of Supplyants, is testi∣fied by Apollonius in his Argonanticks, . About the fire they plac'd themselves all mute: Such postures best with humble supply∣ants sute. o when Themistocles, joyntly perse∣cuted by the Athenians and Lacedaemo∣nians, was forc'd to render himself to the mercy of Admetus King of the Mo∣lossi, whom he had formerly offended, in token of subjection and begging his pardon and protection, he cast himself down before his ire, Plutarch. Hearth, a Stranger thus should sit: At your commands, Attendants ready are, To place him better, in a studded Chair: Bid Heralds powr out Wine, that so we may, Afresh to Jove our due Libations pay, Who such poor Pilgrims oft accompanies; And let the Board be stor'd with fresh supplies. Alcinous rais'd him by the Hand, this said, And to a Silver-studded Chair convey'd, And from his place Laodamus remov'd, His Son, who next him sate, and most belov'd. Water a Virgin, King Alcinous Sewer, Pow'rs in a Bason from a Silver Ewer;
Next she sets Manchet, having spread the Board, Which she with store of various Dishes stor'd: Whilst Wine and Cates hunger and thirst allai'd, Fill Bowls Pontonous, Alcinous said, That we to Jove may glad Libations pay, Who oft assists poor Pilgrims in their way: This said, the Tables he with Wine supplies. When all had drank as much as might suffice, Alcinous said; You Princes, I'll impart The intimating dictates of my Heart; Since it grows late, and we well Feasted are, Each to repose in his own House repair, And we to morrow shall with more resort, Treat civilly this Stranger in our Court, And to the Gods larger Libations pay: Then We'll consult how we this Pilgrim may, Driven by cross Fortune on our happy Isle, Send home in safety to his Native Soyl: Then let the Parcae do, when we have done, What, when his Mother brought him forth, they Spun. Most sure the Gods design some bus'ness here, For still before they accustom'd to appear, When Hecatombs we offer'd, as a Guest, They would with us sit down and freely Feast; And if one met them Travelling alone, To him they alwaies would themselves make known, Because to them we are suppos'd as neer, As the proud Cyclops to the Gyants were. Then to the King Ʋlysses thus reply'd; Such cares Alcinous, please to lay aside. I am no God descended from the Sky, But such as you, a woful Mortal I: Only of Sorrows I much more have shar'd, All which the Gods for hapless me prepar'd
And at convenient time I shall relate, But now, though grieving, suffer me to eat; Natures repair, the Bellies int'rest will Nere acquiesce, but calls and clamours still. Though now my Soul with sorrows is transpierc'd, Yet I must hunger satisfy, and thirst, And former Mis'ries in Oblivion drownd. But would you please at leisure to propound, A means that the through Billows may transport, To my own Country and my Native Court, Where my dear friends my Dying Eyes might close, You make me bless'd after so many Woes. His speech by them approved; off they lay Farther inquiries till th' insuing Day: When all with Wine well satisfied were, Each to repose in his own House repair; And leave Ʋlysses in Alcinous Court, By the King sitting, and his dear Consort: Whil'st the Attendants thence the Boards convey'd, And routed Dishes, thus Arete said; Knowing the Vest and Garment he had on, By her, and her fair Damsels Wove and Spun; Be pleas'd to satisfie me, noble Guest, From whence you came, and where you had that Vest; You said that you were driven on our Coast. Then he reply'd; Impossible almost, Great Queen, it is my sufferings to relate, So many were impos'd on me by Fate. Though my Soul shrink at what my Tongue must say, And flies the sad remembrance, I obey. T' Ogygia, where no God nor Mortal else But Atlas Daughter, fair Calypso, dwells, My Fortune drove me, that scarce ere indulg'd, When Jove my Ship with dreadful Thunder bulg'd:
Where my relations perish'd in the Floud, Nine daies upon my turn'd-up Keel I row'd, And on the Tenth the Gods so kindly dealt, They drove me on those Confines where she dwelt, Who treated me, and promis'd that she would Make me Immortal, never to grow Old: But her Allurements little did perswade, Yet seven long Years with her confin'd I stay'd, Moyst'ning my Garments with a briny Flood, Which the Immortal Nymph on me bestow'd: But in the eighth she came and me injoyn'd, By Jove commanded, or her changing mind, Home to repair; and in a Boat dismist, And did with all things needful me assist, And a fair Wind that serv'd me seventeen daies, Th' eighteenth I did Pheacian Mountains raise, Which me orejoy'd expecting there relief, Who had a second part to act of Grief, Which Neptune gave me: he the Winds enrag'd, And briny Mountains'gainst my course engag'd, Nor me lamenting would rough Waves afford Place in my Boat, but wash'd me over-board: Piece-meal my Vessel, Winds and Billows tore, On Waves I floated, till I reach'd your Shore: There Landing, charg'd ith'Rear with watery Rancks, By Rocks bruis'd and inhospitable Bancks, Thence back I Swam, where I a Creek did find, Free from rough stones, fenc'd both gainst Waves and Wind, Night drawing neer, up to a Grove I crept, And, cover'd ore with Leaves, there soundly slept All Night till Noon: But when the Sun began His Western stage from the Meridian, Your Daughters Damsels sporting, me did wake, And I address to her did humbly make;
A Princess who for Beauty, Shape, and Mein, Might challenge Venus, or the Forest's Queen: Nor could I hop'd more favour in my Flow'r, When Youth and Feature boast their conquering pow'r; She Treated, Bath'd me in the Crystal Flood, And these rich Garments, which thou seest, bestow'd: She did not what she ought, reply'd the King, That did not thee up in her Chariot bring. Then said Ʋlysses; Sir, not reprehend The guiltless Virgin, fearing to offend, Advising me to follow, nor would I, Lest so it might create a jealousie In thee: full of suspition Mortals are. When thus Alcinous did himself declare; I am not scandaliz'd at trifles, who Ambitious am, what's handsom still to do. Ah that the Gods would such a Son afford To me! and my dear Daughter such a Lord. And would'st thou here remain, I with thy Spouse Would riches grant thee, and a stately House: But none shall thee detain in our Aboads Against thy Will, and pleasure of the Gods, But send thee home: To morrow thou shalt know; Taking repose, suspens'd from Toyl and Wo, If so thou please, plowing the briny Deep, Thou shalt thy Native Country reach in Sleep, Were it as far as the Euboean Shore, The farthest Land, they say, that they explore, Who see those Lands where Radamanthus reigns, Where Earth-bornTityus was the Son of Jupiter and Elara, the Daughter of Orchome∣nus, whom Jupiter, fearing the jea∣lousie of Juno, hid in the bowels of the Earth, until the time of her delivery, whence he was supposed to be Terrae filius. Apollonius in his Argonauticks, , . There Phoebus shooting Tityus as he streve To force his Mother to lascivious love, Divine Elara gave the Monster birth, But he was nurs'd by the all-fostering Earth. Homer writes him here to live in En∣boea, but the rest of the Antients agree that he lived in the Country of Phocis; for there he had his Temple and was worship'd; there also was a Den call'd  from his Mother Elara, as Strabo relates. There too was his Se∣pulchre, according to Pausanias. Tityus tortured complains, They the same day, and without labour, reach Those Coasts, and enter with full Sails our Beach. Judg then what Ships and Seamen here we boast, That swift as Swallows fly from Coast to Coast.
When thus Ʋlysses pray'd; Jove, grant the King His good Design may to perfection bring, Alcinous grant immortal Fame, and me My dear Relations and my Home to see. Arete then commands them make a Bed, And Purple ore and Royal Tap'stry spread. Damsels, with Tapers lighted, straight withdrew, And in the outward Porch her Bidding do: Returning they then to Ʋlysses said; Sir, You may go to Rest, your Bed is made. He much desiring sleep gladly arose, And in resounding Portals took repose. Alcinous lay in Lodgings farther in, On a soft Couch prepared by his Queen.
scene from book 8 Nobilissimo Domino Dno Philippo Stanhop Comiti e Chesterfeild Baroni Stanhop de Shelford Tahulam han LMDDDIO Lib. 8.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE EIGHTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. A Counsel call'd, Alcinous moves the Cour, That they the Stranger should safe home Transport. They Feast, then Sport, Ulysses all out flung. Their Bard the scapes of Mars and Venus Sung: The Grecian Steed. Ulysses Weeps: His name Then they desire to know, and whence he came. NO sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With Rosie Fingers, Days Port∣cullice drawn, But up Alcinous and Ʋlysses rose: Preceding all in state, Alcinous goes Then to the Guild, which rang'd before the Fleet; The Concourse there on pollish'd Marble sit. Like the Kings Herald Pallas walks the Streets, And all concern'd, thus summons as she meets;
You Chiefs and Princes who these people sway, Haste to the Hall, to hear what he will say, Who to Alcinous Court so lately came, And like a God through swelling Billows swam. Thus expectation heighten'd, Young and Old Filling their seats, with wonder him behold; Whilst on his head and shoulders Pallas sheds Celestial Raies; his ample Bosom spreads, Taller he grows, his Limbs more Brawny seem, A reverential aw and high esteem So to obtain, and better that he might Perform those Sports, to which they'd him invite. When all well setled and attentive were, Thus said the King; You Chiefs and Princes here Assembled, thus on this occasion, list To softer dictates of my yielding breast; This Stranger here, who now your aid implores, If from the East he came, or Western Shores I'm not inform'd, but grant a Vessel may Him to his Native Soyl with speed convey: None, whosoere my Court shall entertain, Shall long, for Transport waiting, here remain. Let straight a well Rigg'd Galley tight and staunch, Fifty two Youths, all primer Seamen, Launch, Oars, Sails prepare, strong Tackle and a Mast; Then at my Palace let them break their Fast: This for the Youth: But you our Princes shall Receive this Stranger in our royal Hall, Not any must refuse, and bring along Demodocus, whom with Celestial Song Some God inspir'd, who gains from all the Bays, For well-set Notes, and best composed Laies. This said, he rising, forth the Princes leads, And for Demodocus the Herald speeds.
Twice twenty six, as he commanded, went To Margents of the barren Element: Soon as they were aboard they launch their Ship, Erect their Mast, and hoyse their Yard a-trip; They thong their supple Oars, their Sails expand, Afloat their Vessel leaving, straight they Land, And to the Palace with great Concourse throng, The Gates and Waies were fill'd with old and young, For whom Alcinous, well-fed Bullocks two, Eight brawny Swine, and twelve fat Wethers, slew, Which neatly dress'd, a royal Treatment made: To Court Demodocus the Herald lead, On whom a Muse bestow'd both good and ill; Depriv'd ofThe antient Grammarians be∣lieve that the Poet doth describe him∣self here under the name of Demodocus; as Didymus and Eustathius observe. For that himself was blind is generally deliver'd by Historians, particularly by Herodotus in his life of Homer. The Acts of Heroes which Demodocus sung, they refer to Homers Iliads. Sight, but much improv'd his Skill. Him 'midst the Hall he 'gainst a Column plac'd, In a rich Chair with Silver Studds inchac'd; Hung ore his head, his Golden Harp well strung, Upon a Pin, and shew'd him where it hung: Neer on a Table plac'd of antique Mould A brimming Bowl, to Drink when ere he would. Then all fell on, and plentifully fare: When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, The Bard inspir'd, the acts of Heroes Sung, At whose resounding Fame Heav'ns Arches rung, Ʋlysses and AchillesHomer doth in this Poem inter∣weave several passages of the Trojan War which he omitted in his Iliads, whereof this is one, neither does he here tell us the subject of this strife be∣tween Achilles and Ʋlysses, which Di∣dymus thus relates; At Table the que∣stion was started in what manner the City of Troy was to be taken; Achilles counsell'd to take it by storm; Ʋlysses by stratagem: This was the contenti∣on. But in Quintus Smyrnaeus this contest is betwixt Ʋlysses and Neopto∣lemus, after the death of Achilles: in whom Neoptolemus to the proposition of Ʋlysses, ,&c. O Chalcas, valiat men fight hand to hand, But who the Foe far from the Walls withstand, Subdu'd with fear, we justly may con∣temn; Let us not think of Plot or Stratagens; Foremost let us with Javelins try it ont, They are the best in Battel are ost stout. strife, when at A treatment of the Gods, they Feasting sate; But glad was Agamemnon, when he heard, How thus the Valiant'st of their Princes jar'd; Phoebus to him predicted so before, In Pythia vent'ring on his marble Floor, When two such Chiefs should at a Feast contend, Their tedious War and Miseries should end. This Story the inspired Poet Sung, But ore his Face, concern'd Ʋlysses flung
His Purple Vest, veiling his honour'd Head, Lest they should spy those briny Tears he shed. When the learn'd Bard clos'd with concluding Chords Harmonious Notes set to Heroick words, His face he shews, drying those trickling Floods, And powrs a franck Libation to the Gods. But when the Chiefs desir'd, that he once more Would Sing, what them delighted so before, Again his manly Brow Ʋlysses veil'd, And with his Mantle trickling Tears conceal'd: Which straight Alcinous found, and sitting neer, Thus said, whil'st he his deep-fetch'd Sighs could hear; Renown'd Pheacians, who with Sails unfurl'd Plow Azure Mountains through the watery World, Since we are satisfi'd with plenteous fare, And Musick crowning Feasts, let us repair Now to the Cirque, where all who boast, their Skill And Strength may shew, that our brave Guest may tell His Friends at home, none dare with us contest At Running, Dauncing, Wrestling, and theThe Cest is a piece of Brass tied about the hands of the Combatants with Leather thongs when they went to Cuffs. Several forms of them are to be seen in antient Statues. Cest: The King, this said, leads through the yielding throng The Princes, whil'st the Harp Pontonous hung Upon a Pin, then guids the learned Bard Forth to the Forum, where they all repair'd, And sitting down, appointed places fill, Whence many rose to shew their Strength and Skill, Acronius, Ocyall, and Elatrus first; Nautus, and Prymneus, from the Concourse burst; Anchialus, Eretmus, Ponteus joyn, Proteus, bold Thoon, and Anabasine; Amphialus, Euryalus, Naubolides the fair, Whose Shape did with Laodama's compare: Alcinous Sons rose last to purchase Fame, Halius, Clytonius, and Laodame.
These run a Race; they Start, and swift they fly, Whilst Clouds of dusty Atomes dim the Sky: And straight Clytonius got as far before, As Mules will Oxen, plowing up twelve-score: Like winged Lightning he out-stript the Wind, And soon left all Competitors behind. Others their skill in Wrastling put to test, Mongst whom Euryalus obtain'd the best. Amphialus at Leaping none out-goes: The ponderous Quoit farthest Elatrus throws. Not any could with Laodame compare Wielding a Cestus. When they heated were, Trying their Strength and Skill, the Prince thus said; Let us this noble Stranger, Sirs, perswade To shew his Art, he hath been Courtly bred: His Thighs are brawny, well his Shoulders spread, His Person well compact, and strongly Built: But he who hath so many Sorrows felt, May find impairs: not Sickness, Want, nor Age, Impeach us more then Seas and Tempests rage; When they Dispute, the stoutest are convinc'd, Then spake Euryalus, Brother well thou hint'st, Try if thou can'st him to our Sports perswade. Laodamas then to Ʋlysses said; Come, Sir, be pleas'd to give a Tast of what You in these Pastimes are most Skilful at; To have such parts a Traveller behoves; What more the growth of spreading Fame improves, Then Natures bounties polished with Art; Come shake off eating Sorrows from your Heart: Not long will be your stay; Launch'd is your Ship, Ready your Men, and your furl'd Sails a-trip. Why ask'st thou me, Ʋlysses then retorts, Who more inur'd to Sorrow am then Sports?
Much I have suffer'd, and must more indure, But I, an humble Supplyant, would procure, To Waft me home, the King and People's aid. To whom Euryalus then roughly said; Thou hast no Courtly qualities to spare, Nor gentile parts, though they so numerous are, But look'st like one who us'd to Travel, hast Preferment got, and rul'st before the Mast, Mak'st their accounts, and covetous keepest short Their Meat and Pay; sure thou no Horseman art. Whom frowning on, Ʋlysses thus did cool; What ere I am, thou bablest like a Fool, And do'st uncivilly a Stranger use: Jove not on all men equal Gifts bestows, That not so much we praise for outward parts, As for hisThat is, his deformity is recom∣penc'd by his Eloquence and Grace in Speaking. So saith Sappho of her self in Ovid, Si mihi difficilis formam Natura nega∣vit, Ingenio forma damna rependo meae. If Nature hath deni'd me beauty, yet That want I shall supply with ready Wit. Eloquence and nobler Arts; Whom for his modest speaking, Rich and Poor, Love and admire, and as a God adore: The other, though his form Celestial seem, Prates like a Dunce, and looseth all esteem: So thou may'st Heaven for thy fair outside thank, Who art a scribl'd Volumn, or a Blanck: But since my patience th' hast provok'd, and spake What ill beseems thee, and I worser take: I not so ill-bred am as now thou say'st, But stood amongst the primer Heroes plac'd, Whil'st in my Flow'r; but Craz'd I'm now grown stiff, My Spirits with accumulated grief, And toyl, much wasted, where I oft engag'd, Whil'st bloody Mars or cruel Neptune rag'd; And since thou hast provok'd me thus, I will Make tryal of my long neglected Skill. Not casting off his Vest, this said, a Stone He snatcheth up, a far more ponderous one,
Then the Pheacians use: The heavy Flint With violence went, as Pluto had been in't, And flying ore their Heads, They stoop, it goes, Then breaks new Ground beyond all former throws: When in a Humane shape th'illustrious Maid, Fixing a mark, thus to the Concourse said; A blind Man may discern how much thou hast Out-gon the rest, none here shall mend this Cast. These words boy'd up Ʋlysses sinking Heart, Glad he had found a Friend would take his part: And thus he mildly said; My Masters throw, This I not question but I can out-go, And since I am provok'd, I dare the best To Wrastle, Run, or poise the ponderous Cest, Except Laodamas my dearest friend, I challenge all who will with such contend; None but a fool, and such they are abuse, And thus uncivilly a Stranger use. At any of your Exercises I Here challenge forth the proudest, and defie; With skill and strength I draw an able Bow, To reach at randome the advancing Foe: When we at wary distance held dispute, Me onelyOf Philoctetes's skill in Archery, as also of his Army, the Poet makes mention in his Iliads, , ; . These Philoctetes, skilful at his Bow, Lead in seven Ships; each fifty Men did row: These were good Archers, cunning, ftout and strong. When he was deserted by the Grecians in the Isle of Lemnos, by his Bow he found himself provision according to Ovid in his Metamorphosis, lib. 13. Et nunc ille, eadem nobis juratus in arma, (Heu pars una Ducum) quo successore sagittae Herculis utuntur, fractus morboque fameque, Venaturque aliturque avibus, volucres∣que petendo, Debita Trojanis exercet spicula fatis, Now Philoctetes who in the same War Engag'd with us (oh his unhappy Star!) Who us'd Alcides Bow, poor hungry soul With sickness broken, lives by hunting fowl. To kill small Birds those Darts doth now employ, Which have been the destruction of Troy. Philoctetes could out-shoot, And Trojans Gall; let none with me compare, Who now tread Earth, and breath Etherial Aire. I'll not with ancient Heroes have to do, Such as Alcides, andKing of Oechalia, in the Island of Euboea, who profer'd his beautiful Daughter Jole to any who could match him in the skill of Archery; wherein being overcome by Hercules, and denying to stand to his proffer was slain by him, the City raz'd, and his Daughter carried away Captive. This is the History of Eurytus accor¦ding to the rest of the Greek Writers; but which differs something from this relation of Homers. Eurytus; who With Deities in shooting would contend: Eurytus so met his untimely end, And never in his Palace aged grew; Him emulating vext Apollo slew. As far as you can shoot I'll cast a Spear; At running I may worsted be I fear,
But still at Sea and alwaies under Sail, My limbs grow stiff, my Knees and Anckles fail. This said, admiring all, none silence brake, When to Ʋlysses thus Alcinous spake; Mov'd by that temper guards thy noble Breast Well, though provok'd, thou hast thy self exprest, That hast rude tearms with modest glancings check'd; None on thy parts will cast a mean respect, Who to good Breeding hath the least pretence. Now, Sir, be pleas'd to give me Audience, That thou to other Heroes may'st report, When with thy Wife and Children, at thy Court Feasting thou sitt'st, What mighty Jove imparts, On us intailing Wealth and noble Arts. We Wrastle well, and strongly wield the Cest, At Running are, and Navigation best, We always Treat; love dances and the Lyre, Soft Beds, warm Bathes, and change of rich Attire. Our Dancers bid prepare, that he may tell His Friends at home, how much we all excell: Let one straight for Demodocus repair, And bring his Harp, of which pray have a care. This said, thence for the Lyre his Herald goes: Nine Masters of the Revels then arose, Who drove the People back, and more room made. The Harp brought in, Demodocus not stai'd, But went into the mid'st; prime Youth advance, And plac'd in Figures, round about him Dance. Ʋlysses much their Movings did admire, Whil'st he sung sweetly to his charming Lyre The scapes ofThe Greek and Latin Poets do luxuriate in this Theme of the Adulte∣ry of Mars and Venus: we shall only take notice of Ovids description of it in his 2. Book De arte amandi; Fabula narratur toto notissima Coele, Mulciberi capti Marsque Venusque dolis. Mars pater inso Veneris turbatus a∣more, De duce terribili factus amator erat, &c. There is a Tale through all Heaven known well yet, Vulcan took Mars and Venus in a Net: corch'd with the Goddess flames, the God of War, From a stout Leader, turns a soft A∣mour: Nor she, then whom no Goddess is more kind, Prov'd coy or ill-bred, but affections joyn'd. How oft the giggling wanton merry made At Vulcans feet, and hands hard with his Trade? To Mars walk'd limping in her Hus∣bands pace, Each Beauty mingled with a several Grace. At first their sweet Embraces were conceal'd. And bashful modesty their Love-tricks veil'd. But by the Sun (who can deceive the Sun?) His Wives escapes were to her Hus∣band known: When round their amorous Bed sly Vulcan sets, Which no Eye could perceive, ingeni∣ous Nets; To Lemnos then a Journey feigns: they met, Both naked ly infolded in the Net. Vulcan the Gods then summons to the sport, Venus was weeping ripe, as they report. They could not hide their Faces, nor conceal Parts with their hand, which Modesty would veil. When Hermes smiling said; Stout Mars on me Thy Fetters lay, if burthensome to thee. He scarce for thy sake, Neptune, them unties: When Mars to Crete, Venus to Pa∣phos flies. Mars and Venus, how he sped, When first she brought him to her Husbands Bed: How their stoln sports the Sun to him declar'd, And how the news the Jealous chafing heard;
Who at his Forge straight Anvil'd out a Chain, Whose Lincks not force nor cunning could constrain: Then raging to his Chamber went, and spread The artificial Gin about his Bed: The Cordage, like the threds that Spiders spin, Could not b' Immortals be, nor Mortals, seen. Then feign'd toAn Island neer unto Thrace, where Vulcan was received when he was thrown down from Heaven, ac∣cording to our Poet in his Iliads; He once did take me by the foot, when I Came to thy aid, and threw me from the Skie; All day I was ae falling, and at night Did almost out of breath in Lemnos light; There the kind Sintians pittying took me up. Whence ever after it was held Sacred to him: but the Mythologists rather think it, because there were frequent eruptions of Subterraneous Fire in that Island, with many other Symp∣tomes of heat; amongst which is reckoned by the later Writers, that Earth vulgarly call'd terra sigillata fetch'd from thence, but which was not known in the time of our Poet. Lemnos (which he most did love Of all his Seats) that streight he would remove. Mars takes the hint, wounded by conquering Love, And went to Venus, new return'd from Jove: Then by the fair Hand gently wringing, said; Dear, let's repose now on your royal Bed, Vulcan's from home. She not rescents, this said, But Mars unto her Husbands Couch convey'd, From whence they could not stir, nor rise again: Soon they perceive all strugling prov'd in vain. The Sun told Vulcan they were in the toyl, Who never went unto the Lemnian Soyl: He, stepping ore his Threshold, not contain'd His grief and rage, but thus alowd complain'd, That all the Gods his hideous Cry might hear; O Jove, and all you blessed pow'rs, draw neer That you may see, how much I injur'd am, Because I halt, thus indigent and lame, By my lascivious Wife, who in my stead With Mars, Ah me! contaminates my Bed, Because his Limbs are streight: nor is't my fault, But those begot me, that I thus do halt. See how they dallyingly, devoyd of shame, Of which wrong'd I, a sad spectator am: But I believe these Lovers I shall keep, Longer then they would willing be a-sleep; My Art secures them in a Brazen Chain, Till Jove repay me her vast Dow'r again;
Which I made over, taking to my House His beauteous Daughter, my Lascivious Spouse. This said, the Gods all to his Palace hast, Phoebus and Neptune, Hermes; but the Chast Goddesses stir'd not: entring they all smil'd, Beholding them by Vulcan's Art beguil'd, When one thus said; Deceipt not still succeeds, For now lame Vulcan nimble Mars out-speeds; The swiftest of the Gods, by one that halts, Lies liable to beAccording to the law of Athens, to which the Poet seems to allude, the punishment of Adultery was death; as appears out of Pausanias, where he saies, that according to the institution of Draco the Athenian Law-giver, there was impunity granted to those that should any waies revenge them∣selves upon the deprehended Adulte∣rer. The same was the Law of Solon afterwards, , If any one seize on the adulterer of his Wife, let him use him as he please. Wherefore when Eratos∣thenes beg'd his life of him whose Wife he had abused, he answered him, , 'Tis not I that kill you, but the Law of your Country: But as it was lawful for the injur'd person to slay the offender, so was it in his power too, to suffer him to commute, (as we now speak) whence the same Eratsthenes, in Lysias, , Beg'd and entreated that he would not kill him, but exact a sum of Money from him. And this was the case of Vulcan: for since Mars, a God, could not be put to death, he re∣quires a pecuniary Mulct, the price of his Adultery: Mulcted for his faults: Thus talk'd they, when to Hermes Phoebus said; Might we not Mercurie, thee with ease perswade, Although thou wert in all those Fetters ty'd, Thus to repose by Cytherea's side? Then he; Should thrice as many me infold, And all the Gods and Goddesses behold, I should not be asham'd, nor quit my place, Thus resting in fair Venus sweet embrace. The Gods all smil'd, but Neptune did perswade Mars to enlarge, and thus to Vulcan said; For thy demands, unto my promise trust, Free him, th' Immortal Gods are alwaies just. Then he reply'd; Words, Neptune, are but Wind, Bare promises for Pris'ners meanly bind. How shall I make thee pay, if him I free? Then Neptune said; Thy Action lay on me, If he refuse I shall: Vulcan reply'd; In such Security I will confide. This said, he loos'd them: Mars enraged, bent His course toThrace was accounted the feat of Mars, because the People of that Country were a Warlike generation: Eustathius. I know not whence Ovid, when he Translates these Verses, names Crete for Thrace, Vix precibus, Neptune, tuis captivae resolvit Corpora: Mars Creten occupat, illa Paphon He scarce for thy sake, Neptune, them unties: When Mars to Crete, Venus to Paphos flies. Thrace, Venus toPaphos was a City in the Island of Cyprus, whence Venus was call'd Paephia. , . Whose Temple there remain'd in the time of Strabo; as he testifies in his Geography. Paphos went, Where she a Grove and perfum'd Altars hath, Where her the Graces did Anoynt and Bath, Suppling with Oyl, such as the Gods refresh'd, And with rich Garments curiously dress'd.
Thus Sung he, which Ʋlysses pleas'd and all The joyful throng. Alcinous then did call Forth Halius, and Laodamas to Dance: These in this Art most famous, straight advance, Soon as they had a purple Ball receiv'd, Which skillful Polybus had neatly Weav'd, This one throws up, the other, ere it fall, Takes Cap'ring ere he comes to ground the Ball; Then in a figur'd Dance they neatly mov'd, Whose Garb and Footing highly all approv'd, In murm'ring Humms, a loud applause they had; When thus Ʋlysses to Alcinous said; Renowned Prince, you have made good your boast, That the best Dancers, this your happy Coast Breeds, in the World; whom I must needs approve, Since me amazement struck to see them move. Then to the Princes thus Alcinous said; For this our worthy Guest, let me perswade, That we an hospitable Gift prepare, Twelve Kings here Reign, and we the thirteenth are; Let each a Golden Talent him present, A Vest and Robe, which all together sent, He may receive at once, so to our Feast Repair a joyful, and a welcom Guest; Euryalus must satisfaction make, With Words and Gifts, because he rashly spake. This said, the Princes his Advice commend, And straight their Heralds with rich Presents send. Euryalus then; Sir, to your Guest I will Confess my fault, and your commands fulfill: And I'll this Faulchion give him richly Guilt, And Ivory sheath. This said, the Silver Hilt Him he presents: then thus, What words soere I fondly spake, hence let a Whirl-wind bear:
And may the Gods thee, harrass'd with much toyl, To thy dear Wife return and Native Soyl. Ʋlysses then reply'd; May the same Gods Grant thee all blessings in thy own Aboads; And that this Sword no more thou shalt desire, Which thou bestow'st, thus reconciling Ire. This said, the Sword he 'thwart his Shoulders flings, And growing dark, rich presents from the Kings Their Heralds carried to Alcinous House, Which straight his Sons set by his beauteous Spouse: He leading, all the Chiefs in order sate, Then spake Alcinous to his Royal Mate; Rise straight my Dear, and choose a handsom Chest, In which first lay a Robe and curious Vest: And bid them for this Stranger get a Bath, Then let him all those costly Gifts he hath Receiv'd from us, see carefully put up; Then him we'll Feast, and I'll this golden Cup Present, that me he may to memory call, Jove and the Gods Libating in his Hall. This said, Arete straight her Damsels did Command, to set a Trevet on with speed; On which the largest of her Caldrons fix, Then put in Water, and put under Sticks, Whilst from her chamber down she brought a Chest, In which the Princes Gifts, the Bowl, and Vest, Alcinous gave too, in she folding laid, And her own Presents adding, thus then said; NowHe bids him bind the cover of the Chest: for Keys were not in use in the time of our Poet, but were in∣vented afterwards by the Lacedamo∣nians. Mail your Trunck, Sir, well, lest whilst you sleep Secure, transported through the swelling Deep, Something be lost. Ʋlysses straight obey'd, And up the Chest, as Circe taught him, made. Then to a Bath chast Virgins him invite, Which he straight enter'd with no small delight:
For never since he left the Ogygian Queen, Who Bath'd him oft, had he warm Water seen. When he had wash'd and noynted, him they drest, Put on his under Garments and his Vest: Then went he to the Feast. Nausicaa, by A Piller standing, his approach did spy, Whom much admiring when she had survey'd, Hail noble Stranger, hail dear Sir, she said; When thou behold'st thy Friends and dearest Wife, Remember me who first preserv'd thy life. Then smoothly he reply'd; Best Princess, may So Jove me to my Native Soyl convey, Where I shall thee there as aSo faith Virgil, in the form of a Shepherd, of Augustus: — Deus nobis hac otia fecit. Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus; illius aram Saepe tener nostris ab evilibus imbuet agnus. This quiet, Shepherd, from a God we found: For he shall be my God: oft from the Dam I'll bath his Altars with a tender Lamb. Goddess serve, Whil'st Breath I draw, who did'st my Life preserve. This said, he next Alcinous took his Seat, Whil'st they rich Wine commix'd, and serv'd in Meat, The Herald in Demodocus convey'd, And 'gainst a Column plac'd; Ʋlysses said Then to Pontonous (Carving from the Chine, A savoury Morsel of a well-fed Swine) This to Demodocus be pleas'd to bear, And tell him, though unfortunate we are, Yet I a Poet honour, and admire Their Raptures, since the Muses them inspire. This said, the Herald brought him what he sent, Which he received with no small content. Then all fell on, and plentifully fare: When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, Ʋlysses, to Demodocus, thus says; Sir, You I must beyond all Mortals praise, Since Pallas you, or Phoebus taught so well Those Miseries, which the Greeks at Troy befell, To sing as if th'hadst been Spectator there; Of Epeus Horse could I now something hear,
Which he by Pallas aid so rarely wrought, Which within Walls Ʋlysses cunning brought, Pregnant with Grecian arms, and Trojan Fate: If this thou truly could'st to me relate, I, through the World, should trumpet thy Deserts, Whom some kind power inspires with heavenly Arts. This said, He sung, and in an Epick Strain, Told how the Greeks launch'd to the boyst'rous Main, Fir'ing their Camp, and how they lurking hid, Throug'd round Ʋlysses in the mighty Steed, When that the Trojans had with all their pow'r, Drawn the stupendious Monster to the Tow'r, There they consulted if the hollow Oak Should be rip'd up, or tumbled ore the Rock, Or let him stand: on this they fix'd, since Troy Fate had decreed the Grecians should destroy: And how those Caverns leaving, down they came, And plunder'd Ilium fir'd with hostile flame: Whil'st Menelaus andDeiphobus had married Helen after the death of his Brother Paris, which exasperated Menelaus so far, that he seems to have design'd his slaughter beforehand: but that Ʋlysses accompanied him in this encounter, is not related by Quintus Smyrnaeus, who delivers it thus, Deiphobus then Menelaus sped, Who found him slumbring in fair Helens Bed, Who frighted thence did in the Palace hide, But he rejoyc'd to see his Faulchion dy'd. Ʋlysses went Where lay Deiphobus, with dire intent. A dreadful conflict in his Court they had, But soon were Conquerors by Pallas aid. Thus sung the Poet, whil'st Ʋlysses steeps His Cheeks with tears, and as a Woman weeps, Her dearest Lord imbracing on the Plain, For's Country fighting, and his Children slain, Or seeing him in Deaths Convulsions ly, Falls on him groning with a doleful Cry; But they strike on, and drag the Pris'ner, where If he survive, must feel more Toyl and Care: So sad Ʋlysses briny tears distills, Perceived by Alcinous, and none else, Who sitting nearest heard him Sigh and Grone: Then to the Princes thus their King begun;
You Peers and Princes now assembled here, Give order that Demodocus forbear: Perhaps his Notes not pleasing are to all The joyful Feasters in our royal Hall. Our Guest in sighs strikes Diapazons, such Are his regrets, he answers every touch, Lavishing Tears since he begun his Song; The Laws of Hospitality not wrong; And since this Banquet we for him prepar'd, Our Supplyant as a Brother let's regard. Now, Sir, be pleas'd you would your self declare, Where you were born, and what your Parents are, And your Aboads, that so we may instruct Our Ship, you to your Country to conduct? We use nor Helm, nor Helm's-men; our tall Ships Have Souls, and plow with reason up the Deeps; All Cities, Countries, know, and where they list, Through Billows glide, veil'd in obscuring Mist: Nor fear they Rocks, nor danger in the way; But once I heard my Sire Nausithous say, Neptune enrag'd, because we did transport So many People safe, from Port to Port, Returning he one Vessel sunck, which still Shadows our City like a mighty Hill. The Gods their pleasure do: But let me know, From whence thou cam'st, and whither you would go; If amongst Rusticks, Impious and Poor, Or civil Nation who the Gods adore: You wept hearing Demodocus relate, In well-set Notes, the Greeks and Trojan Fate; These are the Gods designs, and all must dy, And make bold Tales for their Posterity: But tell me, have you in the Grecian Hoast At Troy, a Kinsman, Friend, or Brother lost?
Though oft a dear Companion's loss we more, Then our own Blood or neer Allies, deplore.
scene from book 9 Nobilissimae Dominae D:ae Elizabethae Comitissae de Chesterfeild Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib: 9
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE NINTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. His tedious wandering, and his various Fates, Ulysses to th Assembled Peers relates; Ciconians, Lotophagie, and how tost By Storms, he fell on the Cyclopian Coast. Huge Polyphemus eats six Men, he burns His Eye out, scapes, and thence reveng'd returns. THEN said Ʋlysses; Most re∣nowned King, To hear a Poet his own raptures Sing, With such a ravishing and Hea∣venly Voyce, As would both Mortals and the Gods rejoyce, Heightens your Entertainment, and our Souls Cheers, more then laden Boards, or flowing Bowls. But since you'd rather hear my woful Tale, And me afresh past Miseries bewail,
Ah, how shall I begin! what first relate! How tost and harras'd by relentless Fate: Laertes Of-spring I, Ʋlysses am, My Person you preserv'd, the Stars my Fame; My Kingdom Ithaca, Neritos Hill, Checker'd with Groves, I Pasture on and Till. Many rich Isles ly scatter'd there 'mong Floods, One of the Echinades, after∣wards call'd Dolicha, as we have al∣ready prov'd out of Strabo. Dulychium,A City in Cephallenia, under whose name the Poet here denotes the whole Island. Samos,A fruitful Island, now call'd Zant. Zanthus, crown'd with Woods, Which Barren, yet breeds hardy Youth and bold, Then which, no Land I rather would behold; Though fair Calypso I, and Circes Bed Enjoy'd, both Amorous, courting me to Wed: Whose Wealth, nor Charms, nor flatt'ries wrought on me; I long'd my Native Country more to see, My Parents and relations to behold, Then Riches to enjoy, and Roofs though Gold. But I shall now discourse what little joy The Gods prepar'd for us, launch'd off from Trov. First we Ciconia reach'd with prosperous Gales, Where Ismarus took,A City of Thrace, inhabited by the Ciconians, who came to the assi∣stance of the Trojans, as appears in the second of the Iliads, where among the rest of the Trojan Auxiliaries, Euphemus led the valiant Cicons on. Grand-child to glorious Ceas, Troi∣zens Son. we put to Sword the Males, Our Prize their Riches, Wives, and Daughter made: Then I bid hast aboard, they not obey'd, But Sheep and Cattel slaughtering on the Shore, Heighten'd with Wine their high distemper more. Mean while the fleet Ciconians gave th' Alarm, And suddenly the neighbouring Confines Arm, Far more and better Souldiers; who put to't, Would quit well mannag'd Steeds and fight on Foot: Early on us they fall; nor could the Spring, Must'ring her Leaves and Flow'rs, such numbers bring. Then Jove deolard'd, what he design'd before; Who much had suffer'd, now must suffer more. They March to us in Bodies deep and lange, And with sharp Spears, on th Oceans Margents change,
Whil'st Morning grew, and sacred Day arose, So long we match'd our overpow'ring Foes: But when the Sun declin'd into the West, The desperate Enemy had much the best; And six from every Vessel there were slain, The rest got off, and plow'd the boysterous Main. But ere we ply'd our Oars, or Canvase spread, We thriceIt was the opinion of the antient Grecians, that the Souls of those who were unburied, were not admitted into the common Receptacle, until the Fu∣neral Rites were perform'd. We have an example of this, Il. 23. in Patroclus. Me ah! interr, who am from Stygian Coasts, And long'd-for paessage driv'n by happier Ghosts. Virgil also AEneid. 6. Hac omnis quam cernis inops inhumata∣sepulti; que turba est sepulti; Portitor ille Charon, hi quos vehit unda Nec ripas datur horrendas, nec rauca quieruns fluenta, Transportare prius quam sedibus ossa Centum errant annos, volitantque haec littora circum. Those woful Souls thou seest, are not pulcherd Interr'd; That's Charon; those he waits are se None are transported ore these horrid Graves; Waves, Until their bones find quiet in their A hundred years they on these Coasts remain, At last a long expected passage gain. Wherefore, when any were slain in a forein Country, when their Friends had not opportunity of performing the Funeral Solemnities, they call'd over the names of the Dead, inviting them, as it were, to return with them, where they had an honourary Monument, and all Rights perform'd as if the bodies of the Dead were there present. Pindaer. Pyth. Od. 4. — — Thou maist appease the wrath of severe Gods, For Phrixus he commands to the abonds Of King AEetas to bring home his Soul. Where the Scholiast notes, that It was the Custom of the Grecians, though they procured not the bodies of the dead, yet by certain Ceremonies to recal their Souls, who dyed in a strange place, and to trans∣port them into their own Country along with them. Eustathius also observes upon this place, that the Athenians, whenever they lost any men at Sea, went presently to the shore, call'd thrice the names of the slain, and rais'd a Ceno∣taphium, where they made their Paren∣taia. invok'd the Manes of the Dead, When Jove a Tempest rais'd, and in a trice, Muffl'd with Clouds both Earth, the Sea, and Skies, And we dispers'd, off from our Course were born, Our Masts were shatter'd, Sails and Tackle torn, Our fripery up we hurl'd, and fearing Death, Draw near the Shore, there toyling out of Breath Two Nights and Days we lay; th' ensuing Dawn Again we rais'd our Masts, clapt Canvase on, And then the prosp'rous Winds our Fleet had bore, Perhaps in safety to my native Shore, But doublingA Promontory in the Morea, where Navigation was so dangerous, that it become a Proverb, . When you sail by Malea, forget your home Maleas poynt a Tempest bare Us fromThe nearest Island to Malea, in which there was a secure Port, and a City of the same name with the Isle. Cythera back: nine days we were Tost with cold Winds upon the raging Main, The tenth, theThe Antients agree not in the seat of these Latophagi. Artemidorus says that they inhabited the Deserts of A∣frica, South of Mauritania, from the Atlantick Ocean even to Cyrene. O∣thers say, that it is the Island Menyn, which lies before the lesser Syrtis, which is here denoted: because there is abundance of those Lotus trees in that Island, which bear a very pleasant fruit; and an Altar of Ʋlysses's still remaining. Lotophagian Coasts we gain, Who feed on Flow'rs; we din'd, and water'd there: When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, Two then, to make Discovery, I sent, Of our prime Men, with them a Herald went; Who found the Lotophagi planted there, They pleasant Lotus did for them prepare, Not meaning harm; for they who Lous eat Nere mind returning to their native Seat: These, whil'st they shreek, acting distracted Pranks, I forc'd aboard, and fasten'd to their Banks; Then shipt I all the rest, lest they should eat Sweet Lotus, and their Native Soyl forget.
Who settled, brush'd the briny deep with Oars: At last, we sad reach theThe Cyclops inhabited the Moun∣tain of AEtna, and the Country of the Leontini in Sicily. So Euripides understood it; in whose Cyclops (speak∣ing of the approach of Ʋlysses, and his Followers, to the Den of Polyphe∣mus) Silenus thus complains. Tiros Ʋnhappy Strangers th' are who ever came, Net knowing what a Master's Poly∣pheme, Arriving at th' inhospitable Cave, Whose raging gorge must be the wretches Grave. But quiet be, that they may give account From whence they came to the Sicilian Mount. They were so call'd, because they had a round eye in the middle of their fore∣heads, according to Hesiod, The name of Cyclops was on them be∣stow'd, From one round eye, which in their fore∣head stood. Cyclopian Shores, Who the Gods trusting neither Plant nor Sow, Where all things without human Labour grow, Wheat, Barly, Vines, whose Clusters fill the Press, And timely Show'rs from Jove give large increase. These by no supreme Pow'r, or Laws, are ty'd, But in vast Caves on Mountain tops reside: And their own Courts, and Wives, and Children sway, Not minding Kings, nor Parlements obey. An Isle, this lay distant amidst the Floods, Stor'd with fat Goats, and Cloath'd with shady Woods By Swains untrackted, and fierce Huntsmen, who Through Forests, Hills, and Dales, their Game pursue. This Ground no fleecy Flocks, nor Cattel feeds, Nor Plow breaks up, but fattens wanton Kids; They build no Ships, who plow with sails unfurl'd The briny Ocean round about the World: Their own they keep, nor seek to people more, Nor want they have, verging with Meads the Shore; So light the unforc'd Soyl, so fat the Ground, It would with Vines, and purest Wheat, abound: Land lock the Bay, where Ships might safely Ride, Without an Anchor, or a Cable ty'd: Just in the Harbours mouth a Fountain flows, Shaded with Aldar: ere the Moon arose, Hither VVe came, some God did us assist, Obscur'd with Night, and cover'd with a Mist, Ere well aware by a swoln Billovv hurl'd Upon the Shore, straight vve our Sails unfurl'd, Then landing, on the Oceans margents lay, In sweet Repose, expecting blessed Day. No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With rosie Fingers days Portcullice drawn,
But we admiring walk along the Shore, Whil'st kinder Nymphes put mountain Goats up store Us to refresh; for Bows, and Spears we sent, And in three Companies divided went: Venson we slew; Twelve Ships our Fleet, they Nine On each bestow'd, and Ten fat Goats on mine. Till Night we feasting sat, and rich Wine dranck; And though our full Borachios were grown lanck, Some yet remain'd which we at Ismar had: Wee drawing nigh the Cyclops Isle survaid, Hearing their Goats, and Sheep, grown Night we lay Upon the Shore expecting blessed Day. No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn With rosie fingers Days Portcullice drawn, When to the rest I said; Stay on this Shore Till with my Vessel, I yon Isle explore, If Rusticks dwell there, Cruel, and Unjust, Or Civil People who in Gods do trust. Aboard we go, and weigh, in order'd Rancks Brushing the briny Spry upon their Bancks. Drawn neer the Shore, a Cavern we survaid, Which Laurel cover'd with a pleasant Shade, Where Sheep, and fat Goats lay: cut from the Rocks Appear'd a Court built high with Pines, and Oaks. Here a Huge Gyant dwelt, who kept alone His Flocks, a Monster that convers'd with None: Who a prodigious size shew'd when he stood, Like a tall Mountain crown'd with stately Wood. Then twelve stout Men along with me I took, The rest commanding to the Vessel look, And a Borachio full of mighty Wine, WhichIt seems that the City of Ma∣ronea in Thrace, near adjoyning to Is∣marus, receiv'd its name from this Maro. Maron gave me who kept Phoebus Shrine; Who dwelt neer Ismarus; because his life We had preserv'd his Children and his Wife:
Fearing the God he in a shady Wood Residing, many Gifts on me bestow'd; Seven golden Talents, and a Silver Cup, And twelve large Vessels fil'd with rich Wine up. None of his Servants, Man, nor Woman, knew This but Himself, his Wife, and She that drew. When this they drank, they TwentyPliny in his Natural History observes (from Matianus a Roman Consul, who had been at the place) that there was the same vigour, and strength, then in Maronean Wine, which is here mention'd by the Poet. He says, that it is black and odoriserous, and pin∣guifies with age. times as much Water commix'd, then none ere tasted such, Or smelt the like; whose odorous Perfume So Charm'd, none could abstain from't in the Room. This and a Knapsack I with Viands took, And for the horrid Monster went to look. The Cave we found, but found not Him within, He fed his fleecy Flocks upon the Green. There we admir'd his Cheeses on the Shelves, His Lambs and Kids, each shut up by them selves; Here the new wean'd, and there the new yean'd lay, The Pans, and Dishes, full of Milks, and Whey. Here they advis'd me straight from thence to slip With Kids, and Lambs, and Cheeses, to our Ship, Which I would not (but better it had been) Till Him I saw, whom would we ne'r had seen, Whose horrid Look, so much us all agast: We make a Fire, and bold his Cheeses tast; And there we sat expecting his Return, Who brought a Log that must at Supper burn, Which thunder'd as he threw it on the Ground: Amaz'd, we fly, and dark Recesses found, There his full udderd Ewes he milks, his Pails Frothing run ore, but first shuts out the Males, Then with a mighty Stone all Entrance barrs; Which two and twenty though all four-wheel'd Cars Could not remove: when all were milk'd, the Lambs And wanton Kids He lets forth to their Dambs.
Half of his milk makes Cheese, the other half He puts in Vessels for his Supper safe. All this with speed perform'd, a Fire he made: And spying us where we stood trembling, said; Strangers, who are you? from whence came you, say? Merchants are you, or have you lost your Way? Or Piccaroons, who wander through the Floods To make a Prey of Honest Peoples Goods? At his huge Voice, and horrid Looks, dismaid, Trembling we stood: when thus to him I said; We Grecians are, return'd from Ilium, With cross Winds tost on Billows, sayling Home To sev'ral Shores (as Jove thought fit) we boast Our selves to be of Agamemnon's Host, Whose Fame surmounts the Skie, who overthrew Proud Troy, and mighty Nations did subdue: And We thy Hospitality request, As is the Custom to a woful Guest: Revere the Gods, and thy Assistance lend, For favouring Jove poor Strangers doth befriend. Then roughly He reply'd; a Fool thou art, Or Stranger, I not value Gods a— We Cyclops, notJupiter's Mother (that she might conceal him from Saturn, who devour'd all his Children as soon as they were born) expos'd him private∣ly at Olenus, a City in Boeotia, where he was nurs'd by a Goat. So says Aratus; The sacred Goat, that fester'd Jove, they all. Th' Olenian Goat of Jupiter now call. Whom Ovid follows lib. 2. Fastorum, Oleniae surget sidus pluviale Capellae, Quae fuit in cunis officiosa Jovis. Then the moist Sign the Goat shal rise, who love Shew'd in his Cradle to Almighty Jove. Which Goat, after its death, was tran∣slated into a Sign of the Heavens, and Jupiter made his Shield of the Skin of it. But Moera the Poetess, saies; that he was nurs'd by Pigeous, for which they were made that Sign in the Hea∣vens from them called Phiades. Jove bred up was in Crete, which no God knew: But he in comely Shape, and Stature grew: Him Pigeons fed, and to the blessed Gret Divine Ambrasia from the Ocean brought. Goat-foster'd Jove regard, We are for him, and all Heavens Court, too hard: Not thee, nor thine, on Jove's account, I'll spare, Unless I will, nor for his Anger care: Where thou hast left thy Ship, inform me well, Is she aboard the Shore, or nearer, tell. Senting his Drift, I to evade, thus spoke; Stern Neptune bulg'd my Vessel 'gainst a Rock That guards your Coast: Us winds and Billows bore From imminent Danger, to this pitying Shore. He raging, not reply'd, but at us flew, And in his mighty Paw straight snatch'd up two
Of us like Whelps, and dash'd against the floor, Sprinkling the ground with reeking Brains, and Gore; And like a Lyon, them in piece-meal tears, And eating, nor their Bones, nor Bowels spares; Whil'st weeping, we the woful Sight beheld: Soon as the Monster had his Belly fill'd With human flesh, and stuff'd with Milk, and Whey, Amidst his Flocks, stretch'd on the floor he lay: I drawing near, resolv'd to act my part, Whip out my Sword to run him through the Heart: When I bethought, should we the Monster kill, We not the Stone, with all the strength, and skill, Which barr'd the Gate could stir; Sighing, we stay, Th'event expecting of the blessed Day. No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With rosie fingers days Portcullice drawn, But straight he makes a fire, and milks the Dams, Next, turning loose to them their Kids, and Lambs; His work being finish'd, up he takes twoThere were six of Ʋlysses's Companions devoured by Polyphemus, according to our Poet, yet Euripides, and Virgil, who have transcrib'd the Story out of him, mention but two; the one in his Satyr call'd Cyclops, When all things ready were for Pluto's Cook, Two of my men for slaughter up he took. The other in the third of his Aeneids; Vidi egomet duo de numero quum corpora nostro Prensa manu magnâ medio resupinus in antro Frangeret ad saxum, sanieque aspersa natarent Limina: vidiatro quum membra flu∣entia tabo Manderet, & tepidi tremerent sub den∣tibus artus. I saw, when he two of our stoutest men Seiz'd in his mighty hand, and midst his Den Laid on his back, against a Pillar brain'd, And with foul goar, the sprinkl'd Pave∣ment stain'd. He would devour Mens bloody quar∣ters raw, I in his teeth the warm flesh trembling saw. more Of us, and eats them, as he did before: Thus having Break-fast, out he drives his Flock, With ease removing from the pass, the Rock, Which close again with as small pain he puts, As one the cover of his Quiver shuts: And whistling, to the Mountain goes, and me Leaving unpinion'd: studying how to be Reveng'd, imploring Pallas to assist 'Mongst many Plots I laid, this seem'd the best; Close by his Stall, a Pole a drying laid, Which for the length, and size, when we survey'd, We to the main-mast of a stately Ship Compar'd, that plow'd with twenty Oars the Deep; From this I cut an Ell, which straight I gave My Friends to pollish down, and neatly shave,
VVhose Point I harden'd in the Fire, then thrust, Of which his Cave had store, amidst the dust, Then we drew Los, who should with me draw nigh, And when he slept, with this to pierce his Eie; It fell to four, and I the fifth Man made; At Night, his Flocks he to his Cave convey'd, And put up all his Bleaters in the Coat, Either suspecting, or some heavenly Plot, Then shuts his Gates, and milks his Kids, and Lambs, Next, turns them loose to their unburthen'd Dams. His business done, resolv'd on them to sup, Two more of us he snatch'd; when with a Cup Of mighty VVine, towards him I drawing, said; VVhen you have fed, tast this; let me perswade, That you what drink we had aboard may know. This I present, that you may pity shovv, And us dismiss: if thus you cruel prove, VVho will address to you, or offer Love? This said, the Bowl he takes, up all he Quaft, And pleas'd, thus spake; Give me another Draught, Then let me know thy Name, that straight I may Thee vvith some Hospitable Gift repay. Cherish'd with show'rs, we have rich vvine, and pure; But this is Nectar, and Ambrosia sure. Three times this said, I swell'd his empty Cup, As oft he turns th'exhausted Bottom up. VVhen I perceiv'd the VVine begin to take; And He grevv mellow, thus I mildly spake; Thou ask'dst my Name, which I shall let thee know, Keep Promise, and some Gift on me bestow: My Name is Nemo, so my Parents all, My Kindred, me, and best Relations call. Then He reply'd; Thee I shall kindly treat, Thou shalt good Nemo, be the last I'll eat.
Of all thy Friends; my Promise I will keep. This said, surprised with all-conquering Sleep, Bending his Neck, he lay upright, and cast Gobbets of Flesh and Wine; then I made hast, And in the Fire the Stake sharp-poynted put; My Friends then cheering, took it out Red hot, We drawing near, inspired by some God, With wondrous Courage round about him stood, They thrust it in his Eye, which deep I gor'd, And skrewing in, as with an Augre bor'd; Like one that works upon a Naval Keel, And with a Thong, and Wimble, shews his Skill; So in his Eye the blazing Bar we turn'd, Blood gushing out his singed Eye-brows burn'd, The Crystalline, that guards his Eye-balls, hist, Dark Smoke arose, and an unsavory Mist; And as a Black-Smith in the Water slacks, Then takes out hissing his edge harden'd Ax; So sung the Olive-stake fix'd in his Eye: He roars, the Cave resounds, we frighted fly; He plucks it bloody out, and 'gainst the Walls Tormented throws, and Neighb'ring Cyclops calls; Who neer in Caves, on Mountain tops did dwell, They gather straight, Alaram'd at the Yell; And round about his Gates inquire what made Him roar so loud, who thus then troubled, said; Why shriek'st thou Polyphemus, thus, in deep Of silent Night, and hindrest us from Sleep? Hath any forc'd from thee thy Flocks, or laid To take thy Life some Plot, or Ambuscade? Then He reply'd; Ah! Nemo me hath Slain. Then they; if Nemo hurts thee ne'r complain. If Jove on Thee some heavy Sickness lay, The Burthen bear, and to greatHis Father whom he begot on the Nymph Theosa, as we have already seen in the first of the Odysses. Neptune pray.
Thus they departing said; and pleased smil'd That the dull Cyclops thus my Name beguil'd, But he with trembling Hands, and many a Grone From the Caves entrance mov'd the ponderous Stone: Then sate with palms extended 'midst the Gap, Lest any of us 'mongst his Sheep should scape. He thought me shallow sure, whil'st I contriv'd From Danger how my Friends might be repriv'd Life at the Stake, our Danger great, and neer. At last this quaint Designment seem'd most cleer. He stately Rams had, large, well fed, and full, Kings of the Flock, and clad in purple Wool: These silently I bound with Osiers strip'd (On which well twisted the dire Monster slep'd,) Three in a breast, he in the mid'st bore one, The other two on each side guard their Man, The greatest of these Breeders forth I cull, And at his Belly hanging grasp the Wool, In this sad Posture we much sighing stay, And holding fast, expect the blessed Day. No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn, With rosie Fingers Days Portcullice drawn, But to their Pastures forth he drove the Males, Easing the Ews swoln Teats in frothy Pailes, He all their Backs, though pain'd extreamly, felt, But that we kept their Bellies warm, ne'r felt; When the last Ram, loaden with Me, and Wool, March'd forth, stroking his Back; why art so Dull, Now to be last, he said? still us'd to lead, With pace majestick, to the flow'ry Mead, And far before selected tender Buds, The Van conducting to the Crystal Floods; And always first repairing home at Night: Now thou art Lag, would'st thou I had my Sight,
Which Nemo, and his Complices put out When he with Wine surpriz'd me, who no doubt Shall ne'r escape; would thou could'st speak, and tell Where the Wretch skulks, and Him to me reveal: His Brains my Floor should sprinkle e're we part, VVhich would remove some Sorrow from my Heart: This said; He let him pass; and I with speed Loosing my self, next my Associates free'd; And to the Ship our fleecy Prey we drive, Our Friends rejoyc'd that we return'd alive, Yet wept for those were lost: then I bid staunch Their tears, and with our Prize to th' Ocean launch: All go aboard, and sitting on their Banks, Sweep up the briny waves in order'd Ranks. VVhen we were off so far as one might hear, A loud Voyce call, thus I begin to jeer; Cyclops, not well thou did'st a Stranger treat, VVho kindly made address, his Friends to eat, Thou that devourd'st thy Guests, this falls on thee, On whom the Gods, and Jove, revenged be. Raging at this, He a torn Mountains top Threw at our Ship, and aim'd it at the Poope, The mighty Stone close by the Rudder fell, And VVaves percust in briny Billows swell, VVhich back to land our Vessel almost bore; VVith a long Pole I forc'd her off from Shore, Commanding them to Shove; no Toyl they spare, VVhen to the Offine we were twice as far, I would have spoke, but mee m'Associates did Perswade with winning Language, and forbid, Vex him no more; if the great Stone had hit, VVhich forc'd us on the Shore, we had been split: If thou should'st speak again we ruin'd are, Such is his Strength, and he can throw so far,
Yet all their Rhetorick could not me disswade, But to him raging, thus I boldly said; If how thou lost thy Eye th' art question'd, fay Ʋlysses did it, King of Ithaca. Then thus he braid;Telemus the son of Eurymus, according to Ovid, who mentions this Prophesie of our Poet. lib. 13. Meta∣morph. Telemus interea Siculum delatus in a∣quor, Telemus Eurymides, quem nulla fefel∣lerat ales Terribilem Polyphemon adit, lumen∣que qued unum Fronte geris media rapiet tibi, dixit, Ulysses. Telemus sailing the Sicilian Sea, Eurymus Son, well skill'd in Augury, Told Polyphemus, one Ʋlysses shoud Put out that eye which 'midst his fore∣head stood. The same Prophesie is mention'd too by Euripides, but he conceals the Au∣thor of it. Ah th' antient Prophesie, which said that you Coming from Troy should put my Eye out's true. Telemus me foretold, Who 'mongst the Cyclops prophesi'd of Old, By one Ʋlysses I should lose my Sight; Him some Gygantick Prince of matchless Might Then I suppos'd to be; but now I find, An Elf, a Coward, Dwarf, hath made me Blind. But land again Ʋlysses, that I may To thee an hospitable Gift repay; And I my Father Neptune will implore To send thee safe unto thy Native Shore, And heal my wounded Eye, which none else can Of Heavenly Extract, or the seed of Man. Then I reply'd; Would I Commission had To send thy Soul to the Infernal Shade: Then Neptune should not thy lost Eye restore. This said, His Father thus did he implore; Great Neptune hear thy Of-springs earnest Pray'r, Let not Ʋlysses ever Home repair: But if the Fates resolve his Country He, His Court, and Friends, shall view, Late let it be: Drownd his Companions first, then let him come In a strange Vessel, to more Mischief Home. Thus Cyclops pray'd, and Neptune heard his Pray'r: Then up he takes a Stone, greater by far Then first he threw, and whirling round, lets slip With mighty Force, and aim'd it at the Ship, Which like a Rock close by the Rudder fell, And Waves percust in briny Mountains swell, Which from those Confines Us to th' Ocean beat: But when we reach'd the Isle, where lay our Fleet,
Where sate our Friends expecting on the Strand, We run our Vessel in, and joyful Land, And Polyphemus Flock by Divident The people shar'd; the Ram they me present, Which I to Jove, who rules both Earth, and Skies, Offer'd, but he contemn'd our Sacrifice; Who then contriv'd how to destroy our Fleet, And all my Friends: There sat we till Sun-set Feasting, and drinking Wine; but when the Day Nights Curtains clos'd, down on the Shore we lay In sweet Repose: No sooner had the Dawn With rosie Fingers Lights Portcullice drawn, Then I commanded them without Delay, To go aboard, they went, and Anchors weigh: Then placd in order on their Bancks, they sweep The briny Surface of the foamy Deep, And with sad Hearts for our Companions lost We take the Offine, and forsake the Coast.
scene from book 10 Honoratissimo Domino Dno Gulielmo Cauendish Baroni Cauenérsh de Hardrwick Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO lib: jo: Fo: 13:
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE TENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. A Faction; They unrip Ulysses Sack; Imprison'd Winds burst forth, and drive them back. Laestrygon Gyants; The Circaean Shores Ulysses spies, th' Inchantress turns to Boars. He threats to kill her, Love the Quarrel ends, Twelve days She Feasts him, then t' Elizium sends. AND came to th'The Poet mentions one only of the Aeolian Isles, the Seat of Aeolus's Empire, which were seven; Strongyle, Euonumus, Didyme, Phoenicodes, Eri∣codes, Hiera, and Liparae, as they are enumerated by Diodorus Siculus in his fifth Book, and Pliny in his third; nei∣ther doth he deliver the proper name of it (for they are mistaken, which from this place call it Aeolia.) Strabo says it was Strongyle. , Strongyle is so called from the roundness of its figure. This, they say, was the Seat of Aeolus. Him Pliny follows, lib. 3. Tertia Strongyle á Lipara M. Pass. ad exortum Solis vergens, in qua regnavit Aeolus, Stron∣gyle lies a mile East of Lipara, where Aeolus reigned. It lies between Sily, and Italy, in the Italian Carts call corruptly Strombolo. Aeolian Isle, where Aeolus dwelt, A floating Isle guirt in a brazen Belt, With Walls inviron'd of Sea-po∣lish'd Stones: Twelve his fair Race;Diodorus Siculus mentions not any Daughters of Aeolus, but has re∣corded the names of his Sons, here o∣mitted, viz. Astyochus, Xuthus, An∣drocles, Pheraemen, Jocastes, and Aga∣thyrnus. six Daughters, and six Sons, He at his Court in Nuptial Rites conjoyn'd, Who with their royal Parents sup'd, and din'd, With various Dishes feasted to the height: Their perfum'd Roofs all Day resound, at Night
Sleeping on Tap'stry-Quilts, in Beds of Gold, Their Wives in sweet embraces they infold. We to the City, and the Court repaire, A Month with him we entertained were, Whil'st he inquires of Troy, and our Retreat, Our tedious Siege, and Voyage, Irelate: But when I beg'd his Licence to depart, He granting gave me, sow'd with wondrous Art, A stuff'd upIt was the saying of Eratesthe∣nes, that we should then know where Aeolus reign'd, when we found out the Coblers name that stitch'd up this Bot∣tle, in which the Winds were contain'd. It was his opinion, that the whole re∣lation concerning the Cyclops, Laestry∣gones, Phaeacians, &c. and this of Ae∣clus, was meerly a figment of the Po∣ets: but they that have examin'd it more accuratly, do find a real History, though obscurely, intimated in the Romance. Diodorus Siculus saies that Aeolus married Cyane the Daughter of Liparus, whom he succeeded in his Dominion; a Pions, Just, and Hospi∣table Prince; he by observing the dri∣ving of the Smoak which ascended out of the fiery Caverns, with which the Island Lipara abounds, could foretell the motion of the Winds, according to Strabo and Pliny; from whence he is feign'd by the Poet to have the domi∣nion of them. Him Virgil follows, Aeneid. I. —hic vesto Rex Aeolus antro Luctantes ventos, tempestatesque sonoras Imperio premit, & vinclis ac carcere fraenat. — here King Aeolus reigns, And the rebellious Winds in Prison chains. And Dionysius in his Periegess, Great was the Grant to Aeolus assign'd, To rule the gentle, and the boysterous Wind. Bag, a nine years Oxes Hide, In which were Storms, and strugling Tempests ty'd. Impowr'd by Jove, the Winds King Aeolus swaies, Provokes their Fury, or their Wrath allaies. This on our Deck he bound with silver Wire, So that no Breath could issue, nor respire; And sent fair Gales to give our Vessel speed, But by our Folly we our selves undid: Our Voyage lost, nine Days, and Nights, we steer'd, When on the Tenth, our Native Coasts appear'd; And we, drawn neer, beheld the smoke arise: There lulling sleep clos'd up my weary Eys, For still I steer'd, nor would the Helm forsake, That we the sooner might our Voyage make. When thus one murmuring spake; Silver, and Gold, This Bull-skin-Cloak-bag fardled up must hold: No meaner Present Aeolus ever made. 'Gainst me another frowning, then inveigh'd; Ah how our Cheife They prize; of what Renown VVhere e're he comes, in Country, Court, or Town; What Pillage fell at Ilium to his share, When we return as poor as e're we were? This Aeolus gave in Friendship to conjoyn: Come let us search this Gold and Silver Mine. Th' unhappy Counsel takes, and they accurst Unlose the Bag, and forth loud Tempests burst;
A cross-wind plows the Main, and with strange force Them weeping drove from their intended Course; When I awak'd, alaram'd from my Dream, Considering whether I in this extream Should drown my self, or silent yet survive, Till Waves had swallow'd me with them alive: But patient I endur'd, and cover'd lay, Till we were driven to th' Aeolian Bay. Whil'st their loud Sighs out-voyc'd the mouthing wind: There landing, we a Crystal Fountain find, And straight repast they for themselves prepare: When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, I with a Herald and one more addrest My self to Aeolus, sitting at a Feast, Then with his Sons, and Daughters, and fair Queen: All were amaz'd beholding us come in, And stopping at the Door admiring, spake; What evil Spirit drove Ʋlysses back? Whence com'st thou? We dismist thee with great Care, That thou might'st to thy dearest Home repaire. Then sadly I reply'd; Back through the Deep, Wrong'd by my Friends, and overpowr'd by Sleep, I am inforc'd once more to beg your Aid: I in such melting Language did perswade. All silent were, when th' angry King thus spake; Be gon thou worst of Men, this Isle forsake, I must not aid, nor harbour, one whom Fate, And all the Court of Just Celestials hate: In an ill Hour thou hither cam'st, Depart. Thus he Dismist me with a broken Heart; And we from thence in sad Condition sail, No hopes of our Return, our Spirits fail. Six Days, and Nights, through briny Waves we steer, The seventh, to us KingKing of Formiae, a City of Campania, from whom the Aelii, a Se∣natorian Family in Rome were descen∣ded, and received the Sur-name of La∣mia, as Horace testifies Carm. lib. 1. Od. 17. Aeli vetusto nbilis ab Lamo, Quando & priores hinc Lamias ferunt Denominatos, et nepotum Per memores genus ome fastos. Autore ab illo ducis originem Qui Formiarum moenia dicitur Princeps, et innantem Mariae Lttoribus tenuisse Lyrim; Laté tyrannus. Brave Elius from Lamus King a Stem Our Annals say, thy house descends from him, From him deriv'st thou thy Originals, Who first built Formiae, with such lofty Walls, And Lyris ruld, that wash'd Myrica Strands With Silver Waves; who there had large Commands. Lamus Walls appear,
And Laestrygonian Ports, where Shepherds keep Their Flocks by turns, and he that doth not sleep, Watching by Night, they double his reward; This looks to Sheep, Another feeds the Heard. The Port we enter, guarded on each side With jetting Rocks, within the Harbour wide Th' opposing Shores extend, the Passage streight, Winds ne'r rowl here, Waves to unruly height: There in close order the whole Navy lay, And fil'd the Bosom of the winding Bay; I only road without, where fast I made My Vessel to a Clift, then round survaid Upon a Summit, but no Works I could Of Men, nor Beasts, or Pasturage behold, But rising Smoke: straight I a Herald sent, And two with him, along the Path they went. Where from the Mountains they Materials drew: Antiphates Daughter at the spring they view, King of theThe Poet has omitted the names of the persons murther'd, but Ovid has preserv'd one of them, Achamentdes; for thus he makes him speak; Missus ad hune ego sum numero comi∣tante duorum, Vixque fugâ quasita salus comitique mihique: Tertius è bis Laestrygonis impia tinxit Ora cruore suo— I, and two more to him were sent, but two, I and my Maté, escap'd with much ado, The third, the Laestrygonins gullet dy'd With hs own gore. He was afterwards left on land in the Country of the Cyolops, and saved by Aentas who landed there, as Virgil writes at large in the third of his Ae∣neids. Laestrygonians; to this Stream, Artacia stil'd, the Town for Water came. They drawing nigh inquire, who rul'd that Land, What King, or Potentate, there bore Command, She with them to her Fathers Pallace hies; Where entring, they, of a prodigious size A Woman saw, Huge, like a Hill, they all Amazed stood, whil'st she forsakes the Hall To fetch the King her Husband, whom She brought, Descended from Lamus, and King at this time of the Laestrygones. Ovid Metamor. lib. 14. Inde Lami veterem Laestrygonis, inquit, in urbem Venimus: Antiphates terra regnabat in illa. From thence the antient City we at∣tain'd Of Lamus, where Antiphates then reign'd. Death threatning, and with dire Destruction fraught. Straight one he snatch'd, and for his Supper drest, Whil'st to the Fleet, affrighted, fly the rest: But He the Town alarms; the People heard, And Laestrygonians numberless appear'd: They, not resembling Men, but Gyants vast, Upon our Ships torn Rocks, and Mountains cast:
Straight a sad Noyse flys ore the Harbors Banks Of dying Men of shatter'd Decks, and Planks, Which they as Fishes slew to serve their board, Whil'st I, my Falchion drawing, cut the Cord: Their Oars I bid them ply their Lives to save, Death at their Heels: They brush the briny Wave, And soon our Ship the open Sea enjoy'd, But all the rest the Laestrygons destroy'd. Hence with sad Hearts we sail, so many lost, Till we at last reach'd theAn Island in the Hetrurian Sea, so called from Aea a Town by the Phasis, 15 miles from the Euxine Sea, from whence Circe fled thither. Apol∣lonius in his Argonauticks, Stoutly from thence through breaking Waves they bore, And passing view'd th' Ausonian Tus∣can Shore; Then came unto the famous Aeaean Bay, Where neer the Shore they Anchors cast; here they Found Circe washing in the sea her head. This Island was called from her Cir∣ceius. But Pliny observes, that that which in Homer's time was an Island far remote from Italy, and in Theophra∣stus age a mile distant, is now part of the Continent. Strabo says that in his time there remained the Temple of Circe, and a Goblet of Ʋlysses's, some dark remains of this relation. Aeaean Coast. There the bright Goddess dwelt, Circe the fair, Brother and SisterHesiod follows the genealogy of our Poet in his Theogonia, To the Sun Perse, th' Oceans Daughter bare Etes, and Circe with the golden hair. But Diodorus Siculus lib. 5. makes Circe the daughter of Aeetas. Aeetas and Circe were; Sprung from the Sun, Persa their Mother styl'd, Daughter t' Oceanus: some Stars more mild There put us in; there lay we to repose Two Days, and Nights, harras'd with Toyls, and Woes: But the third day, I with the breaking Dawn Took up my Spear, my good Sword guirded on; Then from a Summits top survaid each where, If Men had been, or if some now were there; Thus gaz'd I, and about me round did look, At last methought I saw a rising Smoak, Which was from Circe's Palace in a Wood. There long consulting with my self I stood, Considering what to do, what Course to take: My varying thoughts this Resolution make; My Ship first to revisit on the Shore, Refresh my Friends, then send some out t' explore; On my Design thus walking to the Road, Pitying our sad Condition, some kind God Put from the Grove a Stag, whom Phoebus Beams Inforc'd to water at refreshing Streams; At him, thus stalking on, my Spear I threw, Quite through his Chine the well aim'd Javelin flew:
The struck Deer falling, grovels on the Ground, Whil'st I my Lance draw from the deadly Wound; The Quarry left, I Branches pluck'd, and hard With winding stretch'd to a sufficient Cord, Which on my Neck ty'd by the Feet I bore, Leaning upon my Spear, down to the shore; Well on my shoulder him I could not get With th' other hand, the Monster was so great: Before the Ship my heavy load I laid, And my Associates comforting, thus said; To Pluto's Court, dear Friends, we shall not yet Be summon'd, nor to Nature pay our Debt, Let's now be merry, now lets eat, and drink, No more of Want, nor our Misfortune think: There needs small invitation to a Feast, They all appear, nor wanted I a Guest: Th' admire the Stag, so fat, and fair a prize. When they enough had banqueted their Eyes, They wash their Hands, and Dinner ready get, Then sat we feasting, till bright Phoebus set, With richest Wine, with well-fed Venson store; And growing dark, we quarter'd on the Shore. But when the rosie-finger'd Morn arose, I to my Friends refresh'd, did thus propose; My fellow-sufferers, you who undergo With me, and bravely too, Wo heap'd on Wo; Since we no certainThe vulgar interpretation of this place, amongst the antient Gram∣marians, supposed two parts of the hea∣vens only to be here signified, the East, and West; But Strabo has confus'd that opinion out of several places of our Po∣et, whom we have chose here to follow, Iliad 12.  or darkness is taken If they to th' Sun the right hand take their flight, Or to the left, the seat of lasting Night. North, nor South have found, Nor where th' inlightning Sun posts under Ground, Nor where his Rise; yet our own Interest Let us with Care pursue, and Cast the best. I saw, when I on yonder Prospect stood, A little Isle inviron'd with a Wood, And through a shady Grove, ascending Smoke. This said; they tremble with fresh Terrour struck,
And to their minds the Laestrygons recall, And Polyphemus that huge Cannibal, Whilst down their Cheeks tears in a Deluge glide: Yet I in two my Company divide; Eurylochus had half, the rest I take; And Lots we cast, the brazen Helmet shake: Eurylochus the Country must explore With Twenty two, they weeping leave the Shore, And Circe's Palace found, where Lyons storm'd, And Wolves about the gates, fromIn this story of Circe the Poet delivers the opinion of the antients con∣cerning Witches, and Inchantments, viz. that they had power to transform the bodies of men into other Animals. Herodotus writes thus of the Neuri, or Leiflanders, These may be supposed to be Wizards: for the Scythians, and those Greclans that live in Scythia, re∣port that once a year, for some few dayes, they are all transform'd into Wolves, and afterwards return to their own shape: They persuade not me to believe what they say; nevertheless they do both affirm it and swear to it. So Virgil in his Phar∣maceutria, Has herbas atque haec Ponte mihi lecta venena Ipse dedit Moeris: nascuntur psurima Ponto. His ego sape lupum fieri, & se condere sylvis Moerin— For me these Herbs in Potus Moeris chose, There every powerful Drug in plenty grows Transform'd t' a Wolf I often Moeris saw, Then into shady Woods himself with∣draw. Several modern examples of this na∣ture are to be found in Bodinus, Petrus Mamorius, and Henricus Coloniensis. But Pliny, not unjustly, imputes it to the credulity of the Greeks, amongst whom there could no Lie be so impudent as to want a Witness. Men transform'd: These Monsters set not on them though, but Tame, Wagging their Tails, on fauning gently came: Like vanting Hounds, who leap about their King, Who from a Feast doth them sweet Morsels bring: About them so huge Wolves, and Lyons leap'd: They frighted at the horrid Monsters, step'd Into the beauteous Goddess Portal, where, Her at her Web they sweetlysinging hear Notes so delicious, to a Thred so fine, That we may call both Song, and Web, divine. PolytesHemer mentions but one of them who were transform'd, Polytes, but Ovid has preserv'd the names of two more, in whose Metamorphosis Achaemenides thus speaks; Sorte sumsis lecti; fors me fidumque olyten Eurylochumque simul, nimiique Elpe∣nora vini. Bisque nevem socios Circaea ad moenia misit. To me Polytes and Eurylochus joyn, By Lot chose, and Elpenor giv'n to Wine, With eighteen more to Circe's Palace sent. then, one whom I deerly lov'd, And most esteem'd, thus his Associates mov'd; Some Goddess, Sirs, within, or Woman sings, Plying her Loom, how the arch'd Pavement rings! Let's make Address: this said, aloud they call, The Gates she opening, leads into the Hall; They rashly following, on th' Inchantress wait, Eurylochus staid, expecting some Deceit, Whil'st she the Strangers sets in stately Chairs, And Cheese, Flowre, Hony mix'd with Wine prepares: Before them Bread steep'd with dire Drugs she set, That they their Native Country might forget: When well th' had fed, oft ebb'd the sparkling Cup, Whisking her Wand, in Stys she pens them up,
Transform'd to grunting Swine in brisly Hair, Their Minds the same, so lay they weeping there, Whil'st she brings Mast, and Acorns for their Food, Such as they feast on, groveling in the Mud. Eurylochus fled to the Ship to tell What woful Accident the rest befell, But could not speak one word, though fain he woud, Grief pierc'd his Heart, with Tears his Eys oreflow'd: With these sad Symptoms, ready to expire, We throng about him, and the Cause inquire. When this account he of his Fellows makes; We went, renown'd Ʋlysses, through the Brakes, As Thou commandedst us, untill we found A Court of polish'd marble Moted round, There plying of her Web, as we drew neer, A Goddess, or a Womans Voyce we hear, They call aloud, her self, the beauteous Queen Opens the Gates, and kind invites them in: They rashly entring, all upon her wait, Whil'st I stood still, suspecting some Deceit, But straight they vanish'd, and appear'd no more, Though long I stay'd expecting at the Door. This said; I guirt my Sword, and took my Bow, And straight commanded him the Way to show: But he holding my Knees strove to disswade, And much lamenting, to this purpose said; O take not me along, but leave me here, Your Curiosity will cost you dear; For I am sure, I n'er shall see again You, noble Sir, nor any of your Train: But let us lanch with speed, fly while we may, Whil'st we have power to scape the Evil Day. Thus he requested, when I thus reply'd; Stay then Eurylochus, and here abide,
Rest and refresh thyself; but I must go, Invincible necessity saies so. This said, I from my Vessel did descend, But as through sacred Vales my Course I bend Towards Circe's Court, when I was almost there, In's own shape Hermes did to me appear, A brisk young gallant with a golden Wand, And speaking, took me kindly by the Hand; Unhappy! is this place to Thee unknown, That thus Thou wandrest through these wildes alone? Thy Friends transform'd to Swine, here coup'd in Sties Lie under Circe's dire Arrest; advise First with Thy self, com'st thou their Bail to be? She'll stay thee sooner then thou set them free: But I will thee preserve, take Thou this Dose, And keeping safe, venture into her House: This all her preparations quite disarms. I'll tell thee where she puts her poys'ning Charms, She'll set before Thee Bread, and Wine, in which Dire Compositions are that straight bewitch: But this will stop the working, straight it shall Kill the strong mixture: Come, I'll tell Thee all; When with her wand she offers Thee to strike, Thy Falchion draw, and do to her the like, Threatning to kill; Then daunted she'll invite Thee to Love sports, and pleasures of the Night: The Goddess not refuse, that so thou may'st By her gain'd Favour get thy Friends releast: Then make her swear she by no other Charm, Shall of thy strength, and courage thee disarm. This said, an Herb pluck'd from the tender mold He gave me, and its Vertues did unfold: Sable the Root, bloom'd with a silver Flow'r, Which Gods callThere were several antidotes to Enchantments known to the Antients. Tzetzes, , Moly, Lawrel, and the sea-star, have an anti∣pathy to all manner of Magick. Diony∣sius reckons the Jasper amongst them, in his Periegesis, It brings forth Crystal, and the Jasper bright, Which Ghosts, and Spectrums, puts to flight. Pliny saies that no Enchantments can hurt that house to whose Posts, or Nails is affixed Stella marina dip'd in the blood of a Fox. Amatus Lusitanus af∣firmes that the herb Moly grows in the fields of Naples. Melchior Guillandi∣nus kept one of them among the rest of his Rarities, which was brought out of Egypt, who saies, that it is drawn out of the Earth by a Dog, tied to it for that purpose, who is immediately suf∣focated; which comes something near to what our Poet writes here. Apion the Grammarian declared publiquely, that by the virtue of the herb Cynoce∣phalia, by the Egyptians call'd Osyrites, he had charm'd up the Ghost of Homer, to inquire of him who were his Pa∣rents, and what his Country, but that he durst not declare his answer. Pliny Nat. Hist. lib. 30. Moly, scarce by Mortal power
To be pluck'd up, but Gods can all things do: Thence to Olympick Turrets Hermes flew, I through the Grove to Circe's Pallace went, Much troubled, doubtful what might be th' Event. Drawn neer the House I call, the ready Queen Opens the Gates, and kind invites me in, I sadly follow, where a Chair she plac'd, And Footstool for me curiously enchac'd: A golden Goblet then with dire intent, Full of bewitching liquor did present: I ebb'd the Bowl, but no effect it had, When with her Wand she striking me thus said; Go 'mongst thy Mates, and fill you nasty Sty; At this I draw my Sword, and at her fly, As her I would have slain, a loud she skreeks, And running in, tears trickling down her Cheeks, My Knees imbracing thus a Supplyant spoke; Who art, whence com'st thou, of what wondrous Stock? I am amaz'd thou art not yet transform'd, Who e're tastes this is to some purpose charm'd: Thou art the first escap'd that e're did sip, Or let one dram oth' Bottle pass his Lip: What wondrous Antidote thus steel'd thy Heart? Sure thou'rt Ʋlysses that so subtil art, Whom Hermes oft told me I should enjoy Returning from the Sack of wealthy Troy: Put up that Weapon, must we have a bout? In Bed, with other Arms, let's fight it out; There charge me home, I dare your worst of spight, All Duels their Love seconds, and Delight. To her inticing, I this answer give; How thy alluring words may I believe, And Thee imbracing my Revenge decline, Who keep'st my friends coup'd up, transform'd to swine?
Thou hast some farther reach with powerful Charms To conquer mee left naked in thy Arms: To venture to thy Bed I shall be loath, Unless thou please to take the Stygian Oath, That thou hast no Design on any Score To injure me. This said, the Goddess swore; Bound with her Vow we enter the Alcove, There conquering Fears, and JealousiesHesiod in his Genealogy of the Gods names two sons which Ciree bare to Ʋlysses, though our Poet mentions but one years stay with her, Circe the Suns race to Ulysses bore Agrius, and Latinus. Hyginus in his Fables calls them Nau∣sithous, and Telegonus. with Love. Mean while four Maids, whose office was to keep The Pallace clean, the Rooms to dress and sweep, Fall to their work, Nymphs all, who haunt the Woods, Fountains, and Rivers posting to the Floods. This ore the Benches royal Tap'stry cast, And bordering under with fine linnen grac'd; That neer the Seates covers a Silver board, Then lades with golden Dishes, whil'st the Third Mix'd in a guilded Vessel purest Wine, And makes with golden Bowls the Cupboard shine. The Fourth brings water, on, a Trevet sets, Kindling a lusty fire, the Liquor heats. Then neer the steaming Caldron me she plac'd, And on my Head and Shoulders water cast, My Body bath'd, refresh'd thus after Toyl, She supples ore with odoriferous Oyl; Then on she puts my Coat, and Vestments, neat, Sets me a Foot-stool, and a silver Seat, Bids me fall too; but I distrust the Cates, Fearing they were not Food, but rather Baits. When Circe saw me thus demurely sit, Nor would of various Plenty touch one bit; Ʋlysses, said she, Why sit'st thou so mute, Like one Forlorn, nor wilt thy Spirits recruit With wholsom Wine, and this our Fare though plain Suspect'st thou still? Thou Jealous art in Vain,
Thou know'st that I have sworn the mighty Oath. Then I reply'd; What Man would not be loath, Madam, that Common sense hath, or a Soul, To touch these Meats, or lift that golden Bowl, Before he see his dear Relations freed, Set them at Liberty, then bid me feed: When They appear on then I'll boldly fall. This said, She takes her Wand, and leaves the Hall, Opens their Styes, where straight we might behold Huge Boars, who seem'd at least full nine years old, With counter Charms th' Inchantress 'noints them all; Straight their rough Hair, and horrid Brissles fall, And they their Shapes resume, more young, and fair, Plumper their Cheeks, their Limbs more Brauny were; They knowing mee, by each hand grasping clung, Whil'st with loud Joy the arched Ceilings rung. Then mov'd b'indulging pity Circe spake; Now of thy Ship some care Ʋlysses take, First, draw her up, and freed from boyst'rous Storms, In neighbouring Caves thy Tackle stow, and Arms, Then straight return, and bring those left behind: All doubts, and fears, thus banish'd from my mind, Straight went I to my Vessel, where I found My woful Friends in Tears and Sorrow drown'd; As well-fed Heifers play at Prison-Base, About their Mothers coming home from Grass, Lowing they frisk, their Stals the Wantons shun; Weeping with Joy, so they about me run; As glad as if their Voyage they had made, And landed were at Home, when thus they said; So much we joy to see Thee now return, As if arriv'd we were, where we were born; But where, and how our dear Associates dy'd, Ah tell us, Sir: I cheerfully reply'd;
First draw our Vessel up from Winds and Waves, Our Arms and Tackle stow, in neighb'ring Caves, Then follow me where you in Circe's Court, Shall to your Friends, and plenteous Boards resort. Straight all prepare, Eurylochus dismaid, Refus'd to go, and thus to stop them said; Ah hapless Friends have you not Woes enough, But you'll adventure under Circe's Roof! She will transform you all to salvage Boars, Fierce Wolves, or Lyons, so to guard her Doors: As Cyclops when Ʋlysses in a Brave With Twelve of us adventur'd in his Cave, Half perish'd there by his wild Plot forsooth. My Reason then almost orepowr'd my Wrath: Though my dearAccording to Eustathius he had married Ctimene the Sister of Ʋlysses. Kinsman, I without remorse Had left him there adecollated Coarse: But they with mild perswasions press'd me hard To leave him there, let him the Vessel guard, And lead us on to sacred Circe's Court. This said, we leave the Vessel, and the Port, Neither Eurylochus behind us staid, But fearing my Displeasure, he obey'd. Those whom I left in Circe's Court, mean while She bath'd and 'noynted with delicious Oyl, Cloathing in comely Habits, whom we found Set at a Feast; the arched Roofs resound. With joyful Tears, when they their Friends survaid In such a Posture, Thus then Circe said, No more Renown'd Ʋlysses now complain, I know your sufferings on the boyst'rous Main, And what by Men more rough, you felt a-Shore: Now eat, and drink, and wasted Spirits restore; Be as you were, when first your native Soyl, Rough Ithaca, you left; nor your Exile
To memory more, nor tedious Travels call, What e're, be merry, and forget them all. Encourag'd thus the Goddess I obey'd, And a whole year there banqueting we staid, At various Dishes, and delicious Wines; But when the Sun had posted through twelve Signs, His annual Progress through the Zodiack, Thus then my Friends, their minds imparting, spake; Your Country, Sir, 'tis now ah more then time To call to mind, if e're your native Clime And lofty Palace you to see intend: This said, I to the Motion condescend. Then all the Day we Feasted; but when Night With dusky Troops had put days beams to flight, They to their Chambers went, and I repair To Circe's Lodgings: Her then finding there, I kneeling as an humble Supplyant, said; Goddess, make good the Promise thou hast made, Me to dismiss when willing to depart; And now my Friends, when e're thou absent art, Importune me with Tears thy Court to leave. She kindly to my Sute this Answer gave; Renown'd Ʋlysses, dear as if my Spouse, Thou shalt no longer tarry in my House Then thy own pleasure thee inclines, but know, That first thou must another Voyage go, Where Proserpine, and Pluto, keep their Court, And there to blind Tiresias Ghost resort: Hell's Empress gave his Shade aThe Fable of Tiresias is diversly reported by the Grecians. Callimachus sayes, that as he was hunting on the Mountain Helicon, he unfortunately saw Minerva the Virgin Goddess, wa∣shing her self in the Fountain Hippo∣crene, for which he was struck blind; But to whom she gave the gift of Pro∣phesie while he liv'd, and obtain'd the same for him Proserpina after his death. Tiresias, then a Youth, came with his Hounds Ʋp steep Parnassus Heliconian grounds, Who thirsty went to drink, unhappy he Saw there, what was not fit for him to see When Pallas vex'd, Who sent thee hither, said, And straight eternal night his Eyes did shade, Yet Thee I'll make a Prophet, far beyond Any before, when on the Stygian Strand Alone thou shall have prudence, thy pale Ghost Shall also honour'd be of Pluto most. The relation is different in Ovid, Hy∣ginn, and Didymus. solid Mind, Whil'st others fleet like Waves, or empty Wind. I felt my Heart-strings crack at what she said, Up sat I weeping, and so much dismaid, That I no longer wish'd to live, nor see Days cheering Beams, no Comfort now to me.
But when a briny Deluge I had shed, And wearied groveling postures on her Bed, I faintly thus; But who shall shew the Way? Does any to the Devil go by Sea? Then she reply'd; Dear be n't so much agast, Take thou no Care, only erect thy Mast, Unfurle thy Sails, and Boreas shall transport Thee, with fair Winds, to the Infernal Port. But when some time th' hast plow'd the foamy Brine, And seest a Grove sacred to Proserpine, Of Poplars, and of Sallowes, there abide, And on that Gulphy Oceans Bosom ride, And walk thy self to Pluto's dismal Court, Where Acheron and Phlegeton consort, Where black Cocytus and the Stygian Wave, Beating the Rocks, with mingled Billows rave: Here when thou com'staPliny takes notice, that there is not the least footstep of Magick in the whole Iliads of Homer, but that his Odysses consists almost of nothing else. He seems to have learnt it in Egypt; for there it had its origination, from thence carried into Chadaea, and after∣wards into Persia: where it flourish'd, 6000 years before the Death of Plato, according to Eudoxus, and Aristotle, no credulous Authors; before the Trojan War, 5000 according to Her∣mippus. Ostanes the Magician, accom∣panying Xerxes in his Expedition a∣gainst Greece, sow'd the seeds of this portentous art; And it is certain. saith Pliny, that e not only kindled a desire of this Art in the Grecians, but made them mad after it. Aeschylus, who liv'd at that time, raises the Ghost of Darius in his Tragedy call'd, The Per∣sians: there he delivers the preceding Sacrifice very agreeable to this of our Poet's, I suppose taken from thence, thus, Milk of a Virgin Heifer bring with thee, And Hony cleer dropt from the Bee, A maiden Fountains Crystal tears, and next With drink of an old Vine unmixt, And of the golden Olive-tree the fruit, Whose branches still with Summer suite, And folded Flowers, the beaxteous birth Of the all-producing Earth. There follows also the Hymn with which the Ghost is evocated, but too large to be here transcribed. Hole dig deep and wide, Then a Libation, for the Dead provide, With Hony, and Wine, cast water in, and mix Pure flour, imploring wafted Souls ore Styx: But when thou shalt to Ithaca return, With richer Presents, a Chast Heifer burn; Yet with a Ram Tiresias Ghost invoke, A black Ram, King, and Father of the Flock: But after thou hast pray'd to the Renown'd Nations of Pale Shades wandring under Ground, A Ram, and black Ewe, sacrifice to them, And backwards go to the Infernal Stream; There wander many Souls of those are dead: Then call on those attend thee, and with speed Command them flea those slaughter'd Sheep lie there, And their Skins burning make a zealous pray'r To Pluto, and fair Proserpine: but sit Thou with thy Falchion drawn there, not permit
The pressing shadows of pale Ghosts draw neer To tast sweet blood e're thou Tiresia hear, Who straight appearing then will thee instruct, How Home thy Ship in safety to conduct. Now rose Aurora in her golden Throne, When Circe put my Vest, and Habit, on; She a White Gown guirds round her slender Wast With a bright Zone, her Brows a Fillet grac'd. Then went I forth, thus calling One by One; No more now sleep indulge, Let us be gon, Circe consents. All muster in a Thought, And them I off in Health, and Safety brought, Except Elpenor, who the youngest there Had little Courage, and as little Care; Who lying by himself, after a Cup, In sweet Repose, suddainly starting Up, Hearing the Noyse of those who ready were, Hardly awake drop'd backwards ore the Stair, And broke his Neck: when to the rest I spake; We must dear Friends another Voyage make E're we unto our Native Country sail; Circe commands me, and I must not fail: To Pluto, and dire Proserpine, we must, There to consult Theban Tiresias Dust. This broke their Hearts hearing me thus declare, And weeping down they sate, and tore their Hair. But Grief n'er Voyage help'd, no time let slip, Down we lamenting go unto our Ship. Mean while fair Circe to our Vessel came, Leaving a Black-Ewe bound up with a Ram, Unseen of any: What Celestial would, That their Addresses Mortals should behold?
scene from book 11 Honoratisimce Dominoe Doe Marice Gandish Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib jj Fo j55
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE ELEVENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Ulysses sails to the Infernal Coast. A Stygian Sacrifice, Tiresias Ghost First warm blood drinks, and thence directs him Home. Male, Female shades about him thronging come, Their Stories tell; Souls tortur'd; Gorgon's Head Fearing to see, he hasts to Sea, and fled. SOON as we reach'd the strand, we lanch our Ship, Erect our Mast, and hoyse our Sails a-trip, Aboard the Cattel putting, we deplore Our sad Misfortune, and forsake the Shore: When Circe sent us straight our promis'd Gale, A Constant Friend impregnating the Sail. Whil'st we our stations keep, and banks design'd, Trusting the Steers-man, and so fair a Wind,
All Day we went till Night her Flag unfurl'd Spreading her sable Ensign ore the World, And Waves, we to the Oceans Confines plow'd. The Cimmerians were a miser∣able people, inhabiting the Schythian Bosporus, living incav'd in the rocks, the air ever dull and obscure by reason of the distant Sun, and high hanging Mountains, whence sprung the Pro∣verb of Cimmerian darkness. These our Poet has transported into the fur∣thermost Northern parts bordering on the Ocean, and fitly out of relation to their obscure mansions made them the inhabitants of those parts where the descent is into the dark regions of Hell: perhaps out of a Poetical re∣venge; for Strabo observes that those Barbarians had made an inrode into Aeolit, and Ionia, the Country of Ho∣mer, about that time. From hence O∣vid feigns the Mansion of Sleep among the Cimmerians; Est prope Cimmerios longo spelunca re∣cessu Mons cavus, ignavi domus & penetra∣lia Somni, Quo nunquam radiis oriens, mediusve, cadenve Phoebus adire potest; nebula caligine mixtae Exhalantur humo dubiae crepuscula lucis Neer the Cimmerians lurks a Cave, in steep And hollow Hills, the Mansion of dull Sleep: Nor seen by Phoebus when he mounts the Skies, At height, nor stooping; gloomy mists arise From humid earth, which still a twi∣light make. Cimmerians here, absconded with a Cloud, And gloomy Mists reside, which not the Sun With piercing Rays could dissipate at Noon; Nor rising, nor when He arch'd Heaven forsakes, But still hung round, in everlasting Blacks. Arriving here, our Vessel we put in, Our Cattel eas'd, then lanch'd to Sea agin, And to that Coast Circe directed bore; Eurylochus there, and Perimed, a shore The Offrings brought, I drawing from my side My Falchion, dig'd a Pit four Cubits wide: Then round about I empti'd brimming Bowls, Libations to all departed Souls. First Wine, and Hony, next pure Wine I poure, And Water after, mix'd with finest Flour; Then all the Nations haunt the Stygian shore, With franck-Libations humbly I implore, Assuring Them, at my returning Home, A Virgin Heifer, and a Hecatombe. But with a Ram Tiresias I invoke, A Black one, King, and Father of the Flock. Then ore the Pit the Sacrifice I slew; WarmThat this Magical art of evoca∣ting the infernal Ghosts, was in use an∣tiently among the Grecians, and in re∣pute, we have already shown: we shall onely now take notice of the means they used to raise them: among which, there was constantly effusion of blood. Ovid. in his Metamorphosis, l. 7. Haud procul egestâ scrobibus tellure du∣abus Sacra facit, cultroque in vellera guttu∣ris atri Conjicit, & patulas perfundit sanguine fossas, &c. Out of the Earth Aeetia two Pits Then forthwith digs; and sacrificing slits The throats of Black-fleec'd Rams: with reeking Blood The Ditches fil'd, and poures thereon a Flood Of Honey and new Milk, from turn'd∣up Bowls. Papinius Statius in the fourth Book of his Thebais, Principio largos novies tellure cavata Inclinat Bacchi latices, et munera verni Lactic, et Actos imbres, suadumque cruorem; Manibus aggeritur quantum ca∣pit arida tellus, First in the Trench she pours in Wine, and next With flowing Bowls, Milk, blood, and Hony mixt. So much she pours into the dig'd-up holes, As they contain'd, an Offering to all-Souls. But what Credit the more judicious gave to this Black-art, may be seen in these words of Pli in his Natural History Aidst these manifold vices whereunto the Emperour Nero had betaken, and sold himself, a principal desire he had to have the Gods (forsooth) and familiar Spirits at his Command: thinking that if he could once have obtained to that, he had then climbed up to the highest point of Magnanimity. Never was there man that studied harder, and followed any art more earnestly, then he did Magick. Riches he had enough under his hands, and power he wanted not to execute what he would; yet he gave it over in the end without effect: an undoubted, and perem∣ptory Argument to cenvince the vanity of this Art, when such an one as Nero forsook it. blood gush'd forth, and round pale shadows drew: There Boys, and Girls, and Old Folks I discern'd, And Infants still with Trifling Griefs concern'd; And Valiant Heroes, slain in Battel, view'd, Their Arms Transpiec'd, with recent Blood imbrew'd.
About the Pit They throng, when doleful Cries Else-where I heard, pale Fear did me surprize. Then Those attended on me straight I bad To flea the Cattel which They slaughter'd had, And throw in flames, to prosper my Design, Imploring Pluto, and fair Proserpine: But I with drawn Sword sat, nor would permit Shades for Blood thirsting, once to touch the Pit, Until Tiresias I consulted had: When first drew neer Elpenor's woful shade, Whom uninterr'd we left in Circe's Court, His Rites neglecting, hastning to the Port. I weeping, thus to poor Elpenor said; Cam'st thou a Foot unto this dismal shade Sooner then I could here at Anchor ride? To me his state deploring, he reply'd; Renown'd Ʋlysses, this unhappy Soul, My sad Fate hither sent, and th' other Bowl In Circe's Court; I starting from my Bed, Going down the Ladder with a giddy Head Drop'd backward ore, my Neck broke as I fell, There lay my Corps, my shadow flew to Hell. By those far distant are I Thee require, By thy dear Wife, thy Son, and aged Sire, Since well I know Thou with a leading Gale Must back to the Aeaean Confines sail, There I conjure Thee me to mind recal, Nor leave me there without aFor it was the opinion of the Grecians that the Soul was not receiv'd into the place of its repose, before the body obtain'd its funeral Solemnities, as hath been already observ'd. Funeral, Lest Thou incense some of the pow'rs Divine: With me my arms burn, and what e're was mine, My Tomb upon the Oceans margents rear, That after-times of my sad Fate may hear; And fix upon it myIt was an antient Custom to leave some memory of the life of the deceased upon the Tomb: Archi∣medes, an eminent Mathematician, had a Sphere and Cylinder inscrib'd upon his Sepulchral Stone, of which he had written such excellent Speculations in his life time. Virgil, of Misenus. At prius Aeneas ingenti mole sepulchrum Imponit, suaque arma viro, remumque tubamque, Monte sub acrio, qui nunc Misenus ab illo. But Prince Aeneas a huge Tomb did raise On which his Arms, his Oar, and Trumpet laies Under a mighty Hill, which now they call From him Misenus, and for ever shall. Sepulcharal Oar, With which so oft I tug'd from Shore to Shore:
These his Requests I answer'd thus; Thy Will, Ah hapless Wretch! I'll punctually fulfil: Thus sitting we each others Fate deplor'd, Whil'st ore the Blood I flourished my Sword. On th' other side Elpenor muttering staid; When straight appear'd my Mothers woful shade, Autolychus Daughter, Autoclea, whom I left alive, sailing for Ilium. Her I beholding wept, and pitied much, But would not suffer sacred Blood to touch Before Tiresias came, whose honour'd Shade, Appearing with a golden Scepter, said; Why com'st thou hither, and forsak'st the Day, Pale Ghosts, and dismal Regions, to survay? Lay by thy Weapon, and the Pit forsake, That I warm Blood may drink, then Truth I'll speak. I sheath'd my Sword, and drawing off, obey'd; Who when warm Draughts his Thirst had quenched said; How to sail home in safety thoud'st inquire, Which Jove may easie make, but Neptune's Ire, HisPolypheme, whose Eye Ʋlysses struck out with a Fire-brand. Son by thee struck blind, may much obstruct; Patience thy Ship, and Men, shall home conduct: You and your Friends must your desires contain, Soon as you land, (and leave the gloomy Main) On theSicily, so call'd from its tri∣gonal figure, whose Ensign in the an∣tient Coyns was three Legs triangle ways, as may be seen in Goltrius's Medagles of Sicily. Trinacrian Isle, you'll see there run HerdsOf which he speaks more at large in the following Book. consecrated to th' all-seeing Sun: If them you spare, and thy Return regard, Safe shall your Voyage be, though long, and hard: Which if you kill, you all shall be destroy'd, But if thou Death by Miracle dost avoyd, In a strange Ship, all lost, Thou late may'st come, Where greater Mis'ries thee attend at Home: There proud Corrivals revelling in thy House, Wasting thy Wealth, to marry with thy Spouse,
Presenting gifts, Her courting Day, and Night, But thou shalt be revenged to the height; And after that, by subtilty or steel, Th' hast made the Sutors thy just Vengeance feel, Then thou must sail where thou a Nation shalt Find, who not knows the use of seasoning Salt, NorTiresia very obscurely describes the Country whither Ʋlysses was to traveil after his return: but I find that the antients generally interpreted it of Epirus, not far distant from Ithaca. Pausanias in his description of Attica, : &c. Pyrrhus being highly con∣ceited of his strength, encountred the Carthaginians (the most experienc'd of all the Barbarians in the Sea, being descended from the Phoenicians) in a Na∣val fight, his Armada consisting only of Epirots, who, when Troy was taken, knew not the Sea, nor use of Salt, as Homer testifies. These that knew not the Sea, were ignorant of the use of Salt, according to our Poet; whence it may be conjectured that Homer knew of no other Salt, but what was made out of Sea water. The other to∣ken of their ignorance of the Sea was, that they should not know an Oar, but call it by the name of an instru∣ment with which they winnowed Corn. Seas e're saw, nor Ships with painted Prores, Nor sails expanded, nor well polish'd Oars: And this will be the sign; when on the Way Thou one Incount'erst travelling that shall say, A Winnower he upon his shoulder hath, There fix thy broken Oar, and Neptune's wrath With a fat Ram appease, a Bull, and Boar, Then home returning all the Gods implore. Then fear not, till from SeaAccording to this Prophesie is the story of Ʋlysses's death related by Didymus, Telegonus, the Son of Ʋlysses by Circe, had a Spear made by Vulcan, which was the bone of a Sea-fish call'd in Latin Pastinaca Ma∣rina, with which he slew his Father unknown to him. Not unlike was the Prophecy concerning the Emperour Titus; that his Death should come from the Sea, who was poyson'd by a Sea Hare. Death thee arrest, When thou grown old hast made thy people blest: These Fortunes Thee will certainly betide. Thus said Tiresias; and I thus reply'd; These, Heaven decrees, and ever fixed Fate, But say blest Prophet, and the Truth relate; I see my Mothers Shade, who not her Son Will speak to, nor so much as look upon: Silent she sits by sacred Blood; ah, how May she poor shadow her dear Of-spring know! Then He reply'd; take this from me, who e're Of Shades thou sufferst to the Blood draw neer, They will to what so e're thou asks, reply, Or far from thee, if thou withstand'st them, fly. This said, Tiresia vanish'd from my Sight To Pluto's Court, and Seats of lasting Night: But I that Posture kept in which I stood, Until my Mother tasted sacred Blood; Who straight her Of-spring knew, and weeping, said; How alive cam'st Thou to this dismal Shade?
To see Dark Kingdoms is for mortals hard, With mighty Rivers, and the Ocean barr'd; Which none on Foot will suffer; sure Thou hast Hither by Sea, through raging Billows, past. Wandring from Troy, why didst thou hither come, So much time spent, and hast not been at Home, Nor seen thy Wife, who lives as if Divorc'd. Invincible Necessity inforc'd Me, dearest Mother, to these parts, I said; And to consult Theban Tiresias shade. I ne'r reach'd Greece, nor touch'd my native Coast, But always wandred with Afflictions crost, Since I to Troy with Agamemnon went, And there our time in restlest Leagure spent: But dearest Mother say, and truth relate, How cam'st thou hither? by what cruel Fate? By sickness, or the Quiver bearing Maid Sent with her Shafts Thee to this Dismal shade? Next tll me of my Son, and Father's Fate: Keep they in their Possession my Estate, Or swallow'd up by some incroaching Lord, Who think, I'm drown'd, or perish'd by the Sword? How stands th' Affection of my dearest Spouse? Remains she with my Boy, and keeps my House, Or else become some other Prince's Bride? I strictly thus inquiring, she reply'd; Thy Wife keeps home, afflicting still her mind, And hath perpetual Grief her self design'd, Consuming Night and Day in Tears for thee: Thy Goods, and House as yet in safety be: Telemachus in quiet governs all, And oft makes Princely treatments in thy Hall: Thy Father in the Country still remains, And Royal Weeds, and Furniture disdains;
In sordid Rags when Winter chills the Skies, He on the Hearth, as Slaves, 'mongst ashes lies: But when grown warm, he in his Vineyard strows Leaves for his Couch, there taking sad Repose, Mourning thy Fate till aged grown: but I By neither of these Casualties did dy: Skilful Diana with her gentle Dart, Not, in her Progress, struck me to the Heart; Nor Sickness brought me to that low Estate, My Soul, and Body thus to separate; But the great Care, and Love of thee, and thine, Cost me my life, for I away didThe later Poets say, that out of excessive grief she strangled her self, when she heard that Ʋlysses was destroy'd by Nauplius. Eustath. pine. Stirr'd by Affection when she thus had said, I step'd in to imbrace my Mother's shade: Thrice I attempted, and as often fail, She fled me like a Dream, or nimble Gale. Orepowr'd with Grief whil'st thus I strove, in vain, Of her Unkindness thus did I complain; Why meet'st thou not, dear Mother, my imbrace, That here we may in this most dismal place A Comfort find, and in the mid'st of Grief Conjoyning hands, though small, get some Relief? This all the Favour Proserpine bestows, To shew thee only to augment my Woes? Then thus to give me ease, she seem'd to strive; Oh thou th' unhappiest of all men alive! Hell's Queen not Thee deludes, but 'tis the sad Condition of all Mortals, once being dead, Bodies no more t' assume, when on the Pyre Their Corps are Ashes turn'd in funeral Fire; When breath no more refrigerates our Hearts, Like a swift Dream our fleeting Soul departs: But haste thou to the Living, and the Light, And these bold stories to thy Wife recite.
Thus we discours'd whil'st Heroins drew neer, That Wives, and Daughters of great Princes were, About the blood they gather, driven on By Proserpine, whom I then one by one Resolv'd to question, then before the Pit With my drawn sword, them singly I admit; Who after they had drank, it was their task, To tell me what so e're I pleas'd to ask. First I to Tyro spake, who answer'd, thus; I'th eldest Daughter ofA River in the Morca descen∣dng from a ountain call'd Salmon, which seems to have borrow'd its name from Salmoneus King of that place. Salmonius, Cretheus Spouse; once withThis is he who was thunder∣struck by Jupiter according to Virgil in the sixth of his Aentids; because out of a desire to assume to himself di∣vine honour, he had with Machines, and ire-works endeavour'd to imi∣tate I hunder and Lightning. I saw Salmoneus as he tortur'd sat, Who Lightning could, and Thunder imitate, Bandishing flames he in a Chariot rode, Through Greece in triumph honour'd like a God, And did immitable Fire and Rain With Brass, and speed of horn'd-hooft Horses feign; But through the Clouds at him great Jove did aim A hunder-bolt poynted with piercing flame, Not with slight Squibs or Crackers on him fell, But with a Whil wind tumbled him to Hell. Enipeus took, To whom all Rivers seem a shallow Brook: Sporting on margents of his pleasant Stream. Neptune his shape assuming, turn'd to him, Comprest her midst the Edies of the Sound, Like a Hill, curtain'd with a Billow round, Who there conceal'd lay, by a God imbrac'd, Whose Virgin Zone dissolv'd in sleep he cast, When he well-pleased had all his Love-tricks play'd, He by the Hand her taking, kindly said; Rejoyce in my Affection, e're a year Fills up his Periods, Thou two Sons shalt bear; These breed up well, and now go Home, my Name To none disclose, Know thou I Neptune am. This said, He dives, and breaking Billows rore; To whom she Pelias, and Neleus bore, Joves Champions both, Pelias himself did style A City in Thessay. Iolcus Prince, the other govern'dBeing driven by his Brother from Jolcus; he planted a Colony here. Pyle. But she to Cretheus other Children bare, Aeson, and Pheres, Amathon the fair. Next her I saw Antiopa, Asops Race, Jove himself prided in her sweet imbrace. He Zethus, andThey first liv'd in'a small Town ald Eutrens, afterwards remov'd to Thbs, which they were forc'd to bul∣wak ound for fear of the Phlegya potent enemies nee: hand. The Po∣ets generally say that Amphion plaid so sweely on his Harp, that the very Stones and Trees spontaneously fol∣lowed it to the building of the Walls of Thebes. Horace in his Art of Poetry. Dictus & Amphion Thebanae conditor Ʋrbis Saxa movere sons testudinis, & prece blanda Ducere quo vllet— Amphion, who built Thebes made stones advance, As they report, and to his Musick dance And lead them where he pleas'd with moving Strains. By which they fignified that he by the sweetness of his discourse, and carriage had molified the more fierce and bar∣barous people, and perswaded them to a Politick Society. Amphion had by Her, Who with seven Gates the Walls of Thebes did rear,
And fortifi'd with Bul-warks round about, Although the people were both strong, and stout. I saw Amphitryo's Spouse, Alcmena, there, Whom Jove impregnating, Alcides bare; And Creon's daughter, I Megara spy'd, Who had been stout Amphitryo's Of-spring's Bride. I Oedipus Mother Epicasta saw, She spous'd her Son, 'gainst Nature, and all Law: He kills hisLaius, being inform'd by the Oracle of Apollo that he should be slain by his own Son, caus'd Oedipus, as soon as he was born, to be exposed to be destroyed, either by wild Beasts, or Fa∣mine: but the Shepherds taking pity on him, caused him to be educated: who being arriv'd to maturity of age went to Thebes to inquire after his Father, whom he met by the way; and in a quarrel, being ignorant who it was, slew him: and afterwards marri∣ed his Mother Epicasta (so call'd by Homer, by the later Poets Jocasta.) This story was the subject of two Tra∣gedies of Sophocles. Father, and his Mother Weds, Fame of th' incestuous Marriage each where spreads: He in sad Posture ore the Thebans reign'd, His Conscience touch'd, his Reputation stain'd: She with a Cord, and lofty Beam, her Fates And Grief concluding, enter'd Pluto's Gates: But Him she left 'midst sorrows uncontrol'd, And all the Woes a Mother's Furies could. Next, I fair Chloris saw, whom Neleus Wed, Paying dearly for th' injoyments of her Bed, Amphion's daughter, who Orchomen sway'd, Whom Minyos, and sandy Pile obey'd, To him she Nestor, Chromius, Pericles bare, And beauteous Pero, one so wondrous fair: Whom all the neighbouring Princes came to Woo; But He not her on any would bestow, Could not to himThis story of Neleus, and Pero, is very obscurely deliver'd by our Po∣et, which was this: Iphiclus had seiz'd upon the goods of Tyro, the Mother of Neleus, among which were many beautiful Oxen, which Neleus after∣wards demanded of him, but could not obtain them. His daughter Pero, being a Lady of great beauty, was courted by all the neighbouring Prin∣ces, but he refused to espouse her to any one, unless he could recover those Oxen detained by Iphiclus. Bias per∣swades his brother Melampus, a Pro∣phet, to undertake the business for him, who in the enterprize was taken; and imprison'd; but after some du∣rance there, having discover'd to Iphi∣clus how he might have children by his Wife, who had till then been bar∣ren, receiv'd the Oxen for his reward. Iphiclus Cattel drive; Which once a Prophet promis'd to contrive; But him a woful Fate, a cruel Chain, And Rusticks more unmerciful detain: But when the ever circumvolving Sphere, Months, Days, and Hours had wound up in one Year, Then Iphiclus freed him (Jove would have it so) After he did, what he desired, know. Next, saw I Leda, Tyndarus Spouse, she bare Castor, and Pollux, who such Champions were:
These by Jove's willWhen Castor was slain by Lyn∣cens, his brother Pollux petition'd Ju∣piter to grant him immortality: which when he could not obtain, he imparted to him an equal share of his own. Vir∣gil Aeneid. l. 6. Si fratrem Pollux alterna morte red∣mit, Itque reditque viam toties— If Pollux could by an alternate death His Brother ease, and tread so oft one path. alternate live, and dy, This lies inhum'd, whil'st that ascends the Sky, At once they rise and set, this under groud Whil'st that in heaven remains, with glory crown'd. Next saw I Iphimedia, who confest, Though Aloes Wife, that Neptune her comprest: Two Sons she bore him; Otus, and the fair Ephialtes, with whom none could compare Except Orion; both were Gyants vast, In nine years grown, nine Cubits in the Wast, And nine Ells tall, these fell with Heaven at Ods, And a Rebellion rais'd against the Gods: Ossa they on Olympus strove to lay, Pelion onThe attempt the rebellious Gy∣ants made upon Heaven, has been the subject of whole Poems: but these are distinct from them, as appears by Virgil in the 6 of his Aeneids, though some late writers do confound them. Hic genus antiquum Terrae, Titania pubes. Fulmine dejecti fundo volvuntur in imo. Hic & Aloidas geminos, imneaenia vidi Corpora qui manibus maguum rescinde∣re coelum Aggressi, superisque Jovem detruders regnis. Here Young Titanians be, Earths an∣tient race, With thunder struck down to the low∣est place: Here I the two Aloides beheld, Whose mighty size all Fictions far ex∣celi'd; These, though but Mortals, storm'd high Heaven, and strove To drive from his Celestial Kingdoms Jove. Ossa, so to make their Way, Which had they been of age, and fuller growth, Heaven they had took, but Phebus slew them both, Before the callow Down upon their Chin, Or marks of Manhood on their Cheeks were seen. Phedra, and Procris; Ariadne there, I Minos Daughter spy'd, whom Theseus bare From her own Crete towards Athens fertile Soyl, But could not her obtain inAn Island neer unto Crete: but the Expositors generally take it to be the Isle Naxus, antiently call'd Dia, as Pliny testifies. Here Phadra died sud∣dainly (for that the Poet means by her being slain by Diana) in her passage to Athens. Dia's Isle: Diana her with Virgin Darts did kill, Since Bacchus charg'd her with th' attainting Bill. I Mera, Clymen saw, Eriphyla, Who her dear Husband did for gold betray. Their names, nor Character I can't recite Of all those Ladies in a Winters Night. But since for my Return you take such Care, Grown late let me down to your Ship repair. This said, all silent sate, extreamly took With this Discourse, when thus Arete spoke; His Person and his Mind you may compare, And though our Guest, yet you the Honour share
In his Acquaintance; therefore if you please, Send him not home with trifles, such as these, Dispatch'd in hast, since you in your Aboads Have riches store by favour of the Gods. This said, the eldest of the Princes there, Echenius, his Judgment did declare; Not fondly, nor with Fancy indigest, The Prudent Queen hath now her self exprest; Follow her Counsel, and the King obey, Do as he doth, and say as he shall say. Then thus Alcinous answer'd; Let it be, And what you have propounded I'll Decree. If I'm your King, and you my People sway, Our Guest with us shall till to morrow stay, Though he'd be gon, till we a Present make, Fit for Us to bestow, and Him to take. Then Home dispatch him with all special Care, Of which, your King the greatest part shall share. When thus Ʋlysses did his Mind impart; Thou who the glory of thy People art, Should'st thou command me here a Year remain, Rich gifts receiving, sure I'll not complain; I rather would, and better much for me, With Coffers full my Native Country see, Then they would all me love, and honour more, Subjects contemn their Princes when grown Poor. When thus renown'd Alcinous replies; We not on Thee, as one that carries Lies, Ʋlysses, look, though there be many such, Who wandring tell what scarce indures the Touch, And are beleiv'd, but you your Story cloath In Language that speaks Truth, and Musick both; For with that Emphasis Thou dost relate The Grecians Fortune, and Thy own sad Fate.
But pray go on, saw you not any there, Who in the Trojan Leagure slaughter'd were: 'Tis early yet, and tedious is the Night, More of the wondrous Passages recite; I could with Patience hear Thee till the Dawn, Then with Thy own sad story pray go on. Ʋlysses then reply'd; Thou, who as far Out-shines thy People, as the Sun a Star, Times for Discourses are, time to forbear; But if that you desire the rest to hear, I should be much unwilling to deny; Therefore our miserable Misfortunes I Shall reckon up, and who escap'd the Main, And Trojan Wars, were by th'Clytemnestra, the Wife of A∣gamemnon; but others understand it either of Helena, or Cassandra. Adultress slain. Soon as the Female shades dispersed were, The Ghost of Agamemnon did appear, And others throng'd about me of his Train, That by Aegisthus in his Court were slain: Soon as He blood had tasted, me he knows, When from his Eys a briny River flows, And forth he kindly stretch'd to me his Hands, Which Nervless fail'd, nor answer'd such commands; I, as I saw him, wept, and much dismaid, Pitying our Valiant General, thus said; Renowned Agamemnon, ah! what Fate Brought thee to this Condition, this sad State? Was it by Neptune, He who curbs the Main, And checks like gentle Gales a Heurican? Or by Prophane at th' Altars lost your Lives? Or fighting for your Country, and your Wives? Thus question'd I, and thus the shade replyes; Renown'd Ʋlysses, Laertiades, Neptune not me subdu'd, who curbs the Main, And checks at pleasure a fierce Heurican,
Nor fighting for my Country lost my Life, But sly Aegysthus, and my cruel Wife, Inviting to a Banquet, on they fall, And slew me like a Bullock at the Stall. And my Attendants, full of Cates, and Wine, Together slaughter'd, fell like fatted Swine, For some great Person that keeps solemn Feasts, Or else at Nuptials highly treats his Guests. Thou often hasts great Execution seen, In many Fights and bloody Battels been; This had'st thou seen thou would'st have fetch'd a gron; Cups, Goblets lay, and Tables overthrown, The marble Pavement all with gore besmear'd; I Priamus Daughter, poor Cassandra heard, Whom neer me cruel Clytemnestra slew, Dying my hands upon my Sword I threw, Whil'st my stern Wife from me, disdaining flys, Nor would in Deaths Convulsions close my Eys. What can more odious be, what more abhorr'd, Then she that plots the Murther of her Lord? I thought glad well-come to have found at Home, T' have seen my Children, Friends, and Servants, come Thronging about me, but this Crime will blast, And an Aspersion on all Women cast. To Atreus Of-spring, I replying, said; Great Mischiefs Jove by treacherous Wives has laid: Many for Helen were in Battel slain, But thou by Clytemnestra's subtil Train. This said, He gave me this short Reparty; Ah, never, never too Uxorious be, Nor to thy Wife thy Secrets e're reveal, Feed her with Tales, but thy Concern conceal: But yet Thy Spouse, Ʋlysses, I except, She hath a Breast, where Counsels may be kept.
We left her newly married, going to War, She her dear Of-spring at her Bosom bare; Who now grown Man, 'mongst Princes takes his place, Whom Thou shalt see, and be in thy imbrace: But my fine Wife, my Son not let me see, E're she presented my own Tragedy. Yet one thing I'll advise thee, which thou must Lock in thy Bosom up; No Woman trust: Surprize her Unexpected, that you may E're look'd for land in your own Ithaca. But now be pleas'd, me some Account to give; Hear'st Thou if still my dear Orestes live With Menelaus in the Spartan Soyl? Or else atA City in Boeotia, which accor∣ding to Eustathius was an Asylum, and therefore a proper place of refuge for Orestes. It was also a place of great strength, where the neighbouring Ci∣ties deposited their Treasures for se∣curity. Strabo. Orchomen, or sandyThe seat of Nestor  the great lover of Agamemnon, who he thought might entertain his Son in his Exile. Pyle? For yet he musters not among the Dead. Thus He inquir'd, and I, replying, said; Why ask'st thou me, I no account can make, What happen'd him, nor will on hear-say speake. Thus in sad Language, sadly we discours'd, And mutual Sorrows,Though it might not unjustly be suppos'd that there is nothing fur∣ther meant here then the reasonable suspicion of Achilles, yet it appears that the true story of Pelens is here deliver∣ed: for he was deposed from his Crown by Acastus, but afterwards re∣stored to it again by his Grand-child Neoptolemus, (or Pyrrhus) according to Dctys Cretensis lib. 6. Tears on Tears inforc'd, When up to me Achilles shadow drew, Antylochus, and pale Patroclus too, And Ajax, who in person all excell'd, Unless Pelides, the unparallel'd; Who knew me straight, and thus lamenting, said; Why comes Ʋlysses to th' infernal shade? Ah, what misfortune brought thee to these Coasts, 'Mongst fleeting shades, and miserable Ghosts? Then I reply'd; Oh thou, greatest in Fame Of all the Greeks, I to Tirefia came Consulting him to know, how best I may, A Passage gain to my own Ithaca: I ne're found Greece, nor reach'd my Native Soyl, But always wandring through a World of Toyl;
But no Age did or shall produce one more Happy then you, whom we did all adore, Like the Gods living; nor need'st thou complain, Who after Death in dismal shades dost reign. When thus the Prince me interrupting, spake; Thou of the Dead a weak Discourse dost make; I rather would a Rustick be, and serve A Swain for Hire, ready almost to sterve, And living, be 'mongst all misfortunes hurl'd, Then Dead, an Emperour in this shady World. But of my Son I fain would something know, Came he to th' Ilian Liegure? yea, or no. Of my dear Father's Fortunes something say, If yet the Myrmidons his power obey, Or have they shook his Scepter off, and hold Unfit to govern, now grown Weak and Old. I am not now as when I fought at Troy, And Regiments could in my Rage destroy. Ah! would I were at Home a while, his Crown I should restore, and beat proud Rebels down. Then what I knew, I thus to him declar'd; I of thy Father Peleus have not heard, But I of Pyrrhus shall such truths recount, That Miracles, and Fiction far surmount. Him I attended from theAn Island not far distant from the Coasts of Thessaly, where Pyrrhus was born, and educated with Lycome∣des, a Kinsman of Achilles's. So Sopho∣cles and Strabo. They err who take Scyros for an in-land Town of the Do∣lopes in Thessaly. Scyrian Coast, In a stout Vessel to the Grecian Host, And him unto our Counsel did admit, Where well he spake, and shew'd his forward Wit. Nestor and I could seldom Him confute: And when drawn forth, we were in hot Dispute, He lagg'd not 'midst the Ranks, but forth alone Still charg'd the Trojans, giving place to none. He many Heroes slew in bloody Fight; I cannot them, nor all their Names recite,
Which did his Sword with reeking blood imbrew: But first renown'd Eurypylus he slew, Round whom fell manyStrabo saies, that in these Verses the poet has left a Riddle behind him, not a History: for I find no mention of any people call'd Cetians, or any account of the . Indeed this place has been Crux Grammaticorum. We shall only say thus much of it; that though the name of the people were lost, yet there remain'd some footsteps of it in those parts from whence Eury∣pylus came, the brook Cetium, which pobably took its name from them. As for the , Dictys Creensis sies that Priam had promis'd Eury∣pylus, as a reward of his assistance, his Daughter Cassandra in marriage, with the golden Vine Jupiter had preent∣ed to the Kings of Troy when he took away the beautiful Ganymed. Cetians in that Strife, And all forsooth, about a promis'd Wife. Memnon in shape did only him exceed; But when we entred that stupendious Steed Epeus built, where I Commission had To govern in that dismal Ambuscade, There our Greek Princes wept, and trembling sat; But Pyrrhus ne'r grew pale, nor mov'd one jot, Nor dropt one Tear, but much he me implor'd To let him forth, still brandishing his Sword, He with his Spear alone would Troy attaque. But when we Priams wealthy Town did sack, He went to Sea, and did great Booty share, Safe, without harm, as happens oft in War, Although ingag'd amidst their stoutest Foes. Achilles Ghost, this said, thence marching goes Proudly with joy through flow'ry Medows, on, Inform'd by me he had so brave a Son. Then other shades drew neer me, and relate Their various stories, and unhappy Fate. But Ajax woful Ghost far off, alone Still raging stood, vext I had him orethrown, When for Achilles Arms we pleaded so, Which were judg'd mine byWhen all the funeral Solemni∣ties were over, Thetis offers the arms of Achilles to be dispos'd of to him that best merited them. So Quintus Smyrnaus, following the steps of our Poet, , 'A , &c. In her Skie-colour'd 'Veil then Thetis speaks, I amenting for Achilles to the Greeks; Nw since the gifts are thus disposed all, Oder'd by me for my Sons Funeral. Let him appear brought off the Corps, and he, As valiantest, shall take these Arms from me. Pallas and theBut according to Ovid this con∣troversie was decided by the Com∣manders of the Crecian Army. A se Tantalides onus invidiamque re∣movit. Argolicae que duces mediis consistere ca∣si vis Jussit, & arbitrium litis trajecit in mnes. Atrides, to avoid the hate of these, The Princes bids to sit before his Tent, And puts the strife on their Arbitre∣ment. Fo. Ah! would I had been conquer'd in that Strife, Rather then such a Heroe lose his Life, Who next to great Achilles wert the Flower Of all the Greeks, their Champion, and their Tower. To whom I mildly said; Ajax, 'tis fit That after Death old Quarrels we forget, Arms so destructive, forg'd by angry Fate, To ruine Thee, and raise such dire Debate.
For thee the Camp did put on Mourning all, And wept, as at Achilles Funeral. The blame must lie on Jove, who us did hate, And so impos'd on Thee this heavy Fate. Draw neer great Prince, and swelling wrath allay, And hear what I in my Defence can say. He not reply'd, but mix'd 'mongst other Souls, Seeming to blow up yet revenging Coals▪ But I more earnest grew, inquisitive, With others to discourse were not alive. When I saw Minos, Joves illustrious Son, With golden Scepter, sitting on a Throne Where he heard Causes, and pale Spirits plead Their Privilege, and Customs of the Dead: And next Orion hunting ore the Plain, Beasts which in desert Mountains he had slain, Arm'd with a Club massy with steel, and strong. Pausanias, in his travails through Phocis, saies that at Panopeus a Cty of that Country, he saw the Sepulchre of Tityus, which contain'd two fur∣longs of ground, and something more, which was, as he conjectures, the ori∣gination of this Fable. Tityus I saw lie there nine ackers long: Stern Vultures on his mangled Bosom pearch, And tir'd on's Liver his torn Bowels search; Nor could he drive the Torturors from their Prey, Because Jove's Wife Latona on her way To'Tis to be observ'd from hence, that Latona was President of the Ora∣cle at Pytho, (or Delphos) as well as her Son Phoebus, fom whom he seems to have receiv'd it: although Aes∣chylus saies that the Mother o Latona, Phoebe, deliver'd it him, . The third there Phoebe sat, brought forth To Titan by the eming Earth, Who gave to Phoebus, at they fame, At birth a present, and her Name. For otherwise I understand not her journey thither. She seems to have come from Delos into Boeotia; (for so is Phoebus journey thither describd) from whence in the way to Phocis lay the City Panopeus, in a Streight men∣tioned here by Homer, whom the King of the place, Tityus, attempted to ra∣vish in her Passage. Pytho, neer sweet Panopeas side He would have forc'd. Next Tantalus I spy'd Suffering a horrid torment, standing in A pleasant River close up to his Chin, Who thirsty, oft as he desired to drink, Dry Sands appear, and swelling Billows shrink Beneath his Feet, forc'd by some angry God, About his Head, Trees which rich fruit did load, Pears, Aples, Figs, and Olives, in a throng, Their various kinds in dangling clusters hung. Oft as th' Old Man strove, one of them to catch, A Wind conceal'd, or blew out of his reach.
There Sisyphus I cast my Eye upon, In cruel torture lugging a huge Stone, Struggling with all his strength, his Hands, and Feet, Up a steep Hill indeavouring to get; But soon as he attains the Mountains Crown, It, with a Vengeance hurri'd, tumbles down: Then from the Plain his task he doth repeat, Smoke hides his Head, all over in a Sweat. Next him I saw the great Herculean Shade, But he himself in Heaven Jove's Daughter had, Bright Hebe, and now feasts' mongst Deities: About him Ghosts now clamour'd, like the Cries Of frighted Fowl; He like the Night march'd on, His Bow bent, to the Head his Arrow drawn, Frowning, as if his Shafts he would have delt, Athwart his Shoulders hung his golden Belt; Which Lyons, Bears, Battels, and slaughter fill, The like was never wrought, nor ever will. He knew me straight, and having well survaid The gentle shadow, pitying me, thus said; Poor Prince Ʋlysses, Thou like me wert born The mocking stock of Fate, and Fortune's scorn. I, though Jove's Son, much Misery indur'd, By one much meaner then my self procur'd: 'Mongst many toyls which my strong Nervs did stretch He sent me hither, Cerberus to fetch: This was the greatest task he put me too, Yet from th' infernal Gates the Dog I drew, By Hermes, and the bright Minerva's Aid: Thus saying, he retired to the Shade. I firmly kept my Station to behold, Some antient Heroes who had dy'd of Old, Theseus, Pirithous, Sons of Gods I saw, Who neer with Concourse, and huge Clamor draw:
I sat surprised then with trembling fear, Suspecting that theAt whose sight the Spectators were struck dead. Aeschylus. . Neer these three winged Sisters sate, Whose snaky tresses Mortals hate▪ Which who ere sees concludes their Fat. Gorgons Head was there, Thence straight my Friends I call'd, our selves bestirr'd, We loose our Cables, and straight got aboard: Plac'd on our Banks, we down the River glide, Fair Winds attending, and a nimble Tyde.
scene from book 12 Honorat Dom: Do Rogoro Barony de Broghist Tabulam hanc Comiti de Orrory Regi a Sacris Consilys LMDDDIO Lib: 12
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE TWELFTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Sirens: Ulysses stops his Peoples Ears; Ty'd to the Mast their charming Song he hears. Escap'd Charybdis, He on Scylla fell, Who sweeps ore six. The Sun's fat Beeves they kill, Then put to Sea: a Storm his Men all drownd; Astride his Keel Calypso's Isle he found. SOON as our Vessel the Lands end had cleer'd, For Circe's Isle, we to the Offine steer'd, And plowing Waves through the broad Ocean run To Mansions of the Day and rising Sun: Our Voyage finish'd, straight on softer Sand We bed our Ship, and nimbly leap to Land; Where on the plushy Margents we repose. Soon as the rosie-finger'd Morn arose,
A Party I to Circe's Palace send, That down might poor Elpenor's Corps attend: Wood straight being cut, his Funeral Pyle we rear, At the sad Office shedding many a Tear: Soon as his Corps and Arms consumed were, On a rais'd Hillock we a Column rear, And over that fix'd his Sepulchral Oar, Finish'd his Rites. But Circe knew before We had our Voyage made, down in a thought She, with her Virgin Train attended, brought Store of fresh Viands, Wine, and purest Bread, And cheerfully amidst them standing, said; You living entred the dark Court of Dis, All else but once, you Dead will enter twice; Now eat and drink rich Wine, feast this whole Day, And with the early Dawn you shall away, And I will so direct you, so instruct, That shall through Sea and Land you safe conduct, Unless your evil Counsels you disswade: We take the gentle Offer that she made, And there sate feasting, and carousing Wine. But when the Sun did towards the West decline, They on the Decks, grown sleepy, took Repose, She leading me by th' hand, in private goes; Of all my Observations then inquires; I satisfaction gave to Her Desires. Then she reply'd; You have perform'd your Part, But what thou now hear'st, Cabin in thy Heart. First thou the Sirens shalt discover, which All Comers with inticing Notes bewitch: Who their sweet Voyces hear, remind no more Their Wives, their Children, nor their Native Shore: In Meadows chanting, they 'mongst dead Mens Bones Crown rotten Skins, and heap up Skeletons.
But when thou sailest by them, look that There Thy Followers Ears Thou stop, that none may hear, With yielding Wax: but if Thou hast a mind To hear inchanting Ditties, let them bind Thee Hand and Foot, and with strong Cordage fast About Thy middle tie unto the Mast: So thou mayst hear theThe Sirens were Queens of those Islands, which be in the bay of Pestano, not far distant from Capreae, who held many places on the neighbouring Con∣tinent, especially the Promontory of Minerva; so call'd, because during their Reign an Academy was there e∣rected for the propagation of Learn∣ing, which became so famous for Elo∣quence and all liberal Sciences, that it gave an invention to this Fable of the sweetness of Voice, and attracting Songs of the Sirens. But Archippus tells of a certain Bay contracted within winding Streights, and broken Cliffs, which by the snging of the Winds, and beating of the Billows, report a de∣lightful harmony, alluring those who sail by to approach, when forthwith, thrown against the Rocks by the Waves, they are swallowed in the vio∣lent Eddies. Sirens melting strains: But if Thou should'st command them lose Thy Chains, And set Thee free, then bid them harder tie. But when these dire Inchanters are sail'd by, Then thee I shall not punctually instruct In th' other Course Thou may'st thy Self conduct, By little Hints, how Thou may'st find the way. Two lofty Rocks stand jetting to the Sea, Beaten with Billows groning in their fall, Which Rovers the immortal Deities call; Ore which no Birde're flew, nor swiftest Dove That bearsThere was a long controversie a∣mong the antients about the sence of this place, till they agreed in the Expo∣sition of Moero of Byzantium; who by the word  will not have Pige∣ons here signified, but the Pleiades. And that the Pleiades were so call'd by the antientest of the Grek Poets, appears out of some Fragments preserv'd by Atheneus: Simonides. , . And Aeschylus the Tragedian, . Which because by their rising and set∣ting they foretold to men their Har∣vest and Seed-time, they were feign'd by the Poet to carry Provision also to the Gods. Ambrosia to immortal Jove. But when a Pigeon falls upon that Rock, He sends another to supply the Flock. None ever scap'd this place; who e're drew neer, Both Ship and Men by storms strest swallow'd were. Only the Argo which to Aeta sail'd, 'Gainst mouthing Winds, and roaring waves, prevail'd, And she had prov'd to those dire Rocks a Scoff, But Juno kind to Jason brought Her off. Here two steep Cliffs; one scales the Skie, and shrouds His spiry Forehead in a Shash of Clouds; Where, nor in Spring, nor Autumn, e're is seen A gentle Season, nor the lest Serene. This place no Mortal e're ascended yet, Nor shall, though they had twenty Hands and Feet. This Rock more smooth then Touch, or pollish'd Stone, Hath a deep Cave that views the setting Sun,
To which no neerer sail then one may shoot At Random height, and reach her Sea-wash'd Foot. Here Scylla lurks, and direly yauning yelps, Like a whole Litter of stern Lyons Whelps. This horrid Monster (no inviting sight) Would Mortals, nay the Gods themselves, affright. She Twelve mishapen feet wide splaying spreads, Six Necks extending, arm'd with horrid Heads: Three set of grinding Teeth her gullets gard, On each of them sits purple Death prepar'd. She lying in her Cave prodigious Snouts Shoots forth, and round the Rock for Fishes scouts, Dolphins, and Dog-fish, she on any falls, And oft light Breakfasts makes on mighty Whales. None e're sail'd by her that so well could watch, But from the Stern she one at least would catch. Neer this a lower Rock Thou shalt behold, Which Fig-trees with their spreading Leaves infold. There dire Charybdis briny Billows sups, Thrice disembogues, as oft redrinks her Cups. Then come not neer, for in that long-breath'd Quaff, Neptune not with his Trident gets Thee off. But Thou more safety may'st neer Scylla find, Thy Bark with full Sails, and a Favouring Wind, With loss of six at most, gain Passage shall, But this sad Monster swallows ship and all. Thus she advising, gently I reply'd; Best Goddess tell me how may I avoid This dangerous Hagg, and be reveng'd, if she Should injure any that relates to me. Then she reply'd; Thou talk'st as if thou wert In Battels, or else storming of some Fort: None could revenge, e're of immortals brag, She Deathless is, an everliving Hag,
Invulnerable: you Fool your self to try Your strength 'gainst hers, 'tis the best course to fly. Her if you'll charge she'll muster all her Power, And Thee, and Thine in guzzling Throats devour. Sail thou from thence, and Crateis implore, Who that accursed Monster Scylla bore; And she will her in all her Fury stop. But when at Sicily you Anchors drop, The Sun's seven Flocks, seven Herds, a goodly breed, (Fifty in each thére in fresh Pastures feed) These never pregnant are, nor ever die. Two Nymphs Phaetusa, and bright Lampety, Whom to the Sun divine Neaera bare In Sicily, and educated there, And Shepherdesses, order'd them to keep Their Father's Herds, and silver-fleeced Sheep; If them you spare, and your return regard, Your Voyage shall be safe, though long and hard; But if thou any of these Cattel kill, Thy Ship, Thy Friends, Thy Ruin I foretel: And if thou scap'st thy Self, Thy Native Coast Late thou shalt reach, All thy Associates lost. Whil'st thus she said, Aurora made Approach, Eastern-Hills guilding with her golden Coach: Thence to her Pallace then the Goddess bends, I to my Ship; There I exhort my Friends To go Aboard, and Cables lose; They straight Entring, upon their Banks in order sate, Brushing the briny Spry, a prosperous Gale The Goddess sent, a Friend that did not fail, Whil'st we our Stations keep, and Banks design'd, Trusting the Helms-man, and so fair a Wind. When thus I told them with a heavy Heart; Sirs, not to one, or two, must I impart
But unto all, what Circe doth advise; Which if you follow, grown by knowledge Wise, We shall-escape, or else are all undone. First, you the Sirens flow'ry Meads must shun, She us commands; Next, You must shut your Ear, Lest their bewitching Voices you should hear: But me in Cordage you must fetter fast, And firmly fixing, bind unto the Mast, Then if I beg to lose me, harder bind: Thus I declar'd to them the Goddess Mind. Mean while, we to the Siren'sTwo small Isles between Italy and Sicily, from them call'd Sirenusae. Confines sail, Plowing up Billows with a handsome Gale, When a flat Calm smooth'd ore the glassy Deep, The Winds all hush'd, the Ocean fell a sleep: They rising furle their Sails, next them safe stow Betwixt dry Hatches, then sit down and row. A mighty Ball I cut of yielding Wax In Pellets, which I kneading found relax In my warm Hands, and ready now to run, Help'd with the radiance of the warmer Sun; With which their Ears I luted up; me fast They fetter'd up, and ty'd unto the Mast. Then row'd they on as far as you might hear One shout aloud, they hearing us, draw neer: Impulsive Oars beating the silent Main. Thus they inviting me, did entertain; Ʋlysses, glory of the Greeks, draw neer, Thy Vessel stay, and our sweet Voices hear; None ever past this way, and went from hence, E're they had feasted their Auricular Sense: Then they departed pleas'd, and wiser too, We know what Trojans suffer'd, and what you, Which Fate in ten years Siege on each side hurl'd, And all Transactions of the busie World.
This Song so much transported me, that I Commanded straight they should my Cords untie: Eurylochus and Perimedes rise, And bind me faster; on our Vessel flies Till their Notes losing, I my Senses found; Then they their ears unstop'd, and me unbound. This Isle thus left, I saw a hazy Smoke, And a swollen Sea, and heard rough Waves that broke: They frighted, leave their Oars, the Vessel stopt, Wanting th' impulse, as if w' had Anchor dropt: Then I bestirr'd my self, and did perswade, And kindly to encourage them thus said; Good skill in Danger, Friends, you well may own. This is not greater then when with a Stone Up Cyclops pen'd you in his dismal Cave: Take my Advice, this Danger too we'll wave, And make of it for after-times a Tale, Now mark my words; and all at once, not fail, Sit on your Banks with plyant Oars to sweep, As if one man, the surface of the Deep: Then if Jove please we soon shall safety find: But Helms-man, hoe! this charge bear in thy mind, Because thy care the Vessel must protect; Without yon Smoke, and Waves, thy course direct, Nor too neer to that Rock, lest there we hit, And on her skirts, hid under Water, split. Thus up I cheer'd them, and they straight obey'd, But I no mention of dire Scylla made, Lest by additional fears surprised, they Should slack their Oars, and hinder the ships way. Circes commands, I in this Puzzel had Forgotten too, who me to arme forbad: I guirt on steel, in each hand took a spear, And leap'd up to the Prow, supposing there
The Craggy Scylla to behold (which cost Me after dear, when my best Men I lost) But none I saw, though round my Eys I cast; So onwards to the narrow Straight we past. Scylla on this side briny Seas doth quaff, On that Charybdis drinks the Ocean off; Which when she Vomits up, she murmurs more Then Liquor, in a Chaldron boyling ore, Laving the lofty Rocks with frothy Suds: But when she guzzles up the swelling Floods, All shakes within, Rocks thunder, and drawn neer, The Earth beneath, and glittering Sands appear. This dreadful sight did much my Friends amate; For there they saw, expected there their Fate. Mean while dire Scylla six of them, unmatch'd For gallant Parts, quite ore the Hatches snatch'd. I from the Prow beheld them, where I stood, Turn'd to psie-turvy, tumbling in the Flood, With Feet above, now hands; They call'd to me, Which I ready to burst with Grief did see. As when a Fisher standing on a Rock, The scaly Fry takes with his baited Hook; In goes the Horn, up comes the struggling Fish, Which panting he casts by to be his Dish; So up she whips them whil'st they loud implore, With rear'd up Hands, and eats them at her Door. At Sea, and Land, 'mongst Woes unparallel'd, This was the saddest sight I e're beheld. From Scylla and Charybdis swift We fly, And straight unto that famous Isle drew nigh, Where Phoebus fleecy Sheep, and Cattel were, Whose Bleats and Bellowing out at Sea, we hear. Tiresia and Circe I remind, Who with so many Cautions me injoyn'd
To wave that Coast belonging to the Sun: Then with sad Heart, thus I to them begun; Now hear me, Sirs, You who have suffer'd much, On Phoebus Isle we must not dare to touch; Hence Us Tiresias bad, and Circe, fly; For here attends our greatest Misery, And utter Ruine; Steer from hence I said: They at these words extreamly seem'd dismaid, When roughly thus Eurylochus breaks out; Ʋlysses, You that are so strong, and stout, Who indefatigable wilt ne'r tyre, Thy Body Adamant, thy Sinews Wire, Yet suffer us, consum'd with Care, and Toyl, To sup, and sleep in this delightful Isle, And not all Night to lie at Sea, advise, When darkning Clouds, and bitter storms arise. What if the Winds conspire against us, must Thus we our selves t' unruly Elements trust? Lets here refresh, and Nights good Laws obey, And when the Dawn appears our Anchors weigh: His words Th' approve, and straight cry One and All; Then I perceiv'd some God contriv'd their Fall: And thus I to the Company begun; You may compelme, since I am but One, Therefore I'll swear you, sacred Vows should bind, If any of their Herds, or Flocks, you find, Not one to kill, but quietly that Meat, With which fair Circe-victual'd us, to eat. This said, as I commanded them, they swore, Then to the bottom of the Harbor bore, And neer a pleasant Fountain leap'd to Land, Their Supper straight preparing on the Strand. When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, They play'd a sad Game, vieing many a Tear
For their dear Friends alive snatch'd from their Ship By Scylla, till orepowr'd by conquering sleep. But when the third part of the Night was spent, The Stars descending, Jove a Tempest sent, Which Earth and Sea with muster'd Vapours shrouds, Hanging Heavens Arches round with sable Clouds. But when the rosie-finger'd Morning rose, Our ship drawn up, we in a Cave dispose, In which the Nymphs their fair Recesses had, When thus to my Associates I said; Our Ship dear Friends hath yet Provision store, Forbear these Beeves, lest we too great a Score Pay to exacting Gods, they'll cost us dear; They are the Suns, who all doth see and hear. Thus I advis'd them, and perswaded too, When a whole month South and South-East winds blew. So long as any Bread or Wine remain'd, So long from Sheep and Bullocks they abstain'd: And when they had all their Provision spent, They both a Hunting, and a Fishing, went, A Birding too; No means they did neglect: Dire Hunger much the Belly did afflict. Then I apart implor'd the Gods, that they Would Passage grant, nor more prolong our stay: Whil'st thus I pray'd, well sheltred from all Winds, Me gentle sleep in silken Fetters binds. Eurylochus, who still to Mischief led, Dear Fellow-sufferers, hear me, then said; All Deaths to Mortals bitter are, like Gall, But starving, that's the bitterest of all. The fattest of these Bullocks let us fell, And offer to the Gods in high Heaven dwell; And when our Native Country we obtain, Lets promise to the Sun a stately Fane,
And to adorn it richly be engag'd: But if he, for their slaughter much enrag'd, Will grant no pardon, but our Vessel bulge, Nor any other Gods will us indulge: How e're 'mongst Waves better at once be lost, Then longer languish on a desert Coast. The Counsel takes, They all applaud th' advice, The primest of the Cattel in a trice They fell upon, then grazing neer their Ship; They stand about, and sacrificing, strip Soft oaken leaves, for they no Barly had, Then kill, and flea; and after they had pray'd, They to the brawny Thighs lop'd off affix a double Cawl, and Lean with Fat commix; And Water, since they had no Wine, they threw On burning Altars, as Libations due. The Houghs consum'd, They th' inwards eat, then cut The rest in pieces, which on Spits they put. When Sleep to freedom did my Sense restore, I hasten'd to my Vessel neer the shore: But when that I drew neer, the Wind from thence A steam brought pleasant to th' famelick sence: Then to the Gods I thus complain'd; Oh! Jove, And all you happy Powers that dwell above, My People whil'st I slept have done a Deed, A Villany that doth all Crimes exceed. Lampete brought this Tidings to the S Ʋ N, And told him the strange mischief they had done: Who much incensed thus implor'd the Gods; Oh Jove, and all who dwell in blest Aboads, Revenge me on Ʋlysses cursed Train, Who impious, have my primest Cattel slain; Whose sight more pleas'd me in my Progress hurl'd, Then all the Pomp, and Glory of the World:
Right me with speed,We have already taken notice that Homer has industriously menti∣on'd all the more abstruse Arts, and Sciences which were believed in his time, as Necromancy, Witchery, Na∣tural Portents, and the like: so in this place he gives an instance of predictive Prodigies; in which the antients were superstitiously credulous. When Pyr∣rhus King of Macedonia waged Warr with the Romans, in the Beast which he sacrificed, the Heart, the principle of Life, was wanting; by which the Priest foretold the il success of that underta∣king, and Prrhus accordingly was expell'd out of Italy. With the like re∣lations the Greek and Roman History abound, collected together by Conr. I ysthnes in his Book of Prodigies: we shall only take notice of those which foretold the death of Csar, as recorded by Virgil, who enumerates two and twenty in the first of his Ge∣ogicks, —ille (Sol) etiam coecos instare tu∣multus Saepe mont, fraudemque & aperta tu∣msere bella. Ille etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam Cu caput bscura nitidum ferrugine texit, Implaque ternam timuerunt saecul noctem. Clandestine tumults he doth oft fore∣show, And open War from secret Plots to grow. He, pitying Rome and Caesars funeral, spread A mourning Veil ore his Illustrious Head, That th' impious age eternal darkness fear'd. At Sea and Land what wonders then appear'd? Both howling Dogs and fatal Fowl presag'd. How oft we smoking Aetna saw in∣rag'd, Who from dire breaches the Cyclopian grounds With Fire-bals, and a Pumice-Deluge, drowne Germany heard from Heaven a sound of Arms, And the Alps trembled at unus'd A∣larms. A mighty voice in silent Groves was heard, And gastly Spirits wondrous pale appear'd, Before dark night obscuring shades did make, And Oxen then (who will beleive it?) spake. Earth gap'd, swift Rivers stood, Brass Statues swet, And weeping Ivory made the Temples wet. Eridanus, the Monarch of the Floods, Tears down, and drowns in violent Edies, Woods. Then Beasts inspected entrails threats foreshow'd, And purple blood from Silver Fountains flow'd, And then the populous Cities did resound With howling Wolves which walk'd their nightly round. From serene Skes it never lightned more, Nor such dire Comets e're were seen before. Again, Philippi Roman Squadrons saw, With equal Arms, for dreadful Battel draw. The Prodigy which comes nearest to this of our Poet is that mention'd by Herodotus, the leaping and capering of dried Salt-fish, as if they had been Fish newly taken; by which they on the place did conjecture, that Proteslaus, though dead, should notwith∣standing revenge himself on those that murther'd him. or else these glorious Beams Shall gild Hell's Mansions and the Stygian Streams. Then Jove reply'd; Thou still must Mortals light, And still beat up all quarters of the Night: They shall with red-hot Thunder-bolts be slain, Their Ship I'll burn ith' middle of the Main. This bright Calypso did to me unfold, Which she assur'd me Hermes Her had told. When I drew neer, I blam'd them One by One, But found no Cure t' undo what hath been done. The Beasts were slaughter'd by their joynt-consent, When straight the Gods held forth a dire Ostent: Their Skins did (g) creep, their Flesh on Spits did low, And roasting, bellow'd like an Ox or Cow: Yet six whole days my Men there feasting sat, Those Cattel slaught'ring, tenderest were, and fat; But the sev'nth Morning, Jove the Wind asswag'd, Calming cross Tempests that so long had rag'd: When straight we went aboard, we launch our Ship, Erect our Masts, and hoise our Sail a-trip, Leaving that hapless Isle: No land now nigh, Nothing in Ken but the broad Sea, and Skie: With Tempest big, Jove musters sable Clouds, And with strange Darkness, Air, and Water, shrouds; Nor long the Clouds, imprison'd Winds contain, But straight breaks forth a dreadful Hurrican.
The Whirling-gust our shrouds and tackle rends, Sweeps down our arms, and oars, our Main-mast spends; Which on the Helms-man lighting, hit so full Him on the Head, it shatter'd all his Skull, Down from his Seat he like a Diver sunk, And his Soul flying, leaves a senseless Trunk. Then on our Ship Jove dreadful Lightning threw, Which twirl'd her round, and up our Hatches blew, All places fil'd with Sulphur, out they leap Swimming, transform'd to Mews about the Ship: A God stop'd their return, but I did sit, Until her Keel the dreadful Tempest split, And from the bottom tore the broken Mast, Which, belted with-a lusty Thong, hung fast, Which binding on the turn'd-up Keel, I rod, Born with rough Winds upon the boyst'rous Flood. When Western-Winds their Fury had asswag'd, Arose a Southern-Tempest, more enrag'd, Which back again me overpowr'd with Woes, On swelling Waves to dire Charybdis blows. All Night I floated, with the rising Sun I did to Scylla, and Charybdis run, Who briny Billows in Potations sup; But a tall Fig-tree reaching, I got up, And Bat-like clung by Branches which did bend, Nor could firm footing gain, nor yet ascend: The Roots were deep, and spreading Branches made A Curtain which did dire Charybdis shade: Here did I hang until my Keel, and Mast, She, to my wish, up disemboguing, cast. But when to Supper joyful home doth trudge, After long Causes heard, the weary Judge; Then gladly I, the Mast, and Keel, espy'd, And slipping down the middle, got astride;
Then row'd off with my hands, when Jove took care That I should scape, nor Scylla spie me there. Nine days I floated, on the Tenth at Night, On the Nymphs Isle, Ogygia I did light, Who kindly entertain'd me in her Cave, Of which last Night a large Account I gave; Which to your Queen, and You, would tedious be, Once more to hear, and small Content to me.
scene from book 13 Honoratissae: Dominae de Orrory Tabulam D Margaritae Comitissae han LMDDDIO Lib: 13.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE THIRTEENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Pheacians land Ulysses in his sleep With all his Gifts. Neptune transforms their Ship. He his own Home not knows. Pallas appears, And Him with Counsel, and kind Language cheers. Conceals his Wealth, and carrying on their Plot, Gives him a Hoary-Beard, and thred-bare Coat. THIS said, they silent on each other look, Extreamly with his wonderous Story took. Then spake the King; Ʋlysses, since the Fates Brought Thee a Stranger thus within our Gates, Through sad Adventures both by Sea, and Land, We'll not return thee like a Vagabond. You, who so er'e that's here, I All enjoyn, That feast with me, and drink delicious Wine,
And hear our Poet sing, what more y' intend This Stranger to present, in Coffers send. Refined Gold he hath, and presents store By us presented unto him before, Each in a Tripode, now and Charger lay; Which sess'd upon the People, let them Pay: Easie are Burthens when on many laid. All condescend to what Alcinous said, Then to their Houses went to their Repose. Soon as the rosie-finger'd Dawn arose, Loaden with treasure to the Ship they hast; Which straight Alcinous saw in order plac'd Beneath the Banks; with such Convenience stow'd, It could not hinder any whil'st they row'd. Thence to Alcinous Treatment all withdrew, Who to great Jove a well-fed Bullock slew; And highly feasted there both Old and Young, Whil'st their sweet Poet heavenly Raptures sung. But to Ʋlysses, earnest to be gon, The Sun seem'd tedious, and the Day too long. His Supper so expects the hungry Swain, Who Furroughs ploughs, to propagate sown Grain; And for the World's bright Torch descending waits, Then weary, gladly falls on coursest Cates: Ʋlysses so at the Sun-setting glad, Thus to the King, hem'd in with Princes, said; Thou, who the Glory of thy People art, Since 'tis your will such kindness to impart, Dismiss me with those Gifts you'r pleas'd bestow, Which to your Bounty, and the Gods, I owe, A fair return for, since you'll Me transport In safety to my Wife, and Native Port. Ah! may you here in Plenty spend your Lives, Your Sons, and Daughters, and your dearest Wives;
Whil'st Heaven on them all Virtues showres at Home, And no misfortune on the Publick come. This Speech th' approve, and straight an Order made Him to dismiss who could so well perswade. Then thus Alcinous to the Herald spake; Pontonous, a Goblet ready make, Fil'd with rich Wine, that we may Jove implore, Our Guest to Convoy to his Native shore. This said, full Bowls he dealt about the Hall, Who on the Gods, they thus libating, call. Then from his Seat Ʋlysses started up, Presents Arete with a flowing Cup; And complementing highly, thus begins; May'st thou bealwaies Happy, best of Queens, Till Age and Death comes, incident to all: But I returning, at your Foot-stool fall, Kissing your Hands; Oh, may you to your King, Children, and People, dayly Comfort bring. This said, Ʋlysses to the Vessel went, His Herald him t' attend, Alcinous sent, Arete Damsels; This a curious Vest, And Wastcoat carries, That a Carved Chest, The third brings Wine, and Manchet, to the Ship; The joyful Company no time let slip, But set the good Provision up, then spread Clean sheets and Blanckets ore a well-made Bed: No sooner entred but he takes Repose, They settle to their Banks, and Cables lose. But he, whil'st Oars the briny Billows swept, Like one in Death's eternalThe whole Allegory of this Poem of our Poet is this; Ʋlysses in quest of true felicity, the Ithaca and Penelope here signified, labours under many and grievous calamities. He has several Companions, who through Lust, Luxury, and other Vices, mis∣carry in the Enterprize; himself a∣lone escapes, and by the assistance of the Pheacians is transported by Sea in his sleep to his long'd-for Country. The Pheacians, which signifies black, a, are the Mourners which attend at his Funeral; the Ship his Grave, which is afterwards converted into a Rock, his Funeral Stone; his Sleep de∣cyphers Death, through which alone Man arrives at his eternal Repose. Slumber slept. Not swifter Charioteers their Chariots work, Lashing their lose-rein'd Horses through the Cirque; Who with long stretches soon devour the Plain, Then they were carri'd ploughing up the Main.
Steady and swift as long-wing'd Falcons flie, That seize all Birds that cut the yielding Skie, Bearing a Heroe through the foamy Floods, Able to sit in Counsel 'mongst the Gods; Who had so many hard Adventures past, In bloody Battels, or by Tempests tost, Now soundly slept, forgetting former Woes: But when the glorious Morning-star arose, The glitt'ring Harbinger, which tells th' Approach Of bright Aurora in her golden Coach, Then drew they neer Ʋlysses Native Soyl, And Port, theyPhorcus was the Son of Pontus and Terra, according to Hesiod in his Genealogy of the Gods, He was one of the Rulers of the Seas, and had his Temple in this Haven; from whence it receiv'd its appellation Phorcus from the Sea-God style, This two broad sides extends, and opening doth, Though rough the Margents, make the Water smoth: There without Cable, tall Ships land-lock'd lie, And highest Springs, and loudest Winds defie. But in the bottom of the Bay, they had An Olive, casting ore a Cave, a shade, In which the Nymphs, stil'd Naiades, reside: Within stood Bowls, and Goblets petrifi'd, And there whil'st huming Bees fil'd all the Rooms, They marble Shuttles ply'd in rocky Looms, Where, wondrous to behold, they purple wove: Fountains within two Portals were above, That towards the North still Mortals entred at: Egress and Regress through the Southern-Gate Gods always had, and ne'r by Men prophan'd. Here up they run their Vessel on the Strand, And leave with plyant Oars half-drie, their Ship, Then to the shore from well laid Hatches leap. They first Ʋlysses from his Cabin bore In Quilts, and purest linen cover'd ore, And fast a sleep on Sea-wash'd Margents laid, And all those Gifts which the Pheacians had
Presented him on Pallas score, they put Out of the Way, under anThe Olive-tree was sacred to Minerva, the Patroness of Ʋlysses, and therefore aptly feign'd by our Poet to keep his deposited Treasure. Olive Root, Lest any should before Ʋlysses wake, Stumbling on them by Fortune, Notice take. This done, their Sails they for Pheacia set: But Neptune old picques not forgotten yet, Thus to the Thund'rer said; Oh! Jove, no more Amongst the Gods will Mortals me adore, When theFor Phaeax, King of the Island, from whom they were called Pheaci∣ans, was Son of Neptune, and Corcyra the Daughter of Asopus. Pheacians mind me not at all, Who from my Stock had their Original. I thought Ʋlysses plagu'd with Woe, and Want, Should hardly e're return, such was your grant: They him in sleep on's Native shore have left With Gold, rich Vests, and many a costly gift By them presented, which he doth injoy, More then his wealthy share of plundred Troy. When the Clouds Muster-master thus reply'd; On this account, me Neptune dost thou chide? No God shall thee despise, 'tis more then hard To throw Aspersions on so great a Lord: But if that any Mortal thee shall slight, I will revenge thy Cause, and do thee Right. Thee these I leave to pardon, or chastize. When thus the shaker of the Earth replys; Then by your Leave, a tempest raise I will; But Brother, under your Correction still; And their fair Ship returning Home with Joy, Entring their Land-lock'd Harbour I'll destroy: That they no more shall Mortals thence transport, Shee like a Mountain shall choke up their Port. Then Jove reply'd; Do Neptune what you list, I shall be more then Neuter, and assist: I'll bring forth all the Town, as lookers on, To see a Ship transform'd into a Stone.
They shall admire how such a mighty Fort, Rais'd like a Mountain, should besiege the Port. Thus order'd Neptune, thence with high Content, To Scheria, andThe Island inhabited by the Pheacians, afterward call'd Corcyra, now Corfu in the Venetian Gulf. Pheacian Bulwarks went, And there remain'd until the well-trim'd Ship Drew neer the Harbour, with all Sails a-trip: Then in a trice transform'd her intoEustathius notes that the anti∣ents report there lay a Rock neer unto the Isle, representing the form of a Ship; which occasion'd the figment of our Poet: but certainly by this trans∣tation he has deliver'd his opinion concening that secret of Nature, the transming of one species into ano∣ther; Wood into Stone, by Water, signified here by Neptune. For this kind of transmutation is not lately di∣scover'd, but was known unto the an∣cients. Ovid in his Metamorphosis says that among the Cices, a people of Thrace, there was a River that congea∣led the bowels of those who drank thereof, and converted whatsoever it receiv'd, into Stone. Flumen habent Cicones quod potum sa∣xea reddit Viscera, quod tactis inducit marmora rebus. Ciconian streams congeal his Guts to Stone That thereof drinks, and what therein is thrown. It seems to have had a slime of that na∣ture which unites, and indurates. So the dust of Puzzolo, being touch'd by water, is presently petrified. stone, And fixing there, went off when he had done. When the Pheacians this strange Sight survay'd, They sadly viewing one another, said; Ah! who hath fix'd this Vessel in the Main, The cause not knowing, Thus they all complain; Then said Alcinous; This Chance of Old My inspir'd Father oft to me foretold, That Neptune angry, that we did transport A forein Prince unto his Native Court, Would change the Ship return'd, into a Hill. These his Predictions, thus the Fates fulfil. This Prodigy must us instruct, no more Strangers to waft to any other Shore: And twelve fat Bullocks to great Neptune kill, That pitying, he remove this mighty Hill, As he advis'd, to him they Offrings made, And all the Princes, and the People, pray'd. But when Ʋlysses wak'd, long absent he, Not his own Country knew, nor well could see: With grosser mists Pallas so dim'd the Air, That things refracted, seem'd not what they were, Lest that his Wife, or Friends, should find him, e're He made the Sutors reckon for their Cheer. The Pile and Prospect of the place seem chang'd; The Harbour, Ways, the Rocks, and Trees estrang'd. Whil'st He his Native Country thus beheld, His Thighs He beating, briny Tears distil'd,
Lifting his Hands to Heaven, aloud complain'd; Where am I now? what place is this? what Land? Fallen once more am I 'mongst a Race unjust, Stern, and injurious, only rul'd by Lust? Or pious Souls that Hospitable are? Where shall I hide these Riches? whither bear? Where go my self? would I had still remain'd 'Mongst the Pheacians, or been entertain'd By some kind Prince, who pitying, me from Toyl Had sent attended to my Native Soyl: I know not what to do, nor this great deal Of Wealth, from greedy persons to conceal. I will no more, You Gods, my Judgment trust, These slie Pheacians false are, and unjust, Who leave me on an unknown Coast, whom they To his own Country promis'd to convey. Revenge me Jove on them, Thou, who dost all Such cheating Sycophants to strict Audits call. But I will see what Goods I lack, well may Such Sharks themselves, for me transporting, pay. His Tripods, and his Chargers, ore he told, Vests, and rich Mantles, Silver, Brass, and Gold: All found he there, then creeping neer the Shore, Whil'st his misfortunes thus he did deplore, Pallas drew nigh him, like a Youthful Swain, Such Sons of Kings keep Flocks upon the Plain: His Vest well lin'd, his Sandals neatly ty'd, Arm'd with a Spear; whom when Ʋlysses spy'd, He joyfully thus said; Your Servant, Sir; You being the first that I encountred here, No Look, no Posture of an Enemy, have; Preserve this Treasure, and me also save; Since as a God, or Genius of the place, I supplicate Thee, and thy Knees imbrace:
And I beseech you, Sir, inform me well, What Land, what People in this Country dwell; Whether this be Peninsula or Isle, Or, neer the Sea, the Main-lands gleby soyl. Then she reply'd; Th' art in Experience Young, Or else some Stranger, hast not here been long, That ask'st what Country's this; 'tis not so poor, But 'tis well known to every Neighb'ring Shore, Nay, where so e're the Sun, in progress hurl'd, Gilds with Day-beams the North, and Southern World. Our Grounds are Rocky, we have little Plain, But that well cloath'd with Vines, and golden Grain: This Country dews, and frequent showres not wants, Feeds Goats, and Cattel well; all sorts of Plants Cast pleasant shades; where they to watering come: Ithaca's name hath, Friend, reach'd Ilium, Which they report far distant from this Isle. Glad he had landed on his Native Soyl, His Joy dissembling though, he thus reply'd; And spake at random things both ore, and wide, Still acting subtle parts; Beyond the Sea, Sir, I in Crete much heard of Ithaca, And now brought hither with my whole Estate, My Children left, since I unfortunate It is observ'd by Eustathius that this relation is not consonant to the an∣tient Histories, but on purpose inven∣ted to make him more acceptable to the Sutors, having slain the Son of Ʋ∣lysses's Friend: but something of Hi∣story is contain'd in it: for Idomeneus, King of Crete, was Commander of some Forces in the Trojan Expedition, as appears in the second book of the Iliads, Idomeneus rul'd the Cretan Bands, From Gortyns Bulwarks, and the Gnossian Strands. and, though the antients have not re∣torded it, yet from hence I conjecture that Orsilochus was slain according to this relation, though not by Ʋlysses. Orsilochus slew, Idomeneus his Son, Who all their swiftest Youth could far out-run; Who would have forc'd from me my Trojan share; Purchas'd in War with so much Toyl, and Care, And miseries upon the boyst'rous Main, Because his Father on the Trojan Plain I did not serve, others commanding there. I in the Field with a sharp-poynted Spear, Way laying him, with one Companion, slew, When Night ore Heaven her sable Mantle threw.
My suddain Flight, and his sad Fortune hid, None of my going knew, nor his being Dead: I got aboard in a Pheacian Ship, With this you see, of which they had a snip; Who promis'd to transport me through the Main To Pyle, or Elis, where th'Strabo observes that Hecataens Milesius makes the Epeans distinct from the inhabitants of Elis, and says that they assisted Hercules in the de∣struction of that place; but adds also that it is not at all incredible that two different people should unite into one body, and one name too, in process of time. Our Poet calls them by the same name too in his Iliads; at the end of the 2 book, where he reckons the Gre∣cian Fleet. Who in Buphrasium, and fair Elis dwell Who Hermin, and the Myrsin Plains did till, Th' Olenian Rock from Alisium sent, In fourty Sail, with these the Epeians went. Epeians reign; Up to a Harbour which they not design'd They run their Vessel, forc'd by adverse Wind Against their Wills, intending no Deceit; At Night there landing, neither drink, nor meat; Once thought upon, though we had fasted long, But weary on the shore themselves they flung, Where me they left, surpriz'd in charming Sleep, With all my Goods, and lanch'd into the Deep, And straight for the Sidonian Confines bore, A woful Wretch upon this unknown shore. Wringing my Hand, then with a smile the Maid, Her own Celestial Form assuming, said; Thou'lt prove too hard for who e're plays with Thee And Cheat for Cheat stake, though a God he be; Nor want'st Thou now here, in thy Native Soyl, Feign'd stories, by Thy Stars taught to beguile. But of this Theam to say more I am loth, Since at Contrivements we are Skilful both; For dextrous Slights 'mongst Mortals, Thine's the prize, My ready Wit's well known in th' arched Skies': Yet Thou not Pallas know'st, whose Care, and Love, Labour'd Thy harder Fortunes to improve. I gave Thee Favour in Alcinous Eys, And once more hither come, Thee to advise How Thou these costly Presents may'st conceal: But I'll a greater Consequence reveal. In Thy own Palace, which Th' art now so neer, Many affronts Thou must with Patience bear,
Walk there disguised, wouldst Thou be secure, And silent, what Thou seest, and hear'st, indure: With that same Temper thou so oft hast tri'd Meet their Affronts. When thus the King reply'd; Thou may'st, O Goddess, well Mans Knowlege scape, That canst transform Thy self to any shape: I know how much to Thee I stood oblig'd, When our great Army Trojan Walls besieg'd; But after we did Priam's City get, From thence then sailing Jove dispers'd our Fleet, And I, best Lady, Thee no more did see, Or dreamt Thou hadst the least Concern for me; But wandred as my wav'ring Fancy led, Until the Gods me from all Sorrows freed; And 'mongst Pheacians me Thou didst instruct, And me incouraging, didst to th' Court conduct: Thee, by thy Father, Virgin, I implore, To tell me if this be my Native Shore: For I suppose it is some other Soyl, And Thou wouldst my Credulity beguil. Am I at Home? Me Hopes, and Fears divide. When thus to him th' illustrious Maid reply'd; Thou always dost new Doubts, and Scruples start, Yet my Ʋlysses I shall ne'r desert, Who Prudence, and Complacency may boast: Another coming to his Native Coast, Would long his Children, House, and Wife, to see; Thou ne'r inquir'st, nor car'st where e're they be: Thou wouldst have ventur'd for Her heretofore, Who with salt Teares bedews her Chamber-floor, And Night, and Day, doth in thy Absence mourn, I knew, though hard to Sense, Thou should'st return; But not against my Uncle durst engage, Whose Bosom burns with unextinguish'd Rage;
Nor could thy lost Associats quench the Fire. But Thou shalt see what so thou dost desire: This is the Port of Phorcus, th' old Sea-God, Crown'd with a spreading Olive, like a Wood: Neer this aCronius observes that the Cave here describ'd agrees not with History; there being no mention of it in any, of those who writ the Topographies of that Isle. Wherefore the Gramma∣rians have labour'd to find out the Al∣legory, or Intention of the oet veil'd under this obscure Description. A Cave was the Symbol of the World a∣mong the ancient Theologists, as Por∣phyrius on this place proves out of Pla∣to, in the seventh of his Polity, and Empedocles in his Physicks, where speaking of the World, he saies, The two doors are the two Tropicks; the North, through which the Souls descended when they were to be uni∣ted to a Body; the South, through which they ascended when they were separated: The Nymphs weaving their purple Webs upon Rocks of stones, signified the Souls framing its garment of Blood, and Flesh, upon the solid foundation of the Bones: Hony was accounted purgative; and there∣fore in some initiations the Hands were wash'd with it instead of Water, and the Tongue was cleans'd from all its offences. By the Olive, sacred to Minerva, the Goddess of Wisdom, which grew neer to the Cave, was si∣gnified, that this World was not for∣med by chance, but by some intellectu∣al Beeing, separated indeed from it, but whose seat was neer, upon the head of it. This Olive being  constantly flourishing, did aptly de∣note the perpetual descension, and a∣scension of Souls, for which this Cave was consecrated. Cave, sacred the shady Grot To Naiades, rooff'd with a grassy Plat, Where oft to them Thou Hecatombs hast pay'd: There's Mount Nerytus with a Forest clad. Pallas, this said, dispers'd the gloomy Mist, The Coast appearing, glad Ʋlysses kist His Native Soyl, and kneeling on the shore, Thus did the Nymphs with rear'd up Hands, implore; You Naiades, I thought without dispute, Ne'r you to see, whom I with Joy salute, And shall, as heretofore, your Altars lade, If by Permission of the Heavenly Maid, My Son yet lives. The Goddess then reply'd; Scruple no more I say, in me confide. But let us straight into this Cave convay Thy Wealth, and careful, up in safety lay, There we'll consult what's best to do. This said, Into the Vault walks the Celestial Maid, Whil'st in Ʋlysses all his Riches gets; Gold, Silver, Vests which He in order sets; Gifts which to Him the kind Pheacians gave: Then rowl'd a stone in th' entry of the Cave. Pallas, and He then on an Olive-Root Complotting sat, both in a High Dispute; The Haughty Sutors ruin to prepare. Then Pallas said, Thou must take special Care, How them to master, who now court thy Spouse, And three years now kept Revels in thy House, Contriving Joynters, whil'st she prest with Cares, Now for Thy coming Home hopes, now despairs,
Yet Treats them fair, promising each Address, Sends them kind words, but thinks of nothing less. Ʋlysses then with a deep Sigh reply'd; I here shall Perish, asSpondanus was unhappily mista∣ken in the meaning of this place, who thought that Ʋlysses had here deliver∣ed how by the assistance of Minerva he escaped some imminent danger, in the Palace of Agamemnon; who never came thither, as appears by the whole series of this book: but it is clear that Ʋlysses saies only this, That he had been murther'd, like Agamemnon, in his own Palace, had it not been for the advice of Minerva. Now the man∣ner of the death of Agamemnon he had learn'd from Agamemno's ghost in his descent into Hell, as it is at large delivered, Odyss. 11. Atrides dy'd, In my own House, if Thou not me conduct: But me to be reveng'd on them, instruct: Ah help me now, and stand in my Defence, As when we took Troy's lofty Battlements: Then of three hundred I'll not be afeard, But back'd by Thee, the proudest Rival beard. Th' illustrious Goddess then to him reply'd; I shall be present, and with Thee will side, And make no doubt, we shall with Brains, and Gore, Of those devour thee, stain thy Palace floor. But Thou must not be known where Thou art seen, Therefore I'll rivle up thy smoother Skin, And soyl thy brighter Tresses, and so cloath, That whosoe're beholds thee, Thee shall loath, When to thy Son, and Wife, Thou dost appear, And proud Corrivals, Thy bright Eys I'll blear; But to Subulcus first, who tends thy Swine Make thy Address, He sure to Thee will joyn; He thy Relations loves, Him Thou shalt find Feeding with Mast his brisly Herd, behind Corax was an inhabitant of I∣thaca, who in pursuit of a Hare fell down a Rock, and broke his Neck, from whom it had this appellation. Arethusa his Mother, hearing the sad news of her Son's death, hang'd her self neer a Fountain, from her call'd Arethusa. Eustathius. Corax's Rock, where Arethusa springs, And he to watering, his fat Cattel brings: There stay with Him, till He shall Thee instruct, And I'll thy Son, from Sparta Home conduct; Who went to Menelaus Court, where He, Late his Addresses made, in Quest of Thee, Ʋlysses then; Why tel'st Thou not me all, Since well you know what e're may Him befal? Whether at Sea he met his sullen Fate, Or Harpyes have devoured his Estate?
The Goddess him thus answer'd, be content Him I abroad to purchase Fame have sent, He in Atrides Palace takes his ease, In safety, there commanding what he please, But the Corrivals a dire Plot contrive To murther him, e're he at Home arrive, But some of them before shall meet their Fate, Who in a Raunt now ruine thy Estate: Thus saying, the Goddess touch'd him with her Wand, Straight his clear skin all rivled up, and Tan n'd, His golden Hair a suddain Frost did hoar, And his plump Cheeks Old Age straight crusted ore, His sparkling Eyes she blear'd, then straight she drest Him in a totter'd Coat, and sordid Vest, Peec'd, patch'd, and stain'd, with sooty Smoke, and Dirt, And with a Deer's pill'd skin his Belly guirt. Gave him a Staff, and worn in holes a Scrip, Hanging it in a twisted leather slip, Accoutred thus the Goddess left him there, And to his Son in Sparta did repaire.
scene from book 14 Honoratissimo Domino D:ae Johanni King Baroni De kingston Jabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib: 14.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE FOURTEENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Eumaeus first in Rags, Ulysses spies; Rates off the Dogs, barking at his Disguise: Him as a Beggar kindly entertains, And of the Sutors Revel-rout complains. This, tells the coming of his absent Lord; That, of his Stories not believes a Word. BUT from the Port a rough way through the Cops, Mongst Clifts he went, and wood-cloath'd Mountain tops: Where Pallas told him that Su∣bulcus dwelt, Who with his Lord more faithfully had dealt, Then any Swain, to husband his Estate; And straight he found him sitting at his Gate, Which in fair Prospect, on a rising Ground He built with Stone, and hedg'd with Quick-sets round,
At his own cost; because the King, and Queen, And old Laertes, long had absent been, Which he surrounded with a standing Guard Of Oken Pails, the staves both strong, and hard: Twelve ample Styes within convenient reach He there had built, Fifty fat Swine in each: The pregnant Females in their Chambers kept, Their brisly Husbands in the Portals slept. Many of these had ryoting Sutors spent, To whom the fattest still Subulcus sent: Three hundred yet and sixty there remain'd. Four Dogs as fierce as Lyons he maintain'd, Who alwaies slept attending on the Hogs, Himself then sate ord'ring a pair of Brogues, From a py'd Bullocks Skin, three others there About their Styes, and several business were. The fourth he with a Swine to th' Palace sent, That might the Sutors Feast with high Content. Soon as the Dogs had spy'd him coming on, With open mouths they at Ʋlysses run: But cunning, he sits down, and dropsDidymus on this place saies that , it is a natural Defence for the aversion of Dogs, to sit down, and lay ade the Weapon out of oneshand, as not intending to set upon them. Pli∣ny has the like observation in the eighth Book of his Natural History; Impetus canum & saevitia mitigatur ab homine considente humi, The fierceness, and rage of Dogs is mitigated by a mans sitting on the ground. his staff: Nor was he then from those stern Warders, safe, Had not Subulcus leap'd up to his Aid, And thrown aside the Shoes were almost made, Palting with stones the bawling Party back: Who when he had secur'd the King, thus spake; The Dogs, O Father, gave a fierce assault, And if th' had hurt Thee, t' had not been my Fault, The Gods for me have sadder business found. Here I with Grones, and Sighs, lie on the Ground, Lament my King; whil'st others in his House, Devour his Cattel, and his Wine Carouse; Whil'st he in want by various Fortunes hurl'd, Wanders about the many-peopl'd World,
If yet he live, and see the rising Sun. But to my Cottage go with me, old Man; And when Thou art refresh'd with wholsom Fare, Say whence Thou cam'st, and what thy Sufferings are. This said, Eumaeus in Ʋlysses led, And straight a wild Goats skin, and Branches spread, Him placing on that Couch: Ʋlysses glad At this his first so kind Reception, said; O Jove, and all you Gods, grant his Request Whate're; who now so kindly treats his Guest. Eumaeus then; It is not fit that we Should Strangers, though they poorer are than Thee, Drive from our Gates; Jove to all those in want, In Forma Pauperis gives a special Grant: But small our Treatments are, and mean our Boards, Still fearing Young, and Domineering Lords. Ah! his Return the Gods obstructed have, Who lov'd me well, and this Possession gave: He to his Servantskind was, he a House, And Fortune gave me, with a Vertuous Spouse, Since, his Estate Jove here has much increas'd, And my small Labours not a little blest, Much more the King improv'd had my Estate, Here had he stay'd; but he hath met his Fate. Ah! would that Helen's Race had perish'd quite, For whom so many Heroes fell in Fight: And he went with Atrides to destroy Proud Ilium, and the Walls of lofty Troy. This said, he guirds his Coat, and forth he hies; Then choosing two fat Porkers from their Styes, Slaughters them both, and next a quick Fire gets, And to Ʋlysses, roasted on the Spits, Straight carries hot, sprinckled with finestEustathius notes, that the Cu∣stom here mention'd of sprinkling flower on the meat when brought to Table was long since laid aside. Flour, And in a Mazer lusty Wine did pour.
Then plac'd against him, said; Sir, tast such Fare As only fit for us poor Servants are: The fattest for the Sutors we select, Who want Consideration, and Respect. The blessed Gods all curst Designs abhor, But still for Just, and Pious actions, are: Yet some there be that others Realms in vade, And, Jove conniving, Home their Vessels lade. Yet oft their Bosoms are with Conscience storm'd, Sure they have heard, or by some God inform'd Of his sad Death; Else would they not resort To his fair Queen, and Ryot in his Court, But take their Leaves, who know not how to spare; So many Feasts as Days and Nights there are. Not one, or two fat Victims serve their turn, Who ne'r from eating, but to drink adjourn. He had a fair Estate, his Riches such, That none about him could boast half so much, No not to th' twentieth part would theirs amount, Which, now I'm in, I shall to Thee recount: Twelve Herds of Cattel the main Land doth keep, As many Goats, and Swine, and fleecy Sheep. Goats eleven Herds in th' other Field are bred By lusty Swains, and Jolly Shepherds, fed. They from each Herd one every day afford, And still the fattest, to supply the Board: And from my Charge, to amplifie their Feast, I send the fattest Porkers, and the best. This said, on fell He, eat, and drank rich Wine, His Brains still working on his main Design. His Spirits recruited well, well cheer'd his Soul, Subulcus gives him an oreflowing Bowl: And joyful he so fair a Progress made, Who is this wealthy Person, Friend, he said;
So bold, and hath so ample an Estate, Who at the Trojan War receiv'd his Fate, As thou believ'st; Tell me, there's no such ods, (Since Jove knows all, and the immortal Gods) But I have seen him in my Travels, hurl'd By various Fortunes, through the peopl'd World. None, Father, hither comes, Eumaeus said, But so the Queen, and his dear Son, perswade; And to supply their Present wants, devise Stories to please them, and a thousand Lies. Who e're lands here, they to the Court repaire, And with a handsom Tale still ready are: She entertains them, and inquiry makes, Her sparkling Eys brimful with briny Lakes, As Women use, wanting their dearest Lord: Couldst thou put in one comfortable word, She would new sheath thee, thou shouldst soon be drest In a Court Mantle, and a comely Vest. But, ah! on him Dogs have, and Vultures, fed, And piece-meal rent; Ah! 'tis too true, he's dead, Or hungry Fish devour'd him far from Land, And now his Bones lie sepulchred in Sand, There he remains, whil'st his Relations grieve, But I'm so much concern'd, I loath to live, I, such a Royal Master ne'r shall get, Should I return unto my Native Seat, Where dwelt my Parents, I, my breeding had, Their Loss I should not so much mourn, though sad For such Misfortune I enough should be, As for my Prince, whom, I despair to see, Whom, I with Reverence nominate, and Him, Put in the highest place of my esteem. Then said the King; Who ne'r will Credit give, Are worse then those too easily beleive.
I dare affirm, and positively swear, That soon renown'd Ʋlysses will be here. But Him that brings the joyful News, reward, When you behold Him in His Palace Yard: To Him a Coat, a Vest, and Mantle grant, Till then, He'll not demand it, though He want: Who in necessity a Lie will tell, I hate him worser then the Gates of Hell. Witness, Oh! Jove, the greatest of the Gods, Ʋlysses Table, Hearth, and high Aboads, That what I say shall come to pass, and here, Thou shalt thy Master see, within a Year, Nay, in a Month, arriving at his House, To punish those, thus wrong his Son, and Spouse. Then said Eumaeus; For this Tydings, thee, I never shall reward, nor Him e're see: But talk of something else, and mind thy Drink, Still am I sad, when of my King I think: Yet I'll beleive thee, and Ʋlysses may Return, for which, I, and Penelope, pray, Laertes, and his Son, that hopeful Plant, Telemachus, whose Fortune I lament: Whose Courage, Wit, and Person, to be such, As his brave Ant-cestors, I dare avouch: Whom now some God, or Mortal did beguile, Sending to seek his Father, far as Pyle: Whom now the Sutors watch for, to deface The Name, and memory, of th' Arcisian Race: But we'll be patient, He may fall, or fly, And be protected by Divinity. But, Father, now thy own sad Fortune tell, Recount at large, what may inform me well, Who th' art, thy Parents, and thy Native Land, What Ship thou came'st in, by what People mann'd.
Since none on Foot come hither, neither Ride. When smartly thus Laertiades reply'd; Should I thus at thy Table sitting here, Eating and Drinking, tarry a whole Year, Whilst others ply thy work, 'twould be too short, To make of my sad Tales a meer report, Which by Heav'ns will I long have undergon. I born in Crete, though poor, a rich mans Son, Who bred me with his own Legitimate race, Although hisThis was the custom of the A∣thenians: for although in the infancy of their polity, Women were all in common, yet Cecrops their King, long before the time of Homer, had abo∣lish'd it, and ordained that one man should be the Husband of one Wife, saies Athenaeus, : but withal, though he allow'd them but one Wife, yet he denied them not a plurality of Concubines: and the difference was according to Demesthenes , . The Concubines were kept for pleasure, to revel abroad with their Lords; the Wife for legitimate procreation, and a prudent governess of the Family. Concubine my Mother was, Castor, my Father, on the Cretan Shore, Of old the people did as God adore: His Fortunes great, his Sons of fair report. But when his Fates sent him to Pluto's Court, His Children share his Wealth, and Lots they draw; Our Poet seems in this relation to follow the Laws and customs of the Athenians: for it was Solons Law; that the Father should not have the right of making his Will, who had a∣ny male-Children legitimate living: : but that the estate should be equally divided amongst them, , that all the legitimate Son; should have equal shares of their Fathers estate: by which the illegitimate were totally excluded. This appears plain∣ly in Aristophanes, in Avibus, , I'll tell you Solon's Law; Bastards are not, When they have Children are legiti∣mate, Accounted of the Blood; if none there are, The neerest of his Kindred shall be Heir. And presently after he tells Hercules, who was a by-blow of Jupiter, None of your Father's goods belong to you, For you'r a Bastard, none by Law ar due; 'Tis Neptune will obtain your Sires estate, Since he's Brother and legitimate. A Pittance give to me, not due by Law. Then look'd on as deserving, I a Spowse, And beautious, Married, of a noble House. I did not then contemptible appear, As now in my distress you see me here: Of which some marks you yet may see, though hurl'd In Want and Misery, about the World. For me both Mars and Pallas Valiant made: And when I chose bold Men for Ambuscade, Lay'ng Traps to catch the Foe, this Bosom ne'r Thought of pale Death, nor Symptoms knew of fear; But with the formost alwaies took my chance, And in the Front still interchang'd my Lance: So lov'd I War, but valu'd Plow and Cart, Which makes our Children Wealthy, not a — But I lov'd Ships, and Wars, the Shaft and Spear, And whatsoere to others dreadful were: Me to these dire delights the Stars inclin'd, But other Men are of an other mind.
Before the Grecians had Beleagur'd Troy, Nine times as Captain they did me imploy In several Ships, against all Privateers, And Forein force; success crown'd my desires; By which I purchased no mean Estate, Was lov'd, admir'd, and honour'd through all Crete. Then Jove engag'd us in a Fatal strife. Where many a valiant Heroe lost his life. Idomeneus then and me th' employ, Both Adm'rals, to conduct their Fleet to Troy. And there was no disputing, no Reply, Fame of the Expedition flew so high: Nine Years there lay we, a hard Siege endur'd, The tenth we took their Town, so well immur'd; And Plunder'd Troy by a religious Cheat: Thence Sailing home, great Jove dispers'd our Fleet, And for my pains, poor me, more wretched made. A Month at home I with my Children staid, My dear Relations, and my dearer Wife, And at full Tables lead a merry life: Then I, forsooth, must see th' Aegyptian Land, Nine Ships I Rigg'd, well Victual'd, and well Man'd; Six Daies my Friends I treated to the height, And pay'd the Gods each their peculiar Rite; The seventh from Crete we with a Northern Gale, As down the Channel of a River sail. We nothing wanting, stiff and Tight our Ship, Clap all our Canvass on, our Sails a-trip; The fifth DayIt is a great errour in Giphanius and Spondanus, who take  here for the name of the Country of Egypt; when both Strab and divers others of the Antients have abundantly prov'd the contrary, partly out of this very place. These Pliny follows in his Na∣tural History; Ne ante Nilus quam se totum aquis concordibus rursus jun∣xit. Sic quoque etiamunm Siris, no∣minatus per aliquot millia, & in totum Homero Egyptus, aliisque Triton. Which River never takes the name of Nile before his waters meet again and accord all whole together. And even so was he aforetime named Siris for many miles space; and of Homer altogether Egyptus, and of others Triton, whom Ammianus Marcellinus follows in his History. Whence it may very proba∣bly be conjectured, that the name Nile for the River of Egypt is later then our Poet, it being not mentioned in all his Works; yet in use presently after him, it being found in the works of Hesiod, as Eratosthenes affirms. Nile we reach'd; I order'd there My lusty Lads straight up the River Steer: Our Anchors drop't, a party I command To search the Creeks, the Caves, and winding Strand: But they to Natures rougher dictates yield, And fall to Plunder the Aegyptian Field;
Their Women took, their tender Infants slew, More then a rumor to the City flew; They hear the cry, and with the early Dawn In compleat rms, out Horse and Foot were drawn: There Jove my Party worsted, they gave ground, And were by Foes coup'd up, as in a Pound: Where many slaughter'd were, the rest were lead Thence Captives: Then Jove put it in my head, (Would I had rather dy'd, paid Natures debt, Who still thus suffer, with despair beset) To give my self a Pris'ner up and yield: Down I my Javelin laid, my Helm and Shield, And running to the King, his knees embrac'd: He pittying, me in his own Chariot plac'd, And drove off Weeping from the Vulgar rage, Whom nothing but my Death could then asswage. For Hospitable Jove he well did know, Lov'd mercy to a quarter-begging Foe. Seven Years I there remain'd, whist riches flow'd, Rich Gifts th' whole City upon me bestow'd: But in th' eighth came a Phenician, who, An old Trapanner, cheating tricks well knew: He with perswasions lead me by e Ear, To go with him into Phenicia, where I at his House should well be entertain'd; I went, and there with him a Year remain'd: But when that Months and Daies had fill'd the Sphear, And Time set forth the circumvolving Year, To Libya me in a stout Ship he sent, Freighted with Goods, but to no good intent; He Spirited me over, on account To sell me, for a Sum that did amount. I ventur'd with him, though my Heart did fail, And had as far as Crete a favouring Gale:
But angry Jove shipwrack contriv'd, and death. Thence sailing, yet fair Winds not out of Breath, Until we nothing saw but Seas, and Skies: When suddenly a sable Cloud did rise, Dark grew the Flood, it thunders, ligthens, rains, The dismal notes fill'd up loud Heuricanes: Then with a flaming Bolt Jove struck our Ship, And they like Sea-Mews floated on the Deep: There up and down on bounding Billows born, Since Jove decree'd they never should return. But me with this Disaster much agast, Trembling, my arms he flung about the Mast, Which boyst'rous Winds, and Billows, nine Days bare, Lock'd up in my imbrace, I know not where; The tenth, an ore-grown Wave, the Night being dark, The poor remains drove of my bulged Bark OnThe Thespretians were a peo∣ple of Epirus, bordering upon the Sea-Coasts, over against Corcyca, not far distant from Ithaca. Thesprots shore, King Phidons dearest Son, To fetch me off, both cold, and tyr'd, did run, And to the Pallace lead me by the hand, Then straight to Cloath me gave a strict command. And there I first of your Ʋlysses heard: He me acquainted with how much regard By him he had been treated in his way, Resolving suddenly for Ithaca, And what huge Wealth he had acquired told, Iron and bright Brass, with Ingots of pure Gold, With which ten Generations well might shift, Which he had in the King's Exchequer left; But he was gon, he said, toAt Dodona in Epirus was the most antient and famous Oracle of Jupiter. The story of it is thus rela∣ted by Herodotus, the antientest of the Greck Historians, who seems to have been inquisitive after the original of it. The Priests of Jupiter, at Thebes a City of Egypt, told me that the Phoenicians had oln away formerly two of their Priestesses, and sold one of them into Libya, the other into Greece, which Women first constituted, as they un∣derstood, Oracles in those places. But the Priestesses at Dodona say, that there flew two black Pigeons from Thebes of Egypt; the one into Libya, the other to them; which lighting on an Oak, said with a humane voice, that there ought to be an Oracle of Jupiter there. They, supposing it to be a divine com∣mand, caused one to be built there. The rest of the Dodineans agreed with them in the relation. My opinion of them, faies Heredotus, is this; If it be true that the Phoenicians carried away these two holy Women, and sold one of them into Libya, the other into Hellas; it seems to me that this Woman was sold to the Thesprotians in the Country now call'd Hellas, before Pelasgia, where during her slavery she consecrated the place near a neighbouring Oak: it being probable that she who had been consecra∣ted to Jupiter in Egypt, would retain the memory of him here. Now these Women Were call'd by the Dodoneans , Pigeons, because using an unknown language they seem'd to speak like Birds: but that this after a while spake with a humane voice, because she by conversation had learn'd the Greek tongue. When they say the Pigeon was black, they signify that the Woman was an Egyptian. The Oracle at Thebes in Egypt, and that in Dodcua, are very like one another. Dodon's Grove, There to consult the sacred Oak of Jove, Now absent long from home, to be advis'd, Should he return in publick or disguis'd; He swore to me his Ship and Men were cleer, That him should to his Native Country bear,
But he before, a Vessel touching there, ForA small Island near Ithaca, one of the Echinades, right over against the mouth of the River Achelous. Dolicha bound, put me in, and with care Intreated them, in safety to convey To King Acastus through the briney Sea. There these pure Villains a contrivement laid To make me wretched, and their Pris'ner made. No sooner had they lost the sight of Land, They by the sequel made me understand; First stripping me of my fair Coat and Vest, Then cloath'd in Raggs, which thou so totter'd seest; Reaching your Coast at night, they left me fast Bound in the Ship, and Landing took repast: But me the favouring Gods from Fetters freed, I on my head wrapping my totterd Weed, To Shore descending by the Rudder, Swam, And far from them to sheltring Copses came: There close I sculk'd whilst privy search they make, And sighing, pry'd in every Bush and Brake, Until they thought more labour were in vain; Then they neturning Launch'd into the Main, The Gods for me then play'd their second part, And sent to thee, thou who so worthy art, That now I hope to live for better daies. When thus Eumaeus to Ʋlysses saies; Your story and particulars are such, That I confess, poor man, they move me much: But how shall I a wanderer believe, Or any credit to such hear-saies give? Since one in thy condition flattering tales To tell, and smooth Romances, most availes. What hopes have I of his return, what odds? When in close Juncto a whole Court of Gods Complot against him, nor would they at Troy, Nor him amongst his Friends at home destroy:
For then the Greeks had him interr'd in state, Which had been much Renown, and glory great Unto his Son; now Harpyes on him dine Wanting due rites; and I, forsooth, keep Swine, Nor go to Court unless the Queen commands, Or else when Strangers come from forein Lands, They busie then about him in a Ring, At once ask Questions and lament their King, Whilst others Feast upon Ʋlysses score; So I shall be inquisitive no more. Late anThere is a certain allusion in the Greek word which could not be ex∣press'd in English. signifying a beggar, the condition of the person here spoken of, as well as a native of the Country of Etolia. The like we find in Aristophanes, . Aetolian Homicide that fled HisHe alludes to the custom of the A hinians, who punish'd all Homicide, though unwittingly committed, with Exile for one year. This appears by these Verses of Euripides in his Hip∣polytus; . , , . Where the Scholiast observes, It is the custom that those who committed Homi∣cide should be banish'd for the space of a year. When Hercules in his distracti∣on had slain two Sons of Iphicles and one of his own, as soon as his passion was over, he was desired by Iphicles and Licymnius to absent himself for one year, (saith Nicolaus Damascenns) as the custom is, and then to return to Thebes again. pag: 334. Country, thus my credulous fancy fed, He wandring up and down, I entertain'd, And for my real kindness, me with fain'd And idle Stories, like returns thus made, Who at Idomeneus Pallace said, H' had seen our King new sheathing his craz'd Fleet, By tempests tost, and that next Spring from Crete, Or Summer at the farthest he would come With all his Friends, laden with Riches home. So thou like him would'st tickle me in th'ear, With Tales not working on me, though I hear: But thee I pittying, kindly though shall treat, Nor laws of Hospitalitie forget. When thus Ʋlysses to Eumaeus said; Will neither Oaths nor Evidence perswade Thy unbelief; a bargain let's contract, And the Gods witness this our Deed and Act: When under these thy Roofs the King shall rest, Then I demand a Coat and comely Vest; That to Dulichium I well clad may Sail To my concernments of no small avail: But if he come not as I said before, Order thy Servants then to throw me ore
A Precipice, that others may beware To tell such stories that delusions are. Subulcus then reply'd, Sir, all my aime, Now and hereafter, is an honest Fame: Therefore I'll save whom ever I invite, Nor take his life, in justice though I might; Else Jove will much offended be with me, Breaking his Laws of Hospitality: But now to Supper come my weary Mates, And we have ready course, yet wholesom, Cates. Whil'st thus they bandied smartly reparties, The Swineherds came, first shutting in their Sties The brisled breed to fatten with repose; A cry amongst the sunly Porkers rose, Of which he bids them choose one of the best, Better to entertain their wand'ring Guest. And we with him our selves will recreate, Long suffrers now, under too hard a Fate: Who title want, unpunish'd here make spoyle, And we have only Labour for our Toyle. This said, he cuts some Wood, and they lay hold Of a fat Swine, at least was five Years old, And straight the Brawn near to the Hearth he brought, Who alwaies of religious duties thought; By good thoughts prompted, casts the brisly Hair Into theThis cutting off a lock of Wool was, saith Eustathius,  to preserve the me∣mory of antique cloathing, , of Hair and Pelts. The like Ceremony or Rite was used in Sacri∣fices at the striking of a League, as ap∣pears in the 3. of the Iliads, , , , &c. Streight Agamemnon and Ulysses rise, The Heralds in rich habits, as the guise, The Rites prepar'd, and Wine commix'd with Wine, Pour on the Princes hands, which they conoyn. His Knife Atrides drawing, which well strung. Alwaies behind his Swords broad Scab∣bard hung, From both the Lambs curld fore-heads cuts the hair, Which straight the Greek and Trojan Princes share. The meaning of which Rite is deli∣ver'd by Sophocles, That let the false unburied be, Bath he and his posterity Cut off, as is this lock by me, Fire, making a Zealous Pray'r To all celestial Deities, that Home His King Ʋlysses may in safety come: Then with a knotty Stake he fetch'd his swinge, Fells the fat Swine, whose Throat they cut and Singe, And straight divide the Joynts Eumaeus plac'd, Which well with Fat and Lean he interlac'd: Part in the Fire, commix'd with Flow'r he threw, They the cut Collops spit, and Roasted, drew,
And in a Charger dish'd, Eumaeus Carv'd, Who alwaies points of equity observ'd; Dividing all into seven equal shares, To th'To the Nymphs, saith Eusta∣thius, because they, as Presidents of the Fountains, Rivers, and Groves, pro∣vide food for Cattel; to Mercury, because he is patron of Shepherds. Both these has Simonides also joyn'd together, perhaps taken from hence, , . To the Nymphs sacrifice and Maia's race, For Shepherds live by their especial grace. Nimphs and Hermes he with zealous Pray'rs Sets by one part, distributing the rest In order due, but honouring most his Guest; Which he receiv'd as kindly, the whole Chine He plac'd before him of the white-tooth'd Swine. Ʋlysses said; Eumaeus, would thou wert In as much favour as with me thou art, With mighty Jove, that thus hast me supply'd. To whom Subulcus cheerfully reply'd; Sir, please your self with what's here, pray fall too, God gave us this, God who in all things do. This said, first Fruits he pays the pow'rs Divine, His King presenting with a Bowl of Wine. Next his own share, then bluntly takes his Seat, To th'rest Mesaulius distributes the Meat, In his Lords absence him he kept alone, Both to Laertes and the Queen unknown; Him of theThe Taphians inhabited some of the Islands call'd Ethinades, neer unto Ithaca. Taphians, bartring Goods he bought. To Meat prepar'd all fell too as they ought. When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, Mesaulius takes away their broken Fare: On Couches then themselves they entertain'd; Dark grew the Night, it Blew, and sadly Rain'd, When thus Ʋlysses said, trying his Friend; If any of you me a Coat would lend, Or perswade others, sure it would do well; On which occasion I'll a Story tell: Both Fools and Wisemen, warm'd with sprightly Wine, Act Buffons, Sing, in Antick Dances joyn, And oft speak words had better not been said; But now I'm in, I'll on, nor be dismaid.
Ah! would I were as Young, that Vigour had, As when your King, and Menelaus laid Neer Troy an Ambush, they in chief, I, third: But when we came to lofty Walls immur'd Mongst shrubs, and Weeds, down in the plashie Fields We lay, under our Arms, and ample Shields: Dark grew the Night, and Boreas cold did blow, Ushering a showr of Sleet, of Hail, and snow. Our Targets all in Crystal cases, shin'd, Then they had on their Coats, and Mantles lin'd. Under their Shields they quiet lay at rest, I, like a Fool, had left behind my Vest. I only had a Jump on, thin, and slight, Nor dreamt how cold might be th' insuing Night: Of which three quarters spent, when towards the West, Declining, Stars descended to their rest, Your King I pinch'd by th' Elbow, lying near, And whisperd thus to him, who straight did hear; Out, long I cannot dear Ʋlysses, hold, But here shall perish, kil'd with bitter cold, Wanting a Coat, deceived by some God, In a thin Cassock I shall be destroy'd. After he had my words consider'd well, Who both in Field, and Counsel did excel, With a low Voyce thus whisper'd in my Ear; No more, lest any of the rest should hear; His head then leaning on his Elbow, spake; A Vision told me we recruits should lack, Adventuring so far now from the Fleet, Lets with all speed some one or other get, That to the Camp may to our General run. Up Troas started straight, Andraemon's Son, And left behind his well-lin'd purple Vest, In which I lay till guilded was the East.
Had I that strength, and youth, as then I had, Amongst you soon I should be better clad, Either for Love, or Fear; There's small respect For one in tatter'd Weeds, thus poorly deckt. Thou well and wisely hast thy self exprest, Eumaeus said; Thou shalt not want a Vest, Nor ought for one in thy Condition meet, Well as we may to morrow Thee we'll fit, We know no change of Suits, nor to be brave, So many Backs, so many Coats we have, The Prince will then what e're he please bestow, And you your Pasport give where e're you'll go. This said, He near the Chimny made his Bed, And ore a shaggy Goats and Sheep Skin spread: There lay Ʋlysses, over whom he threw His upper Weed, soft, and well quilted too; With which himself 'gainst any Change he arms Of cloudy Skies, or Winters bleaker storms. So slept Ʋlysses amongst youthful Swains: But sleep not long Eumaeus there detains, Out straight he goes, which made his Master glad, That he in absence such a Servant had. First ore his shoulder his good Falchion hung, And over that a well-lin'd Garment flung, A Goats Skin next athwart, then takes his Spear, With which he neither Theevs, nor Dogs, did fear. Under a Rock where He his Porkers kept, Then took Repose, whil'st they, well shelter'd, slept.
scene from book 15 Honoratissimce Domince Tabulam hanc Doe katherince kingston LMDDDIO Lib 15 Fol 2JJ.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE FIFTEENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Minerva to Telemachus appears, Gives him good Counsel, and abates his Fears. The Princes leave of Menelaus take. Ulysses and Eumaeus long awake, Their Stories tell. Telemachus sets Sail, And scapes the Sutors with a favouring Gale. BUT straight to Sparta went th' Illustrious Maid, And to Telemachus her self con∣vey'd, T'advise him home, and how all Plotts to shun, In Bed she found him, with old Nestors Son, In Menelaus Court; Nestorides Slept soundly, but sweet Sleep not him did seise: Such care in solitary night he took About his Father, t'whom thus Pallas spoke;
Telemachus, thou must not longer stay, Leaving thy House and Fortunes thus a prey To haughty Rivals, lest they share thy State, And all consuming, thou return'st too late. Leave to depart of Menelaus get, At home thou shalt thy Mother find as yet, WhoseSemus and Anletes, according to Enstathius. Father and herThis is not a Fiction of Mi∣nerva's, but a true relation of what pass'd; as appears by Penelopes Speech in the nineteenth Book. The like is delivered by Ovid in Penelopes. Epistle to Ʋlysses;; Me paeter Icatius viduo discedere lecto Cogit, & immensas increpat usque moras Increpet usque licet, tua sim, tua dicar oportet: Penelope conjux semper Ulyssis ero. Icarius my Father would compell Meleave my Widows bed, much blaming still My long delaies: and let him still me blame, Still I'll be thine, Ʋlysses Wise I am. Brothers urge to Wed Eurymachus, as worthiest of her Bed, Who best can settle her a plenteous Dowr: So thy imbezzled state they will devour. Women are fickle, and their second Spouse Shall with her former Childrens goods, his House Replenish, nor regard their Husbands Dust. What ere thou hast of Value, that intrust Unto some careful Damsel, till the Gods Give thee a Wife, and fix in thy aboads. But this be sure to Cabinet in mind; To Murther thee the Sutors have design'd, Lying to intercept thee in the way, 'Twixt dustyEither a City on the island of Cephallenia. or else the name of the Isle it self, between which and Ithaca the passage was very narrow, fit for the Sutors designs: Artemidorus Ephesius, in a fragment of his Geogra∣phy extant in Porphyry, measures it thus; From the Port of Cephallenia East∣ward lies Ithaca distant 12. stades; which Island is 85. stades in circuit, &c. Samos and steep Ithaca; But first the Earth shall some of them intomb, Who seek thy ruin, and thy state consume. Off from those Isles by Night steer thou at large, And what ere tutelar Pow'r hath thee in charge, Shall a fair Wind to wait on thee command. But soon as thou shalt reach thy native Land, Thy Ship and Men run up into the Town, And to Subulcus Cottage first go down: He loves thee well, he who thy Swine doth keep, There in the Farm all night in private sleep; Him to thy Mother send, who long hath mourn'd, T' acquaint her thou in safaty art return'd. This spake, to Heaven her self she thence convey'd, But he Pisistratus a-waking, said;
Rise dear Nestorides, arise I pray, Let us put in our Steeds, and drive away. To whom thus then his dear Companion spake; Though we have hast, such hast what need we make, To ride by Night ere Dawn; Stay till the King Puts up the Gifts, which he intends to bring, Safe in our Chariot, and he us dismiss With gentle Language, such a Friend he is, And us with such civility doth treat, That whilst we live we never must forget. Thus as they held dispute, the blushing Dawn Purpled the East, in her guilt Chariot drawn; And from his Bed straight Menelaus rose, Leaving fair Helen to her own repose: Of which, soon as Ʋlysses off-spring knew, He slipt on's Coat, and ore his Shoulders threw His upper Weed, and out in hast he made, To whom he thus, meeting in th' Entrance, said: O thou who here the sole Commander art, Your Licence grant, that home I may depart: My Genius prompts me, here not to abide. To whom thus Menelaus then reply'd; Be sure Telemachus, I shall not long Detain thee here, desiring to be gon: In Hospitality I not think it right, Fond of our Guest to be, or too much slight: I for the Golden Mean am; 'tis all one To thrust one out, would rather not be gon, Or keep him sits on Thorns; sure better 'tis To treat Guests well, and when they please dismiss. Stay but untill thou in thy Chariot may'st Behold those Gifts that I present Thee, plac'd: Our Maids within straight something shall prepare To break-fast, good, though short hour Bill of fare,
And long your Journey; I, to mend your Dish, Shall to both Honour, Wealth, and Fortune wish, And would you farther Greece, and Argos view, I'll in my Chariot ride a-long with you, I'll shew you many Towns, and not in vain, Who'll us presenting, kindly entertain. Give each a Tripode, Caldron, or at least, A pair of Mules, or golden Bowl enchas'd. Then said Telemachus; Renowned Sir, Who to thy People Rudder art, and Star, Fain would I Home, to my own House repair, Because I left no faithful Steward there, Whilst they my Goods imbezzle, and abuse, Seeking my Father, I my self may lose. When Menelaus this did understand, He to his Queen, and Servants gave Command, Cates to prepare, of which were store within. Eteoneus started from his Bed, comes in, Whom Menelaus earnest did desire, He lodging next him, straight to make a Fire. Spits are laid down, the business he attends, And to his perfum'd Parlour then descends With Helen, and hisMegapenthes the Son of Mene∣laus, not by Helen, but by a Slave, as appears in the beginning of the fourth book, ,&c. Son; but when drawn neer, Where lay their Goods of greatest worth, they were, A Cup, and Silver Charger, then from thence Atrides takes, and gives unto the Prince To carry as a Present to his Guest, Whilst the fair Queen opens another Chest Full of rich Vests, which she her self had wrought, And culling mongst the bright'st, one forth she brought Whose splendor so out-shin'd all others far, It in the bottom glister'd, like a Star. Thence went they forth, straight to Ʋlysses Son: Then said Atrides; Now you may be gon,
If Jove so please, great Juno's thundring Spouse. The best of what is pretious in my House, Here I present this Goblet of pure Mold, The Body Silver, the bright Margents Gold, By Vulcan wrought, which the Sidonian King Did at his Court me as a Present bring, When thither I return'd, the same as free, I, dear Telemachus, bestow on Thee. This said, his hand he with the Goblet fraught, Whil'st Megapenthes him the Charger brought, To him the Veil Helen presenting, spake; This Token of my dear affection take, Which at thy Marriage give thy beauteous Spouse, Till then, let thy dear Mother in her House Keep safe for Thee: Now may a prosp'rous Gale, Impregnat to thy native Port thy Sail: Which He with Joy accepting, in the Box Pisistratus, the work admiring, locks. Then to the Hall Atrides them convaid. Soon as their Seats they fil'd, a comely Maid, That they might wash, pour'd streams like Crystal pure, In a bright Bason, from a silver Ew'r: Then spreads the Table, sets on Bread, and plac'd Dishes well cook'd, and pleasing to the Tast. Eteoneus their just Proportions karv'd, And Megapenthes at the Cup-board serv'd. Straight they fall too, and plentifully fare. When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, Telemachus and Nestor's Off-spring got Their Horses in, and mount their Chariot; And through the founding Portico they drove. That they might their Libation pay to Jove, And Favour beg from all the Powers Divine, The King presents them with a Bowl of Wine,
And standing thus before their Horses, spake; Farewell my youthful Princes, merry make, My Commendations to King Nestor bare, Who as a Father had of me a Care, In that long business of the Trojan Siege. Telemachus then; How much you me oblige I shall acquaint him, Ah! could I as well Return'd to Ithaca my Father tell Of all your kindness, and rich Presents shew, Which you on me are pleased to bestow. Thus whil'st they take their Leaves, at parting just A stately Goose up a stern Eagle trust At the Barn door, and carried through the Skies, Women and Men pursuing with loud Cries, And on theIt is evident from this place, and several others, that in Augury the right side was accounted successful, as on the contrary, the lest, ominous, and unfortunate. Iliad. 12. And now to speak my mind I shall not spare, This day th' entrenched Enemy forbear: Bad I suspect that this event will be Since we this towring Engle here did see, Grasping a speckled Serpent, by us glide, Through yielding air, on our sinister side. But when any observation was made from Heaven, the left side was esteem∣ed fortunate. Virgil AEneid. 9. Audiit, & culi genitor de parte serena Intonuit la vum— Because saith Servins on the place, When we look up, what is our left, is the right side of Heaven. right side of the Chariot flew: With joy the Omen glad Spectators view. When to the King Pisistratus thus spake; Of this strange Sign a judgment please to make, If our Concern or yours it signifie. Whil'st Menelaus studied a Reply; Helen preventing him, thus said; Hear me, The Gods are pleas'd I should the Augurer be; As from the Hill this Eagle stooping, did Snatch up a Prey her Aery to feed: Ʋlysses so shall Home return e're long, And call t'account all those that do him wrong. Then thus Telemachus to Her reply'd; Be this from Jove that warms fair Juno's side, Then as a Goddess I will honour Thee. This said, he whips his Steeds, the Horses free, Swift through the City with a looser Rein, In a trice hurries them into Campaign: The jolted Teem-pole rattles all the way, Till Nights black Regiments obscur'd the Day.
To Diocles Court at Pherae on they trot, Whose Sire Orsilochus, Alpheus got, Where they all Night well treated took Repose. But when the purple-finger'd morn arose, They joyn'd their Steeds, and mounted, ply the whip, The Ports resounding, they the Wind out-strip. When neer to Pyle their Journey almost don, Telemachus thus spake to Nestors Son; Dear Friend, may I with thee prevail at all, Our selves we Fellow-travellers may call; By our Sires freindship, and our equall age, And Love begot, thus posting Stage from Stage, At my Ship land me, least your Father stay Me' gainst my will, whom business calls away. This sayd, Pisistratus a while did muse How thus to serve him, and himself excuse: And thus at last concludes; he turns his Steeds, And to the Ship on sea-wash'd margents speeds; Then by the Stern he thrusts into the Hold Atrides costly Presents, Vests, and Gold, Then sayd; Now get aboard, but order some That wait on you, to march before me home, And tell th' old man, well I his humour know, His bounteous soul would never let thee go, Till entertaining he presented thee; To balk his House thus, sure he'll angry be. This sayd, he drives on his free mettal'd Steeds, And through the City to the Court proceeds: When to his Friends Telemachus thus spake; Get straight aboard and all things ready make, That we may in our Voyage speed. This sayd, His Orders, as one man, they all obey'd, The Ship they entred, on their Bancks they sate, All at their work, whilst he did invocate
His Goddess Pallas on the lofty Stern, When he One drawing neer him could discern, Flying for refuge, who a man had slain, A Prophet, one of graveMelampus was eminent among the Gracians for predictions, which continued in his Family, as the art of Physick in Esculapius's, as appears by this Relation, compared with another in Pausanias, where he saies, that E∣perastus the Prophet was descended from Melampus. After his Death; at AEgisthaena he had a Temple consecrated to his Memory, where on his yearly Festival the people sacrifie'd to him. Concerning his Im∣prisonment, and enlargement we have already spoken Iliad eleventh. Hesiod writ the History of his life in his book call'd from his name . Melampus strain, Who once in Pyle a fair Estate enjoy'd, And fled from thence great Neleus wrath t'avoyd, Who in one year by Rapine and a Cheat, Had purchas'd to himself a vast Estate; Whilst in a Dungeon he in Chains lay bound, For Neleus Daughter, in deep sorrows drownd, Almost distracted, never could take rest, Such Snakes Erynnis shot into his Breast: But he scap'd Death, and did from Phylax get The bellowing heard, so paid the unjust debt On Neleus, then to his Brother's House, From thence he brought his long desired Spouse; To Argos then he went, where better Fate Increas'd his Power, augmented his Estate; TherePratus King of Argos, his daugh∣ters being suddenly possess'd with a raging fury, offer'd one of them with part of his Kingdom for a portion to him that should cure them, which was effected by Melampus by the virtue of Ellebore (from him call'd Melampodi∣um saith Pliny) for which he receiv'd the propounded reward, and succeed∣ed Proetus in the Kingdom of Argos. married he, and built a stately House, Had Antiphat, and Mantius, by his Spouse. Antiphates got Oicles the great, And Oicles Amphiaraus gat: Both Jove and Phoebus his admirers were; But he ne'r liv'd to Age, and silver Hair, He dy'd at Thebes upon a Female Plot. Alcmaeon and Amphilochus he got Mantius, Polyphides and Clytus had But in Aurora's golden Chariot rod, Clitus snatch'd up, and took, for Beauty, place In Heaven 'mongst Gods, and the Celestial Race. But Phoebus Polyphides raised high, Above all men inspir'd with Prophesie, Amphiaraus dead: He did retire ToHyperesia was a Cityof Achaia, so call'd from Hyperes the Son of Ly∣caon. Eustathius. Hypersie, t' avoid Paternal Ire.
His Son, Theoclymenus was his name, Now to Telemachus for Refuge came, And found him as he sacrificing pray'd, On the high Stern, and thus imploring, said; Thee since I find thus off'ring on this shore, I by thy Sacrifice, and God, implore, Thy Self, and Friends, to let me know your Name, Your Country, Parents, and whence now you came. Then said Telemachus, the Truth I'll say, Stranger, I boast my Birth in Ithaca, My Sire Ʋlysses, if he yet survive, And fill the Musters up of those alive, For whom long absent I have been in quest, And him to seek this ship and men imprest. To whom Theoclymenus thus reply'd; So I from Home about a Homicide, Fly to thy Refuge; His Relations such, That me to apprehend, they promise much. Since I must wander, my sad Fates Decree, And am as banish'd, take me home with Thee, Lest I be slain, for me they close pursue, My Blood, their vengefull Weapons, to imbrew. When thus Telemachus kindly to him spake; If Thou art willing, I'll not drive Thee back, Come Thou aboard, and Thee from hence I'll bear, And whatsoe'r we have be pleas'd to share, The Prince from him his Jav'lin takes, this said, And down 'mongst Poles, and other Tackle laid, And from the Decks up to the Stern convey'd; Then placing next himself, They anchor weigh'd, Telemachus bids them to their Tackle stand, They readier are to do, then he command. They raise their Mast, and hoyse their Sails a-trip, Whilst with fair Winds Minerva wings their Ship.
On each side broken Billows thunder loud, Whilst foamy brine the Ship in furrows plow'd. Now the Sun setting, Darkness all ore spread, They Phera past, and where th' Epeians swaid, To Elis came, andThoae are Islands which lie East ward of Ithaca, as Cephallenia, where the Suitors lay privily to intercept Te∣lemachus, Westward: They are part of the Ethinades, according to Strabo, and the inhabitants serv'd under the same Prince in the Trojan expedition. But Stephanus in his book de Ʋrbibus, saies, that the Isle Dulichium was call'd , which Homer plurally call'd . the signification of those two words being the same, viz. sharp poin∣ted. Thoae Isles forsook, Fearing his Death, or to be Pris'ner took. Mean while Ʋlysses and the other Swains, Once more with Cates Eumaeus entertains. When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, Ʋlysses try'd Eumaeus if he were, Still in one Humour, or if colder grown, T' advise him from his Cottage to the Town: And thus he said; Eumaeus, and the rest, Because I would not be a tedious Guest, I to the City earnestly intreat To go to morrow, there an Alms to get; Advise me well, and let some one instruct Me on the way, and through the Town conduct, Lest I should wander, whil'st from street to street, Alms I from charitable people get, And to the Court I'll, if I can thrust in, Venture, and something tell the Virtuous Queen. I'll mongst the haughty Sutors, who perhaps, From heap'd up Dishes, me may throw some scraps, Amongst themselves They bountiful may be, But what I'll tell thee think on't as from me; Hermes confers on us our better parts, Fortune, and Honour, and all Liberal Arts: Few dare their strength with me at grasping, try, Dry Wood I cleave, and cut, make Fires Nose high, Well rost I Meat, and skinck rich Wine, and kerve, As We the meaner sort, the better serve. Eumaeus started at the motion, said; What fond Conceit thy Judgment hath betraid.
Hast thou a mind, poor Stranger, there to die? The Sutors insolence invades the Skie, Their high Affronts, and Injuries such they be, They have no Waiters, Gentlemen like Thee, But fresh Young Men, accoutred Al-a-mode, Their hair kem'd out, in their plump cheeks fresh blood, Such them attend, not better taught then fed, Who load the boards with Dishes, Wine, and Bread: But stay; not I, nor any here desires Your absence, Us your Company not tires, And when Telemachus returns to Court, Thee he will cloath, and, where thou wilt, transport. To whom then thus Ʋlysses made reply; Ah would great Jove lov'd thee as well as I, That me wandring and poor hast entertain'd, What's worser then to be a Vagabond? An empty belly business ill designs, When in the Juncto Grief and Errour joyns, But since my leisure well admits my stay, Now something of Ʋlysses Parents say, Whom aged grown He left, if yet they breath, Or else descended to the House of Death. Eumaeus then Prince of the Rustick Youth, Said, I'll inform Thee of the certain truth, Laertes lives, but still imploring Jove, From that Condition him he would remove, Much grieving for his absent Son, and Wife, Who pining for Ʋlysses lost her Life. Whom he espous'd a Maid, so broke her Heart, And He now almost ready to depart. May none that loves me die a Death so sad, And she for me great kindness alwaies had. Long as she liv'd it was her dayly use, To send for me, inquiring after News:
For with her youngest Child Ctimena, she Had foster'd, nor much less esteemed, me: But after both were grown to marriage state, At Samos she provided her a Mate, And on her settled a great Joynter there: Me, she with Shifts, and Vests, and Sandals fair, And all things fitting sent into the Field, And still for me the same affection held; Which now I want: But yet the Powers Divine, I hope, will better Days for me design; Yet here I eat and drink, a Stranger treat, Though nothing of our Queen I can relate That's fit to hear, of which I may complain: A pack of Roysters in her Palace reign. Yet of my Servants oft she questions asks, And one by one, inquirs their several Tasks; Then makes them eat and drink, and something bear, To them at home that may their Spirits cheer. When thus Ʋlysses to Eumaeus spake; Didst Thou thy Native Country e're forsake, And Parents? I am earnest now to know, Or was your City sack'd by any Foe? Where your Relations dwelt, or keeping Sheep? By enemies wert Spirited through the Deep, And here dispos'd of, at no little price. Eumaeus then, the Rusticks Prince, replys; Since you'll my story know, I would injoyn Your silence, siting ore a Bowl of Wine, The Nights are long, there is a time to rest, Or to hear pretty Tales, or pleasant Jest; Repose before the hour did never good, Much sleep the Brain distempers, and the Blood, But whosoe'r would rather go to Bed, Let him his Charge forth in the morning lead,
Breaking his Fast, whil'st here we drink, and eat, And stories sad alternately repeat. Those who have suffer'd much, and travel'd far, Recounting former Griefs delighted are. So now my Tale I'll tell; There is an Isle BeyondOne of the ancienter names of the Island Delos, because, according to the Fabulists, Asteria, to avoid the em∣braces of Jupiter, transformed her self into a Quail, in Greek call'd  and leaping into the Sea was changed into an Island, whence Delos is obscur∣ly describ'd under the title of the winged Quail, by Lycophron in his Cassandra, . Tremo the Monument neer the winged Quail, Waves of the Egean Sea shall ne'r as∣sail. Or rather, according to Phanodemus, in Athenaeus, from the great number of Quails found in that Island. Ortygia, which theyAn Island neer to Ortygia, me∣morable for nothing but that it brought forth Phrecydes the Philoso∣pher, Master to Pythagoras; though commended by our. Poet both for Health and Plenty: but in this he seems to describe the Saturnine age, of which there is no other mention in him. Cer∣tes Hesiod expresses it in sence not much differing from this of Homer's. They liv'd like Gods, without or toyl or care, Nor felt they drooping age when old they were, But strong and active, they delighted still To dance, and died as if asleep they fell. Syria stile, Not great, but fruitful, Vin'yards store they plant, Much Corn, and Pasture have, and know no want, Nor sad Diseases, which poor Mortals have; But when grown old, full ripen'd for the Grave, By Phoebus and Diana they are slain, Insensible of Sicknesses, or Pain. Two Cities there divided all the Land, Which Ctesius my Father did command. Voyages hither the Phenicians made, And with Toys freighted, drove a subtle trade. My Father there kept a Sidonian Dame, Well bred, and fair, at these do Merchants aim, And her from washing did aboard intice, There won to wanton Dalliance in a trice: When condescending, she had quench'd Loves Flame, He ask'd her who she was, and whence she came. She said that Arybas her Father dwelt In Sidon, where no Poverty they felt: But me the Taphians from thence convaid, And to the King her selling, well were paid. Then her Gallant to his new Mistress, spake; Sail with us to thy Native Country, back, That thou thy Parent's stately House may'st see, Who yet are both alive, and wealthy be. Then she reply'd; If solemnly you'll swear, That me in safety you'll to Sidon bear: At this all there, not one of them were loath, But took the Solemn Covenanting Oath.
Then thus she said; If any of you meet At yonder Fountain me, or in the street, Or at the Palace, in the Old Mans Hall, Not the least notice take of me at all; Lest angry, He should me in Chains secure, And you by Folly your own Deaths procure: But when you victual'd, and well freighted are, Straight me inform, I, Gold, and what so e're Lies in my Trust, shall straight from thence convey, And my young Master, at the Gates at play, Foster'd by me, who when you come abroad, May of more value prove, then all your Load. This said; She left them, there a Year they stay'd, Acquiring Riches by a mighty Trade. But when their Vessel They had freighted well, They to the Palace sent one, Her to tell, A cunning Snap, that no man could suspect, Bringing a golden Crown with Amber deck'd: On this my Mother, and her Women look, Much with the Beauty, and Invention took; Beating the Price; He winks, no time let slip, She takes the Sign, and steals down to the Ship: But in the Portal me she snatches up, A curious Table, and a Golden Cup, With which my Father oft his Friends did Treat, Before they march'd unto the Judgment Seat, And three Cups more she in her Bosom hid, And I aNot her Son, as Spondanus on the place conceiv'd, but the prince whom she nurs'd, or govern'd. The name indeed of his Mother is not de∣liver'd by our poet, but Euphorion calls her Panthea, others Penia, or Danae. Child went with her as she bid. Just when the setting Sun obscur'd the Way, We came where theHerodotus notes that the Phoeni∣cians were the first that carried away Captives in this Manner, and enslaved Men, and Women, which was the occ∣sion of the Wars afterwards between Asia and Europe; and therefore are aptly here made the subject of this fig∣ment. Phenician Vessel lay. Them all aboard, They steer their Course design'd, Plowing vast Billows, with a favouring Wind: Six Days and Nights the foamy Brine we plow, But when the seaventh morn shew'd her shining Brow,
Diana kill'd the Strumpet, down she fell, And like a Sea-mew drop'd into the Well: Ore board they threw her to be Fishes food, Whilst I sate weeping to this Port they stood, Where dearly me they to Laertes sold, And so this Country first did I behold. Then said Ʋlysses; Me, Eumaeus, much Thy Fortunes sadly thus related, touch: But Jove hath mix'd thy Lot, that thou so good A Master hast, who Raiment grants, and Food: Though mean, Thou hast enough, when I am hurl'd, In Want, and Woe, despis'd, about the World. Thus various Discourses they recite, Spending with little sleep the tedious Night. But when the Dawn appear'd, all Danger past, Telemachus furl'd his Sails, and struck his Mast, And rowing in their Vessel straight-they Moor, And safely harbour'd, they all went a shore; There eat and drink, and plentifully fare, When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, Telemachus thus to his Mates begun; Now to the City up your Vessel run, I'll to the Fields, and to my Rusticks walk, And there with them on Country business talk. I, in the Morning down to you will come, And give you Breakfasting, your Welcom Home. When Theoclymenus to the Prince thus spake; But where shall I, Sir, my Addresses make? Shall I some noble Person here attend, Or to the Queen, and thy own Palace bend? Then gravely thus Telemachus replys; Not to my Mother, I would thee advise, Though nothing thou couldst want, but yet I fear, It would be worser in my Absence there.
Besides, my Mother is but seldom seen, By those make Court, she plys her Web within: But I'll direct thee unto Polybus Son, Eurymachus, by all now look'd upon As the most fit Penelope to wed, And have the Honour of Ʋlysses Bed: But Jove knows best, whether those Nuptials may Not be prevented by a Fatal Day. This said, aThe Falcon was peculiarly, as other Birds to the rest of the Gods, sa∣cred to Apollo, whence Aristophanes in one of his Comedies, — , , Jove who new reigns as King, bears on his Crest, An Eagle, Pallas with an Owl imprest, I hoebus a Falcon. Which the Grecians seem to have bor∣rowed from the Egyptians: of whom thus writes Aelian; There were cer∣tain Priests of Apollo which were called  Feeders of Hawks: For they are peculiarly consecrated to Apollo, either by the swiftness of their flight, sgnifying the motion of the Sun (that is, Apollo,) or else, , because Hawks alone of all Birds, can without pain look directly against the beams of the Sun. Herodotus saies, that they were had in so great honour in Egypt, that whosoever kill'd one of them, though unwittingly, was certainly put to death. lib. 2. c. 65. Falcon, Phoebus Messenger, Flying, a Dove did in her Pounces bear, Pluming her Quarry, Feathers dropt, andThe ancient Augurs prognosli∣cated from Birds several waies: either from their manner of Flight, or Wing, which Birds were call'd Praept, or else by their Note or Cry, which were call'd Oscines; or else from their fight∣ing with, or devouring, one another, which were call'd by the Latines Vols∣gr: which last sort of Augury is here mention'd, where the Eagle, the En∣sign of a King, betokened Ʋlysses King of Ithaca; the Pigeon the suitors, those whom Ʋlysses was to ergge with. blood, Amidst the ship, and where Telemachus stood. Then him aside Theoclymenus takes, And gently wringing by the Hand, thus speaks; From some kind Power this happy Omen came, For I, dear Prince, in Augury skilful am: No other Stock here Regal power shall gain, But you and yours for ever here shall reign. Then thus Telemachus reply'd; Ah, wo'd; Dear Sir, thou couldst what thou hast said, make good, I should so bountifully play my part, That who e're hears should say, Thou happy art. To Pyreus then his Confident, he said; My Orders Thou hast punctually obey'd, Conduct this worthy Stranger to thy Home, And love, and honour him, until I come. Then he reply'd; Though long thou shalt remain; He shall have no occasion to complain. This said, they went aboard, and Cables lose, And on their several Banks themselves dispose; Whilst on Telemachus his Sandals knits, From whence it hung, down his strong Javelin gets. Their Anchors weigh'd, their Vessel lose, they sail, Up to the City with a leading Gale:
As them the Prince injoyn'd; But he on Foot, Went merrily on until he reach'd the Coat, Where lay the Porkers which Subulcus kept, And He, a Friend toth' Princes, soundly slept.
scene from book 16 Honoratissimo Domino Do Gulielmo Caulfeild Baroni de Charliemont Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib: 16
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE SIXTEENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Telemachus up to Eumaeus goes, Who treats Ulysses kindly, and not knows. Sutors return, their Enterprise in vain. Pallas Ulysses turns t' Himself again. He to his Off-spring doth Himself reveal. Penelope rings Antinous a Peal. EƲMAEƲS and Ʋlysses, by Day-break, Kindle a Fire, andThe antient Grammarians ob∣serve that there were three usual times of eating in the times of the Heroes; the former meal is call'd by Homer  in this place, and but once more, that is Iliad 24. . yet we must not think that this meal was unusual because that word is but twice found in Homer, for he calls it by another name common to other meals, Dinner and Supper, as may appear from these places , for, saith Athenaeus, they fought at break of day. So on Odyss. 1. — Eustathius, , it is manifest that in this place signifies the morning Repast. Break-fast ready make, And sent the rest forth with their grunting Crue: When neer Telemachus, the Cottage, drew, The Dogs about him fawn, the King this saw, And heard one nearer yet, and nearer draw. Thus then Ʋlysses to his Swain begun; Some Friend is neer, some Person sure, well known,
The Dogs at him not bark, though very neer: Now you the trampling of his Foot may hear. Scarce spoke, when ore the threshold steps his Son, To whom, surpriz'd Eumaeus forth did run, And lets his Mazer brim'd with rich Wine fall, T'embrace his Master entring now the Hall, Kissing his Hands, his Cheeks, and sparkling Eys, Whilst down fell Tears in briny Deluges. A Father so receives his dearest Son, Come from far Countries, had been ten years gon, His only Darling, gotten in his Age, For whom his Sorrows he could ne'r asswage: Eumaeus so his Prince did entertain, And him saluted ore and ore again, And oft, as if escap'd from Death, imbrac'd: Then thus with glad Condolements at the last; Com'st thou alive? I thought, my dearest Prince, Ne'r to have seen after you sail'd from hence: Be pleas'd to enter, that I may delight In thy glad Presence, and thy joyful Sight, Who amongst us too seldom, ah! we view, Took up with Sutors, and that ranting Crew. Then said Telemachus; At that I aim, And now on such a business hither came. Remains my Mother still within her House, Or chang'd Condition with another Spouse? And now by this my Father's empty Bed, WellThis is an hyperbolical speech used by the Gretians when they sig∣nified neglected, and deserted, not further used: From whom the L∣tines borrowed it: So Plautus in Au∣lularia. — an nè quis aedes auferat? Nam hic apud nos nihil est alud qusti furibus Ita inaniis sunt oppltae atque araneis. Will not this house be stoln? For no∣thing's left Worth stealing; 'tis of all things else berest But Spiders Webs. and Catullus of his empty Purse, — nam tui Catulli Plenus sacculus st arantarum. Spiders may with Nets and Cobwebs spread. To whom the Rusticks Monarch thus reply'd; She patient in thy House doth still abide, And Day and Night her sorrows never cease, Paying in Tribute briny Deluges. Thus whil'st he spake, he took from him his Lance, And He into the Parlour did advance,
And for his Son, Ʋlysses straight gave place, Which thus Telemachus refusing, saies; Pray Sir, sit still, be pleas'd to keep your Seat, Eumaeus shall for me another get. Ʋlysses reassums his Chair, this said, And he with Boughs, and Skins, a new one made. The Prince thus settled, he supplies the Board, With cold Meats, and with Bread, and Wine well stor'd, And sitting down, they plentifully fare. When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, Telemachus thus to Eumaeus said; Whence came this Stranger hither, how convaid? Of what great Family himself he Boasts? Since he on Foot could never reach our Coasts. Then to the Prince the Rusticks Monarch spake; Well as I can a true account I'll make: From Creet, he saith, him cruel Fates have hurl'd, Through divers Fortunes round about the World; And now some God his Course did hither shape, Here from a Thesprot-Ship he made escape, And found me out: Do with him what you please, For he's your humble Suppliant, he saies. Then thus Telemachus himself declar'd; You put me on a business something hard. How can I give at home this Guest respect? Since I am Young, Pow'r wanting to protect His Person from their Insolence, and Scorn. My Mother's mind by various thoughts is born, Whether she still will keep my Father's Court, Preserve his Bed, and her own fair Report, Or let her noblest Sutor her espouse, And carry with rich Presents to his House. But since he is thy Guest, I'll him afford A Coat, a Vest, new Sandals, and a Sword,
And sign his Pasport wheresoe'r he goes; Mean while amongst you let him here repose. I'll send him Cloaths, and Diet too, lest he, To thee and thine too burthensom should be. I, 'mongst the Sutors would not any trust, Such are their high affronts, and so unjust Which I must suffer in, though ne'r so strong, For many may a single Person wrong, Then said Ʋlysses; Sir, since now I may, Be pleas'd to hear on this, what I can say; I much am troubled, Sirs, at this Report Of ryoting Sutors in Ʋlysses Court, Who in perpetual Rants devour, and swill. Sir, act they thus with, or against your Will, Or have you else incurr'd your Peoples hate, By Revelation from the Book of Fate? Thereunto mov'd by Brothers, and Allies, In whom we trust when Differences arise? Ah! would that I as Young, and Lusty, were, As now You seem, that art Ʋlysses Heir! Or if himself in here should wandring Chop, Which I despair not of, but rather hope,. This Head I'll wager, should I on them fall, If suddenly, I did not rout them all: But should they me ore power, I rather would Dy in my House, then such dire acts behold; Strangers ill treated, Virgins wrong'd, our Wine, And Meat devour'd, and all, on no Design: Then spake the Prince; Sir, I'll the Truth relate; I never yet incurr'd the Peoples Hate; My Brother I not blame, nor dear Allies, In whom wee trust when Differences arise. Jove pleas'd our Stock should still produce butThe Genealogy of Telemachus, is here imperfect, but preserv'd intire by Eustathius, I know not out of what Authour, thus; Telemachus the Son of Ʋlysses, and Penelope; Ʋlysses the Son of Laertes, and Anticlea; Laer∣tes of Arcisius, and Chalcomedusa; Arcisius of Jupiter, and Eurucdia. One: Laertes was Arcisius only Son,
None had Laertes but Ʋlysses, he Left in his Court a tenderAlthough Homer mentions but one son of Ʋlysses, yet the Authour of the Telegonia, an ancient Writer, mentions another, Arcesilans: and Sophocles one call'd Euryalus, slain by Telemachus. Infant, me, Who now am haunted with this spightful Train, The primer sort who in these Islands reign; WhoThree Islands lying round Itha∣ca: for by Samos is here meant Ce∣phallenia, as we have already observ'd out of Strabo. Samos, or shady Zacynthus sway, Dulichium, or our rocky Ithaca, My Mother court, consuming her Estate; She not refuses, nor will chose a Mate: But what we have these Roysters now injoy, Abuse our Palace, and would me destroy. Heaven's Will be don: But go thou straight, and tell The Queen, I'm come from Pyle, am safe, and well, And I till thy return shall tarry here: Be sure when thou inform'st her, none are neer To catch the News, the Sutors many be, And alwaies brewing mischief against me. Eumaeus to Telemachus then said; Sir, your Commands with care shall be obey'd: But as I go along be pleas'd to say, Shall I acquaint Laertes in my way? Who would, though much he for Ʋlysses mourn'd, Look on the Labourers, and oft not scorn'd To tast their homely Cates; But all this while That thou wert absent, and hast sail'd to Pyle, He will nor eat, nor drink, but sighs, and groans, And pining sits, consum'd to Skin and Bones. Then said the Prince, We his tormenting Grief, Not yet can ease, with cordial relief, Till better we inform'd may make't appear, That my dear Father will be shortly here. But to the Court do thou directly bend, And tell the Queen she may a Servant send, May him the News in privat bear. This said, On he his Sandals knits, and ready made,
And hasting forth, Minerva not beheld, Who in a Womans shape her self conceal'd: But straight she forth before Ʋlysses starts, A Beauty skilful in all Female Arts: Neither did her Telemachus espie, Gods to appear to every one are shie. But her Ʋlysses, and the Dogs, beheld, And mute, they fled, where they themselves conceal'd: She beckons to Ʋlysses, he obey'd, And drawing neer to her, thus Pallas said; Disclose thy self, Ʋlysses, to thy Son, And carry Fate, and dire Destruction, To the proud Rivals; I my self shall be Ready, both to assist, and counsel Thee. Then with her golden Wand she touch'd his Vest, Which newly wash'd, became his manly Breast, Which larger grew, his Cheeks waxt plump and fair, His Beard turns brown, and black his hoary Hair. Thus to himself transformed, in he goes, And to his Son amaz'd, himself then shews; Who looking round, much wondring, and afraid, Lest he some God should be, thus trembling, said; You are so alter'd, Sir, from what you were, Neither the same your Cloaths, nor Person, are; You are some God, descended from the Skies: If so, be pleas'd that we may sacrifice, And to thy Deity golden Gifts prepare, That Thou our woful Family wouldst spare. Then thus the King did to his Son reply; Why call'st thou me a God, no God am I, But I thy Father am, whose Bowels yern, About these Sutors, and thy sad Concern. Kissing his Son, this said, Tears, which before Broke not their Sluces, now bedew'd the Floor.
But yet the Prince could not himself persuade, He saw his Father, but thus doubting, said; Th' art not Ʋlysses, but some Drolling God, That me would yet with more afflictions load: Thou art some Deity, no Mortal could Cast aged limbs thus in aThat is, so suddainly. For the Ancients did conceive it to be in the power of man by virtue of Herbs, and Minerals, to retrive decaied nature, and to restore it to its former strength, and vigour: as appears by the story of Medea, who by a Medicine boyled in a Cauldron composed of sundry Herbs, and Roots, and pretious stones of like nature, with the dew of the Night, and spume of the Moon, and the flesh, and wings of Schreech-owls, and other ingredients, restored Old Aeson to his Youth again; thus at large de∣scribed by Ovid in his Metamorphosis; —stricto Medea recludit Ense senis jugulum, veteremque exire cruorem Passa replet succis; quos postquam com∣bibit Aeson, Ant ore exceptos aut vulnere, barba, co∣maeque Canicie posita nigrum rapuere clorem: Pulsa fugit macies, &c. Medea cuts the old mans throat, out scrus'd His scarce-warm blood, and her Re∣ceipt infus'd, His mouth, or wound, suck'd in. His Beard, and Head Black hair forthwith adorns, the hoary shed. Pale colour, morphue, meager-looks remove, And under-rising flesh his wrinckles smooth. His imbs wax strong and lusty. Aeson much Admires his Change: himself remem∣bers such, Twice twenty Summers past. With all, endu'd A youthful mind, and both at once re∣new'd. Youthful mould. Now you were Grey, your Garments rent, and bare, Now one of the Celestial List appear. When thus the King to his dear Off-spring said; Be not surpriz'd with Wonder, nor dismaid, Thou ne'r shalt see another Father here, Whose absence now hath finish'd twenty year, Tost and turmoil'd, through Seas, and Countries, hurl'd, Returning to his Home, through all the World. But this Minerva did, she shapes can fain, And me thus change unto my self again; Now a Young man, in comely Habit deck'd, The Gods can us ennoble, or deject. This said, no longer the Young Prince forbears, But hugging of his Father, shed salt tears, And he his Son in strict embraces kept, And both alike ore one another wept. As Eagles cry, with bitter sorrow, stung, When Rusticks bear away their callow Young; So from their Eys did briny Rivers run In joyful Spouts until the setting Sun, Had not the Prince thus to Ʋlysses said; How were you hither, Royal Sir, convaid? From whence? what Master did your ship command? For hither sure you could not come by Land. Then to his Off-spring thus the King begun; I'll tell Thee, tell Thee all, my dearest Son, Me the Pheacians through the Ocean bore, And sleeping left upon my Native Shore,
With Gold, and Silver store, with Robes, and Vests, Put up in Fardels, or kept safe in Chests: Which in a Cave the Goddess did conceal, And bid me now I should my self reveal, That we may plot against the Enemy. But stay, how many of these Roysters be, That I may know, and gravely then advise, If them our selves w' are able to chastise; Or whether we should draw to us more aid. Then thus Telemachus to his Father said; Sir, I have heard what Fame you alwaies gave, Valiant to be in Field, in Counsel grave: Well you advise, but 'tis beyond my Hope, That two with many Valiant men should cope; Not two, nor ten to one, but many more, Which I, well as I can, will reckon ore: Twice twenty six from the Dulichian State, With six Attendants, on her Answer wait; From Same, Valiant Striplings twenty four, And fromAn Island in the Ionian Sea, not many Leagues distant from Ithaca, now called Zant. Zacynthus, we count twenty more, Ithacans twelve, are early there and late, On whom the Herald and thePhemius the Son of Terpius, Odyss. 22. Poet wait: Two more there are that Dishes marshal up, And at their Elbows when they Dine, and Sup. If we should charge all these, our selves then might Fall unreveng'd, in the unequal Fight; But if y' are able, some more Forces list, And who most willing are us to assist. Then said Ʋlysses; Thee a truth I'll tell, Of which, when th' art inform'd, consider well; If Jove and Pallas pleas'd, would us assist, What need we muster others in the List? Then said the Prince; If They be on our side, With a sufficient Party w' are supply'd.
They sitting on Olympus, have the Ods, Both of poor Mortals, and Immortal Gods. Then said Ʋlysses; Now the time draws neer, When who shall have the better, will appear In cruel fight 'twixt us, and that proud Crew, Whose blood our Walls, and Weapons shall imbrew. But with the Dawn return Thou to the Court, And there with Drols, and Buffoons, talk, and sport, Whilst me Eumaeus to the City leads, Clad like a poor Old man, in tatter'd Weeds: But if Thou see that there they me abuse, Keep down thy swelling Breast, and Patience use: Though through the Hall they by the Feet me drag, And ore me punching with their Javelins, brag, Retain Thy self, and them with Language fair, Advise they would such foolish tricks forbear: But they will still go on, nor Thee obey, Because draws neer to them the fatal Day. But one thing more now closet in thy mind, Which Pallas, who devises well, design'd; When I shall nod, what ever arms doe ly About the House neglected, lay Thou by In thy own Chamber; If the Sutors ask, With gentle Language, our dire Purpose mask. Tell them they are remov'd, beeing spoyl'd with smoak, And smutted, nothing like those Weapons look Ʋlysses left, when he to Ilium sail'd, With sooty smoke their glittering lustre foil'd, Next, I, what Jove commands, do Thee injoyn; If we should quarrel, warm'd with lusty Wine, And splendid Banquets turn to bloody Fights, Arms are inticing, and dire Steel invites, For us two Swords, two Shields, two Javelins leave, To Charge, whom Pallas will, and Jove deceive:
Next, if from us Thou dost Thy stock derive, And art my Son, tell this to none alive. This from Laertes, and Eumaeus, we Must keep, and all, nay from Penelope: Next, Thou, and I, must first the Women find, And then how our Domesticks are inclin'd; Which of them us still honour, and still fear, And which for me and my Concerns do care. When thus to him the Gallant Youth replys; Sir, knew you me, you would not Cowardice Lay to my charge: This hard to us will prove, W' have many great impediments to remove, And long, and hard, you know would be the Task, To take them One by One, and questions ask, Since they all settled, and contented are, To eat Thee up, and what Thou hast, not spare. But first, to move the Women I advise, Who Thee, stirr'd by Femality, despise, The Men pass over, Them to try forbear, Till Jove discovers what a Pack they are. Thus they amongst themselves discours'd. Mean while The Ship that brought Telemachus from Pyle, And all his kind Associats, up They bore Into the Harbour, laying close a-shore Their Arms, and Tackle, and rich Presents bare To Clytius House, and left in safety there, And straight sent to Ʋlysses Palace, One, T' inform the Queen Telemachus was gon Up to the Field, least that the Queen salt Tears Should pay, no Custom due, to Tyrant Fears: The Herald, and Eumaeus, met full Butt, Each ready with their Message, piping hot: Entring the Court, the Herald could not hold, But the glad tydings to each Gigglet told;
Whilst up Eumaeus to the Queen did run, And told her what commanded had her Son: His Errand told, Eumaeus then at large, Porsakes the Court, and goes unto his Charge. But this bad News the Sutors much amates, And out they went, and sat before the Gates, And in close juncto there their business weigh'd, When thus Polybus Son Eurymachus said; Telemachus hath a great business don, Of which, we twenty would have laid to one: Let our Consult be brief, no time let slip, But with all speed send forth a well-rig'd Ship, Them to inform, and hasten to come back. Amphinomus saw their Vessel as they spake, Bare to the Port within imbracing shores, Furling their Sails, and lifting up their Oars. Then smiling, said; Yonder our Friends appear, We need not send advice, for they are here. Some God inform'd them, or his ship in view, Infatuated, they could not pursue. This said; The Princes rising, went a shore, And lusty Sailers their stout Vessel moor. Then to a frequent Council they all throng, Not suffering one to speak, nor Old, nor Young. When thus Antinous said; Heaven mocks our Hopes, All Day some sate on windy Mountain tops, And at Sun-setting, him to intercept, We tack'd about at Sea, and never slept, That we at once might take him, and dispatch, Whom sure a Guardian Deity doth watch, And thus convai'd unto his Native Shore. But now our business do, lose time no more, If we would finish what we have design'd; The Young Man's parts are great, and high his mind:
To us the Peoples favour now grows small, Let's do his Work e're he a Council call, There us he'll charge, and the whole Court incense, How they conspir'd the Murther of a Prince, Which they'll so take, that us they will exile To live unhappy in a forein Soyl: Let's intercept him e're he reach the Town, And share his Wealth, and Fortunes, as our own; To's Mother all the movables afford, And whomsoe'r she choseth for her Lord: But if this Counsel you not well receive, Let him enjoy his Father's state, and live; Then we no more must banquet in his House, But each at Home seek out some wealthy Spouse. This said, all silent were, when Nisus Son Amphinomus, Dulichium's Prince, begun, Whose Courtship best Penelope did please, Who still Dissentions labour'd to appease. Kill not Telemachus, the Royal Heir, But to the Gods forThat is, Let us consult some O∣racle: for the Grammarians, in stead of the word , read , pro∣thecies, Oracles.  was the name of the Mountain in Epirus, on which the Temple of Jupiter was built in Dodona, so much celebrated for Re∣sponses, whence the word afterward signified a Prophet, as in Lycophron, . Now Eustathius elsewhere observes, that the Grecians had often deposed their Princes upon the meer command of an Oracle. Counsel first repair. If Jove his Death's Commission please to sign, Boldly go on; If not, the Fact decline. Pleas'd with th' advice, up they their Council broke, And in Ʋlysses Hall their places took. Mean while the Queen, to ease her troubled Breast, To the Conspirators her self addrest; Medon had told her all; Chaf'd, she descends, Her comely Damsels on each hand attends: Veiling her Cheeks, she at the threshold staid, And thus aloud taxing Antinous, said; Accurst Antinous, thou who'art so much Fam'd for good parts, and yet hast nothing such; To kill my Son, why hast thou Plots prepar'd, Nor hast to Jove, and Piety, regard?
And evil thus for good repay'st, nor know'st, When first thy FatherEupithes, saith Eustathius. shelter'd on our Coast, Fearing the people, who against him rag'd, When with theThe Taphians inhabited some small Islands neer to Ithaca, one of which was Taphos, afterwards call'd Taphiusa. They were formerly call'd Teleboae, noted for Piracy. Taphian Pyrats he engag'd Against our Thesprot Friends, him th' had destroy'd, Plunder'd his House, and his Estate enjoy'd, Which then Ʋlysses hind'ring, sav'd his Life, And now you eat him out, would wed his Wife, Murther his Son, and me with Sorrow kill: You, and the rest forbear, his blood not spill. Eurymachus then, Polybus Son, reply'd; Best Queen, on my Integrity confide, Lay by your fears, none here, whil'st I draw breath, Shall hint the smallest motion for his Death; Who e're attempts, by all the Gods I swear, Shall purple, with his reeking Blood, my Spear. Oft on his Lap Ʋlysses me hath set, Giv'n me sweet Wine, and many a savory bit: Therefore thy Son I love, and most admire, What e're the Princes shall 'gainst him conspire, I bid him not to fear, nor mind their Ods, When I have on my side offended Gods. Thus he persuades, and yet his Death conspires. Thence to her Chamber the chast Queen retires, Where for her Lord, her Cheeks salt Rivers steep, Till Pallas cast Her in a golden Sleep. Eumaeus, e're the Day his Course had run, Came back unto Ʋlysses, and his Son; And in the Cottage Supper they prepare, Slaught'ring a Yearling Porker, fat, and fair. But Pallas did behind Ʋlysses stand, And Old again made, touching with her Wand, And clad in Rags, lest he his King should know, And back to th' Queen with the glad Tydings go.
Telemachus then to Eumaeus said; What News in Town, are from their Ambuscade The Sutors rose, or in the Field now lie Passing to seize me? Then Eumaeus; I Not my self troubled questions more to ask, But straight return'd, having perform'd my Task. Where from thy Vessel I did one behold, Who the glad News first to thy Mother told. And neer the City on aCall'd Hermaeum from the Statue of Hermes, ('that is, Mercury) standing on it. Eustathius. Hillock's side, Up to the Port, I saw a stout Ship glide, With Men, and Arms, fit to receive a Foe, These I suppose are they, more I not know. Telemachus on's Father smil'd, this said, And from Eumaeus turn'd aside his Head. Their Labour done, their Supper straight they drest, Nor wanted Will to make a sumptuous Feast. When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, They to their several Dormitors repair.
scene from book 17 Edoardo Bysshe de Surey Equiti Aurato Smalfeild in Comitatu Tabulam hanc IMDDDDO Lib. 17.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Telemachus leavs the Farm, and walks to Town, Ulysses follows in a Beggars Gown. Argus his Dog, his Lord disguised knows. To crave an Alms he'mongst the Sutors goes: They fill his Scrip, but Him Antinous strikes. His Son's Resentments, and his Queen's dislikes. SOON as in th' East appear'd the blushing Dawn, The Prince his curious Sandals did clap on, Takes up his Spear well-fitted to his Hands, And going forth, Eumaeus thus commands; I go, that first my Mother me may see, Who, nor from Tears, nor Sorrow, will be free Till I a Visit make; But You I bid, This hapless Stranger to the City lead:
There up, and down, He craving Alms, may go, Plying those few, are willing to bestow: I am not able, thus ore powr'd with Grief, To give to every one in want, Relief. This if he like not, he may worser fare, They are good Friends, that no Dissemblers are. Then thus Ʋlysses to his Son reply'd; I here desire no longer to abide, In Towns, our Scrips, and Bottles, oft are fill'd, Alms drop but thin, and coldly, in the Field, No longer here I lingering shall stay, But what my Master orders, shall obey. Be pleas'd Eumaeus, shew me to the Town, Since thin my Vest, and threadbare is my Gown: I at a little Fire my self would warm, Lest me thus clad, the morning Dew may harm; They say the City is far off from hence. Forth went, this said, with speed the active Prince, And going gainst the Sutors, Plots contriv'd: As soon as at the Palace He arriv'd, Against a Column he his Javelin plac'd, And ore the Marble threshold step'd in hast, Whom Euryclea', dressing up the Hall, Ord'ring the Chairs, and Seats, spy'd first of all, And weeping, to him ran, Damsels, a throng Imbracing gather, and about him hung. Penelope from her Appartment came, Like bright Diana, or the Cyprian Dame, And with glad Tears to his imbraces flies, Kissing his rosie Cheeks, and sparkling Eys, And like a tender Mother, question'd thus; Art come my Dear, come my Telemachus; I never thought alass to see Thee more, When Thou for Pyle forsook'st thy Native Shore:
But tell me what hath happen'd since you went To seek your Father without my'Tis apparent, that according to Homer, Telemachus travail'd without the knowledge of Penelope; where∣fore I take that to be the meaning of Ovid in Penelope's Epistle, Ille per insidias pene est mihi nuper a∣demptus, Dum parat, invitis emnibus, ire Py∣lon. Consent. Then said the Prince; Mother, let Sorrows rest. Nor Passions stir fermented in the Breast, It is enough that Death not seiz'd me hath, Go up with your Attendants to your Bath. Then vested in yourHomer usually express'd that purity of mind required of those that made their supplications to God, by the washing of the Hands, as Odyss. 12. But here he adds another rite of the same nature, the putting on of clean garments, not to be observ'd in any other part of his Works. cleanest Garments come, And offer to the Gods a Hecatomb, Imploring Jove, what he begun, to end; But I must to the Change to call a Friend, That came with me; Gon with Pyreus Home, Order'd to treat him well, until I come. This said, Penelope took her Son's advice, Bath'd, and fresh Garments put on, in a trice, And with a Sacrifice the Altars loads, Jove's aid imploring, and all favouring Gods. The Prince walks forth, arm'd with a glittering Spear, His Dogs, his faithful Guard, attendants were? Pallas with heavenly raies his Temples deck'd, That all admir'd his Mein, and brave aspect; Whil'st round about the Sutors fauning, throng, Gall in their Bosoms, Honey in their Tongue. He their Croud waving, to old Mentor bends Alitherse, and Antiphas, his Father's friends. Whil'st they together there discoursing, sat, Pyreus up to them the Stranger brought: Telemachus not his respects delaid, But up he stands, when thus Pyreus said; Your Gifts let Damsels to the Palace bear, Which by the Spartan King presented were. Pyreus then Telemachus reply'd; How may they there secur'd, as mine abide! Me the proud Sutors plot to murther there, That they may my Paternal Fortunes share,
I'd rather thou, then they should'st them enjoy, But if those would destroy me, I destroy, Send them with joy then to my House: This said, He by the Hand the Stranger Home convaid. As soon as they within the Palace drew, Their Vests aside on Beds, and Seats, they threw, Then to sweet Baths they went, where cleans'd from soil, Damsels their skins suppled with perfum'd Oyl; Then on them richer Vests, and Mantles cast, And leading out, in Chairs prepared, plac'd. Water to wash their Hands a Virgin Sewer Pours in bright Silver, from a golden Ewer: Next, spreads the Table, sets on Bread, then plac'd Dishes in order, grateful to the tast: Plying her Loom, his Mother there did cull. The softer Fleece, and carded purple Wool, Whil'st fall too, and plentifully fare. When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were, My dear Telemachus, the Queen then said, I'll now retire, where I'm no sooner laid On my sad Couch, but trickling Tears distil, Which wash my Pillow, and my Bosom fill, Since my Ʋlysses sail'd to Ilium, But you'll not tell me e're the Sutors come, What you abroad have of your Father heard. Then thus Telemachus himself declar'd; Mother, I will the truth to you relate; We went to Pyle, where Nestor us did treat, And us'd me as a Father would his Son, Return'd from travel, had been absent long: Such was my joyful Welcom, such our Cheer; But of my Father he did nothing hear, If dead, or yet alive: But me he sent To Menelaus, Horse, and Chariot, lent:
There I fair Helen saw, upon whose score, Trojan and Grecians with commixed Gore Dy'd Phrygian Plains; The King of me enquires Wherefore I came, I told him my desires; When thus to me the Royal Spartan said; A feeble Wretch so fills a Heroes Bed, A Hind so in a Lyons Den, her Fauns Secures, then wanders fertile Vales, and Launs, When he returning straight devours them all; So would Ʋlysses on these Sutors fall. Would Phoebus, Jove, and Pallas, Him assist, As when at Lesbos, entering the List: He threw Philomelides on his Back, When joyful shouts rung like a Thunder-crack. To these Corrivals he would prove as kind, They soon should sad, and bitter Nuptials find. But to the Point, in pitty of thy Youth, I'll not extenuate, nor wave the Truth; WhatProteus; whose account of Ʋ∣lysses, deliver'd Odyss. 4. is here ver∣batim repeated. Proteus told me, shall not be conceal'd, Who said, That Him he in an Isle beheld, Whom, 'gainst his will, Calypso did detain, No means to see his Native Soyl again: There he laments, wants Shipping, Men, and Oars, That should transport him from inchanted shoars. Such was th' account he gave, from thence the Gods With fair Winds sent me to my own Aboads. This, new Commotions in her Bosom made, To whom Theoclymenus thus then said; Best Queen, Your Son knows little, but I'll tell, That am Prophetick, and shall Truth reveal, Jove I attest, the greatest of the Gods, Thy Hospitality, and these Aboads, Arriv'd, Ʋlysses now abscondeth neer, And all their Plots, and Villany doth hear,
Whose sure Destruction now he hath contriv'd, I saw theA pigeon devour'd by a Falcon, mention'd in the latter end of the fif∣teenth book. Omen just as we arriv'd, And to thy Son my Observation made. Ah! couldst Thou make this out, the Queen then said, I such returns, and kindness should impart, That all should say, a Happy man thou art. Whil'st thus they talk'd within, just at the Gates The Rivals Javelins threw, and play'd at Coyts, Where they before their Consultation held. But when neer Supper, Sheep come from the Field, Medon whom they lov'd best, and did attend, Still at their Feasts, said; When your Game you end, That we your Supper may prepare, walk up, 'Tis not accounted wholsom late to sup. This said, they all went in, their Vests and Coats In their Seats laying; Sheep, and well-fed Goats, And fatted Swine, with a huge Ox they drest, Then having sacrific'd, prepar'd to Feast. Mean while Ʋlysses, and Eumaeus, made Hast to the Town, when thus the Swinherd said; You to the Town desire to walk to Day, As our Lord bids, and Lords we must obey: But I had rather you would here abide, But then my Master would be sure to chide. Come, let us now make hast, the Day grows Old, And closes of the Evenings oft prove Cold. Kindly himself Ʋlysses thus exprest; Your Orders, Friend, I closet in my Breast, So let us march, lead you, and I'll attend. And since we must make hast, your staff me lend: You say the way is rough, and I may slip. This said, He ore his shoulder threw his Scrip, Which worn in Holes, hung on a twisted Thong, His staff He lends him, and they walk along,
And leave the Farm, by Dogs, and Rusticks watch'd, Then like an Old man leaning, poor and patch'd, In Beggars habit, on he leads the King, Through rough waies, neer the Town, unto the Spring, From whence the City all their Water had, WhichThese were three sos of Pe∣lerans: From the one the Island, and City receiv'd its name, Ithaca; from the other, the Mountain Neritum; and from the last, a place call'd Poly∣ctorium. Ithacus, Nerit, and Polyctor made, Planting a Grove of pleasant Trees about, Cold crystal falling from a marble Spout: And to theThese Nymphs were of three several kinds among the ancients, as Homer in one of his Hymns distin∣guisheth them, Those here meant, are the Naiades, or Ephydriades, whom antiquity call'd the daughters of the Ocean, because all Fountains have their origination from thence. Nymphs above an Altar plac'd, Where weary Travellers offer'd as they past, There he Melanthus, Dolius Son oretook, Leading the Goats, the primest of the Flock, Must Sutors feast, which two Swains after drove: Whom thus he taunts; which much the King did move: One Villain leads another, 'tis Joves Will, That like to like must go together still. Where, Swin-herd, leadst thou this thy hungry Mate, Who begging scraps, hath crowching at the Gate, His shoulders broke; how he a Feast would rout? Chargers, and Swords fit no such heavy Lout: But lend him me, and he shall sweep my Coats, Look to my Flocks, and feed my tender Goats, And Whey shall swill untill his belly sag, But since he will not work, but rather beg To feed his hungry Paunch, let him beware He go not to Ʋlysses House, lest there, About his Head, their Foot-stoles flie as thick As Hail, whil'st him about the Hall they kick. This said, he strikes Ʋlysses on the Hip. But he stood firm, him up he could not trip: Who ready with his staff to knock him down, And teach more manners to a Buffle-head Clown, Patient, forbears: which as Eumaeus spies, Rateing him first, his Hands rais'd to the Skies,
He thus begins an Execrating Prayer; You Fountain Nymphs, Joves beauteous race, if e're Ʋlysses offer'd you the brawny Thighs Of well-fed Lambs, and Kids, in Sacrifice, Ah! grant me my Request, that He may come, Conducted by his better Angel, Home: He'l spoil your Pride, which wand'ring up and down You boast, both in the Country, and the Town, Whil'st wicked Swains destroy the numerous Flock. When thus Melanthius the Goat-herd spoke; For what Thou say'st, Dog, I shall thee convay, In a good Ship e're long from Ithaca, For whom, I bart'ring, should my Garner fill. Would Phoebus, this Telemachus would kill, Or let the Sutors Him to day dispatch, They long may look, that for Ʋlysses watch. This said, muttering Replies, He left them there, And to the Court, with speed, made his Repair, There 'mongst the Sutors for a place He prest Against Eurymachus, who lov'd him best: Who from their several Messes, him afford Choice Cates: Waiters with Bread supply the Board. Eumaeus and Ʋlysses then drawn neer, A well-strung Harp, and Phemius singing, hear: The King by th' Hand taking Eumaeus, said; This Court of old was for Ʋlysses made, You easily may know it at first sight, The Hall adorn'd, the Wall and Trench not slight, The double Gates are fortifi'd so well, They mock all Force or Power of Humane skill, But many sure invited Guests are met, And merry, now at plenteous Tables set. I a good Treatment smell, the Harp I hear, Which heaven ordain'dThe Grecians were so far addi∣cted to the study of Musick, from the very foundation of their Common∣wealths, that their common discourse became afterwards Musical: but they especially us'd it in their Temples, and at their Banquets, and Entertainments: whence is that of Horace, concerning the Harp, Divitum mensis & amica Templis Nor does Homer ever describe a Ban∣quet without it. Which Custom Vir∣gil translated out of him, into the Ban∣quet of Dido; — cithara crintus Iopas Personat aurata, docuit quae maximus Atlas. Hic canit erraentem Lunam, Solisque labores, Ʋnde hominum genus, & pecudes, unde imber & ignis, Arcturum, &c. —whil'st curl'd Iopas plaies Upon his golden Harp, great Atlas laies. He changing Moons, and the Suns la∣bours sung, Whence Men, and Beasts, whence Showrs and Lightning sprung, The Bears, Triones, Kids foretelling Rain; Why Winter's Suns run head-long to the Main. The Instrument chiefly at that time us'd was the Harp, call'd by our Poet  and Quintilian lib. 1. Institut. Orat. Ʋnde etium ille mos, ut in conviviis post coenam circumferre∣tur lyra. Whence rise the Custom that at Banquets after Supper a Harp was carried about. Pind. Olymp. 1. speak∣ing of Hiero King of Syracuse, He loves sweet Musick best, Such as is usual at a Feast: But take me down the Dorick Lyre From the nail. Companion to good Cheer.
Then thus Eumaeus to Ʋlysses said; You know, who have so long experience had, But now let us consult what's best to do; Either do Thou first in the Palace go, And walk up to the Hall, and here I'll stay, Or tarry here, and I will shew the Way: But be not long, lest whoe're Thee first spies, Shall strike, or drive away, thus I advise. Then said the King; Discreetly dost thou say, Go Thou in first, and here a while I'll stay: I'm us'd to stripes, my sides are hard with Blows, My Heart grown steel, enduring Woes on Woes, Turmoil'd in Battels, tost on swelling Seas, Banging, and Kicks, are flea-bitings to these. The hungry Belly in each Corner hunts, For which we suffer many sad Affronts: To feed the Paunch, stout Ships we man, and rig, With mischief, and our enemies ruine big. Whil'st such Discourse amongst themselves they had, His Dog pricks up his Ears, and rais'd his Head, Argus, whom oft before he went to Troy, Ʋlysses fed, for others to enjoy. With him in's absence the young men were wont, Wild Goats, and swifter Hares, and Deer, to hunt: But now he lay in a dejected state, Upon a Dunghil just before the Gate, That Mules, and Steeds congested with their Dung; Which Swains on the improving pasturage flung. There lay poor Argus, full of Ticks, and knew His Royal Master, as towards him he drew, Wagging his Tail, and couching close his Ear, But could not stir; at which he stole a Tear, Which hiding from Eumaeus, thus he said; I wonder here this Dog his Bed hath made,
He hath been large and fair, of swiftest Breed, And such as Princes at their Tables feed. Then he reply'd; This once fair, fat, and young, Did to Ʋlysses (Dead I fear) belong, When he to Troy with Agamemnon went, You would admire his swiftness, strength, and scent: Through Groves and Thickets, He the Game, in view, Or hunting on the Foot, would swift pursue: But now grown Old, absent, or dead his Lord, The Women negligent, not him regard: Servants when that their Masters absent are, To execute their Duties, little care. Half of their industry Jove takes away, Slaves care not what comes on't, wheres none t' obey. This said, He ventur'd through the arched Gate, And went directly where the Sutors sat: But Argus Eys the sullein Prcaae seal'd, When he his LordPliny in his Natural History, Vivunt Laconici (canes) annis denis, foeminae duodenis; caetera genera quin∣decim annos, aliquando viginti. The Laconian Dogs live ten years, the Fe∣males twelve: other sorts live fifteen, sometimes twenty: in which he follows Aristotle. But Aelian in his History of Animals, produceth the life of a Dog to fourteen years only. twenty years past beheld. When first Telemachus Eumaeus saw Coming, He beckon'd, neerer him to draw: But He looking about straight took his Seat, Neer where the Cook distributed the Meat About the Hall unto the Feasting Crew, And neer Telemachus his Table drew, When seated by himself, the Herald brought His Dishes, and the Board with Manchet fraught, Straight after him Ʋlysses, hung in Rags, Enters the Hall, his Bottles, and his Bags: Like an old Beggar down within the Gate, Before the Ashen Portico, he sate: His back against the Cypress Entrance staid, With rich Crotesk engraven, and boscade. Telemachus then to Eumaeus spoke, And a whole Manchet from the Charger took,
With as much meat as both his Hands could hold; Bear to yon Stranger this, bid him be bold, And round of all the Sutors Alms implore, Bashfullness sutes not Persons that are poor. Thus order'd, straight Eumaeus him obey'd. And drawing neer, thus to Ʋlysses said: The Prince, this Plate, and Manchet, sends to thee, Advising, that you would their Charity From all the Sutors, round the Hall, implore, Modesty sutes not Persons that are poor. The Prince, Ʋlysses said, Jove happy make, And prosper all things He shall undertake. And with both Hands, this said, puts up the Meat In a foul Wallet, lying at his Feet. Mean while the Poet heavenly raptures sung, And Supper ended, up his Harp he hung. Then various prattle, ecchoing Voices made, When Pallas drawing neer Ʋlysses, said; Now craving Alms among the Sutors go, That Thou their several Characters may'st know, But how so e're He spar'd none of them all. Then craving Alms, He speaks about the Hall, At each ones back, He like a Beggar stands, Importuning them with extended Hands. The Princes all Him pity, and admire, Ask whence He came, who He might be enquire. When thus Melanthius the Goat-herd spake; Hear me you worthy Heroes, that here make Addresses, hoping to espouse our Queen; This sturdy Beggar I before have seen, Eumaeus brought Him here, but I not know, Whether He may be call'd a Friend, or Foe. When thus Antinous, Subulcus chid; Why didst Thou to the Town this Vagrant lead?
Have we not yet enough of such fine Guests, A pack of wand'ring Rogues at all our Feasts? Think'st Thou it fit to bring one here to sup, Would us devour, and eat thy Master up? When thus Eumaeus on Antinous fell; Sir, this your speech is not digested well, Whoe're invites a Stranger, treats him fair, Those who be Tradsmen, or Mechanicks are; A Poet, or Physitian, or whose Voice At Banquets, makes both Poor, and Rich, rejoyce: Such famous Men are entertain'd by all, That none: are pinch'd by Poverty, they call Of all that's here; You worst to please still be, Still finding faults, but piquing most at me: But I regard not you, nor all your spleen, Whilst here the Prince dwells, and our gracious Queen, When thus Telemachus to Eumaeus spake; Be silent Sirrah, and no answer make, Antinous loves to meddle thus, and brawl, Himself to trouble, and disturb the Hall. Then turning towards Antinous he went on; You use me as a Father would his Son, That from my House driving poor Strangers, still Officious art, but sure 'tis not Jove's Will: Give him an Alms, I beg it, neither fear, My Mother, Sir, nor any Waiter here, But this not your Design, you'll rather stay, Devour't your self, then any give away. Then thus Antinous boldly did retort; Sweet Prince, your speech methinks is something smart, If each should give as much as I bestow'd, At Home, three months, Cates would his Table load. Here threatning, he a Foot-stoole up did whip, Whilst all the rest with Doles fill'd up his Scrip.
Ʋlysses then e're his retreat he made, Stopping before Antinous thus said; Dear Sir, your Charity to me impart, Sure thou art Rich, so like a Prince Thou art, Therefore on me you better may bestow, And I shall praise thee wheresoe're I go. I once was wealthy, had a fair Aboad, And oft on Strangers what I had bestow'd: I many Servants kept, had all things which Make People Happy, and accounted Rich: But Jove destroy'd it, who doth what he list, And me with Crusing Privateers dismist: For Egypt we a tedious Voyage had, At last, we in the pleasant River rode, Then to the Company I gave Command To moor their Ships, and by no means to land, And sent forth Spies, that should the Country view; But they ore daring, the poor Natives slew, And fell to plunder the Egyptian Field, The Women ravish'd, tender Infants kill'd: The Country to the City gives th' Alarms, Who with the Dawn drew forth in glittering Arms, Both Horse, and Foot shining in steel compleat, And so Jove pleas'd, that straight they us defeat, Not any stood, but all the Field forsook, Many they kill, and many Pris'ners took. To do their Drudgeries, me toAlthough Cinyras be King of Cyprus in the Iliads; yet he being dead, this Dmetor the son of Jasus seems to have reign'd in his room. Eu∣stathius. Metor gave, Who reign'd in Cyprus, there to be his Slave: From thence I hither, as you see, forlorn, Ventur'd through Worlds of woes, still Fortunes scorn. When thus Antinous himself exprest; What God this wandring Rogue sent to our Feast? Stand farther off, lest Thou at once do see, Aegypt, and Cyprus acted ore by me,
Thou impudent and lying Rascal, go, Thou beg'st of each, and All on thee bestow: There is no spare, no pity, none forbid To cut large slivers from another's Bread, Since there's no Want. When thus Ʋlysses spoke; Sir, in your Judgment sure you are mistook: In your own House, you scarce wouldHe exprobrates to Antinous by this expression, his Inhospitality, of which Salt was the Symbol among the ancients, which was therefore first brought to Table, and last carried a∣way. Salt afford, That art thus pinching at another's Board; That from such Plenty wilt not me Carress With one smal bit of Bread, in my Distress. At this Reply Antinous, almost mad, Frowning on Him, in much Distemper, said; Thou never shalt unpunish'd leave this Court, That dar'st so sawsily to us retort. Then with his stool him on the shoulder struck, But he the fall took, standing like a Rock: Nor more was moved at Antinous blow. Then silent, thinking on Revenge, did go Back to the Door, there sitting down, he laid His full Scrip by, then to the Sutors said; Hear you that court the Queen, and here now Feast, The sudden Dictates of my troubled Breast; Men are not griev'd when they receive a stroke, Fighting to save their Cattel, or their Flock; But from Antinous I my payment have, By ill-advising Hunger forc'd to crave: But if the Gods the Poor revenge, then He May Death espouse, before he married be. Then he reply'd; Sit quietly, and eat, Or else be gon, lest Thee the Waiters treat In a worse manner, who dar'st thus retort, Kick, cuff, and drag Thee round about the Court. They all dislik'd, he so much on him took, Then one of them to him thus boldly spoke;
I must confess, Antinous, a dislike, Objects of Charity any one should strike. What if some GodIt was the opinion of the an∣tients, that the Gods often assum'd a humane shape, in which, they viewed the world, and the actions of mankind. So Ovid lib. 1. Metamorth. of Jupiter, Contigerat nostras infamia temporis au∣res, Quam cupiens falsam, summo delabor Olympo. Et Deus humana lustro sub imagine ter∣ras, &c. The Times accus'd (but as I hop'd, be∣ly'd) To try, I down from steep Olympus slide. A God transform'd, like one of hu∣man birth, I wandred through the many-peopled Earth. 'Twere long to tell what Crimes of every sort Swarm'd in all parts; the truth exceeds report. These all receiv'd this opinion of theirs from Homer, and he from the Egypti∣ans, who believ'd the world to be full of Gods, or Angels. from Heaven descended be, Who oft as despicable seem as He? And the World wandring, make a harder shift, That they the just from the unjust may sift. These words Antinous did but little touch, But poor Telemachus was troubl'd much, To see his Father beaten, nor forbears To wet the marble Pavement with salt Tears; Yet he sat silent, working out his Plot. But when Penelope this News had got, That one was struck, she to her Damsels said, Would Phoebus at his foot Him dead had laid. Eurynome reply'd; Let me too pray, May none of them e're live to see the Day. Then said the Queen; They all are of one Pack, And no invention to our ruine lack. But this Antinous plaies the Devil and all, A Poor Man craves their Charity in my Hall, Ready to starve, they fill his Wallet full, He takes him ore the shoulder with a stool. This sence the Women of the Business had, Set in their Chamber, whil'st Ʋlysses fed. The Queen then thus did to Eumaeus call; Go for that Stranger, sitting in the Hall, And bring him straight up hither, I desire, That I may bid him Welcom, and enquire, If e're our Lord he heard of, or did see, Who, like him, a poor Wanderer may be. Then he reply'd; Ah! would this pratling Throng, Madam, were silent, or without a Tongue. Such his Discourse, that me he much delights, I kept him in my Cotte three Days, and Nights.
He first escap'd from Sea, to me repair'd, All his sad stories yet I have not heard. As when some rare Musician sweetly sings, Touching from Heaven inspir'd, concording strings, Ravishing all with his Celestial Voice; So did his sweet discourses me rejoyce. In fruitful Crete, where Minos Off-spring swaies, He with Ʋlysses met, who now, he saies, Among the Thesprots, living, and in health, Prepares to come, and fill his House with Wealth. Penelope then; Go fetch him hither straight, They now are in the Hall, or at the Gate, Or where they list, following their various sports, Their own Estates preserv'd, in empty Courts, Their Servants stinted with Crab Wine, and Bread, Whil'st here they on Varieties are fed: Our Beevs, and Goats, our fatter Sheep they kill, And all the day our richest Wine they swill, Havock they make, and none dares be so bold, 'Mongst their loose Ryots, once to bid them hold. None like Ʋlysses, who this Pestilence Would quickly, with a Vengeance, drive from hence. He, and his Son, if e're He live to see His Native Soyl, would soon revenged be. This said, Telemachus sneez'd aloud, whil'st round The ample Hall re-ecchoings resound. But the Queen smiling said; Eumaeus, call Straight the poor stranger hither, in the Hall: See'st Thou not how my Son scarce draws his Breath, That sneezing was counted o∣minous by the Greeks and Romans, we find by many of their Histories When Themistocles was ready to offer sacri∣fice to the Gods, there were brought before him three Captives of noble descent, and richly habited; whom when the Prophet Euphrantides had viewed, seeing the flame of the Sacri∣fice large and lucid, and hearing a sneezing on his right side; taking The∣mistocles by the hand wish'd him to make a Victim of those three Youths unto Bacchus Omestes, by which he should obtain security and victory. So Xnophon relates how the whole Army promised themselves success upon a suddain sneezing. Mention of which is more frequent in the Poets. Catullus, Hoc ut dixit amor, sinistra ut ante Dextram sternuit aporobationem. Nunc ab auspicio bono profecti Mutuis animis amant, amantur. When Cupid this had spoken, He Then sneez'd, good must the Omen be; So going from a happy sign, The Lovers in affection joyn. Sneezing so oft; the Omen carries Death, The Sutors are involv'd in one sad Fate: But what I promise, do not Thou forget. If Probabilities to me He tell, I with a Suit and Coat shall cloath him well.
Eumaeus straight Penelope obey'd, And drawing neer him, hapless Pilgrim said; The Queen calls for Thee, who though full of Woe Something about her absent Lord would know, And She, if her what's probable Thou tell, With a new Suit, and Coat, will cloath thee well: Thou shalt no more about a begging go, What e're Thou want'st, she freely will bestow. Then thus Ʋlysses said; Eumaeus, I, Icarius Daughter well shall satisfie Concerning him, Her I can well acquaint, For we a-like felt Miseries, and Want. But much these Ranters me with fear surprise, Whose Pride, and Folly, scales the starry Skies; One struck me without Cause, nor did the Prince, Nor any here, rebuke his Insolence. But let the Queen be patient, till 'tis Night, And I at large shall, what I know, recite Neer a good Fire; My Cloaths are of the worst, Which well you know, who entertain'd me first. Eumaeus with this Answer coming in Without the Stranger, smartly said the Queen; Why hast Thou not this Guest, Eumaeus, brought, Is he mistrustful, fears some Female Plot? Or is he Modest, in anothers Court? Blushes not well with wandring Pilgrims sort. Eumaeus then; Madam, th' excuse he made, Seems what, in Prudence, any might have said, That he this boyst'rous Crew might better shun, You would be patient till the setting Sun: For you t' will be convenienter, best Queen, To talk with him in private, nor be seen. Then thus Penelope her self exprest; Sure this is no Buffoon, nor simple Guest,
For never such a Crew together got Of Mischiefs, that do naught but mischief Plot. The Queen thus having shew'd her Discontent, Eumaeus thence amongst the Sutors went, And to Telemachus then drawing neer, He softly whisper'd thus, that none might hear; Now Sir, I must unto my Charge repair, But to your safety look, take special Care: Many they be, in mischief All conjoyn, First Jove destroy them by their own design. Then said the Prince, I'll do what you advise, Just, Father, are your Fears, and Jealousies: But early bring fat Offerings for our Feast, And leavet' Immortal Gods, and Me, the rest. This said, The Prince again resumes his Seat, Subulcus then fell too, and drank, and eat, Then walks he to his Charge, and leaves the House, Full of proud Feasters, who rich Wine carouse, Dancing, and Singing, Merry to the height, Till bright-day fled from sable-ensign'd Night.
scene from book 18 Domino D:nc Gulielmo Hanvard de Tandridge Equiti in Comitatu de Suny Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 18.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Irus, a sturdy Beggar of the Town, Quarrels his King; They fight, He knocks him down. Publick the Queen in Gorgeous Dress appears, Where She her Sutors both trappans, and jeers. A Stool Eurymachus at Ulysses throws: The loud Disturbance Flowing Cups compose. BUT then a Beggar came, who long in Town, And through all Ithaca begg'd up and down: Deep could he Gussle, and much Gormandize, Yet wanted strength, though of the largest size. His Mother HimEustathius observes that it was the Custom amongst the Grecians, that the Mother should give the name to her Child: which I find confirm'd by Euripides in a Fragment preserv'd by the Scholiast of Aristophanes; . ; What name the Child, the Mother the tenth day. On the tenth day after the birth of their Children they made a Feast, and then give a name to their Children, according to Euripides in his Tragedy call'd Ageus, Arnaeus nam'd, whom all, For carrying speedy Errands, Irus call; Who thought to drive the King from his own Gates, Whom in a baffling humour, thus He rates;
Dotard, be gon, hear'st not the Feasters sence, That I should drag Thee by the heeles from hence? Warn'd, I say rise, else we'll the Cause decide With dint of fist. He frowning, then reply'd; I hurt not you, I hinder none to give, Nor any one their Charity to receive: Here's room for more; is't fit, Thou snarling Dog, Rogues should with one another play the Rogue? Heaven make us thankful, here's enough for both: No more, lest I begin, though I am loath, You'll find too soon, an Old Man's pond'rous Fist Shal make your mouth die with fresh bloodyour breast: Then I'll alone here till to Morrow stay, And you'll scarce take this House more in your way. Then he reply'd; Rascal, Thou well canst brag, But look'st no better then a wither'd Hag. I'll on your mouldy Chops your Pasport sign, And drive your Teeth out, as from Corn, the Swine. Prepare thy self, that all may here behold The Younger Beggar triumph ore the Old. Thus sitting, They out in rough Language broke, Of which Alcinous first notice took, Then smiling, thus to his Companions said; Yonder's such sport, the like we never had, The Beggars ready are to play a Prize, Let's set them on. At this they all arise, And in their Seats their upper-Garments fling, And thronging round the Champions make a Ring. Then said Antinous; Hear me I desire, Goats Puddings are now lying on the Fire, Well stuff'd with blood, and suet, ready drest, And he who in this Duel gets the best, Shall first make choice, and alwaies with us eat, And keep all Beggars else without the Gate.
Antinous motion all the Concourse took, When slie Ʋlysses cautiously thus spoke; 'Tis hard for me, consum'd with Grief, and Age, With such a sturdy Youngster to engage; But since the Belly, which ne'r counsels well, Says, I must fight, and Hunger doth compel; All that are present take the Solemn Oath, That none help Irus here, but let us both Try our own proper strength, two against one, Though ne'r so Valiant, may be orethrown, This said Ʋlysses, and they swore; when thus Unto his Father spake Telemachus; Stranger, If Thou by a brave Confidence Art mov'd, not doubting but to drive him hence, Fear none that stand behind thee, or before, Whoe'r strikes Thee, shall fight with many more. I, and Eurymachus, and Antinous, shall Be on thy side: This motion pleas'd them all. Whil'st up to's twist his Shirt Ʋlysses ties, And round his Wast, shewing his brawny Thighs, His Breast, and Arms, and spreading shoulders bare, Which Pallas made more rossid, plump, and fair. The Sutors wondring at his Manly make, Thus looking then on one another spake; Irus, I doubt, will by this Bargain lose, What Thighs, his Rags now off, the Old man shews! Thus said they, whilst the Waiters Irus dress'd, And lead him forth, with extream Fear possess'd, A trembling Ague his whole body shook, When thus Antinous to Irus spoke; Tremblest Thou boaster (hope for no relief) To fight an Old Man, spent with Age, and Grief? But this I threaten, and it shall prove true, If He the better have, and Thee subdue,
I shall transport thee to Epirus then, Where KingHe was King of Epirus, son of Euchenor and Phlogea, who put out the eyes of his daughter Metope, or Am∣phissa, corrupted by Aechmodicus, and set her to grind Corn, made for that purpose of Iron, saying she shouldthen recover her sight, when she hadground that to flower. Inviting afterwards Aechmodicus to a banquet, caus'd all the Members of his body to be cut off: At last falling into extremity of Mad∣ness, died by devouring his own flesh. Others say that Echetus liv'd in the time of Homer, by whom being ill trea∣ted, he poetically reveng'd himself by this relation, as he did on Thersites in his Iliads. Echetus reigns, the worst of men; Who shall cut off thy Ears, thy Nostrils slit, And thy raw Dowsets give the Dogs to eat. These threatnings more encreas'd his aguish Fear, But in they drew, and high their Hands they rear. Ʋlysses then consider'd, I or no, If he should kill the Rascal at one blow, Or lay him on the Pavement with a Cuff; The last seems best, and such Rebuke enough: Lest the Spectators so his strength should find. Then to't they went, His business thus design'd. First Irus Him on the right shoulder struck; But Him Ʋlysses such a whirret took Under the Ear, a Bone broke with the blow; Straight from his mouth a purple stream did flow, He on his Back lay, in a deadly Swound, Gnashing his Teeth, and kicking of the Ground. Clapping their Hands aloud, the Sutors laugh, Whil'st by the Heels Ʋlysses drags him off, And setting by the Wall in th'outward Court, Gave him a staff, still giddy, to support. Here Sirrah, Dogs and Swine drive from the Door, Y' have no Commission to keep out the Poor; The worst Thou shalt receive from me, Thou hast. This said, His Scrip he ore his shoulder cast, Which hung down at a Thong, then on the Floor, Resumes his place, just where He sat before: The Sutors then all thronging in, and glad, Thus to Ʋlysses, much delighted, said; May Thee great Jove, and the Immortal Gods, Who hath thus driven from us, and these Aboads, This sturdy Rogue, this gormandizing Beast, Grant whatsoe'r Thou shalt of them request.
But we'll to Epire, ship'd, the Rascal send, To Echetus, who governs like a Fiend. This said, Ʋlysses at their Vote rejoyc'd, Antinous the Paunch before him plac'd, Stuff'd well with blood and fat; Amphinomus brought Him in a Basket two Loaves, piping hot, And with a Golden Bowl presenting, spake; Bold Stranger, may the Gods thee happy make, And give such Riches as thou hadst before; For, Father, now thou art exceeding poor. When thus Ʋlysses said; Sir, I beleive, That Character which all your Fathers give, May be call'd yours, Dulichian Nisus aim, Though rich, was alwaies to preserve his Fame, Since thou his Off-spring, like him, prudent art, This for a special Maxim I'll impart; What ever breaths, and on the Earth doth crawl, Man is th' unworthiest Creature of them all, Who a defiance to bad Fortune gives, And saies, he n're shall suffer whilst he lives: But when chang'd Fates Usher the evil Day, Then he must bear't with Patience, as he may. Such vain Opinions mongst weak Mortals be, So Poverty, unlook'd for, fell on me. I once was rich, so much in Wealth did trust, I, on meer humour, lov'd to be unjust: Such Confidence in my Relations had, None without Pow'r are impiously bad: But here at plenteous Boards, some ne'r give thanks, And such you Sutors seem, who play mad pranks, Courting his Wife, making of all a Spoyl, Who may e're long, his Friends, and Native Soyl, With joy revisit: Stay not till he come; Ah! may some God before conduct thee Home!
When ever he returns, your long love-sutes He'll cancel straight with blood in smart Disputes. This said, libating first, he Gold turns up, Returning then with thanks the well-ebb'd Cup. But he went in, and troubled shook his Head, Struck with his own presages, almost dead. Not so he scap'd, but trap'd in Pallas snare, His blood distain'd Telemachus his Spear. Minerva then Penelope possest, To shew her self, in gorgeous habit drest, T' inflame the Sutors, and be honour'd more, Both of her Son and Husband, then before. Then smiling on Eurynome she said; A suddain motion doth my mind persuade, That to these proud Corrivals, whom I hate, I should appear, and shew my self in state; And to inform my Son, that he should not Converse with them who his Destruction plot. Then she reply'd; Madam, I like it well That your Intelligence your Son you tell; Go then, and him with their Designs acquaint, But bath first, and your Cheeks a little paint, Appear not blemish'd, those small Trenches fill, Worn by perpetual tears, and weeping still; For such a Son thou shouldst the Gods implore, To see him grow in Virtue more and more. When thus to her the Queen straight made Reply; Persuade me not to bath, my Cheeks to die, The Gods that wounding Beauty quite destroy'd, Since he to Ilium went, I then enjoy'd. Antinoe and Hippodamia straight Call hither, only they on us shall wait, To go alone will Modesty invade. Forth goes th' old Matron, and her Queen obey'd.
Then Pallas drove a better Plot, and fast A sleep Penelope too wilful cast, Then brought her Heavenly Gifts, Love to acquirë, That all the Greeks her Beauty should admire, That Fucus us'd to cleanse her Face from specks, With which Love's Queen remov'd impeaching frecks, When with the Graces she intends to dance; Then fatter made, Her stature did advance. To these advantages Her skin did show, Whiter then polish'd Ivory, or Snow. The Queen thus heighten'd, the Celestial Dame From thence departs, and in Her servants came, And with their noyse the slumb'ring Queen did wake, Then Her Cheeks drying with her hands, thus spake; I drousie, in a pleasant slumber fell, Would me Diana could so sweetly kill, That I my Lord no longer might lament, Wasting my self with Grief, and Discontent. Because his Peer he hath not 'mongst them all. This said, she straight descends into the Hall, Two Damsels her attending: when she drew Neer to the Portal, straight the amorous Crew, Her Beauty spying through a slenderIt was the Custom of Greece, as now in Spain, that both Wives and Virgins should have their faces cove∣red. Whence Libanius. mentioning the destruction of Troy, . The head of the Woman was without a Veil, for the destruction of her Country had taken away the consideration of Modesty. And this appears out of a Comedy of Xenarchus's. . So on the contrary, it was the fashion for Courtizans to walk open fac'd, as may be seen in Callimachus's hymn on Venus; and in the Comedy forementi∣on'd. Whence the Athenians, who pu∣nish'd adultery with death; made this caveat; that whosoever was taken with any Woman, Wife, or Virgin, who walked unveil'd, should not be counted an adulterer. Veil, Trembling, surpriz'd with conquering Love, grew pale, Wishing th'enjoyments of her happy Bed. Then to her Son Telemachus she said; Thy judgment fails thee, and thou want'st that heart; For which, when Thou a Child, so praised wert: Now Thou art past a Boy, a Man full grown, That whoe'r sees will say, a Heroes Son Thou need'st must be, when they Thy Features scan. When Thou of Him hast but the outward Man, And nothing of his Vertues know'st at all, Who such Affronts endur'st in Thy own Hall;
That a poor Stranger, who in Charity W' are bound to comfort, should thus injur'd be. Who ever we receive under our Roof, From wrongs it should protection be enough; Thine's the Disgrace, and the example bad. When thus her Son unto his Mother said; I'm not offended at your high Discourse, But yet I understand better from worse, As well as when a Child, but cannot here, With greatest Prudence ought distinguish clear: Me they would ruine, Plots on Plots are laid For my Destruction, and I have no aid. By joynt Consent young Irus, and our Guest, This Combat had, the Stranger got the best. Ah! that great Jove, Pallas, and Phoebus, would We in like case your Sutors might behold, Some in the Court, and some within the Hall, With palsied Heads in Death's Convulsions, fall, As Irus now in th' outward Porch doth sit, Shaking his Head, as in a drunken fit: He cannot stand, nor able to come back, Who locomotive Faculties doth lack. They such Discourse standing together had, When to the Queen Eurymachus thus said; Icarius Daughter, sair Penelope, If all our youthful Princes You should see In this yourThe word in this place, , is a general word for Greece, as  for the Grecians, which with several Epithets signifies several partciular pla∣ces, as Thissaly, . So in this place signifies Peloponnesus, or the Morea, according to Strabo; from Jasus, son of Jo, King of the place. splendor, many Sutors more, Would early wait to morrow at your Door; Since Nature you her Master-piece design'd, In so much beauty casing such a mind. Then said the Queen; those parts that I enjoy'd, Features, and Vertues, deathless Gods destroy'd, With which I so much took my dearest Lord, When he with Agamemnón went aboard.
Would he returning rule this Life of mine, My Honour, and my Beauty more would shine, Now Fortune's bitterer blasts hath all bereft. When he, me, and his native Country left, Me by the right hand taking, said; My Dear, We shall not all return from Troy I fear, They say the Trojans Valiant be in War, Throw Jav'lins well, and able Archers are, On foot, or mounted, to no Nation yield, Who in a trice will clear a bloody Field, Nor know I if my Fate will drop me there, Then all that's mine I leave unto thy Care: But my dear Father, and my Mother mind, Be in my absence, Love, to them more kind: And when our Son shall come to Age, espouse Then whom thou wilt, and leave to him thy House. Now all hath happen'd what my Husband said. The Night draws neer, that I the Nuptial Bed Must venture in, although so much abhorr'd; Since Jove hath took away my dearest Lord. But something grieves, that now I will unfold, The Custom here of Sutors, was of Old, Who some great Dame, or rich man's Child, wouldwed, Courting t' enjoy the honour of her Bed, Fat Beevs, and Sheep, and richer Presents sent, To feast her Friends, but not her Fortune spent. This over-hearing, made Ʋlysses glad, That thus dissembling she did them persuade To send their Gifts, and costly Presents in. When thus Antinous did first begin; Icarius daughter, fair Penelope, What ever presents we do send to thee From us be pleas'd with kindness to receive, Returns ingratful be of what we give.
But we'll no other business undertake, Till one of us you choose, and Husband make. All to his motion gladly condescend, Their Heralds with rich gifts the Queen attend, Antinous sent a Vest, joyn'd to each fold, A Button, which a dozen were all Gold. Eurymachus a golden Chain, so bright With Amber, like the Sun it cast a Light. Eurydamas two servants, Pendants brought, Set forth with Orient Pearl, and rarely wrought. A Carkenet Pisanders Herald bare: Each sent her something, beauteous, rich, and rare. The Queen thence to her Chamber went, and they Who waited, up with Her the Gifts convey. In Dancing, Singing spent, and all Delight, Till golden Day sunk, vanquished by Night, But They went on, still varying several sports, Three Lamps were plac'd to light the gloomy Courts, Nourish'd with drie materials round about, That they might clearly shine, and not go out, Which Damsels snuft, and with fresh fuel fed: To whom the King offering his service, sed; You servants of your absent Lord, go in, And there attend the Pleasure of your Queen, In Her Apartment silver fleeces cull, And carded, her present the purest Wool: And I'll supply, and feed these Lamps, should they Be merry here untill the Break of Day: All pains I conquer, make a sport of Toyl. This said, the Damsels on each other smile, But first to him Melantho gigling said, Dolius proud daughter, whom the Queen had bred As her own Child, but she a Wanton prov'd, At all not at her Ladies sorrows mov'd.
She with Eurymachus had don the Feat, And in uncivil Tearms thus on him set; Sure thou art mad, nor sleep wilt any more On a Smith's Forge, or Stall, or at some Door; But prat'st amongst Young Princes boldly here, Nor Symptom hast of Modesty, nor Fear, But full of Wine, Thou them dost entertain With trifling Talk, or stories false and vain, Or prid'st Thou that Thou Irus did'st ore throw, Another comes that will not take it so, Shall with a Vengeance beat Thee from the Door, And with thy own blood paint thy Bosom ore. Then frowning he reply'd; The Prince shall know, Bitch, what thou say'st, and Thee shall punish too: At these his threats they much affrighted, all From thence ran, trembling, and forsook the Hall, Saying, they fear'd the Stranger true had spoke. Then to preserve the Lamps he undertook, Looking about, contriving in his mind, How he might finish what he had design'd, Nor longer temper them did Pallas grant, But that they should him suddainly affront, That so his Choller they might more provoke. When first to him Eurymachus thus spoke, And smiling on his Fellows, did begin; Hear me all you that court a Royal Queen, And to the dictates of my Soul attend, Some God this Man t' Ʋlysses House must send, His Looks majestick, his Deportment fair, His Ey-brows thick, not cloath'd with scattering Hair, Then turning from them to Ʋlysses spake; If thou wilt serve, Thee to my Farm I'll take, Good shall thy Wages be, nor shalt thou want, To keep my Hedges prun'd, my Trees to plant;
Sandals I shall bestow, and neatly cloath; But those who idly live all works do loath: Thou rather would'st a begging go, and put More Victuals still in thy ungodly Gut. Then to Eurymachus Ʋlysses said; 'Twixt us I would there were a Wager laid, Or in the Spring, or in the longest Day, Which of us with a Syth should mow most Hay; We'll begin fasting, nor to labour yield, But when Night calls to supper, keep the Field: Or let us for the Plough our Cattel Yoak, When we have both well fed our big-bound stock, Then Thou shalt see me up long Furrows tear: Or if Jove Peace should turn to cruel War, Then to the Battel boldly I'll advance, With Cask, and Shield, in either hand a Lance; Not as you say to fill my greedy Gut: But such Affronts on me you alwaies put. You think, forsooth, that no man is your match, Who hath converst with none but thy own Batch. But should Ʋlysses come, sooner then spy'd, These Gates would seem too narrow, although wide, To make escape, rather then be engag'd. At this Retort Eurymachus enrag'd, Thus frowning, made Reply; Rascal, I shall Thee to account for sawcy Answers call, Who with such Impudence, and at no rate, Mongst Princes thus unmannerly dar'st prate, And full of drink, thy self do'st entertain With wondrous Raptures, and Discourses vain; Or prid'st Thou that poor Irus down you struck? Thus talking loud, up he a Foot-stool took, Ʋlysses to Amphinomus Knee did duck, Fearing Eurymachus: the thrown Tripos struck
A Skincker on the Hand, down on the Ground The Goblet drops, the bruised Brims resound: He on his back lay roaring, with the Fall, Which made a great disturbance in the Hall. When one of them thus to another said; Ah, would this wandring Rogue had perished, E're he came here, quiet we were before, This Devils Brat puts all in an uproar: Fooling with him the pleasure of our Feast We loose, nor well our savory Dishes tast. When thus Telemachus did his mind declare; Your full Bowls work, or you distracted are, Or else the Devil in you this stir doth keep, Since y' are well treated, pray go home and sleep: No man I'll force, but so much I desire. This said, biting their Lips they all admire Telemachus, that he so boldly spake: Whom thus Amphinomus did undertake, Not any should be mov'd, or take dislike At saucy words, nor should a stranger strike, Nor any Servant of Ʋlysses Train, That are appointed us to entertain. Now let the Skincker with a full Bowl come, And when we have libated, all walk Home, And to the Prince his care this Stranger leave. This said, the Sutors the advise receive. Mulius the Goblet carries through the Hall, Amphinomus Herald, and straight serv'd them all, PayingAthenaeus observes that in Ho∣mer, libations to the Gods were usual as well after Meals as before, whom Plato follows in his , for he saies, that after they had supp'd, they made their libations to the Gods, and ho∣noured them with their usual Hymns. The like doth Xenophon: only in Epi∣cur's Banquet no mention of offer∣ings, or libations. Thus far Athenaeu. Libations to the Powers Divine, They troul the goblet full with richest Wine, Thus after flowing Bowls, and plenteous fare, To rest, they to their several Homes repair.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE NINETEENTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Ulysses and his Son convey forth all The Arms and Spears that were about the Hall. The Queen descends, Her Husband entertains, Not knows him: He a woful Story fains. Euryclea bathes his Feet: His Antient Maid, Knows her Old Master by a Scar He had. BUT still within the Hall Ʋlysses sat, Plotting with Pallas the proud Suors Fate: Who thus spake to his Son; It will behove, That all these Arms we from the Hall remove, And carry in; And if why so they ask, That we the better may our business mask, Tell Them th' are taken down, because the Dust, And Smoke, their brightness with a sulein rust
Hath much impeach'd, not like the same they were Ʋlysses had, sailing for Troy, left there: Or say a Revelation from the Gods You had, if they by chance should fall at Ods, With Wine distemper'd, and turn Nuptial Rites To bloody Banquets,He counsels to have the Arms remov'd, least the very sight of them should tempt the Suitors to a quarrel, as the sight of a Woman a Man unto Lust. In omnire (saith Ʋlpius) & ad omem rem multum valent oculi. In, and to all things the Eys are of great preva∣lency. itch of steel invites. Telemachus these his Commands obey'd, For Euryclea calling next, thus said; In their Apartments, Nurse, the Women shut, Till the King's arms I in my Closet put: Soil'd th' are with smoke, which I a careless Boy, Left hanging here, e're since he went to Troy. When Euryclea thus to him begun; Ah! would thou had'st that prudence of a Son, Who in his Fathers absence being th' Heir, Should of all Houshould-businesses take care. But when I'm gon, who, lights you out and in, When not a Female-waiter must be seen? Telemachus then said; This Stranger shall, I'll have no idle Persons haunt my Hall: Whoe'r eats here shall work, be what he may. His Orders she did punctually obey, And first, to shut the Gates she had a care, Whilst in, Ʋlysses and his Off-spring bare Helmets, and Shields, and Lances, whom before Pallas in gold a blazing Taper bore. Telemachus then to his Father said; Prodigious beams, oh, Sir! my Eys invade: The Walls, the Seats, the Beams, and Pillars shine, As if they were a fire, some Pow'r Divine Hath left those Seats, where they in Heaven reside. When to his Son Ʋlysses thus reply'd; Be not inquisitive, nor more enquire, This oft do they who plant Olympus spire.
Go thou and sleep, but here I shall remain, That I thy Mother, and her Female Train, May questions ask; she grievs and nothing knows. This said, Telemachus went to his Repose, Where he in Morpheus golden Fetters lay, And soundly slept untill the blessed Day: But in the Hall the King with Pallas staid, To finish up the Plot which they had laid. When the fair Queen down from her Chamber came, Like bright (b) Diana or theHe compares her to Venus for the beauty of her Face, to Diana for the proportions and comliness of her Bo∣dy: for in that was her excellence: Odyss. 6. (Dianae) Whom Virgil follows Aeneid the first. Qualis in Eurotae ripis, ant per juga Cynthi, Exercet Diana choros, quam mille secu∣ta Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades, illa pharetram Fert humero, gradiensque Das super∣eminet omnes. As on Eurotas banks, or Cynthus top, Diana Dances leads; a beauteous Troop Of Mountain-Nymphs attend on eve∣ry side, Her golden Quiver at her shoulder ty'd, Walking, she all the Goddesses ex∣ceeds. Cyprian Dame, Against the Fire her Chair of state they plac'd, Which Ismarus with Gold, and Ivory grac'd, And straight a Foot-stool for her they brought in, Which soon they cover'd with a dapled Skin; There sat the fair Penelope in state, And all her Damsels round about her wait. A Table spreading they with Manchet store, And Cups, in which proud Sutors drank before: This a Fire kindles, That laies on more Wood, Which in a Pilemight light, and warm the blood: When thus Melantho at Ʋlysses flew; Stay'st Thou still here to see what Women do, And us thus in our Privacies molest? Sirrah, be gon, and quickly too, y' are best, Or we with Fire-brands shall your Pasport seal: Then thus Ʋlysses frowning, on her fell; Why dost Thou me so spightfully thus taunt, Minx, is't because I better Garments want? I poor, crave Alms of those that best can spare, And many such poor Wanderers there are: I once had Riches, and a fair Aboad, A part of which, oft I on those bestow'd That wanted; Many Servants I employ'd, What stiles men Rich, and Happy, I enjoy'd:
But Jove was pleas'd my state to ruin quite, Therefore take heed to exercise such spight, And make of others Poverty a sport, Who brave now 'mongst the Maids of Honour art. You may be out that now in Favour are, The King may come, of whom we not despair, But should he not, and if no hope we had, He hath a Son, who, by Apollos aid, Will suffer no such Giglets in his Court, To make of woful Pilgrims thus a sport. Penelope observing what they said, Thus in rough Language rattl'd up her Maid; Audacious Drab, how in my Presence dar'st, Thou speak such words; nor a poor stranger spar'st? On your own head the Plot may fall, you lay, Know'st Thou not well, didst Thou not hear me say, From him I hop'd Intelligence to have Of my dear Lord, would sorrow give me leave? Then to Eurynome thus spake the Queen; Bring a Chair hither cover'd with a Skin, That I what he can better tell, may hear; For Him I'll sift, and question very neer. She straight obeys the Orders of the Queen, Brought a high Chair, and cover'd with a Skin. Ʋlysses there sat down, his Reverence made, To whom Penelope thus mildly said; Sir, first be pleas'd to tell me who you are, Your Nation, Town, and Parentage declare. Then he reply'd; Not any You can blame, The World your Honour knows, the Stars your Fame; Like a Just King, who fearing Joves Commands, Maintains in happy Union many Lands; Where several Grains they in deep Furrows throw, Whose Fruit on Trees beyond Abundance grow,
Pregnant his breed, Fishes the Sea afford, His people both with Wealth, and Vertues stor'd. Therefore, best Madam, ask not who I am, Nor who my Parentage, nor whence I came, Lest my own sorrows me too deeply touch, Recounting to you, I have suffer'd much: In a strange House it fits not to be sad, And to weep alwaies, and lament, as bad: Some of your Maids may take offence, or you, Saying the Maudlin, Wine with Tears can brew. Then thus Penelope to him reply'd; The Gods my Parts and Beauty then destroy'd, When first the Greeks 'gainst Troy an Army sent, And with them my dear Lord Ʋlysses went. Should He return to rule this Life of mine, My Fame would grow, and more my beauty shine: But now in Tears, time, and my self I spend, And my Misfortunes follow without end; Whoe'r Dulichium, orThe name of the Island Cephal∣lenia, (in the Italian Charts now call'd Zapolania) from the chief City thereof. Same sway, Woody Zacynthus, or rough Ithaca, Court me and vex my House, that no regard I Strangers give, nor who attend, reward, Nor means Petitioners to answer find, Still troubl'd for Ʋlysses in my mind. Them, hasting Nuptials, still I did deceive; And by some Godinspir'd, obtained leave, E're any of the Sutors I espouse, A curious Web to finish in my House. My Princely Sutors, thus to them I said; Since you suppose my dearest Lord is dead, Delay our Marriage till that we have don Laertes Herse-cloath which I late begun, Lest I incur some Grecian Ladies Hate, Without, t' interr one of so great Estate.
Thus I the hauty Sutors did persuade, By Night unrav'ling what by Day I made. Three years I mock'd their Hopes, and held them on; But when the fourth with finish'd months begun, My careless Women let them in, they chide, So I must finish what I could not hide. Now no means left dire Nuptials to avoyd, No Counsel, neither Friend to be employ'd. My Parents, they, forsooth, still put me on, And wasted state of my displeased Son Now grown a Man, fitting to rule his House, Whose Cause I hope Jove will himself espouse. But pray Sir, tell me who you are, and Stock? Y' are not descended from an Oak, or Rock. Then thus Ʋlysses civilly replies, O Thou the Spouse of Laertiades, No more me of my Stock, and Parents ask, Though you on me impose so hard a Task, To reckon up those sorrows fell so thick, They like my Tears would pose Arithmetick: I shall declare who have so long been hurl'd, Bandied in sufferings round about the World, Crete a fair Isle, guirt with the Ocean round, Well planted, and withWhat here is ninety, in his Ili∣ads is a hundred, , &c. Phaestians and Rhytians, and who in Crete, Did in a hundred famous Cities dwell. Idomeneus, who did much exl In feats of War, and bold Meiones, In fourty Vessels brought through briny Seas Which dissonancy the antient Writers have several waies attempted to recon∣cile. Some say the number of the Ci∣ties were a hundred in the time of the Trojan War, but that Leucas King of the Island demolish'd ten, for terrour to the remainder. But Ephorus, an an∣tient Historian, saies that ten Cities were built by the Dorians, whom Al∣thamenes planted there after the Tro∣jan War; to whom Strabo assenteth. Others think that the number hundred is used indefinitely for a great many, as in the Lemma of Rome, in an antient Coyn  Ninety Cities crown'd, Greeks,That is Natives of Crete, such as came not from other Countries to set∣tle there. Eteocrets, and Cydones there commix'd TheThere is great diversity of o∣pinion among the antients in the ex∣plication of this Epithet. Andron, one of the antientest of the Greek Histori∣ans, saies that Doris, from whence this Colony came, consisted of three Ci∣ties, and therefore the Dorians are call'd by Homer : which cer∣tainly is the meaning of the Poet, though Strabo admitteth it not: be∣cause, saith he, Doris consisted not of three but four Cities: but both Thy∣cydides and Diodorus Siculus agree with Andron the later in his eleventh book, . After a few daies the Phocians wag'd War against the Dorians; descended from the Lacedaemonians, who inhabit three Cities, Cytinium, Boeum and Eri∣neum, lying under the Mountain Par∣nassus. After the same manner does the latter enumerate them in his first book. triple Dorians, and Pelasgians fix'd, Gnossos the greatest City of that Land, Where Minos nine years Joves great Favourite reign'd, He bold Deucalion, and Deucalion me, And King Idomeneus got, but He In the Armado that the Grecians sent Against the Trojans, with Atrides went, Idomeneus Younger Brother am, I, whom you see thus poor, Aethon my Name:
There I Ʋlysses saw, and Him did treat, He forc'd by adverse Winds, put in for Crete, Sailing for Troy, bruis'd by roughA Promontory of Pelopounesus lying South-east, not far distant from Crete, where Navigation was so dan∣gerous that it became a Proverb, . Strabo also notes, that the Italian and Asian Merchants chose rather to carry their goods by land over the Isthmot at Corinth, then trust them to those Seas. Malean Waves, He inA station for Ships belonging to Minos King of Crete, according to Strabo: others say, it is a River of that Island. Eustathius. Amnissus neer Lucinas Caves Anchor'd, and hardly scap'd with Tempests tir'd, And for Idomeneus straight enquir'd; He said he knew him well, did much esteem. Ten days on this account I treated him With whatsoe'r my Palace could afford: Th' eleventh, He with his Followers went Aboard, Whom I with Corn, and Wine, and Beef supply'd. There in the Bay twelve days Wind-bound they ride, So loud rough Boreas blew, they could not stand, Neither to Sea, nor yet recover Land, Kept by displeasure of some angry God, The thirteenth day, calm, they forsake the Road. Thus like the Truth, he fains a handsom Tale, At which she faints, and weeps, grows wan and pale, Melting like Snow upon the lofty Hills, Which milder Wind sends down in pettie Rills, Whose muster'd Waves, Rivers to Oceans swell; So from her Cheeks a briny Deluge fell, For her Lord weeping; fitting by her side, And pitying her he equal sorrow vy'd; But kept his bright Eys drie, like horn, or Steel, Though he within did like Compassion feel. When she had wept enough, and dri'd her Eys, Blubber'd with briny tears, she thus replies; Pray Sir, be pleas'd I may some questions ask, Which call'd to mind, will be an easie Task. You in your House, you say, my Lord did Feast: What Habit had he on, what fashion'd Vest? Such things I long to know: what kind of Man, And who those were that him attended on?
Then he reply'd; Madam, 'tis hard to tell These Niceties, and to remember well, Now twenty years being past, since Crete he left; But I, well as I can, shall make a shift. Ʋlysses then had on a purple Vest, With Loops and golden Buttons neatly drest; Before he had within aIt appears from hence that the art of working all sorts of Animals to the life in Vests, Hangings, and the like, was very antient among the Gre∣cians; which surely they must have learn'd either from the Sidonians, or Egyptians, as they from the Persians or Indians: for that sort of work was most usual in those Countries. Aristo∣phanes in Ranis, Mine not like yours prodigious Monsters be, Such as are wrought in Median Tape∣stry. The like we find in Sidonius, Peregrina det supellex Cteliphontis ac Niphatis Jugā texta belluasque Rapidas vacante panno, Acuit quibus furorem Bene ficta plaga cocco, &c. From Ctesiphon straight get enough, And Niphates fair houshold-fluff, Wrought with Hills, and Wild-beasts, which The empty prospect may enrich; Who, by well feign'd wounds enrag'd, Seem more desperately engag'd: From Javelin fixed in their sides, Blood in bloodless Rivers glides; Where the Parthian with such arc Ore his shoulder throws his Dart; His Horse now charging, then retreats, And flying, so his Foe defeats. Landskip drawn, A Hound, who greedy, seiz'd a trembling Faun. The curious work Spectators all admire, The Dog and Hind both wrought in golden wire: He seem'd to hold fast by the Throat his Prey, The other panting, strove to get away. What he wore under shew'd so fine and thin, As a drie Onyons perspicable Skin, So soft, it like the Sun shot golden Beams, Admired much by our most skilful Dames. But, Madam, pray this Caution take before, I cannot say that here such Cloaths he wore, Or that some Friend, or Stranger, did present The wondrous Habit, when to Sea he went: For many did Ʋlysses much esteem, Since few of all the Greeks resembled him. I Him presented with a curious Sword, And purple Vest, and sent them both aboard. The Herald that Ʋlysses Ushered, Was somewhat older, more his shoulders spread, More swarthy his Complexion, curl'd his Hair. More of Ʋlysses honour'd then all there That follow'd him, his Parts kept up his Fame, And as I take't Eurybates his Name. When this exact Description she had heard, A-fresh she weeping, thus Her self declar'd; You in sad plight were, when you did attend For Alms here, but be now my honour'd Friend.
That Vest I him presented, which thou say'st, He then had on, with golden Buttons grac'd. But him alas I shall behold no more, Nor he e're see his House, and Native Shore; Who went to Troy, enforc'd by cruel Fate, That cursed Town, whose very Name I hate. To her, Ʋlysses comforting, replies; Thou the fair Spouse of Laertiades, Preserve thy Beauty, nor thy bright Eys blind With blubbering Tears, I am not of your mind, But any would her former Lord deplore, Whom young she married, t'whom she Children bore: But you much more, for your dear Husband, may Lament, for he was like a God, they say. But cease from Grief a while, and list to me, I am plain Tell-Troth, and shall be as free, Me an assured Information gives, Ʋlysses now hard by the Thesprots lives, 'Mongst wealthy People, ready Home to sail With store of Wealth, and Goods of great avail; But all his Friends, and his stout ship were lost, Swallow'd in Waves, neer theThat is, the Coasts of Sicily', so call'd from its three Promontories, Pelorus, Pachinum, and Lilybeum. Trinacrian Coast. For angry Jove and Sol them in the sound, For slaughtering of his sacred Cattel, drown'd, He on his Keel reach'd the Pheacian Shore, Where him they all did like a God adore: Rich Gifts they gave him, would have sent him home In safety, who before this might have come; But what seems profitable t'him, seems fit, By Travelling a great Estate to get: None knows more then Ʋlysses, now alive, Nor will with him in usefull Science strive. This Phidon, Thesprots King, to me declar'd; He swore his Ship was rigg'd, his men prepar'd,
That soon would set him on his Native shore: But me he sent in a stout ship before, Bound for Dulichium: and there your Lord Shew'd me a mass of Riches, such a Hoard, Which would ten ages his whole charge defray, Which safe then in that Kings Exchequer lay. He to the sacred Oak in Dodons Grove Went to consult the Oracles of Jove, Whether he should to his desired Home, Private, or like himself, in Publick come. So he's in safety, and will soon be here, Which, if you make a question of, I'll swear By Jove, the best, and greatest of the Gods, E're long he shall behold his own Aboads, Where I a stranger find your Charitie: What I averr, effected straight shall be. Ʋlysses here shall land within a Year, Nay, in a Month, or little more, be here. Then straight Penelope this Answer made; Ah! would thou could'st make good what thou hast, said, With friendship I, and bounty would my part So act, that all should say thou happy art: But as my mind misgives, even so I fear, I never shall behold Ʋlysses here, Nor thou get Home; these Rulers fit not thee, Not like my Lord, if any such there be, That would each Stranger courteously receive, And hardly to depart would grant him leave: When he had bath'd, hee'd shew him to his Bed, Cause Rugs, and softer Blankets ore him spread, That warm, He might repose till the approach Of bright Aurora in her golden Coach; And in the Morning wash'd, and would anoint, And him to sit with his own Son appoint.
Him whosoe'r did use with Disrespect, Be what he would, He sure was to be check'd. How could you know I other Dames excel In ord'ring House-affairs, in ruling well, If meanly cloathed with them thou should'st sit? Mans life is short, and if not, should be sweet. But those who cruel after Rapine thirst, They live to hear themselves by all men curst, And after Death have Maledictions store: But those who charitable help the poor, Strangers shall through the World their Fame resound, And be for Liberality renown'd. Then thus Ʋlysses to his Queen replies; O thou the spouse of Laertiades, I warmer Rugs, and Blankets thought unfit, Since I set sail from snow-crown'd Hills of Crete, Brushing with plyant Oars the briny wave, I like such Lodgings as I us'd to have: Many long Nights in Cottages I lay, Expecting Comforts of the blessed Day; I cleansing, nor refreshing Baths think fit, Nor any of your Maids should touch my Feet, Unless one Old, who woes like mine hath felt, And Fortune with her as unkindly dealt: That she should wash my Feet; I could abide. Then to Ʋlysses thus the Queen reply'd; You have, dear Sir, so well your self exprest, That I ne'r entertain'd a worthier Guest, That better spoke, or more discretion had; I have a Prudent, and an Antient Maid, Which at his Birth my poor Ʋlysses first From's Mother took, and diligently nurs'd. Go, Euryclea, and the Pilgrim bath, Who Feet, and Hands, so like my Husband hath,
And may with him contemporary be, They soon look Old who suffer misery. This said, th' Old Nurse, whilst Tears in rivulets ran, Which she conceal'd, this woful speech began; Oh my dear Son! oh cruel Jove that dost Declare thy self 'gainst pious men and just; For none so oft as he the brawny Thighs Of Beevs, and Goats, to thee did sacrifice, Imploring that hisThis was the only end of all the Devotions, Victims, and Offerings to the Gods among the antients, the hap∣piness of this present life; the parti∣culars whereof are set down by Juve∣nal in his tenth Satyr, and Persius in his second. Da spatium vitae, multos da, Jupiter, annos, Conjugium petimus, partumque uxoris- Prima fere vota, & cunctis notissima templis Divitiae ut crescant, ut opes, ut maxi∣ma toto Nostra sit aroa foro— Me many years, O Jove, and long∣life grant, Marriage we pray, nor Children let us want: Our first request, and in most Temples known, We may grow wealthy, and full Cof∣fers own. So Persius, — O si Ebullit patrui praeclarum funus, & O si Sub rastro crepet argenti mihi seria de∣tro Hercule, pupillumve utinam quem pro∣ximus haeres Impello, expungam: namque est scabi∣osus & acri Bile tumet, Nerio jam tertiae ducitur uxor. Oh that I could my Uncle's Funeral see, Or silver-pot find, Hercules, by thee; Or that Brat bury t' whom I Heir am next, That scabby Elf, with itchy Choler vex'd. Netrius hath his third Wife now in∣terr'd. Glass might longer run, That he grown Old, might breed his hopeful Son, But now there's little hope of his Return: So such proud Giglets made of him a scorn, When to their House he did for Alms resort, As now these Minxes make of thee a sport. Who to avoid these scoffs, and grosser Wit, Not suffer'd them, but me, to wash your Feet, Which me the Queen commanding, I obey, For your own sake, as for Penelope, Since something I 'mongst troubled motions call To mind, I know not what, but out it shall: Here many woful Travellers have been, But none so like Ʋlysses have I seen: Such a shap'd Body, Voice, and Feet he had. When thus Ʋlysses to th' Old Woman said; Madam, they say, who ever saw us two; W' are strangly like, so fancy just as you. This said, th' Old Woman straight did Water heat, He neer the Hearth, turn'd from the light his Feet; For suddainly it came into his mind, That she the scar above his Knee might find. His doubts prov'd true, she spy'd it, long before Made on Parnassus by a salvage Boar, When he t' Autolychus, his Grand-sire, came, Who bore for Cheats, and slight of Hand the Name,
Hermes his Patron gave Him special Gifts, That he out-did the World at cunning Shifts. Because so often he the brawny Thighs Of Lambs and Goats to him did sacrifice. Coming to Ithaca, his Daughter there He found deliver'd of a hopeful Heir. Euryclea set the Babe upon her Knee, Noble Autolycus,The seventh or tenth day after the birth of a Child was the Feast of Lustration or Expiation, when, all the Kindred being invited to a Banquet, the Name was imposed. The Ceremonies us'd at this solemnity are partly ex∣press'd by Persius, in his second Sa∣tyr, Ecce avia, aut metuens Divum mater∣tera, cunis Exemit puerum, frontemque atque uda labella Infami digito & lustralibus ante sali∣vis Expiat, urentes oculos inhibere perim. Tunc manibus quatis, & spem macram supplice voto Nunc Licini in Campos, &c. The Grand-mother, or Aunt, the Child up takes, On's Lips and Brow an Expiation makes With Spittle on her middle finger, which Averts the bane of ill eys which be∣witch: Then dandling in her Arms prays for its health, Begs him Licinius Lands, and Crassus Wealth. May Kings and Queens wish him th' a∣dopted Son: May him all Virgins love that look up∣on. And whatsoe'r he treads on be a Rose. but their chief Superstition was in the choice of a Name, which they look'd upon as an omen of their future Feli∣city. name the Child, said she, Hinting that he's of thy renowned Race: When thus Autolycus to the Parents saies; Dear Son and Daughter, I shall give the Name: Who hither, hated by so many, came, Ʋlysses call him, and when fit to come, Send Him to me, and my Relations, Home. Where I shall many Gifts the Youth present, Then send him back to you with all Content. He went, expecting Gifts of great esteem, Autolycus and his Son's receiving Him With greatest Kindness that can be exprest, But more his Grand-mother then all the rest, Old Amphithea him in strict embrace, His fair Eys kiss'd, his Head, his Brows, and Face. Autolycus his Sons then whispering, bid A Feast prepare, which with all speed they did: And first an Ox of five years old they got, Whom straight they flea, and then in quarters cut: Then the divided joynts on Spits they fix'd. And rosted well, they drew, and serv'd up next. Thus sat they feasting till the Sun did set, Nought wanting that could make a noble Treat: Grown late, each went unto his own Repose. But when the rosie-finger'd Morn arose, Autolycus Sons straight forth a Hunting go, Their Dogs with them, and Young Ʋlysses too.
And soon wood-cloath'd Parnassus crown they scale, There found a Flat, cool'd with a briezing gale, When the Sun, rising from the gentle Main, Tinsel'd the Meads, and tip'd the blushing Grain, They in the bottom were, before them went Their well-nos'd Dogs, who follow'd close the scent. Autolycus sons with young Ʋlysses were, In their strong Hand each brandishing a Spear. Here in a thicket lay a huge Boar, where No winds could penetrat, nor piercing air, Nor could the Sun shoot through one radiant Beam, Nor Show'rs that fall in Deluges extream. So built it was and roof'd all ore with Leavs: The noyse of Dogs, and Hunters he receives, As they drew night, and scorning to retire, Draws forth all brissled, and his Eys like fire. Ʋlysses first against him did advance, And stoutly charg'd the Monster with his Lance: But the Boar gaunch'd Him with a cruel Gash Above the Knee, and tore away the Flesh, But miss'd the Bone, whilst him Ʋlysses paid, And his sharp point ran through his Shoulder blade: Down falls the Beast extended on the Ground. Autolycus Sons straight drest Ʋlysses Wound, And binding with aPliny in his Natural History spends a whole Chapter in enquiry whether Charms are available in Phy∣sick or no: whose words, as far as they shall tend to our purpose, we think fit to transcribe. Dixit Homerus pro∣fluvium sanguinis vulnerato femine Ʋ∣lixem inhibuisse Carmine; Theophra∣stus ischiadicos sanari, &c. Homer hath written that Ulysses being wounded in the thigh staunched the blood with a Charm: and Theophrastus testifies that there be proper spels to cure the Sci∣atica. Cato hath left in writing, that there is a special Charm for dislocations, whereby any bone put out of joynt may be set again. Attalus avoucheth for a cer∣tainty, that if a man chance to espie a Scorpion, and do no more but say this one word DƲO (that is, two) the Ser∣pent will be still and quiet, and never shot forth his Sting. Charm, the bleeding stay'd, Thence to their Fathers Palace hast they made. Autolycus and his Sons there curing Him, Dismist with many Gifts of great esteem: And he to Ithaca well pleas'd did come, His Parents glad to see Him safe at Home, Him many questions ask'd, and how he had Receiv'd that Scar, them this account he made; How onA Mountain in Achaia, call'd by the later Greeks corruptly . Parnassus him a Boar had gaunch'd, And how the blood his Cosen-Germans staunch'd,
Wiping his legs. This th' Old Woman found, And letting fall, the Chargers sides resound, Down drops she backward, and the liquor sheds, Sorrow and Joy at once her Breast invades, Her Eys brimful of Tears, she could not speak, At last, from troubled thoughts thus forth did break; Thou art Ʋlysses sure, that Prince I Nurs'd, And though I bath my King, knew not at first. This said, she turn'd to th' Queen, and did prepare To tell her that her dearest Lord was there: But her the Queen not in this posture spies, Pallas on other Objects cast her Eys: Whilst on her Throat her hand Ʋlysses lay'd, And thus, her drawing neerer to him, said; Dear Nurse, why will you ruin me, who bred Me with such care, and at your Nipple fed? Who through a World of Miseries and Toyl, The twentieth year, have reach'd my Native soil: But what Thou know'st, what God puts in thy Heart, There lock up, nor to any one impart: For this I'll promise, and it shall be don, If the proud Sutors are by me ore-thrown, Although my Nurse, thy Life I shall not spare, But thou shalt like these flouting Giglets fare. Then Euryclea thus her self declar'd; How scap'd these words thy Teeth, that Ivory gard? You know my Constancy and Courage well, My Bosom firm as Rock, my Heart as Steel, But I'll inform what's fit for you to know, If Jove so please the Sutors you ore-throw: I'll point out all those Harlots in your Court, That you dishonour, making Crimes their sport. Then he reply'd; Nurse, who they are ne'r tell, That pains I'll spare thee, them I know too well,
And all their Characters; Pray silent be, And the whole business leave to Fate and Me. This said, a Laver to the Hall she bore, For all the Liquor she had spilt before. When with pure Oyl she suppled had his Feet, Ʋlysses to the Fire then drew his Seat, And ore the Cicatrice his Garment spread: When thus Penelope to her Husband said; I here in talk, Sir, longer you would keep, But now the time draws nigh indulging sleep, Which should to wasting Sorrow give relief, But my sad Fortune aggravates fresh Grief. All day my flowing Tears scarce find an ebb, Viewing my Servants how they ply their Web. But when Night comes, and all the House at rest, A thousand Sorrows sting my troubled Breast. As whenTereus King of Thrace, infe∣cted with the vice of his Country, burns with love of Philomela (daughter of Pandarus, according to Homer, by others call'd Pandion) his Wifes Sister, and in the heat of his Lust ravish'd her. Which his Wife understanding, studies a strange revenge, murders her own son Itylus, or Itys, and feasts her Hus∣band with his flesh: Which being made known to him, he pursues the two Si∣sters, who are feign'd to have! been chang'd into Birds, for their speedy flight unto Athens, by which they e∣scaped the revenge of Tereus; Philo∣mela into a Nightingal, and Progne into a Swallow: in that no Nightin∣gals are seen in Thrace, as hating the Countrey of Tereus; nor Swallow ever builds there, as is observ'd by Pau∣sanias. The Nightingal chanting in the solitary Woods, is feign'd to be∣moan the death of her son Itylus, by which the Poets generally express extream grief, and lamentation. The wholestory is elegantly describ'd by O∣vid in his Metamorphosis, but 'tis too large to be here transcribed. Pandareus Daughter in the Spring, Perch'd 'mongst thick branches, doleful notes doth sing, Her Son lamenting Itylus in vain, This story is otherwise related here then amongst the late Greek and Roman Writers, thus; Pandarus had three daughters, Merope, Cleothera, and Aëdon; Aëdon was married to Zethus, by whom she had Itylus; whom she slew out of a mistake, intending to have murdered Amaleus, son of Am∣phion, her Husbands Brother. Zethus fair Off-spring, in her fury flain. So I with wand'ring thoughts perplexed am, Should I my Husbands Bed, and my own Fame, My Son's Estate, Servants, and House, preserve; Or wed some Prince, who best might me deserve, And with a wealthy Joynter me endow. My Son whil'st under age would not allow That I should wed, and leave him here alone; But now a man, he prays me to be gon: And much incens'd, rather desires my Room, Because my Sutors his Estate consume. Sir, you have skill in Dreams, I'll mine repeat, I twenty Geese picking up Corns of Wheat, With pleasure look'd upon, when from the Hill A mighty Eagle with a dreadful bill
Upon them falling, the whole Flock there slew, Breaking their Necks, but he thence mounting, flew. I in my sleep much griev'd, did weeping lie, And many Women more as well as I, Because the Eagle had so many slain: But he sat perching on the House again, And with a humane Voice to me thus said; Icarius daughter, be not so dismaid, This not a Dream, no fleeting Fancy this, But certain Truth: The Sutors are the Geese, And I that then appear'd to thee a Bird, Am now arriv'd, Ʋlysses thy dear Lord, On all thy Sutors just Revenge to take. This said, the wond'rous Dream did me forsake; But looking out my Cacklers I did see, Feeding on Corn, where they were wont to be. Then he reply'd; Madam, there is no need To clear your Dream, himself Ʋlysses did; Who said, your Sutors by his hand should fall, Nor one escape a woful Funeral. Then she reply'd; Dreams hard are to explain, All prove not true, but idle some, and vain: This aenigma of the two Gates of Dreams is several waies resolv'd by the Interpreters. Porphyry saies that the Soul being free from the employ∣ments of the Body in time of sleep, is busied about other Objects, which yet it views not perfectly and clearly, but as it were through a Veil drawn before it by that dark Nature to which it is united: which when it admits the sight of the Soul into the truth of the Ob∣jects, it is said to be of Horn, whose substance is of that nature that being attenuated it is pervious to the sight; but when it hinders and repels it, it is said to be of Ivory, which is of so solid and compact a body, that after most accurate attenuation it remains impe∣netrable to the Eye. Others by the horny Gate understand the Eys, whose first tunicle is said to be like Horn; by the Ivory Gate, the Teeth; signifying that what we speak may be falfe; but what we see, is infallibly true. This expression of our Poets, Virgil follows in the sixth of his Ae∣neids, Sunt geminae somni portae; quarum al∣tera fertur Cornea; qua veris facilis datur exitus Ʋmbris; Altera candenti perfecta nitens elephan∣to, Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia Manes. There are two Gates of sleep; One made of Horn, Through which, true Visions to the Skies are born; The other Ivory, polish'd purely bright, Whence false Dreams sally to aethereal light. And Ausonius in his Ephemeris, Divinum per hibent vatem sub frondibus Ʋlmi Vana ignavorum simulacra locasse sopo∣rum, Et geminas numero portas: quae fornice eburno Semper fallaces glomerat super aera formas, Altera quae veros emittit cornea visus. The Poet plac'd dull Dreams (as fame receives) And fancies slight, under an Elms thick leaves, Two Gates close by; the one of Ivo∣ry, where Deceitful forms pass to aethereal air; The other Horn; from whence true Dreams go forth. Two Gates there are of Sleep, One made of Horn; The other polish'd Ivory doth adorn, From whence vain words their flattering hopes pursue, But Visions issuing through the Horn prove true; So this sad Dream I hope may prosperous be, And joyful prove both to my Son, and me. But with one secret more Thee I'll entrust; When that unhappy Day shall come, which must Me separate from my Ʋlysses Court, I'll for my self provide a little sport; In order I'll set Axes in my Hall, Each of them hath their Annulets, twelve in all,
With which at distance he a shaft could shoot; Now to this Tryal I'll the Sutors put: And he that best my Husbands Bow can bend, And through a dozen Rings his arrow send, Him I will marry, and forsake this House Furnish'd so well, although my former Spouse In Dreams will haunt me. Then the King reply's; Thou the dear Spouse of Laertiades, Put off this Tryal, since the time draws neer, Madam, that your Ʋlysses will appear; Lest practising, they by experience know, As well as he, to draw your Husbands Bow. Then spake the Queen; Here I could stay all Night, And less in sleep, then thy discourse, delight; Though woful Mortals that on Earth reside, Must Rest and Toyl alternately divide. But I'll to my Apartment now retreat, Where I with nightly Tears my Pillow wet, E're since Ʋlysses went to th' Trojan War, Whose very Name, to mention, I abhor, There I'll repose: For you we'll Carpets spread, Here on the Floor, or help you to a Bed. This said, to her Chamber straight she did ascend, Her Maids in order the fair Queen attend: There weeping for her Lord she lay, till fast In deep and pleasant Sleep her Pallas cast.
scene from book 20 Thomce Stanley de Hartford Arm Tabulam Cumberlon in Comitatu hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 20.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE TWENTIETH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Revengeful Cares awake Ulysses keep: He hears his Queen in her own Chamber weep. Pallas appears, advising Him to rest. Ominous Thunder prologues a sad Feast. Theoclymenus fore-tels the Sutors Fates, For which, they Vote to turn Him out o' th' Gates. BUT in the Porch the King to take Repose, First ore himself a Bullock's raw∣hide throws, Next Sheep-skins that were new∣ly slaughter'd, got: Eurynome over all casts a warm Coat, He Plots contriving, long awake did lie, Until the Sutors Mistresses came by, Laughing, and talking of their Young Amours He much concern'd at these so impudent—
Bethought himself should he do well or ill, Such Harlots in their high debauch to kill, Or let them yet be prostituted Drabs. His Heart did seem to bark, it fetch'd such Throbs, Like a fierce Spannel suckling of her Whelps, A Stranger spying, rages, snarls, and yelps, Ready to seize; such thoughts his troubled Breast With tumut fill'd, when thus himselfh' exprest; Be patient, Thou hast worser things endur'd, By Polyphemus, in his Cave secur'd, When six of thy Associats he devour'd; Yet his huge strength by Prudence I ore-pow'r'd, And those expecting the like death, did save, And with my self freed from the Monsters Cave. The swelling passions of his Mind, this said, He strove to settle, they his Will obey'd: But he still waking lies, and tost, and rowls, As one a Pudding broils upon the Coals, Well stuff'd with fat, and blood, left it should burn, Ne'r lets it rest: So did he restless turn, Contriving how the Sutors to destroy. Pallas descending then from seats of Joy, Like a fair Lady, drawing neer him, spake; Why troubled thus keep'st thou thy self awake? This is thy House; thy Wife, and Son, are here; A Son, that should by thee be prized dear. Ʋlysses then reply'd; Celestial Maid, Thou to the purpose hast divinely said: But how alone I should (that makes me watch) So many proud Corrivals over-match, Who alwaies are, as in a body, joyn'd. Besides, this, more then that, distracts my mind, How to come off my self, if Jove decree, That singly I of all revenged be.
Then Pallas said; Should any mortal give Thee Counsel, Him Thou rather wouldst believe, Though His advice were impotent and lame, Then me, although I thy Protectress am. But what I tell thee now, I shall make good; If fifty drawn up Squadrons round thee stood, Thou shouldst disperse them with thy sword and shield, And drive their Sheep and Cattel from the Field. Wave troubled thoughts, and take some small Repose, Oft from much wanting high distempers grows. This said, she clos'd his eys, which done, retires To seats of bliss, that Crown Olympick Spires. Mean while his Queen vex'd with like Cares, and Fears Sitting, her soft bed drowns with briny Tears. When she had wept till she could weep no more, Thus she the ChastPenelope doth properly invocate Diana here, because she was reputed to be the authour of sudden death to Women, as Apollo to men; as we have already observ'd. The imprecation of the Danaides, rather then to marry with the sons of Pelasgus their Cousin-Ger∣mans, is not unlike to this, in Aeschy∣lus. , &c. Ah let me die noos'd in a fatal Chord, Ere a loath'd Husband I receive as Lord. First let the Devil rule, let him me bear Into the middle region of the Air; Or else a sullein Rock all over hide, Before against my Will I am a Bride. Or may I food for Dogs and Vulturs be, From such dire mischiefs death will set me free. Come Death, come cruel Death, conclude my Fate, Rather then Nuptials with the Man I hate. Diana did implore; Virgin; Jove's Daughter, grant me this Request, To shoot thy deadly arrow through my Breast, Or snatch me hence with a swift Heurican, Far as the confines of the flowing Main: There let me be 'mongst dismal mansions hurl'd, And Seats of Darkness in the lower World, Such be the Storm as that the Gods imploy'd, When the Pandarian Parents they destroy'd, And left their tender Orphans almost dead, Fair Venus them with Chese, Wine, Honey, fed: But Juno gave them 'bove all Women, place, Adding to beauty a majestick Grace, To them Diana granted other parts, And Pallas skilful made in her own Arts, Whilst Heaven bright Venus scal'd, of Jove to know, The great dispenser of our Weal and Woe, With whom these beauteous Virgins should be match'd Them Harpyes in a winged Tempest snatch'd,
And to th' infernal Hags presented straight, That they on them, and their dire works might wait: So may the Gods snatch me to shades of Woe, Or chast Diana kill me with her Bow, That I my dear Ʋlysses may behold. Ah, let the earths dark Bosom me infold, Before that I a meaner Person wed. What's worse then Day and Night thus Tears to shed, And when all else drown'd in forgetful sleep, Their Daily cares, I thus sit up and weep, Methought this Night One to my Bed did come, Like him that sail'd from hence to Ilium: I over-joy'd, believ'd all to be true. This said, from Eastern-Hills the Morning grew: But her Ʋlysses heard, whilst Tears she shed, And dreamt like her, with him she was in Bed. Straight rising, in the Chairs the Skins he plac'd, And the Ox-hide into the Portal cast, And thus to Jove, with hands up lifted, pray'd; O Jove, who me ore Sea and Land convay'd, Some human Voice within, ah, let me hear; Without, another sign let strike my Ear. Thus pray'd Ʋlysses, and Jove heard his Prayer; Answering inThat Thunder was a testimony of prayer being heard and answered, we find a pertinent example in Virgil, where when Old Anchises, seeing the lambent flame upon his Grand-Child Iulus's head, lifted up his hands to Hea∣ven, and prayed to Jove for help and direction, he was thus answered, Vix ea fatus erat Senior, subitoque fra∣gore Intonuit lavum, &c. Scarce had the grave Sire spoke, when suddenly It thunder'd prosperous, &c. So does Claudian make Thunder a to∣ken of the Divine approvement of the election of Probus and Olybrius to their Consulships, Ʋt sceptrum gessere manu, membrisque rigentes Aptavere togas, Signum dat summus hiulca Nube Pater, gratamque facem per. in∣ae rotantes Prospera vibrati sonuerunt omina nim∣bi. As soon as rob'd and scepter'd, Jove aloud His signal favour thunders from a Cloud: Successful Lightning through heavens arches shines; Both at th' Inauguration happy signs. Thunder from a serene Air. The happy Omen made the King rejoyce, When at the Mill he heard a Womans Voice. Alternatly there twice six Damsels still, Six taking their Repose, six ply'd the Mill; Grown'd Wheat and Barley, and all kinds of Grain, Mans marrow, which doth human life sustain: But this the weak'st, her Task yet had not done, Who wond'ring at the Thunder, thus begun; O Jove, thou King and Father of the Gods, Thou thunder'st strangly, when there are no Clouds.
This signifies, make good thy happy sign, And I a wretch will in my wishes joyn; Let this day be to all the Day of Doom, That feasting here Ʋlysses state consume; Who me have tir'd with Toyl, and sitting up, To grind, and sift; Ah may they never sup. Joves Thunder and her Vote the King ore-joy'd, His hopes confirming, all should be destroy'd. The Damsels then began themselves to show: Some bring in Wood, some make the Fire and blow. Telemachus then from his Bed arose, Puts on his Vest, and ore his Falchion throwns, Buckles his Sandals, up his Jav'lin takes, And going forth, to Euryclea speaks; Hadst thou for this our Guest so small esteem, That thou not with a Bed wouldst furnish him? My Mother better Lodgings would provide For meaner Persons. Then th' Old Nurse reply'd; Blame not thy Mother; here the Pilgrim sat Drinking rich Wine, eating whilst he could eat, And when grown late, she to her Damsels said; Go make the Pilgrim's Bed; which he forbad: But he, as one Unfortunate and Poor, Refus'd well-furnish'd Lodgings for the Floor. He in the Porch on an Ox-hide did rest, Cover'd with Skins, and I threw ore a Vest. The Prince went forth, this said, arm'd with a Spear, Two Dogs his Guard, and bold Attendants were, Unto the Counsel; when the antient Maid Grave Euryclea, to the Damsels said; Dress up the Hall with speed, andThat is, persum'd Oil to be sprinkled about the room: which Eustathius upon the place, notes to be an antient custom from these Verses (whose Author he names not) Open the Lodgings, make the Chambers sweet, Then make the Beds well, and a good Fire get, And then a bowl of pleasant Wine me fill. And Athenaeus saies of Demetrius Pha∣lereus, Governour of Athens, that he cau∣sed perfum'd oil to be sprinkled upon the ground. perfumes get, And purple Cushions put in every feat: Let some the Boards with Spunges neatly clense, Others the Cups, and golden Goblets wrense,
And fetch pure Water for the Rival Guests, The Prince this day highly intends to feast. Thus gave she order; They, the ancient Maid Their Governess, saluting first, obey'd. Twice ten went to the Fountain, others drest The stately Hall, whilst in the Sutors prest, Who Billets cleave; others came from the Spring. Eumoeus in did three fat Porkers bring, Which had at freedom plentifully fed; Who smiling, thus then to Ʋlysses said; Art thou in Favour with the Sutors more, Or use thee scornfully as heretofore? The King then to Eumoeus thus reply'd; Would Heaven take Vengeance on them for their pride, That with such insolence thus ryot here, Against all Conscience, Modesty, or Fear. Melanthius came, whilst thus Ʋlysses spoke, And brought fat Goats, the primest of the Flock: Them to the Portal fast two Herders made, Who drolling then thus to Ʋlysses said; What Good-man Troublesom, art thou here yet, Know'st thou not how out of these Doors to get? Thou who so saucy art 'mongst Lords and Peers, Stay'st thou until th' art pluck'd out by the Ears? Will nought but blows serve such a greedy Guest? Are there no other Houses where they feast? Ʋlysses thus affronted nothing said, But kept down struggling rage, and shook his Head. Philetius third, amongst the Swains a King, AFor the Oxen, and other of the Cattel, were fed in Epirus, the Con∣tinent over against Ithaca, as appears from these Verses in the 14 book, , . The Island it self being an unfruitful and barren Country: betwixt which and the Continent there was but a narrow passage. Barren Heifer, and fat Kids did bring, (The Vessel brought them ore that goes betwixt, Carrying all Persons over who came next) And them did neer the ecchoing Portal tie, Thus spake, then to Eumoeus standing by;
What Stranger's this hither so lately came, What Country, who his Parents, what his Name? Though poor he seems, his Looks majestick are, They often suffer Want who wander far; And Gods do Kings oft sad Examples make. Him by the Hand then taking, thus he spake; Welcom grave Father, may'st thou Wealthy be, Who now art pinch'd with Want and Misery. O Jove, of all the Gods thou tak'st least Care, For woful Mortals though thy Race they are, And giv'st them as their Birth-right Toyl and Grief: When I remind, how wanting all Relief, Ʋlysses may thus wander up and down, Without a Vest, my Cheeks salt Rivers drown; If yet he live, but he, alass, is dead Long since descended to th' infernal shade: Thinking of him I almost am distrought, A Boy he me from Cephalenia brought His Herds to wait on, now a numerous Breed; And these forsooth must proud Corrivals feed, Who scorn his Son, and Providence deride, And will our absent King's Estate divide. My Bosom prompts me something should be don, Lest cureless Mischief light upon his Son, To drive his Cattel amongst Strangers, where More dangerous it can not be then here, And from these proud Corrivals, though long since, (Intolerable is their Pride and Insolence) To have escap'd: But still I hop'd the King Might Home return, and their Destruction bring. Then thus Ʋlysses; Swain, thou prudent art, Discovering both a Bold and Loyal Heart: This I shall say, and what I say I'll swear, By Jove, and by this House, in which we are,
And all the boards of Hospitality, Ere long thou here shalt King Ʋlysses see, If so thou wilt Audits with them to cleer, In bloody reckonings paying for their Cheer. Then he reply'd; Oh! Jove but make this true, Then should'st thou see what I for him would do: And so Eumaeus pray'd to all the Gods, To see Ʋlysses in his own Aboads. Whilst these amongst themselves discoursed thus, They plotted how to kill Telemachus; But as the place and manner they discust, An Eagle, bad the sign, a Pigeon trust. Startled at this, Amphinomus then said; Let your what e're Contrivance off be laid, And for a plenteous Feast your Humours fit. This said; they to his Counsel all submit, And the whole Gang straight to the Hall repairs, Laying their Mantles down on Stools, and Chairs. Sheep, Goats, and Swine, the Heifer there they slew; And th' inwards rosted, dealt to each his due. Their Wine well mix'd, their Bowls Eumaeus fraught, Philetius Bread in curious Baskets brought, Melanthius diligent Skinks about to all, Their Meat serv'd up, they to the Dishes fall. The Prince dire Plots contriving, then thought sit Ʋlysses at a little Board should sit, His Meat before him, in a golden Cup Wine pouring, thus he cheers the Pilgrim up; Drink now with Princes here, I'll thee maintain, 'Gainst whosoe'r thy Poverty shall disdain: Nor shall this Palace prostituted be, My Father built it for himself and me. To spare your Tongues and Hands I all advise, Lest Quarrels from Disturbances arise.
All bite their Lips, and him no answer make, The Prince admiring, who so boldly spake. Then said Antinous; Princes, keep your Seats, And though he threaten, not regard his threats; Since 'tis Jove's Pleasure him a while to save, Let us till then Revenge and Answer wave. Telemachus car'd not what Antinous said, The HeraldsThis was the first day of the moneth, or New-moon (for the an∣tient Greek months were Lunar) which was a publick feast-day among the Gre∣cians, and therefore fitly contriv'd for this action of Ʋlysses's, that while the whole City was abroad at their pub∣lick Entertainments, the Sutors might find no assistance from thence. Didy∣mus T , &c. They conoeive that the New-moon is sacred to all the Gods, for our An-cestors dedica∣ted it to the God, because it was the first of the Moneth, attributing justly all be∣ginnings to them; whence they offer'd their First-fruits to all the Gods. Now it was proper that that day should be con∣secrated to Apollo (that is, the Sun) he being the cause of light. through the City then convaid A Hecatomb; People in Throngs attend, And towards Apollo's Grove th' whole Concourse bend. When all the Meat was roasted, dish'd and mess'd, Down sat the Princes to a plenteous Feast, Of which Ʋlysses had an equal share, The Waiters by the Prince so order'd were. But Pallas the proud Rivals urg'd once more, With Scoffs and Taunts, such as they us'd before, To move the King, and his Revenge inflame. A cross-grain'd Sutor, Ctesipus his Name, Whose Father had in Same a fair House, Trusting Paternal Wealth, he to espouse Absent Ʋlysses Wife, 'mongst others, made Common Address, thus to the Sutors said; Hear me you Princes, what I shall declare; This Stranger hath with us an equal share, Nor is it fit to question whosoe'r Telemachus treats, or hither makes repair: But we may add; I'll something more bestow, That he may give a servant e're he go, Of's Liberality to be a proof. This said, at him he threw a Bullocks Hoof, Snatch'd from the Basket; he his Head declin'd, Avoids the Blow, much troubled in his mind: The cloven-foot rebounds against the Wall. On whom Telemachus thus did roundly fall;
Your Actions, and your Breeding, seem alike, Or else you would not a poor Stranger strike, 'Tis well he scap'd, else Thou thy due desert Shouldst have, and this my Spear should pierce thy Heart; Then for thy Nuptial Rites thy Father should Have made thy Tomb, or any who so bold Durst in my House commit a Crime so vild, Know now I am of Age, and past a Child, And can distinguish Good from Bad: but yet, You may behold me here with patience fit, Whil'st you devour these Cates, my Wine drink up, 'Tis hard for one with many men to cope: Therefore I wish you would more civil be, For Death it self seems better far to me. Should you all thrust your Swords in me at once, That would be easier then these high Affronts; To strike our Guests, our Women to abuse, As if this Palace were a Common Stews. This through the Hall a general silence made, When thus at last Young Agelaus said; When words are spoke, so well with Reason sure, Sharp Reparties avoid, and rough Dispute; For shame, t' affront a Stranger, Sirs, for bear, Or any Servant that Attendants are: But to Telemachus and the Queen I'll make A motion, which may both parties take; As long as we believ'd Ʋlysses might Return, and here enjoy his Native right, So long she might refuse: that he should land, We cannot now expect, or understand, Therefore move thou thy Mother to espouse, Whom best she likes, then shall we leave thy House, And thy Paternal State, thy Self to guide. Then thus Telemachus to him reply'd;
By Jove and my dear Fathers wants and Woes, Who dead, or wandring lives, I'll not oppose My Mothers Nuptials, but use all my Power Her to persuade, and to secure her Dowre: But 'gainst her Will I would not her remove, Such acts not acceptable are to Jove. Here Pallas stirr'd loud laughter in the Hall, All merry were, but knew no cause at all. Their Meat straight bloody grew, and briny lakes Stood in their Eys. Theoclymenus then speaks; Ah, Sirs, you are involv'd in mists, sad Shreeks Invade my Ears, salt Tears run down your Cheeks, The Walls with Blood besprinkled, red the Posts, Thicker then Atoms walk infernal Ghosts About the Porch, the entrie, and the Hall, The Sun's eclips'd, and Darkness covers all. At these expressions they extreamly laugh'd, When thus Eurymachus the Stranger scoff'd; This Fellow's mad; Go lead him to the Gate, That he may Home, because he thinks it late. Then Theoclymenus thus to him replies; Send none to lead me out, for I have Eys, And Ears, and Feet, I thank you, and each Sense, I without leading shall depart from hence: Because I see that your Destruction's neer, Not one shall scape just Vengeance that are here, Not one of you who in Ʋlysses Court, Make of uncivil Actions thus a sport. This said, he went, without once taking leave, Whom straightThis is he to whom Telemachus recommended Theoclymenus when he left his Ship, and went into the Coun∣try to his servant Eumaeus; Odyss. 15. Pireus kindly did receive. The proud Corrivals laugh, and look about, And both Telemachus, and Strangers flout. When to the Prince a haughty Youth thus spake; None worser choice in chosing Guests could make,
A Wanderer, One that loyters in thy Hall, That eats and drinks, but never works at all, An Idle person, a vain load of Earth; Th' other a Prophet, and forsooth holds forth: But I'll advise, which may advantage be, Let them be ship'd with speed for Sicily; There for no little sum they may go off. Thus said he, but the Prince not minds his Scoff, But look'd on's Father when with stretch'd out Arm, The Sutors charging, he would give th' Alarm. But fair Penelope in her Chair of State, In private, at convenient distance sat; Where her Gallants she could distinctly hear, Mixing their Bits and Cups with many a Jeer, They had abundance, and so merry made, But never sharper sawce their Dishes had: A Goddess, and a Valiant Prince decreed, They for accumulated Crimes should bleed.
scene from book 21 Edwardo Sherborne Armigero Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 2j.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE TWENTY FIRST BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Ulysses Bow all Love-sutes must decide: The Queen will be the ablest Archers Bride, But none the Bow could bend: for Lard they call: But strive in vain, the tough Yew baffles all. Ulysses takes the Bow, Jove from the Skies Thunders, He shoots, and bears from all the Prize. BUT Pallas here carrying on Plots design'd, Then puts it in Icarius Daughters mind To fetch the Sutors down Ʋlysses Bow, To try their strength, and prove their over-throw. And up she hastens drawing forth a Key, The Handle wrought with brass and Ivory; Her Maids attending her in order, they Ascended where Ʋlysses Treasure lay,
Gold, Brass, and polish'd Steel, a glorious show, Thence takes she forth his Quiver, and his Bow, And deadly Shafts, when he to Sparta went, Him Iphitus meeting did to him present, At Ortilochus Court, where they in Messen met. Ʋlysses came to claim a publick Debt, Three hundred Sheep, and Shep-herds too, which they Had toPausanias observes that Mes∣sene here is not the name of a City, but of a Country. , &c. Before the battel at Leuctra be∣tween the Thebans and Lacedaemonians, I think there was no City call'd Messene I do partly conjecture so from the Verses of Homer, who in the Catalogue of those that went against Troy, reckoning Pyle, Arene, and others, makes no mention of Messene, The Verses are these, 'O K . , Who dwelt in Pyle, and those Arene stor'd, And Thryos, where Alpheus you may for'd Who did in Aepy's lofty Walls reside, In Cypariss, and Amphigen abide. But it is wore apparent (saies he) in his Odysses, where speaking of the Bow of Iphitus. T — At Ortilochus Court they in Messene met. For Ortilochus's house was not in the Ci∣ty Messene, but at Pherae, which himself declares in Pisistratus's journey to Me∣nelaus. 'E — This Country receiv'd its name from Messens daughter of Triopas, Wife of Plycaon. Messena ship'd from Ithaca. Him Young, his Father, and the Peers oth' Land Sent thither, satisfaction to demand: But Iphitus came upon his own affairs, Seeking twelve sturdy Mules, and twice six Mares, Which after that his sad Destruction prov'd, (He came to visit Hercules, who mov'd On some pretence, him at a Treatment kill'd, And hospitable Boards with blood defil'd, Then the same Mules and Mares, his prize he made, And in's own Stables as good Booty staid) Which then he sought when he Ʋlysses met. He this Bow gave him, which before the great Eurytus drew, who when of life bereft, To his dear Son in his own Palace left. Ʋlysses him a Lance gave, and a Skain; But neither either e're did entertain: For at the Table great Alcides slew Renown'd Iphitus, at an enterview. Of this Ʋlysses had so much esteem, He would not bear it to the War with him: But kept in the remembrance of his Friend, And never did but in's own Country bend. But when she came up to his Room a-part, Well-floor'd with Oak, and planish'd with much art, Whose Portals and fair Thresholds had no match,Hercules took them not from Iphitus, but had bought them of Au∣tolycus, who had stoln them from him. There she puts in the Key, and draws the Latch:
The Bolt shot back resounds, whilst she unlocks, As in the Meadows lows a well-fed Ox. The Queen then enters, where in Cedar Chests Her Ward-robe lay, store of perfumed Vests: There straight, Ʋlysses Bow and Quiver she Takes down, and sitting, laies upon her Knee, Weeping a main: but when sh'had eas'd her Woe With briny Tears, down went she with the Bow, Quiver, and Shafts, of which some deadly were. Two Damsels down the ponderous Coffer bear, Where the King's Annulets, Brass and Silver lay. The Queen when neer the Sutors, makes a stay, Just at the Entrance of the stately Hall, There casting ore her Cheeks a slender Vail; On either hand attended by a Maid, She boldly thus to the Corrivals said; Proud Sutors, hear me, You in this my House Dayly feast high, and richest Wine carouse, In my Lords absence, I'll no more delay, Nor by pretences cause your longer stay: But you that me would marry, and now Court, Let's end our serious Difference in Sport; And here Ʋlysses Bow shall be your Law, Which, who can handle best, and ablest draw, And through these twice six Annulets shall shoot, He shall my Husband be without dispute: I'll Home with him, this House no longer keep, Which still I shall remember in my sleep. This said, She bids Eumaeus carry in The Bow and Annulets where they might be seen, Which he plac'd, weeping when the Bow he spy'd, Whose Tears thus proud Antinous did deride; Pox on thee Coxcomb-Rustick, why dost cry, Wherefore, forsooth, put finger in thy Eye?
To move the Queen, who, now her Husband's dead, Shall find fresh comfort in another's Bed: Eat thou thy meat in quiet, or else go And whine without, and leave with us the Bow. The Prize propounded will be hard to bear, As 'tis to bend Ʋlysses Bow I fear: Not one of us but seems a meer Jack-straw, To what Ʋlysses was when him I saw, Whom I remember well, when but a Boy. Thus said he, hoping though the Prize t' enjoy, Who was the first Ʋlysses Arrow felt, And with him most dishonourably delt, And more then others did the rest provoke. To whom Telemachus thus boldly spoke; Sure Jove hath made me mad, my Mother saies, And her but seldom idle passion swaies, That she will marry, and this House forsake, Yet I'm not troubled, but still merry make. Well Sirs, begin, she's ready, such a piece You shal not match though you should search all Greece InIf Argos in this place signifies Peloponnesus, as some interpreters do conjecture, then by a Poetical figure he enumerates some of the parts toge∣ther with the mention of the whole: for Pylus and Mycene are Cities in Pe∣loponnesus: which figure is very fre∣quent in Homer. So Iliad. 2. 'O . These from Dulichium, and the Echina∣des. for Dulichium is one of the Islands of the Echinades. So Odyss. 11. — Through Greece and Phthia. The like we find in the Poets who next followed him. Hipponax, K . And Alman in his Lyricks, For both Amathus and Paphus were Cities of Cyprus. But it may here he taken for that part of Greece peculiar∣ly so call'd, or for the City Argos it self. Argos, nor Mycene, nor in Pyle, Ithaca it self, Epire, or any Isle. Which you all know, I need not speak her praise. Now lay by all Excuses and Delaies, Nor hancker long that you your Dooms may know, But first I'll try if I can bend this Bow, The Prize endanger by my Strength and Art, Nor when my Mother shall from me depart, I shall not grieve, nor of her loss complain, But take the Prizes which I shall obtain. This said, his purple Mantle off he threw, And standing up laies by his Falchion too, First he the Rings sets in so just a Line, That their Circumferences, and Centers joyn,
Then fix'd in Earth, all wonder he excell'd, In ordering what he never yet beheld. Then standing forth he twangs the string, then hales; Three times he tries his strength, as often fails, Still high his hopes, the Prize he should obtain. His fourth attempt then had not prov'd in vain, But that Ʋlysses wink'd, and took him off; When thus Telemachus at himself did scoff; I shall but prove a dull and heavy Beast, Or else too young am, not fit to contest In martial sports, whom any one may worst: But who here stronger are then I, draw first. Against the Wall he set the Bow, this said, And on the floor close by the Arrow laid, Then reassum'd the place he had forsook. When thus Antinous to the Concourse spoke; Let us in Order move, and all conjoyn, That he shall first begin sits next the Wine. Antinous thus advising, none oppose. Liodes first, Oenops's Off-spring, rose, Who was their Priest, and next the Goblet sate, Who much did them and their abuses hate. He first receiv'd the Bow and Shaft by Law, Then standing forth attempted it to draw, But fail'd; his Hand the stiff string weary made; Not us'd to shoot: then thus to them he said; Some other take this Bow; it will not bend, This to the Shades will many Sutors send: And better die then live; thus with a Scoff, After a long sute to be shaken off: And here perhaps are some that hope to win, Then bear in triumph hence the beauteous Queen; But this Bow try'd will finish all Dispute, Remove your Leagure, t' other Dames make sute,
And let her marry whom she please. This said, He on the Board the Bow and Arrow laid, When thus Antinous his mind declar'd; How scap'd these words thy teeth, their Ivory guard? Must to the shades this many Sutors send, Because thou want'st the strength the Yew to bend? Thy Mother no such person bore, that can Handle an able Bow, and play the Man: But here are several brisker Youths that shall. This said, he to Melanthius thus did call; A little Fire go in and quickly get, And close before a Chair and Cushion set; Then bring the rowl of Lard that lies within, That warm they may the suppling stuff work in: Then we may bend the Bow, and get the Prize. This said, a Fire he kindles in a trice, AThe Chair was for the Archer to sit in, when he shot, the scope or mark being too low for them to shoot standing. And this appears afterwards when Ʋlysses takes the Bow, The Lard serv'd to moisten and molli∣fie the drie Bow, that thereby it might the easier yield and bend; not to a∣noint the Arms of the Archers, that their Nervs being thereby corrobora∣ted they might draw it with the great∣er strength; a great mistake in Zuin∣ger and Spondanus. Chair and Cushion set, and brought the Lard, They fall to work, no pains the Sutors spar'd To make it yield, with chasing in grown warm: But all in vain, none had so good an Arm. Antinous and Eurymachus, who were The Sutors Princes, and the strongest there Attempted; not as if concern'd at all, Eumaeus and his Swain stole out oth' Hall: After these two some hast Ʋlysses made, And to them, past the Gates, and Entrance, said; Eumaeus and Bubulcus, Friends you be, Shall I now hold my Tongue, or else be free. What if your King should suddainly appear, By some strange Miracle transported here. Would you the Sutors, or Ʋlysses aid? Say what your Inclinations would persuade. Bubulcus then reply'd; O Jove wouldst thou Bring this to pass, that's thus in question now,
And that some God would hither him transport, Then thou shouldst see that I would make some sport. Eumaeus so implor'd then all the Gods, To see Ʋlysses in his own Aboads. After he found he faithful Servants had, Thus he to them himself discovering, said; I that so much have suffer'd now am here, In my own Country after twenty year, I know that none of all my Servants do Wish that I should return, but only you: For which, what I'll confer I'll not declare; If by Jove's means these Roysters conquer'd are, I'll give you Wives and Wealth, your Houses build, And you shall both be Friends, and Brothers styl'd To my dear Son: but you not to deceive, Behold the mark which me the wild Boar gave, When with Autolycus his Sons I went A hunting oreA high Mountain in Achaia. Parnassus steep ascent. Here he to them the Cicatrice did show, Which after they beheld, and well did know, They weeping hung about him in embrace, Kissing his Shoulders, and his Head and Face: Such Complements they had not finish'd yet, Shedding glad Tears, at lest till Sun had set, Had not he thus forbid, lest any should Come forth, and in this posture us behold, And tel't within; no longer kindness show: And now let's in, but not together go, First I, then you, and this shall be the sign. For the proud Sutors, as one man conjoyn, I shall nor Bow nor Quiver touch at all: Bear them to me Eumaeus, through the Hall, And put them in my Hands; The Women tell, That they must shut their Doors, and bar them well:
But if that any of them hear within Sad Grones and Cries, with a confused Din, Let them not stir, not what's the matter ask, But there in quiet go on with their Task. Philetius, of the Palace Gates take Care, Locking them up, well bolt and strongly bar. Back to the Hall, this said, Ʋlysses goes, And re-assumes his seat from whence he rose. Next in Eumaeus and Philetius go: When bold Eurymachus takes up the Bow, And at the Fire well-suppling, warm'd, but had The same success; at which extreamly mad, With a deep sigh his Passion thus exprest; I for my self not mov'd am, nor the rest, Nor to be baffled thus, not much it galls, By which we lose expected Nuptials: Address our selves to several Dames we may In other places beside Ithaca, But that none here can draw Ʋlysses Bow, This to our shame Posterity will know. Then thus to him Antinous reply'd; Not so grieve, Sir, we better shall provide, Now is Apollos Festival you know, Who farthest shoots, and draws the silver Bow: Let us compose our selves, these trinckets all Stand, as we leave them, in Ʋlysses Hall; None I suppose will meddle with them there: But let the Skinker Wine in bowls prepare, That we Libating may take up the bow, And let Melanthius the Goat-herd go Early for Goats, the best of all the Flock, With which we'll offer Phoebus, and invoke; Then we shall venture once more for the Prize. They all approve Antinous advice.
For their Hands water straight the Heralds brought, Others got Wine, and empty Goblets fraught, When they had drank, and their Libations pay'd, Ready for Action, sly Ʋlysses said; You bold Corrivals, hear what I'll impart, Although the suddain Dictates of my Heart; Eurymachus and Antinous, I request, Because the last said well, and counsel'd best, Early let Phoebus Victory bestow Where he shall please, but let me touch the bow; That I may by Experience find, if still I have the same dexterity and skill I once enjoy'd, or whether they are lost In misery, wandring thus from Coast to Coast. This word did all their angers much incend, Mistrusting he the able bow might bend: To whom in ranting Tearms Antinous said; Unlucky Stranger, art Thou still stark mad, Is't not enough with Princes here to feast; All priviledges having of a Guest, And hear'st our Table-talk, which none before Enjoy'd, like thee, a Vagabond and Poor? Wine put into thy Head this fond design, Distempers rage that rise from too much Wine. So WinePirithous was King of the La∣pithites, a people of Thessaly dwelling about Pindus and Othni, who invited the Centaurs, not far distant from him, to his Nuptials; one of whom, Eury∣tion here (by others call'd Eurytus) enflam'd with Wine, and supriz'd with the incomparable beauty of the Bride; offer'd to make a rape upon her, which bred a sudden Quarrel betwixt the Centaurs and the Lapithae, describ'd at large by Ovid in the 12 of his Meta∣morphosis, Now Eurytus, more heady then the rest, Foul rapine harbours in his salvage breast, Incens'd by beauty and the heat of Wine. Lust and Ebriety in out-rage joyn. Straight turn'd up Boards the Feast profane, the fair And tender Spouse now haled by the Hair. Fierce Eurytus Hippodame: all took Their choice, or whom they could; sack'd Cities look With such a face. The Women shreek, we rise, When Theseus first; O Eurytus un∣wise! Dar'st thou offend Pirithous as long As Theseus lives? in one, two suffer wrong. The great-soul'd Heroe, not to boast in vain, Breaks through the throng, and from his fierce disdain The rape repris'd. He no Reply af∣fords, Such facts could not be justify'd by words, &c. The Centaurs from the navel down∣wards carried the shapes of Horses, begotten by Ixion on a Cloud, formed like and mistaken for Juno: represent∣ing the vain pursuit of imaginary glo∣ry, attempted by unlawful mean, and the prodigious Conceptions of Ambi∣tion. Eurytion in Pirithous House Distracted, taking a too deep Carouse; When on the Lapithae he mad did fall, Raising so high Disturbance in the Hall: But they inflam'd with the like raging fit, Cropt both his Ears, and up his Nostrils slit, And by the Heels they dragg'd him out a Door, After mix'd slaughter had imbrew'd the Floor, But for his insolence he first did pay. I in proviso this shall only say;
If thou but offer'st once this Bow to touch, No longer Thou shalt cram and swil so much Amongst us here; but shipping, thee we'll send To King Echetus to man-kind no Friend; Which if you would avoid and quiet are, With us sit still, but not with us compare. Antinous, then Penelope reply'd; It is not fit thus strangers to deride, If once th' are Guests, and we them Favour show. Think'st Thou if he should draw Ʋlysses bow, That therefore him I should my Husband make? He cannot hop't, feed no such gross mistake. When to the Queen Eurymachus thus sed; We not believe, Madam, that him you'll wed: But we fear scandal, when the baser sort Our actions shall thus to our Shame report. Such Princes who would value at a straw, Who court his Wife, whose Bow they cannot draw? Others will say, a Beggar thither got, And through the Annulets his Arrow shot: Which shall infix a high disgrace on us. The said the Queen; Not so Eurymachus, None ever found the peoples favour yet, And thus deboshing, up their betters eat. How can they you disparage then at all? He hath a goodly Person, strong, and tall, And him to be of fair extract we know: Let him then try his Strength, and take the Bow. If Phoebus please that he obtain the best, I shall present him with a Coat, and Vest, A Sword, a pair of Sandals, and a spear, That he nor Dogs nor Men shall need to fear, And I'll his Pasport sign for him beside. Then to his Mother thus her Son reply'd;
Madam, none here more powerful are then I, Whom I think fit, my Fathers Bow shall try: Not any of the Chiefs of Ithaca, Nor those that in more fertile Elis sway, Shall drive me from my resolution, so If me it please, him I'll present the Bow. But Mother, now be pleased to walk in, Look to your Webs, see how your Damsels spin, Leave Mens affairs to me; Sure in this Hall 'Tis my concern to rule and order all. The Queen, her Son's direction much admires, And straight to her Apartment thence retires, There for Ʋlysses weeps, till her at last, Into a pleasant Sleep Minerva cast. But straight Eumaeus lifted up the bow, At which, the proud Corrivals angry grow: When some of them thus to Subulcus said; Since Thou to bear the Bow down art so mad, Thee thy own Dogs shall eat, those which thou breed'st, And with such care amongst thy Porkers feed'st, If Phoebus and th' immortal Gods to us Be at to morrows Feast propitious. In the same place the Bow again he sets Thus ranted out, amazed at their Threats. The Prince then from another side oth' Hall, Thus rated him; Obedient unto all None well can be, take up the Bow, be gon, Else thee, although I'm Younger, hence I'll stone To thy own Farm: Ah! could I but as well With these that riot here as with thee deal, I with a mischief soon would send them hence, Who act with so much pride and insolence. When here the jolly Sutors not retort, But smile, converting anger into sport.
And to the King the Bow the Swain convaid: Then from the Prince to Euryclea said; Shut fast your Doors, and if you hear within Sad Groans and Cries with a confused Din, Let them not stir, nor what's the matter ask, But there in quiet go on with their Task. The Prince thus ord'ring, she with speed obey'd, And all the Doors fast in an instant made. As soon Philetius steps out of the Hall, Locks up the Gates, and outward Portals all. There he the Cable of a Vessel found, With which he faster all the former bound: Then entring, sits down where before he sat, The King observing; who the bow had got, Turning and tossing lest theEustathius on this place, . The Bow they say, as it appears, was made of Horn, not like the antient Scy∣thian Bows, of wood: But I see no ne∣cessity for this interpretation, because the Horn may be understood of the two tips of the Bow, which usually were made of that material. Horn were bor'd, With eating worms, in th' absence of its Lord. When one amongst them him observing, spake; Sure by this bow he would another make, He turns it up and down so in his Hands; Skilful in mischief are most Vagabonds. He'll take a Pattern, he looks on't so oft. Whom thus another proud Corrival scoft; May Fortune him a special Favour send, And not before, until this bow he bend. Thus jeer'd the Sutors whilst Ʋlysses bore The able bow perusing it all ore. A Skilful Harper so, before he sings, Winds up and down with ease concording strings, Pitching the Sheeps-gut either high or low: As did Ʋlysses ordering his strong bow. Then taking up, he twangs the well-stretch'd string, Which like a Swallows shriller Voice did ring: At which, the Sutors pale as ashes look, And, thundering, Jove them with more Terrour struck:
But the dire Omen glad Ʋlysses made, Because the God thus promis'd him his aid. And up he takes a Shaft lay on the Board, His Quiver after many did afford, Which mongst the Sutors must as Favours go, Then with strong Arms he drew the yielding Bow: The well-aim'd Shaft through the first Annulet sent, Through all the rest just in the Center went, And so a free and easie passage made. When to Telemachus Ʋlysses said; Not any here, Sir, now your Choice should scoff, I've done the business, and am well come off: My former strength, nor old experience wants, I am above the scornful Sutors Taunts. But now 'tis late, and supper-time invites To singing, musick, and what else delights; Which more then Cates concerns a liberal board: Then wincks on's Son, who straight puts on his Sword, His Javelin takes, then draws in Arms compleat, Down to his Father standing neer his Seat.
scene from book 22 Gulielmo Ford Armigero Joannce filice Henrici Tabulam hanc et Uxori Ipsius Dent de Biker Arm: LMDDDIO Lib 22.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE TWENTY SECOND BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. The King Antinous shoots; All think it Chance. Eurymachus Quarter asks. The Prince's Lance Amphinomus kills; He to his Father gets, Who with a few on all the Sutors sets. Pallas appears: Corrivals slaughter'd all. Women dress up, and clense from Blood, the Hall. BUT now the King himself from tatters strips, And with his Bow and well-fill'd Quiver leaps On the broad-threshold; out his Shafts then shakes Before his Foot, then to the Gang thus speaks; This Game is won, though difficult to win, But now a harder match we must begin; Which will, if Phoebus help, make up two Games. This said, a Shaft he at Antinous aims,
Who by both handles held aDionysius the Thracian notes that from this place of Homer, where Antinous is slain whilst he is lifting the Cup to his mouth, grew the Proverb among the Grecians, . Many things hap betwixt the Cup and Lip. golden Cup, In jocund posture, ready to turn up, And take a deep Carouse, then little thought At's Elbow Death should spoil so sweet a Draught. The Prince of Sutors, 'mongst his merry Mates, Of slaughter little dreamt, and sullen Fates. Ʋlysses Shaft found in his Throat no check, Till the sharp point transpierc'd his tender Neck. He stagg'ring backward, down the Goblet throws, A purple Fountain conduits from his Nose. Down comes the Table, spurn'd ore with his Feet, Making a muss of Drink, and Bread, and Meat. Up start the Sutors as they saw him fall, And sudden murmur flies about the Hall: About the Walls they look, and search each where, If they could find a Shield or single Spear. When thus enraged they Ʋlysses blame; Thou dost not well, Villain, at Men to aim; No more shalt thou 'mongst us for Prizes shoot: Th' hast kill'd a Person, who without dispute Was Prince of all the Youth in Ithaca: Therefore on Thee shall Dogs and Vultures prey. The Sutors blabber'd thus, supposing still, That he had slain Antinous 'gainst his Will: Nor did it in Consideration fall, Now one Calamity would swallow all. When frowning, thus Ʋlysses made Reply; No more, you Dogs, shall you believe that I Will ne'r return to my own House, from Troy: Who wast my Goods, and would my Wife enjoy, Her Women prostituting when you please, Jove slighting, and th' whole Court of Deities, Nor injur'd men regard, nor future Fame: Death without mercy I to all proclaim.
This said, pale fear puts on his trembling shape, Each look about how Death they may escape, Only Eurymachus made this saint Reply; If Thou our Ithacan Ʋlysses be, Thy threats are just, these Trespasses we own, Both in thy Court, the Countrey, and the Town; But here Antinous lies, the only Cause, Who made us break all Hospitable Laws, He neither wanted Nuptials, nor desir'd, But Supream Power his hot ambition fir'd, Which Jove would not, he reach'd at absolute Sway, To be first Monarch of all Ithaca, Laying a Plot to kill thy only Son, By Death prevented now; Take pity on Our sad Condition, once thy People styl'd, That we united, may be reconcil'd: For what we here have in such Ryot spent, Each of us twenty Bullocks shall present, And Gold, and Silver send in Loads to thee; Till then, 'tis fit Thou thus incens'd should'st be. Then frowning on him thus Ʋlysses spake; If ore to me your Heir-ships you would make, And what's your own, what else you may enjoy, I would not hold my Hands, but all destroy: Under my just Revenge you here must lie, All I can grant you now, is, Fight, or Fly; Hopes to get off let idle Fancies shape, But I believe not one of you shall scape. This said, their Knees relax'd, cold Agues shook, When thus Eurymachus to them trembling, spoke; Sirs, He'll not spare you; Such a cruel Foe, With a full Quiver, and a deadly Bow, Will pick us out, and One by One us kill, Recal your Valours, Sirs, and draw your Steel;
Against his shafts, for Targets Tables take, Imbodied sure we something on't shall make. If many can from one once cleer the Hall, The Town alarm'd we'll to assistance call, And He shall soon this undertaking rue. This said, Eurymachus his Falchion drew, And raging like a tempest on Him set: Ʋlysses shoots Him under-neath the Teat, Which in his Liver fix'd, he drops his Sword, Water and Wine down tumbles with the Board; His Fore-head, struck against the Earth, rebounds, His Seat, with clattering of his Heels, resounds; Whilst an eternal Darkness clos'd his Eies. Amphinomus next at stern Ʋlysses flies, Drawing his Sword, so his Escape to make: But Him Telemachus ran through the Back, As he against his Father did advance: Out at his Bosom came the Handsel'd Lance, Whilst with his Fore-head He salutes the Floor, The Spear Telemachus draws blushing with Gore, With all the speed he might, fearing least they Should get that Lance, or wound Him in his way. Then to his Father swift as Lightning made, And drawn up to Him, thus rejoycing, said; Sir, I shall straight for you a Target get, And with two Javelins, and a Helmet fit: And that these Swains may better stand the storm, I shall as soon them both compleatly arm. Then said the King; Dear Son, no time neglect, Fetch them whilst these my Arrows me protect; Lest, when alone, they force me from the Gate. This said, the Prince went to his Chamber straight, Where Hung the Arms; From thence He loaden bears Four shields, four Helmets, and eight glittering Spears:
First he himself, and then his Servants arms, To guard their King, dispensing feather'd storms. But He, so long as any Shafts he had, So well he aim'd, that each shot left one dead; And thick they lay, weltring in purple gore. But when the shooting-King had Shafts no more, Against the Wall his useless Bow he sets, And ore his shoulder his bright Target gets, And with a glittering Cask his Brows impails, Grac'd with a waving Grove of Horses Tails: And straight each Hand arms with a glittering Spear. Above the Threshold two fair Windows were, Under, a Path; which through the Palace lay, To the next Town a neer and privat way: Good, this Ʋlysses bids Eumaeus make, When Agelaus to the rest thus spake; O Sirs, let one up to the Window get, And call aloud for Help; some hope there's yet, That he who kill'd so many, we may kill. Then out Melanthius cry'd; you counsel ill, For neer that passage stands you sturdy Lout, Who will not let you once your Head thrust out. But I will arms down from the Chamber bear, For sure the Son and Father left them there. This said. Melanthius hastens up the Stairs, And thence twelve Shields, and plumed Helmets bears, And twice six Lances: straight the Sutors arm. Ʋlysses trembled at this fresh alarm: Seeing them shine in steel, and Javelins shake. He a hard task had now to undertake, Then to Telemachus he said; Ah! Son, Some of the Women hath this Mischief don, Or else Melanthius. Who made this Reply; Sir, 'tis my fault, no others, only I
To blame am, that the Chamber Door's not lock'd, Nor to so great a Charge no better look'd; But dear Eumaeus, go, and straight them shut, And mark, if any Women were ith' Plot, Or if this feat were by Melanthius plaid. Whilst 'mong themselves they such Conjectures made, Melanthius went again more Arms to bring. Eumaeus spying him, drew neer the King, And to him said; Melanthius, that vile wretch, Whom wo suspected now, went more to fetch: What shall I do: if I the stronger be, Shall I dispatch, or bring him down to thee? That to a strict account Thou him may'st call, Till in just punishments he pays for all. To whom Ʋlysses, troubled, answer'd thus; The Sutors I must, and Telemachus, Keep here within, who would be gon; Him take, And tie his Hands and Feet up to his Back: Then up a Pillar draw him with a Chain, To linger there in worse thenƲlysses, it seems, thought not Death a sufficient punishment for those grand misdemeanors, of his Servant, unless accompanied with torture: whose example is generally followed by more severe Princes. Suetonius doth write thus of Tiberius the Roman Emperour, Sed & Tibe∣rius mori volentibus vim adhibuisse vi∣vendi dicitur; Nam mortem adeo leve supplicium putabat, ut cum audisset u∣num ex eis, Carnulium nomine, antici∣passe eam, exclamaverit, Carnulius me evasit: It is reported that Tiberius u∣sed to force those to live that desired to die: for he thought Death so slight a punishment, that when he understood that Carnulius had died in prison, he exclai∣med, Carnulius has escap'd me. So when a prisoner desired of him that he would hasten his death, he answered, that he was not yet friends with him. Which Seneca in one of his Tragedies has well express'd, Qui morte cunctos luere supplicium ju∣bet, Nescit tyrannus esse: diversa irroga. Miscrum veta perire, felicem jube. He that all punisheth with death, not knows To act the Tyrant, different waies im∣pose, To th' happy Death, life to him full of woes. Whence Minerva complains Odyss 1. that Neptune studying to revenge the excoecation of his Son upon Ʋlysses, would not put him to death, . Neptune not kills Ulysses on this score, But forc'd him wander from his native shore. dying pain. What they commanded were, they straight obey, And at the Chamber Door in ambush lay, Whilst he about did search, more Arms to get, They on each side the Entrance close beset: When to the Door he came, his Armes well-fill'd, Bearing a stately Crest, and antique Shield, Which had of old youthful Laertes been, But now the braces ript were from the Tin. They took and dragg'd him in, then on the ground, Him backwards by the Hands and Feet straight bound, And as Ʋlysses them commanded had, Then with a Chain fast to a Column made, Him hoysting up unto a Beam they tie. Whom thus Eumaeus scoffs; There may'st thou lie,
As on a Bed all Night, till the approach Of bright Aurora in her golden Coach: Then 'twill be time in thy fat Goats to drive, To feast the Sutors, if thou art alive. This said, They left him hanging in the Chain, Then arm'd, and the Door locking, went again Down to Ʋlysses: Thus encourag'd more, They now so many fac'd that were but four. To their assistance the illustrious Dame Minerva, then transform'd to Mentor, came. Ʋlysses seeing her, rejoycing, said; Let, Mentor, now old friendship thee persuade, And former Kindness here with me t' engage Against this Crew; we are of equal Age: But he suppos'd it was Minerva yet. On th' other side, as much the Sutors threat: T' whom first thus rattling Agelaus said; Mentor, let not Ʋlysses thee persuade Him to assist, and against us to fight, Since we resolve on thee to wreek our spight. When we the Father and the Son have slain, Then thou shalt die, that dar'st his Cause maintain: Thy Head lopt off, thine and Ʋlysses states, We'll share, and drive thy Sons out of thy Gates: Nor shall thy Daughters, nor thy Wife here stay, They shall be banish'd out of Ithaca. Pallas at these expressions more enrag'd, Ʋlysses thus with harsher Tearms engag'd; Thou not so strong, nor so courageous art, As when nine years so well thou play'dst thy part At Troy, the beauteous Helen to re-gain, And hast so many Valiant Heroes slain, And by thy Stratagems took'st strong bul-wark'd Troy: Thou coming now thy Kingdom to enjoy,
Dar'st not engage with these; Come stand by me, And what these Braggars are thou soon shalt see; And how I'll former Benefits repay. Thus said she, though not gave them yet the Day, But let Ʋlysses and his Off-spring trie Their Strength and Valour 'gainst the Enemy. Up to a golden Beam she takes her flight, And like aThe reason why he likeneth her to a Swallow, is, lest the Sutors should suspect the appearance of some God for the assistance of Ʋlysses, which they could not now reasonably do; it being agreeable to the nature of those Birds to be conversant among the Beams of Houses. swallow perch'd to see the Fight, When Agelaus Old Damastors Son, Eurynomus, and Young Amphimedon, Demoptolemus Polyctorides And Polybus, amongst the Sutors, these For Strength and Courage did the rest transcend, And living yet, did well themselves defend, The rest slain with Ʋlysses Arrows were, Thus to renew the Fight did others cheer. Mentor is fled, who talk'd and seem'd so stout, And they are left alone to fight it out. We six, each at Ʋlysses cast his Lance, Him let us wound, and then defie all Chance. At once all threw, as he did them enjoyn, But straight Minerva frustrates their Design. This on the threshold lights, another stuck Fast in the Gate, the fourth the Wainscot struck. When they had scap'd this threatning storm of Spears, Ʋlysses thus those were about him cheers; At Random throw amongst that impious Throng, Who us would kill, whom they before did wrong. This said, They all at once their Javelins threw, Ʋlysses, Demoptolemus first slew, The Prince Euryades, Eumaeus, Elate, Pisander from Philaetius meets his Fate, These on the floor in Deaths Convulsions lie, The rest with-drawn into a Corner flie:
They follow plucking Javelins from the slain, Whilst the Corrivals throw their Spears in vain. What e're th' attempt, Pallas made fruitless all; This hits the Floor, the Gate this, that the Wall, Telemachus Hand Amphimedons Javelin rac'd, The point the Skin scarce piercing, over-past. Eumaeus shoulder; Ctesipus his Lance, Flying ore his Target, did a little glance, And scarce blood fetching, lighted on the Ground, Groves of faln Spears hedg in Ʋlysses round, Which the whole Gang of Sutors at him threw; Amongst them then Eurydamas he slew, The Prince Amphimedon, Eumaeus Polybus, Philaetius on the Breast hit Ctesipus, And with these words persu'd his well-aim'd Spear; Thou lov'st high Language and delight'st to jeer, Leave boasting speeches, fitter for the Gods, Who can perform, and have of thee the Ods; Take this return for th' hospitable Hoof Thou sent'st Ʋlysses under his own Roof, Craving thy Alms: But then Ʋlysses slew Agelaus running with his Javelin through, Telemachus Leocritus struck there, Quite through the Navel with a driv'n Spear, Reeking the point, in's Back a passage sound, Who falling, with his fore-head beats the Ground. Then Pallas on a step her Target rais'd, At which, all were confounded, and amaz'd; Who like a Herd of Cattel take their flight, When in the Spring theBy this similitude of an Ox mo∣lested with the Fly call'd Oestrum, or Asilus, is represented the extremity of terrour and affrightment. So Virgil in the 3. of his Georgicks, Et lucos Silari circa, ilicibusque viren∣tem Pluribus Alburnum volitans, cui nomen Asilo Romanum est, Oestrum Graii vertere vocantes, Asper, acerba sonans, quo tota exterri∣ta silvis Diffugiunt armenta. A Flie about the Groves of Silarus haunts, And high Alburnus, green with state∣ly plants, Asilus call'd by Romans, but the same The Greeks stile Oestron by an antient name, Extreamly fierce and loud, whose spight to shun, To sheltring Woods affrighted Cat∣tel run, And with their bellowing strike Hea∣vens arched round. Which Groves and shallow Tanagrus resound. With this dire Monster, Juno long ago Her spight did on th' Inachian Heifer show, Fly doth them affright: But th' other Partie on like Vultures rush, When the affrighted Quarry leaves the Bush, And them t' escape from Heaven so hard beset, Takes the Champaign, and falls into the Net:
No Quarter there, no hope in Strength of Flight, They kill them straight who in such sport delight: So they promiscuously upon them all, Breathless and panting, without Mercy fall, Dashing their Heads together, the whole Floor With Bodies fill'd, and stain'd with purple Gore. Liodes then Ʋlysses knees imbrac'd, And thus himself on the King's Mercy cast; Me I beseech you hear, and pitie shew, I with your Women never had to do, I sat amongst my Patrons, and still bid Them to abstain from those foul acts they did; And now they suffer for their Pride and Lust, At acts, I alwaies scrupled, were unjust, With them let not their guiltless Chaplain lie, No such Example make Posterity. Then frowning on Him, thus Ʋlysses said; Art thou their Chaplain? Then Thou oft hast pray'd In my own Court, far off the Happy Day Might be, of my Return to Ithaca, That thou might'st wed, and pregnant make my Wife; Expect not therefore I will save thy Life. Then from the Ground He up a Falchion catch'd, Which Agelaus drop'd, by Him dispatch'd: With this He took him on the Neck so just, His Head lop'd off lay muttering in the Dust: But Phemius, who the Sutors 'gainst his Will, Forc'd both to sing and play, He did not kill; Holding his Harp he stood by th' upper Gates, And of two waies, which best was, cogitates; Should he for Refuge toJupiter , so call'd from signifying the enclosure or out-wall encompassing the Court-yard: for, as Athenaeus observes,  is con∣stantly to be taken in Homer for the Court-yard; which afterwards among the later Comedians signified a Palace: as in Diphilus, 'A , . Favour in Palaces to seek to have, Is for a Beggar, Exile, or a Slave. In this place was the Altar of Jupiter ; for when Ʋlysses had com∣manded Medon and Phemius to leave the Hall, and go , — , . They straight obey'd, and the dire Hall forsake, And to the Altar of great Jove they make. So is the Altar whither Hocuba and Priam fled, described by Virgil to be sub Dio in the open Air, Aedbus in mediis, nudoque sub atheris axe Ingens Ara fuit, juxtaque veterrima laurus Incumbens Arae atque umbra complexa penates: Hic Hecuba & natae nequidquam alta∣ria circum Praecipites atra ceu tempestate columbae Condensae & Divum amplexae simula∣cra tenebant. Amidst the Palace, in the open air, An Altar stood, an ancient Laurel neer Embrac'd the Gods with a declining shade: Here Hecuba and all her Daughters fled, As Flocks of Pigeons from a Tempest hast, And round the Statues of tho Gods embrac'd. Now that this Altar was that of Jupi∣ter Herceus appears from Tryphiodorus At th' Altar of Herceus sick of breath, Bold Pyrrhus put the aged King to death. And Ovid in his Ibis, speaking of Pri∣am, Cui nibil Hercaei profuit ara Jovis. Whom th' Altar of Hercean Jove not sav'd. Joves Altar run, Where old Laertes and his only Son So oft had sacrifie'd; or whether He Should cast himself down at Ʋlysses Knee:
The last of these advices seem'd most sound. 'Mongst Cups and tumbled Chairs upon the Ground His Harp he leaves, since dangerous are Delaies, This is a most exact description of the Grecian , that I wonder there should be that difference among the antient Grammarians, in he explaining of it. And thus his Knees imbracing, Quarter praies; Save me Ʋlysses, and my Blood not spill, You'll soon Repent if Phemius you kill, Who sings to Men and Gods; Jove doth inspire My Muse, and adds a spirit to my Lyre: I'll chant like Phoebus, a celestial air Shall ravish Thee; ah! Sir, my life then spare. Telemachus thy Son will tell thee all, How I against my Will play'd in thy Hall, Enforc'd, I sung at their disorder'd Feasts, Ore-pour'd by many, and uncivil Guests. Telemachus heard how he for Quarter pray'd, And hasting neer, thus to his Father said; Hold Sir, ah! hold; Him Innocent, ah! spare; And Medon too, who still of me took Care, If by Philaetius, or Eumaeus, He Not yet be slain, nor in the Charge by Thee: Him Medon heard, who skulking lay unseen, Under a Chair, wrapt in a Bullock's Skin: Straight up he starts; and throws off his disguise, And at his Prince's Knees, thus Quarter cries; Ah! I am here, thy Father, ah! engage, Lest me he kill, persuing in his Rage, On the proud Sutors score, who his Court spoil'd, And thee contemn'd, as if thou wert a Child. Then smiling, said Ʋlysses; Take my Word, And since my Son hath sav'd thee from the Sword, Learn this that thou and others may beware, Good Deeds successful more then Wicked are: But go thou forth, and Phemius take along, And sit without, free from this slaughter'd Throng:
Then I'll an end here of this business make. Both straight obey'd, and the dire Hall forsake, And by the Altar of great Jove they sat, Looking about, expecting still their Fate. Ʋlysses then strict search made every where, If any had escap'd, and living were. Many he found weltring in Dust and Gore, Like new-drawn Fishes lying on the Shore, Wishing their watery Coverlet in vain, Whilst the hot Sun concludes both Hope and Pain: Just so in heaps the slaughter'd Sutors lay. When thus Ʋlysses to his Son did say; Call Euryclea, my Telemachus, That she may take some orders straight from us. The Prince his Father with all speed obey'd, And the Door opening to his Nurse thus said; Dear Euryclea, who here govern'st all, My Father calls, make hast into the Hall. His Voice she hearing, opens straight the Door, Following Telemachus who went before; Where 'mongst the Dead the King she found, all ore Besmear'd with blood, sprinkled with Dust and Gore; Like a huge Lion, who a Bull had slain. His shaggy Breast and Cheeks warm blood did stain, Who with a terrible aspect appear'd, Ʋlysses Hands and Feet were so besmear'd: Soon as the dismal business she did spie, She straight began to raise a joyful Cry At the dire work, Ʋlysses straight forbad, And Her with kind words comforting, thus said; Conceal your Joy, and dearest Nurse refrain, From triumphing ore these that here lie slain: Fate, for foul Crimes, presents them this reward, Whose Pride not any Person living spar'd:
Be they or Good or Bad, be what they may, For their offences now in Death they pay. Straight number up those Women, who my House, And me dishonour'd, and my vertuous Spouse. Then Euryclea said; Dear Son, I shall, I'll give you in a strict Account of all: Twice twenty five young Damsels are within, All taught to work, to card, to weave and spin. Amongst these only twice fix faulty be, Who scorn thy chast Penelope and me: Telemachus, but now of age, not yet, His Mother thought to govern Women fit. But I will up and tell the Queen, who fast Asleep some gentle Deity hath cast. Then he reply'd; Wake her not yet, but all Those your kind-hearted Women hither call, Who in my absence here have been so bold. This said, She went and the Kings Order told. Eumaeus, and Philaetius, and his Son He calling to him, thus to them begun; Bear hence these Bodies, bid the Women come, And cleanse the Seats, the Tables, and the Room, And with wet Spunges every Chink make clean: And when the House is put in order, then Lead forth those Strumpets, twixt the Hedg and Gate, And there with Steel cool their intemperate Heat, Until their lustful Blood the Pavement warms, Who hugg'd the Sutors in lascivious Arms. By this the faulty Female-Troop appears, A loud complaining, drown'd in trickling Tears. But first they bore the Bodies from the Hall, And laid in private by the Palace-Wall. Ʋlysses bids the Women, when th' had renc'd The Chairs, and Tables, and with Spunges clens'd,
That they the Lumber, Spears, and Targets all, Promiscuous fallen should bear out of the Hall. The Prince and his two Swains swept clean the Floor, The Dust the Damsels carried out oth' Door; The House well-deck'd, the guilty Females they Betwixt the Quick-set, and the Gate convey. There drove them up, from whence they could not fly. Then said Telemachus; They shall not die Here by the Sword, that is a Death too brave, Who both on me, and my Dear Mother, have Cast such Reproach, our Palace common made, Where lewd Pranks they with lustful Gallants plaid. This said, a Rope on a cross Beam he bound, High, lest their dangling Feet should touch the ground, So their expanded Wings, a Dove, or Thrush, Shakes in the Net, conceal'd within a Bush, Entring the Hedg catch'd in unhappy Beds, So noos'd, in woful order hung their Heads, Shaking their Feet, till suffocated Breath Fate finish'd in dishonourable Death. Next to the place they forth Melanthius get, There cropt they off his Ears, his Nostrils slit, His Members they cut off, his Hands and Feet, And raging threw for hungry Dogs to eat. After that they had wash'd and finish'd all, They to Ʋlysses went, yet in the Hall; Who thus to antient Euryclea said; BringIt is generally deliver'd by Hi∣storians that Epimenides first brought into Greece the Rites and Ceremonies of cleansing or expiating Houses and Fields polluted with human blood. So Diogenes Laortius writes in his life: but we find here some foot-steps of that su∣perstition long before the time of E∣pimenides. Of personal Lustration the most accurate description, now extant, is this of Claudians in his Panegyrick to Honorius the Emperour, Lustralem sic triste facem, cui lumen odorum Sulphure coerulco nigroque bitumine-fu∣mat, Circum membra rotat doctus urganda sacerdos, Rore pio spargens, & dira fugantibus herbis, Numina terrificumque Jovem Trivi∣am que precatus Trans caput aversus manibus jacula∣tur in Austrum Secum rapturas cantata piacula taedas. The Lustral fire brand so, whose bla∣zing smoak With Pitch and Sulphur black and a∣zure look, The Priest, well-skill'd in Expiations, bore About his Limbs, and sprinkled him all ore With holy Dew, and Herbs expelling bane, The Gods imploring, Jove and bright Diane, Then ore his Head into the South he throws, With which all Spells and dire inchant∣ment goes. When any Country or City was to be cleans'd, the Sacrifice was first led round the same, as appears out of Po∣lybius, , They appointed a purga∣tion, and led the Victims round about the City and Country adjacent: whence those sacra were call'd by the Romans, Ambarvalia. But that Sulphur was peculiarly us'd we have the testimony too of Pliny in his Natural History, Sulphur habet & in religionibus locum ad expiandas suffitu domos, Sulphur is employed ceremoniously in hallowing of Houses: for many are of opinion that the fume and burning thereof will drive forth all Enchantments: and of Juvenal, Satyr 2. Tet bellorum animae, quoties hinc talis ad illos Ʋmbra venit, cuperent lustrari si qua darentur Sulphura cum taedis, & si foret humida laurus. Sulphur straight, and let a Fire be made, To air the Room; And then entreat the Queen, With all her chaster Damsels to come in; Not one of all her Train must stay behind. She thus reply'd; This is not well-design'd; But I'll a Robe first, and a Mantle bring; Such Weeds not fit the Person of a King,
You must not so appear. Then he reply'd; However Fire and Perfume straight provide. Old Nurse, this said, dispatch'd, and in a thought, Fire in a Censer, and sweet Sulphur brought. Whilst he the Hall and Chamber did perfume, She went and told them all, the King was come; They came with Tapers, clustering in a Throng; About his Neck, his Hands and Shoulders clung, Kiss'd and embrac'd, glad Tears their Cheeks bedew. He takes all well, who their Affections knew.
scene from book 23 Seorgio Wharton Armigero Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 23.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE TWENTY THIRD BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Old Nurse ore-joy'd up to the Queen doth go, And waking, tells, Ulysses stay'd below. Penelope, with female Fancies fed, Long scruples, till the King describes their Bed. Transported then she leaps into his Arms: Pallas Night almost spent prolongs by Charms. BUT Old Nurse hasts up to the drawing-Room, To tell Penelope the King was come. Nimbly she trip'd, not feeling strength decay'd, Then standing neer her Pillow, thus she said; Rise dearest Daughter, rise Penelope, That thou may'st him behold thou long'st to see, Ʋlysses, who, though late, at last is come: Those Roysters all are kill'd, who here at Home
Devour'd his state, and did his Son deride. The Queen, her not believing, thus reply'd; Dear Nurse, the Gods thus make thee rave, who can Make Wisemen Fools, and wise the Foolish man, They Hand in Hand conjoyn Follie and Wit, They thus distract thee, who wert once Discreet. Why didst Thou wake me grieving, from so deep And pleasant, such a golden-fetter'd sleep? I never had the like, sinceƲlysses. all my Joy Went to that hateful Siege of cursed Troy. Leave me: If any else had been so bold To break my Rest, and me such Tydings told, I should have sent her back with worser News: But, Euryclea, Age shall Thee excuse. Then thus Old Nurse reply'd; I wrong not you, My dearest Daughter, all I say is true: The King is come, and now within thy Court, That Stranger whom the Sutors made their sport. Telemachus knew all before, but hid The whole Concern, as Him his Father bid; That the proud Crew examples might be made. At this ore-joy'd, she leap'd out of her Bed, And the Old Woman shedding Tears embrac'd, Dear Nurse, then said, Is this all true thou say'st? How came He hither? How could He alone The Rivals worst, so many against One, Who alwaies ready, stood upon their Guard? Then she reply'd; I neither saw nor heard, More then their dying Groans, we trembling, all Our Chambers kept, till me your Son did call Down to his Father, where the King I found Hem'd in with heaps of slaughter'd bodies round. You had admir'd to see, how there he stood, Like a stern Lyon smear'd all ore with Blood.
In th' outward Court they lie heap'd in a Pyre, The Room's perfum'd: He standing by a Fire, Entreats your Presence, and sent me to call; Make hast, that there we may be joyful all: Now make glad periods to all Sorrows past, Since what so much you long'd for's come at last. He is in Health return'd to his own House, Finds well his hopeful Son, his Virtuous Spouse, And all the Havock which the Sutors made, For't with their Lives they have full dearly paid. Then thus, Dear Nurse, Penelope reply'd; Boast not, nor my Credulity deride. Thou know'st that nothing can more welcom be, Then his Return, both to our Son and Me: But 'tis not as thou say'st. This cursed Crew Some God incens'd, for their Offences, flew; Since they all Strangers us'd alike, nor had Regard to any either Good or Bad: They justly suffer'd, but Ʋlysses lost Will ne'r, I fear, review his Native Coast. How scap'd such words thy teeth, their Ivory guard? Euryclea said, You'r of Belief too hard. He in the Hall stands by the Fire, nay, more, I saw his scar got by a Salvage Boar, When Him I bath'd; which I to you had told, But on my Throat, he starting up, laid hold. Come, follow me, and if I tell a Lie, Let me with new-invented Torturs die. Then she reply'd; No Mortal e're could sound The Gods Decrees, nor plumb those Deeps profound. But let us go that I may see my Son, The Sutors kill'd, and Him by whom 'twas done. This said, the Queen descends, much troubled, should She question Him, and at some distance hold,
Or leap into her dearest Lord's embrace. But through the Hall she passing, took her place Against th' opposed Wall, a little higher, Where by a Column stood, before the Fire, The King, expecting when the Queen would speak: But long she sat, nor once would silence break, Gazing on him, whom, in mean Garments clad, She knew not, when Telemachus thus said; My Mother, no, ah! thou too cruel art, Why sitt'st thou from my Father thus a-part, And wilt not speak, nor the least Question ask: For any other Lady 'twere a Task, Too hard, from her dear Husband to abstain, Now after twenty years return'd again, Through Worlds of toyl, of misery, and want; You have a Heart harder then Adamant. Then thus reply'd the Queen; Dear Son, I find Such strange Confusion in my troubled mind, I cannot speak, nor question what I would, Nor dare look up his Face once to behold. If this Ʋlysses be, which yet I doubt, Rather in private I would find Him out: He hath some marks, which if we were alone, Would better be to me, then others, known. Ʋlysses at the Quaeries that she made, Smiling, thus to Telemachus then said; Son, her advise with me a-part to go, Then we may one another better know: Shabby my Looks, so mean my Garments be, Now for her Lord she'l not acknowledge me. But now let us consult what's to be done, If any 'mongst these People kill butHe alludes to the Laws of the Athenians, who punish'd all Homicide, though unwittingly committed on the meanest of the people, with Exile for one year. This appears from these Verses of Euripides in his Hippolytus, , , . When Hercules in his distraction had slain two sons of Iphiclus's and one of his own, as soon as his passion was o∣ver, he was desir'd by Iphiclus and Licymnius to absent himself for one year (saith Nicolans Da∣mascinus) as the Custom is, and then to return to Thebes again. pag 202 One, Seldom but few in his behalf will stand, He flying, straight forsakes his Native Land:
But we have many slain, the greatest too, In Ithaca, resolve whats best to do. When to his Father thus his Son replies; You, Sir, best know, you'r ablest to advise, No Mortal whosoe'r, as goes the Fame, Better then you, Sir, plaies an after-game: Lay you your Plot, and we'll do what we can, Nor Valour want we, if it be in Man. When thus the subtile King himself exprest; I'll speak my Judgment, what to me seems best: First let us bath, then put rich Garments on, The like must be by all the Women done: Let Phemius march before us in great state, As if we Dances were to celebrate; That some may say without they Nuptials hear, As they pass by, or those inhabit neer, E're flying Fame the City give th' Alarm Of this their Deaths, or we walk to the Farm, And there consider in the shady Grove What's best to do, and what seems best to Jove. Their King they, as the Oracle, obey'd; All bath, and in rich Habits ready made: The Women drest themselves in gay Attire, And Phemius, as at Nuptials, ouch'd his Lyre: Sweetly he sung, their light Feet beat the Ground, And Dancing, make the arched Hall resound: Then some did say that heard without the Gate, The Queen had chosen now a Princely Mate, And would no longer keep so great a House, Nor more expect her so long-look'd-for Spouse: So some did say, but nothing knew. Mean while Eurynome baths, and noints with purest Oyl Ʋlysses, and in Royal Habit clads, And to his Face and Person, Pallas adds
Beauty and Size, and on his Tresses sets Lustre that shone like purple Violets: As Gold and Silver by some Artist wrought, WhomAs the Poets feign'd all Artists in general to receive their skill from Minerva; so in particular those that dealt in Metals, from Mulciber, that is, Vulcan: and therefore they are both nominated in this place. What the Ancients meant by Vulcan, we find in these Verses of Orpheus, , . Nymphs water, Vulcan Fire, Ceres Grain, But Neptune and Enosichthon are the Main. Whence because all Metals are by the medium of Fire subjected to the Ar∣tists, they were esteem'd to be under the protection of Vulcan. Mulciber or bright Minerva taught, On's Head and Shoulders she such splendor strow'd, That from the Bath he march'd out like a God, And where he sat, that place resumes agen: Then thus he spake unto his self-will'd Queen; Beyond all Women thou unhappy art, Since Heaven hath so obdurated thy Heart. What other Woman would be kept off so, From her dear Lord, who, through a world of Woe, The twentieth year himself to her addrest? Nurse, go and make my Bed, that I may rest: Thy soul is steel, or else thy Heart would ake. When to the King Penelope thus spake; I never, Sir, affected was with Pride, Nor Rich admire, nor thee, though Poor, deride: But I remember well what then thou wert, When me thou left'st, if such a one thou art. But Euryclea, go and make that Bed In the great Chamber which Ʋlysses made Himself, with so much Art, soft Blankets let Be put on straight, and a rich Coverlet. Thus said the Queen, her dearest Lord to trie. But He offended, made this rough Reply; Strangely you talk, your Order's something od, Who can remove that Bed, unless some God? Celestials may by their Supernal Power, But never Mortal shall, though in his Flower: This as a signal fram'd I with much Art, And greatness, none but I perform'd that part. A stately Olive in my Court did sprout, With spreading branches, like a Beam about.
This, when I had our Wedding-Chamber built, With well-lay'd stone, well plaister'd, seil'd, and guilt, Made able Doors, close by the Root I lopt, And off luxurious Boughs, and Foliage cropt; Then with an Augre bor'd, and by a line I cut and joyn'd whate'r I should conjoyn: So of this Olive I my Bed-sted made, With Ivory, Silver, and with Gold in-laid, And strongly corded then withIt seems in the time of our Po∣et, before the use of Cordage, they bound their Beds with Thongs of Lea∣ther; beautified with colours answer∣able to the quality of the Person. purple Thongs, This the great signal which to me belongs; Nor know I, Madam, if you us'd it yet, Or else remov'd it in some sullen fit. Thus doubts remov'd, weeping, she quits her place, And throws her self into her Lord's imbrace: There she with Kisses smothering Him, his Neck Imbracing, said; Thy rage, Ʋlysses, check, Since thou so prudent art, and know'st that we Shar'd equal Woes, divorc'd by Fates Decree, From joys of Marriage in a spightful hour, I, in my prime, Thou in thy sparkling Flower: Be not offended that I thus delaid Thy dear imbrace, that alwaies am afraid, Lest some (for many such Contrivements lay) Me with dissembling Language should betray. This similitude, consisting of se∣ven verses in the original, is generally accounted spurious by the Grammari∣ans, as not answering to what prece∣ded: some there be, who by another sort of interpunction make another sence corresponding with the argu∣ment, thus; Holen had never consen∣ted to the enticements of a Stranger, had she consider'd what I have said, but because she was cheated (Venus representing Paris in the form of Me∣nelaus her Husband) the Grecians un∣dertook the expedition for her reco∣very: pardon me therefore if I be sollicitous to know your person before I acknowledge you for my Husband. Helen had ne'r offended as she did, And chang'd her Husband's for a forein Bed, Had she but dreamt the Greeks should e're transport, From Ilium, her to Menelaus Court: But Jove into that error let her fall, Because she not considered at all The mischiefs that might happen, which hath wrought So strongly, and on us these sorrows brought. Your Bed, which you describ'd, I not deny, Me hath convinc'd, which none but you, and I,
And Actoris, (my dearest Fathers Gift, When I his Roofs for this your Palace left) E're yet beheld; She keeps lock'd up and barr'd. Now I believe all what before seem'd hard. This said, a gentle Grief his Wrath disarms, He weeps, his Queen imbracing in his Arms: As when the Skie after a Tempest cleers, And Coast to storm-strest Mariners appears, A few escaping swim unto the Land, And their bulg'd Vessel bedded, leave in Sand, Their bodies wrapt in Weeds, the shore they reach, Their weary Limbs reposing on the Beach; So glad was she her Husband to behold, Nor could her Arms from his imbrace unfold: And in this Posture they had been till Day, But that Minerva stop'd Aurora's way, Not suffering her from th' Ocean to approach, Nor her swift steeds joyn in her goldenThe Poets attribute a Chariot to the Sun in regard of the swiftness of his motion, and to express what is be∣yond the object of sense by that which is subject unto it. His Horses, as their names express, are no other then Light and Heat, whereof the Sun is the foun∣tain. Homer here allows him but two, but the rest do generally attribute four to him: Ovid in his Metamorphosis, Interea volucres Pyrois, Eous, & Ae∣thon, Solis equi, quartusque Phlegon hinni∣tibus auras Flammiferis implent, &c. Mean while the Suns swift Horses; hot Pyrous, Light Aethon, fiery Phlegon, bright Eous Neighing aloud, inflame the air with heat, And with their thundering Hoofs the barrier beat. Coach, Lampus and Phaeton, who quick Light convay To Mortals, call'd the Horses of the Day. When thus Ʋlysses to his Queen begun; My Dear, our business yet we have not done, A world of several Labours we must through, All which necessity compells unto: For so Tiresias me foretelling, said, When I descended to th' infernal shade, How we in safety might return t'enquire: My Dear, in private let us now retire, Where we may please our selves in gentle rest. When thus the Joyful Queen her self exprest; Your Bed shall ready be, Sir, when you please, But since the Gods you convoy'd through the Seas, To your own Palace, and your Native Land, Since well your future state you understand:
Now tell me what I must here-after hear, Better to know, then not know, what to fear. Then he reply'd; Why my ensuing Fate Would'st thou, dear Wife, that I should now relate? But I shall tell thee and the Truth recite, Which neither me nor you will much delight. I many populous Cities must explore, Still carrying in my Hands a handsom Oar, Untill I find a People saw not yet The swelling Main, norI find that the Antients gene∣rally interpreted this place of Epirus, not far distant from Ithaca. So Pa∣sanias in his description of Africa, , . &c. Pyrthus being highly con∣ceited of his strength, encontred the Carthaginians (the most experienc'd of all the Barbarians, being descended from the Phenicians) in a Naval Fight, his Armada consisting only of Epirots, who when Troy was taken knew not the Se, nor use of Salt, as Homer testifies. These that knew not the Sea, were ig∣norant of the use of Salt, according to our Poet: whence it may be conjectur'd that he knew of no other Salt but what was made of Sea water. The other token of their ignorance of the Sea was, that they should not know an Oar, but call it by the Name of an instrument where∣with they winnowed Corn. Salt use with their Meat, That know not how to steer with sails a-trip, Nor handle Oars, that Wings are to a ship, My sign shall be when first I meet a Man, Mistakes the Oar I carry for a Van: Then in the Countrey I should fix my Oar, And there great Neptune, th' Ocean's King, implore, Offering a Lamb, a Bull, and pregnant Sow; From thence then Home, to my own Palace go, And there whole Hecatombs must sacrifice, To all the Gods who plant the ample Skies. Then Death, from Sea, shall me, grown Old, arrest, When I am happy, and my People blest. I this response had from Tiresias shade. Then to the King Penelope thus said; If Thee thy Age the Gods more tranquil Doom, Then we preceding Sorrows may ore-come. Betwixt themselves they such Discourses had, Mean while, their Bed, Nurse and Eurynome made, And lighted Lamps; when they had finish'd all, Back Euryclea goes into the Hall, Eurynome, bearing a Taper, led Them to their Chamber, and their Marriage-Bed, Then left them to themselves, where th' antient Feat, Love's sweetest Lesson, they with joy repeat.
When the Young Prince, and his bold Swains forbid Them longer Dance, as order'd, so they did. Thence, weary, then to their Repose retir'd, But when they had injoy'd what both desir'd, They fell into Discourse; his well-pleas'd Spouse, Tells him how much she suffer'd in his House; What Revel-rout the Sutors there did keep, Devouring his best Beevs, and fattest Sheep, Drinking whole Tuns of Wine: but he relates, A Series of his Sufferings, and sad Fates, Pleas'd with his Tale, in sleep she could not fall, Nor close her Eys, till he had told her all. Who first recounts, how theThe Ciconians were a people that inhabited Ismarus, a City of Thrace, as we have already seen in the 9 of the Odysses. They were assistant to the Trojans, reckon'd up among Auxiliaries, Eu . 'T . Euphemus led the valiant Cicons on, Grand-Child to glorious Ceas, Troi∣zen's Son. Ciconians he Ore-come; next, what theThe Lotophagi were inhabitants of the Island Menynx, which lies be∣fore the lesser Syrtis, so call'd, because they fed on the fruit of the Lotus tree, of which there is great abundance in that Isle. Lotophagie be; How Cyclops us'd him, how he Him did treat, Who without mercy his Companions eat. How Aeolus Home, him kindly feasting, sent, But Fate did his arrival then prevent; Back from his Native shore a Heurican Bore him, lamenting, through the boysterous Main: OfOf these Giants, see Odyss. 10. where the story is deliver'd at large. Laestrygonian Gyants he tells then, How they destroy'd his Ships, and all his men: How with one Vessel he escap'd to Sea: Next, tells her Circe's Charms and Subtilty: Then how he went to Pluto's Dismal Gates, What of Tiresias he enquir'd, relates: There all his Friends and Mother he beheld, Who bore and foster'd him a little Child: Next, Syrens heard, Charybdis rocky Cape, And Scylla past, whence seldom any scape: Then how his men the Sun's fair Cattel slew; How Jove his Vessel up with Lightning blew, All his Associats swallow'd in the Sound; How he escap'd, the Isle Ogygia found,
Where fair Calypso Him to be her Lord, Long courted, treating both at Bed and Board: That Him she would immortal make she said, Ne'r to be Old, but all would not persuade. Next how He came to the Pheacian shore, Whom there they all did as a God adore: Of Gold and Garments a rich Present made, And then by Sea to Ithaca convay'd. As thus he talk'd: sleep seiz'd him unawares In golden Chains, which cures Heart-eating Cares. But Pallas then another Plot contriv'd, When sleep enough his Spirits had reviv'd, And his dear Wife's embraces; Daun's approach, From Sea she hastens in her golden Coach, Conveying Light to Mortals: from his Bed Ʋlysses rising, to his Queen thus sed; We both have surfeited with Grief, my Dear, Thou in my absence many troubles here; But me the God's wearied with Woe and Toyl, Crossing my Passage to my Native Soyl: Now in one Bed we former Comforts find, Next to Domestick cares let's turn our mind. What sheep the wasting Sutors did consume, I'll take so many as shall fill their Room: The Greeks that number shall for me provide, Till all my Coats and Stals are re-supply'd: But I must go now to the Field, to give My Father Comfort, who for me doth grieve. But, Dearest Wife, Thee I command, although Thou art Discreet (for straight the Fame will go Of these proud Sutors slaughter to the Town) To keep within thy Chamber, nor come down, Nor see, nor speak with any there. This done, He arms himself, the like commands his Son,
Eumaeus, and Philaetius, and all there, That straight in glittering Armour they appear, All clad in Steel were, straight their King th' obey'd, Open'd the Gates, whom forth Ʋlysses led: Now the Sun rose, whom Pallas though convay'd Forth from the City cover'd with a shade.
scene from book 24 Johanni Markham Armigero Tabulam hanc LMDDDO Lib. 24.
HOMERS ODYSSES. THE TWENTY FOURTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Hermes conducts to Shades the Sutors Ghosts, Greek Heroes meet them on th' Infernal Coasts. Amphimedon and Agamemnon talk. Laertes found in his own Garden walk. A War begins. Eupitheus sad Decease. Pallas like Mentor makes a lasting Peace. CYLLENIANHe has this Epithet attributed to him from the Mountain Cyllene in Arcadia, where he was especially wor∣shipped. Hermes leads to th' infernal Strand, The SutorsMercury was feign'd to pass be∣tween Jupiter and Pluto, fetching Ghosts from the under-shadows, and carrying them thither, because he taught that no man came into the World, or went out of it, without the Divine appointment. Which office we find generally attributed to him by the Poets. Virgil, Aeneid. 4. — bac animas ille evocat Orco Pallentes, alias sub tristia Tartara mit∣tit: Dat somnos adimitque, & lumina mor∣te resignat. With this pale Souls from Erebus he calls And others in sad Tartarus inthrals. Procures, and Sleep repels; shuts dy∣ing Eys. Ghosts, arm'd with his golden Wand, With which He seels up Mortal's Eys from Cares, And opes again to follow their Affairs. He drives them on, they after murmuring flock Like Bats, who in the belly of a Rock, When any one drops from their Order, out, All fluttering, rise; and Humming, fly about:
So Hermes lead them muttering through broad waies: They reach th' effluxes of the swelling Seas, Then Leucas rock, thence on their Course they keep To the Sun's Portals, and the Town of sleep, And straight they enter in a flow'ry Mead, Where, after Death, departed souls reside: And first the shades they of Achilles found, Patroclus and Antilochus so renown'd, And Ajax for his Valour honour'd most, Except Pelides of the Grecian Hoast. About Him neerer the pale Sutors drew, And Agamemnon with his slaughter'd Crew, Lamenting, who were by Aegisthus slain, To whom Achilles shade did thus complain; Atrides, we suppos'd that thundering Jove Most Thee, of all the Grecian Chiefs, did love: Because so many thou did'st lead, and such, Who Troy subdu'd, where they endur'd so much, And wert Thou, ah! so barbarously destroy'd? But none that's born can sullen Fate avoyd. Would Thou hadst dy'd with Honour in Command, And met thy destiny on the Phrygian Strand, Then had the Grecians bravely Thee interr'd, And Thou great Glory on thy Son conferr'd: But now on Thee a sadder Death did seize. Then He reply'd; Renown'd Aeacides, Thou far from Greece fell'st on the Trojan Plain, Many on both sides in thy Rescue slain, Whil'st in a dustie Whirl-wind Thou did'st lie, Thy Valour lost, forgot thy Chivalrie: All day we fought, and had not then giv'n back, Had not Jove scar'd us with a Thunder-crack: Then off we bore Thee laying on a Bed, Bath'd and anointed, on thy Corps we shed
Rivers of Tears, and offer'd Thee our Hair: Thetis with all her Nymphs then did repair, For they our Sorrows to the Sea could hear, Such Vollying Groans arose from Grief, and Fear; And we had thence with our whole Navy fled, But that Old Nestor, grave in Counsel, did Our rashness stop, and thus to us did say; Fly not for shame, once valiant Grecians, stay; His Mother, with her Sea-Nymphs in a Train, Comes to lament her Off-spring, from the Main. These words straight dissipate their Panyck fears, Th'oldNereus, from whom the Sea-Nymphs were call'd Nereiades. Sea-gods daughters thronging round thy Herse Their Griefs with Cries and floods of Tears exprest, Covering thy Corps with an immortal Vest. There the nine Muses sung alternatly Thy Funeral-song, thy woful Elegy. Thou could'st not see an Ey of all were there, So sweet, so sad their Notes, without a Tear. There seventeen Daies, and Nights, we never slept, Whil'st the immortal Gods, and Mortals wept; On th' eighteenth we kindled thy lofty Pyre, Casting fat sheep and Cattel on the Fire, And thee imbalm'd with Honey and pure Oyl, And the Gods Vests consum'd upon the Pyle; Both Horse and Foot, compleatly arm'd, surround The crackling Flames, whil'st doleful Cries resound. The Fire once out, thyIt was an antient and long con∣tinued custom, among both Greeks and Romans, to burn the bodies of the dead, to put their ashes into Urns either of Stone or Metal, and to enclose them in their Sepulchres. Iliad 23. , . Ah! in that golden Ʋrn our Reliques save, Which thee thy Goddess-Mother Thetis gave. Soon as the Ashes fell, with tears and groans, They in a golden Ʋrn enclose his bones, Which Wrapt in Linnen at Achilles Tent They leaving, next design the Monu∣ment. The same we find in use among the Romans, mentioned by Tibullus. — Non hic mihi Mater Quae legat in moestos ossa perufta sinus. compared with these of Ovid in his Metamorphosis, Quodque rogis superest una requiescit in Ʋrna. And what the fire had left lay in one Urn. Bones we gather up, And early luting in her golden Cup, With Wine and Oyl thy Mother we present, By Vulcan wrought, which herThis Cup was given Thetis by Bacchus for her kind treatment and reception of him, when being pur∣su'd by Lycurgus, he took sanctuary in the Sea. Which Vulcan bestowed on Bacchus for his entertainment gi∣ven him in the Island Naxus. Lyaeus sent; In this promiscuously thy Bones they laid, With thy Patroclus reliques, but they had From Antilochus distance, whom thou honour'd'st most After thou had'st thy dear Companion lost.
Over your Urns we did a Mountain rear, And consecrated then yourStrabo saies that the Tomb of Achilles was extant in his time, at the Promontory Sigeum, with a Temple also dedicated to him; the Tombs al∣so of Patroclus and Antilchus; to all of whom the inhabitants of new Ilium sacrific'd. Sepulcher Neer the broad Hellespont, that all may see That now sail by, or shall here-after be. Thy Mother grac'd with Games thy Funeral-Rites, And to rich Prizes our prime Chiefs invites. I have seen many Heroe's Obsequies, And Princes emulous to win the Prize, But none like Thine, Thou would'st admire t'have seen, What Thetis there the silver-footed Queen Plac'd for Rewards, so thy immortal Name Stands in the Records of eternal Fame. But what gain'd I by War, that lost my Life, At my Return by Aegisthus and my Wife. Thus they discours'd, when the pale Sutors Ghosts Hermes had brought to the infernal Coasts: All wonder'd at them much when neer they drew. Amphimedon, Atrides shadow knew: For Him in Ithaca He treated had, To whom thus first pale Agamemnon said; Melanthius Son, what to the shades hath sent These of one Age, all Persons eminent? None that their handsom-Mein, and Habits see, Can judg them less then Princes Sons to be. Whether did Neptune them with storms engage, And swallow'd 'mongst rough Billows in his Rage? Or by Prophane at th' Altars lost their Lives, Or fighting for their Country, and their Wives? Pray tell me, for I boast my self your Guest, Since to your Palace I my self addrest, Moving Ʋlysses there with us to Joyn, And Menelaus, on ourTrojan War. grand Design. A moneth at Sea, and lingring there we stay'd, E're we the City-sacker could persuade.
When thus Amphimedon's shadow made reply; What thou rememberst now I not deny, But I to thee our Tragedy shall relate, And how we suffer'd under cruel Fate. We long did court absent Ʋlysses Spouse; Marriage, though loathsom, she would not refuse, Nor yet comply, but fostering secret Hate, Our Death's she plotted, by untimely Fate: But thus her Sutors first she did deceive; She had forsooth a curious Web to weave, And thus to all said; Though my Lord be dead, Suspend your sute, and urge me not to wed Till this be wrought, that when his sad Fates call, Must serve Laertes for his Funeral Pall: So shall no Grecian Lady me asperse, That I with naught adorn'd his Funeral Hearse. Thus did the Queen our easie minds persuade, By Night unraveling what by Day she made, Holding three Summers thus, and Winters on: But when the fourth year's gliding Spheres begun, One of her Women her design reveal'd, And buisie her, unweaving we beheld. Discover'd thus she ends what she begun, And shew'd it us more glorious then the Sun. Fortune at last Ʋlysses Home convaid; Some time he at his Swine-herds Cottage staid, There came his Son Telemachus, mean while, In a stout ship, return'd from sandy Pyle. Where they, as soon as he had thus arriv'd, Th' unhappy Sutors woful Deaths contriv'd. They to the City came, Ʋlysses last, But first Telemachus to Court made hast; By Eumaeus led, the King came strangely drest, Like an old Beggar in a tatter'd Vest,
Leaning upon a Staff, not any there Knew him disguis'd, though they our Elders were: In his own House him did we strike and scoff, Yet he bore all, and patiently came off, And well our Buffoonries and Drolling took. But when incensed Jove did him provoke, That He his Son bid all his Arms convey, And keep in Private under Lock and Key, Moves his dear Wife to fetch his Bow and Steel, To shoot for her, which after we did feel, Which our Destruction prov'd and Over-throw: For none of us could draw Ʋlysses Bow, Nor bend, had not of it the lest Command. But when the tough Yew came into his Hand, Then we all ranted not to let him ha'it, Though he should ne'r so much for it intreat, Only Telemachus bids Him try his skill: He bends the Bow, and shoots through all the steel: Then standing up, he forth his Arrows got, And frowning direly, first Antinous shot, Then deadly shafts dispensing through the Hall, Many he kills, thick they together fall. Aloud they groan, and falling smear all ore With reeking Blood, and Brains, the marble Floor. Thus finish'd we our woful Destiny, Our Bodies in his House neglectedly, Nor none of all our Friends know where they are, That they might of our Funerals take care. Then thus Atrides Ghost to Him replies; Oh Thou renowned Laertiades, Thou by thy Prowess hast thy Wife regain'd, And she hath well her Chastity maintain'd, For which, Penelope shall bear the Name, For ever in the Registers of Fame.
Songs of Icarius Daughter they shall write, Shall Mortals, and Immortal Gods delight, ButClytemnestra, daughter of Tyn∣dareus and Leda, who slew her Hus∣band at his return from Troy, as is al∣ready deliver'd. Odyss. 11. — But Aegisthus and my wicked Wife slew me. Tyndarus Daughter, my accursed Spouse, Her own dear Lord murther'd in his own House. Scriblers of thee shall hateful Ballads frame, Th' whole Sex aspersing with eternal shame. Amongst themselves such sad Discourse they found, In Pluto's dismal Kingdoms under ground. But they went through the City to the Field Laertes had with so much labour till'd; There stood his House with Cottages beset, Where all his Servants sleep, and drink, and eat; There was an ag'd Sicilian Woman there, Who of the Old Man took especial Care: Then to his Son and Swains Ʋlysses spake; Go to yon House, and a fat Porker take, One of the best, and there for supper dress; But to my Father I'll my self address, To try if He, when I my self shall show, After long absence, me at first will know. He to his servants gave his Arms, this said, Then to the Palace with all speed they made. Mean while Ʋlysses march'd the Garden round, Yet in those spacious Walks not Dolius found, Nor any of his sons, nor servants there, At Hedging they and trimming Quick-sets were: But found his FatherCicero in Catone majore mnti∣ons this place thus; At Hmerus ∣ertem colentem agrum & cum ster rantem facit: He seems to have rd , otherwise it is a slip of his Memory. pruning of a Plant, A sordid Mantle on, both thin and scant, About his Ankles course Gamàsshoes ty'd, Which He 'gainst scratching Brambles did provide, On his Hands Mittens, lest they might grow red, A Goat-skin Bonnet on his woful Head. Ʋlysses knew Him straight with sorrow pin'd, And Age, that loads the Body and the mind,
Weeping he neer a stately Pear-tree stood, Contriving with himself whether he should Kiss and embrace his Father, and mean while, Tell how He came unto his Native Soyl; Or else enquire of him, and Questions ask: The last seems best, and the more easie Task, His Humour first with rugged tearms to try: To whom Ʋlysses, this resolv'd, drew nigh, Who digging round a Plant, hung down his Head, When to his Father thus Ʋlysses said; Old Man, thou play'st most skilfully thy part, That shew'st such Care, such Industry, and Art: No Plant, no Fig-tree, Olive, Vine, nor Pear, But both in rank and file well-order'd are; Yet let me tell Thee, nor be angry though, Small Cultrature dost on thy self bestow: Thee Age and Melancholy hath decay'd, Thou shew'st in tatters thus as thou wert mad, Or doth thy Master in such weeds thee cloath, As due rewards of Negligence and Sloath? There's Majesty on thy Brows, thy Limbs are large, A Kingly Office fitter to discharge, If thou would'st bath, and eat, and drink; for Rest, And soft Repose are for the Aged best. But Old Man, tell me, and the Truth impart. Whose Garden keep'st thou, and whose Servant th' art? And one word more, that I inform'd may be, If I'm in Ithaca, as one told me, A simple Rustick, whom i'th' way I met, And could no more out of the Fellow get. About a Friend, alive, if still he breath, Or Dead, descended to the House of Death. Pray listen, Sir, and well me understand, I fairly treated him in my own Land,
Not any Guest did e're to me resort, Found kinder Entertainment in my Court: He told me he was born in Ithaca, Laertes was his Father he did say. When to my House himself he first addrest, I lead him in, though I had many Guests; And hospitable Gifts, such as I could, Presented him, ten talents of pure gold, A silver Goblet graven, and refin'd, Twelve Tap'stry pieces, twelve fair Vests, unlin'd, As many Robes and Mantles for his wear, And four young Damsels, all well-bred and fair, Which he himself selected from the rest. His Father weeping, thus himself exprest; Thou art a Stranger sure to this our Coast, That ask'st such questions; all thy Gifts are lost, Since here unjust and wicked People reign, And whatsoe'r he had, thou gav'st in vain; But had'st thou found Him living here, he would Have made a fair Return of what he could: For He is just, and scorns ungrateful shifts, Had loaden thee with hospitable Gifts. But, good Sir, say, and do not me deceive; How long since is't your Friend you did receive, He was my Son, though most Unfortunate, Whom far from Friends, his Countrey, and Estate, Or Fishes have devoured in the Sea, Or Beasts, and Birds, a-shore, have made their Prey: Nor could his Parents weep upon his Herse, Nor his dear Wife, whom Fame could ne'r asperse, Deplore him dying, nor close up his Eys, Which honourable makes his Obsequies. So much be pleased I may you engage, To tell me where you dwell, and Parentage,
Where lies your Vessel, that you hither brought, Or did some Strangers ship you hither freight? Then hoysing sail you on this Coast did leave. Then said the King, a brief account receive. King Aphid's son fromAlybas, or Alyba, a City in Italy, afterwards call'd Metapontium. Eustathius observes that the proper names in this place are on purpose feign'd by the Poet. Alybas from , to denote his Wandrings abroad, Aphidas, to signifie his munificence, which appears in his present to Ʋlysses, and Polypemon to denote the multitude of his sufferings in these his Travails. Alybas I came, As Sicily I past, Eperitus my Name, Missing my Course, against my Will I stood For Ithaca, my ship lies in the road. Five years 'tis since from me Ʋlysses went, Glad Omens to his Voyage gave consent: We of each other joyfully took leave, Hoping to give rich Presents, and receive When next we met. This said, a dismal Cloud Of darkning sorrow did his Temples shroud; With both his HandsCasting of Dust upon their heads seems to have been a symptom of extremity of grief and sorrow a∣mong the ancients. So is Achilles de∣scrib'd lamenting the death of his dear Patroclus, Iliad 18. — A cloud, this said, upon his Brows he hung. Dust on his manly Face and Fore-head flung. Then falling down, his golden Tresses tore. And with his Royal habit swept the floor. Whom Virgil follows Aeneid 12. Demittunt mentes, it scissa veste Lati∣nus Conjugis attonitus fatis, urbisque ru∣ina. Caniciem immundo perfusam pulvere turpans. Their Courage fails, the King his gar∣ments rent, At his Wifes fate, and ruin'd Town struck dead, Throwing foul Dust upon his silver-head. Dust on his Head he threw, Poud'ring his silver Hair, deep sighing too. At this Ʋlysses mov'd, short breath did draw, When Him he in so sad a posture saw, He kissing, and imbracing, said; I'm here, Whom, Sir, you have not seen in twenty year: Now weep no more, no longer thus complain, The insolent Corrivals are all slain, And dearly pay'd for all their mischiefs done. Then said Laertes; If thou art my Son, How cam'st thou hither? I'll some token see, That I may be persuaded thou art He. Then to his Father thus the Son replies; Sir, on this Cicatrice first cast your eys, Got by a Boar, when I a hunting went, Where you, Sir, and my dearest Mother sent Me to her Father, promis'd Gifts to have, Which his word keeping there he kindly gave. All Plants within thy Orchard well I know, What Trees I begg'd, and which thou did'st bestow:
When I a boy, with thee went up and down, Their several names thou told'st me One by One, Pear-trees thrice ten, twelve aple, fourty Fig, Vines fifty, gave me with full clusters big: Of every sort, you some on me bestow'd, Which seasonable showrs with Fruit did load. This said, He trembling did the Scar behold, Then did his Child in strict embrace infold, Who fainting, then supported by his Son, Recovering Spirits thus ore-joy'd begun; I know, O Jove, now Gods in Heaven reside, Since these proud Sutors punish'd are for Pride, We stand must on our Guard, for much, I doubt, Against us the whole City will draw out, And send to th'For the Cephallenians were Masters of several Isles; Cephallenia, Ithaca, Zacynthus, &c. as appears from the enumeration of them Iliad 2. , Ulysses the stout Cephallenians led, Whom Ithaca, and steep Neritus bred, Who in the Crocyl and Egylipe dwell, And those that Samos and Zacynthos till. Cephallenians for aid. Fear not, Ʋlysses to his Father said; Nor such things Valew I more then a Pin, But to yon House we'll go upon the Green, My Son, Eumoeus, and Philoetius there I sent, that they our Supper should prepare. This said, they walk'd together, as design'd, Where with Telemachus the rest they find; Then dressing Meat, and mixing Wine; mean while Laertes Maid him baths, and 'noints with Oyl, Cloath'd in a Royal Vest, whom Pallas straight Made Plump, and Fatter, adding to his Height. Come from the Bath, his Son admiring stood, To see his Father look so like a God: To whom he said, Some Power with wondrous Art Hath made Thee Fat and Fair, as e're thou wert. Then He; Would Jove, Phoebus, and Pallas, make Me such as when INericus is the antient name of the Island Leucas, which Strabo calls , which at first was a pe∣ninsula under the command of the A∣carnanians, but afterwards made an Island by the industry of the Corinthi∣ans, call'd Leucas from Leucadius the brother of Penelope. Nericus did take, When I the Cephallenians did sway, And had well-arm'd with thee been Yesterday:
Those Sutors I my self had all destroy'd, And thou thy Palace had'st with joy enjoy'd. Thus they discours'd amongst themselves: mean while The Rusticks come from their agrestick Toyl. Supper prepar'd, they down in order sat On several Seats, and fall unto their Meat: When Dolius and his Sons enter the Hall, Weary, the old Sicilian them did call, And special care of Him and His she took, And much to Dolius, antient grown, did look. When they Ʋlysses saw, and knew, they all Stood wonder-struck, like statues in the Hall: To whom Ʋlysses in kind Language said; Father, sit down, and be not so dismaid, Fall to your Supper now, no time neglect, We tarried for you, and did long expect. Dolius, this said, no longer wond'ring stands, But to Ʋlysses running, kist his Hands, And thus ore-joy'd, unto his Master spoke; Sir, since y'are come, for whom we long did look, Some God hath brought you to your Native Soyl, Let him convert to joy all former Toyl. Knows, Sir, Penelope that you are here? If not, let me the joyful message bear. When thus Ʋlysses said; Old Man, she knows, Fall to thy Victuals, and no time now loose. This said, down sat he in his polish'd seat; Whilst Dolius Sons about Ʋlysses get, And his Hands kissing, thence they straight retire, And sat in order neer their aged Sire. Thus they at Supper sate, whil'st flying Fame Did through the Town the Sutors Deaths proclaim. Soon as they heard, together all resort, And sighing went up to Ʋlysses Court:
Then they the bodies carrying, straight interr. To other Cities some transported were In Fisher-men, who home their Bodies sent: Which done, they all to Consultation went. When they conven'd a frequent Court had made, Eupithes rose, and to the Concourse said; He for his Son ready with Grief to burst, Antinous, whom Ʋlysses slaughter'd first, When thus he spake, Tears trickling down his Cheeks; Great works this Prince hath finish'd for the Greeks: He lanch'd a Royal Navy from our Coast, Mann'd with brave men, and them and all hath lost, And now hath many Cephallenians slain, But ere he Elis, where th' Epeians reign, Or Pyle shall reach, let's his Escape prevent, Or else for ever we may all repent: This our Posterity will brand, if you Not punish those your Sons and Brothers slew. I shall in Life no longer pleasure have, But with Grief loaden sink into my Grave: Let us his Transportation straight prevent. This said, they all the Business much resent: When to the Council Medon made resort, And Phemius early from Ʋlysses Court: Then standing in the midst, all were dismaid, When Medon thus to the great Council said; You Ithacans assembled now, hear me, Ʋlysses not against the Gods Decree This work hath done, I saw a Deathless God, Who like Old Mentor at his Elbow stood; And when he cours'd the Sutors through the Hall, That Power assisting, they in Heaps did fall. These words the General Concourse much dismaid, When thus the Heroe Alitherses said;
For only he fore-saw this rising Storm, And gravely thus their Judgments did inform; You Ithacans, now hear what I'll relate, You are the Cause of their untimely Fate: Mentor and Me you scorn'd, when you me chid, Nor would the madness of your Sons forbid, Who such high Mischiefs acted in his House, Wasting his State, wronging his Vertuous Spouse: They thought Him sure, that ne'r He would return, Let me advise you straight, this Court adjourn, Nor Him oppose, lest worser you betide. This said, they clamouring in Factions side, But there the discontented Party stay'd, This Speech not pleas'd, but what Eupithes said, And straight they arming, their Design persue, And forth in glittering Regiments all drew: Eupithes the distracted Squadrons led, Reveng'd He for his Son would be, He said: But there He dy'd, and ne'r return'd again, When thus to Jove Minerva did complain; O Thou who govern'st all, so favour me, That I may know thy undisclos'd Decree: A lingring War design'st Thou in that Isle, Or wilt Thou else both Parties reconcile? Then He who oft Heaven with black Clouds doth mask Said; Daughter, why such Questions do'st thou ask? What er'e thou hast design'd, ne'r prov'd in Vain, Hath not Ʋlysses all the Sutors slain? Do as thou wilt, and let all Quarrels cease, And let them joyn in everlasting Peace: They now being punish'd, let Him alwaies reign, They shall forget their Dear Relations slain, And as before in blessed Union joyn, Where Peace and Riches shall with Justice shine.
This said, He sends willing Minerva down, She shoots like Lightning from Olympus Crown. When they with Meat and Drink were well-suffic'd, Ʋlysses thus the Company advis'd; Go forth, and see if any draw this way. Straight Dolius Son, as bidden, did obey: And He a Party on the Threshold saw, Then shouts; Ʋlysses, arm, they neer us draw. This said, themselves they for the Fight prepare, Ʋlysses four, six Sons had Dolius there, With these Laertes and old Dolius arm, Age not exempts when suddain's the Alarm. When all in compleat Steel the King beheld, Through open Gates he draws into the Field: To them, like Mentor, the Celestial Maid Conjoyns her self, at which Ʋlysses said; Thus to his Son; Thou'lt see in this Contest, Who boldest are, themselves behaving best; But do not Thou thy Ancestors disgrace, Who ne'r in Valour gave to any place. Then he reply'd; Dear Father, you shall see, I neither shall dishonour Them, nor Thee. At this, Laertes much reioycing, said; You Gods, I hear now that which makes me glad, That I have such a Grand-Child, such a Son. Then to Laertes Pallas thus begun; O Arcesiades, when thou hast pray'd To Jove's fair Daughter, the Celestial Maid, Then throw thy Lance: this said, he makes his Prayer, She gives him Strength, and first he throws his Spear, Which pierc'd Eupithes Cask, and Skull, to ground Th' Old Heroe falls, his rattling Arms resound: In rush Ʋlysses and his Valiant Son, And at them with their Swords, and Javelins run,
And with huge slaughter they their way had made, When Pallas loud to stop their Fury said; Hold, hold, you Ithacans, from War abstain, Part without blood-shed, let no more be slain. Thus Pallas said, and Fear surpriz'd them all, And from their trembling Hands their Javelins fall Upon the Ground, the Goddess threats aloud, They fly, and to the Town for safety croud; Ʋlysses follows close the routed Crew, And after them like a swift Eagle flew; Then Jove at them his dreadful Thunder shot, Which lighted just before Minerva's Foot, When to Ʋlysses thus the Goddess saies; Jove's Off-spring, stand, stand Laertiades, No farther in this War thou must engage, Lest thus displeasing, Jove thou should'st enrage. The King at Pallas threatnings makes a stand, And joyfully obeys the Maids command. Pallas, like Mentor, as she had design'd, Thus them again in happy Peace conjoyn'd. FINIS.
