H266B 99828101 32528
A SPEECH, SPOKEN BY Mr. HAYLES, A STUDENT of University-Colledge of OXFORD, And Son to the Honourable Sir Edward Hayles. With His Majesties Gracious Acceptance. Most Dread Sovereign, WE, Your Majesties Humblest Sub∣jests of this House, have the grea∣test reason to rejoyce in this your Majesties presence, in as much as this being the most Antient Col∣ledge, and Mother of all the rest in your Dominions, hath been chosen out to begin the restitution of the Re∣ligion, which was first Planted and Watred by so many Eminent, Devout and Learned Persons, of whom Four are accounted Saints in our English Kalendar; And we hope that as Providence hath reserv'd a Reformation to Your Majesty, after so long and Deplorable a Breach; so You will be pleas'd to Protect and encourage this tender beginning amongst Us: For the Winds and the Storms threaten us, yet being founded upon a double Rock, the one of Perpetuity of the Church: The other of your Majesties Protection, We rest Fearless, and Re∣solve till it shall please our good Lord to settle it in that Peace and Liberty which we confidently hope for in your Majesties Life and Government. Next, VVe with the rest of the Nation, acknowledge your Majesties great Goodness for that absolute Liberty granted to all your Subjects, restraining nothing but what is Eternally con∣trary to the Preservation of Peace and Justice.
You have only hindred confessed VVickedness and Violence to one another, which could not have been committed without the Breach of all Laws, and utter Confusion. And tho' you leave the Duty towards God, to every Conscience, yet you have hereby taken off the Vizard of Rebellion, and manifested to all the World, that who∣soever henceforth takes up Arms against your Power, must not pretend either Reformation or Religion, or In∣justice of the Government, as an Indulgence. This, wherein your Majesty and your Co-partners have the least Portion; it is, Great Prince, an Excessive Kindness to your People, that your Self accepts sparing∣ly, what upon others you so Bountifully bestow; as if your Own Interest were the least of your Care: And were the Nation United, your Own Self could be con∣tent to be neglected. It is a long time since that the Wounds of this Nation have been still wid'ned by In∣tressed Persons, applying only Corosives. Your Majesty hath by powering in Oyl and Balm, be∣gan an Unction and Coalition of the Parts. An Union at least in the concerns of the Nation, tho' not (as we de∣sire) an Unity in Religion. Yet so much of Religion too, as to be at Peace with One Another. And your Majesty is now, by your Majesties giving Warmth and Vigour to these desires, making the whole Nation Witnesses of the Sinerity of your Proceedings, as well as that of your Piety, Prudence, and most won∣derful Example, in all Virtue, becoming either a Prince, or even a Private Person. VVe hope your Subjects will be made more Cautious, when They see so much of an Excellent and Divine Spirit, seconded with the Power and Piety of a Prince. Nor will they pretend Conscience for Disobedience, when they perceive Him, who Demands, to have better Conscience than Themselves. VVhich Speech His Majesty was Graciously pleased, kindly to accept, &c. London, Printed for A. M. 1687.
