H3417 R15505 11849318 49887
AN Humble HINT TO THE King and Kingdom ON THE Coronation-Day OF JAMES the II. &c. Expressing the Due LOVE and LOYALTY Of the Humblest amongst His Majesties Servants. Printed by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden near Charing-Cross, MDCLXXXV.
TO THE KING Upon the Day of His CORONATION PRosper Great Monarch in that Royal Throne, Which all True English Hearts do this day own Is due unto Thy Sacred Self alone. Take here Thy Peoples Love, the Richest Gem That does this day Adorn Thy Diadem, Illustrating at once both Thee and Them. Proceed as Thou'st begun, let to Thy Court None Vicious, but the Virtuous Resort; Thou'lt have a Richer Crown than this is for't. None will at thy Blest Policy repine, So Safe and Sacred is thy Grand Design, Being to plant Vertues in thy Self and Thine. Virtue's of such Import, of such Renown, As will yield ev'ry Subjects Head a Crown, Equal in endless value to thine own. What Blessings can our wish from Heaven bring, Beyond the Love and Care of such a King As would Advantage Us in every thing?
Like in a Deluge to a Saving Ark, Thou drawst from Danger, lead'st us out o'th Dark; And play'st by Princely Pow'r the Patriarck. Thy Awful Scepter, Crosier-like Distills Such Divine Bounty as the Needful fills With Gracious Gifts agreeing with our Wills. Then let thy Charming Favours hence expect, We'll with our Prayers Thee to our Powers protect, And all Disturbers of thy Peace detect. Keep still thy Fame, with God in high request; And then 'twill be by all true Hearts confest, Their Love to Thee's their Heav'nly Interest. Let in each Act concerns the Realm, thine Eye Consult the Great All-seeing Deity, That VVe for Bliss may with all Nations vie. Let to Thy Zealous Bless'd Resolves be wed Dispatch, that now it may be boldly said; The Crown sits well on Resolutions Head, Where Courage, Kindness, Care and Conduct wait To Bless the Church with Zeal, with Peace the State, And make the Realm by their Protection Great. 'Tis from Thy New-Crown'd-Head, that now we may Expect such Wise Directions to Obey, As will chase all Seditious Thoughts away: Nay further, leave no room for such belief As made Thy Realms Credulity its Grief, And of Thy Subjects, the most Factious, chief.
But now with better Notions Blest, we'll strive To make in Peace Thee and thy People Thrive; And in our Hearts keep Loyalty alive. Thy Attributes that claim a Publick Praise, I leave to those Contenders for the Bays, Who by their Pens their Fortunes hope to raise. My Duty, Love and Loyalty Combine To teach: he that Allegiance does design May say, My King's and Kingdoms Good is mine. Wherefore you Masters of your Pens and Wit, Speak out, and Publish what you know is fit; I'll have my self a Subjects share in it. Now in the Name of all the Throng, I Vow That Love and Liberty thou do'st Allow; We'll n'er abuse, but to thy Edicts bow. This to my King, now to my Countrey I Must shew where all its Ancient Glories lie Ripe for its Peace and sure Prosperity. To ENGLAND. SEe, see Blest Isle how by th' Almighty's Hand, Thy People's pleas'd, Protected too thy Land By One that could Obey, and can Command. Thou hadst not fore the Conquest, nor yet since, More Plea to prove thy Bliss, and men convince, How Mild yet Mighty is thy Gracious Prince.
Skill'd in the Wars with Foes of God and man, And vers'd in all their Stratagems, He can As Subjects Rule, as Rebels them Trepan. Not by that thing He always scorn'd, Deceit, But Wisely lying for their Wiles in wait, He from their Malice will their Peace create. Until His Pow'r with Mercy mixt shall prove, He knows to Conquer both by Force and Love Them who to ruine Him have basely strove. Exclusion from Revenge he does exclude, Each Subject b'ing by Loyalty allow'd To be still of his Princely Favour Proud. Gain but his Peaceful Heart, his Pow'rful Arm Will help, Defend, but never do thee harm, And thee with Greatness and New Charters Charm. Take with his Love and Care a Loyal part, And urge not still a Kings Indulgent Heart, That would (Caress and Pease) to make thee smart: Be Wise, and on Sedition cease to plod; Molest no more thy Monarch, least thy God Translate thy Soveraign's Scepter to a Rod. Temper thy Grief with Joy, since God has gi'n For one King took away, a King and Queen As Good as all their Ancestors have been. Two Charles's thou hast lost, it is confest (Whilst they did Reign,) of Kings the very best; But with the Worth of both thy Prince is Blest,
To loose, and to Embrace the best of Kings, Demonstrat's that well born-Affliction brings Thy Grief to Peace, thy Peace to better things. Nor must thou blame the fickleness of Fate, That makes upon thy Woe such Comforts wait, As teach Condoling to Congratulate. Who 'gainst the just Decrees of Heaven blames, The Blessed Death of Charles and Life of James, His own Rebellion 'gainst his God Proclaims. When Divine Fore-sight thinks-fit to Ordain Two Brothers shall in two Blest Kingdoms Reign, To fret against Omnipotence is vain. Where is the stroke of Fate; where is the Frown, When to the Sacred Monarch she pull'd down; She gave Successor to His Worth and Crown? As Gracious, Just and Clement without doubt, And if He chance to prove more Resolute, Twill be to bring thy Happiness about. Then do not Thwart (Dear Isle) thy Ruler's Power, But do Anticipate that Happy hour Will yield the Fruit of Peace, now in the Flower. Behold thy Hopes and Happiness in Bloom, Thou from thy Judge mayst claim a Glorious doom, If in thy Heart Great James ne'er wants a Room. Give but due value to His sound Advice, And then expect to that Old Fame a Rise, Which to Adore thee did the World entice.
Thou that wast once the Precious Dowry stil'd, Of Mary Mother to th' Redeeming Child; Be to thy Ancient Virtue reconcil'd. Let not the Soveraign's Power, but Subjects Love Teach thee How to Applaud and to Approve, Thy Joys in James the Great, Decreed Above. Let not thy fond Dissenting Children say, His Pow'r alone; but Piety does sway, And make them all their due Allegiance pay. He that does Royal Clemency abuse, Resembling so the Flinty hearted Jews, Acts oft too soon, what oft too late he Rues. Mind then in time; Supply thy Princes wants, Unanimous and Frank be in thy Grants; 'Tis th' Liberal Subject who his King Inchants. And who can Wealth to better purpose spend, Than to make King and Kingdom both his Friend; With whom none but a Rebel dare contend. Be open then both in thy Heart and Hand, And from thy Prince expect no more Command, Than what may with thy Blest Improvement stand. But now let's hear th' Exulting People Cry, Let ne'er King JAMES nor His Queen MARY Die. So to Facilitate Posterity. FINIS.
