H3471 12431089 61955
THE Humble Petition OF MANY INHABITANTS In and about the City of LONDON. Presented to the Parliament by Mr. SAM. MOYER and others, May 12. 1659. Together with the Answer of the Parliament thereunto. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Brewster & Livewell Chapman, 1659.
TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMON-WEALTH OF ENGLAND. The humble Petition of many Inhabitants in and about the City of London. Humbly sheweth, THat whereas it hath pleased the most wise Orderer and Disposer of all things, to put you once more into the exercise of that Supream Trust, wherein the King of Na∣tions some years since suffered you to be interrupted, as a righteous check and chastisement to you and us, for our unthankfulness, for the Great Sal∣vations wrought for us, and unfaithfulness in a vigo∣rous
improvement of the opportunities thereby given, to bring to maturity and perfection the sure founda∣tion of a Common-weal in matters religious and ci∣vil, then happily laid and declared for, and signally owned by the Lord of Hosts in the days of Appeals in the high places of the Field; which stroke from the Lord, with its sad consequences and effects, we desire may be never forgotten by you or us. We judge it our duty, as to admire the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God therein, and heartily bless his Name for hear∣ing, and in his own time miraculously answering our sighs, tears and prayers: So also to present unto you our cordial owning and rejoycing in this special Provi∣dence towards you and us, wherein you are recalled by God, and the Friends of this Common-wealth, and capacitated to re-assert the main Substance of the Good Old Cause, and effectually to Superstruct there∣upon, till the Top-stone of Universal Liberty, Free∣dom, Common Justice and Righteousness be visibly laid, to the Glory of God, the Satisfaction of your Friends, and the Conviction of all Enemies and Gain∣sayers. We presume your hearts and doors will be always open, to the sober addresses of your Friends, as op∣portunity shall be offered, and therefore shall not in this juncture of time perplex your weighty affairs with multiplicity of particulars. Wherefore at present we only pray; 1. That the Militia of the several Cities and Coun∣ties within this Common-wealth may be speedily set∣led
in the hands of such who have in this time of tryal approved themselves faithful to the Interest thereof. 2. That such faithfull persons, who have been ejected out of places of Trust, Military or Civil, or have for Conscience sake been necessitated to quit their em∣ployments, may be speedily invited and restored to their former capacities; and that none for the future may be imployed in any place, from the highest to the lowest, but such who have (without declension) manifested their good affection to the Common-wealth. 3. That care may be taken that the persons intrusted with the Legislative power, may not be perpetuated, but that all persons within this Common-wealth may taste of subjection, as well as rule, and in order there∣unto, that in convenient time provision may be made for an equall distribution of Elections in the Represen∣tatives of this Common-wealth, with such due qualifi∣cations of the Electors and Elected, as may consist with the Interest thereof. 4. That the Liberty of all persons within this Com∣mon-wealth may be so tendred, that neither their per∣sons may be imprisoned, nor their goods touched, without the breach of some known Law, and due pro∣secution accordingly, and that such Ministers of Justice, Jaylors and others may be proceeded against and re∣moved, who have acted contrary hereunto. 5. That what Monies are, or shall be levyed upon the people for the service of the Common-wealth, may not be diverted to any other purpose whatsoever; that the great summs of Money, proportions of Lands, and places of Advantages that have been granted to, or conferred upon any by the Broad Seal, or otherwise,
since the 20th. of April 1653. may be taken into Consi∣deration, and that the chargeable Office and Officers of the Exchequer, (as to receipts and payments) may be reduced and regulated, as being calculated more for the Meridian of the Court, then fitted for the service of the Common-wealth. 6. That provision may be made, that such who live peaceably in Godliness and Honesty (though of dif∣ferent perswasions in matters of Faith and Worship) may be equally protected and encouraged. 7. That a Committee may be appointed to receive Propositions from any such person or persons as may be able to give light and direction in such things, as may conduce unto the frame or constitution of a good and equall Common-wealth, or Free Estate. 8. That all such summs of Money, that since the 20th. of April 1653. have been received, or borrow∣ed out of the Exchequer by Privy Counsellors or others, be repayed into the Treasury of this Common-wealth.
Thursday May 12. 1659. THe House being informed that several Gentlemen were attending with a Petiti∣on at the door, they were called in, and Mr. Samuel Moyer Esq in behalf of them all presented a Petition, which when the Petition∣ers were withdrawn, was read, being entitu∣led, The humble Petition of many Inhabitants in and about the City of London. Ordered that the Petitioners be called in, and that Mr. Speaker acquaint them, That the House will take the matter of the Petition into con∣sideration in due time, and that he give them thanks in the name of the Parliament, for their good and constant affections. And the Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker returned them this answer.
Gentlemen, The Parliament have read your Petition, and every part of it, and do intend in due time to take the things therein mentioned into consideration; In the mean time they have commanded me to tell you, that they do accept of your Petition, and give you thanks for your care in it, and for your good affection. Jo. Phelpes, Clerk of the Parliament pro tempore.
