j156 09550866 43603
J2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King, A DECLARATION. JAMES R. WHereas We find it requisite for Our Service, That the Forces, which We are obliged to Maintain for the Preservation of the Peace of this Our Kingdom, be kept in good Order and Discipline, and that Our Subjects may not suffer by any Disorders or Misbeha∣viour of any Officers or Soldiers within Our Pay and Entertainment; We have thought fit hereby to Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That in what Place so∣ever any of Our Forces shall pass or remain, they shall duly pay their Quarters at the Rates and Allowances formerly paid by Our Forces, and shall not, upon any pretence whatsoever, refuse or avoid the same. And We do likewise strictly forbid all Our Officers and Soldiers to use any Violence or Threatning Words to any Person whatsoever, or to give any other Offence, or just cause of Complaint. And in case any of Our said Offi∣cers or Soldiers shall presume to commit any Spoil or Disorder, or use any Violence, or threatning Words, or otherwise misbehave themselves, We do hereby Require all Our Loving Subjects forthwith to make known the same to their Superior Officers, who are to cause Satisfaction immediately to be made to the Persons Injured. And if such Officer, to whom Complaint is made, shall forbear or delay the causing due Satisfaction to be given as aforesaid, the Persons to whom the wrong is done, are then to present their Complaint to Us, that We may Order speédy Iustice to be done them, by Reparation of the Injury, and by causing the Officers and Soldiers so offending, to be forthwith Cashiered, and such further Pu∣nishments to be inflicted on them as the nature and quality of their Offences shall deserve. And We do further Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That no Officer or Soldier in their March or Quarters shall be Lodged in any Private House whatsoever, without the Freé and Voluntary Consent of the Owner; And that in case any Officers or Soldiers shall for any Reward or Consideration, leave or change the Quarters appointed them, or shall demand or exact Money for Quarters, or to exempt any persons from the same, they shall be Punished by Cashiering and loss of their Pay. And We do likewise strictly Prohibit and Forbid all Officers and Soldiers to Destroy or Disturb the Game in any manner whatsoever, without Leave from Us, the Lords of the respective Mannors, or others to whom it may belong to Grant the same: It being Our Royal Intention and Command, That all Officers and Soldiers in Our Ser∣vice, behave themselves Orderly in all things, upon Pain of the Severest Consequences of Our High Displeasure. Given at Our Court at Windsor the Twenty fifth day of August 1685. In the First Year of Our Reign. God Save the King. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.
