J505 12013037 52468
ERRATA. PAge 10. l. 6. r. love of God. p. 23. l. 45. r. praerequiritur. p. 42. l. 19. r. analo∣gum. p. 47. l. 15, 16. r. where he saith man hath not causalitatem, p. 50. l. 32. r. indiguisset. p. 52. l. 23. fruitionis. p. 54. marg. l. 5. r. infinitum. l. 17. r. re∣tu. p. 56. l. 39. r. patet. p. 5. marg. l. 19. r. libeè. p. 61. l. ult. r. as already. p. 64. l. 6. r. added. l. 12. r. usual. p. 68. l. 6. r. . p. 70. l. 13. r. is lapis p. 71.. 35. r. you spend. p. 72. l. 5, 21, 42. r. intension. l. 40. r. supplyed. p. 73. l. 43. betwixt length and there's insert, is a greater intension. p. 74. l 21. r. of. p. 75 l. 5. r. knev. p. 77. l. 40. r. vel unum. l. 41. r. rationem marg. l. 7. r. actu. l. 40. r. vel necessaria unt. p. 78. l. 26. r. conferre. l. 39. r. à quâ. l. 44. r. his. p. 81. l. 35. r. Monachis▪ b. r cap. 13. p. 82. l. 15. r. that a Scholar. l. 24. r. rake. p. 83. l. 34. r. lavvfully. . 84. l. 11. r. appetitu. l. 16. r. beare. There are divers other escapes, mispointings, mispellings, misaccentings, and the like omitted, because they are so obvious that every ordinary Read∣er may easily discerne them, and so slight, as that every ingenuous Reader vvill pardon them. There vvere divers pages in the Defendant misfigured, against which the Author in his quotation of them had found an expedient; but the Printer not having observed his direction, the matter is left to be rectified by the Reader himself.
Dr. CREED'S Voluminous Defence OF Dr. HAMMOND'S ἘΚΤΕΝΕ'ΣΤΕΡΟΝ Briefly EXAMINED, And The weaknesse thereof fully discovered. By HENRY JEANES. LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster at the Signe of the Crane in Saint Paul's-Church-yard, 1661.
Dr. CREED'S Defence OF Dr. HAMMOND'S ἘΚΤΕΝΕ' ΣΤΕΡΟΝ, EXAMINED. I Shall premise three things touching this doughty Work of Dr. Creeds. The first shall be, concerning the Insolent and Scurrilous Inci∣vilities wherewith it is every where fraught. And it is to acquaint the Reader, That I shall not honour them so much as to take a distinct and particular notice of them, for they are so gross, as that they carry their condemnation in their forehead. Indeed I have not heard of any wise, sober and moderate man, though of the Doctors perswasi∣on in other particulars, that hath made the least Apology for them, when they have been told how he hath in them trespassed against all good manners. I shall therefore leave them unto his Romance Readers, who are so much taken with their gaudy language, and for the Meridian of whose soft understandings they were especially calculated  and they shal have my fair leave to make themselvs as merry with them, as they please: their mirth may stir my pity, but it shall have no influence upon either my anger or envy. The second shall be concerning the wonderful prolixity thereof, occa∣sioned by his frequent extravagancies or out leaps, his numerous, but impertinent Qutations, his frivulous Objections, in all which should I follow him  the bulk of my Book would be so swell'd thereby as that all Readers would be arighted from the perusal thereof. In fa∣vor
therefore to the Reader, I shall pass by most of these with a just and deserved neglect, and select only such passages to be examined, which those learned and judicious friends whom I have consulted, have judged most material and important. A third thing shall be concerning the sense of Doctor Hammond in the controversie. He never affirms (saith the Defendant) that the self same numerical act of holy love in Christ was more intense at one time then at another: but onely that one act of his love of God compared with another, was more high and intense then another. pag. 22, 23, 63, 64, 185. Unto this I shall readily agree▪ nei∣ther know I any reason that he hath to charge me for dissenting herein. About the state of the Question he objecteth, (pag. 17, 47.) that the terms of the Question are much altered from what they were at the first. Saith he, This Refuter charged the Doctor with a direct and flat denial of the all-fulness of habitual grace in Christ, and now it is onely by consequence. To prove the notorious falshood of this crimination, I shall onely refer the Reader unto pag. 258, 259. of my Mixture, for there he may see▪  by sequel I did deduce my charge from the Doctors words; and the validity of this deduction I have made good against Doctor Hammond, and shall further clear against this our Defendant, by discovering the vanity of all subter∣fuges, that he hath, to evade the force of my argumenta∣tion. They are in number four. When the Doctor saith that the acts of Christ's love of God are ∣pable of degrees, and sometimes more heightned, more ardent and in∣tense then at other times, or in other acts. 1. He speaks by a Metonymie of the effect, or Synecdoche generis, and not of the love of God properly and formally taken. 2. He is not to be understood of those acts of love of God that are immediately terminated on God the onely good; but of those that are im∣mediately terminated on us men for God's sake. 3. By the actual love of God he understands (saith he) not the acti∣on of loving, but the term of that action, a quality produced thereby, which for want of words is called love. 4. By the actual love of God he understands not that which agreeth to him as Compreensor, and was a sequel of the beatifical vision; but that which belonged to him as he was Vator, and arose from the infused knowledge of God, and the infused habit of Divine cha∣rity. Having thus propounded the evasions of the Defendant in General, I shall take a distinct and several survey of them. The first is pag. 5, 6, 217, 335, 336, 546. and 'tis, That when Doctor Hammond saith that the acts of Christ's love of God, or holy charity, are capable of degrees's and sometimes more heightned,
more ardent and intense then at other times, or in other acts; he speaks by a Metonymie of the effect, or Synecdoche generis, and not of the love of God properly and formally taken. But that Dr. Hammond is to be understood of love properly and formally taken, when he asserts a greater ardency in Christ's love of God at one time, then another, is as clear as the Sun, from sect. 22. of his . For there he saith, that love as a genus is predicated of that love which he speaks of. Now the genus is predicated properly and for∣mally of it's species, for 'tis predicated thereof in primo modo dicendi per se. But perhaps you may say, that though the love which Dr. Hammond speaks of, be love properly and formally taken, yet 'tis called the love of God onely tropically. Unto this I Reply, I. That Christ's love, which Dr. Hammond saith, is capable of de∣grees, &c. is that very love which is commanded Deut. 6.5. a love of God with all the soul, heart, might, and strength, &c. and that is a love proper and peculiar unto God, and not to be communicated unto any creature. And, pray Sir, is not this that high, and tran∣scendent act of Divine love you speak of pag. 5. whereby the soul is immediately fixed, and knit to God as the onely good? and then with what face can you deny it to be the love of God pro∣perly and formally taken? But however, the poor Refuter must be condemned lege falsarii (pag. 5.) right or wrong. For where∣as Doctor Hammond spake expresly of Christ's love of God, the Re∣futer is so dull and simple an Animal, as to understand him of his love of the Creator, whereas alas, Doctor Hammond had a profounder con∣ceit, which is highly rational in it self, and is to be interpreted concern∣ing his love of the Creature. And this is enough to clear me from the crime of Forgery, with which this shamelesse Defendant asperseth me. But his Calumny will be the more apparent if we insist up∣on those two Tropes, One of which he sayes the Doctor makes use of. The first is the Metonymie of the effect, and that is when the effect is put for the efficient. Now do not you by your Discourse plainly insi∣nuate, that the efficient is here taken for the effect; the love of God, for the issues and effects of the love of God. If there were then a Meto∣nymie in Doctor Hammond's words, it was by you a Metonymie of the efficient, and not of the effect. And indeed you tell us, pag. 217. that all the acts of piety, and mercy, and charity, and vertue, are called the love of God by a Metonymie of the efficient, because they flow from it. And either this is a flat contradiction to what you here say, or else the Metonymie of the efficient and of the effect must be confounded, and be all one. But secondly, Dr. Hammond doth not make use of any Metonymie at
all, either of the efficient, or of the effect. For that which is termed the love of God only Metonymically, is so called only equivcally▪ and that the love of God is here taken by the Doctor, for that which is so stiled only equivocally, you dare not aver; for that which is predicated of a thing equivocally, may in propriety of speech be denyed of it: that which is the love of God only equivocally, may be said not to be the love of God. But you may perhaps say that he speaks, if not by a Metonymy of the effect, yet by a Synecdoche generis. But Synecdoche generis (as Vossius, Alsted and other Rhetoricians have taught me) is when the genus is put for the species, as creature for man Mark 16.15. But how the love of God is here by Dr. H. taken for any of its species, passeth my dull imagination. I shall not therefore adven∣ture so much as to guess at your meaning, but patiently wait for your own Learned Explication of it. And thus the Reader sees, how this first Evasion, that Dr. Hammond speaks of the love of God only as 'tis taken tropically, by a Metonymy of the Effect, or by a Synecdoche generis, fails against both Logick and Rhe∣trick. But it may be objected, from pag. 6. That Christs love of God which Dr. Hammond speaks of, is his prayer unto God: now prayer is properly an act of Religion and Devotion towards God; and improperly and figurative∣ly an act of holy Charity or divine Love. For answer 1 Though Prayer considered formally in it self, be an act of divine Love only improperly, and figuratively, yet it implieth the love of God properly and formally taken; and 'tis undeniable, that Dr. H. speaketh of Prayer under this consideration, as implying the love of God properly and formally such; for he bringeth Christs praying more earnestly, as a proof to make good his exposition of those words, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, heart, might and strength, where the love of God is taken properly and formally. Now of this exposition it can be no confirmation, if the Doctor do not consider Christs prayer, as imply∣ing his love of God properly and formally taken. Though Prayer considered formally in it self be not properly an act of divine love, but only implyedly, viz. preposiivè and concomitantèr, yet the reason which the Defendant brings for the confirmation of this, because 'tis properly and formally an act of Religion, is very question∣able. For 2 According to the language of Protestant Divines, one and the same Act may properly be an act of both Religion and holy charity too; for they take Religion in so large a sense, as that it comprehends all duties of he first Table. Thus Ames makes all parts of Gods Worship both na∣tural and instituted to be parts of Religion. Now if this acception of Religion be proper, it will not be material, though it be somewhat different from that of the Schoolmen.
2 But proceed we unto his Second Evasion, which differs little from the former, if at all, but in termes, and 'tis concerning the acts of Christs love of God. These, saith the Defendant, are of two sorts: 1 Those that are immediately terminated on God the only good. 2 Those that are immediately terminated on us men for Gods sake, in whose love as the prime act they are all radicated and founded; the one the Schooles call charitas ut finis; the other they call charitas propter finem. Though then the acts of Christs love, as immediately terminated on God, were always at the height and one equal perfection (as was never yet questioned or de∣nyed by the Doctor) yet this nothing binders but that the other acts of this love (of which alone the Doctor speaks) regarding us for Gods sake, might consist in a latitude, and gradually differ from one another, and fall short of the fervour of those acts that immediately respected God, &c. See pag. 3, 5, 22, 70, 71, 216, &c. usque ad 248, 279. us{que} ad 291, 328, 329, 335 336, 338, 343, 361, 372, 373, 516, &c. Well then, the great mistake of the Refuter is, That whereas Dr. Ham∣mond spake expresly of Christs actual love of God the Creator, and yet meant thereby his actual love of man a creature, the Refuter was such a dull Block-head, as not to reach this hidden and invisible meaning of Dr. Hammond. But first, if this were a mistake, it should not (me thinks) be so cri∣minous and unpardonable; For First, The Refuter in his exposition of the actual love of God went by that common rule, Analogum per se positum stat pro faviosiori analogato; If a word hath two significations, one proper, another improper and o∣pical, it must be taken properly if it be put by it self and have nothing added to determine and carry it unto an improper and tropical sense. Now the actual love of God is taken properly only of those as that are terminated immediately unto God, and all those that are terminated un∣to us men for Gods sake, are termed the love of God only improperly, and by a trope; and Dr. Hammond speaks absolutely of the actual love of God, and hath nothing to restrain his speech unto the latter sort of acts; and therefore he is to be understood of the former, those that ar immediately terminated on God. Secondly, If this were a mistake, it had been an easie matter for Dr. Hammond to have prevented it in his , by a clear and di∣stinct explication of his meaning: but he hath not done this, and there∣fore if the Refuter be to be blamed, Dr. Hammond cannot be altogether excused. But I deny that I am guilty of any such mistake as is imputed to me. For that Christs actual love of God in Dr. Hammond cannot rationally be understood of all those acts of love that were immediately terminated on us men, all duties of the Second Table, &c. I shall prove by an Argument drawn from the Relation that Dr. Hammonds discourse concer∣ning Christs actual love of God, &c. hath to the Commandment Deut. 6.5. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy , and
with all thy soul, and with all thy might. It is brought as an Exempli∣fication and proof of his interpretation thereof; and therefore this actual love of God in Christ, must be the same with that love of God which is there commanded. Now that love of God which is there commanded, is that only which is immediatly terminated on God. For, 1. It must be with all the heart, soul, might, and strength: and the Acts of love that are terminated unto the creature immediat∣ly, cannot be performed in such an intension without grosse and palpa∣ble Idolatry. 2. The love of God here commanded, is by our Saviour himself di∣stinguished from the love of our neighbour, and of our selves, and consequently 'tis restrained unto the love of God, which is termi∣nated immediatly upon God. Jesus saith, The great Commandement  the Law is, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, this is the first and great Commanement; and the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self, Matth. 22. vers. 36, 37, 38, 39. Here these two Commandements, are the two Summaries of the Commandements of both Tables: And seeing they are distinguished by our Saviour him∣self, we must not make any confusion betwixt them. But they are con∣founded when the duties of the second Table, or this Commandement, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self, are ranged under the first Table; Or this Commandement, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul, might, and strength. Now those acts of chari∣ty that are immediatly terminated unto us men for Gods sake, are all Duties of the second Table, and belong unto that Command∣ment, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self. 3. Unto this let me adde a third Argument (which may be reduced unto the first) taken from the second Part of Doctor Ham∣mona's Exposition of the place, and thus it stands; That act of the love of God which transcends all those acts of love that are imme∣diatly terminated on the creature, is that high act of the love of God, which is immediatly fixed and terminated on God, as the only good. But the act of the love of God which is commanded Dut. 6.5. transcends all those acts of love, which are immediat∣ly terminated on the creature: Therefore 'tis that act of the love of God, which is terminated and fixed immediatly on God him∣self, as the only good. The Major is undeniable, and if the Minor be not Doctor Ham∣mond's own, let the Defendant expound unto us these words of his, That Phrase thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul; denoteth secondly, the loving him above all other things, and not admitting any thing into competition with him, not  any thing else in such a degree.
This argument may briefly be thus also varied. No acts of the love of God, that are superiour unto those that are immediately terminated on us men for God's sake, can be those very acts that are immediately terminated on us men for God's sake; for one and the same thing cannot be superiour unto it self. But those acts of the love of God that are com∣manded Deut. 6.5. are superiour unto those that are immediately ter∣minated on us men for God's sake, and so much is evident by Dr. Ham∣mond's exposition of the place: And therefore those acts of the love of God, that are commanded Dut. 6.5. are not those that are immedi∣ately terminated on us men for God's sake. But suppose that Dr. Hammond spake of those acts of holy charity that are terminated on us men for Gods sake: yet by what the Defen∣dant saith, it will be no injustice to think, that he speaks of those acts under this reduplication, as terminated immediately on God himself. For by the Defendants opinion, pag. 234, 235 holy charity and it's acts, are terminated unto us mea for God's sake, onely as a material object, and unto God's infinite goodnss alone, as the formal object. Now things are rather denominated from that which agreeth unto them formally, then from that which is ascribed unto them only materially, for dn∣minatio fit à pottori. Now those acts of charity that are terminated un∣to us men, considered as terminated on God as their formal object, ought to be in all, and were in Christ alwayes at the height, and one equal perfection. Our Defendant himself confesses, pag. 217. that to English ears, this phase, the love of God, seems especially to import the prime and more principal love that hath God for its immediate Ob∣ject: but then withal he adds, that in Scripture phrase it frequently does not. The first place he quotes, is Luk. 11.42. Wo unto you Pharise, (saith our Saviour) for ye tythe mint, and rue, and all manner of hrbs, and passe over judgement, and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. But this place he confesseth to be otherwise expounded by divers, and we have (saith he) no need of doubtfull places. But 'tis without doubt, that the love of God is not there taken in such a latitude o am∣plitude, as to contain the whole duty of man towards God and our neighbour: for 'tis distinguished from judgement, and that compriseth, if not all, yet a great part of our duty towards our neigh∣bour. But the Defendant in the next place alledgeth instances out of the first Epistle of St. John, that are (he saith) beyond all ex∣ception. The first instance is 1 John 2.5. But who so keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him. But to prove the impertinency of this place,
we need go no further then Dr. Hammond's Paaphrase of it. But the observing his commands, is the only sure argument, that he that doth so, is a perfect lover of God, truly so called (the appellation being falsely as∣sumed by the Gnosticks) and an argument of evidence to himself, that be is a branch, a member of Christ, as the Gnosticks boast that they are, and that whatsoever they do, it cannot make them cease to be so. The observing of God's commandments is an argument of the perfect love of God, but it doth not therefore follow, that it is the love of God it self. The two next places, the 1 Joh. 3.17. 1 Joh. 4.20 every rational Reader will judge wide from the mark. For the utmost that can be ga∣thered from them is, that the love of God is inseparably connexed with the love of our Neighbour, and hath an influence or impery upn the acts thereof. But what is all this unto the purpose? The last place the 1 Joh. 5.3. may perhaps be thought to have some colour of an Argument, For this is the love of God, that we keep his com∣mandments. Here 'tis plain, that the Apostles speech is to be understood Metonymi∣cally, and the meaning of it is, that the love of God is the cause of the keeping his commandments, and the keeping of God's commandments i an inseparable effect, or fruit of the love of God. This meaning of the place is excellently laid down by Estius; Sensus idcircò adjec de mandatis ejus servandis: quia diligere Deum, per consequentiae ratione est mandata ejus servare. Charitas si quidem erga Deum, ait Cajetanus, ratio est servandi mandata ejus. Unde quamvis praeceptum diligendi Deum, ab aliis us praeceptis diversum sit: quicunue tamen boc dilectionis servat praeceptum, ex câ dilctione ettam caetera Det praecepta servat, ut quorum obsrvatio ex dilectione Dei necssariò depndeat, ac sequatur tanquam ef∣fectus ex propriâ causâ. Quod etiam significant illa Chsti verba Jan. 14. Qut babet mandata mea, & servat ea: ille est qui diligit m. Et iterum: Si quis diligit me: sermonem meum servabit. Et ca. 15. Ves amis met estis, sifeceritis quae ego praecipio vobis. Simile est buit loco qued supra ca∣pite . dixit Joannes: Qui servat verbum ejus: vè in boc charitas Di perfecta est. By what hath been said, the Reader may perhaps think that this place seems to be very advantagious for the Defendants turn. But upon more serious consideration it will be found to do him no ser∣vice at all: For, First, though there be a Metonymy in the Apostles words, yet it lieth not in the love of God: the Metonymy is in the praedicate, and not in the subject of the Proposition; and the love of God is the subject of the Pro∣position, as is evident from the prefixing of the Greek artcle , and there is nothing hindeth, but that it may be taken in the greatest propriety, onely the praedicate (this, that we keep the com∣mandments of God) is affirmed of it Metonymically. Secondly, it is plain, that in S. John's words there is a causal
predication Praedicatio impropria ca∣salis est, quâ unum extre∣mum alteri ad ejus causam de∣signandam nn repugnante lo∣qudi consue∣tudine conjungitur, e.g. Ira est fervor sanguinis circa cor, est oratio vera sensu causali. Nee nim ira, quae est affectio auimi, proprie loquendo est servor seu ebullitio, sed existit ex illà ebullitione, & ebullitio illa existit ex irâ, sed diversa respectu. Huc reser & illa: hic bolus est mihi mors, boc est mortifer. Alsted. for the love of God is the keeping of his Commandements, not formally, but causally, that is, 'tis the cause of keeping Gods Com∣mandements. Now every one knows, that in a causal predication there is ever a Metonymy of either the efficient or effect. But no in ths proposition, one act of Christs love of God was more intense then ano∣ther, which the Defendant confesseth to be the sense of Doctor Ha∣mond; there is no causal predication, nor any footsteps of any other argument, from which a man may Logically conclude a Metonymy. Nay, thirdly, if any Argument can be drawn from coherence, it is (as I have already shewen) evident that Dr. Hammond cannot be un∣derstood of the love of God in a Metonymical acception, for he speaks of the same love of God that is commanded, Deut. 6.5. and that is un∣deniably the love of God properly taken. In the next place, pag. 219, 220, &c. Us{que} ad 227. the Defendant endeavouresh to prove by arguments from the Doctors writings, that he takes the love of God in such a large sense, as to take in all duties to our neighbour. The weakness of which arguments it were an easie matter to discover, if it were worth the while: but indeed we may justly despise them, for it being cleared that Dr. Hammond cannot rationally be understood of any other love of God, but that which is immediately terminated on God himself; if they prove any thing they will conclude that the Dr. contradicts himself, and that is a matter wherein I that am none of his Idolaters, am no wayes concerned. Once it is very apparent, that this large acception of the love of Gods very Catachrestical, for according to it, the lowest and meanest acts of both Charity and Justice towards our neighbour (even the Hangmans consci∣entious performance of his Office) may be termed the love of God: and most men would judge this to be an unsavoury expression; it would sound very harshly unto not only English but all Christian eares. And whether so harsh a Catachresis be to be tolerated in Controversal writings may justly be doubted. If Dr. Hammonds cause then cannot be upheld, but by flying unto such a Catachrestical and abusive acception of the love of God, it is a shrewd signe, that 'tis in a very tottering, if not desperate condition. From what hath been said, the Reader may furnish himself with an answer unto the greatest part of the book: But more particularly unto two of those arguments, which the Defendant brings to make good this affection, that there is and must be in Christ, a gradual difference in respect of the several acts of the habit of the love of God. As for
the third argument, p. 244. the confirmation of it may more fitly be re∣ferred unto a more proper place. The first argument he prosecutes from p. 227 us{que} ad 236. and 'tis by him thus summed up, p. 227, 228. Where there is, and of necessity must be, a gradual difference, and more in respect of the goodness of the Objects of the habit of charity, or the law of God, there is, and of necessity there must be, also a gradual difference in respect of the se∣veral acts of this habit of charity, or the love of God. But there is and must be a gradal difference, and more in respect of the goodness of the objects of the habt of charity, or the love of God in Christ. Therefore there is, and must be, a gradual difference in respect of the several acts of this habit of charity, or the love of God in Christ. In the Argument there is committed that fallacy which is termed fal∣lacia ignorationis Elenchi; for, the conclusion takes the acts of the love of God in Christ in such a latitude, as to comprehend those acts of love which were terminated unto man: Whereas Dr. H. and the Refu∣ter are to be understood (as hath been shewn) only concerning those acts of the love of God, which are terminated on God himself: and be∣tween these there is no gradual difference, for they have one Object alone, Gods infinite goodness in himself. Unto this we may add ex abundanti unto the Minor, that the pretended difference betwixt the Objects of the love of God in Christ, is by the Defendants opinion, only as touching the material objects thereof, for the formal object or reason is asserted by him to be still one and the same; and hereupon 'twill follow, that the acts of Christs love of God are for∣mally the same, and consequently the acts of this love which have their specification from their objects, are, by his opinion, formally the same too; and the formal consideration of things is chiefest and most to be heeded. These answers might easily have been foreseen, but instead of them the Defendant falls to his conjectures, p. 232, 233. There can (saith he) be but two things possible (as far as I can foresee) returned in an∣swer to this discourse. First, that it is not one and the same habit of charity, whereby we love▪ God and our neighbus a our selves; and and therefore as the precepts are several, so the objects are divers, and the affections of the soul, that carry it on to the love of God, and our neighbour, are as different as the Objects themselves are. And there∣fore though it be granted that the several acts that flow from these severally distinct habits, do gradually differ in themselves in respect of intenseness, according to the gradual distance of goodness in the ob∣ject; yet it follows not, that therefore the acts of one and altogether the same habit, of charity and holy love, do gradually differ also; which was the thing to be proved. Secondly, Though it were granted, that the hbit of charity and holy love to God, and our neighbours, be one and the same habit, yet a gradual difference in the goodness of the objects of this love will not argue a gradual
difference of intenseness in the inward acts of this love, but onely in the out∣ward acts and expressions. These answers are none of mine, but the groundless sictions of the Defendant, and therefore I may justly pass them over in filence. But yet unto the first I shall say something, because it affords occasion of some discourse that may be acceptable unto the Reader. First, Scotus resolves indeed, with Aquinas, that eodem habitu dili∣gimus Deum, & proximum; but then scripto Parisiensi in 3um. sent. dist. 28. he determues that diligere proximum is velle eum condiligere Dum. Dico, quod eodem habitu diligimus Deum & proximum, quia eodem actu volo vel diligo Deum in se, & volo proximum Deum in se diligere, perfecte autem amans, dilectum vult diligi, & Deus, qui est bonum commune non vult esse bonum particulare, ideo habens habitum talem, cujus actus prae∣cipitur in communi, quod possibile est fieri, potest diligere Deum, & proxi∣mum velle Deum diligere, quia eodem habitu possum tendere in objectum, & reflecti super illud, ergo eadem charitate possum diligere Deum, & velle proximum diligere Deum: & hoc est diligere proximum, quod est respectu honesti. Quod probatur ex bo, quod ista duo, sc. alquid velle, & dili∣gere, sunt ejusdem rationis. To love our Neighbour, is to will, that to∣gether with us he should love God. Scotus then doth not take the love of our Neighbour in such a latitude as the Defendant, but far more re∣strainedly. Secondly, If Aquinas his opinion be, that the habitual love of God, and the habitual love of our neighbour be one simple and indivisible ha∣bit, one specie infimâ, then his opinion may be impugned by two argu∣ments, in the solution of which the Defendant may do well to take some pains. The I. argument is because the habitual love of God is or ought to be more intense then the habitual love of our Neighbour: and this inequa∣lity is an argument of a real essential, and consequently specifical disti∣ction. For it cannot be numerical, because duo accidentia, numero tan∣tùm diversa, non possunt esse in eodem subjecto simul. Secondly, If the habitual love of God, and the habitual love of out Neighbour were one and the same specifically, then the acts of love that are terminated to our Neighbour, all Duties of the Second Table would be elicite acts of the habitual love of God; whereas 'tis evident, they are onely imperate acts thereof. But the Defendant objects, pag. 233, 234. That God and our Neigh∣bour, are beloved for one and the same formal reason or object, and therefore the habit of Divine love towards them must be one and the same. Unto this it may be answered. First, That the love of God, and the love of our Neighbour, have one formal ultimate object or motive: Yet their formal immediate objects may be different. The formal object or motive of our love of God is his infinite Goodness, considered as it is in himself, and the immediate formal
object of our love of our Neighbour, is the Goodness of God commu ca∣ted unto, and shining in, our Neighbour. Secondly, though the formal object be one and the same, yet the appli∣cation thereof, and the way of tendeney thereunto, is far different. For 'tis applied unto God intrinsecally, unto our Neighbour extrinsecally: Unto God as the end, unto our Neighbour as the means. And therefore our love of God is called Charitas finis, and the love of our Neighbour Charitas propter finem. To clear this, I shall quote the words of Suarez, Metaph. disp. 44 sect. 11, n 30. Advertendum est in omni habitu dari ex parte objecti aliquam rationem tendendi in illud, quam motivum operan∣di possumus appellare, &c. habitus antem voluatatis tendunt ad prosequn∣dum aliquod bonum: omais autem proseutio boni est ex aliquo motivo, seu ex aliqud ratione boaitatis, quae voluntatem attrahit. Hoc ergo motivum seu rati tendendi, est absque dubio, quae dat actui specificam rationem, quae eadem erit, si aequaliter aut eodem modo per actus attingatur: quia semper id, quod est sermale, est quod dat spectem: materiale autem est quasi per accidens, vel individuale, respectu talis actûs. Dic autem, si aequaliter vel eodem modo talem rationem tendat, nam contingit  & eandem rationem tendendi non aequè applicari diversis materiis, & ideo non eodem modo attingi per actus. ut ect, v. g. bonitas divina quatenus est in Deo, & reddit illum amabilem, vel quatenus per quendam respe∣ctum applicatur proximo, ut illum etiam amabilem reddat. Nam licet illa bonitas in se una sit, non tamen ill is rebus aequè convet: & ideò modus tendendi in illan non est idem. Et idem est universum de bonicate finis, re∣spectu ipsius finis, & respectu mediorum, & de similibus, in quibus ratio tendendi alteri intrascè, altis vero extrinsècè applicatur. I confess Sua∣rez holds, that the habitual love of God and the habitual love of our Neighbour are but one indivisible habit. But this is no hinderancè, but that we may make use of his words against himself; and the rather, be∣cause what afterwards may be picked out of him in answer hereunto, is very unsatisfying: The utmost that he saith is, that there is a necessary sonnexion betwixt the acts of the love of God, and the love of our neigh∣bour; he saith the same of other acts, But this connexion of the acts, doth not prove an unity of the habits. The habits may be connexed as well as the acts; and connexion, if it be real, implieth a real distincti∣on. And 'tis very observable, that Suarez himself infers from the con∣nexion of acts onely a possibility, not a necessity of the unity of the habit▪ Tandem, quando actus ipsi sunt inter se connexi, & quasi radicati in ali∣quo primo, tunc etiam possunt habere similem connexionem, saltem virtua∣lem, in ipso habitu: ergo quantum est ex hoc capite, si aliud non obstet, poterit idem indivisibilis babitus esse principium hujusmedi actuum. Disp. & sect. praedict. n. 32. But I shall not pertinaciosly contend about this matter, but leave it to the judgement of the learned Reader. Here I shall digress a little from the Defendant, to consider the opini∣on of some School-men, who maintain, that 'tis alwayes one and the savie act whereby God and our Neighbour are loved: and they have of it a
pretty illustcation, from their tenet of Image-worship. Look (say they) as an Image and its Prototype are worshipped with one and the same wor∣shp, so God and our Neighbour are loved with one and the same act of love. But the real distinction of the acts of the love of God and the love of our Neighbour, I shall prove from four Arguments. 1. From their separability: there may be an actual love of God, when at the same time there is not an actual love of our Neighbour. And so again on the other side, there may be an actual love of our Neighbour, when at the same time there is onely virtual or habitual love of God: For at the same time there may not be any actual cogitation of God. Now things that may really be separated, are qestionless really distin∣guished. 2. From their inequality: The love of God ought to be more intense then the love of our Neighbour, (for it is to be with all the soul, heart, might and stength) and therefore 'tis really distinguished therefrom. 3. From the dependency of the love of our Neighbour upon the love of God: The actual love of God is the efficient cause of the actual love of our Neighbour, and the efficient and the effect are alwayes really distin∣guished. 4. From this may be drawn another Argument, proceeding from the posteriority of the actual love of our Neighbour, unto our actual love of God: For being the effect thereof, it must needs be after it, and that really à parte rei, and not onely in regard of our consideration. Now this is an evidence of the real distinction of these acts; for if they were one and the same act really, then one and the same thing should be really both before and after it self: which is a manifest contradiction. But I return unto our Defendant, and unto his second Argument, which he pursues very copiously p. 236, &c. usque ad 244. The sum of it is this, There are not onely perfect and effectual, but also imperfect, conditionate, and uneffectual acts of Christs will, and those are gradually distinguished from these, &c. But what of all this? it will not therefore follow, that one act of Christs love of God is more intense then another act, unless you can prove, that these imperfect and uneffectual acts of Christs will, are eli∣cite, proper and formal acts of his love of God. This is a thing that you all along presuppose, but have not proved, nor never can prove. Not onely Scholastical Dvines, but all that have any moderate insight into Practial Divinity will tell you, Master Defendant, that to say that Christs actual love of God is imperfect, uneffectual, conditionate, is an ignorant, gross, and very lewd blaspbemy. I shall but remark two things more, touching this second Evasion of the Defendant, and then proceed unto a third. First, Christs actual love of God, which Dr. Hammond speaks of, is not (saith the Defendant) frequently the action of loving, but a term produced thereby: and yet he saith p. 70. that the acts of Christs love
of God, are some of them terminated immediately on God, and others of them on us men, &c. By this then it seems that the supposed utmost term of the action of loving in Christ, is terminated further unto ano∣ther term, if not effective, yet objective. Now this is a very deep sub∣tilty the clear explication and confirmation of which, we shall justly ex∣pect from the Defendant. 2. The Defendant grants, that the outward expressions of love, are not love it self, and wonders that I can be so uncharitable, as to think that Dr. Hammod was a man of so shallow and slendor parts, as to take the outward expressions of love for love it self, pag. 84, 90, 95. And yet he tells us, that Dr. Hammond takes Christs actual love of God, in such a latitude or amplitude, as that it contains the whole duty of man towards God and our Neighbour, whatsoever is good and excellent in him, pag. 216, 219, &c. Now the outward expressions of the love of God, are a part of man's duty, and therefore, by the Defendant, are the love of God in Dr. Hammona's sense of the word. How the Defendant will re∣concile this, the event will shew. But go we on unto the third Evasion of the Defendant. He distinguish∣eth of a two-fold actual love; 1. the action of loving; 2. the term of that action, a quality produced thereby, which for want of words is cal∣led love. Now Dr. Hammond (he saith) is to be understood of the latter, the term, and not of the former, the action of loving. p. 21, 22, 25, &c. usque ad 42, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 211, 212, 113, 214. But first suppose, though not grant, that there were such a term of the immanent action of loving, yet this cannot be the actual Divine love which Dr. H. speaks of. For, 1. The actual love which he speaks of, is the matter of that Com∣mandement, Deut. 6.5. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, &c. Now that the supposed term of the immanent action of love is not in any probability. For, 1. That is most likely to be the matter of this precept, whose being is most undeniable, and uncontroverted: but the existence of imma∣nent actions is less questioned, then that of their terms. The existence of these hath been much questioned by many subtil Philosophers; and setting aside Philosophers, the most of men never so much as dcamt of them. Take ten rational and knowing men that never heard of this Question, An omnis actio habeat terminum? and demand of them, whether they think, that by the immanent actions of their senses, their understandings, and wills, they preduce within them∣selves certain qualities of the same name with the actions themselves? and I am confident that most, if not all of them, will return a nega∣tive answer. 2. The matter of this precept, is of a very important, general, an necessary obligation: and therefore it must be obvious and evident unt all that have the use of their reason, so that the knowledge of it ma
be gained without any great difficulty, but now the pretended terme of the action of loving, is a very dark and abstruse thing, and it will be a very difficult matter to make unlearned men understand it: Nay I believe many great Scholars are yet strangers to what the School∣men say about the nature of it. 3. We may and ought to examine the sincerity of that love of God in us which is commanded Deut. 6.5. But it would be new Divinity, to say that we are to examine the terms of the immanent actions of divine love, whether they be in us or no: men may with some certainty re∣view, and reflect upon the habit of love, and the immanent actions thereof; but their reslex knowledg of the terms thereof, can be but conjectural. 2. The Love of which Dr. Hammond speaks, is, by the Defendant, such wherein there is exercised that freedome of the will, which is usually cal∣led a freedome of indifferency: But there is no freedome of the will ex∣ercised, in the supposed terms of the immanent action; for they presup∣posing the actions, are supposed to be necessary and unavoidable, and therefore the will hath no indifferency unto them: the will indeed is a free cause of the action of loving; but this action, if it be the cause of a terme, it is the natural and necessary cause thereof. 3. The Terme of the immanent action of loving is called love, saith the Defendant, for want of sufficient words: but to affirm this of that actual love which Dr. Hammond speaks of, is very very ridiculous. For of that love (saith he) love is predicated as a genus; and so in primo mod dicendi per se: the love therefore that Dr. Hammond meant, cannot be the terme of the immanent action of loving. But secondly, It is denyed also by many great both Philosophers and Divines, that there is any such terme as the immanent action of loving: and they say the same of all other immanent actions. Indeed our De∣fendant takes notice of no Diffenters, but my self and my poor Master Scheibler. But this bewrayes his gross ignorance in the School-men, ma∣ny of whom lead the way unto Scheibler into this his opinion, and go herein a great deale farther then he. Durand is very express for it, Lib. 1. dist. 27. q. 2. Capreolus l. 1. dist. 27. q. 2. quotes also Aureolus, Petrus de Pallude, Gerar. de Carmlo, as of the same judgment unto these I may add Scotus upon the same Dist. quaest. 3. and two Eminent Scotists, Philip. Faber Favntinus, lib. 1. disp. 21. and Reda l. 1. Controvers. 7. represent this to be the Common opinion of the followers of Scotus. Unto all these let me farther subjoyn Raphel Aversa Philos. tom. 2. q. 58. Sect. 3. And Franciscus bonae spei in lib. de animâ. Disp. 2. dub. 3. who mentions others of the same perswasion. Oviedo though he blame Cajetan, and other Thomists, for denying actual intellection to have a terme, because every action he thinks is productive of some terme or other, yet he thinks this opinion may be so interpreted, as to be drawn into a good sense; and that is done (he supposeth) by making the terme not to be really di∣stinct, but the same with actual intellection. Haec opinio jure ab omnibus
rejecta, si loquendi modum attemperaret, mea quidem sententia optime pos∣set defendi. Existimo enim tantum in modo loquendi discedere à sententiâ, quam poste à omnibus praeferam, asserente intellectionem consistere in quali∣tate immediatè per se-ipsam nullâ interjectâ actione à principio dimanaute, vel in actione identificatâ cum termino, quod sic ostendo: utraque opinio constituit intellectionem in entitate quadam immediatè ab intellectu di∣manane per suammet entitatem, ex vi cujus intellectûs in actu secundo con∣stituitur formaliter intelligens: Ergo tantum differunt hae duae opiniones, ex o quod una entitatem hanc essentialiter per suam entitatem ab intellectu dependentem, & nullum distinctum terminum respicientem vocat actionem sine termino; & altera andemmet entitatem vocat actionem um termino identificatam. Neutra nim barum opinionum novam formalitatem conce∣dit, vel negat, quam altera opinio diverso modo deendat. De anima Con∣trov. 6. punct. 1. S. 1. It were an easie matter to produce many other testi∣monies: But the matter must not be carried by the number of voices, but by the weight of Arguments. And therefore I shall next propound the Arguments on both sides. The Arguments for the Negative may be ranged into two sorts, the first prove that some immanent actions have no terms; the second, that no immanent actions have any terme. The 1. That some immanent actions have no terms. Cajetan, as it is said, determineth that intuitive intellections have no term and such are the Beatifical Vision of the Saints in Heaven, the Angels in∣tuitions of themselves. And the reason which he giveth is, Because the Objects of such intellections are per se present unto them, and intimately conjoyned with them. But omitting Cajetan, I shall insist onely upon the Arguments of Scheibter, which I referred unto in my refutation of Dr. Hammond's . The Defendant is pleased in derision to call him my Ma∣ster: But where the wit of the Sarcasme lieth, is best, if not onely known unto himself. If his meaning be, that I have no Metaphysicks but what I learn'd from him, unto this I shall make no Apologie: though he in his Epistle Dedicatory, vain gloriously boasteth of his Rhetorick, yet I am not so foolish as to say any thing of my Metaphysicks. But if he mean that Scheibler is but a poor and sorry Master, one that can teach me but little in Metaphysical Learning, a vulgar Author, one too low for Doctor H. to consult, pag. 26. One that first lighted his candle at the taper of Suarez, p. 119 I shall then refer the Reader unto Dr. Barlow his Epistle prefixed unto Scheibler's Metaphysicks, and by that the Reader will be satisfied touching the falshood, pride, and immodesty of this censure. But proceed we unto Scheiblers Argument. Metaph. lib. 2. cap. 10. n. 30. Quod non omnes actus immanntes habeant terminos, patet. Quia secùs omnes actus im∣manentes essent , sive effectivi. Per terminum enim nunc ille in∣telligitur qui per actionem producitur. At actio postquam lind relinquitur  est, sive effectrix. Absurdum autem est omnes actiones esse , ut saltem patet ex discrimine artis, & prudentiae apud Aristt.
l. 6. Ēthic. quae per agere & facere astinguuntur. Et confirma∣tur: quod nullus possit dari terminus, qui producatur per actiones aliquas immanentes. Quid enim producit, v. g. intellectio vel vi∣sio. Nihil hic dici specioè potest, quàm quod per istos actus produ∣catur notitia habitualis. Sed haec imprimis per accidens est ad actus illos, ut hic etiam fatetur Suarez d. l. alique. The Argument reduced unto form standeth thus. If every immanent action be productive of a term, or work, then every immanent action is poieticall or effective. But some immanent actions are not poietical or ef∣fective: Therefore some immanent actions are not productive of any term or work. The sequel of the Major may be confirmed from this, because  or effectio is nothing else but the production of some term or work. If it be objected that effection is properly onely in an external matter, efficere ea propriè dicimùr, quae extra edimus: Unto this you may have an answer in Scheibler's introduction to Logick, cap. 1. n. 33. where he sheweth this to be false. For there be, as he there declareth, internal as well as external effections, as the making of a Syllogism in the mind; and we may say the same of definitions, divisions, and propositions. Falsum est, inquit, quod dicitur: Ea tantum propriè effici, quae extra eduntur. Nam effectio est omnis ista operatio, ad quam opu sequitur, sive extra nos, sive intra nos sit; atque sic factio syllogismi, etsi in mente nostrâ enni formamus, est reverâ effectio. Probatur: omnis nostra erudita operatio est vel speculatio, vel praxis, vel  hoc est effectio. At factio Syllogismi non est speculatio, (haec enim tantum est secundum habitus speculativos.) Nec praxis, haec enim tantum fit per directionem rationis factam secundum prudentiam, vel virtutem moralem, Ergo est Effectio. With Scheibler all those concur, that make Ars to be the genus of Logick, for they say, that the effection, which is proper unto ars, may be, and often is in an internal, as well as in an external matter. So Doctor Saun∣derson in his first Appendix De usu Logicae pag. 309. Effectio, quae est propria artis operatio, non minùs est in materiâ internâ, quàm externa. Thus the Major is sufficiently fortified by comparison of Scheiblty's Metaphysicks, with his Logick. As for the Miner, Scheibler confirms it from the difference which
Aristot. 6. Ethic. makes betwixt prudentia and ars, which are there di∣stinguished by agere and facere or efficere. Prudentia est habitus cum re∣ctâ ratione activus. Ars est habitus cum rectâ ratione effectivus, or facti∣vus. Actions then strictly so called, moral actions, are not effections. But the Defendant says, that the sequel is very infirm, and most evi∣dently false, pag. 28. And why so I pray? Why first, 'tis not true of all transient actions, that their terms must remain after the action is ended, &c. And secondly, 'tis not true of all actions that are artificial, and so confessedly poietical, that their terms and work do remain after the action is past, as appears in the artificial actions of singing, and play∣ing on the Lute, and other musical Instruments: and this (saith he) is sufficient to prove the inconsequence of his argument, and the weak∣ness of whatsoever proof the Refuter shall draw from it. p. 29. Any rational by-stander must needs here wonder at the Defendants confidence, that I give it not another name. For all this nothing infrin∣geth the consequence of the forementioned Syllogisme: To manifest which, I shall reduce it unto a Categorical Syllogism, by due change of the Major. Every immanent action productive of a term or work is effective or poietical. But some immanent actions are not effective or poietical. Therefore some immanent actions are not productive of a term or work. Now, Sir, apply what you say unto the Major, and you will find that it no way opposeth it. There be (you say) some transient actions which have terms that are not permanent or lasting after the actions are ended; therefore every immanent action productive of a term is not effective or poietical. A most rare and excellent consequence, which follows à bacu∣lo ad angulum. And your next is of the like, that is, no force. There be some artifi∣cial actions which are confessedly poietical, whose terms or works do not remain after the actions are past: as appeareth in the artificial actions of singing, and playing on the Lute. Therefore every immanent action pro∣ductive of a term, is not effective or poietical. The Reader by this may see, that the Argument stands unshakeable in it self, notwithstanding all the opposition of this daring Defendant. But I perceive he catcheth at an incommodious expression, in his pro∣posal of the Argument, and in his Answer to the first reason of Suarez. In the Argument he saith, Actio post-quam aliud relinquitur, , est, sive effectrix. And in his Answer to the first Objection of Suarez, he saith, Non omnis causalitas est per mdum productionis propriè, & rige∣rosès per quam, sc. producatur aliquid post actionens remanens. From these passages I believe it is that our Defendant thinks that Scheibler's opinion is, that  or effection is onely such an action, whose term or work remains after the action it past and ended. Indeed if this were
Scheibler's opinion, there were good reason for the denial of the sequel of his Argument. But this opinion cannot reasonably be fastened on him. For the instance which he gives of an effection, in the preceding number, is the making of a Syllogism in the mind; and a Syllogism hath no exi∣stence in the mind after 'tis made, or longer then 'tis making. As for the two passages but now mentioned, a favourable interpretation may be made of them. A term or work may be said to remain after the action is past in order of nature, or in order of time: Now the term of immanent actions remain after their effection, in order of nature, not time. And that permansion or remaining may have such a sense, may be gathered from another place in Schiebler, lib. 1. Metaph. c.16. n.17. Ni∣hilominus si subtiliter intueamur hanc rem, videtur etiam in unico momento esse qualiscunque permansio. Momentum enim dicitur per defectum successi∣onis temporalis, unde in codem momento potest adhuc relinqui successio se∣cundum prius & posterius naturae. Veluti in codem momento simul sunt for∣ma, & res formata, ut sol, & illuminatio, sive lumen. Vide de his naturae instantibus distinctis, in codem momento. Conim. l. 4. Phys. cap. 14. q. 3. a. 2. Atque sic etiam relinquitur, in tali momento, successio qualiscunque, ut non sit prorsus repugnans, durationem & proinde permansionem tribuere enti instantanco. But our Defendant saith, that this of Scheibler is an utter impertinency unto the matter in hand. But now how these assertions (saith he) if all were granted [and these are two of these assertions, Actiones im∣manentes aliquae non habent terminum: Actio ut sic non dicit respectum ad terminum] can any ways advantage the Refuters present Argument, I leave any man to judge. For Scheibler expresly asserts, that as some immanent actions have no terms, so others of them have; and he proves it by an instance borrowed from Julius Scaliger against Cardan. Exercit. 307. sect. 28. & Exercit. 1. sect. 3. Now to prove that nulla actio immanens habet terminum (which must be the Refuters proposition, if he speak any thing to the purpose; (for how else will he prove that the immanent acts of love have no term by this medium?) by this as∣sertion of Scheibler, that speaks onely of some such, and proves the contrary of others, will be impossible, till he can shew us a new Mood and Figure to prove an universal by a particular. Here I must desire the Defendant to awake, and to consider, that I pro∣pounded an Objection, that omnis actio habet terminum, unto which I oppose Scheibler, asserting and proving that some immanent actions have no term. Now this particular negative proposition made good, Some im∣manent actions have no terms, is a full, home, and sufficient disproof of the universal proposition objected, Omnis actio habet terminum, because 'tis contradictory thereunto. For of contradictory Propositions, that which is true overthroweth the other, because 'tis impossible that both contra∣dictory propositions, should be both either true or false. But go we on unto a second fort of Arguments, the Arguments of those who hold that no immanent actions whatsoever have terms.
1. They all unanimously alledge the testimony of Aristotle, l. 9. Metaph. text. 16. Ubi distinguens actionem immanentem à transeunte, at illum distingui ab ista, quia haec habet aliquid operatum pe ipsum tanquam terminum, illa vero, scillcet immanens nullum habet operatum. The words of Aristotle by Kada are thus rendred. In quibus igitur aliud quippi∣am est, quod sit praeter usum corum, eorum actus in eo, quod efficitur est, qualis est aedificatio, atque actus texendi, illa enim in eo, quod aedifcatur, hic in eo, quod texitur inest. In quibus autem praeter actum non est aliud quicquam opus, in iis ipsis est ipse actus, nam visio in eo est sane, quod vi∣det, & contemplatio, in eo quod contemplatur, & vita in anima. I am not ignorant of the answers that Cajetan, Bannes, and Capreolus, give unto this testimony of Aristotle: but they are such gross evasions, as that I shall for reply onely refer unto Rada, and Faber Faventinus in the places above mentioned. But Suarez hath another answer, which I shall lay down, and briefly reply to. Ad primum ex testimonio Aristotelis dicitur, Aristotelis sententiam non esse, per has actiones immanentes nihil fieri; sed vel nibil fieri extra ipsum operantem, vel (quod magis existimo) nihil fieri, quod maneat transacta actione: & hoc modo ait, hujusmodi actionem consistere in ipso usu. Quomodo 1. Ethicorum, cap. 1. ait, In non∣nullis artibus operationes esse fines, & non aliquid per eas factum, ut in arte cytharizandi: quod necessario intelligendum est de termino facto, & permanente, quia manet post actionem ut supra declaravimus tractando de causa finali. Sic ergo dicitur, per actiones immanentes nihil factum relin∣qui, quia per illas nihil fit, quod ill is finitis maneat. Metaph. disp. 48. sect. 2. n. 20. The sum of this is, that the meaning of Aristotle is, that nothing is made, or produced by immanent actions, that remain after they are past and ended. But 1. There is nothing in Aristotle that gives the least countenance unto this interpretation: and if men may be allowed the liberty of de∣vising such senses of Authors for which there is no ground in them, it were no difficult matter to clude the most pregnant Authorities that can be al∣ledged. Secondly, If this were the meaning of Aristotle, then the difference of transient actions from immanent stands in this, that they are productive of a term or quality that remains after they are past of finished. But this cannot be the difference of transient actions from immanent; for I demand, whether it be predicated of transient actions per se, or per ac∣cidens. If it be predicated per accidens of transient actions, then the difference of them cannot consist therein; if it be praedicated per se of transient actions, then 'tis predicated of all transient actions, for à per se ad de omni valet consequentia. But 'tis not predicated of all transient actions, as is a little afterwards confessed by Suarez himself, concerning the acti∣ons of singing and playing on Musical Instruments, and therefore 'tis not predicated of transient actions per se, and consequently 'tis not the dif∣ference of them from immanent actions.
As for reasons to confirm the conclusion, most of them will serve which are brought to prove, that intellection hath no term. For 'tis ge∣nerally confessed, that there is, as to this particular, the same reason of it, and all other vital immanent actions. If then actual intellection pro∣duce no term, then neither is there any term produced by the acts of the senses of the sensitive appetite, or of the will. But now that intellection hath no term, no verbum mentis produced by it, Scotus proves by several reasons; two of which I shall propound as managed by In lib. controv. Rada, because he urgeth them with a great deal of perspicuity. Primò si verbum esset terminus productus per intellectionem, impossibile esset nos intelligere intel∣lectionem ipsam, quin simul intelliger. mus aliquem terminum per ipsam produci (praesertim cum ex Divo Tho. p. p. q. 27. a. 1. de ratione intrinsec intellectionis sit terminus productus su verbum ibi; im ait, quod intelli∣gens eo ipso quod intelligit producit in scipso aliquid) sicut impossibile est nos intelligere calefactionem, quin simul intelligamus calorem per ipsam pro∣duci, tanquam jus terminum: Consequens tamen est falsum, nam experi∣entia constat, nos intelligere intellectionem, cum tamen non recordemur, quod aliquid per ipsam producatur: Ergo verbum mentis non est terminus per intellectionem productus. Probatur sequela Majoris (Caetera enim patent) quia si intellectio haberet tanquam terminum proprium verbum ment is, di∣ceret ordinem essentialem, & intrinsecum ad verbum, sicut calefactio ad calorem per ipsam productum, ergo non posset intelligi sine ordine ad ver∣bum, sicut nec calefactio sine ordine ad calorem, quia est talis ordo ei in∣trinsecus, & essentialis. If there were any word or term, produced by intellection, it would be impossible to understand or conceive the action of intellection, but we must withal conceive this term produ∣ced thereby. But now the consequent is false, for 'tis manifest by ex∣perience, that we conceive and apprehend the act of intellection, when we have no thought of any word or term produced thereby, and therefore there is no such term. The sequel of the Major is thus proved: because if intellection had such a term, it would carry an essential and intrinsical order thereunto, as calefaction does unto heat, dealbation unto whiteness: and therefore it could not be conceived or understood, without order unto it, even as 'tis impossible to conceive calefaction without order unto heat, &c. be∣cause such order is intrinsecal and essential unto it, and therefore it can∣not be abstracted therefrom. The Argument mutatis mutandis may be applied unto the immanent actions of the Will, and conclude that they also have no term produced by them: for if they have any such term, it would be impossible to conceive them without order and reference thereunto: But 'tis very possible to conceive the immanent actions of the will, and not to think of any terms produced by them; and for this I may appeal unto the bosomes of all men; for their experience will tell them, that they frequently review the actions of their wills, when yet they have no reflection upon any term produced by them.
A second reason, Intesteto est as  piae llectae, l∣tinsaque ejus perfectio (ut ai Aristotles none Metaphysicorum ubi supra, & 1. Ethie. c. 9.) ergo nihil producitur per eam. Probatur consequentia: quia jam ille terminus productus esset ulterior, & per consequens ipsa non esst actus ultimus. Intellection is the ultimate or utmost act of the in∣tellective power (as Aristotle saith in both his Metaphysicks and Ethicks) and therefore nothing is produced thereby: The consequence is proved, because if there were any term produced by intellection, this supposed terme would be beyond, or farther then intellection; and consequent∣ly intellection would not be the utmost or ultimate act of the under∣standing. This argument too may be sadled upon the mmanent and eli∣cite actions of the will: Volition is the utmost act of the will, and the utmost perfection thereof; and therefore there is no terme produced thereby, for if there were, that terme would be a perfection beyond it. Unto these two reasons out of Scotus, I shall add three more out of Raphael Aversa Philos. tom. 2. q. 58. S. 3. to prove, that intellection does not produce verbum mentis, as a terme distinguished therefrom. The first is the uselesness of this terme or quality; no use, office or pur∣pose can be assigned for which it should serve. 1. It is said, That it is for the assimilation of the understanding unto the object known. But this assimilation being only in esse inten∣tionali & representative, that is, in esse cognito, is sufficiently made by the action of the understanding it self, though no terme be produced by it; for when an object is known by the understanding, 'tis o ipso represented unto the understanding. 2. It is said by others, that 'tis necessary to exhibit the object pre∣sent unto the understanding. But this presence required of the object in the understanding is only intentional and objective; and tis ob∣jectively present when 'tis actually the object of the action of intellecti∣on, and therefore the action of intellection renders the object intentio∣nally present, though we suppose no terme to follow it. 3. Tertia ratio quam Cajet. Ferrar. & Ca∣preol. addunt; ad hoc ut in ip∣so verbo tan∣quam in imagine expressâ ipse intellectus intueatur objectum, ita ut actus cognitionis imme∣diatè attingat verbum, & mediante verbo Objectum, &c. Neque haec ratio potest admitti. Primo enim non cognosci cognitionis terminum eodem ipso actu, patet ab experientiâ. Quià du consideramus, & contemplamur aliquod Objectum, constat nos non percipere aliud, quàm illud ipsum de quo cogitamus, nullamque se nobis offerre imaginem mediantem. Quod si intueremur ullam imaginem, realiter ab objecto di∣stinctam, id nos non lateret, & sine dubio evidenter discerneremus, nos intneri talem ima∣gine, sicut evidenter discernimus, quicquid aliud ex parte objecti cogitemus. It is said, That 'tis an image, wherein the understanding be∣holds the object that it understands. But now if it have this office, then, whensoever an object is understood, the image thereof must be understood also. But now this is false, for we consider and contemplate objects, and yet take no notice of these feigned images of them: Nay,
such images are hidden from the most of men, none but those that have swallowed this dictate, omnis actio habet terminum, are privy to them: and what sense or feeling (I mean knowledg and apprehensi∣on) they have of them, passeth my sense and imagination. A second reason that I shall urge out of Aversa, is, that those that aver that intellection bath a terme, which they call verbum mentis, do also affirm that this terme is propter intellectionem; Now non est ponendus terminus propter actionem, sed actio propter terminum: Non enm quiquam est ad hoc ut producatur, sed productio exercetur ad hoc, ut res producta ponatur. Non bene ergo, supposita jam intellectione, quae dicitur esse cognitio objecti, ponitur verbum propter illam, tanquam terminus propter actionem: sed po∣tiùs, si intellectio esset actio productiva verbi, deberet ipsa esse, & exer∣ceri propter verbum. Cùm ergo principaliter & per se constet, dari intel∣lectionem quae est cognitio objecti, censendum potius esset ipsam intellecti∣onem fieriper aliàm actionem, quam intellectionem esse actionem per quam fiat alius terminus. A third reason is, because the terme of an action, is more noble and excellent then the action it self: but suppose there be a terme of intelle∣ction, it cannot be more noble then intellection. The Beatifical vision is an action of the understanding, but suppose it have a terme, yet it con∣not be surmounted thereby in perfection; for in it (as the Thomists deter∣mino) stands our happiness, and our utmost end. Now if one intellection be not productive of a term, then to be productive of a term, doth not agree per se and effentially unto intellection: for that which agreeth un∣to intellection per se, agreeth unto every intellection, because à per se ad de omni valet consequentia. But for the further strengthning of this Argu∣ment, I shall quote the words of Aversa himself. Semper terminus est no∣bilior, & praestantior actione, ut habetur ex Aristot. 1. Ethic. c. 1. & ex re ipsâ notum est. Sed certè intellectio quâ anima constituitur formaliter cgnscens, & comprebendens objectum, non potest dici nobilitate inferior aio verbo, quod tanquam terminus ejus inducitur. Et Aristot. 10. Ethic. 6. 7, & . Docuit felicitatem debere esse praestantissimam perfectionem in ammâ, & simul determinavit esse contemplationem, id est intellectionem. Non ergo potest addi aliud verbum, quod sit terminus intellectionis. Et planè repugnat, ad aliqui ex adversariis respondent, in actibus immanentibus action esse praestantiorem termins, & terminum esse propter actionem. Id eni manifestè est contra rationem & ordinem intrinscecum actions, & ter∣mini. Thus you see that intellèction hath no term; and if that hath none, then neither have the immanent aictons of the Will any. But Oviedo hath a distinct and peculiar Argument concerning the acti∣on of love, De anima controv. 6. p. 1. sect. 3. In amore, de quo eadem est ratio ac d intellctione, spiale instituitur argumentum ad probandum in actione confistere, ex quo infermus talem actionem carere termino, quia in  tota ratio antols sita est. Argumentum is a precedit cognitio in omium sententiâ praerequitur ad amrem, sed cognitio tantùm requiritur ad actio∣nem
voluntatis: Ergo in has actione consistit ratio amoris. Prob minorem, cognitio ex parte intellectûs requirit, ut vluntas valeat se determinare ad objectum amplectendum: ergo requirstur ad determinatienem voluntatis; d determinatio voluntatis consistit in actione, per quam ex actu primo re∣ducitur ad actum secundum: Ergo cogniti requiitur ad actionem volun∣tatis: Ergo in actione consistit amor, ad quem cognitio praerequiritur. Hac etiam ratione ptimè assignatur ratio formalis amoris, cui primariò & in se compet, esse exercitium libertatis, quia hoc exercitium in actione con∣sisit, ergo ad hoc ut amor sit exercitium libertatis, in ipsa actione constitui debeat, per quam vluntas constituatur amans, quae cùm perse ipsam hunc praestet essctum, nlo alio indiget termino, cui nullum superest munus, quod exerecat respectu libertatis, quae per actionem formalitèr amans constitui∣tur. What he saith may be thus briefly summed up, Knowledg is neces∣sarily pre-required (he means immediately) unto actual love. But 'tis only pre-required immediately, unto the action of loving, and not unto any terme of such action: and therefore the act of love consists wholly in the action, and not in the term. It may here perhaps be objected, That all these Authors which I have mentioned, differ from me; for they make the immanent actions of the understanding and will, to be only qualities, and not predicamental acti∣ons: they are only (say they) Grammatical actions; that is, they are wordd and expressed, after the manner of actions: they are actions (saith Rada) non absolutè & simpliciter, sed secundum quid & similitu∣dinarie. I confess this difference betwixt their opinion and mine: but this dif∣ference is not material, for it nothing advantageth the adversary, nor prejudiceth me; and the arguments may be considered so abstractly, as that they may very well be applyed unto my opinion. Ovied tels us of some Thomists, who agree with me in making intel∣lection, (and the fame may be said of Volition) to consist in an action not having any terme. But he goes to reconcile them with his own opinion; and against this reconciliation, he propounds the same Objection, that I now mentioned; viz. that those Thomists which he speaks of, held intellection to be a proper action, whereas he made it only a quality. Unto this he answers, That the dif∣ference is not material, but only modo loquendi. His words I shall insert at large, because I judge them very pertinent unto our present: purpose: Dices in re differre has opiniones, quia Thomistarum opinio asserit, illam ntitatem esse pram actionem, altera vero opinio formalitatem qualitatis in illa actione cognoscit. Contra, formalitas qualitatis ab hac opinione in qualitate constituta, in co debet consistere, quod haec entitas tali modo afficiat subjectum, illudque formaliter constituat in∣telligens, & informatum propria objecti representatione, & imagine; ed in opinione asserente illam centitatem, in qua intellectio constirui∣tur esse puram actionem, codem modo assicit subjectum, illudque cadem ratione constituit intelligons, & informat tanquam representa∣tio,
& imago objecti: Ergo in re Thomistarum opinio concedit in hac intellectione, quam appellat puram actionem, formalitatem il∣lam, quam altera opinio qualitatem appellat: Ergo in nullo roi dif∣ferunt, sed tanquam in loquendi modo. Si dicas, rationem qualitatis non consistere in modo respioiendi objectum, peto. âte, quae sit for∣malitas qualitatis, quam constituit opinio, quae docet intellectione esse actionem cum termino identificatam? Et cum illam dederis, an∣dem assignabo in entitato Thomistica, quam actionem sine termino il∣lius auctores vocant. Concludo, has opiniones tantum in modo lo∣quendi differre. Oviedo loc. praedict. Before I proceed farther, I shall crave the Readers patience, to digress in a few lines, for the examination of a passage in the Defendant, p. 119. I having proved, that love is not a genus equally comprehending habitual and actual love as its two species, because they are in several predica∣ments: Habitual love in the predicament of quality, and actual in the predicament of action. In the next place I forestalled an objection, that might be made from the opinion of divers groat Philosoghers and School∣men, that mak all 'Immaient acts, and consequently all inward acts of love, to be qualities (they are, say they) only Grammatical actions, not Metaphysical actions in the predicament of action. For refutation of this opinion, I offered unto Dr. Hammonds consideration two arguments out of Sbelble, unto which let us hear what the Defendant saith. Defendant. And have you not told us news indeed? You should have brought us word that the Sun shines at Rbodes, or when it is in its Zenith. There is nothing more generally received in the Schools then that is: And I dare say searce any Philosopher or School-man of any note, has for these hundred years almost delivered any thing to the contrary. Why then urge you Scheibler and his reasons, as if he, being a late wtor, had discovored a truth which former Authors were mistaken in? &c. Here is strange considence, indeed down-right impudence; for 'tis as clear as the Sun, that many Mdern, both Philosophers and School-men, have delivered much to the contrary: and this is well known unto all that have read any thing almost in either Philosaphers or School-men, But you will be ready to but face the matter, and thorefore to consound your , confice, I shall refer unto souse Philosophers and School-men that are of good here, and that have sourished within theso hun∣dred , who  terminis affm, That immanent acts are only quali∣ties, and nor , proper and predicatutal actions. Reda that was print∣ed 1620. super ▪ c. . Controv. 7. p. 121, 122, 123, 124 125, 126. Faber , licensed April  1612. In  Rapael Aver∣s,  Controv puke. 1. Pouclus, part 3.  p. 499.500, &c.
Unto these testimonies, it were very easie to add many others, b these are sufficient to satisfie the Reader, that you neither know nor care what you say herein. But to return from this digression. In the next place I shall add ex abundanti, that divers great Philoso∣phers both Protestants and Papists maintain that immanents acts are pro∣perly predicamental actions, and that yet they are not productive of any terms, that are qualities. Amongst Protestant writers, I may justly reckon the generality of Logicians; for these qualities have no place in their prediamental ta∣bles; and if they had thought that there had been such qualities, the omission of them had been an inexcusable defect in their Logicks, be∣cause supposing, though not granting, such qualities, they would have been as numerous as any other entities whatsoever, and there is nothing can be said to exclude them from the Predicaments. As for Papists Suarez confesseth that there are many Thomists of this opinion, Metaph. disp. 48: Sect. 2. n. 5. Secunda sententla negat esse de intrinsecâ essentiâ actioni ut sit, habere terminum, qui per cam fiat, ad quem dicat respectum, de essentia (inquam) actionis quatenus est proprium quoddam genus summum ab aliis distincum, quia sub eo ge∣nere quaedam sunt actiones habentes terminum, aliae non. Habentes terminum sunt actiones transcuntes, in quo haec sententia convenit cum praecedenti. Quae verò non habent terminum sunt actiones im∣manentes, de quibus longè diverso modo sentit haec sententia, quàm praecedens: Existimat enim has actiones immanentes esse proprissi∣mas actiones de genere & praedicamento actionis, esse tamen puras acti∣ones, quae nullum terminum intrinsecum, per se loquendo, producunt, sed immediatè per sese attingut sua objecta. Ita sentiunt de actioni∣bus immanentibus multi ex discipulis Divi Thomae: nam licèt pculi∣ariter tribuant intellectioni, quod producat verbum tanquam intrinse∣cum effectum, tamen ne similem aut proportionalem effectum tribu∣unt omni actioni immanenti, nam in actionibus sensuum, & utrius∣que appetitus id ferè omnes negant. Neque inter se conveniunt in attribuendo illo effectu omni intellectionis, nam quidam solùm prop∣ter absentiam objecti in quibusdam intellectionibus illum effectum requirunt. Nec denique videntur ponere illud verbum per modum proprii termini intellectionis ut actionis producentis, quia docent ver∣bum & intellectionem esse res omninò distinctas, quod repugnat acti∣oni & proprio, & termino intrinseco, quià actio solùm potest esse modus illius rei quae est terminus, non re realiter distincta, us su∣pra probatum est disputando de causalitate effectivâ. Est ergò o∣rum sententia, actionem immanentem ut sic perse nihil producere, quod sit proprius terminus ejus, sed esse puram actionem, quamvis interdum ex illâ aliquis effectus resultet. Ita sentiunt citati Tho∣mistae & alii Moderni Interpretes D. Thom. in 1. parte, q. 27, a. r. & Javel. 9. Metaph. q. 16. Ubi non numerat alios effectus actionum immanentium, nisi habitus, ad quos potius comparantur ut principia
agendi, quàm ut actiones: in quo satis declarat, illas actiones non habere terminos intrinsecos propriè dictos. Suarez propounds three grounds they lay down for this Opinion, two are common unto them with others, but the third, I believe, is proper and peculiar unto them. Tertio potest adjungi haec ratio, qula hae actiones non sunt à natura institutae ad aliquid producendum, neque ut agens per illas communicet suum esse, sed ut per eas potentiae sese uniant objectis suis: Ergo sine causâ tribuitur his actionibus quod aliquid producant. These actions are by Nature instituted for this end, that by them their Powers may unite themselves with their Ob∣jects: but this union may be performed without production of any term that is a quality, and therefore these actions have no term that is a quality. Whereas Suarez saith in answer, that the union is sufficiently Me∣tapborical, this no ways weakens, but rather fortifieth the Argument: For unto a Metaphorical union of powers unto their objects, what need is there that there should be produced de novo, real and physical qualities. But to say nothing further of these Thomists, I shall trouble the Rea∣der but with one Author more, and 'tis a very late one, Franciscus Bonae Spei: That which I conceive in him to be most pertinent, I shall here transcribe, in lib. de animâ, disp. 11. dub. 3. Dico 3. intellectio formali∣ter consistit in actione sie termino realiter à se distincto. 1. Contra Mo∣linam 1. parte, & Conimbricenses, Scotum, Lessium, Hurtadum, Fon∣secam, Gonzalem, &c. docentes illam quidem sormalitèr consistere in acti∣one, sed habere terminum realiter à se distinctum. 2. Contra Vasquez 1. part. Suarez etiam 1. parte. Valentiam, Salas, Arriagam, Poncium post Scotam in primum distinct. 3. &c. docentes illam consistere in sola qualitate per actionem realiter distinctam producta. Complutenses verò nostros disp. 21. q. 3. in sola qualitate, producta siae actione realiter distincta. Probatur 1. Ex Philosopho. 9. Met. textu 19. apud Poncium hic, ubi aperte docet, visionis, speculationis, vitae, &c. non esse aliud quoddam opus praeter terminum, sen actionem. Et 10. Ethic, c. 3. Nec enim virtutis operationes, id est, intellectus, & voluntatis opera∣tiones, qualitates sunt. Ergo, &c. Proatur 2. quia alioq intellectio formaliter consisteret, vel in acti∣one ut praecsâ à qualitate realitèr, à se distinciâ vel in ipsâ qualitate ut praecisà ab actione realiter dist netâ, sed neatium dici potest: Ergo, &c. Probatur minor, pro prima part. 1. quia si impertinens esset quali∣tas ad intellectionem, ipsâque ablata & per impossile manente olâ actione (cui tantum subistendae ferviret) remaneret intllectio, unde illa qualitas esset omnino ad constituendum intelligentem formalitèr superslua. Probatur Minor pro 1. parte 2. quia non est ratio, cur in ipsa acti∣ut
praecis à qualitte realiter à se distincts, formaliter consistat intellectio, & non in qualitate ut praecisa, &c. Probatur Minor pro 1. parte 3. quia illa actio ut sic praecisa, solùm facit folmaliter producent & productum: Ergo, &c. Probatur Minor pro 2. parte 1. quia intellectio est verbale quod∣dam, quod semper impotat formaliter aliquam actionem, five ab intrinscco five ab extrinsco, ut per omnia discurrenti patebit; nam visio facit videre, intellctio intelligere, volitio velle, quae omnia important actionem aliqam. Probatur Mino pro 3. parte 2. in actione praecisè viventis ut vi∣véntis salvati potest ratio vitae five accus vitalis, ut patebit discurrenti per omnes definitiones actus vitalis supra disput. 3. dub. 2. allatas, quidni & in tali accione praecisè salvari posset ratio vitae, seu actus vi∣talis viventis ut talis viventis? Unde non est ratio, cur in ipsa qualitatè ut praecisa ab actione realiter distincta consistat intellectio, & non in actione, ut praecisa, &c. Ergo, &c. Hinc patet ad fundamentum P. Comptoni. What this Author speaks of intellection, may be extended unto voli∣tion, and indeed unto all the vital immanent acts. Unto what hath been said out of Philosophers and School-men, I shall add the testimony of other rational and knowing men, that never so much as heard of the Question, Whether all immanent actions are pro∣ductive of terms that are qualities? These are likely to be the most im∣partial and unprejudiced Judges in the Controversie, and let them be asked, Whether they think, that they produce some quality within them∣selves, every time that they see, hear, &c. understand, will, or desire  and I am verily perswaded, that very few will give their Votes for the affirmative; they will much doubt whether there be any such things in Na∣ture. For they will think it very strange, that they should be the Parents of such numberless and even infinite swarms of beings, and yet not be in the least degree privy to their production. But this argument may be thought but probable, and therefore I shall conclude with one of a convincing nature. And 'tis that which I urged unto Dr. Hammond, Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate. Now that there is no necessity of asserting these terms of immanent actions, I shall evince by answering all the Arguments which the Defendant brings to prove them, 1. He refers unto the reasons of Suarez, p. 31, 32. Secundum hos actus, scilicet immanentes, verè dicimur quales, nempe boni aut ma∣li, scientes, amantes, irati, &c. Item hi actus sunt formae ultimo actu∣antes ac perficientes ipsas substantias, quibus insunt; ergo convenit illis communis ratio qualitatis supra assignata. The first Argument is taken from the denomination by immanent acts. But in this there's petitio principii: for 'tis no less doubtfull and contro∣verted, An secundum hos actus immanentes verè dicamur quales? as, An
actus ipsi sint qualitates? And Suarez could not be ignorant, but that the latter would be denied, as well as the former: for he thinks one to be as unknown as the other, and therefore he doth very unlike him∣self, onely to suppose it, whereas he should have proved it. That he thinks one to be as unknown as the other, will easily appear by the ex∣ception that he takes at this Definition of Quality, Qualitas est quâ quales quidam dcuntur. Quae desinitio, inquit, liceteâ ratione es∣sentialis videatur, quod dtur per habitudinem ad effectum formalem, quem omnis fma essentialitèr respicit: tamen quod ad nos spectar, aequè obscura nobis manet propria ratio qualitatis. Sicut si definere∣tur quantitas esse  qua dicimur quanti, licet confuse indicaretur ectus & deneminatio quantitatis, tamen aequè ignotum maneret quid in nobis sit esse quantum, vel quid conferat quantitas rei quantae. Ita ergo in praesenti aequè ignotum manet quid sit esse quale, seu quis peculiaris modus affection is per hanc vocem explicetur. Percontanti enim quid sit quale, bene etiam respendebimus esse id quod qualitate affectum, vel constitutum est: tameisi alia via supponatur ut notum, quid sit qualitas, tota res aequè ignota relinquetur. Metaph. disp. 42. S. 1. n. 1. This general answer may suffice. But I shall say something unto every particular. First saith he, Secundum hos actus verè dicimur boni & mali. These acts denominate us to be good and evil. For Answer, Immanent acts denominate us to be good and evil, not qualitativè, but effectivè, or activè; they denominate us not to be good or evi habitually, but to do good or evil actually. And such a denomina∣tion may be from a meer action, that doth not include a quality as its term, though it presuppose a habit as its principle, from which it floweth. Secondly, Secundum hos actus dicimur scientes, amantes, 'irati, &c. But is it not every way as doubtfull and controverted, whether these concretes, sciens, amans, &c. be qualitative denominations, as whether these abstracts, actualis scientia, actualis amor, actus sciendi, actus amandi, be qualities? Nay, doth not Suarez himself, in the place but now cited, make it to be a most obscure and uncertain matter. Adde inquit, interdum obscurissimum esse discernere an res denominetur qualis, neene, aliquâ denominatione, ut dicitur homo amans, aut videns: incertum autem est, an illa denominatio sit qualis, vel alterius rationis, &c. The second Argument is taken from their actuating and perfect∣ing the substances in which they are: Item hi actus sunt formae ultimò actuantes ac perficientes ipsas substantias, quibus in∣sunt: Ergo Convenit illis communis ratio qualitatis supra assig∣nata. The foundation of this Argument is this Proposition, that Every form which ultimately actuates and perfects the substance in which it is, is a
quality. But Suarez could not but expect, that this Proposition would be denied by his Adversaries. 1. They will say, that suppose immanent acts be pure and meer acti∣ons, no ways including qualities, yet even so they are second acts, for every action is a second act: and as second acts they actuate their active powers, and his mediantibus they actuate the substances in which they are. 2. They will say, that meer and pure actions may be said to perfect the substances in which they are. And for this they think they have Aristotle on their side, for he defines man's happiness to consist in action; . Batitudo est operatio animae rationatis se∣cundum virtutem optinim, & perfectissimam in vita perfecta. Now it cannot be denyed, but that mans happiness being his supreme end, doth perfect him. It may be said, that Suarez intimates a confirmation of the conse∣quence of his Ethymem, from his own definition of quality. Item hi actus sunt formae ultimò actuantes, ac perficientes ipsas substantia, qui∣bus insunt; ergò convenit illis communis ratio qualitatis supra assignata. Now the definition of quality that he meaneth is, I suppose, in these words, Qualitas ego videtur esse accidens quoddam absolutum, ad∣junctum substantiae creatae, ad complementum perfectionis ejus, tàm in existendo, quàm in agendo. Disp 42. S. 1. n. 5. Now this definition is refuted by my Master Scheibler; and though it be too low for Dr. Ham∣mond to consult such a vulgar Author as Scheibler, yet I hope I may refer the Defendant to him. But I shall refer (as he saith of Suarez) not so much unto his Authority, as unto his Reason. His words are as followeth. Haec definitio similiter mala est. Aut enim illae partiçulae: in essendo, vel operando, intelliguntur conjunctim, five copulativè, aut disjun∣ctivè. Hoc quidem modo, ut quod alterutrum illorum praestat, dica∣tur qualitas. Illo vero modo, ut intelligatur id solùm esse qualitas, quod utrunque facit, hoc est, quod perficit substantiam in esse, & ope∣rarì. Utroque tamen modo vitiosa est definitio. Nam si qualitas sit, divisim loquendo, quod substantiam perficit, vel in agendo, vel in essendo: sie etiam locus, tempus, &c. erunt qualitates, quae in exi∣stendo substantiam perficiunt: Item actio, quia ipsa forma est, undè substantia agens denominatur: sin verò qualitas sit demum, quae utrunique praestet, tùm multe qualitates, non erunt qualitates. Mul∣tae enim qualitates nullam actionem exercent: velutiex habitibus sa∣nitas, si ea sit habitus, ex potentiis natualibus, potentiae passivae: plurimae ex qualitatibus partialibus, quae ipsae in unive sum, si quid operentur, est id secundario solùm, & quasi eventualiter. Ac den {que} etiam sigura, quippe quae activa non est, non erit qualitas fuit autem de re plenius supra cap. 6. tit. . art. 3. punct. 1.
Another Argument we have, pag. 121. As there cannot be an ef∣ficient cause without its causality: so impossible it is there should be any causality, where nothing is produced and caused by that cau∣sality. As it is impossible there should be an active power, without respect to the act that terminates the power: so impossible it is, there should be any action, without some product to terminate the a∣ction. This argument is in Suarez, Metaphys. disp. 48. Sect. 2. n. 16. and cited by Scheibler, Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 10. n. 31. Est ratio à priori, quia actio ut actio, si sit vera, ac propria nihil aliud est, quam productio aut effectio, aut causalitas efficientis causae: sed impossibile est vel mente concipere veram productionem, quin per eam aliquid sit productum, vel causalita∣tem actualem sine re aliqua causata: Ergo impossibile est etiam intelligere actionem sine termino. Unto this argument you have an answer in my Ma∣ster Scheibler, n. 32. Respondeo, omnem actionem esse causalitatem; sed non omnis causalitas est per modum productionis propriè, & rigorosè, per quam scilicet producatur aliquid post actionem remanens. Nam & ipsae actiones dicentur effectus praecisè & in se, quia habent esse dependens ali∣unde, ut fatetur Suarez Disp. 18. Met. sect. 10. n. 8. Ex quo etiam apparet: nullam in eo repugnantiam esse, si aliqua sit causalitas, neque tamen sit aliqua res causata, distincta caufalitate, quia causalitas ipsa potest esse boc ipsum causatum. There is but one expression in the answer lyable to exception, post actionem remanens. Now leave out that, or else rectifie it, by adding ordine naturae, vel temporis, and the answer is good, and remains unshaken by any thing that you say. The same objection you have in Franciscus Bonae spei, de animd, disp. 11. dub. 3. resol. 3. applyed unto into intellection in particular: unto which his answer is, That some actions are productive of terms that are really undistinguished from them. The words of both the objection and answer, are as followeth. Objicies, actio est formaliter fieri termini, sive modus, quo aliquid fit, ergo intellectio est aliquid realiter distinctum à suo termino. In forma, Responde, distinguendo antecedens, actio est formaliter fie∣ri termini realiter à se distincti, vel indistincti, concedo antec, necessari realiter distincti, nego antecedens. Sic patet ad consequentiam. For further clearing this answer of Franciscus Bonae Spei; I shall de∣sire the Reader to take notice Quod eadem numere faul∣tas simul habe∣at vim agendi, & sit principi∣um reipiendi actionem quam elicit, non potest cum aliqua probabilitate dubitari, supposita ve∣ra dectrina, de actibus immanentibus, qui recipiuntur, ipn esdem potenti is, à quibus eliciunter, five ad eam effectionem indigeant aliquo alio co-rincipio, ut specie vel bjecto aut ali simili, five non. Nam quidquam in hoc sentiatur, verum nibilominus est eandem facultatem scundum rem esse simul potentiam activam & passivam respectu ejusdem a∣ctus, & respecta sui ipsius, quatenus cundem actum & recipit, & elicit. Et ratio est quia illamet qualita, quatenus hbet actualem persectionem talis speciei, potest esse vir∣tus eminenter, vel virtute continen alium actum, & potest esse sormaliter actuabilis per cundem actum, ut in praedicta disputatione 18 latius diximus, Nec in hac occurrit nova difficultar, quae ibi tractata non sit. Suarez Metaph. Disputat 43. Sect. 2. n. 14. that a faculty or power (verbi gratiâ, the understanding) is in several regards or considerations both active and passive. It is active, as it produceth the action of understanding, and
passive, as it receives and sustains it: answerably the immanent act of this power or faculty, intellection, may undergo the consideration of both an action and a term. 1. The consideration of an action, as it actuates the understanding, as an active power, as it is from it, and produced by it. 2. The consideration of a term, as it actuates the understanding as a passive power, as it is received and seated in it. But it may be Objected, That by this, intellection should be a term unto it self. But this cannot be, for then it should be both before and after it self, and that is a thing utterly impossible. For answer, It is impossible for a thing to be both before and after it self, à parte rei, really and indeed: but 'tis no repugnancy, for a thing to be before and after it self, in regard of several considerations; a thing may have several formalities and considerations; and one of them may an∣tecede the other, signo or momtato rationis. Thus the consideration of tho production of intellection by the understanding, precedes the reception or inhaesion of it in the understanding. By this you see then, that if immanent actions be productive of a term, it is of a term that is distinguished from them only ratione racieinatâ, and therefore they are not properly productions, but conceived and considered after the manner of productions. But perhaps there may be another Argument, p. 116 in these words And give me leave to tell you, That it will be impossible to make it good, till first you shall demonstrate against Suarez and the best Me∣taphysicians and Philosophers, that actie, ut sic, non dicit essentia∣lens respectum ad terminum, and that there can be any motion whether instantaneous, or successive, and not from a terminns à quo, to a terminus ad quem, and give us a solid answer to their Argu∣ments. If there be here any argument at all, thus it stands reduced to form. Every motion, whether instantaneous or successive, proceeds from a ter∣minus à quo, to a terminus ad quem. But now every action is motion: Therefore every action preceeds à termin à quo ad terminum ad quem.
1 The Minor is false, unlesse motion be taken largely and im∣properly, and if it be thus taken, then the Major is denied; in∣deed the Major affirms thus, the , the thing in controversy: so that in the argument there is petitio principi; for tis every way as doubtful and controverted, whether mo∣tion, taking the word in a large and improper sense, hath terminum ad quem effectivum, as whether every action hath. For motion in this large and improper sense, is the equivalent of action, I said, signanter terminum effectivum, for there is no doubt, but all actions and motions have an objective terme, such a terme as is their object: the question is, whether every action, and motion in the large and improper sense of the word, have an ef∣fective terme; such a terme as is its product or effect? And this being the onely thing in question, is onely affirmed, and not con∣firmed. But the Defendant not onely presseth us with reasons, but also burdens us with the Authority of Suarez, Ruvio, Smiglesius, &c. p. 30. 31, 11, 6, 11, 7. Unto these it were very easy to adde many other, and as easy to oppose as many on our side, but in points controverted amongst School-men, it signifieth very little to muster up the Abettors of the several Opinions; for the matter must be carried not by mul∣titude of Voices, but by weight of Arguments. It is not therefore ma∣terial what Suarez, Smiglesius, or Ruvio say; unless withal they prove what they say; having then answered all the Arguments that the Defendant produceth, either of his own or of others, there is no reason why we should stay any longer upon the con∣sideration of any of his witnesses. But yet before I part from them, I cannot but professe my won∣der how Scotus comes to be reckoned in the number of them. Faber Faventinus, and Rada represent him to be of a contrary Opinion, and they being his professed Champions, are likely to be as well read in him as Dr. Creed. But let Scotus be consulted, and he will speak another language concerning Intellection, and what he saith of that, may be extended to all immanent vitall actions. Nec est verbum mentis teminus aliquis productus per intellectionem, quia intellectio non est actio productiva alicujus termini tunc enim impossibile esset eam intel∣ligere, et non esse termini, sicut impossibile est intelligere calefactionem esse, et non esse calorcin, ad quem fit calfactio non est autem impossibile intelli∣gere intellectonem in se, non intelligendo, qud sit alicujus termini, ut pro∣ducti per ipsam. But our subtile Doctor was but a man, and there∣fore 'twas possible for him to contradict himself; but whether he hath done so, will appear by examination of the passages that our Desendant quotes out of him, p. 30. And now if our Refuter shall think fit to lodge any strength upon Scheiblers confirmation, I shall refer
him for an answer to Scotus, l. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. 6. where he shall find this largely discussed, that though habitual knowledge be not the in∣trinsicke terme of these Operations, sed quasi consequens, & extrinsecus, and that operationes hujusmodi possunt intelligi, & esse sine habitu, ur patet in habentibus habitum intensissimum, ut in beatis, and in Christ in respect of habitual Grace which was alwayes in him in its utmost height possible; yet they cannot possibly be, or conceived to be without actual knowledge, the quality that terminates them. To this purpose also may the same Scotus be seen, l. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. ult s. 130. & 1 Sent. d. 27. q. 3. p. 347. ad 3. ex edit cavelli. As for the first place, l. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. 6. s. 32. indeed the former part of the words are in Scotus, that a habit, viz. of know∣ledge, is not the Intrinsick Term of immanent Operations, but only their Extrinsick, and Accidental Terme. But now as for the lat∣ter words, they, that is, Immanent Operations cannot possibly be con∣ceived to be without Actual knowledge, the quality that terminates them: these are not found in Scotus, but are a bold Supply, that I say not Forgery, of our Defendant, Scotus there propounds three questions concerning Intellection, and the like immanent Operations. The first, which belongs only to our present purpose, is cuiusmdi entitas sit intellectio, vlitio, et hujusmodi operationes immanentes? and his Resolution is, that they are onely Qualities. This he proveth by removal from them of all other kinds of being, and because there is most doubt, whether they be not actions, de praedicanento actionis, he cheifly insists upon that, and the cheif reason which he brings, is, because they are not productive of any terme; he thought Im∣manent Operations not to be Predicamental Actions; and herein, I consess, he differs from mine opinion, and so he doth also from yours. But pray , mark whats the reason, for which he exclu∣des them from the Predicament of Action? It is because they have no term. With what face then do you affirm that Scotus sayes, That Immanent Operations cannot be without a quality that terminates them. But because you are likely to outface the matter, I shall in ert Scotus his words at large: First, he hath, N. 31. this passage, Praeterea actinis est aliqualis terminus realis, hic autem praeter intellectionem? non est aliqualis terminus, &c. And again afterwards, N. 32. Quod intellectio non sit actio, vel passi, pob sic actio, & passi, sunt ali∣cuus termini accipientis esse per ipsas sed operationes immanentes sunt ultimi termini, quibus nihil accipit esse, &c. Marke you me that Sir, Quod si dicos, qued cum per actus habitus generantur, habitus est ter∣mnus dictaum operationum, & sic sunt actio, vel passio. Ad argumentum dicendum, quod actio illa, quae proprie est ad termi∣num, non potest intelligi sine termin: sed operationes hujusmodi possunt intelligi sine habitu & esse, ut patet in habentibus habitum intentissi∣mum, ut in Beatis: Ergo proprie non dicitur terminus quasi intrinsecus,
sed quasi consequens, & accidentalis cum ergo hujusmodi operationes aliquid sint & probatum est, quod non sunt substantia, nec relatie, nec actio, aut passio, neque quantitas, vel aliquid extrinsecus adventitium, relin uitur, quod sint in genere qualitatis, &c. The Reader is by this time, I suppose, convinced of your unworthy falsification of Scotus, for he saith no such thing as you say; ay, he saith the quite contrary, Operationes Immanentes sunt ultimi ter∣mini, quibus nihil accipit esse. This one instance is sufficient, to give a taste of your fidelity and honesty in quoting Authors. Of it I shall make this Ʋse, that for the future I shall little trouble either my self or the Reader, with Examination of your Autho∣rities; for you have in so shameless, gross, and palpable amanner, sal∣sified Scetus, as that you deserve but little Credit in any Testimo∣nies that you shall alledge. In the very same question afterwards: N. 35. he expresly denyeth, that Immanent Operations have any Terme, which receives any being by them. And in this particular he sayes they are unlike, proper and praedicamental actions. Tertia prepricas actionis proprie sumptae, est quod est circa aliquem term∣num, ad quem terminatur, qui esse accipit per eum idem intelligt de passione. Operationes ergo immanentes assimilantur actioni & passioni in prima conditione, et secunda, non autem in tertia, que est com∣pletiva. A second place is lib. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. ult. p. 130. n. 11. Is est alia conditio ulterior, videlicet, quod istae formae de ratione sui transeant in aliquid, ut in terminum, & hoc sive illud aliud sit intra operans five extra, non curo non est enim intelligibile, quod sic intel∣lectio, & volitio, et quod non sit alicuus term ni hoc atem conveni actioni propriè dicts, ut transeat in aliquid, ut ia terminum, propter istas igitur duas conditiones concurretes in istis firmis, dicuntur istae formae esse actus secundi, cum vere sint fmae manentes. The words are not quoted, but I suppose these are those the Defendant meaneth. But 'tis plain that Sectus speaks of an Objective, not Effective Terme. 1. From a comparison of this place, with other passages, that plainly, and expresly deny Immanent Actions to have Termes. 2 From a following passage in the same page, Nunc autm ali∣quis actus intellectionis vel volitionis, potest esse ejusdem rationis, licet non sit alicujus termini producti: Here he supposeth it possible for Intellection and Volition not to have any Terme produced by them; And therefore, when he sayeth in the place objected, Non est enim intelligibile, qud sit intellectio, et volitio, et quod non sit alicujus trmini. Here by the Terme he means onely the Object, and not the Product of Intellection and Volition. 3 From the Coherence of the words, with the foregoing:
Scotus his design is to prove, that Immanent Operations, though they be not proper actions, de genere actionis, may yet be called Second Acts, because in two respects they resemble Actions: 1 Because of their perpetual dependance upon their causes. 2 Because they have a tendency unto a Terme. Now this must needs be understood of an Objective Terme onely; for if it were understood of an Effective Terme, it Would make them to be, by Sous his Opinion, proper and Praedicamental Actions, which is a thing that he constantly denyeth. 4 That the word Tem, which Intellection (saith Scotus) re∣gards, signifieth onely an Objective Terme; the Defendant, if he had not been in haste, might have gathered from the Margent, where we have these words: Intellectio, & volitio dicunter Actio∣nes, quia dependent continuè a suis causis, et quia tendunt in aliquid ut in terminum attingentiae. Here terminus attingentiae is distinguished plainly, a termino efficientiae. This distinction of the Terme of Intellection, is plainly insinuated by Rada, a great follower of Scotus, controv. Theol. p. 1. controv. 7. p. 124. 125. Intellectio, inquit, habet terminum quem actualliter respicit, scilicet, objectum, &c. Sed non est productiva sui termini nec per ipsam tanquam per actionem aliquid producitur, &c. But go we on to a third place in Scotus, lib. 1. sent. d. 27. q. 3. p. 347. ad 3. This place the Defendant quotes again, p. 32. and there he inserts the very words of Scotus. Howsoever, saith he, Though the Refuter thinks fit to refer the Doctor, because he is a Critick, to learn some Metaphisicks from Sheibler; yet I will be so civil to him, because he is a School-man, to refer him for his learning in this point, to one of the subtlest of thse Doctors. And let Scotus be the man, it is, l. 1. sent. d. 27. q. 3. f. 19. d tertium. The place is short, but full, and not taken notice of by Suarez; and the words are these: Ad tertium, concedo quod Ntitia est proles & vere genita, sed preductio illa non est actualis intellectio, quia, ut dictum est supra, actualis intellctio non est actio de genere actnis, sed est qualitas nata terminare talem actionem, quae significatur per hic quod est dicere, vel in communi per hoc quod est elicere; non igitur verbum est aliquid productum actione, quae est intellectio, quia ipsa intellectio non est pro∣ductiva alicujus, sed ipsa est producta actione quae est degenere actionis, sicut dictum est supra. He here referrs to the place quoed by Suarez, 1 Sent. d. 3. q. 6. p. 110. Col. 2. n. 31. & ib. q. ult. p. 130. ex edit Cavel, where he has very solidly proved it. For answer, Scotus in this very question delivers (as you have seen) another Doctrine; and 'tis very strange that he should so forget himself, as to contradict it so soon: But the truth is, that in this pastage, there is not to much as one word or syllable sound∣ing for the Defendants purpose, viz. That all Immanent Actions
are productive of Termes: Nay, here is something that expresly contradicts this tenet of the Defendant; and 'tis that intellection which the Defendant cannot deny to be an Immanent Action, is not productive of any Term. For which reason he makes it a Quality, and denies it to be an Action, De genere actionis, non igitur verbum est aliquid productum actione, quae est intellectio quia ipsa intellectio non est productiva alicujus, &c. Indeed he makes dicere to be productive of intellection as its Term, but the Defendant should take notice, that dicere is by Scotus a Transient, and not an Im∣manent Action; an Explication of which may be seen in Omnis actio habens termi∣num productum per ipsam di∣citur, transiers ab Aristotele, non quia tran∣seat inexternam materiam, sed quia transit in terminum, sive ille terminus maneat in agen∣te, five transeat in exteram ma∣teriam. De q re videndus est Antonius Tromb. to in sua Metaphisica. Controv. Theol. pa 1. Controv. 7. p. 125. Ra∣da. There is, I believe, now no impartial and unprejudiced Reader, but must needs confess, that Heat and Rage of Opposition, hath here blinded the Defendants judgement: For else, how is it possible that he should thus mistake, and misunderstand a plain place in Scotus? It is very probable that the Defendant may judge Me uncapable of understanding Scotus; but he hath no reason to think so contempti∣bly of all his other Readers, into whose hands his book may come. For doubtless many of them are as able to reach the meaning of Scotus, as himself: hereby a Guesse may be given at the great Abilities of his Admirers, who swallow such stuff as this. Here, before I passe on, I shall briefly sum up the State of the Question, A omnis actio habeat terminum. For Explication of the Termes, I. Actions are either Immanent or Transient. II. The Terme of Actions is either only Objective, or else Effective also. An Effective Terme is either Extrinsick, and Accidentall, or else Intrinsick, and Essentiall, unto which an Action carrieth an Intrin∣sicall and Essentiall Respect. These Distinctions thus premied: I shall lay down three things which are granted, and uncontroverted on both sides. 1. That all Transient Actions have not only an Objective, but also an Effective Terme; a Term which they produce. 2. That all Immanent Actiens, have an Objective Terme, an Object unto which they tend, which is called Terminus attingen∣tiae. 3. That some Immanent Actions have an Effective, Extrinsick, and Accidentall Terme, viz. Habits. I call it an Extrinsick and Accidentall Term, because 'tis Accidental unto Immanent Actions, to be pro∣ductive of such a Terme: For there are many Immanent Actions that produce no such Terme. The matter that is controverted, is, Whether all Immanent
Actions have an Effective, Intrinsick and Essentiall Terme? This is denyed, no Immanent Actions have such a Terme, for respect unto such a Terme is not Intrinsick and Essentiall unto such Immanent Actions: And the Reasn is, because they may be abstracted from such a respct. Now nothing can be abstracted from that which is Intrinsick and Essential to it. Having thus proved that these pretended arms of Immanent Actions are excluded enumero entium, it is needless to enquire under what head of being they are ranged. Yea, but our Defendant tells us, page 37. that Suarez makes them to be dispsitions. Doth he so? What then I pray? Is he not our professed Adver∣sary in this Question? And therefore is it any Newes, or wonder, that he dissents from us? The truth is, having affirmed that there are such things, it concerns him to place them somewhere or othe, and he could think of no such convenient place to ledge them, as amongst Dispositions. Yea, but the Defend. p. 37, 38. acquaints us with a Reason, which Suarez hath, why he makes them dipositious: For, dispositio is fa∣cile mbilis, and so are the Termes of Immanent Actions: They have no fixed and permanent, but a mvable being, by reason of their de∣pendance on the actuall influx of their Vital Powers. For answer. 1. Though every disposition be facile mobilis, yet eve∣ry thing that is facile mobilis that hath a moveable being, is not a Dis∣position, as is apparent from predicament all Actions, and such Relati∣ons as have transient foundations. Secondly, this Reason weighs little with us; for we deny these pretended Termes to have any being at all: And if they have no being at all, then consequently no moveable being. This reason were of some Validity upon Presupposition, that these pretended Termes were Qualities: But we deny them to be Entities, and say that they have no being, but a fancied one, in the imaginations of a Party, or Faction of School-men; and for this Affirmation, I have laid down as I suppose, sufficient ground. But suppose the Terms of some Immanent Actions may be called dis∣positions, yet there is no reason for calling so the pretended Termes of the Actions of Divine Love in our blessed Saviour: Because they dispse unto nothing; and dispositio disponit ad aliquid; neither the Name nor Nature of Disposition agreeth unto them; and therefore why should they be called dispositions? For conclusion of this discourse; I shall adventure to give my Guss at the Reason which led some of the School-men to devise these Termes of Immanent Actions. It was, I suppose, to support, and clear their mnstus, and groundles, Fictions that they have concerning the
doctrine of the Sacred Trinity, which they vent upon the first of the Sentences, Dist. 27. and 32. And on the fust of Summes, q. 34. and 37. Where they have usually these bold inquiries An verbum divinum producatur peractum intelligendi? &c. An Spiritus Sanctus producatur per actum diligendi? By these daring and Presumptus Disputes, they have expsed the Mistery of the Trinity unto a great deal of scandal, and scorn amongst Socinians and other An∣ti-Trinitarians. Before I Passe on to the furth, and last Evasion of Dr. Creed: I shall from what hath been said, in impugning the Pretended Termes of Immanent Actions, inferre the impertinency of all that he faith, p. 72.73.74.75.76.77.115.116.117.118. In defence of this pro-Position Position in Dr. Hammond, the word Love is a Genus equally compre∣hending the two Species, habitual and actual Love, or the Acts of Love. For Dr. H. by actual Love, or the Act of Love, understands, as hath been shewn, the Action of Loving, and not (as the Defend▪ most vainly pretends) any quality Produced by that Action, which is its Term and Product. His Proposition then, notwithstanding all Doctor Creeds De∣fence, is still chargeable with that absurdity which I objected against it, viz. that it makes Love as a Genus equally to comprehend, as Species, primo divesa, things put in several Predicaments. For habi∣tual Love is in the Predicament of Quality, and the action of loving in the Predicament of Action. For further disproof of Dr. H. his preposition, I shall add what I said touching the habit of Love, and the sincere and cordial expressions thereof. No one word can, as a Genus, equally comprehend the effi∣cient, and the effect, viz. as species; but the habit of Love is the efficient, and the acts of Love are the effects thereof, (the habit of Love (saith the Defend.) effectively concurres with the Will, to the production of the inward Acts of Love: therefore Love, as a Genus, doth not comprehend habitual Love, and actual Love, as Species. The Major of this Syllgisme, the Defendant will say is most ridiculous∣ly false, as appeares by what he saith to the like Syllogisme, that I framed concerning the habit of Love, and the Expressions thereof. His Answer is very remarkable, for the transcendent and matchless, both ignorance and impudence of it; and therefore I shall crave the Readers patience for a while to consider it.
Dr. CREED. YOur third (to begin with that, for I shall not tie my self to your Me∣thod) is most ridiculously falfe. You say (not to trouble our selves about the Mod and Figure (3) No one word can as a Gerus equally comprehend the efficient, and the effect: The habit of Love is the efficient cause, and the sincere and cordial expressions of Love are the effect: Therefore Love is not predicated of them equally as a Genus. Your Major, Sir, your Major; by all meanes have a care of your Ma∣jor. For what think yu, Sir, of all Ʋnivocal prductions? When Fire produces Fire, and Corn brings forth Corn; when a Man begets a Man, and one Heat makes another; does not one and the same word as a Genus comprehend the efficient and the effect? And is it not in these a certain maxime, tha, Qualis est causatalis est effectus; such as the Cause is in nature, such also is the effect? And I hpe you will think it lawfull for things of the same nature to be comprehended under the same Genus: Nay, are not these distinguished from equivocal productions, because in these, Ef∣fectum est ejusdem ratinis cum efficiente; but in the other, efficiens non convenit cum effectu in eadem forma, sed eminenter illam cntinet? Nay, does not your own Scheibler, as well as Suarez (both whom you so seriously commend to the Doctor's perusall) tell you that Causa uni∣voca, est quae prducit effectum similem in specie? But methinks, Sir, if (since your more noble, more serious employments in the Stu∣dy and writing of Scholasticall and Practicall Divinity) you had thought sit to neglect such Vulgar Authors, and to forget the Com∣mon Notions and Maximes delivered by them; yet you should at least have observed, this in your reading of Aquinas, that in his Sums does frequently deliver this doctrine, and makes very good use of it. And now, Sir, I hope you will think it lawfull for things of the same Nature to be comprehended under the same Genus; For where, I pray, will you rank the several individualls of the self-same Species (for such are all Ʋnivocall Causes, and Effects, as is plain
from Sense and Experience) if not under the same Genus? I might prove the grosse and palpable falshood of your Major. Sir, by divers instances drawn from equivocall productions, where the Cause and Effect must be placed in the same predicament, and con∣sequently under the same remote Genus at least, which is sufficient to destroy your Major. When the Sun and Stars produce Gold and Silver, and Brasse, and other Mineralls, when they produce Sones of all sorts and kinds in the Bowlls of the Earth, are not the cause and the effect, at least as species subalternae, placed under the sine Genus of substantia Corporea? When an Asse begets a Mule, or a Man produces Wormes and Vermin in his Head and Entrailes; and when a Woman brings for mnstrous births instead of Lgitimate issues, as Serpnts, Moles and Froggs, and other such like (of which a∣mong Physitians there are may true stories) I pray, Sir, must not the cause, and effect be both ranged under the same immediate Genus proximum, which is Animal? So when light produces Hea, are not the Cause and the Effect both put in the same Predicament under the same Genus of Patible Qualities? To keep closer to the business more immediately in controversie. The habit of Love effective∣ly concurrs with the will of to the production of the inward Acts of Love, and yet I say that love as a Gnas is Equally predicated of the habit, and the inwad Acts of Love, as has already been demenstrated, and may in due time b further proved, notwith∣standing any thing you have, or can say to the contrary. And this is abundantly more than sufficient to shew the fashod of your Major, when you say that no one word can as a Genus (whether proximum or remotum, smmum, or subaleum) (for you bs∣lutely deliver it) equally comprehend the Efficient and the Ef∣fect. The Major which you say Is most ridiculously false, and against which you make so horrible an Out-cry, I shall fortifie by three reasons. The 1. Is because Genus Analogum non praedicatur aequaliter dae speciebus. But now Analogy, viz. Attributionis Intrisecae, consists in dependency, from which Effective dependency is not excluded; as is maintained by the generality of the ancient Thomists, by my Master, Scheibler. Metaph. lib. 2. cap. 1. art. 3. cap. 3. tit. 5. art. 1. And by Scheibler's Master, Suarez, M∣taphys. di p. 28. s. 3. disp. 32. s. 2. n. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. By e∣nus a Frier Ca melite, Discep. in Univers. Logic. p. 113. Mar∣tinus Exercit. Metaph. p. 521. And by divers others as you may see in Stalio Reg. Philosoph. p. 397. And upon this account is it, that Ens is made to be Gerus Analogum to Ens creatum, and increatum, to substantia and accidens. And I have read in
the Manuscript of a Great Philosopher of the Ʋniversity of Ox∣ford, that for this reason Qualias is geus Analogum, because of the Dependency that Habis hath upon Potentia. I know this is to be understood with many Limitaions, with which I shall not now Cumber the Reader: and besides, I am not Ignorant that 'tis Opposed by many Moderne Philo∣sphers. But however it hath so Great and Learned Patrons, and they brng so good Reaons for this their Opinion, as that no modest man will Censure it to be a mst Ridiculus Proposi∣tion. Seondly, No word that is predicated of things Secundum prias, et psterius, is predicated of them equally, as genus univcum of its species, for the equality that distinguisheth genus univocum from analogium, Pro hac Sententia vi∣dtur militare, qud habet Aistotles in cap. de dis simul e dicens quae ex edm gnere in di∣viione sibi in∣vicem opponuntur, esse natura simul. Atqui species immediate unum genus respi∣cientes, ex codem genere in divisione sibi in vicem opponuntur, ut albedo & ni∣gredo, in quas color dividitur. Sunt igitur natura simul. Quod si natura simul iunt, nn potest una ab altera dependere in participando genere. Stallio. Reg. bilosoph. p. 397. is aeualitas ordinis, not dignitatis. But what∣soever is predicated of the Efficient Cause and the Effect, is predicated secundum prius and psterius: Erg nothing that is predicatd of the Efficient and the Effect, is predicated of them equally as genus un vicum. Thirdly, Species totius generis univoci, are simul natura: but the Efficient Cause and the Effect, are not simul natura: And therefore they are not species of the same genus. And thus have I sufficiently provided for my Major; as for your Arguments against it, they had need be very strong, and convincing, for otherwise indifferent Readers will judge your Vociferation against it, being with so full a mouth, to be Frontlesse. But let them be what they will, let us hear them.
Dr. CREED. For what think you, Sir, of all univocal Productions? When Fire produces Fire, and Corn brings forth Corn, when a Man begets a Ma, and one heat make another; does not one and the same word, as a genus, comprehend the Efficient and the Effect? When I Read this passage, I was about, I confesse, with a just indignation to throw away your book, as unworthy mine, or any other Schollars further perusal. I desire to have low and humble thoughts of my self, but yet I cannot think him a dompetent Adversary for me to Encounter, who is so Igno∣rant in Logick, as to say, that Man and Fire are genera: I propounded the Question to a Fresh ma, an  sit genus? and he answered no, and readily confirmed his Negative thus: Nulla species infima est genus: hom est species infima; Ergo homo non est genus. I make no doubt but that our Defen∣dant hath great abilities in other learning, but I shall never acknowledge him to be a Philosopher, or School-man, that thus trespasseth against the very A. B. C. of Logick. I shall give him this friendly advice for the future, that before his next at∣tempt in Scholastical Divinity, he first con over Smith, Breer∣wood, Sanderson, or some other such compndium of Logick, that so he may be able to avoid such mistakes as this, which will Expose him unto the Derision of every Boy. If any shall Object in the Defendants behalf, that the Ramifts hold that every species is genus, and that individuum is sp∣cies infima, as may be seen in Scheiblers Tpicks: c. 28. n. 77, 78, &c. usque ad 85. This yet can be no stating hole for the De∣fendant, for this proposition, every genus is predicated equally of
its species, is a Maxime of the Aristotelians, delivered by them long before ever Ramus saw the light; and there is no doubt can be made that they take genus and species in a Peripattical, and not Ramistical sene. If it be said again secondly, that even Dr. Sanderson in his Logick, l. 3. c. 24. confesseth that Topically species infima is genus. Why this can as little availe the Dfendant as the former shift, for tis undeniable that we speak of genus as praedicabile, and the Maxime, Genus paedicatur aequaliter de speciebus, is delivered by Pphyy in his Isagge, where he handles the Doctrine of the Predicables. In a third place it may be replyed, that in that Interrogation of our Defendant, does not one and the same word as a ge∣nus comprehend the Efficient and the Effect? He is not to be Interpreted of any of the words imediately preceding Fire, Corne, a Man, Heat, but of some words that are to be un∣derstd and Supplied as Elementum, which as a genus compre∣hends the Fire producing, and the Fire produced: and planta, or corpus animatum, which in like manner is predicated of the Corne bringing forth, and the Corne brought forth as a genus: and ani∣mal, which is predicated in the same manner as a genus of the man bgetting, and the man begotten: and qualitas patibilis prima, which in the same way is predicated of the Heat making, and the Heat made. But First, what Reason have I to make this Supply in your Words? Secondly, We cannot Supply, or understand these words, Ele∣mentum, Corpus animatum, animal qualitas patibilis prima: For Ele∣mentum is predicated of the Fire producing, and the Fire produ∣ced; Corpus animatum, of the Corn bringing forth, and the Corne brought forth, &c. and so Animal of the Father, and the Son, onely as of Individualls: whereas the comprehension, and predication of the Genus, that we speak of, is onely concerning its Species. Unto all this I shall adde Ex abundanti, out of Irenaeus, a Modern Thomist, that which will answer your Objection. And 'tis the more pertinent, because it speaks of one of your Instances, viz. Fires producing Fire; Cave tamen putes quamlibet dependentiam facere nostram Analogiam, nam ignis generat ignem, qui ambo un voce conveniunt in natura ignis, quia cum illa depen∣dentia
Physica non reperitur dicta inaequalits: Vel melius ista de∣pendentia est solum quoad actualem existentiam, seu positionem ex∣tra causas, non autem quoad participationem secundum essenti, seu esse objectivum si enim quaeratur, utrum ignis B. genitus ab igne A. et ab eo dependens, ut generetur, et existat, ab eodem dependeat essentialiter spectatus, non considerata existentia? di∣cendum erit, quod non quia ignis A. non est principium igneitatis, altoqui esset principium sui ipsius. At vero accidens dependet a sub∣stantia essentialiter, ut sit ens. Qud fiet evidens comparanti singula hoc modo. Leo non minus erit animal, eti si homo sit impossibilis: At accidens non erit ens, si substantia sit impossi∣bilis; cum enim accidens sit entis ens, cujus erit ens, si nulla sit substantia? ergo aliter accidens participat ens, quam lo participet animal. Nec refert, quod sublato hommine tollere∣tur leo, quatenus rationale, & irrationale sunt relata, ac pro∣inde simul sunt natura: Nam hic non considerantur ut relata, sed precise ut Animalia. Discept. in Univers. Logic, p. 113. In the next place you tell us great news, of the difference betwixt Ʋnivocall and Equivocall productions, a thing that is known, and obvious unto every Puisny. But you spend many lines about it, and very gravely confirm it, by the testimo∣nies of Scheibler and Svarez: Then you intimate that I forget this Notion, and therefore referre me for it to Aquinas his Summes. But what ground, nay colour, have you to say that I forget it? The truth is, you have not so much as a shadow for such an imputation; but to Caluminate, is grown to be so familiar with you, that 'tis even incorporated into your discourse. But what inferre you from all this? Why forsooth, that Individuals, whereof one is the Efficient, and the other the Effect, may be compren∣ded under the same word as a Genus. But what is all this to the pur∣pose? Is it not clear, that my Major is to be understood concerning the comprehension of Species by the Genus? Indeed no Reader, but such a Dis-ingenuous Caviller, as Dr. Creed will understand me, concerning the comprehension of Individualls. This supply of Species is no subter-suge, but may easily be gathered from the coherence of my words. For the Pro∣position which I undertake to prove, is that Love as a Genus, doth not comprehend as Species, the Expressions of Love, equally with the Habit.
But let us see next whether you have any better success with your Equivcall productions. First, Most of your instances are of Genus remotum; whereas Dr. Han. and I, are all along to be understood of Gnus procimum, and the Maxime of Porphyy, which is the foundation of all this argumentation, hath the same sense too. But you next bring instances, wherein the Cause and the Effect, are both ranged under the same immediate Genus proxi∣mum, which is Animal. When an Asse begets a Mule, or a Man produces Womes and Vermine in his Head and Entrailes, and when a Woman brings forth Mnstruous birth instead of Legitimate Issues, at Serpents, Mles, and Freggs, and other such lich like (of which among Physians there are many true Stories) I pray, Sir, must not the Cause and Effect be both ranged under the same imme∣diate Genus proximum, which is Animal? But fiest, that Animal is a Genus proximum unto an Asse and Mule, unto Wormes and Vermin, unto Sepents, Moles and Froggs, is a grosse falshood, easily discernable by every one that knowes any thing almost in the Predicament of Substance. For such a one cannot be ignorant, that bum intervenes be∣twixt all these and Animal: Aristle in the 7th of his Meraph. text. 28. saith, That the Gerus proximum of Mulus, and Equus wants a Name. And the same may be said touching the Ge∣nus proximum of an Asse and a Mule. Secoudly, All these instances are impertinent, because they are of such Efficients and Effects as are per accidens: Whereas 'tis undenyable, that I am to be understood of such only as are perse: For so at ehabituall and actuall Love, as also the sincere and cordiall Expressions thereof. Thus in generall. But to take a particular Survey of the severals: I. When an Asse begets a Mule, it is a Monstrous and Un∣naturall production, and Monstra fiunt per accidens, as not being intended by particular nature. II. That a Man produceth Wormes and Vermin in his Head and Entrailes, as an efficient, is new, strange, and false Phy∣losophy▪ For,
1. No particular cause Suarez Me∣taph. disp. 18. s. 2. n. 26. A∣versa Philos. tom. 2. p. 238.239.240.241. Compton Carlton disp. 25. Phys. s. 3. n. 7, 8. p. 304. can be the Efficient, viz. Principall, of any Essentiall forme specifically different from its own. I may concurre there∣unto dispositive, disponendo, ut praeparano uerin, nec  cam praebnd, or applicative applicando acti passivis, non effective, immediate attingendo producti∣onem ipsius formae. Nay, 'tis a received Opinion, that no Angell can produce any substantiall forme, but only as causa applicans: and therefore the production of Animals out of putrid matter, is generally resolved to be by a Ʋniversall Cause, either the Heavenly Bdyes, or the first cause. But 2. That man is not the Efficient of Wormes and Vermine in his Head, &c. The Reader may see in Poncius. p. 3. pag. 22, 23. Causalitatm effectivam respectu vermium, qui produ∣cuntur ab aliis causis extrisecis: Contra hines habent activiratem respectu humoris, seu substantiae il∣lius, ex qua preducuntur vermes: Ergo possunt dici habere activitatem respectu vermium; nec enim alia ratione maes habent activitam, aut dicuntur principia productiva aliorum hommum, nisi quatenus habent acti∣tatem productivam seminis ex quo funt. Respondetur, negando corsequentiam ad cujue proba∣tionem dicitur, quod non prptere precise home dica∣tur esse pincipium alterius kminis exeo, quod produ∣cat, semen ex quo fit alter home, sed etiam, qua illud semen habet aliquam activitatem in ordine ad preducendum alm illum hminem. III. A Woman may bring forth monstrous births instead of legitimate issues, as Serpents, Moles, Froggs: but that she is the Efficient of them, viz. Pese is a palpable un∣truth; and that for the same reason, that man is denyed to produce Wormes, and other Vermin in his Head and Entrailes. Unto this let me add, that the Effective dependanc, which I speak of, is Necessary, and in some sense Essentiall. But the Dependance of these monstrous births upon a Woman, is per accidens, Fortuitous and Casuall; and so most impertinently al∣ledged.
Now let us summe up the State of my Major Prposition, and thus it runs. No word as a Genus proximum doth equally compre∣hend as its Species, the Efficient per se and the Effect. Unto this, now, let us see what a brave and gallant opposition you make. You say. 1. That one word as species infima doth comprehend the Efficient and the Effect. 2. That one word as Genus doth comprehend, viz. Me∣diately, Individualls, whereof one is the Efficient, and the o∣ther the Effect. 3. That one word, as Genus remtum doth comprehend equal∣ly as species, the Efficient and the Effect. 4. That one word as Genus doth equally comprehend the Efficient per accidens, and the Effect. Now none of all this doth in the least degree impugne my Major Proposition, as meant by me: And therefore I might here justly desire you to sit down, and sadly to consider, how groundlesse and soolish your Tragical Exclamation is against my Major Proposition. But I appeale from you and your ignorant and partiall Admirers, unto the Learned and Ʋnprejudiced Rea∣ders. I go on unto the Defendants fourth and last Shist. There was, saith he, in Christ, a twofeld actuall Love of God, The one agreeing to him as Comprehnsor, being a sequell of the Bentisick Vision; this he grants to be alwayes equally full and intense. But this love, saith he, was necessary, and there∣fore not meritorious. There is therefore belonging unto Christ another Actuall Love of God, as he was Viatr, which was free, and by which he merited: and this sprang from the infused knowledge of God, and the infused habit of Charity. And this▪ Love was more intense at one time then another, or one Act of it was more intense then another Act: and this distin∣ction he prosecutes very largely, pag. 68. 244. 288.290. 333, 334, 33, 330, 336, 339, 344, &c. Usque ad 357, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 372, 522, 524, 525, &c. Usque ad 540, 622, 624, 626, 627, 628, 629, 635, 636, 637. 1. This Answer I saw in Suarez, but could not foresee that Dr. Ham. would make use of it. Indeed I had no ground to think that he would: for it cannot do him the least service, as I shall shew anon; and therefore I had no Reason to trouble the Reader with any mention of it.
2. Where you read this distinction in Suarez, you might have also seen an Objection against it, which might have deterred you from using it, if you had consiered how unsatisfying uarez his answers are therunto. The Objection is, that two accidents only numerically distinguished, cannot be at the same time in the same subject. But now Christs beatifick love of God, and that which springs from the insused habit of charity, are distin∣guished only in number: And therefore they could not be at the same time in Christ. The first Proosition, that two accidents cannot be at the same time in the same subject, is a proposition that you your self acknowledge, p 196.256. to say the contrary, you say is a gsse absurdity, the salshood of which, reaso it self a the vey first proposal is able to discover. But it may be said, that Saarez hath unto this Objction two answers. Bt how unsatisfying they are, will appear by the examination of them. The fist is, that thse two loves differ, not only numerically, but also specifically: Sd hoe altero ex duabus modis probabilibus dissolvi potst. Primus est, dceno actus illos differre sp, quia actus amoris beatifici ten∣dit in Deam propter onnem pefectionm, & rationem, propter quam amabilis est: nam toa ill a per  bata dist ntè, & clarè vidtur, & pro∣ponitur voluntati; at vero amo, qui consequitur jcientiam insusam, vel tan∣tum fertar in Dum sub speciali aliqâ ratione bon, ut justitiae, misericor∣diae, &c. vl solum sub rationae summi boni, qusi confusè cognita, & non distincte popofita: quatenus in se coninet omnem boit atem & perfectionem, Qae diversitas satis esse videtur ad diversitatem specificam illorum actuam. In certiam part. Thom. tom 1. disp. 49. f. 2. p. 622. Unto this I shall reply in the words of Becas Sum. Theol. Scholast. part. 3. trast. 1. cap. 22. qaest. 5. having averred against Cajetan and Ca∣preolus, that actus chattatis, in via, and in patria do not disserre specie; he confirms his conclusion from the testimonie of Aquinas, and from rea∣son. Trtia Col . Actus charitatis non solum potest esse tam inensus in via, quam in patria, sed tiam tam perfectus in essentiali perfectione ob∣jectiva. Est contra Cajetanum, & cprcolum, qui doent actum charitat is in patria dffe re specie ab actu charitatis in via, & essontialiter persecti∣orem esse.  est, qua alter versatur cirea Deum clare visum, alter cir∣ea Dim obscare cogniam. Sout ergo clara visio, & obseura cognitio dif∣ferunt spcie, ita etiam amo viae, & amor patriae, qui in illis fundantur. Sed concusio nostra est D. Thom. in 2 quaest. 67. art. 6. ad 2. ubi asserit di∣lectionem sumre suam spciem, & essintiam, non ex cognitione, sed ex re cognita: ac proide in via & i patia esse andm spcie charitatem, quia licet cognitio sit diversa, tamen res cognita est eadem. Et confirmatur, quia diversitas essentialis in actibus voluntatis, praesertim quando conveniunt in genere proximo, debet swni ex diversitate objecti formalis. At in amore viae, & patriae, est idem objectum formale, nempe infinita benitas, qua Deus in se infinite bonus est: ergo in illis actibus non est diversitas essentialis. The second answer is that duo accidentia solo numero distincta possunt salte supernatur aliter esse in eadem subjecto, &c.
But this supernatural providence of God, is not to be fled unto without a man be necessitated thereunto by some cogent argument and if you can find any such argument in Suarez, good leave may you have to manage it unto your best advantage. All the argument that I can find in Suarez, is, that he thinks it fit to extend the merit of Christ unto his love of God. Now his beatifick love of God, was not meritoricus, (saith he) becse 'twas not free, but neces∣sary: and therefore he thinks there must be another love of God in Christ assigned, which was free, and so capable of meriting. This argument you also propound very often. Unto this arguhere are in the School-men several answers, of which you take no notice: for which concealment I believe no probable reason can be rendred, but your late and small acquaintance with the School-men. 1. Some hold that Christ did merit by the beatifick act of his love of God, as terminated unto God himself. Suarez, in the place by you cited, quoteth for this opinion, Altisiodorensis, Gabril, Stus and Capreolus, un∣to whom you may s in Vasquez added, Almain, Occam Major. You referre the Reade, to a short passage of Scotus, in the place cited by Sua∣rez, which proveth nothing denied by me. But I shall now referre you to another paslage in the same place, which expressely contradicts you; for there Scotus declareth at large how Christ merited by his beaufice love of God, as he was Comprehensor, Dico (inquit) propter argumntm, quod Chistus meruit secuadum portionem superiorem & secundum omn actum ejus. Hoetamen est difficile tenere propter alios beato, qui tunc videntur posse mereri in infinitum: proo autem illud, quia omnis actu, acceptatus  Deo, tanquam actus ows & landabilis, pro quo Deus velit a quid retribu∣ere illi, cujus actum acceptat, vel alteri, pro quo fit, est meritorius: bujusmo∣di est omnis actus Cbristi secundum naturam humanun: etiam actus beati∣ficur, quo secundum potionem superiorem fruitur Do: quia persona illa non secudum omnem conditionem sui, fuit simpliciter in termino; ideo potuit Deus omnem actum creatum illius personae acceptare tanquam dignum aliquo boto proco retribuendo illi personae, si indiguisset, vel alteri, scilicet nobis, pro quibus meruit. Et hoc tenendo, oporter dicere, quod si actus beatificus se∣cundum portionm superiorem Christi suit meritorius, quod non includit con∣tradictiounn actum beatifieum Michaelis, vel alterius beati, pesse acceptari tanquam aliquid dignum retributione, quod retribuum dartar propter mertum; puta daretur Michaeli aliquid propter actum meritorium custodiae quam exerces circa me, contradictio dico non esset; tamen de facto Dus, non sicacceptat actum illum, quia persona illa est totaliter extra statum mrendi secundum totum subjectum: non sic Christus, sed secundum aliquid suit in statu viatoris, & propter hoc omnis actus ejus creatus acceptus erat, & meritorius illis, pro quibus offerrebatur Deo. Oe would think it very strange, that you should over see this passage in Scotus, in the very same question that you quote. I may here make use of your words concerning my self, p. 633. I can think of no other probable ground of the Defendants mstake, but only his writing at randome, and cn∣jectures
upon other mens short notes and suggestions. But this over-sight is trivial, in respect of that which is in your Quotation out of Nicholaus Da Orbellis, p. 349. for in that there are words expressely gainsaying your o∣pinion; for they assert that it was possible for the beatiick act in Christ (that is, in the Scotist-language, his fruition of God by love consequent unto the beatifical vision) to be meritorious. Ideo potuit Deus omnow a∣ctum creatum illius personae accetare tanqu n dignum pro se, vel pro illis pro quibus offertur Deo, etiam actum beatificum. Sicut enim meritum non tantum consistit in ipso actu clicito, sed in conditionibus perse elieitis; sic acceptatio divina non solum respicit actum, sed conduioxes accidentales sup∣positi elicient is. In pig. 637. with a great deale of gravity and scorn, you advise me for the future to let the School men and Scholastcal Divinity alone, &c. But I have juster reason to advise you, that seeing you have been so un∣happy in quoting Scotus, and his Epitomator, Nicholaus De-Orbellis; to get some able friend, if not to consture, yet to expound such passages, as you shall quote for the future our of School men: seeing you are so won∣derfully prone to alledge out of them such things as make nothing for you, but apertly against you. But to return to the matter in hand. This opinion of Scotus touching the meritoriousneffe of Christs bea∣tifick love of God, is maintained by the generality of his followers, as may be seen in two renowned ones of them, Faber Faventnus in Sent. lib. 3. disp. 48. p. 210, 211, 212. Kada Super 3. lib Sent. Controv. 12. a. 1. p. 338, 339. In Faber Faventinus there are two other arguments, besides that already urged by Stus, Contra eandem assertionem recentiorum, quod Christus non merucrit actu beatifico, est aliud argumentum: nam certum est, quod Christus dilexit Deum ex charitate, & voluit illi bonum affectione u∣stitiae, & in hoc praesertim consistit meritum, lit ait Scot. & ipsi satenu, quia radix omuis miti pd Deum est charitas, & amor ipsius Dei, ergo non vidtu neganum esse hoe meritum:  Christo, at hic amor, & dilio in Christo fuit fruitio beatifica, quia erat beatus, & videbat Deum clare, ex qua visione sequebatur dilectio, & fruitio perfectissima, quae est beati∣fica. Praetercà est argumentum Scoi, sieut in nobis meritum respicit partem intellectivam, sic in Christo, sed in nohis non est meritum, nisi sit in portione superiori, neque  meremur actius nostris, nisi voluntas nostra perfectis∣sime jungatur Deo actibus, qui respiciunt Deum, sicut nec peccamus, nisi o∣luntas nostra  cedat a Deo, ergo Christus non potuit mereri secundum por∣tionem inseriorem tantum, & non superiorem, si meruit autem superiori, hoc suit per dilectionem Dei, quia hic actus immediate tendit in Deum, er∣go dilectio, quae est fruitio, fuit actus meritorius in Christo. loc. praedict. Unto this some Modern-School-men answer, by distinguishing, as our Defendant, out of Suarez, concerning a twofold love of God in Christ. This distinction Faber Favntinus, in the place but now cited, first pro∣pounds, and then refutes. 1. He propounds it. Respondent ad hoc Recentiores ubi supra diffingnen∣do
de duplici actu amoris & dilection is in Christo, nam alter actus dilecti∣on is crat in Christo, quatenus erat comprehensor, qui sequcbatur visionem beatisicam; & hoc actu non meruit, quia non crat actus liber; alter vero actus dilectionis rat in Christo, in quantum crat Viator, qui sequbatur, non visionem beatificam, sed cognitionem insusam, & hoc actu mruit, quia erat actus liber, & hanc sntentiam sserunt essa D. Th. multis in lois, sed pae∣rtim, 3. p. q. 19. a. 2. in responsione ad primum, uli ait, quod Christus per charitatem meruit, non in quantum crat Comprchser sed ut ot Vior. 2. Having thus propounded the distinction, he replieth unto it. Sed contra hanc Responsionem est argum ntum secundum Scoi in ipalc, quo pro∣bat, quod actus, quo anima Christi fuebatur Deo, non poteran esse duo, sed unas tantum, quod argumentum est tstud: actus frutinis est actus adaequa∣tus potentiae, quia voluntas creata fenitar quantum otest: seduna, & ca∣dem potentia cirea id mobjectum, non habt actum  adaequa um, & alterum in daequatum, & distinctum à primo, quia boc implicat coradi∣ction m, nam primus non esset adaequatus, rgo voluntas Christi per actum suitiois non poest diligere Deum per se amoe amicitie adquae, & per alium actum cundem Deum deligere per se amoe aicitiae, sed in dqate. Nxt he sets down the Rejoynder of the Adversary, and unto it sub, oyns his Triplication. Sed Responderunt, quod Major est vera, quin actus sunt omnino cjusdem rationis, sed qando sunt dvrsi actus, & di∣versae rationis, non est vera In proposito autem sunt divesiactus specie, quia actus fractionis tender in Deum propter omnem perfecti∣onem, & rationem propter quam Deus est amabilis, sed amor, qui est meri oriustendit in Deum propter aliquam speccialem ationem, ut propter justitiam, vel misericordiam, &c. & haec diversitas dicitur esse sufficiens, ut actus ille distinguatur a priori. Secundo dicerent, quod snt diversi numero, quia tendant in Deum, quod est objectum idem diversis viis, quia aliud per charitatem consummatum, aliud per charitatem viae. Sed istae Responsiones non satisfaciunt argumento, queniam non recte probatur istos actus distingui, nam actus distinguuntur per objecta ex cando de anima: at objectum actus fruitioni per se est ipse Deus di∣ligibilis propter se amore amicitiae, similiter objectum primum meriti est. Deus ipse diligiblis propter se amore amicitiae volendo sibi bonum, cum ergo objectum sit idem materialiter, & secundum eandem rationem for∣malem actus non possunt esse diversi. Ad primam rationem, qua probat diversitatem specificam, dico qued illae circumstantiae, non pluificant essentiam actus, sed solum mutant in eo aliquas circumstantias, & accidentia, externa autem accidentia non plurificant substantiam rei. Praeterea dato, quod illae circumstantiae faciant diversitatem actus, tune non solvitur argumentum, quia nos hic quaecimus, an actus amoris, quod tendit in Deum plen, & amat illum more amicitiae toto corde, & inten∣siori modo, quo potest, sit meritorius, necne, non de aliis actibus dile∣ctionis sub varils circumstantiis minus perfectis, nam videtur absurdum
negare in Christo actum illum perfectiorem, qu odilexit Deum totis vi∣ribus, non esse meritorium cum in nebis sit meritorius, Secunda ratio non concludit, qula eadem charitas, quae est in via, remanet in Patria, ut docet Scot. in hoc 3. suo leco, ideo ex medio non distinguuntur istiactus. Praeterea, ut dictum est, mdium non variat actum substantialiter, sed accidentaliter, at distinctio accidentalis nihil facit. Praeterea argumentum Scotistat in suo roboe, vis enim argumentiest, quia nulia potenia cadem potst habere unum actum adaequatum circa alquod objectum, & simal alterum actum inadaequatum circa idem ob∣jectum, qa implicat contradctionem, ratio est, qua in illo primo actu adaequato includitut actus imperfectus, & inadaequatus. Ad pro∣posuum, actus fruitionis est actus, quo perfectissine, & sub omaibus cir∣cumst untiis diligit illud objectum, ergo non potest also actu sub alia cir∣cumslantia dilgere idem objectum quia jam hic actus includitur in illo & ustia maltiplicatur. Quod verod cunt D. Th. fuisse hujus senten∣tiae, ego puto falsum, quia loco citato, dum ait, Christum meuisse cha∣ritate non in quantum erat comarchensor, sed viator, non infert diver∣siatem actus ut ipsi volunt, sed diversitatem status personae; ac si dicat, Christus meruit actu elicito ex charitate, quiactus erat fiuitio, sed quia arus ille erat prsonae, quae simal erat Viatr, & Comprehensor, illo merit, non in quantum erat comprehensor, sed in quantum erat viator, & hoc modo cum intelligendo, convent cum Scot. ut infra videbimus. Sed dices, potut Christus habere dplicem actum cognitionis Di, scil. per visionem beatificam, & per scientiam infusam: Ergo potuit quoque habere duplicem actum amoris, alterum per fruitionm beatam, alterum per charitatem infusam. Respondent, qd non est par ratio de scientia, & amore, quia scientia eiat de codem objecto, sed diverso modo cognito, & per diversa media, qae faciunt cognitionem esse diversam, distinguitur enim scientia penes m dium, sed amo, ut hic loquimur, est de codm objecto, codem modo, ac etiam medio. Faber Faventinus. lib. 3. dist. 18. q. 1. disp. 44. There are two considerable Objections against this doctrine of Scotus, which are at large propounded and ans ered in these two eminent Scotists tht  mentioned, Sed est tune alia difficultas gravis, quia si cnedatur Christum mruisse actu fruitionis, & beatifico, videtur idem dicn lum de aliis beatis, quod est absardum, quia Beati in Patia su sactibus non merentur, quia sunt in termi∣no. Respdt St. non valere consequentiam, ratio est, quia ut superins dictum est in raon meritt incuditue acceptatio divint, placait rgo Deo acceptare omnes actus Christi, tam poritionis inforioris, & partis sensiti, quam potionis superioris, & beatificos prome∣vitoriis, idio facio hoc pacto ab aetern, actus illi erant merito ji, & hoc codem modo potusset actus aliorum Beato  pro meritoriis acceptasse, sivolusset, & secisset, hoc pactum, quia non implicat conradictionem, tamca quia non fecit hoc pactum, ideo illi non sunt meritorii, non fecit autem Deus hoc pactum neceptandi actus batorum pro meritoriis, quia in illis non crat congruitas, quae erat in actibus Christi, dum erat in bac vita, num Christus in bac vita non crat counctus Deo, q. o. ad affectiomem commodi perfecte, ut ceteri beati, sed poterat pati, & de facto patiebatur, ergo suit congruum, quod omnes actus Christi, etiam be∣atisici acceptarentur pro meritoriis ratione personae, qua erat Viator. Faber Faventinus in ter∣tium lib. Sent. disp. 44. p. 212. Sed his modus dicendi dissicilis est propter alios beatos qui tune videntur posse mereri in infinitam. Nihilominus tamen probatur, quoniam omtis actus acceptatus a Deo, tanquam actus bonus, & laudabilis pro quo Deus velit aliquid retribuere illi cujus actum acceptat, vel alteri pro quo sit, est meritorius. Sed omnis actus Christi secdum naturam humanam, etiam actus beatificus voluntatis est bujusmodi, ergo est meritodius. Consequentia optima est cum majori, minor probatur. Num quia persona Christi non fuit seundwn omnem conditionem sui simpliciter in termino, poruit Deus omnem actum creatum ejus acceptare, tanquam dignun aliquo bone, pro co retribudo, vel Christo si indiguisset, vel alteri, si nobis pro qbus me∣ruit. Ex quo insertur non esse contradictionem, nec eam includore, acture beatificum Micha∣clis, vel alterius beati acceptari tanquam aliquid dignum retribution, qudd daretur propter meritum. Defacto tamen nullum actum beatisicum alicujus beati, nc quemlibet alium ac∣ceptavit, no acce tat, quia persona cujuscunque beati est totaliter extra statum meredi secun∣dm totum subjectum. Non sic Christus, sed securdunali quid fuit in statu Viator is propter quod omnis ejus ceatus acu liber acceptuserat, & meritorius illis pro quibus offerebatur Dco. Sed objicies, quomodo Christus mereri potuit cum secundum portionem superiorem suerit extra vi, am, non minus, quam alii beati, videtur sane, quod non plus mereri potuerit quam alius bea∣tus in Patria. Respondeo cum Scoto, quod sicut meritum non respicit, nec consistit tantum in ipso actu eli∣ito, sed aliquo modo in conditionibus persona suae suppositi ecienis, sic acceptatio Divin non solum respicit actum, sed conditiones etiam accidtates suppositi clicientis. Atque it actus Christi ctiam beatisicus, cum ipse esset viator, nec totaliter in termino potuit ob hane conditionem acceptari, non tamen actus beatificus alterius beati, licet in hoc nulla esset contra∣dictio. Rada Super tert. lib. sent. controv. 12. a. 1. p. 338, 339. Faber Faventinus and Rada.
The first is taken from a comparison of Christs beatisick love, with that of the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven. If his beatisick love of God be meritorious, then also that of the blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven is so too: But this is absurd, for then they should merit unto all eternity. They both answer out of Scotus by denial of the sequel of the Major, and for this denial they give this reason: God's acceptation is requisite unto merit, Now God accepteth all the created acts of Crist as meritori∣ou, whereas he made no Covenant with, or promise unto the blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven, touching any such acceptation. And for this different dispensation towards them and Christ, they lay down out of Scotus this following congruence. Whilst Christ was here in this life, he was Viator as well as Comprehensor, and consequently all his created acti∣ons were capable of meriting: for merit regards not only the action me∣riting, but also the state and condition of the person performing the acti∣on: but now the blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven were absolutely and altogether comprehensores, and so in termino extra statum merendi unca∣pable of meriting: You see then they resolve the meritoriousnesse of Christs beatisick love of God into the condition of Christs person: Christ me∣rited by it, not so much because 'twas beatisick, but because 'twas the love of
a person who was in some respect Viator, in viâ, which was a state of meriting A second Objection is drawn from the necessity of Christs beatisick love of God: Every merito. ious act is free; for freedome is essentially requl∣fite unto merit. But now Christs beatisick love of God was not free, be∣cause 'twas necessary. And freedome and necessity are incompetible in the same act: It followeth therefore that Christs beatisick love of God was not meritorious. This argument the Defendant inculcates frequently. The Scotists answer by denying the Minor. Christs beatisick love of God was, say they, free, though not with a freedome of indifferency, yet with a freedome of complacency, and that not only concomitant, but causal. I call that concomitant, which is in acts whereof the will is not a cause, qua voluntas sibi complacet in aliquo, etsi respectu ejus nullius causaerationm habet: and such a freedome there was (say they) in the Fathers bgeting of the Sonne, the Father had a complacency therein, and was well-pleased therewith. But he did not beget the Sonne by any act of his will. I call that cansal, which is in acts whereof the will is a cause. This is that liberty which the Scotists call the essential liberty of the will, and is by Rada thus defined. Haec libertas est complacenter cognitione finis sub propria finis ratione, supposita, quasi se determinare ad agendum, sive con ingenter se determinet, sive necessario. In 1. lib. sent. Controv. 13. p. 207. This freedome the Scotists make to agree unto every elicite act of the will, and consequently unto the batifick love of God. And the reason that they give, is, because freedome is essential to the will, and is predcated of it quitnus ipswn, and a quatenus ad de omni valet argumentum: What is predicated of the will as the will, is pedi∣cated of every act of the will. This reason is urged very acutely by Fa∣ber Faventinus against Cajetan, who saith that the will is a free agent only in respect of some acts, and not in regard of others, Contra: vel competit volntati scundum essentiam, & absoute esse pncipum liberum, vel non, si non ergo volun as accidentaliter est principium liberum, & tun quaere, quaenam fit illa potentia, cui inest principium agendi libere per es∣sentiam, vel est voluntas vel non dabitur principiu liberum essentialiter, quod est absurdum, quia omne per accidens redueitur ad aliquod per se, da∣tur principium liberum per accidens; ergo debet dari principium liberum per essentiam. Si dicas voluntaes respectu aliquorum actum est libera per essentiam, respctu a orum est natueale principium. Cora quod inest alieui per essntiam, & secundum quod ipsum inest i universaliter. Ex Arist. 1. Post. c. 4. exemplum. Homo per eslentiam, & secundum quod ipsum est rationalis, ideo omnis actus, qui provenit ab homine per essen∣tiam, est rationalis, i. per rationem factus, unde actus naturales sentien∣di, vegetandi, &c. quia non sunt rationales non competunt homini, ut homo est, sed ut animal & vivens: Est ergo verissimum, quod inest ali∣cui secundum quod ipsum inesse ei universaliter, tunc sic, at voluntas est principium liberum per essentiam, ergo universaliter est libera respectu omnis actus, vel est dicendum, quod non est libera per essentiam, sed per accidens, quod jam rejectum est, ut absurdum, si dicas quod inest
voluntati secundum essentiam, tenc sic. Duo praedicata contraria, & mu ò se destruentia, non possnt insse dem subjecto, securdum id m, quia implicat repugnantiam, sed voluntati secundum essentiam inest esse principium liberum, ergo nonporest secundum essentiam in∣esse principium naturale, ut contra distinguitur à libero, ut in proposi∣to intendimus, ex hace, go ratione colligitur, qued voluntas essentia∣liter est libera non naturalis, & sic patet, quod ratio Scoti concludit, nm rum quod agere naturaliter, & agere liberè sunt differentiae pri∣mae entis, quae non possunt inesse eidem potentiae, & principio essen∣tialiter, sed necessario constituunt duo opposita principia activa, quo∣tum unum non redecitur ad alterum, nec ambo ad tertium, & per hoc impugnatur, quo volt as rspectu sin's cla. èvsi, & beatitudi∣nis in communi habeat actum naturalem, si enm est potentia es∣sentiater libera, omnis actus clicus ab ea est ei liber non natu∣ralis. Consi matur, quia aliequin voluntas in primo instanti, quo habet actum naturalem, nonesset voluntas, sed natura, & ita non habe et esseperfectum, sed transiret de imperfecto ad perfectum, quod de di∣vina voluntate est absurdum, & tiam de creata quia illa in instanti pro∣dctur, & ideo in illo habet totam suam perfectionem. In lib. 1. Sent. disp. 37. p. 223. Unto Faber Faventinus let me adde Rada, who Lib. 1. Contr. 13. p. 210, 211. proves largely, That the will, quatenus potentia est, cannot be considered prout natura est, as nature is an active principle distinct from that which is free, and therefore consequently cannot have any na∣tural act, but all its acts are free. Quinta conclusio voluntas quatenus potentia est, nequit considerari, ut natura, prout natura est principium activum distinctum contra libe∣rum, nec ut talis aliquam actionem habet. Pobo priorem hujus con∣clusionis partem. Primo potentia naturalis & potentia I bera sunt oy∣positae potentiae, ergo cadem voluntas non porest considerari, & ut na∣tura, & potentia libera, vel dstingui in naturam, & petentiam liberam. Anteceens probatur, quia Arist.9. Met. tex. & 6. distinguit liberum a naturali. Consequentia probatur, quia tunc idem distingucretur in se, & in oppositum sui, sicut si animal distingueretur in animal, & non animal, vel homo in hominem & equum. Quod patet: quia (ut diximus) potentia naturalis & libera opponuntur, sed distinctio, qua distinguitur idem in seipsum, & in oppositum sui, est prorsus absurda, ut de se paret: ergo illa distinctio, qua voluntas in naturam & liberam distinguitur, est absurda, Confirmatur argumentum, quia unica po∣tentia non potest habere gemnum operandi modum oppositum atque di∣versum: sed agere libere & naturaliter sunt modi oppositi immediatae di∣videntes potentiam activam, ut supra diximus: Ergo voluntas non po∣test per modum naturae & libertatis, utrumque consideretur, operari, &c. Ad confirmationem dico, maximum esse inconveniens ndem po∣tentiam
specie, & numero diversos, & oppositos omni ò operand mo∣dos habere. Nam sicut duas differentias idem genus dividentes cidm speciei inesse implicat: ita implicat omninò idem prin ipium specie, & numero habere diversos, & oppositos operandi modos, quales sunt agere libere, & naturalitèr, quod ex aequo, & immedaè dvidunt principium activum. Et cum objicitur, quod an ma operatur cum dis∣cursu, & sine discursu in ordne ad diversa, scilicet principia, & con∣clusiones, Rspondeo quod ut ait Scot. in 2. d 1. q 6.  A. agere cum discursu & sine dscrsu, non sunt modi oppositi, arque , diversas naturas indicantes, cam eidem nitur at onali ins nt: at ve∣ò agere libere, & agere per modum naturae, modi sun omnino oppo∣sitidversis necssar ò pricipis convenients:  principium activum prima divisione dividitur in liberum & naturale, &c. Secunda pars ejusdem conclusionis, t puta, quod voluntas nal∣lam operationem habeat, ut nura, sed ut voluntas, probatur. Volun∣tas ut natura, prot natura distinguitur contra agens liberum, nulla∣ten is porest sine repugnantia considerari: E go ut natura non potest habere actionem. Paetera, cum consideras voluntatem, ut naturam, vel ly natura, lumitur pro principio opposito, & distincto contra liberum: & hec jm manet impugnatum. Volaccipitur in communi ad pincipium liberum & naturale. Et si sic, claumn est quod nullam potest habere operationem: quia operatio cum sit singularis & determi∣nata, necessariò otum habet à principio singulari determinato: Ergo necessarò debet esse, vel principitum liberum, vel naturale: Ego si est illa actio à voluntate, ut natura necessariò voluntas ut sic, erit a∣gens per modum naturae, vel liberum, sed non primam propter dicta: Ergo scundum: Ergo voluntas, ut natura, est vountas, ut libera: Er∣gò agit liberè. Et confirmatur: quia sicut omnis actus elicitus intelle∣ctus est ab intellectu, quatenus intellectus est: ita omnis actus volunta∣tis, est à voluntate, ut voluntas, & libera est. Et certè si voluntas praecisè, ut natura quaedam est, consideratur, solum habet propensio∣nem & inclinationem in sum sinem sicut lapis in centrum: quia omnis actus & operatio elicita ejus est ab ipsa, ut potentia libera est contra po∣tentiam naturalem distincta. Quod voluntas ut natura nullam habeat operationem, tenet subtilis Doctor in 3. d. 15. lit. A.& dist. 33. paulo ante lit. O. Whereas 'tis added for the confirmation of the Minor, that Christs beatisick love of God was necessary, as being a necessary consequent of the beatifical vision in him, and freedome and necessity are repug∣nant. Unto this the Scotists Unde pro dilucidatione hujus rei, & ra∣tionum in oppositum, notandum est, 1st elicitur ex Scoto quodl. 16.a. 2. circasinem, & di∣cemus in Metaph. in propria disp. haec quatuor, contingens, necessarium, naturale, & libe∣rum sic se habere, quod contingens, & necessarium opponuntur, ut patet ex Arist. 2. Peri∣her, inc. de modalibus similiter naturale, & liberum opponuntur, utpatet ex corum defini∣tionibus. Naturale enim est quod determinatum ad age adum, liberum, quod est indetermi∣natum ad agendum, sed scipsum determinat, ex quo sequitur necessarium stare cum naturali, & cum libero, quia illis non opponitur, non autemstare cum contingenti; similiter sequtur liberum stare posse cum necessario, & cum coigenti, quia illis non oppenitur, non outens oss stare cum naturali. Confirmatur, quia in Philosophia multa naturaliter fiunt, & ta∣per accidens five contengencer siunt, ut monstra, & quae casu, & fortuna even unt, ut  Et tam causae per se illius omnes st naturales, multa e∣tiam naturalter, & necessario siuat, ut patet in conting generatione, crgo aliquid produci , & contingenter no pgnt, non crgo hae , aliquid sit naturaliter, er∣go : similiter multa a cssario , & no naturaiter, ut quae coaciè, & vio∣te siunt. liberè siua, &  cessario non contingenter, unde ownes communiter dieut,  & paestim D. To. q. 10 de Potia. a.  ad 5. dili∣git ergo D se liber , & , quia si libere, & necessario hic esset , quod  Thomiste dicere, quod spiritus sanctus liberè & , quo lamen dicut pugnare, ut revra repugat ex corum dfinitio∣us, omnes crgo susii: enes  dicant Dm nece ario se deligere,  ut Theologi, & mi ex Prpteticis, licet in actibus ad extra pant D∣um agere necessariò, & beati in patria sundum nos libere diligunt Dn, & tamen neces∣sario, lict rgo in volunt creata pro hoc statu couiagentia concomitnter libertatem, & saepe consunntur, tamen propr è loqu  idem, ut vidimus, ex hoc patet soluto dabtat onis, quia licet concedamus Spiritum Sanctum procedere libere non tamen ab hoc se∣quitur contingerter produci. Faber Faventinus. In 1um lib. Sent. disp. 37. c 4. p. 224, 325. answer, that there is no such repugnancy betwixt freedome and necessity, as is imagined: indeed a natural agent,
and a free are opposite, and so also a necessary agent and cowingent: And therefore the same agent in the sane act cannot work naturally and free∣l, wssarily, and contingently. But now there is no such opposition betwixt natural and contingent, and betwixt free and ncessary: and here∣up on it followeth, that a natural agent may work contingently, and per accidens, as we see in Monsters, in casu, and sowta: and so again on the other side, a free agent may work necessarily; thus God loves himself most freely, and yet withal most necssarily too. Rada hath four very shrewd Arguments, to prove the cosistency of the highest free∣dome, with the highest necssity, which I shall insert for the Defendant to try his utmost still upon. Quod summa necessitas star cum summâ libertate, probo multipliciter. Primòvoluntas divina necessariò vult bonitatem suam (ut supra ostendimus) & tamen in volendo eam est libera: igitur libertas stat cum summâ necessitate. Consequentia te∣net; minorem verò probo. Voluntas divina refert ad finem alia obje∣cta, quae sunt volibilia propter finem, igitur ipsa sub eadem ratione potentiae est operativa circa utrunque: sed circa ea, quae sunt ad si∣nem, operatur sub ratione potentiae liberae, ut etiam Thomistae conce∣dunt, ergo etiam circa sinem, (ut puta circa bonitatem suam) opera∣bitur sub ratione potentiae liberae, ergò liberè vult bonitatem suam.
Prima consequentia hujus argumentationis probatur, quia potentia o∣perans circa unum objectum, non absolutè, sed in ordine ad aliud, eadem sub eadem ratione est operativa circa utrunque. Quod pater ex Philos. 2. de anima tex. Com. 146. ubi ait, quod potentia illa, qua cognoscimus differentiam unius objecti ab alio, illamet sub eadem ra∣tione potentiae, cognoscit utrunque: ergo simliter in proposio poten∣tia operans circa unum objectum in ordin: ad aliud, ipsa sub eadem ratione potentiae, operabitur circa utunque. Et cnfimatunquia alias oporterer constituere unam potentiam, quae versaretur cica sinem & ali∣am circa media. Secundò probatur. Libertas est Conditio intrinseca voluntatis ab∣solute, vel in ordne ad actum volndi, ergo est compossibilis cum con∣ditione perfecta operaionis perfectae circa perfectssimum Objectum, praesertim illa conditio nn repugnat, im otest convenire tali opera∣tioni: sed talis conditio in operatione perfctest necessitas: Erò li∣bertas est compossibilis cum necessitate. Antecedens est manifestum, quia voluntas natura sua intinseca libera est. Consequentia proba∣tur, quia conditio intrinseca potentiae, quae secundum se nullam dicit imperfectionem, non potesf esse contraria, perfectioni operationis e∣jusdem potentiae, quia tunc prorsus repugnaret hujusmodi potentiae ha∣bere perfectam operationem etiam in ente infinito, in quo reperitur. Sdquod talis conditio perfecta, sit necessitas, patet, quia perfectio voluntatis, unde voluntas est, est diligere Deum, ergo perfectionis est habere illam operationem sirmiter, & necssariò. Et confirmatur: quia posse non habere illam dicit imperfectionem, ergò necessariò ha∣bere illam, perfectionis est maximae, & rutsus, ergo est possibilis illa necessitas in operatione perfect voluntatis, ut voluntas est: alias enim, nec in Deo reperitetur. Tertiò probatur. Actio circa finem ultimum, ut finis est, est per∣fectissima, ergo necessitas in tali actione non tollit, sed magis ponit id, quod ad ejus perfectionem per sepertinet, sed libertas maxime eam perficit, ergo necessitas quae in tali actione reperitur, non tollit, sed ponit potius libertatem. Probo assumptionem, quia actio libera ex na∣tura sua est perfectior cunctis operationibus, ut in controversiis quar∣ti, Deo favente, ostendemus. Quarto probatur. Qantoactio voluntatis circa finem ultimum est magis necessaria, tanto est liberior. Ergo summa necessitas est com∣possibilis cum summa libertate. Consequentia est evidens, antece∣dens probo, quia secundum Anselmum & Augustinum, quos suprà cita∣vimus, illa voluntas est liberior, quae omninò à rectitudine deviare non potest, sed illa quae necessariò simpliciter diligit bonum insinitum à rectitudine nullatenus deviare potest, ergo illa est liberrima: sed talis est divina voluntas respectu dilectionis Dei, &c. ergo est respectu ca∣rum liberrima. In 1•m lib. Sent. Controv. 13. p. 213, 214. The Defendant is pleased to say, page 68. That the Saints and
Angels in heaven love God freely, with a freedome improperly taken, for a liberty from coaction. But first, the Scotists Cenditio in∣trinscca poten∣te n repug∣not perfctioni inp rando ip Gus potenie, si∣ ab sulatè po∣tmia conside∣retu, si in or∣dine adactum perfectum, sd libertas est coad tio intrinscea, & essentiatis, voluntatis, ergo non repugnat prficioni sius vol nais in operande ei ca actium porfctissmum. Faber Faventinus In 1um lib. Snt disp. 37. c 3. p. 221. will tell him that freedome is attributed unto their love of God in the greatest propriety. For the beatisick love is the greatest perfection incident unto their wills: and freedome is an intrinscal and essential condition of their wills. Now (say they) th which is intinscal and esscutl unto a power or faculty, cannot be re∣pugnant unto the greatest perfect on thereof: therefore the beatisick love of God which is accessary, and freedome, are no wayes inconsi∣stent. Secondly, In their love of God there is a freedome, not only from coact on, but also from natural necessity, such as that which is in the metion of a stone downward, which prelupposeth no act of the under∣standing. The ncessity which is in their love of God, is not such a∣necessity, but a voluntary necessity, which hath alwayes foregoing an∣act of intellectual knowledge. And this for the first answer unto the diffi∣culty propounded. There is by some School-men given another, indeed a quite contra∣ry answer: and 'cis, that Christs love of God was not meritorious, and in asserting this they think there is no absurdity, because there is other∣wise a very wide and spacious field for Christs merit, in the acts of his love of man, and in the cts of his other vertues. Of this opinion Be∣caus makes mention, Sum. Theol. Scholast. tom. 5. c. 14. q. 3. Alij sic st unt Christiam suisse viatorens, not solum ratione carnis, & ani∣mae passibilis, sicut jam explcatum est, sed etiam ratione animae, qua∣tenus amabat proximos. Comprehensorem vero, ratione animae, quatenus∣amabat Deum clare visam. Ita{que} meruisse per actium charitatis circa proximos; non tamen per actum charitatis circa Deum. This opinion∣he thinks to be probable, and Suarez in 3am part. Thom. tom. 1. dis. 39. S. 2. saith that it may easily be defended. The contrary opinion therefore, at the most is but a Scholastical Probleme. But Vasquez hath a full defence of this Opinion, that Christs love of God was not meri∣torious: and with it he joyneth a refutation of this distinction, of Christs∣love, given by Suarez, and others: the passige is somewhat large, but because 'tis home, and accurate, I hope I shall have the Readers patience for the inserting of it. Mihi verò multò probabilius semper visum est, Christum non meru∣isse per affectum ullum charitatis, & dilectionis erga Deum, sed per o∣pera aliarum virtutum, tam circa se, quam circa proximum, &c.
Primum igitur Christum non meruisse per illum actum charitatis ortum ex scientia infusa in Doctrina S. Thomae, manifestum est, nam cum ille aperte dicat q. 11. a. 1. essentiam Dei, ac proinde mysterium ipsum Trinitatis, non cecidisse sub scientiam infusam, id quod nos etiam supra disputatione 53. c. 11 satis saperque probavimus, consequitur nullum potuisse in Chrislo esse affectum dilectionis erga Deum paeter illum, quem vocant beatificum, cumque ille non potuerit esse merito∣rius, ut paecedenti capite monstravimus, effieitur etiam, per nullum actum dilectionis Dei Ghristum mereri potuisse: quamvis enim dia∣mus, in Christo mansisse scientiam naturalem unins Dei, tamen illa non potuit esse principium dilectons ipsius Dei ex charitate, ut mani∣festum est. Praeterea cum Christus non habuerit fidem, sequitur, ex nulla cognitione potuisse Deum dilgere. Age tamen, concedamus Christo scientiam-infusam essentiae Dei distinctm ab adquisita, nihilo∣mnus frustra in eo concedemus daos affectus charitatis erga Deum, al∣terum ortum ex visione clam Dei, alterumex scientia infusa; nam af∣fectus dilectionis tendit in rem cognitam, sicut in subjectum, non au∣tem in ipsam cognitionem: ergo licet esset scientia infusa Dei in Chri∣sto, quia tamen esset eadem bonitas ipsius Dei proposita voluntati per scientiam infusam, & per visionem, idem-effectus esset dilectionis: qua ratione, ut communis fert opinio Theologorum, eadem est dilectio Dei in via, & in patria, & quamvis visio Dei in patria esst causa novi actus dilectionis Dei, quia intensius eliceretur, aut alio modo, tamen non po∣test esse causa diversi actus secundum speciem, & uterque actus simul non posset manere in patria, etiamsi in patria posset manere fides, non quidem alia ratione, nisi quia dum-voluntas movetur circa objectum du∣plici modo cognitum, solum ab eo allicitur prout perfectiori modo cog∣nito, ipsum autem prout cognitum minus perfecto modo nihil mover voluntatem, ac eo modo cognitum non esset & hoc quisque quotidie in se ipso experitur; nam cum quis diligit alium ex relatu, atque ip∣sum, & ea, quae de ipso audiverat, postea vider, jam non ex relatu, sed ex clara visione, & experientia ipsum diligit, & aliorum testimoni∣um nihil in ipso operatur, ut eam diligat: quae doctrina multo majori ratione in paesenti locum habet; nam cum essentia divina per claram vi∣fionem perfectissimo modo videatur, ita ut necessariò ad se trahat vo∣luntatem per affctum amoris, ut supra diximus, neque adeò rapiet ad se voluntatem, ut ipsa deinceps moveri non possit ex alio genere cog∣nitionis ad diligendum Deum alio affectu, aut codem. Quod verò dicitur Johannis 14. Sed ut cognoscat mundus, quia dligo patrem, & sicut mandatum dedit mihi Pater, sic facio, surgite, eamus hinc, non probat Christum per dilectionem Dei nobis redemptionem meruisse, quia eo loco solum commendatur charitas Christi erga Patrem, & obedientia, de merito autem, & operatione meritoria non a∣gitur. Here Vasquez presupposeth two things already proved by him.
1. That in Christ there was no infused knowledge of the essence of God and the mystery of the Trinty distinct from the beatifical Vsion. 2. That Christs beatifique love of God was not meritorious. Having premised these to things, he next proves, that though there were in Christ an infused knowledge of the essence of God distinct from the beatfical vision; yet it would not hereupon follow, that there should be in him a love of God distinguished from that, which was the sequele of the beatisical vision; and the reason is, because there was one and the same goodness propounded unto his will, by the infused knowledge and the beatsique vision; and therefore the same effect of love, where the will is moved, and stied up about an object known af∣ter a twosold manner, it is only allured, and wrought upon as 'tis known, after the more perfect way and manne,  when I come to see by experience those good things in a man, which before I knew only by report, I then love him only upon mine own experimental knowledge, and no longer upon the relation of others. Lastly, Suppose this distinction of Christs love of God were true and sound, yet 'tis utterly unserviceable for the defence of D. Ham∣mond, and that by the opinion of the Defendant himself: For Dr. Ham∣mond (saith he) is to be understood of the acts of Christs love termi∣nated towards man for Gods sake: Now the Authors and Fautos of this distinction, understand it expressly concerning the act of Christs love Dico ergo pri∣mo, habuisse Christum actum amoris Dei libe∣rum, superna∣turalem, & eli∣citum à chari∣tate, & ab a∣more beatisico distinctum, & illo actu perfectissime meruisse. Ita intelligo sententiam D. 'Tho. hic solutione ad primum dicentis, meruisse Christum per charitatem non in quantum erat charitas comprehenso∣ris, sed in quantum crat viatoris: ubi de charitate lequitur, prost terminatur ad De∣um. Suarez in 3 part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 39. S. 2. p. 622. as terminated towards God himself, and they do distinguish it from the acts of his love of his neighbour. This is so plain in Suarez, out of whom the Dfendant borroweth the distinction, as that one would think it impossible for the Gentlman to oversee it. But this oversight renders it very probable, that he never read Suarez himself, but had the distincti∣on sent him from some friend, who knew not the consistency of it with his other distinctions. Unto this we may adde, that those that stickle for this twofold actual love of God in Christ, as terminated unto God himself, have not so much as one word or syllable for the indifferency of his love as Viator, touching the degrees, whereof all the indifferency that they assert therein, is Contradistionis quoad exercitium actus. So much is affirmed by Gregory De Valentia, tom. 4. disp. 1. q. 19. punct. 2. Hunc a∣ctum charitatis aiunt in Christo fuisse aliquo modo liberum: ita scilicet, ut posset ab eo certe aliquando desistere, &c. quam libertatem, modo diceudi in Scholis usitato, vocamus libertatem quoad actus excreitium
tantum, &c. But our Defendant himself will not deny, that all the inward acts of the love of God in Christ, that were terminated imme∣diately on God himself, were alwayes at the highest equally intense: And therefore this distinction being meant of the acts of Christs love of God as terminated unto God himself, can do Dr. Hammond no service at all in this Controversie. Having beaten the Rfater from all his Evasions, I shall next examine what he saith unto my three Arguments. The first is drawn from the all fulnss and perfection of Christs habitual grace. The habits of all graces and vertues in Christ were alwayes ful and perfect, most intense, and not capable of further or higher degrees, and therefore so are the inward acts or actions of those graces and vertues too. Now what is said in general of the habits of all graces, may in particular be averred of the habitual grace of divine charity. That in Christ was alwayes full and perfect, most intense, and not capable of further or higher degrees, and therefore so were the inward acts, that is, actions thereof too. Here are two Enthymems im∣plyed, the latter subordinate unto the former: For habitual grace is the genus of divine charity, and not the equivalent thereof, as the De∣fendant fondly thinks. That I make it, p. 330. B. the Consequence of the latter Enthymem; I proved p. 3, 4, 12. from which the confirmation of the former may easily be collected. The said proof of the Conse∣quence I shall briefly repeat, and somewhat re-inforce. And 'tis, that there can no other ground be assigned, for the intension of the action: of loving of God in Christ, but the intension of the habit of love: which Dr. Hammond and his Defendant both affirm, in Christ to be alwayes so full, and intense, as that it was not capable of further or higher degrees: For an action is not capable of degrees of intension and remission, but scondarily, mediante qualitate, which it produceth, or from which it proceedeth, vatione termini, or vatione principij: it cannot be ratione termini: any quality that was the effective term, the product of the inward action of love; for that there is no such term or product of the action of love, hath now been largely confirmed. And if it be said, that it was ratione principij, then it must be in regard of the habitual grace of divine love: for there are but two qualities, that are the principles of the action of loving God in Christ; the power or fa∣culty of the will, and the habitual grace of love. Now the power or faculty of willing, cannot be intended in any man: and the habitual grace of love in Christ, was alwayes so intense, as that in him 'twas un∣capable of further intension; and consequently all the inward actions flowing therefrom, were of an equal intension. Here your Answer unto which you referre, is, that I ignorantly, or wilfully confound the immanent acts of love with the action of loying, &c. And that the Doctor speaks of the immanent acts of love, and not at all of the actions, p. 21, 22.
But first, I have proved, that there are no such things in rerum na∣turá, as the acts of love distinguished from their actions as their termes. Secondly, Suppose that there were such termes, yet that the Doctor can∣not reasonably be understood of them, hath been sufficiently demon∣strated. Unto this I adde ex abundanti, the testimonies of some few School∣men, from which may be gathered, that the habit and the act, are al∣wayes equal in gradual perfection: and from this it will follow, that if the habit be alwayes equally ntense, the act mst be so too. But now for preventing all future mistakes, and to cut off the Defendants Obje∣ctions, I shall lay down, of this a limitation, which might easily have been foreseen, and is usually in things of this and the lke nature. It is to be understood caeteris paribus, provided that all other cass concurre equally, and uniformly unto the act, so that the habit be not hindred by them, but left to its natural way of working. Now in Christ caetera e∣rant paria: there was no disarity but a most absolute and perfect equa∣lity, and uniformity in the influence of other causes, viz. The will of Christ, and Gods assisting grace, in the production of his actual love of God, hs will never willed any abatement of the act, and God never withdrew his assisting grace in the least degree or measure: and there∣fore his habitual love of God wrought in him alwayes equally and uni∣formly, as to the inward acts thereof. Having premised this limitation, which I shall intreat the Reader to carry along with him in his mind in that which followeth, Let us come unto what you say unto the testimonies themselves. First, you quarrel me for that I cite not Aquias from his own wri∣tings, But quote him twice from Caprcolus, but I had very good reason for this, for the passages that I quote are not in Aquinas his Smnes or in his book Contra gentes, which is all that I have of Aquinas. The first passage he quotes out of Aquinas De Vertutibus, q. 1. a. 11. and the se∣cond is out of the same work, questio de charitate art. 10. I believe that if you had read Caprcolus, you would have been as much to seek to sind these places in Aquinas as I was. If you can direct me to them I shall thank you, but I suppose 'tis a book not commonly to be had. The first testimony you do not answer, but outface. From i I truly (as you grant) concluded, that a greater vehemency in the operation of love, argued a greater participation in the subject of the habit of love. Now from this it undeniably followeth, that if the operation of love be more vehement at one time than another, then the subject doth more participate of the habit of love, at one time than another: and whether this be not to the purpose, Let any man judge. The pertinency of the second testimony, is as evident as that of the first. For if it be, as you grant, an undoubted truth, that idem est cha∣tatem augeri secundum essentiam, & ipsam habere essicaciam a pro∣ducendum ferventioris dilectionis actum; then 'tis also as undeniable  truth, inevitably following hereupon, that if the habit of charity is ef∣ficacious
in producing a habit of more fervent love, at one time than at another, the habit of charity is encreased; according to its essence, at one time more than another. In answer unto the third testimony you spend part of four pages, which is all nothing to the purpose: for you mistake the place of Aqui∣nas, supposing it to be 22 ae. q 24 a. 8. Cop. whereas it is not, (as I have shewn out of Capreolus) in his Summes at all. Unto the place out of Scotus, the Defendant, to amuse the Reader, talks a great deai: p. 341, 342. but I must needs profess, that I cannot pick out of all that he saith, so much as one syllable that is applyable in a way of answer. Unto what I urge out of Scous, Actus naturaliter elicitus (pray good Mr. Dfnant mark the word naturaliter:) ab ali∣qua forma aeqa  in pfction ill fomae. But of what I urged out of Htado De Mendoza, that intensio actus secundi suppoit aequalem in ensi nem i actu primo, you have a very rare, and iubtile explication. His meaning is, say you, that the se∣cond act cnnot possibly exceed the first, in gradwal persection, though it may come short of it; p 334, 337. Away Trister: before you write any more Conovsiet, learn some Syleme of Logick: And indeed e∣very Syste ne of Lugick will discover the foppery of this conceit, for it will teach that unequals are adequately opposed unto eqals, and that inae∣qualia ae minora, as well as majora. But unto this first argument, you have as you think, a most satisfy∣ing answer, p. 331b, 337b, which you inculcate very often else∣where, p. 24, 63, 67, 68, 69, 71, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 185, 186, 209, 210, 247, 249, 250, 340. And it is, that though natural and acssay causes work aw tyes equally and sormly ad extremam viri∣m, yet 'tis otherwise with fre agents: and such are all moral habits in general, and consequently the habitual love of God in particular, which is as free (you say) as the will it self, in which 'tis seated. Unto this I have two things to reply. First, that any habits, either intellectual, or moral, are free Agents, is new and strange Philosophy: for hitherto it hath been a Proverb in the Schools, that habitus agunt ad modum naturae, caeteris paribus. But having to do with such a modst Adversary as our Dsendant is, it will be necessary to transcribe some testimoties, otherwise I shall never stop his mouth; and I shall begin with Scotus, Scripto Oxoniens. Lib. 1. dist. 17. q. 2. p. 248. Operatio non elicitur libere, cujus principum acti∣vum est mere natural, & agens per modum naturae: sed habitus cum non sit formaliter voluntas, nec per consequens formaliter liber, si est prin∣cipium activum, erit mere naturale; ergo operatio ejus non erit lihera; & ita nullum velle erit liberum, si eliciatur ab habitu, ut à totali principio actio. Scripto Paris. lib. 3. dist. 33. q. 1. p. 431. Qili∣bet habitus, quantum est de se, inclinat per modum naturae, & cha∣ritas per modum naturae suae ad actum supernaturalem inclinat natura∣liter
ficut habius acquisitus ad actum sibi proportionatum, quoniam ba∣bitus non est liber, sed tantum voluntas; habitus enim ita inclinat per modum naturae potentiam in objectum, sicut gravitas ipsum grave deorsum. Unto Scotus I shall adde Suarez in his Metaphysicks. At{que}, hine colligitur generalis regula, &c. scilicet uihil obstare libertati, vel contingentiae actusscu affectus, quod aliqua causa naturali necessitate ad illum concurat dummedo aliqu cum indifferentia efficiat, respectu cu∣jus effectus denominetur liber. Ratio hujus satis declarata est expli∣cando fundamentum secundae sententiae: amplius vro illastrari potest non nullis exemplis, &c. Simile quid dici potest de insluxu habi us con∣currentis cum ptentia libera; habitus enim ex so non habet indifferen∣tiam, aut popriam libertatem, sed ex necessitate naturae operatur epe∣rawe st potentia, disp. 19. s. 3. n. 20. Unto Suarez I shall subjoyn a Modern Scotist Ponus, who, Philos. Curs. part 3. disp. 13. q. 3. n. 39. page 552. expressely averreth that it is absurd to say that thè hali of charity either infased or quired is fre. Probatur sequela, quia asias habitus chariatis de fcio tam insusus, quam acquisitus, esset liber, quod est absurdum. But I night have spared the labe. of quo∣ting all these Authorities, for there is a place which I urged out of Scotus, that the Dfendant transcribes at large, p. 340. b that will strike the matter dead. The place in Scotus at large is this, Centra, possibile est illam anima habre summam gratiam, ergo summam frurtinem. Consequentia pobatur; quia actus naturaliter elicitus ab aliqua forma equatur in persectione illi formae; fruitio est actus supernaturalis, & pr consequens elicitus a causa supernaturali, quae est gratia, & patet quod naturaliter, quia gratia non est formaliter libera. Ergo seedum quantit atm gratiae potest esse quantitas fruitionis. Here you see Scolus expressely affirmeth, that the fruition of God, which he makes to be the actual love of God, is naturally elicited from grace, because grace is not formally free: and is not this apertly contradictory unto our Defendants dictate? pag. 337. b that all the habits of grace, whether in Christ, or in all other men, are naturally free and undetermined in their operations. And now can any man think, that the Defendant understood this passage in Scotus? for if he had, he would in all probability have concealed it, as much as he could, and not thus have transcribed it at large, seeing 'tis so apparently destru∣ctive to his own Opinion. But by this the Reader may see, with what pro∣found judgment he quotes the School-men. Unto these Authorities I shall annex a Reason, taken from the De∣fendants own notion of freedome, for he makes it to consist in indiffe∣rency: and habits answerably to the degree of their intension and pre∣valency, take away and diminish the indifferency of both-contrariety and contradiction. 1. Of Contrariety: for by inclining to their own proper acts, they render averse from all contrary acts: by how much the habit of tem∣perance prevails in a man, by so much he abhors all acts of intemperance.
2. Of Contradiction: for they incline unto frequency of their acts, loco & tempore debitis, and incline against sinful omission of their acts. This Reason may, for the substance of it, be collected from what the School-mn usually say, to prove that free-will doth not consist in a habit. I shall at present content my self only with a Quotation of A∣quinas, Primâ part. q. 83. a. 2. Corp. Habitus dicuntur, secundum quos nos habemus ad pssions, vel ad actus bne, vel male, nt dci∣tur in 2. Ethic. Nam per temperantiam bene nos habemus ad omcu∣piscentis. Per intemperantiam a tem male. Per scientiam etiam bene nos habemus ad actum incellectus, dum verum cognoscimus, per habitum autem contearium, male. Liberum awem arbitrium indifferener se ha∣bet ad bene eligendum, vel male; unde impossibile est quod liberum ar∣bitrium sit habius. This mutatis matandis will prove that no habit is formally free. Secondly, Though habits be not formally free, yet I confess they are, in regard of their use and exercise, subject Aquinas. 1. 2 ae. q. 52. a. 3. q. 63. a. 2. q. 71. a. 4. unto the impery of the will. So that the will freely useth or not useth them. But this will no wayes advantage the Defendant: for all men are obliged to act the habit of love, as touching its inward acts, unto the highest, ad extre∣mum virium. They are bound to love God with all their might and strength, therefore with all their habitual might and strength: and if their love fall short of this height, it is sinul and defective, which can∣not without blasphemy be imagined of Christ, who was impeccabilis, and therefore fulfilled all righteousness; and therefore when he loved God, he lovd him as much as he could: the all-fulness of his a∣ctual love, was for dgrees answerable to the all-fulness of his na∣bitual. As for his Answer to my secon Argument, drawn from the beatifical vision in Christ, that hath been sufficiently replyed unto, in my exami∣nation of his distinction of Christs love of God, as he was Viator, and as he was Comprebenso. The third, and last Argument was fetcht from Christs impeceabili∣ty. It was impossible for Christ to sin: but if the inward acts of his love of God, had been less intense at one time than at another, he had sin∣ned; for he had broken that first and great Commandment, Thou shalte love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy might and strength, Deut. 6.5. Mat. 22.37. Mark 12.30. Luke 10.27. In Answer unto this Argument, the De∣fdenant insists from pag. 357. us{que} ad 520. of examining which, his own concession will save the labour: for he grants that if we speak of that eminent act of holy charity that is immediately terminated on God himself, we are bound to love God to the utmost height we can, and that he who doth not so love him, doth not love him so much as he deserveth, or as much as man ought: and that therefore the acts of Christ love, as immediately terminated on God, were alwayes at the
the height and one equal perfection, p. 71. Now that Doctor Hammond is to be understood of this eminent act of holy charity, that is immediately terminated on God, I have clearly de∣monstrated: and unlesse the Defendant can answer my arguments, his accusation of my third argument, as guilty of that Sophisme which the Philosopher calleth , will passe but for an idle and ignorant ca∣lumny. The Defendants friends may be ready to say that  decline the examination of that which followeth, because 'tis unanswerable, but alass▪ there's no such matter: for that it is a very otten, eroneous di∣scourse, guilty of complyance with Popry, in a great measure, I shall shortly demonstrate in a dstinct Treatise, if God grant me life, health and liberty. The reason then why at present I take no further notice of it, is, because not only the Stationer, but divers good friends, have for several reasons much importuned me, to contract this Debate as much as I could, and I should now forth with put a period to it, but that I am desi∣rous to give the Readet in brief, a further taste of the inconsqncies with which  work of Doctor Creed is every where fraught. First, p. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57▪ he concludes that a habit of divine love in Christ was not capable of further degrees because the act and exercise of it was capable of further degrees. If Christs love of God (in the act and ex∣ercis) was capable of Degees, more intense at one time than another, and had in its latitude, or amplitude several Degrees, one different from another secundm magis & minus, all them comprehended in because issuing from) the habit of Divine Love, then this babitual love of God must be acknowledg∣ed all-full and perfect, alwayes (pray Master Defendant mark the word al∣wayes) in him so fall, and so perfect as not to want, and so not to be capable of further degrees. But the Antecedent is true, and therefore also the Con∣sequent. The evidence of the sequel is supposed, and grounded upon two ve∣ry now Maxims; Nihil est in effectu, quod non prius erat in causâ, and Nihil dat quod non habit. This is an argument silly and ridiculous be∣yond all comparison: for, mutatis mutandis, a man from it may argue a∣gainst the growth of the habit of love in all the Saints that ever were, are, or shall be on the earth. If their love of God in this life, in the acts and exercise, was capable of Degrees, &c. then their habitual love of God, must be acknowledged all-full and perfect alwayes in them, so full and perfect as not to want and so not to be capable of further degrees. As for the two known Maxims, they will do him no service, unlesse he put in the word semper. Nihil est in effectu, quod non erat prius semper in causa, Nihil dat quod non habet semper. And if you adde the particle semper every fresh-man will soone discover their notorious falshood. Secondly, p. 57. he hath another rare consequence: The Apostle saith that Christ's being in the forme of God, though he thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the forme of a servant, and was made in the likunesse of man, and being
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse, wherefere God also hath exalted him. Therefore Christs love, viz. actual and inward, was more intense at one time than another: v.z. i his agony and dying for us more intense, than in his suffering nakednesse and hunger for us. Thirdly, in p. 18, 19. of my Refutation of Doctor Hammonds , I have these words. If this be your meaning, I must needs assume the boldnesse to tell you, that no such matter is visible unto me in any of the School-men. But perhaps you may mean such School-men, as such a Pu∣ny, as I never saw or heard of; however you cannot expect blief, until you produce their testimonies: And I shall intreat you to alledge such as may be had in Pauls-Church yard, o at least in the Library at Oxford. Now from this the Defendant concludes, . 62. that I tell the world in effect, that I have all the School-men at my singers end: nay just as many, no more, nor no lesse than are in Pauls-Charchyard, and the Lbary as Ox∣ford. Fourthly, p. 88, 89. the Defendant saith, that I do not throughly un∣derstand a passage which I quote out of Raynandus: My words are these. Kaynaudus makes mention out of Gabriel Biel, of a distinction of love into affctive, and effctive: and hat is this effective love, but the ef∣fects and expressions of love. But now that he doth not take this to be a proper destribution of a Gnus into its Species, appeareth by what he saith out of the same Au∣thor concerning the division, &c. Well, where lieth my mistake in these words? why plain it is (say you) from Raynaudus, that love effective is not only the outward sensible effects, and expressions, but also something else. For though it be true, that all the outward sensible effects, and ex∣pressions of love, be love effective, or in plain English the issues, and effects of love; yet the termes are not reciprocil, and convertible. For there are many effects of love, that are not sensible, and thus external. For in∣stance good wishes, good prayers, are the effects of true love, so also are joy at the we fare of the beloved persons wll-doing, and sorrow, and grief at his miscarriage; and yet thy are not alwayes expressed, nor does any prudent man alwayes shew his joy or grief, or expresse his good wishes, thoughts and desires to him be most tenderly affects. Well, what of all this? Why saith the Defendant, the subject-mat∣ter of your discourse leads me necessarily to understand your inter∣rogation of the outword sensible effects and expressions of love. Sir, you must put in the word only, or else you say nothing to the pur∣pose: and if you put that in, what you say is very false. It is (I say) false that the subject-matter of my discourse, leads you ne∣cessarily to understand my interrogation, only of the outward sen∣sible effects and expressions of love, and you can never prove it
by any rule of argumentation. Indeed my designe is, to prove that love is not a genus unto the outward expressions of love, or that the outward expressions of love are not a species of love, and may not this be very well proved, though in my inter∣rogation the effects and expressions of love be taken in a ge∣neral sense, abstracting from both inward and outward expressi∣ens? may not that which is denied of estective love in general, that is all effects and expressions of love, be particularly denied of the outward and sensible expressions of love? Did you never hear of arguing à genre ad spciem negativè, grounded upon this Max∣me Sanderm, Lo∣g. p. 205. Quod convenit aut not convenit generi, Convenit etiam, aut non convenit spce? Is it not a good argument to conclude, that hom is not lapis, bcause nullum animal it lpis: because no effe∣ctive love, no effects, and expressions of love are a species of love, will it not thence irrefagably follow, that no outward effects and ex∣pressions of love are a specis of love? Fifthly, I had said p. 10. of my Refutation, &c. I am very loth to enter into a Contest with so great a Critick touching the mean∣ing of a word: And from this innocent and harmiess passage, the Defendant concludes, That I contemptuously undervalue the Docto's excellent Critical learning, That with me a Critick is but a whisting Grammaian, an empty Pedaggae, p. 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101. That the Doctor in my opinion is some petty Grammaticaster, that knows the meaning of Musa, and can tell how to decline Lapis, some great Cri∣tick for sooth, one fit to teach School-boyes perhaps the meaning of a Greek or Latine Author: but for any skill in the Arts, and Reserches of Philosophy, he is a very Dunce, and not at all seen in the curious speculations and subtleties of School-learning. But what colour is there for these odious sequeles in my words▪ Indeed they can be drawn from no Topick place, but that of the Defendant's furious malice. Sixthly, Whereas Dr. Hammond had said, that each of the ex∣pressions of Christs love of God, had an act of internal love of which they were so many proportionably different expressions: I an∣swered, that if the Doctors meaning were, that these different ex∣pressions in regard of intension, must be proportioned exactly unto their inward respective acts of love, must be equal or parallel un∣to them; then I denyed what he said, and called upon him for the proof of it. Now this my denyal, which no rational man can or will deny, the Defendant himself most unnecessarily and idly con∣firms in 16. pages, p. 139, 140, &c. usque ad 155. and p. 150, 151, 152, 153, 154. he quotes the testimonies of many School-men for the confirmation hereof, and in the close of all this, he won∣ders
at my omission of these, and the like testimonies: And here∣upon he concludes my ignorance in School-men. His words are these: And therefore I cannot chuse but wonder, that our Refuter should take no notice of these or the like passages, which to ordinary eyes would have shewed more to his advantage, than all that he has quoted in his Panphlet from the School-men, and Suarez, and Scheibler to boot. But this and some other passages in his book, which offered themselves at first sight, make me not value his School-learning at the same rate and pice he has put upon it in the Title-page of his mixture. But old Homer was blind, though he were the Prince of Poets; and our Wri∣ter of Practical, and Scholastical Divinity sees not all things in those Doctors that may most serve for his advantage. Here by the way I deny, that I put such a rate and value upon my School-learning, in the Title-page of my Mixture, as the Defendant pretends: only I pro∣fess my self a Well-wisher unto Scholastical Divinity, desirous to re∣vive the study thereof: but however there is not either in mine, or in his own discourse any foundation, (shall I say?) nay, not so much as any shadow, for either his wender or censure. The particle therefore (therefore I cannot chuse but wonder) &c. plainly intimates, that what he saith, is a conclusion drawn from something foregoing. And for my part, I have most diligent'y sought for premises unto this conclusion, and can find none, and therefore must earnestly entreat the Defendant, to direct us where or what they are. In my fore-mentioned denyal, I acted the part of a Respondent; and by what laws of dispu∣tation a Respondent, though a School-man, is obliged to heap up te∣stimonies out of School-men, for the confirmation of every denyal that he makes, especially if the proposition denyed be apparently false, as this was, viz. That the outward expressions and the inward acts of love of God in Christ, must of necessity be of equal intension. And thus ho∣ping that by the next we shall know why you fell into this fit of wondering, I pass on. Seventhly, In the next place you tell us, that in men the in∣ward affection commonly varies, according to the intension and re∣mission of the outward expressions and effects: and in prosecution of this he spends, with a great deal of noise and triumph, about 16. pa∣ges more, p. 155, 156, &c. usque ad 171. But what of all this, Sir? is this any thing to the matter in hand? Can you from any thing in this tedious discourse inferre any thing against my Denyal, vlz. that the outward different expressions of love, must of necessity be proportioned exactly unto their inward acts of love? and if you cannot, (as undoubtedly you cannot,) to what end serves all that you say, but to waste time, pen, ink, and paper. But you tell us often, that the Doctor is no wayes engaged to prove, that the inward acts of love, and the outward expressions, are of necessity equal in point of intension, But the contrary will
appear to every Pusny in Logick, that will but peruse the Doctors sequel, as 'tis in him at large, for thus it runneth: and from hence I suppose is unavoidably consquet (pry Mr. Defendant mark the word unavoidably) that that act of internal love expesed by Christs dying for us, was supeur to thse omer act (supply in intention) which only exprest themselves in his povertie: and so the same person that loved sincerely, did also love, and expresse that love more intensely at one time then at another: which was the very thing I said in another instanc. Now choose unto this con∣sequent what Antecedent you will, out of Dr Hammonds words: either those that are immedaely foregoing▪ yet it being eain that each of these expresions had an act, of internal love, of which they were so many propertion∣aby different expression; or thse that precede these. To this I sub∣joyne that such as the expression wa, such was the act of inward love, of which that was an expression and from it it is impossible for you or any other of Dr. Hammonds friends, to inferre ths consequent. But you pretend p 68, that you have done the feat your self. And now because you psesse, (and it is your third charge) that the reason of the Doctrs conse∣quenc is to you invisible, and that you shall never acknowledge his Inference legitimate, util you be diven thereto by educing his Enhymee unto a Syllo∣gisme: I shl nce, for your better satisfaction, rsre it; I ordinaiy there i and must be a proportionable agreement in respect of Inerion and R∣mission, betwixt the inward acts of love, and the outward expressions, then that act of internal love expressed by Christs dyig for us was superiour to thse former acts which only exprest themselves in hs Povertie, &c. But the Ante∣cedent is true, as we have shewed from reason and experience, and the Auth∣rity of Gregory, and the Schoolmen. Therfre also is the conse∣quent. First, for the major of this your Syllogisme, I demand concerning the Consequent, vvhether you inferre it from your Anteedent necessarily, or only probably; If you say only probably, then your Consequent is none of Dr. Hammnds: for he supposeth that his follovveth necssarily from vvhat he hath said. Hence I suppose it (faith he) unavoidably conse∣quent (that is, necessarily consequent) that that act of internl love expressd by his dying for us, was superiour to those former acts which only exprest them∣selves in his povertie. If you say you inferre it necessarily, then the conse∣quent is evidently false; you must then change in your Antecedent the vvord ordinarily, and in the room thereof put in the vvord necessarily, or else the consequent vvill not follovv unavoidably. As for the assumption, that is evidently false too, if you supply what is to be supposed, for then thus it runs. Ordinarily there is, and must be in all men, and was in Christ, a proportionable agreement in respect of intention and remission, betwixt the inward acts o the love of God, and the outward expressions thereof. Now all men are by the commandement of God, which Christ fulfilled, oblged to love God, when they love him, with all their might, and consequently with all their habitual might. But by the opinion of both Dr. Hamond,
and the Defendant, men are not bound in all expressions of their love of God, to performe then with all their might: and therefore 'tis false, very false, that there must be a proportionable agreement in respect of intension and remission; betwixt the inward acts of the love of God, and the outward expressions thereof. And thus you see what a rare Syllogisme you have made, both the premises of which are notoriously false. By wht hath been said, the Reader may, (as discover the faishood of your Syllogisme, so also) frame a true Syllogisme, against the sequele of Dr. Hammond: and 'tis as followeth. If all the inward acts of Christ's love of God were with all his habitual might, then that act of hs internal love, viz. of God, exprest by his dying for us, was not superiour, viz. in intension to those former acts, which only exprest themselves in his poverty: but all the inward acts of Christ's love of God, were with all his habitual might: therefore that act of his in∣terral love of God, expressed by his dying for us, was not superiour, (viz. in intension) to those fomer acts, which only expresse them∣selves in his poverty. The Major is undenyable, and we may say as much of the Minor: because Christ fulfilled the commandement, which was to love God, with all his might and strength; Therefore with all his ha∣bitual might and strength: and this is confessed by your self touching the acts of love that are terminated unto God himself, of which I have proved Dr. Hammond only to be understood. Eightly, Dr. Hammond saies that if it be proved that , ac∣cording to the vulgar translation, signifieth Luke 22, 44. Prolixiùs; thee will yet be place equally for his conclusion, viz. that one act of his eternal love of God was more intense then another. But if there be any place for such a conclusion, then thus the argument stands. Christ in his agony prayed longer then before; therefore his inward actual love of God was then more intense then before. But this sequele (as is evident unto every ordinary Reader) is very illogical and irrational, and yet the Defendant justifieth it, and in vindication of it spends twelve pages, p. 253, 254, &c. us{que} ad 265. But how unsatis∣tying this h vindication is, will quickly appear, if he please to cast into Syllegismes what he takes to be argumentative therein. But this is a thing that he dates not so much as attempt, for then every Fresh∣man will easily discover the foppery of his discourse. However in the meane time I shall give the utmost strength that I can unto Dr Hammond's argument, as 'tis propounded by himself, and as 'tis rein∣forced by the Defendant. The conclusion to be proved is, that one inward act of Christs love of God was more intense then another. Now this Dr. Hammond proves from the length of his prayer: for pa∣ralel to a greter length, there's a greater intension of the inward actual love of God in a longer prayer, compared with that which is shorter. All the proofe that I can finde of this, reduced into forme, stands thus. Where there is a multiplication of Degrees, more de∣grees
of the inward actual love of God, there's a greater intension of the inward actual love of God: but in a larger prayer of Christ, there was a greater multiplication of Degrees of love, &c. more degee of love, &c. then there was in a shorter: And therefore thee was a greater intension, viz. of the actual internal love of God. The Major is confirmed from the nature of intension, which is nothing else but a multiplication of Degrees in the same subject, an addition of one. Degree unto another. And then the Minor is thus confirmed by Dr. Hammend, where there is a greater multiplication of the acts of love, viz. inward; where there are more acts of love, there is a greater multiplication of the de∣grees of love: for in every act of love, there was some degree of in∣tension, but in a longer prayer of Christ there was a greater multipli∣cation of the inward acts of love, mre acts of love then there was in a shorter; and answerably there was a greater multiplication of the Degrees o love, more Degrees of love, &c. My Answer unto ths Sygisme shall be, both unto the Major and the Minor. First then, I answer unto the Major, by distinguishing concerning the multiplication of Degrees. It is either of the same numerical forme, or fo fomes numerically different. Where there is a greater multiplica∣tion of degrees of the same numerical forme, there is a greater inten∣sion; but not where there is a greater multiplication of formes nu∣merically different, for intension is an addition of Degree unto Degree in the same numerical forme. The Major then, if understood of the latter multiplication of degrees, is false: but if understood of the former is true. But then th Minor, if understood answerably of the same, will be false. And Dr. Hammond's proofe of it will be most impeinent. For the several inward acts of Christs love of God, are formes numerically different, and therefore let them be multiplyed never so much, this will conduce nothing unto the greater multiplica∣tion of Degrees, in one act of love then there is in another: So that from this it can never be inferred, that one inward act of love in Christ, was more intense then another. But Dr. Creed very stoutly and lustily affimeth the contrary p. 256. I Reply and say, If the Degrees of his live are in number multiplyed as the acts are, there must be a growth in their intensive perfection, and the last act, which has the greater number of Degrees in it, will be gradually more perfect then the former. Here you say that if the Degrees of Christ's love are in number multi∣plyed as the acts are, there must be a growth in their intensive per∣fection, and withall you suppose, that the last act hath a greater number of degrees in it: and here upon you conclude of it, that it will be gradually more perfect then the former. But, good Mr. Defen∣dant, instead of saying and supposing, you should have proved what you say and suppose: but of such proofe there is not in all that you say, any the least footsteps.
Bt e this how it will, plaine it is, you say p. 257. that I do not rech the Doctor's meaning, and the force of his argument. I have made the most of his words that I could, but as for any hidden and invisible meaning, distinct from that which his words hold forth, I know not that I was obliged to search after it. And therefore I shall leave that unto the Defendant, who can see further into a Mill-stone then other Mortals. But however, let us examine this profound meaning of Dr. Ham∣mond's. The Doctor concludes and argues from the effect to the cause, thus, where th zale is true and real, and not tersonate and counterfit, (as in Christ without doubt it was most true) there a multiplication of the outward acts of prayer, and a longer continuance in them, argues a greater a deny of inward affection, and true zeale. And for the truth of this assrtion I appeal to the practice of the whole world. Here if you supply what is to be supplyed, touching the object of this inwad affection, This assertion, which you obtrude with such a confidence, is apparently untrue. I say 'tis apparently untrue, that a multipcation of the outward acts of prayer, and a longer continu∣ance in thm, argues a greater ardency of inward affection to God, or love f him. And for the falshood of this assertion, I appeale to th bosomes of all experienced, either Ministers, or Christians, who can tll him that their inward love of God is frequently as intense, in their shores, as it is in their longer prayers, and that the shortnesse of their prayers, many times doth not proceed from any abarement of their love of God, but from regard to the infirmities of such as joyn with thm, and for diverse other reasons. Mr. Paul Beyne was e∣seem'd a very plous and devout man in his time, and 'tis said of him, that his prayer in his Family, was not usually above a quarter of an hour long: as having respect to the weaknesses and infirmities of his Ser∣vants and Children; and he used to disswade others from tediousnesse in that duty. I beleive the Defendnt will not deny, but that a man may, in putting up the Lord's Prayer, have his actual love of God every way as high and intense, as in the longest prayer either of a man's own or anothers composition. But not to insist longer on o∣ther men, It is plaine of Christ, that his shortest prayers, his shortest eiaculations, did proceed from an actual love of God, every way as intense as the longest. And for the truth of this, I appeale unto the Commandement of God, that enjoyned Christ, and all other men, to love God with all their migt and strength: therefore with all their ha∣bitual might and strength. Now however other men may transgresse this Commandement, Christ did not, could not; and therefore whenever Christ loved God actually, he loved him with all his habi∣tual might and strength, ad extremum virium; and consequently one inward Act of his love of God, was not more intense then another. Ninthly, p. 268 you accuse my Answer unto an Argument of Dr. Hammond's, as guilty of that fallacy, which is called petitio principii
If this be not (say you) , I know not what your great Master Aristatle mednes. But this is a most ridiculous and groundlesse crimination, for this, as every other fallacy, is a sault or defect in arguing, not in answering, 'tis (saith my rtle Master Scheibler) dcepto in syllogizando. De Sydogism, cap. 17. n. 6. 'tis, saith my great Master Aristotle, Elenchus Sophisticus. It hath alwaies been observed for a rule in dsputing, that when the Respondent denyes a sequel, and gives a reason for it, it is the Opponents part to fute the reason, and the Respondent is not obliged to confirm it. It is then a grosse non-sequitur to conclude me gltie of this falacie, of petitio principii, because I do not confirm the reason, for which I deny Dr. Hammonds consequence. But, Sir, if you had not falsifted it, by adding must to may be, it is a Proposition so plain and evident, as that it needs no confirmation, and can be denied by no rational man. Thus it stands, my reason is, because in all these inward acts of Christs love of God, (and we may say the same of the inward acts of other vertues and graces) there may be no gradual dissimilitude. Mark, Sir, the word may be, and then tell us whether there be any contradi∣ction in this Proposition, in several inward acts of Chsts love of God there is no gradual dissimilitude; it there be, pray discover it, if there be hot, then give me leave to conclude, that in the multiplied acts of christs love of God, there may be no gradual dissimilitude. You say this is the controversie betwixt me and, the Doctor. But your own conscience must needs convince you that this is a faishood: for you your self state the controversie to be, whether one act of chsts love of God were actually more intense then another? and yet if I had said, that in the inward acts of Christs love of God, there could be no gadual dissimilitude; this I have proved by three reasons, unto which you have given but orrie answers: and these reasons I am not bound to repeat at every turne, for this would quicklie swell my book to such a Volume as yours is. Tenthly, he hath a passage page 272. for which he hath not in my words the least toundation: And will not every man think that our Re∣fute was a man of great judgment and parts, and fit to quote Suarez against Dr. Hammond? But I rather think he was misguided by some Notes, and that he never consulted the Authors he quots, but took them upon trust: other∣wise mthinks it is impossible he should be so strangely deceived. But, pray Sir wherein, wherein is the efuter so strangely deceived in Suarez? why 'tis clear and evident by Suarez, though every act of Christ, in respect of the person that performed it, was of an infinite, and so of an equal in ensive value, yet in respect of the moral goodnesse, that is intrinsecally inherent in Christs actions, nothing hinders but that one in this respect may be better and more intensely persect then another, as well as one grief and torment which he suffered was greater then another. And ther∣fore (say you) the same Suarez, even in that very page and columne, and in the section immediately preceding that passage that our Refuter has quoted, ex∣pressely sayes to this purpose. Primum omnium satendum esse, opera Christi
fuisse inequalia in prepâ bonitate intrinfec, & essentiall, vel ter inhae∣rente ipsi actai: quia ut dictum est,  hee bonites  finia, porat ergo esse major &  & allunde unum pus Chris erut metioris objects quam aliud, & um inthsu's , & sic de , go  vol po∣ternt esse inaequalta in hc bonitate, &c. Why what of all this? he I delivered ay thing that contradicts this either expresly, or implyedly, or doth Suarez here oppose, in the least degee, any thing that I have said? doth not Sed haec sen∣tentia & tot objectio proce∣dunt ex falso principio: singunt enim esse in eo∣dem acta plures valores, seu plu∣ra merita, juxta varias ejus cir∣cumstntias, quod patet esse falsum ex his quae paulò su∣periùs diceba∣mus de infinitate sacrisicii, ex re oblaa, vel person a offerene sumpta. Ostendimus en∣im reipsa non esse duas, ne{que} per∣tinere ad diver∣sa merita, vel satis actiones: quia ratio me∣rit vel satis∣factionis (sieut & ratio bni∣tatis) non con∣su git ex singulis conditientbus a∣ctus prse sum∣pris, sed ex col∣ecs ne omnm. Haec enim ratio ettam in prae∣sente proedit, nam intensio octus, vel obiectum, out persona prons per se singla non sfficint ad mernum, ut ex singali distinctamerta in actu orientur, sed omnia simu necessaria el sut, vel su modo concurrunt ad unum meritum, & quentitate eius. A{que} ita cessat objectio: nom stone∣ritum actus tantum est unum, & illud est infinitum, & aequle, hil est meiti, in que ceni possit inaequalit. In tertiam part. Toom. tom. 1. disp. 4. s. . 49. Surez all along assert that there is but one meito∣tious value, in one act of Christ? and that in respect of meritorious value, one act of Christ was not better and more intensively perfect then another. Nay, do not you your fele p. 271. quote a place out of Surez, where in he affirmuth that the moral goodnesse inherent in the action of Christ, is a thing distinct from their meritorious value Therefore Suatz (say you) acknowledgeth in that very fection I quote, Valorem hunt quem habet actus in ordine ad meritum, esse quid distin∣ctumd realt boniate quae est dffe entin ipsius actû, prout consituitur in esse vi tuc, el illi arquo  inste inhret. Now Dr. Hummond is to be understood only of a meritorious value, for he is to be understood of a value, that was to be rewarded, and that out of debt: and such a one is a meritorious value. Nay, do not you your selfe understand him to speak of a meritoious value? p. 266. And now to shew the ap∣psirnesse of the Proof. I must tell him what either he knowes not, or will not observe, That the Doctor gaine a gues à posterori, from the effect to the cause, and the necessary relen betwxt th work and the reward. His gu∣ment is funed upon a Maxune of dsributive justice; not expressed, but sup∣pesed and intted, and it is th; where the reward does proceed of debt, as in Christ certainly it did and is properly wages, there must be a proportio∣nable incre s of thereward and the work, &c. By this then the Roader may se, that all that you have concerning the moral goodnesse in hrent in the actions of Christ, in respect of their rel eny and good ase, is nothing at all to the purpose: for it is a thing quite different from their meritorious vlue, as Suarez faith in the very Words that you your sefe quote out of him. What hath been said is enough to convince the Defendant greateft friends, that I Was not a jot deceived in Suarez. But yet for both his, and their further and fuller conviction, I shal compare the passae that he quote out of Suartz. with the Words fore going and following. A little before he propounds a second Objection, against the insi∣nite value and efficacy of Christs Wks to satsle and merlt, Secund Objectio est b inconveni mi: nam si satisfactio Chrsti infinita es, seutur unum vel fiitum esse majus ulio, in geee, in quo nfiritu st, quod est contra Nationem infiniti, vel unum opus Christi no esse majorts vlor quà aliud: nec duo, quam unum, quod videtur ubsurdum: m quia totum est majus sua parte, tum eam quia unum opus Christ erat mellus alio, & unus
dolr major quàm alius quod muliùm resert and quantitatem satisfactionis: um deniq quiainde fieret, non magis redemisse nos Christum per passionem, & mor∣tem, qum per alios actus vitae suae, quod est contra scripturam, quae passioni semper tribuit redemptionem nostram, ad Rom. 3.4, and 5.  Ol. 3. ad Hebr. 2.9, and 11. In AnsWer. First he propounds a Concession, the very passage quoted by the De∣fendant, and therein he grants, that Christs woks Were unequal in regard of that moral goodnesse, Which Was intrinsecal and essential to them, really inherent in them; and in regard hereof one Work might be better then another. Respondeur, priùm omnium fatendum esse opera Christi fuisse inaequalia in propia bontate intrinseca, & essential, ve realiter inhaerente ipsi actui quia, ut dictum est, tota hc bonias erat finita: poterat ergo esse major, & minor, & aliunde unm opus Christi erat melioris objcti, qum aliud & unum itensius alio, & sic de aliis cercumstantiis, ergò erant vel poterant esse inaequelia in hc bonae. But then in the next place he sheweth at large, quomedo stt aequalitas merii, cum inaequali bonitate, as 'tis summed up in the margent; how an equality of merit or meritorious value, is consistent wth the unequal goodnesse, that is really inherent in the actions themelves. Nihilo∣min addendum secundo est, quod'ib topus Christi ex parte personae operantis fuisse infiniti valoris, quia licèt onitas, & aliae conditiones actus cnfert in∣terdum ad hunc valorem, tamen quia haec dignitas infinits personae extollit hune valorem ad perfectissimum ordinem, & us{que} ad infintum gradum, ideò tollitur omnis alia proportie: illa enim person, cùm in omni gnere infini fit, emin∣entér continet omnia alia bena, & idè consert actui, quidquid valoris omnes aliae circumstantiae conferrae pssent. Quo circa totum id, quoderat in opere Christi, ex pte ipss actûs, intelligendum est quasi materialitèr se hbere, personam verò esse quasi formem conferentem valorem, quae omnes illos actus aequaliter informat, & ideò omnibus consert infinitum, ái{que} ad equelem ve∣lorem. Exemplo explicari potest, fi pecunia tali regio signo figurata, tantum valee, cujuscunq, esset materiae ration figurae. And hereupon in the third place he inferres, that which I cited out of him. Hinc terio fit, plura opera Christi esse quidem extensivè plura me∣rita, intensivè tamen non esse plus valoris in mutis, quam in uno: ut si essent plures calores infinitè intensi, essent quidem plures, non tamen efficerent unum intensiorem & pari ratione, si in uno opere Christi quod successive pe partes fi∣bat, partes cum tot comparemus, intensivè tanus valor erat in qualibet par∣ta, sicùt in to opere, & in uno momento, sicùt in long tempere: quia forma  quid erat vlor, tote erat in toto, & tota in singulis partibus. And now t the most partial Reader review this discourse of Suarez, and then let them sit down and sadly consider, whether the Defendnt doth understand Suarez; or if he does understand him, whether his conscience informe him not, that I was not a jot mistaken in mine allegation of him, and if it doth, then what conscience is there in hi affirming that I was. Eleventhly, p 330. the Defendant pretends a grant of mne that I never made. Howsoever, saith he, I observe that in your first Argument you right∣ly
understand the Doctors notion of the love of God, and take it here as he still does in the large sense, as it is all one with holy charity, as containing in its ge∣neral otion the acts of all graces and verues whatsoever, and therefore be∣cause now hbe mus confitentem reum, I am resolved to hold you to your concession; You are, Sir, very quick sighted to observe that which ne∣ver dropt from my Pen, nor was ever in my thoughts. Pray Si re∣flect once more upon my words; put them upon the Rack, and try your utmost skill in Logick, nay, call in what assistance you please; and if you an from them prove this pretended concession, then trample upon me with a much scotne as you please, and until this be done, I shall assume the boldnesse to tell you, that your pretence is a shamelesse untruth. Twelfthly, p. 370. the Defendant hath two strange sequels from my wors, which until he can justifie I shall look upon as slanders. If in the slate of Christs humiliation, there vvas by special dispensation, as our Resuter grants, a restraint of his happinesse or beatifical vi∣sion, he could not then see God so perfectly, and so perfectly enjoy him, as after his Glorification, vvhen there vvas no restraint, and consequently his love could not be so ardent, so highly intense and perfect as aftervvards, vvhen novv he fits at the right hand of God. Let the Reader but view the place quoted by the Defendant, p. 261. and adde unto it another, p. 346. vvherein I moe fully explicate my selfe; and then if he vvill judge impartialy, he cannot but conclude the De∣fendant to be a most unvvorthy Calumniator. My vvords p. 261. are at large, as follovveth. It is not to be denied, but that by special dis∣pensation there vvas some restraint of the influence of his happinesse or beatifical vision, in the vvhole course of his humiliation, and particularly in the time of his doleful passion. Unto this joyne page 346. vvhere the point is farther explicated. Of this Heaven happi∣nesse in the soul of Christ, from the beatifical vision, there vvould al∣vvays, vvithout Gods miraculous restraint and prevention, have been tvvo, as it were, connatural sequels. 1. A fulnesse of unspeakeable, and unconceivable joy, solace, delight, pleasure and comfort in his soul. 2. A redundancy of glory from his soul unto his body. But by he special dispensation of God, the resultancy of the former was suspended and withheld in the time of his passion, and the lat∣ter the derivation of glory from his soul unto his body, was totally deserted until his exaltation. Here I do not say, that there was a cessation, interruption, or abate∣ment of the betifical vision, but only a restraint of its influence, not upon his love of God, but upon the fulnesse of joy in his soul, in the time of his passion, and the redundancy of glory from his soule unto his body, in the whole time of his humiliation excepting his transfi∣guration. Now from this the Defendant inferie two Propositions, one in the neck of another, one immediately, and the other medi∣ately. 1. In his state of humiliation he could not see God so perfectly and so perfectly enjoy him, as after his Glorification, when there was no restraint.
And 2. Consequently, his love of God could not be so ardent, so highly intense and perfect as afterwards, when now he sits at the right hand of God. But now, if any should presume to ask for a reason of the consequence of these two Propositions, I must needs tell him that they are dravvn from a Topick place, vvherein the Defendant is vvonderfully skled, fallacia cosequentis. And in Keckerman's Logick p. 543, 544. there are amongst others especially, two rare sequels instanced in, that are of the same stamp vvith these of our Defendants. Beculus stat in argul, egò ra pluet. Divus Gregorius edit casum. Ergò Div Veronica saltt. I finde aftervvards, p. 22. that from this very same Proposition of mine, he hath tvvo other like absurd and inconsequent inferences. His vvords are as follovveth, If the invvard acts of Christs love vvere alvvays at the utmost height, because this most intense love is a na∣tural and necessity sequel of the beatifical vision, then it necessarily follovves, if his love vvere alvvays thus intense, that then he al∣vvays enjoyed the beatifical vision, the sole and necessary cause of such a love. For it is an undoubted maxime, That positis ut sublatis effectu, & causa necessariis, ponuntur & olluntur causa & effectus. And if so, vvhat then shall vve say to the Author of a mixture of Scholastical Divinity vvith Practical, Henry Jeanes of Chedzey? for sayes he not expressely. That it is not to be denied, but that by special dispensa∣tion, there vvas some restraint of the influence of this happinesse or beatifical vision, in the vvhole course of his humillation, and particu∣larly in the time of his doleful passion? And novv if his fervour of love vvere a natural issue of the beatifical vision, it vvill necessarily follovv, that as that his happinesse, and clear intuitive sight of the divine essence vvas restrained, so the fervour of his love vvas propor∣tionably abated also. Here he dravves tvvo Propositions from my vvords. 1. That Christ did not always enjoy the beatifical vision. 2. That sometimes the fervour of his love of God was abated. Now both these inferences are very inconsequent. For First, this stands the first, there was some restraint of the influence of the beatifical vision in Christ. Therefore he did not alwayes enjoy the beatifical vision, with as good Logick a man may conclude, that there was no heat in the fire, Dn. 3. because God restrained its influence up∣on the bodies of those three Worthies. It is very strange, that this our great Schoolman should b so ignorant, as to confound the inter∣ruption or cessation of the beatifical vision, vvith the restraint of its influence: or to think the former a necessary sequel of the later. Here by the vvay observe, that vvhereas the Defendant p. 523. quotes a saying of Leo, vvhich he saith is approved of by all Antiquity, that at the time of our Saviours passion. Non dissolvit unionem sed substraxit visi∣nem; It is to be understood vvarily, that the beatifical vision vvas vvithdravvn only in regard of influence, and never in respect of existence; for that in had a perpetual being or existence in the soul of Christ▪ i upon very good reasons affirmed by the generalitie of both Papists and Pro∣testants.
The second Inference is every way as inconsequent: for thus it stands. There was, by special dispensation, some restraint of the influence of his beatifical vi∣sion: Therefore there vvas a restraint of the influence of it upon his love of God; so that the fervour of his love vvas proportionablie abated, as the in∣fluence of his beatifical vision vvas restrained. Here is palpable fallacie, à dicio secund quid, ad dictum simpliciter; the restraint of the influence of the beatifi∣cal vision in Christ is particular, not universal. There vvas, I said, some restraint of the influence of this happinesse, or beatifical vision, &c. And I instanced in the particulars, upon vvhich the restraint of this influence vvas, of vvhich his love of God vvas none. Thirteenthly, p. 378, 379, 380, 381. the Defendant chargeth me to make use of an objection, that not only opposes Dr. Hammond in this particular, but equally overthrovvs the vvhole Christian Religion, that destroys the doctrine of the eveblessed Trinitie the Godhead, and satisfaction of our Saviour, and the immortalitie of the soul, and hell-fire, and eternal torments, that blovvs up as vvell the office as the maintenance of Ministers, and opens a broad gap for the Socinian and Anabaptist, the Ranter and Atheist, to come and invade all that is sacred among us. This is a terrible and most horrid accu∣sation, and if the Defendant cannot make it good, he may (to use his ovvn vvords, p. 11.) justlie be decried for the most monstrous Railer and Syco∣phant, or any vvose thing that Christianitie abominates. But he pretends that he hath made it good. And novv that the Reader may see that I do you no vvrong. I shall for the present suppose that the Doctor had borrovved this Exposition from Bellarmine, and consider the force of your Argument against him, upon this supposition. I reduce it thus into forme, that the strength of it may appear. Whosoever makes use of any Argument or Tenent, or Ex∣position of Scripture, that is to be found in Bellarmine or other Popish Wri∣ters, is guiltie of a compliance vvith Papists. But Dr. Hammond makes use of this very Exposition vvhich is to be found in Bellarmine. Ergo, Dr. Ham∣mond is guiltie of compliance vvith Papists. That you do me intolerable wrong the Reader may see, if he will but peruse my words. "Your Reader hath just reason to expect a confirmation of what you say. "Because this very Answer is the shift of Papists in several controversies be∣tween them and us, Bellarm Tom. 2. De Monarchis. lib. 2. cap. 1. Tom. 4. de amissi∣one gratie, & statu peccati. lib. 1. cap. 12. &c. And was it not fit that you should acquaint us, what those cogent reasons were that necessitated you unto this complyance with Papists? Now from these words of mine, the Father of Lyes cannot inferre that proposition, which you most injuriously Father upon me. viz. that whosoever make use of any argument, or Tenent, or exposition of Scripture, that is to be found in Bellarmine or other Popish Writers, is guilty of complyance with Papists. But the Defendant will extort this pro∣position from my word whether I will or no. What say you Sir, is not this your present argument? Can you give us any other proposition, to reduce your Socratial Enthymeme into a Syllogisme? If you cannot, pray tell me then, what strength is in your Major, and what answer you will give to it, when a Socinian, an Anabaptist, or Ranter, or Atheist, shal presse you with it, &c. And so he raves on most furiously, as if he were wood, not only in this but the next page. But to discover to every ordinary Reader, that he doth most grossely and palpably calumniate me; I shall reduce my words into two Syllogismes, and yet leave out that proposition, which he so maliciously imputes unto me. The pro∣position
to be proved it, that it was fit that Dr. H. should acquaint his Readers what those cogent Reasons were that necessitated him unto the answer that he gave, and thus 'tis proved. If this answer were guilty of complyance with Pa∣pists then it Was sit that Dr. H. should acquaint us, vvhat cogent reasons nece∣ssitated him hereunto But this ansvver is gulty of complyance vvith apists. And therfore it vvas fit that Dr. Hammond should acquaint us, vvhat cogent reasons necessitated him hereunto. For consmation of the Minor the particle this, (this complyance) &c. carri∣eth us to the foregoing vvords, and from them vve may cravv this Syllogisme. That ansvver vvhich is the sht of Papists in several controversies betvveen them and us, is guilty of complyance vvith Papists. But this ansvver is the shift of Papists, in several controversies betvvixt them and us. And therefore 'tis guilty of complyance vvith Papist. And novv my vvords being thus Analyzed, the Reader cannot but be astonished, a Shlar, a Mn of wi, and parts, a Minister, a Christian, should so forget himself, as to lay at my doores a proposition, that hath no bottome at all in my vvords, bt is his ovvn meere invention, that I say not forgery, and I believe h can hadly tell vvhich to vvonder at most, the malice or ignorance that is in this crimination of the Defendant. But I forget my selfe, thus to go beyond the limits that I have pre∣fixed to my selfe, in the examination of this Volume. and indeed I beleeve 'tis very inksome unto the Reader, as vvell as unto my self, to take in such a Dunghil of Non-seuiturs as this vvork is, and there∣fore I shall trouble the Reader vvith the Examination of but one Argument more, and that I am vvilling to inst a little upon, because it seems at first blush o be of more force and weight then the rest. And besides, 'tis concerning that vvhich is the the , the matter in connoversie, 'tis dra from Luke 2.52. And Jesus ino eased in wisdom and stature, and in grate wih God and man. This Argument the Defendant prosecutes from page 188. usqe a 206.343, 344, 369, 370, 572 573. &c. useod 596. vvhere he heaps up the e∣st monies of a vvorld of Commentators, vvhereof many contradict one ano hen st no purpose, that I knovv, but to distract the unvvary▪ and unlearned Read∣er, and to vvork in hm a belief, that our Defendant is a man of vast reading. The Argument for better distinction-sake may be branched into tvvo parts. First, he argueh from Christs increase in vvisdom, he increased in wisdome; therefore he increased also in the invvard actual love of God. The reason of the consequence is, because love of necessitie bears propo∣tion unto knovvledge, p 60 370 431, 512, 524. Unto this I shall return several Ansvvers. The first is▪ in the first part of my mixture, p. 249. The increase in wisdom hré spoken of, is only extensive, not inensive, and from an extensive increase in wisdom, can never be inferred an intensive increase, in the inward acts of the love of God. Yea, but saith our Defendant, p. 191. how you will reconcile this with what followes, I will lev any man to judge: and so will I too, provided that he be a man that und stands any thing of an Argument  for such a one will quickly perceive, that there is nothing in that which followeth, either in my own words, or else in those quoted one of Amos, which doth in the least degree contradict what I say. Secondly, it is only an increase in the knowledge of the formal object of the love of God, viz. his infinite goodnesse in himself, that will argue and inferre an increase in the inward actual love of God. Now that Christ increased in know∣ledge
of the infinite goodnesse of God in himself; St. Luke never averred, nei∣ther will any man averr it, but an Arian or Socinian. The Defendant objects often against me, that I confesse, that the fulnesse of Christs knowledge in the state of humliation, was consistent with the nesci∣ence of dirs things. But, pray Sir, what were those diverse things he knew not as man? I say the day of judgment, the barrennesse of the figtree, &c. p. 249. But do I, or any Schoolman, or any Orthodox Protestant say, that Nescience of the tormal object of divine love, Gods infinite goodnesse in him∣self, was consistent wth the fulnesse of his know edge. If not, all that you say is a meer extravagce. Thirdly, the increase in wisdom that Luke speaks of, is by none of all the Au∣thors that you alledge, applied unto the beatifical vision; and if Christ did not increase in his beatifical vision, then neither in his beatifick love, and conse∣quently not in his love at all: for there was in him at the same time only one inward actual love of God, for accidenti numero tantum diversa non pssunt esse sinal in edem subject: as for the acts of the infused habit of divine love, di∣stinct from the ba ifick love, they (as I have already shewn) are proved by Vasquez to be but a fignent, and as much may be said of that love of compla∣eency, that acquisite and experimental love, which you ascribe unto Christ, p 537. for you make it to arise from Christs acquisite or experimental know∣ledge: And that Vasquez proves to be imposble, because the act of the love of God, seeing 'tis of a supernatural order, ought to arise from a supernatutal knowledge of God, and such is not that which is acquisite and experimental. Exscientiâ cquisitâ nullum actam amoris circa Deum esse posse, nisestum est, quia actus charitatis cum sit supernaturalis ordinis, oriidbet exnotitiâ D supernaturali, in tertiam tem Thomae tom. 1. dsp. 73. c. 3. p. 790. As for the Reason whereby your consequence is confirmed, our love must of necessity be roportioned unto our knowledge; It is, I suppose, to be un∣derstood of a gradual proportion, in point of degree, and yet even so it needs limitation. For 'tis evident that it failes, if it be understood universally of all men. For, First the knowledge of many surmounts their love of vertuous objects: but this is a sinful disparity, and therefore I shall wave it. But secondly, mens love many times doth, and sawfully may, exceed their knowledge in point of degree. A mans love of Philosophy, may be more in∣tente then his skill in it. Aquinas 1.2. q 27. a. 2. the Question there debated is, Ʋum nii fit caus amoris; the second Objection against the Affirma∣tive is as followeth, Ejusdem ratiois vidtur esse, quod aliqud incognitum ametur, & quod aliquid amtur plusquon cgaoseatur: sd aliqua amantur plusquam cognosun∣tar, sicut Deus, qui in hic vit potest per seipsum amari, nn autem per sespsum cognosci: ergo cognio nonest cusa amoris. Unto this Objection Auinas returnes ths fol∣lowing answer, Ad secundum dicendum, quod aliquid requiitur adperfectionem cgitio is, quod non requiritur ad persectionem ais. Cognitio enim adaonem per∣tiet, cuius est distingue einterea quae secundum rem sunt conjuncta; & componere quo∣damodo ea quae sunt diversa, unu lteri comparando, & id ò ad persectionem cogniti∣onis reqiitur quod hom cgnoscat figillaim quiquid est in re, s ut partes, & virtutes & propriettes. Sed amor est in vi appetitiva, quae respicit rem secundum quod in se est Ʋde ad perfectionem ameris sufficit, quod res prout in se apprehn litur, ametur. Ob hoc ergo contingit quod liquid plus ame, quam cognoscaur: qua potest perfectè amari etmsi non persectè gnoscatur: sicut maximè pet in scientii, quas aliqui amant pro∣pior iquam sumariam cognitionem quem de eis habent, put a quod sciun Rhetorican esse se tiam, er quam homo porest persuadere, & hoe in Rhetorica amnt Esimil∣ter est diendum circa amore Dei. From the last words Irenaeus the Carmlite d
Anim c. 3. s. 6. p. 151. hath this inference, Inde fit, u lict Deu lvite cognsca∣mus, vehementer tmen eum aliqundo amemus. Against this doctrine of Aqs Irenaeus propound, an Objection, and returnes unto it an Answer, both which I shall insert, Dices, Tuncigitur voluntas fertur in incogni rations excessûs amoris supa cognitionem. Rs. Dist. aneced. sertu in incognium simpliciter, nego: fertur in incognitum cognitione distinctâ & perfectâ, concdo.  etimi distinc & explice non cognos singula, quae sunt objecti; tamen implicitè  cognscit, saltem novit illud esse appetibile. Reslara est exemplo. Plures enim ardenter appetunt scienti. v.g. Rhe∣ricam, Philosophiam, &c. Eis viae sciant queles a sint, sed solum quod doceant medum dis∣crurrendi, &c Hinc etiam fit ut aliquando levis cogittio animi, aut propositio alicujus ob∣jecti intensum excitet amorem, eò qòod mgna sit convenientiatalis objects cum appetius, licèt ills notitia fit consusa in intellectu. And thus you see this proposition, our love of necessity must beare propo∣tion unto our knowledge, is not true, if it be understood universally of all men, and so 'tis understood by the Defendant, for he speaks not only of Christ, but of us: Our love of necessity, must bare proportion to our knowledge, &c. But now concerning Christ we shall readily grant, that his love of God was alwaies for degree proportioned unto his knowledge o God, his knowledge of God's in∣finite goodnesse in himself. But now that he increased in this knowledge, Luke doth not affirme, neither have you proved that he is to be understood hereof, by any of the School▪men in Paul's▪Church-yard, or in the Library at Oxford. Nor by any other of the Authorities, of which you make in the pages forecited, such a vain-glorious, but impertinent muster. The second branch of the argument is taken from Christs increase in grace, he increased in grace, therefore in the love of God, at least actual: for love is a grace of God. But is it that grace of God, which Luke speaks of, let the Reader but look up∣on the words following, , which God and man, and the addition of them, (which addition our Defendant for the most part leaves our, in his quotation of the words) will soon inform him, that Luke speaketh not of the grace of the Spirit in Christ, either actual or habitual, but of the grace of Gods favour towards him: and in our Translation , is rendred in favour. Now in Gods favour he did not increase otherwise, then in some effects, fruits and signes thereof, and from that our Defendant can never con∣clude a gradual increase in the inward acts of Christs love of God. The Defendant quotes me p. 189, 369. as saying, that Christ did as truly and really grow in the invvard acts of vvisdom and grace, as he did in stature. Indeed I said that he did as really increase in vvisdom aske did in stature. But that he did as really increase in grace as in stature, I never said, I never thought, for I vvell knevv that his increase in stature vvas proper, vvhereas he increased in favour or grace vvith God, only improperly and metonymically, in regard of the effects and tokens thereof. That Christ then encreased in the invvard acts of grace, as really as he did in stature, are none of my vvords, but foisted in by the Defendant, vvih vvhat truth and ingenuity, I leave unto the Reader to judg. And now I shall dismisse the Reader, and take my leave of the Defendant too. The Gentleman is pleased (p. 643.) to promise, that if I manage my Reply in a Scholastical way, then he will keep close unto our Ob. and So this indeed would be very acceptable, as unto my selfe, so also unto all judicious Readers. But when I consider how in this pretended Defence, he hath all a long vapor∣ed, bragged, railed, and raved, like a Bedlam, I have little reason to expect from him any such thing as a faire, candid, regular, and orderly disputation. Hovvever he shall have my hearty prayers unto God, to cure him of this his raging distemper, that  the future he may as Paul (Act. 26.25.) speak forth the words of truth and sober. FINIS.
