K127 12572215 63505
Monumenta Westmonasteriensia: OR AN Historical Account OF THE Original, Increase, and Present State OF St. PETER's, OR, The Abby Church OF WESTMINSTER. WITH All the Epitaphs, Inscriptions, Coats of Arms, and Atchievements of Honor belonging to the Tombs and Grave-Stones: TOGETHER With the Monuments themselves faithfully described and set forth. With the Addition of three whole Sheets. By H. K. of the Inner-Temple, Gent. London, Printed for C. Wilkinson, and T. Dring, at the Black-Boy, and at the Harrow in Fleetstreet. 1683.
TO The Right Honorable HENRY Lord HOWARD Earl of Arundel, &c. Heir apparent to the Illustrious Prince Henry Duke of Norfolk, &c. And Earl Martial of England, &c. My Lord, THe honour I have had (for some years past) of being of your Lord∣ships acquaintance hath given me assurance of troubling your Great∣ness, at present, with a Dedication. But when your Lordship shall un∣derstand
to whose sacred protecti∣on your illustrious name is called upon; and that no less than the dead Ashes of your noble Ance∣stors, humbly lay themselves  your Honours feet (branch'd  their several Stems, and mix'd with those of the Bloud-Royal o England:) I am confident my in∣vitation will want wings, and come too late, compared to your Lord∣ships fervent wishes and willing desires to embrace them: For that innate piety wherewith your ex∣cellent Progenitors have in all ages signalized themselves is more par∣ticularly eminent in you, as imme∣diately deriving it from so great a stream of virtue as your renown∣ed
Father, the present Duke of Norfolk. Our Chronicles, our Histories, our Records are all full of the glo∣rious Actions, and puissant Name of the Howards. The lofty Stru∣ctures and Princely Fabricks disper∣sed here and there in this our Island of Great Britain silently speak the Magnificence of their Founders your Predecessors: And those who have had the opportunity of being abroad, and have passed through France, Flanders, Brabant, Germany, even to Rome it self, can want no occasion of beholding the pious footsteps of your Religioce∣ors, by those many marks o un∣ and liberality they have left be∣hind
them. And as if Europe alone were too little to have so great a name confined within its bor∣ders, you have made a descent into Asia, from thence into Affrick, and planted your fame in no less than three parts of the habitable World. To whom then, My Lord, could I more properly offer these my endeavours but to your self, if for no other reason than that you in∣herit as well the virtues as the ho∣nours of such renowned Ancestors. But when I shall declare, That it was always my intentition to pre∣sent your Lordship with the first fruits of these my poor labours ever since I had the honour of knowing
your Lordship, by reason of that affable disposition and generous temper I constantly beheld in your great mind, I hope your Lordship will pardon my intrusion, and give me leave upon your own account to subscribe my self, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, Henry Keepe.
TO THE READER. OBserving (when I was takingThe reason and occasion of this under∣taking. out the Inscriptions, Epitaphs, and Arms belonging to the Tombs and Funeral Monu∣ents of this Church, for my particular tisfaction and delight) what a daily con∣ourse of Gentlemen, and Ladies; as ell Forainers, as Natives, led by their riosity, came to behold this so famous Mausolaeum, or place of Sepulchre and Re∣ository of our Kings, Princes, and chief Nobility, with the Encomium's and prai∣s that were continually bestowed thereon: et at the same time I could perceive a nging kind of desire that some of the more iudicious and Inquisitive had to be better nformed, than what this cursory sight, d the imperfect relation of the Tomb∣ewer had given, by their frequent in∣iry after some Historical Narration or rinted account concerning this Churches
Antiquities and Memories. But when they understood how among all the noted Churches of the neighbouring Nations round about her, she only had the misfor∣tune in this particular to be least attempted; not without some shew of discontent, and admiration at so great a neglect and care∣lesness of her inhabitants, They went away full of dissatisfaction and dislike. This consideration gave me the occasion of exposing these my Collections to the pub∣lick, that (if possible) I might in soe measure take off the Imputation and blame (not without reason) laid to our charge, by reviving again the almost dead remem∣brance of this Churches greatness and for∣merTo inform Strangers, and oblige the Natives. splendour, and by leaving to Posteri∣ty the condition she continues in at this day. And if herein I have been any ways serviceable to my worthy Countrymen, and can oblige the Noble Stranger, I shall esteem my pains and labour so well bestowed, that I may be induced (accord∣ing to the favourable reception this Essay shall meet with in the world) to travel further in the like kind hereafter. Omitting therefore all tedious ha∣ranguesThe memora∣ble commen∣dations of this Abby. and long discourses concerning this Churches reputation and renown, (as is usual on such subjects) by reason of my
designed brevity in the whole, I shall only tell you that for Antiquity, Princely In∣dowments, large Priviledges and Immu∣nities, it always was, and still remains, inferiour to none of the most illustrious Churches either at home or abroad: But in this is her principal glory, that all our Kings and Queens (at least from the days of EDWARD the Confessour) have honoured it with their Inaugura∣tions or Coronations, and many of them made it the place of their burials and Sepulchres. The Method that I have proposed inThe Method observed in this Work. 1. The Histo∣ry of the Churches ori∣ginal and con∣tinuance to this day. this undertaking, is first to give you a concise and short Historical account of the Original, foundation, and continu∣ance of this Church both in its Buildings and Government, with the several alte∣rations and vicissitudes it hath met with for the spce of fifteen hundred years or more. And although therein I may seem to differ from many others who have sprinkled thir greater Works with some∣thing concerning this Abby, yet I have done it upon such grounds, and taken my evidence from such authentick Re∣cords and Testimonies, that I have little reason to doubt of the certainty or truth thereof.
In the next place, (for that I could2. The de∣scription of the Tombs and Monu∣ments therein. not have the Fabrick, with the Mon∣ments therein so represented to your eye by their Icon's as I could wish; the charge and cost far exceeding a private under∣taking) I have endeavoured, by giving you a lively description of each Tomb and Monument by words, to fix some Sentiments and delightful Ideas thereof in your mind. And lastly, I have added all the Epi∣taphs,3. The Epi∣taphs, Inscri∣ptions, and Coats of Arms Inscriptions, and Tables, as they are now remaining, by which such in∣animate Creatures are wont to tell us why they are there posited, and for whom. In collecting these Epitaphs and In∣scriptionsThe trouble in collecting the Epitaphs, &c. (notwithstanding the gre care to preserve them to the contrary) I found many liable to the same sate with others elsewhere, either wholly worn away by the malevolence of time, or defaced by the injury they receive by negligent and heedless Passengers. To supply this de∣fect I have taken the greatest pains ima∣ginable, and I dare promise, there is no a Tomb or Monument, either in the Church or Chappels, except some fe Gravestones in the Area, but that I have given a satisfactory account to whom
they belong. For those InscriptionsThough in∣deavoured by others, yet performed but in part. which are more perfect, and visible, it may be said, I might have saved my self that trouble, seeing CAMDEN, STOWE, and WEAVER have done it already. Truly I should have been glad to have have found in any (or all) of them to∣gether that certainty that I might have relied thereon. CAMDEN, if that small Work be1. By William Camden in lib. intit. Reg. Re∣gin. Nob. &c. in Eccl. B. Pe∣tri Westm. Edit. Lond. 1600. 1603. & 1606. his, (which I much doubt) of the fu∣neral Monuments of this Church (which was so acceptable that it was Printed no less than three times in five years) is the most to be commended of any I have yet seen, but it will not reach us in many things as well as point of time, the last Impression being in the year 1606. STOWE in his Survey of London2. By John Stowe in his Survey of Lon∣don Edit. 1603. and continued by A. M. 1618. and by A. M. and H. D. to 1633. and Westminster, and the continu∣ators of him untill the year 1633. have only set down what pleased themselves, or what they thought most remarkable, neglecting many other worthy a remem∣brance; and those they have given us, when the Inscriptions have been long, and in Latine (or any other Lan∣guage than English, as there are some in Greek, and others in French) they have
clipped them off in the midst, or wholly left them out. WEAVER, whose method would not3. By John Weaver in his antient fune∣ral Monu∣ments of great Britain▪ &c Edit. Lond. 1631. permit him to put forth any other than the Antient Epitaphs and Inscriptions, hath rather in them trusted to the credit of those Books and Authors from whence he drew them, than gone to the trouble of searching whether any such were remain∣ing when he wrote, or no; as s manifest by very many alledged by him, which had been torn, or worn away in the beginning of the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH. All these defects I have therefore sup∣pliedAll their de∣fects supplied. by comparing the Inscriptions, men∣tioned by CAMDEN, STOWE, and WEAVER, and correcting them ac∣cording to the originals remaining at this day, and have set them down as they are now in being; and what are not, will be seen in the description of any such speechless Monument. To this I have continued the Epitaphs from the years 1631. and 1633. (where STOWE and WEAVER left off to this present time) where (in the compass of little less thanAnd above 120. Epitaphs added with their Coats of Arms, &c. fifty years) have been produced mo than one hundred and twenty seve Inscriptions. And what as yet hath
been undertaken by none, I have added Coats of Arms, with the Atchieve∣ments of honour in Blazon of all those Kings, Princes, Noblemen, and others, that have any such like adornments on their Tombs or Grave-stones. And I have set them down either with, or without co∣lours, as I have found them, without any addition or alteration of my own, that what faults are committed, might not be imputed to me, but to the ignorance or carelesness of the Carver, Graver, or Painter. The same likewise may be said of the harsh English and bad Latine that is to be met with in many of the Epitaphs and Inscriptions, which would have been as unprofitable, as it were an endless labour every where to have rectified, and there∣foreThe Authors short Apology for himself and Printer. I have left them in their native sim∣plicity, unless some faults of the Printer may have contributed to their alteration, for whom and for my self I shall make no farther Apology, or detain you any lon∣ger, but leave all to your candid ingenuity and acceptance. H. K.
MONUMENTA Westmonasteriensia, OR AN Historical Account OF THE Original, Increase, and present State OF St. PETER's, &c. §. 1. AMong particular Fami∣liesThe Intro∣duction to the History of this Churches Ori∣ginal. and Generations of Men, those Genealogies and descents have been esteemed the most Noble and Illustrious which carry with them the greatest certainty of their existence for many Ages. So sumptuous Buildings and Religious Structures are in nothing more valued and set by, or sooner in∣vite the Eye of the curious Passenger to behold them, than when they bear
an outward shew and appearaece of venerable Age and reverend Antiqui∣ty: If therefore so great Honour and Renown be acquired by the real Anti∣quity of the first, and Respect by the seeming appearance of the last; I doubt not, That this Edifice of St. PETER'sEminent for her Antiquity. or the Abby Church of Westminster (which I have undertaken for my Pro∣vince at this time) will want either; as being attended with all these invi∣ting circumstances. For if we behold the Fabrick as it now stands, nothing so intire in this our Nation can seem more Venerable and Antique, or if we dive into her Histories and Records, we shall find those who have asserted her Original to bear date almost with Christianity it self, and that the Apostle St. PETER was the first who ErectedA Christian Chappel here in the time of the Apostle St. Peter. a Christian Oratory or Chappel here: But upon what probable conjectures or humane certainties they have grounded this their Opinion, it is not my inten∣tion at present to discuss. §. 2. Let it therefore suffice that about the latter end of the Second Age, we want not Authorities of good Cre∣dit and Reputation, who tell us; That
LUCIUS King of the Britans, whoA. D. 183. A Church built here by Lucius King of the Britans. ruled here by permission of the Ro∣mans, having relinquished his Pagan Superstition and Heathen Idolatry, and imbraced the true Faith of CHRIST, sought as much as in him lay to Esta∣blish this his new Belief over all his Do∣minions, and as means conducing there∣unto commanded, That the Heathen and Idolatrous Temples should be abo∣lished, and in their rooms Christian and Religious Structures Erected, and that in this place where our Church of Westminster now stands, a Christian Oratory was Built by him and Dedi∣cated to St. Peter. But when the Per∣secution under Dioclesian and Maxi∣minian, the one in the East and the other in the West, grew so large and exten∣sive that it stretched it self to the re∣motest parts of the Roman Empire, and coming into Britain, became so violent and resistless that ev'ry where the Chri∣stians were put to death with most un∣heard of Cruelties and exquisite Tor∣ments, the Women deflowred, theA. D. 313. Destroyed by Dioclesian and turned into a Temple of Apollo. Churches subverted, and in their places Temples again Erected to the Gods of the Heathen. This Church built here by Lucius, after one hundred and
thirty years, was immediately pulled down and turned into a prophane Tem∣ple of Apollo, so that in the same place where God had been devoutly worship∣ed before in his own Church, Idola∣trous abominations were afterwards performed, the place losing the memo∣ry of its former Christian Inhabitants became the head and principal seat where Pagans exercised their execrable Superstitions. §. 3. How long this Temple of A∣polloThe Temple of Apollo sub∣verted. continued, or by what means it came to be destroyed: whether decay∣ed for want of those necessary repara∣tions which are requisite towards the support of such Structures? or that it fell down, and was overturned as some think by an Earthquake? I cannot be certain: For we hear no more thereof for almost three hundred years, and then we find it utterly subverted altogether in its ruins, and the place so overgrown with Briars and Thorns, with the Ri∣ver of Thames flowing about it; That the Saxons who were now the Inhabi∣tants, had given it a Name suitable to its new condition by calling it Thorney Island, or the Island of Thorns. Here
it was and on those Ruins of Apollo's Temple that Segebert or Sebert King ofA. D. 6 . On whose ruins another Christian Church was Erected by Sebert King of the East-Sax∣ons, and Dedi∣cated to St. Peter. the East-Saxons, soon after his Conver∣sion to Christianity and his being Bap∣tized by the hands of Augustine the Mong, commanded another Noble Edi∣fice and Christian Church should be Erected and Dedicated to the remem∣brance of its former Patron St. Peter. And that there might not be wanting a sufficient number of Religious Persons continually to attend the Celebration of the Holy Sacraments and Services of this Church: He was at the same time induced by the persuasion of Mellitus who was then Bishop of London, to Build an adjoyning Covent, and libe∣rally to indow it for their better sup∣portAnd a Mona∣stery adjoyn∣ed thereunto. and maintenance: which from the scituation thereof and in opposition to another that was placed on the East side of the City of London took the name of , that is, the West-Monastery or Minster, as it is called at this day. Of the famed Miracle and Story of the wonderful Consecration of this Church at that time by St. Peter himself who list to read, may find it writ by AELRED Abbot of Rivauloe, in the Life of EDWARD the Confes∣sor,
as likewise in BARONIUS and ALFORDUS in their Ecclesiastical Annals, Bishop USHER in his rise and original of the Churches of Great Bri∣tain, with others. §. 4. This Church and Monastery,A. D 959. Almost ruined by the Danes, and the Monks slain, but re∣paired by King Edgar. with many more, was cruelly harrased and destroyed by fire, with all the Monks therein slain some Ages after the first institution, by the outrage of the barbarous and inhumane Danes, and so continued desolate and forsaken un∣till the days of King EDGAR, by whose care and bounty it was again new cased and re-edified, and by the vigilance of St. DUNSTAN, supplied with a small number of Monks of the Order of St. BENEDICT, set∣ting over them for their chief Gover∣nour or Abbot, the Bishop WOLSINE, who by his exemplary holiness and piety gat himself the renown of being placed in the Kalendar for a Saint; he died and was buried here, saith Mat∣thew of Westminster, about the year nine hundred fifty eight.
§. 5. Afterwards, when King ED∣WARDA. D. 1045. The occasion of re-building this Church by King Ed∣ward the Con∣fessor. the Confessor came from his exile out of Normandy, and calling to mind the vows and promises he had then made to Almighty God in case of his restauration, grew much troubled, that having been some time in England, he had so long neglected to perform the same; wherefore he called an Assembly or Convocation both of his Clergy and Nobility, and related to them his intention of visiting the chief Pastor of the Church, and his going to Rome, according to the tenor of those Vows and Promises: But this resolution of his was diverted by the earnest intrea∣ties, and persuasions of his Subjects, who having but newly recovered a little breath from their former grie∣vances and oppressions, were fearful upon his so sudden departure that their peace might be disturbed, and themselves relapse again under their old burthens and vexations, so that laying before him (even with tears in their eyes, and hearts full of sorrow) the imminent danger the Common∣wealth must inevitably fall into upon his removal or withdrawing, sought
with all their endeavours that other measures might be taken, wherein him∣self might not be altogether disquieted for the non-performance of his Pro∣mises, nor they absolutely ruined by his absence. And therefore with all diligence Embassadors were dispatched away to the Bishop of Rome, who ha∣ving related the case, and procured a Breve from the Papacy for the dispen∣sation with the said Vows, they re∣turned again to their disconsolate Ma∣ster, informing him of their success, and the imposition injoyned him in lieu of his Promise, viz. That all the expences that he had prepared for his Journey should be distributed among the poor and indigent; and that he should build a new, or repair some old Monastery, to the honour of St. PETER. §. 6. This then was the occasion that our old ruined Abby, (founded by King SEBERT, destroyed by the Danes, and re-edified by King ED∣GAR) now fallen into great decay, was thought on as a place most proper for such an undertaking; but much sooner was the performance thereof
put in execution, and the design ac∣complished, when this pious King un∣derstood that it was the express will and command of St. PETER himself that he should do so. If you will be∣lieve those who report that WULFI∣NUS (a man whose austerity of life and retirement from the world had gained him the reputation of being no small Prophet among his brethren) had orders in a vision to inform him.His great dili∣gence and ex∣pence there∣in. With all alacrity therefore he set him∣self to the work, commanding that his Estate, either in Gold, Silver, Jewels, or Possessions should be de∣cimated, and appropriated to the pul∣ling down the old ruined Church of King SEBERT, and the erecting a most stately Edifice in the place there∣of. He removed the Parish Church of St. MARGARETS (which then stood in the Cloisters of the old Abby) and built another in the Church-yard,The Magnifi∣cence of this Fabrick, and the first built in the form of a Cross. that he might make more room for this his magnificent foundation, for as such it was reputed by those who were eye∣witnesses of it, which for august maje∣sty and excellent contrivance that Age could not parallel, affording a pattern of framing Churches in the figure of
a Cross, which in succeeding times was emulated (saith WILLIAM of Malms∣bury) with incredible expences. For the greater honour of this new erected Fabrick, in imitation of the glorious Emperour CONSTANTINE (as the learned SPELMAN observes) he cal∣led together an Assembly of all his chief Clergy and Nobility, that theyThe solemn dedication of this his Church. might be present on the day of the solemn dedication of this Church, and witnesses of his Princely bounty and liberal Magnificence, which was shewn by the endowing it with large Posses∣sions, adorning it with high privi∣ledges, and exemptions, making it a perpetual Sanctuary, and habitation for Benedictine Monks (which heThe endow∣ments and priviledges granted there∣to. brought from Exeter and placed here) who should be subject to no other per∣son but to the King only. To these he confirmed it to be the place for ever (as it had been aforetime) of the Kings Constitution and Consecration; the Repository of the Royal Crown and Ensigns of Majesty; and gave to∣wardsThe donation of the Rega∣lia. the same several rich Vestments, golden Crows and Scepters, a Dalma∣tick embroidered Pall, a pair of Spurs, Linnen Gloves, a Tortois-shell Comb
set in Gold, a Chalice made of an Onyx stone, bound about the foot with a Patten thereunto all of pure Gold, with some other Royal Gifts and Per∣quisites to be used on the days of the Inauguration or Coronation of our Kings and Queens, many of them re∣maining at this day preserved, and in the custody of the Dean and Chapter ofAnd the con∣firmation of all by three Royal Char∣ters, being the first sealed Charters in England. this Church. All these Possessions, Pri∣viledges, and rich Gifts were ratified at the same time by his signing and sea∣ling three Royal Charters, and getting them confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, whose Bull was inserted in the body of the Great Charter according to the custom of that Age. After allHis Death and Burial. vid. Sect. 146. which he fell sick, and soon after died, and was buried according to his desire in this his new Church of Westminster. §. 7. One hundred and threescoreA. D. 1220. The structure of King Ed∣ward pulled down, and an∣other erected by King Henry III. with a new Chappel to the blessed Virgin. years had now passed from the time of King EDWARD the Confessor, (during which space all the Kings and Queens of England had not been sparing in their Liberalities whilst living, nor forget∣ful by their Legacies when dead, to increase and multiply the Revenues of
this Monastery) when HENRY III. King of England, commanded the old Fabrick of King EDWARD to be ta∣ken down, and out of the largeness of his Princely mind, began part of that work which is now standing, laying the first stone thereof in the year 1220. and as an addition thereunto built a particular Chappel at the East end, and dedicated it to the Virgin Mary. But such was his misfortune at this time, that having begun a work, so ample and large, that it exceeded the bounds and incomes of his revenue, he was for∣ced to have recourse to means not alto∣gether so honourable as he could have wished to finish the same. For by a wile or stratagem he procured money of the Citizens of London, with which, and by the help of the Monks, (who very much enlarged it towards the West) at length, after fifty years time, and a won∣derful charge, it was finished. §. 8. But long had not this ChurchA. D. 1274. Destroyed by fire, and re∣paired by the bounty of King Edw. I and II. with the help of the Abbots. of King HENRY continued, when a sudden fire hapning in the Palace hard by, and the wind driving the devou∣ring flames towards the Abby, it took hold of the Church, whereby the
Roof, which was then covered with Lead, and all the Timber therein was consumed, leaving nothing but the bare Walls as a mournful remembrance of its former splendour; which by the assistance of King EDWARD I. and II. with the help of the Abbots was again repaired, some of whom were especi∣al Builders and Benefactors to this Monastery. §. 9. As SIMON LANGHAM,A. D. 1359. 1. Simon Lang∣ham, vid. § 46. who being Abbot, (and afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury) he dischar∣ged a debt of 2200 marks, owing by this Covent to some Merchants: he gave 400 pounds towards the finish∣ing the body of the Church, Books to to the value of 830 pounds. And for∣gave this Church a debt which was owing him of 3954 pounds▪ §. 10. NICOLAS LITLINGTONA. D. 1380. 2. Nicolas Lit∣lington. vide §. 45. Abbot, who from the foundation built the Hall and great Chamber called Hierusalem, with the West and South side of the great Cloister, his Arms re∣maining there at this day, viz. Quar∣terly Argent and Gules, in the second and third a Fret Or, on a Bend B. 3. Flowers∣de-lucies
of the third. He also erected the Granary which is now the dormito∣ry for the Kings Scholars, with the Tower adjoyning, and a Water Mill for the use of the same Abby. §, 11. JOHN ESTNEY eased thisA. D. 1436. 3. John Estney. vid. §. 171. Church of 3070 pounds which was owing to the See of Rome for the confirmation of their Abbots, and built the great West Window at his own charge. §. 12. And JOHN ISLIP, who wasA. D. 1500. 4. John Islip. vid. §. 141. a man of great Authority in the time of HENRY the Seventh, King of Eng∣land. He built that which is now the Deans House, repaired much of the Church and other buildings belonging to this Monastery, renewing all the Butteresses, and placing in the Niches thereof the Statues of all the Kings and Queens that had been Benefactors to the same. §. 13. In this Abbots time it was thatA. D. 1502. The new Chappel of King Hen. VII. built. vid. §. 77. HENRY VII. before-mentioned in the year 1502. intending a more sum∣ptuous and curious Chappel to the ho∣nour of the Blessed Virgin, than what
King HENRY III. had already built, pulled down that Structure so reared by him, and erected that stately Edi∣fice now called by his name, which by LELAND, and other learned Antiqua∣ries, is stiled (not unworthy) Orbis Miraculum, or the wonder of the World. The King himself laid the first stone thereof, and forbad by his last Will and Testament that any but the Bloud Royal should be interred therein, expending in the raising and finishing this curious Fabrick the sum of 1400 pounds only. §. 14. From hence (as to the build∣ingsThe Govern∣ment of this Church, with its various al∣terations. about the Church) all things have continued without any eminent altera∣tion or change until these our days. But the Government thereof hath par∣ticipated of divers variations and turns of Fortune. For after it had remained1. By an Ab∣bot and Monks, which continued 935 years. almost a Thousand years under the re∣giment of Abbots and Monks; It was resigned up by WILLIAM BENSON the Abbot, and seventeen Monks, into the Kings hands (in pursuance of an Act of Parliament) on the sixteenth day of January in the 31. year of the Reign of King Henry VIII.
being able to expend by the year 3471 pounds, and two pence farthing: so great were then her constant revenues. Soon after the resignation in the year 1539. and that the Abbot was prefer∣red, but the Monks sent abroad to seek their fortunes, the King took the Revenues into his own possession, and ordered the Church to be go∣verned by a Dean and Prebendaries,2. By a Dean and Preben∣daries. An. 2. placing therein BENSON, who had been the last Abbot, to be the first Dean. But in the year 1541. this Go∣vernment was dissolved; and the Church turned into an Episcopal See, having Middlesex for its Diocess, and THOMAS THURLEBY for its Bishop,3. By a Bishop. An. 9. who having much dilapidated and spent the Revenues allotted for its maintenance; after nine years he was removed from thence to the Bi∣shoprick of Norwich, whereby a se∣cond4. By a Dean and Preben∣daries again. An. 6. time it reverted to be governed by a Dean and Prebendaries. But when MARY Queen of England came to the Crown after the death of her Brother King EDWARD VI. it again changed its condition; for the Queen5. By an Ab∣bot and Monks again. An. 2. (having procured a Licence from her kinsman REGINALD POLE, who
was Archbishop of Canterbury, a Cardi∣nal, and the Popes Legate here in Eng∣land, for disanulling the former insti∣tution of a Dean and Prebendaries,) setled therein JOHN FECKNAM Ab∣bat, and fourteen Monks in the year 1556. But with her life this Govern∣ment likewise ended. And with the entrance of Queen ELIZABETH into the Throne it reassumed to be governed6. By a Dean and Preben∣daries, and turned into a Collegiate Church. An. 90 by a Dean and twelve secular Canons and Prebendaries, who turned it into a Collegiate Church, placing therein be∣sides petty Canons and others of the Quire to the number of thirty. Ten Officers belonging to the Collegiate Dyet, two Schoolmasters, forty Scho∣lars, and twelve Alms-men, with plen∣tiful maintenance for all; besides Stewards, Receivers, Registers, a Li∣brary-Keeper, Collectors, and other Officers, the Principal being the High Steward of Westminster, who is usually one of the prime Nobility. Most of7. By the Pres∣byterian Di∣scipline, An. 12 these Revenues were embezled, and crilegiously disposed of in the late Usurpation, after the Martyrdom of King CHARLES I. his present Maje∣sties most Royal Father, as Dean and Chapters Lands. But upon the happy
Restauration of our King to his Crown8. By a Dean and Preben∣daries again, and so hath remained 21. years. and Kingdoms they return'd again to their former Proprietors, and the Government continues the same at this day. §. 15. As the Abbots of this Mona∣steryThe Privi∣ledges and ho∣nours former∣ly belonging to the Abbots of this Mona∣stery. in former times had divers high Priviledges and Honours annexed to their Function, as to be intrusted with the custody of the Regalia, for the Co∣ronation of our Kings and Queens, and to have a place of necessary Ser∣vice on those days of Solemnity, to exercise Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction in their Liberties, and to sit as Spiritual Lords in Parliament, &c. so in all thoseIn what the Deans succeed them, and what not? Rights, except that of Parliament, the present Deans of this Collegiate Church succeed: who is likewise in Commission of the Peace within the City and Liberties of Westminster; and with the Chapter is invested with allThe Dean a Justice of Peace, and having Archi∣episcopal Ju∣risdiction. manner of Jurisdiction both Ecclesiasti∣cal and Civil, not only within the City and Liberty of Westminster, but within the Precinct of St. Martins le Grand (which was first annexed thereunto by HENRY VII.) within the Walls of London: And in the other, from
that of the Archbishop of Canterbury. And when the Convocation is ad∣journed from St. PAULS (for the conveniency of being nigh the Parlia∣ment when they sit at Westminster) hi∣ther, the Bishops first declare (upon aThe Deans Protestation, and the De∣claration of the Bishops when they meet here in time of Par∣liament. Protestation made by the Dean there,) that they intend not thereby to vio∣late that high priviledge, (which was granted to this Church by King ED∣WARD the Confessor) viz That no Bishop or Archbishop may come there without leave of the then Abbot, but now Dean, first obtained. §. 16. And as the Abbots in antientThe Abbots and Deans of this Church advanced to great honour and places of Trust. time were men generally well esteem∣ed, although chosen by the Monks, and no small Fa-vorites of their Princes, as may be gathered by the several places of great trust and honour that were be∣stowed on them; As to be Archbishops of Canterbury, Bishops of other Dioceses, Lord Treasurers, and Chancellours of Eng∣land, &c. so likewise have the Deans (since the Reformation) not come much behind them in the like dignities and special honours.
§. 17. By all which we may seeThe Conclu∣sion. how from Age to Age, especially for these last eight hundred years, what care hath been taken to add to the re∣putation of this our Church, by the several new erections, reparations, and bounteous gifts that have been heaped thereon, the great priviledges and im∣munities that have been granted there∣to with the particular favours of our Kings in advancing the Governours thereof, and all this as well since as before the Reformation, and the con∣tinuance thereof to this day. A Catalogue of the Abbots of Westminster. Silvardus. Ordbrutius. Alswynus. Alfgarus. Adymerus. Alfnodus. Alsricus. S. Wulsinus. Alswinus. Wolnothus. Edwinus. Galsridus. Vitalis. Gislebertus. Herebertus. Gervasius de Blois. Laurentius. Walterus. Gulielmus Pos Radulphus P
Gulielm. de Humes. Richard. de Barking. Rich. de Crokesley. Philippus Levisham. Richardus de Ware. Walter. de Wenlock. Rich. de Kedington. Williel. Curlington. Thomas Henley. Sim. de Burcheston. Simon Langham. Nicolas Litlington. Guliel▪ de Colchester. Rich. Harounden. Georgius Flaccet. Richardus Sudbury. Edmundus Kirton. Thomas Milling. Johannes Estney. Johannes Islip. Guilielmus Benson. Johannes Fecknam. The Bishop of Westminster, Tho. Thurleby. A Catalogue of the Deans of Westminster. Gulielmus Benson. Richardus Coxe. Hugo Weston. Guilielmus Bill. Gabriel Goodman. Lancelot. Andrews. Richardus Neyle. Georgius Monteine. Robertus Tompson. Johannes Williams. Johannes Earle. Johannes Dolben, now Dean of Westminster, and Bishop of Roche∣ster.
A description or survey of the Abby Church of St. Peters Westminster with the Monuments, Tombs, and Grave-stones therein as they are now standing, &c. §. 18. Having in the precedingThe Survey of the Church both outside and inside. discourse given you an information of the rise, progress, and continuance of this our famous Abby in its buildings in its Buildings, Government, and names of her Governours in general; I shall now enter into the particular description thereof by observing what is most wor∣thy our remembrance; and therein I care not if for once I play the Mysta∣gogus my self, and lead my noble Tra∣veller from one Tomb to another, from one monument to a second, and so to a third, until we have gone over them all, that his curiosity may not want a plenary satisfaction. §. 19. If then we intend to take a view of her outward shape and pro∣portion, before we come to behold her beautious entrails, we shall see itOn the South-East part. best, and least confused on the North and South-east parts thereof, as being less incumbred with private buildings,
by which she seems in some places al∣together hid and obscured. On the South-East part you behold that curi∣ous Chappel of the Blessed Virgin, builtKing Hen. VII. Chappel. by King HENRY VII. whose Battle∣ments, Windows, Supports, and Adorn∣ments speak no less the Magnificence of the Founder than the Mastership of the Inventer, and skill of the Work∣men; as being of that exact composure that nothing in the whole world of the same kind is said to exceed, if equal it. On the North part, you rather beholdOn the North side. the Skeleton of a Church than any great comeliness in her appearance, being so shrivelled and parcht by the continual blasts of the Northern Winds, to which she stands exposed, as also the continual smoaks of Sea-Coal which are of a co∣roding and fretting quality, which have added more furrows to her declining years, that little of her former beauty now remains. On this side is a most noble Door or Portal, with a Porch thereunto that opens into the cross of the Church, and on each side thereof two lesser Portico's one of which only serves at present for the conveni∣ence of entering therein. This PorchSolomons Porch. in former times hath been of great
esteem and reputation, assuming to its self no less a name than that of the Porch of Solomon, that it hath been a cu∣rious, neat, and costly Porch in foregoing times, the remains thereof at this day do in some measure declare; for there∣in were placed the Statues of the twelve Apostles at full proportion, be∣sides a multitude of lesser Saints and Martyrs to adorn it, with several in∣taglio's, devices, and fret-works that helped to the beauty thereof: But that it came in any proportion to the state∣ly, rich, and noble Porch of King Solomon is not to be imagined; nor can we think that those who christened and gave it that name were so ignorant or vain as so to believe, but as a thing excellent in those times, and far sur∣passing any of the same kind; it was looked upon as a piece of work well deserving no common name, and there∣fore had the title of Solomons Porch ap∣propriated thereunto. §. 20. But leaving the outward view of this ruinous building, let usThe inside of the Church. see whether her entrails (the inside) be altogether as decayed and forlorn: For though she seems by her outward
shape and appearance to be cloathed with the disconsolate veil of Widow∣hood, yet if we enter by the great West door, which leads you into the body thereof, you will behold her sound at heart, not adorned with the gayeties of a new made Bride, yet en∣dowed with all the graces of a noble Matron, sufficient at once to attract the eyes and contemplations of the Ingenious to admire her, and frighten away the vanity of Idle Fools by her venerable countenance from despi∣sing her. §. 21. For the figure of this Church,The form thereof. you will find it built in the form of a Cross, whose Vault and side Isles are supported by eight and forty Pillars of Grey Marble, each distant from the other eight foot, and from thence another row of lesser Pillars, double the number of the first, and of the same Marble to the upper Roof or Vault sixty foot. The Vault it self being supported by these Pillars, whose Arches turn not upon the Semy-Cir∣cle, (according to the Roman manner of Architecture practised in our days) but meet in acute Angles, in imitation
of the Gothick way of building, and dividing themselves into several Squares, compose a most stately Roof, wrought with divers figured stands, and in some places curiously gilt with Gold. The length being 360The length, breadth, and height. foot onely to the Stairs of the Chap∣pel of our Lady or HENRY VII. within the Walls. The breadth of the Nave 75 foot, of the Cross 195 from the Chappel of St. BENEDICT on the South to that of St. ERASMUS on the North 114 foot; from the Chap∣pel of S. EDMUND to that of St. JOHN BAPTIST 126 foot; and from that of St. NICOLAS South to that of St. PAUL on the North 95, all being in your view as you enter the Church; and adding thereto the Chappel of the Blessed Virgin or King HENRY VII. which contains 122 foot in length, and 62 in breadth: The whole Fabrick will be no less than 482 foot long with∣in the Walls thereof, as I have measu∣red it by a Line; a very noble and large Structure, almost equalling in length St. PETERS in Rome, St. PE∣TERS in York, &c. and surpassing many famous Churches and Temples, as that of Solomon, only 60 Cubits
long; the Temple of DIANA in Ephe∣sus, 425 foot; and the great Moske at FEZ, long 150 Cubits. §. 22. There are in this Church no less than ten Chappels, (besides thoseThe Chappels. two of the Kings, or the Chappels of St. EDWARD, and the Blessed Virgin, and those of St. KATHERINE, and St. ANNE, of whose situation I am ignorant) viz. on the South four, those of St. BLASE, St. BENEDICT, St. EDMUND, and St. NICOLAS; on the North six, those of St. AN∣DREW, St. MICHAEL, St. JOHN EVANGELIST, St. ERASMUS, St. JOHN BAPTIST, and St. PAUL, which serve to flanck up this Church notably to its advantage and credit. On each side the body or Nave under every Window, and between each Pillar, you have the names in antient English or Saxon Letters, and under them the Coats of Arms of the several Kings, Princes, and Noblemen, who flourished when HENRY III. re-edi∣fied this Church. On the South, (1.) S. Edwardus Rex & Confessor. B. a Cross Patonce between five Mart∣lets Or. (2.) Henricus Tertius Rex
Angliae. Gules. three Lions passantAntient Arms of Kings, Prin∣ces, and No∣blemen, who were living in the year 1220. and contribu∣ted towards the re-build∣ing this Church in the time of Henry III. gardant O. (3.) Alexander Tertius Rex Scotorum. Or, a Lion rampant within a double Tressure flory coun∣ter-flory, Gules. (4.) Raimundus comes Provinciae. Or four Pallets Gules. (5.) Rogerus de Quincy comes Wintoniae. Gules 7. Mascals conjoyned, 3. 3. 1. Or. (6.) Henri∣cus de Lacy comes Lincolniae. Quar∣terly, Gules and Or a Bendlet Sab. and file of five Lambeaux. Arg. (7.) Ri∣chardus comes Cornubiae. Arg. a Lion rampant, Gules crowned Or. within a bordure Sab. bezanty. (8.) R. comes Rothesaiae. Gules three Lions rampant Argent. (9.) Guilielmus comes de Ferrariis, & Derbiae. Vaire, Or, and Gules. (10.) Guilielmus de Longaspata, comes Sarum. B. six Lions rampant Or. 3. 2. 1. (11.) Gui∣lielmus de Valentia, comes Pen∣brochiae, Barry of 10. Argent. and B. an Orle of Martlets Gules. (12.) Ro∣gerus de Mortuo-mari. Barry of 6. Or and B. an Inescucheon Arg. on a chief, of the first, a Pale between two Esquires, based, dexter, and sinister of of the second. (13.) Guilielmus de Percy. Or. a Lion rampant dublee
quevee B. (14.) Rogerus de Clif∣ford. Checkie Or and B. a Fess, Gules. (15.) Rogerus de Somerey. Or two Lions passant B. (16.) Iohan∣nes de Verdon. Or, fretty, of eight pieces Gules. (17.) Robertus de Thwenge. Argent a Fess Gules be∣tween three Birds vert, collared, of the second. (18.) Fulco filius Warini. Quarterly per Fess indented Argent and Gules. (19.) Rogerus de Monte Alto. B. a Lion rampant Argent, crowned Or. (20.) Rogerus de Ve∣nables. B. 2. Bars Argent. On the North, (1.) Fredericus Secundus Imperator. Or an Imperial Eagle Sa∣ble. (2.) S. Lodovicus Rex Fran∣ciae. B. Semi de Flowers de Lucies Or. (3.) Richardus Clare comes Gloce∣striae. Or three Cheverons Gules. (4.) Rogerus Bigod comes Norfol∣ciae. Or, a Cross Gules. (5.) Simon de Monteforti comes Leicestriae. Gules a Lion rampant, double quevee Argent. (6.) Io. comes Warennae & Surriae. Checkie, Or, & B. (7.) Hum∣fridus de Bohun, comes Herefordiae & Essexiae. B. a Bend Arg. cottised between six Lioncels rampant Or. (8.) Guilielmus de Fortibus, comes
Albemarlae. Gules a Cross Patonce Varry. (9.) Edmundus comes Lancastriae. Gules, three Lions pas∣sant guardant in Pale barways, Or, a file of five Lambeaux B. each charged with three Flower-de-Luces of the second. (10.) Hugo de Vere, comes Oxoniae. Quarterly Gules, and Or. in the first quarter a Mullet Argent. (11.) Iohannes de Dreux, comes Richmondiae. Checkie, Or. and B. a bordure of England, and Canton Er∣mine. (12.) Henricus de Hastings. Or, a Manch. Gules. (13.) Rogerus de Mowbraye. Gules a Lion ramp. Arg. (14.) Robertus de Stafford. Or, a Cheveron, Gules. (15.) Robertus de Ross. Gules three Waterboudgets Argent. (16.) Robertus filius Wal∣teri. Or, a Fess between two Cheve∣rons Gules. (17.) Iohannes de Bal∣liol. Gules, an Orle Arg. (18.) Gil∣bertus Talbot. Bendy of ten Argent and Gules. (19.) Warinus de Ver∣non. Or, a Fess B. (20.) Guiliel∣mus de Malpas. Gules three Pheons Argent.
§. 23. About fifty and five footA place set apart for the celebration of divine Ser∣vice. from the great West Door in the midst of the body or Nave to the Screen that separates the high Altar from the Shrine of St. EDWARD, and the Chappel of the Kings, being near 152 foot in length, and 32 in breadth, is a place set apart for the Quire, with all decent conveniences for the celebrati∣on of divine Service, and preaching the Word of God; where (by the Pulpit) is a most comely Picture ofThe Picture Richard II. King of Eng∣land. one of our Kings sitting in the Orna∣ments and Chair of Coronations, which is said to be the Picture of RI∣CHARD II. King of England; it is very beautiful to behold, and well done, considering the distance of years since it was made: And that it was de∣signed for him is greatly confirmed by the report our Historians give of his incomparable beauty, and admirable features, and that his Picture, placed in the Kings Collection at his Royal Palace of Hampton-Court, differs very little therefrom. Ascending from this Picture by two or three Greeses or steps, until you come to the Rails that compass in the High Altar, you there behold that noble and most glo∣rious
inlaid Floor still remaining in∣tire,The inlaid Area by the Communion Table. that was done by the command and charge of RICHARD de Ware, Abbot of Westminster, in the year 1260. where in most artificial Work and de∣lightful Figures you have the Jasper, the Porphyry, the Lydian, the Touch, the Alabaster, and the Serpentine stones, so laid and wrought to the Spectators satisfaction that you are unwillingly drawn from the sight thereof; round the Squares and great Circles, in Let∣ters of Brass, are some of the Verses still remaining, which when entire were thus to be read, concerning the durati∣on of the World. Si lector posita prudenter cuncta revolvat, Hic finem primum mobilis inveniet, Sepes trina, canes & equos, homines, super addas Cervos & corvos, aquilas, immania cete, Mundi quodque sequens pereuntis triplicat annos, Sphaericus Archetypum globus hic monstrat Microcosmum, Christi Milleno bis centeno duo deno Cum sexageno subductis quatuor anno, Tertius Henricus Rex, urbs, Odericus & Abbas, Hos compegere Porphyreos lapides.
§. 24. On the North-side of thisich. de Ware, Abbot of West∣minster, and Lord Treasu∣rer of England Area was this Abbot buried, next to the Tomb of AIMERY de VA∣LENCE Earl of Pembroke, after he had been Lord Treasurer of England, and Abbot of this Monastery twenty three years, he died on the Second of December 1283. but nothing now remains on his Grave-stone to distin∣guish it from the rest. Not far fromThomas Henley, and Richard Sudbury Ab∣bots of West. minster. Sir Tho. Clif∣ford. Anne Queen of England. him was THOMAS HENLEY Abbot of Westminster interred. And RI∣CHARD SUDBURY, another Abbot of this Monastery, with Sir THOMAS CLIFFORD, Governour of Ber∣wick, but all the Brass and Inscriptions are torn away. On the South-side was Queen ANNE, Wife to King RI∣CHARD III. and Daughter to RI∣CHARD NEVILL Earl of War∣wick, interred, who died not without suspition of Poyson, anno 1484. By whom lies WALTER WENLOCKWalter Wenlock, Abbot of West∣minster, and Lord Treasu∣rer of England▪ Abbot of Westminster, and Lord Trea∣surer of England, who died at his Man∣nour of Pireford in Gloucestershire, on the twenty fifth day of December, 1307. after he had governed this Church twenty six years, having a
decent Marble-stone plated, and laid over him by the South Door entering the Chappel of St. EDWARD, of which there is nothing continuing at this day, save a guess at the stones only. There are five noble Monuments still remaining, three on the North, and two on the South part of this Sacriste, but no Inscriptions or Epitaphs on any of them, nor are they visible but by withdrawing the Hangings, which are hung before them for the better adorn∣ing this place. §. 25. The first on the South is aAnne of cleve Queen of Eng∣land. Tomb of Freestone unfinished, with these two Letters insculpt thereof A. C. and this 1557. and a little Ballister or Rail thereto adjoyning, which was de∣signed to remember ANNE of Cleve, Queen of England, Sister to WILLI∣AM Duke of Cleve and Gulich, whom King HENRY VIII. repudiated when he took to Wife the Lady KATHA∣RINE HOWARD; she died in the year 1557. and lyeth buried here at the head of King SEBERT.
§. 26. The next is an antient Sepul∣chreSebert King of the East-Sax∣ons and his Queen. vide Epitaph. 139. of stone, Arched, where in a lea∣den Chest enclosed in Touch, lie the remains of SEBERT King of the East-Saxons, and ETELGODA his Queen, who in the year 605 began the foun∣dation of this Monastery, as I have de∣clared elsewhere; he died on the last day of July in the year 616. and she the thirteenth of September 615. after they had finished this worthy design; and therefore in the year 1307 their bodies were removed by the Monks of this Abby from the old Church, erected by King EDWARD the Confessor, and placed here hard by the Sepulchre of the Kings. The Canopy erected over this Tomb of eight panes of delicate carved Wainscot, contained as many painted Figures, of St. PETER, St. JOHN BAPTIST, King SEBERT, King EDWARD the Confessor, &c. with divers Verses of Questions and Answers under each of them, which are all defaced and washed away, and only a Table of Verses adjoyning to the Tomb (which you will find among the Mounmental Inscriptions) is still remaining to inform you who it is that lies there deposited.
§. 27. On the North side, next to the Chappel of St. EDWARD, in a most noble Monument of Freestone, canopied, painted, and adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, his Image thereon cross legged lies EDMUND Crouch∣back, Earl of Lancaster, Son of King Hen∣ry III. CROUCHBACK, Earl of Lancaster, and younger Son of HENRY III. who was born at London on the sixteenth day of January, anno 1245. about eight years after he was invested by the Pope into the Dominion of Sicily, made Earl of Chester, and Lord High Steward of England during life, and after the death of his first Wife AVE∣LINE went into the Holy Land, after∣wards returning, he was by his Brother King EDWARD I. made Earl of Champaigne; he founded the house of Nuns, called the Minoresses with∣out Algate in the Suburbs of London, and going into France, he died at Bayon, from whence his body was brought, and honourably interred in this place, and this Monument erected to his memory. This great Earl, by BLANCHE, his second Wife, Daugh∣ter to ROBERT Earl of Artois, (third Son to LEWIS VIII. King of
France) Widow of HENRY King of Navarre, Earl of Champagne and Bry had Issue three Sons, THOMAS, HENRY, and JOHN, and a Daugh∣ter, who died with her Brother JOHN in France without Issue. §. 28. Next to this Tomb of ED∣MUND Earl of Lancaster is such another like Monument, very beauti∣ful to behold, Canopied, and gilt with Gold, with an Image thereon for AY∣MERAymer de Va∣lence, Earl of Pembroke, Cou∣sin to King Henry III. de Valence, (third Son to WIL∣LIAM Earl of Pembroke, who was Son of HUGH le BRUN Earl of Marche, in the Confines of France and Poictiers, by ISABEL his Wife, Widow of King JOHN, and sole Daughter to the Earl of Angolesme, who took his Surname from the place of his Nativity, and being Brother to HENRY III. by his Mother, in June 1247 was sent for into England, &c) who was a great Souldier in the Wars of Scotland, Flanders, France, &c. he was Guardian of the Mrches of Scotland, Lieutenant and Captain General of all the Souldiers there, Ge∣neral of the Kings Forces from the River of Trent Northwards un∣to
Roxborough in Scotland: But go∣ing to Rome he was taken prisoner by JOHN MOILLEY a Burgundian, and sent to the Emperour, being obliged to pay 20000 pounds for his ransom. After which he was again in the Scotch Wars, and Governour of Rockingham Castel, and at the ta∣king of THOMAS Earl of Lancaster at Borough Brigge in the County of York, but being one of those who gave sentence of death upon him at Pomfrat, as he was attending Queen ISABEL into France, anno 1323. he was murthered on the twenty third of June the same year; his body being afterwards brought and buried here: He had three Wives, but had no Issue by any. His first was BEATRIX Daughter to RALPH de NEAL Con∣stable of France; his second, one of the Daughters of the Earl of Barr; and his last was MARY Daugh∣ter to GUY de CASTILION Earl of St. Paul. §. 29. At the head of AYMER de VALENCE is the third and last Mo∣nument on this North side, which is likewise a very beautiful Tomb of
Alabaster and gray Marble, Canopied with curious worked stone, and gilt with Gold, her Image lying thereon at full proportion, for AVELINEAveline Coun∣tess of Lanca∣ster, Daughter in Law to King Hen. III. Countess of Lancaster, first Wife of EDMUND CROUCHBACK Earl of Lancaster, and fourth Son of HEN∣RY III. (as is before said in the de∣scription of his Monument.) She was esteemed a Lady in her time far sur∣passing all others in beauty, and was the Daughter and Heir of WILLIAM de FORTIBUS Earl of Albemarle, she was Countess of Holderness, and by her Mother Countess of Devon and the Isle of Wight, leaving her Inhe∣ritance to the House of Lancaster, and her body to be buried in this place, dying in the year 1269. without any Issue. §. 30. The rest of the Monuments about this Church are very numerous and noble, Persons of the greatest dignity and honour being permitted by the Licence of the Prince only to be buri∣ed in the Chappels thereof, of whom we shall speak when we come to the particular places wherein they are de∣posited. In the mean time we will
take a survey round the body of the Church; and beginning on the East∣side of the North Cross, the first Monu∣ment we meet with will be that of the Lady MARY JAMES, Wife of SirMary James. vid. Epit. 3. JOHN JAMES, and Daughter to Sir ROBERT KILLIGREW, Vice∣chamberlain to Queen MARY, who died in the year 1677. being a neat Mo∣nument composed of a large Pedestal of black Marble, on which is the Epi∣taph, and an Urn of white, admirably polished, encompassed with an Iron Grate, garnished and adorned with Gold. By which on a Pillar adjoyning to the Chappel of St. Michael is a small Monument of white Marble for GRACE SCOT, Daughter of SirGrace Scot. vid. Epit. 2. THOMAS MAULEVERER Baronet, who died in the year 1645. And against the Screen of the said Chappel of St. Michael is a most noble Tomb and Monument of black and white Marble, garnished and adorned with Arms, and warlike Trophies, on whose Pedestal are placed the Images at fullWilliam Caven∣dish Duke of Newcastle, and his Dutchess, vid. Epit. 1. proportion of WILLIAM Baron Ca∣vendish. Viscount Mansfield, Earl of Ogle, Earl, Marquess, and Duke of Newcastle, with MARGARET his
Dutchess, Daughter of Sir CHARLES, and Sister to the Lord LUCAS of Col∣chester, who was esteemed in her time a Lady of great learning and bountiful Magnificence beyond the usual qualifi∣cations of her Sex. The Duke caused this Tomb to be made in his life-time, soon after the death of his Dutchess, and being scarce finished, he died him∣self on the twenty fifth day of Decemb. in the year 1676. aged 84 years, and was buried here. §. 31. On the North side of this Cross are two small Monuments placed against the Wall; The one, towardsSir William Sanderson, Knight, vid. Epit. 5. the West for Sir WILLIAM SAN∣DERSON, of Alabaster, with the Busto or head of the same, he was Gen∣tleman of the Chamber to the King, and writ the History of MARY Queen of Scots, King JAMES, and King CHARLES the First, worthily vin∣dicating them from the vile aspersions of some virulent Pens of those times; he died in the year 1676. The other, towards the East, or black Marble for Collonel THOMAS BLAGGE, an emi∣nentThomas Blagge, vid. Ep. 4. and faithful server of his King and Country in the late unhappy Wars,
and since made Governour of Yar∣mouth, in which Office he died in the year 1660. §. 32. On the West side of this Cross is a small black Marble stone to remem-DoctorDr. Will, John∣son. vid. Ep. 6. WILLIAM JOHNSON, one of the Kings Chaplains, many of whose learned Writings are abroad in the world; he died in the year 1666. §. 33. On the North side the Nave is a little Monument of black Marble and Alabaster, adorned with Arms, for ELI∣ZABETH EDMONDS of Sussex,Eliz. Edmunds. vid. Ep. 7. who died in the year 1667. Next to whom are two Tablets of black Mar∣ble, with an Epitaph and Arms for PE∣TERDr. Pet. Heylyn. vid. Ep. 8. HEYLYN D. D. a Prebendary, and Sub-dean of this Church, who (among many others) writ that famous Cosmography and Geography of the whole World; he lies here without any date of his death. Beyond whom is a very curious Monument of black and white Marble, set up by Sir Edward deEdw. de Carte∣ret, vid. Ep. 9. Carteret Knight, to the memory of his Son Edward, a Child of seven years of Age, who died in the year 1677.
Below this you have another neat Mo∣nument of white Marble, adorned with warlike Trophies for RICHARD leRich. le Neve. vid. Ep. 10. NEVE Esquire, Captain of one of his Majesties Ships of War called the Ed∣gar, wherein he lost his life valiantly fighting against the Hollanders in the year 1673. Hard by this, under the Arms of Iohan. de Dreux comes Richmondie, is a small Monument of white Marble, adorned with Arms for GILBERT THORNBURGH, oneGilbert Thorn∣burgh. vid: Ep. 11. of the Kings Servants, who died in the year 1677. The next is a little Monu∣ment of black Marble, with the Image of a woman kneeling in Alabaster, to remember SARAH STOTEVILE,Sarah Stotevile vid. Ep. 12. first Wife to EDWARD ELLIS Esq and then to Doctor OTHOWEL HILL, J. C. who died in the year 1631. And lastly under the Arms of Guilielmus de Malpas is one large intire black Marble stone, veined and streaked with white, set up without a Pedestal against the Wall, to commemorate PENELO∣PE,Penelope Daughter of Robert Nedham Viscount Kil∣murray. vid. Ep. 13. the Wife of RANDOLPH EGERTON, and Daughter of ROBERT NEDHAM Viscount Kilmurray in the Kingdom of Ireland, who died in Childbed in the year 1670.
§. 34. On the South side the Nave is a Table of Arms placed to remember one Peers Gruffith Esq who died inPeeres Gruffith. vid. Ep. 18. the year 1628. Next to which, on the East side the great South door that en∣ters the Cloisters, is a comely Monu∣ment of black and white Marble, with an Epitaph in Hebrew, Greek, andCarola Mor∣land. vid. Ep. 20. English for Carola, Daughter of Roger Harsnet, and Wife of Sir Samuel Mor∣land Baronet, who died in the year 1674. A little higher is another Mo∣nument of black and white Marble, adorned with several warlike Trophies, and on the Pedestal the representation of a Sea-fight well designed in basso relievo, to remember two Friends who lost their lives together with the vali∣ant Earl of Sandwich in the year 1672.Sir Charles Harbord and Clem. Cotterel. vid. Ep. 21. Bridget Rad∣ley. vid. Ep. 19. viz. Sir Charles Harbord, and Clement Cotterel Esquire. Not far from this is a little Monument erected for Bridget, the Wife of Charles Radley Esquire, of white Marble, adorned with Arms. A small Monument by the little South door ofSir Rich. Bing∣ham Knight. vid. Ep. 22. the Cloister is placed for Sir Richard Bingham a man famous for his warlike Acts at home and abroad, of which his Epitaph gives you a particular; he died in the year 1598.
§. 35. On the West side the South Cross is a small Monument of black and white Marble, set up to remember that learned Antiquary William Cam∣den,Will. Camden. vid. Ep. 23. Clarentieux King of Arms, with his demy Effigies leaning on a Book, on whose leaves are insculped Britan∣nia: his Writings are highly esteemed by all men of Learning; he died in the year 1623. Next to him lies that Ma∣gazine of Literature, (but especially for his experience in the Oriental Tongues) Isaac Casaubon, J. C. whoIsaac Casaubon. vid. Ep. 25. died in the year 1634. Then have you a Monument of white Marble placed for Thomas Triplet, D. D. and one ofDr. Tho. Triplet. vid. Ep. 24. the Prebendaries of this Church; who died in the year 1670. Beyond whom is another small Monument of white Marble for Sir Richard Coxe, Knight,Sir Richard Coxe Knight, vid. Ep. 26. who died anno 1623. A little lower are two other Monuments of white Marble, the one for Isaac Barrow, S. T. P.Dr. Isaac Bar∣row. vid. Ep. 29 and one of the Kings Chaplains: The other for William Outram, S. T. P. Ca∣nonDr. Wil. Outram. vid. Ep. 27. of this Church, and Archdeacon of Leicester, an eminent and learned Wri∣ter; who died in the year 1679. and Dr. Barrow in the year 1677.
§. 36. On the South side of this Cross, hard by the little East door, is a decayed Tomb of grey Marble, very much defaced, and nothing of the an∣tient Inscription remaining, which was in Latine, but of late there is another in English to inform you that EdmundEdmund Spen∣cer. vid. Ep. 28. Spencer, a most excellent Poet, lies there intombed, who indeed had a sweet and luxuriant fancy, and expressed his thoughts with admirable success, as his Fairy-Queen, and other Works of his sufficiently declare; and pity it was such true Poetry should not have been imployed in as true a subject; he died in the year 1596. §. 37. Next to him, on the East side of the same Cross, is a little Monument of white and black Marble, with a Busto or head crowned with a Laurel, for Michael Drayton, another memo∣rableMich. Drayton. vid. Ep. 30. Poet, who rectified the fault com∣mitted by Spencer in applying his Geni∣us to the Histories and Antiquities of his own Nation, and native Country, witness his Poly-Olbyon, which the learned Selden hath worthily embel∣lished with his notes; he died in the
year 1631. And now come we to the first and last best Poets of the English Nation Geffrey Chaucer, and Abraham Cowley, the one being the Sun just ri∣sing, and shewing its self on the English Horizon, and so by degrees increasing and growing in strength till it came to its full Glory and Meridian in the in∣comparable Cowley, whose admirable Genius, hard to be imitated, but never equalled, hath set the bounds to suc∣ceeding times. Chaucer lies in an anti∣entGeffrey Chaucer. vid. Ep. 31. Tomb, Canopied, of grey Mar∣ble, with his Picture painted thereon in plano, with some Verses by; he died in the year 1400. And Cowley hathAbrah. Cowley. vid. Ep. 32. on a curious Pedestal of white Marble a stately Urn placed thereon, and environed with a Grate by the com∣mand and charge of the noble and illustrious Duke of Buckingham; he died in the year 1667. universally lamented. §. 38. On the South side of the Quire are three stately Monuments, the first Westward is that of ThomasThomas Owen. vid. Ep. 17. Owen, one of the Justices of the Com∣mon Pleas, who died in the year 1597, being a noble Monument of
Alabaster, Marble, and divers coloured stones, adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, his Image lying thereon in his Scarlet Robes in full proportion. TheSir Thomas Ri∣chardson Kt. vid. Ep. 15. next for Sir Tho. Richardson, Speaker of the House of Commons, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of England, who died in the year 1634. being a fair Tomb of black Marble, neatly adorned with curious wrought Brass, with his demy Effigies in his Judges Robes and Collar of S's, all of the same Brass gilt. The last is an Alabaster Tomb, adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold where on a Quilt is placed the ImageWilliam Thynne. vid. Ep. 16. in Armour of William Thynne, a famous Commander at Muscelborough Field, and in the Scots Wars, who died in the year 1600. §. 39. On the North side of the same Quire you have a noble Monu∣ment of Alabaster, Marble, and di∣vers coloured stones, whereon is placed the Image at full proportion in hisSir Tho. Hesket Knight. vid. Ep. 14. black tufted Gown of Sir Thomas Hes∣ket, the Queens Attourney for the Court of Wards and Liveries, and one of the Council of the North, who died in the year 1600.
§. 40. And thus you have what Tombs and Monuments are to be found round about the Body, Alleys, and the Cross of this Church: We will now see what persons are deposited under the several Grave-stones that have any Inscriptions thereon. And first in the midst of the Body or Nave there lies Gilbert Thornburgh, (whose Tomb IGilbert Thorn∣burgh. vid. Ep. 34. have mentioned before,) who was Servant to the King, and died in the year 1677. §. 41. In the North Alley, the bo∣dy of Anne, Wife of Sir George Rad∣cliffe,Anne Radcliffe. vid. Ep. 35. and Daughter of Sir Francis Trappes, who died in the year 1659. Ben. Johnson a Poet Laureat, and soBen. Johnson. vid. Ep. 36. universally famous for the Dramma, that at this day his Works are in great estimation. Martha, Wife of GervaseMartha Price. vid. Ep. 37. Price Esquire, one of the Kings Ser∣vants, who died in the year 1678. There are Grave-stones likewise placed for Edward de Carteret, Carola Morland,Vid. Epitaph. 117. 42. 41. 44 33. Mary James, Bridget Radley, William Outram, and Abraham Cowley, nigh their Monuments.
§. 42. In the South Alley lies Judith,Judith Isham. vid. Ep 45. Daughter of Sir Justinian Isham Baronet, who died in the year 1679, having a grey Marble stone placed here for her. And a little lower, the Lady Anne Mor∣landAnne Morland. vid. Ep. 43. under a stone of black Marble, who died in the year 1680. §. 43. In the North Cross is a Grave∣stoneSir Hen. de Vic Baronet. vid. Ep. 40. for Sir Henry de Vic Baronet, and Chancellour of the Garter, who died in the year 1672. Another antient grey Marble stone for Didacus Sanchez, aDidacus San∣chez. vid. Ep. 39 Spaniard, he died in the year 1557. And one more for Mary, the Wife of ThomasMary Willis. vid. Ep. 38. Willis M. D. and Daughter of Samuel Fell S. T. D. Dean of Christchurch, and now Bishop of Oxford, who died in the year 1670. and with her lies her Daughter Catharine, who died in 1667. §. 44. In the South Cross, over∣against Cowleys Tomb, are some re∣mains of a man in Armour, with a broken Inscription round the Verge, ingraven on Brass, whereby may be gathered that one Robert Haule liesRobert Haule. vid. Ep. 47. there, who was murthered in this
Church on the eleventh of August, Anno Dom. 1378. In the same Southern Cross lies John Osboldston Esquire, oneJohn Osbolston. vid. Ep. 46. of the Kings Servants, he died in the year 1666. Another Grave-stone for Samuel Bolton, D. D. one of the KingsSamuel Bolton. vid. Ep. 48. Chaplains, and a Prebend of this Church, he died in the year 1668. Another to Sir William Davenant, aSir William Davenant Kt. vid. Ep. 50. Poet Laureat, and memorable for his excellent Poems, natural fancy, and Dramatick Poesie in our time. Ano∣ther for Thomas Chiffinch, Servant to hisTho. Chiffinch, vid. Ep. 49. Majesty; he died in the year 1666. And lastly, Thomas Parr, a man remark∣ableThomas Parr. vid. Ep. 51. for his long life, who had lived in the Reigns of ten Kings and Queens of England, being born in the year 1483. in the time of Edward IV. and died in the year 1635, in the Reign of King Charles I. being of the age of 152 years. The Chappel of St. Blase. §. 45. Having informed you of all the Tombs and Grave-stones (and to whose memory they were there posi∣ted,) that you meet with in any part of the body and side Iles of this so
famous Church, we will now enter in∣to the particular Chappels thereof, and beginning in the South Cross, where the Dial and Clock stands, and the place made use on at present as a Revestre, was formerly a Chappel dedicated to Saint Blase, in which Chappel Ni∣colas Llington, Abbot of Westminster,Nic. Litlington, Abbot of West∣minster. vid. §. 10. whom I have mentioned before, was bu∣ried in the year 1386, after he had go∣verned this Monastery twenty five years. And Edward a Monk of West∣minster, who was Son of Owen Tuddor by Queen Katharine, the Widow of Henry V. and Daughter of Charles VI. King of France; he was Brother to Edmund Earl of Richmond, and Un∣cleEdward Monk of Westminster, Uncle to Hen∣ry VII. to King Henry VII. There is nei∣ther Inscription or Epitaph remaining to distinguish their Grave-stones from the rest. From hence going to the East-side of this Cross, and next to Cowleys Tomb is a little Chappel of St. Benedict. §. 18. Which is sometimes called the Deans Chappel, by reason some of the Deans of Westminster have been buried therein, for whom there are
two Tombs remaining. On the South side, that of Gabriel Goodman, S. T. D.Dr. Gabriel Goodman Dean of Westminster. vid. Ep. 54. and Dean of this Church forty years; he founded an Hospital and School at Ru∣thin in Denbighshire, the town where he was born; but dying on the Seven∣teenth day of July in the year 1601. aged 73. was buried here, and had a Monument of black and white Marble, with his Statue kneeling thereon, erected to his memory, and is yet in being. On the North side one of his Predecessors (under a raised Tomb of grey Marble, having his Effigie engra∣ven thereon in Brass, with Arms and Epitaphs,) was interred, viz. WilliamDr. Will. Bill, Dean of Westm. vid. Ep. 55. Bill, S. T. D. who was Master of Tri∣nity College in Cambridge, President of Eaton, Dean of this Collegiate Church, and grand Almoner to the Queen; a man liberal in his gifts to this Colledge, by several pieces of Silver Plate, and other Largesses bestowed thereon; he died on the fifteenth of July, in the year 1561. Next to him, on the same North side, is an antient Tomb of Free∣stone, mixed with grey Marble and Brass, with the Image of Alabaster, re∣presenting an Archbishop in his Pontifica∣libus, under a Canopy of the same stone,
placed there to remember Simon Lang∣ham,Sim. Langham, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Abbot of West∣minster. vid. Ep. 56. & §. 9. that famous Monk, Prior, and Abbot of this Monastery, afterwards Bi∣shop of Ely, London. and Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of Praenest in Italy, Cardinal S. Sextus, Chancellour and Lord High Treasurer of England, and the Popes Legat here; he died in the year 1367 at Avenion, and was buried in the House of the Carthusi∣ans there, which himself had founded, but afterwards his bones were tran∣slated, and interred here, hard by the Altar of St. Benedict. Against theFrances Coun∣tess of Hert∣ford, Grand∣child of the Duke of Nor∣folk. vid. Ep. 52 East Wall of this Chappel is a most stately Monument, above twenty six foot high, most nobly adorned with Corinthian Columns and Pyramids of Alabaster, Porphyry, Lydian, and di∣verse coloured Marble, variously wrought, and curiously gilt with Gold, on whose Pedestal is the Image of a Countess in her Robes of estate, cum∣bant at full proportion, being erected by the command of Edward Earl of Hertford, and Baron Beauchamp; (Son of Edward Duke of Somer∣set, &c. Ʋncle to King Edward VI.) to the memory of his Wife the Lady Frances, who was Daughter of William
Baron Howard of Effingham Knight of the Garter, High Admiral to Queen Mary, Lord Chamberlain and Privy Seal to Queen Elizabeth, and Son of Thomas Duke of Norfolk; she died in the year 1598. In the midst of the Area of this Chappel is a noble Tomb of black and white Marble, whereon are placed the Images of Lyonel Cranfield Earl ofLyonell Cran∣field, and his Countess. vid. Ep. 53. Middlesex, who was Lord High Trea∣surer of England, with that of the Lady Anne his second Wife; he died in the year 1645. §. 47. Next to this Chappel you are let into the Area (or passage that leads you round the Chappel of the Kings,) by an Officer of the Church, who attends there to wait upon all persons that are desirous of seeing the Monuments within, whose Fee is what the particular bounty of each Gentle∣man shall think convenient to give him; you may therefore save the civil Offi∣cer that trouble, and better inform your self by taking these directions; The first place you are led into on this South side will be the Chappel of St. Edmund the Archbishop, but be∣fore you enter therein I would not
have you overpass a little Monument between the Chappel of St. Bene∣dict and this of St. Edmund, being a small raised Tomb, adorned with di∣verseThree Chil∣dren of Hen∣ry III and four Children of Edward I. coloured stones, and Arched, under which are the Effigies of four Children painted thereon in plano, but there is no Inscription or Table belong∣ing thereto; in this Tomb are inclosed the bones of Richard, John, and Ka∣tharine, Children of King Henry III. and was set up by Edward I. King of Eng∣land for three of his Sons and a Daugh∣ter, which he had by Eleanor his Queen, Daughter of Ferdinand III. King of Castile, viz. John, Henry, Alphonsus, and Eleonore. From this Tomb we go into the Chappel of St. Edmund. §. 48. On the right hand of the en∣trance you have a very antient Tomb of grey Marble, about three foot high, adorned with divers Coats of Arms, which serves as a Pedestal to support a Wainscot Chest, covered over with Valence or. Earl  broke . Ep. 67. plates of Brass richly enamelled, and thereon the Image of William de Va∣lence Earl of Pembroke, with a deep
Shield on his left Arm, in a Coat of Male, with a Surcoat all of the same enamelled Brass gilt with Gold, and beset with the Arms of Valence, viz. Bar∣rule Ar. & B. an orle of Martlets Gules; round about the inner ledge of this Tomb is most of the Epitaph remain∣ing in the antient Saxon Letters, and the rest of the Chest covered with Brass, wrought in the form of Lo∣zenges, each Lozenge containing either the Arms of England, or that of Va∣lence, alternately placed one after the other, enamelled with their colours. Round this Chest have been thirty little Brazen Images, some of them still remaining, twelve on each side, and three at each end, divided by certain Arches, that serve as Niches to inclose them: And on an outward ledge, at the foot of each of these Images are placed a Coat of Arms in Brass, en∣amelled with their colours. This Wil∣liam de Valence (for whom this curi∣ous Tomb was made) was Son of Hugh le Brun, Earl of March in the Confines of France and Poictiers by Isabel his Wife, Widow of King John, &c. as I have said before in the descriptionVid. §. 28. of his Sons Monument, and being half
Brother to King Henry III. was by him advanced to great honours, who ha∣ving married Joan, the Daughter of Warren de Montechensey, died in the year 1304, and had this Monument erected to his memory. §. 49. On the West side of this Chappel, and next to the Tomb ofEdward Talbot Earl of Shrews∣bury, and his Lady. vid. Ep. 66. William de Valence Earl of Pembroke is a most noble Monument for one of the Successors of that renowned Fa∣mily of the Talbots Earls of Shrews∣bury, viz. Edward the eighth Earl thereof, who died on the eighteenth of February 1617. aged 57 years, and the Lady Jane his Countess, who was the eldest Daughter, and one of the Co-heirs of the last Lord Ogle of that name. On a large Table of black Mar∣ble, supported by a stately Pedestal of Alabaster, and six Corinthian Pillars, lie their Images at full proportion, in their Mantles of Estate, painted, and gilt with Gold; at his feet, is placed a Talbot passant, and at hers, a Griffons head coped, with the Effigies of a fe∣male Child beneath them, all under a sumptuous arched Canopy of curi∣ous wrought, and diverse coloured
stones, adorned with large Columns, warlike Trophies, Cherubims, Stems of that illustrious Family, Coats of Arms, and Epitaphs. §. 50. Beyond which, more to∣wards the South, is a comely Monu∣ment of Alabaster, and various co∣loured Marble, adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, with three little Images on their knees, under as many arched Canopies of black Marble and figured Alabaster. In the midst is thatSir Rich. Peck∣sal Knight. vid. Ep. 62. of Sir Richard Pecksal Knight in Ar∣mour, who was Master of the Buck∣hounds to Queen Elizabeth; On one side of whom is that of his first Wife the Lady Eleonore, who was Daugh∣ter of William Pawlet, Marquess of Winchester, Lord High Treasurer of England, by whom he had four Daughters, whose Statues help to beau∣tifie the Pedestal of this Monument: on the other, his second Wife, who was likewise named Eleonore the Daughter of J. Cotgrave, who after the death of this her first Husband was re∣married to Sir John Savage of Cheshire Knight, and caused this Monument to be erected to his memory.
§. 51. Next to this, within the WallSt. Bernard Bro∣cas Knight. vid. Ep. 65. directly South, between two Pillars of the Chappel Windows, is an antient Canopied Tomb, adorned and enriched with Gold according to the fashion of those times, under which is an em∣battelled Pedestal of grey Marble, ha∣ving thereon the Image of a Knight in Armour, reposing his head on his Helm, ensigned with a Blackamores head for a Crest, and his feet suppor∣ted by a Lion couchant, with a deep Shield on his left arm, almost broken away, with eight lesser Escutcheons placed on the breasts of as many Che∣rubims, diversly set about the Tomb, but all the painting wholly decayed and worn away, nothing remaining but a piece of a broken Inscription in Brass on the ledge of the imbattelled Pedestal, whereby we may understand that this Monument was erected for one Sir Bernard Brocas Knight, Cham∣berlain to Anne Queen of England, who was Wife to King Richard II.
§. 52. Against the same Wall, butJohn Lord Russel Son to the Earl of Bedford. vid. Ep. 59. more towards the East, is a noble Mo∣nument of Alabaster, black, and vari∣ous coloured Marble, Canopied and adorned with Corinthian Pillars, Coats of Arms, and gilt with Gold, on whose Pedestal is placed the Image of a man at full proportion, leaning on his left side, and supporting his head by his left Arm in his Robes of Estate, with an∣other little Image of an Infant at his feet, all in curious wrought Alabaster, painted and gilt with Gold, environed with a Grate, and an Epitaph in La∣tine, Greek, and English, set up here to remember John Lord Russel and his Son Francis a Child, by the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir Anthony Coke Knight, and Widow of Sir Thomas Hobby; he was Son and Heir to Francis Russel, who was the second Earl of Bedford of that surname, but dying before his Father in the year 1584. and his Son Francis, anno 1580. was buried here, leaving behind him only two Daughters, viz. Anne and Elizabeth.
§. 53. Which Elizabeth is said toElizabeth Daughter of John Lord Russel. vid. Ep. 113. have bled to death by a prick she re∣ceived in the fore-finger of her left hand by a Needle, but with what truth I know not: Yet the Monument placed here for her within the same Grate with her Father by the Lady Anne her Sister seems not obscurely to point out as much: For on a Pedestal of black and white Marble, shaped after the figure of a Roman Altar, made Co∣lumn wise, is set the Statue of this young Lady, reposing her self in a cu∣rious wrought Osier Chair, all of poli∣shed Alabaster, melancholily inclining her cheek to her right hand, and with the fore-finger of her left only ex∣tended, directs us to behold the deaths head placed at her feet, silently intimating, that from thence sprung the Malady that brought her to the grave; wherefore we may not irrationally con∣jecture, that having touched an Arte∣ry with the invenomed Needle, the infection might so suddenly disperse it self (well known to able Physicians,) that in a short time it might occasion her death, which by the Ignorant might be imputed to the simple prick
of her finger, a thing altogether un∣likely and absurd. §. 54. Next to this Columnial Mo∣numentFrancis Holles, Son to the Earl of Clare. vid. Ep. 58. is another of the same form, but somewhat larger, composed of Alabaster and white Marble, with the Statue of a noble Youth thereon, fur∣nitured and equipped like a Roman He∣ro, with Helm, Shield, Coat of Male, Buskins, Sandals, &c. of polished Marble, which the illustrious Earl of Clare caused to be erected for his third Son Francis Holles, who returning sick from the Wars in Flanders and the Low-Countries, died at the age of eighteen years, and was buried here, anno 1622. §. 55. Between these two Altar-likeThe Lady Katharine Knowles, Cou∣sin German to Queen Eliz. vid. Ep. 60. Monuments, are two little Tombs fix∣ed to the Wall above them against the East side of the Chappel, both of Ala∣baster and black Marble, adorned with small Corinthian Pillars, set about with Arms, and gilt with Gold: The one, which is next to the door, for the La∣dy Katharine Knowles, chief Lady of the Bed-chamber, and Cousin German to Queen Elizabeth, and Wife to Sir
Francis Knowles Knight, Treasurer of the Houshold to the same Queen; she died at Hampton-Court on the fifth day of January 1568. and was honou∣rably buried in the floor of this Chap∣pel. The other, for the Lady JaneThe Lady Jane Seymour, Cousin-Ger∣man to King Edward VI. vid. Ep. 61. Seymour Cousin-German to Edward VI. King of England, and Daughter of Edward Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, and Baron Seymour, who dying a Virgin on the nineteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1560, at the age of nineteen years was buried here, and had this small Monument erected by her Brother the Earl of Hertford to her memory. But the Latine Verses mentioned by Stow and Camden to have been placed on this little Tomb are not here now, but only the English Inscription. §. 56. In the Area or floor of thisFrances Dut∣chess of Suf∣folk, Grand∣child to King Henry VII. vid. Ep. 57. Chappel, not far from the Monument of Francis Holles, is a raised Tomb of Ala∣baster, about five foot from the ground, adorned with Arms and In∣scriptions, and gilt with Gold; joyning to the four corners thereof are as many Corinthian Pillars, supporting a Table
of black Marble, whereon is placed the Image at full proportion in her Robes of Estate, and at her feet a Li∣on couchant, with a rich Jewel pen∣dant at the end of a Chain, encompas∣sing her neck, and falling between her breasts, all curiously wrought, and ad∣mirably pollished, in white Marble, erected here for the Lady Frances Dutchess of Suffolk, anno 1563. she was a Lady of great extraction, being Daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Mary the French Queen, who was the Daughter of Henry VII. King of England; she was married first to Henry Grey Marquess of Dorchester, who by King Edward VI. was created Duke of Suffolk; and afterwards to Adrian Stokes Esquire, who set up this Monument to remember her; she had a Daughter named Mary by her former Husband the Marquess of Dor∣cet, who died in the year 1578. and was buried by her without any Monu∣ment, Tomb, or Grave-stone. §. 57. By this of the Dutchess ofWilliam of Windsor, and his Sister Blanch of the Tower, Chil∣dren of Ed∣ward III. Suffolk is a little raised Tomb of grey Marble, on the top of which are placed the Images of two small Chil∣dren,
a Boy and Girl in Alabaster, nei∣ther of them being above sixteen Inches in length, at the feet of the Girl is a Lion couchant, but part of the Boys feet and Tomb under him is bro∣ken away; there being no Inscription or Epitaph thereon, but are reported to be two Children of Edward III. King of England, viz. William of Windsor, so called because born at the Kings Castle of Windsor, with his Sister Blanch of the Tower, for that in the Tower of London her Mother was delivered of her, both lying under this little Tomb. §. 58. On the left hand of the doorJohn of El∣tham, Earl of Cornwall, Son of King Ed. II. of this Chappel, and not far from this little Tomb is a most noble raised Mo∣nument of grey Marble, set about with twenty four little Images of various coloured Alabaster and white Marble, under each of which are the blank Escutcheons remaining, whereon had been as many several Coats of Arms depicted, which are now wholly whol∣ly worn away and decayed. On this Tomb is an Image of admirable wrought Alabaster, in his Coat Ar∣mour, and a deep Shield on his left
arm, whereon is graven the Arms of England within a bordure of France, and was placed here for John of El∣tham, Earl of Cornwal, having two Angels on each side supporting his head, and a Lion couchant at his feet, carved and finely pictured of the same Alabaster, with a Canopy covering the whole with delicate wrought Spires and Masons work, every where inter∣mixed and adorned with little Images and Angels according to the fashion of those times, supported by eight Pillars of white stone of the same curious wrought work: But there is no Epi∣taph or Inscription further to inform us. He was the second Son of King Edward II. by Isabel Daughter to Phi∣lip le Bell King of France, and took his Surname from the place of his birth, viz. at Eltham in Kent, he was ad∣vanced to the title of Earl of Corn∣wall by his Brother King Edward III. made twice Lieutenant of all England by the same King upon his Expeditions first into France, and then into Scot∣land, during his absence. But atten∣ding his Brother in the tenth year of his Reign into Scotland; he fell sick at St. Iohnstones Town, and there
died without Wife or Issue, and was afterwards brought into this Chappel, and here honourably buried, and had this Monument erected to his Memory. §. 59. In the midst of the Area of thisElenore Dut∣chess of Glo∣cester, Daugh∣ter-in-law to King Edw. III. vid. Ep. 64. Chappel, under a large grey Marble Tomb, about two foot from the ground, with her Effigies engraven thereon in Brass, under a Canopy artificially pour∣trayed, adorned with Arms and devices of the same Brass, with an Epitaph cir∣cumscribed in French, all remaining intire at this day, lies Elenore Dutchess of Glocester, who was one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex, Northampton, and High Constable of England, and Wife of Thomas de Woodstock, Duke of Glocester, Son to King Edward III. by whom she had a Son, who died in his Infancy, and a Daughter, named Anne, who was Wife first, to Edward Earl of Stafford, and afterwards, to Sir William Bourchier Knight, from this Anne by her first husband, the atinent Dukes of Buck∣ingham were descended, and by her last, the Bourchiers Earls of Essex; she died on the third of October 1399.
§. 60. There is another raised TombHumph. Bour∣chier, Son of the Lord Ber∣ners, vid. Epit. 63. of grey Marble, somewhat higher than that of the Dutchess of Glocester, adjoyning to Sir Bernard Brocas where∣on is portrayed the Effigies of a man in Armour, with his head on his Helm, ensigned with a Crest, and his feet sup∣ported, the one by a Leopard, the other, by an Eagle, with divers antient fashi∣on'd Shields, and Coats of Arms, all en∣graven on curious wrought Brass, fixed to the Marble, and remaining intire at this day, with an Epitaph in Latine Verse, insculpt on the same brass plates just under his Effigies, to inform us, that Humphrey Bourchier, Son and Heir of John Lord Berners, lies there interred, who married the Daughter and Heir of Frederick Tilney, and lost his life in those Civil Broyls of the Houses of York and Lancaster, ta∣king part with Edward IV. against Henry VI. in the Battel of Barnet, from whence he was brought, and here intombed. I know not how it came to pass, but certainly there is a mistake in Mr. Camdens Collection of these Mo∣numents, where he places this Tomb to another Humphrey Bourchier, who
was Lord Cromwell, and Son toHumph. Bour∣chier Son of the Earl of Essex. Henry Earl of Essex, who was slain at the same time at the Battel of Bar∣net, and interred in this Chappel, hard by the Monument of William de Valence, without any further remem∣brance of him: And for a confirmati∣on that this Tomb was made for the former Humphrey, Son of the Lord Berners, not only the Verses of his Epitaph specifie in part as much, but is most evident by his impaling the Coat of Tilney, with quarterings re∣maining very visible at this day on the same Tomb. §. 61. On the Floor or PavementRobert Walby Archhishop of York. vid. Ep. 69. of this Chappel adjoyning to the foot of the Tomb of Elenore Dutchess of Glocester is a large grey Marble stone, adorned with most excellent workman∣ship of Brass, whereon is lively pictu∣red, as he was accustomed to sing or say Mass, with a Miter on his head, and a Crosier Staff in his hand, the Effigie of a Bishop, with so much of an Epitaph round the Verge still in being, to in∣form us that Robert Walby, Bishop of Durham, afterwards of Chichester, and then Archbishop of York, died on
the fourth day of January in the year 1390. and was buried here. §. 62. More towards the East, onHenry Ferne, Bishop of Che∣ster. vid. Ep. 68. the same Pavement, is another grey Marble stone, with five Plates of Brass, whereon are engraven as many Coats of Arms, with a Miter in the midst, and round about the Verge an Epitaph insculpt on the like Plates of Brass, giving us to understand, that Henry Ferne, who was the eighth Son of Sir John Ferne Knight, was Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and afterwards Bishop of Chester, who died in the year 1662. at the age of fifty nine years, and was here depo∣sited. The Chappel of St. Nicolas. §. 63. On the right hand, as youPhilippa, Dut∣chess of York, Grand-daugh∣ter-in-law to King Edw. III. vid. Ep. 78. come into this Chappel is an antient decayed Tomb of Freestone, with the Image of a Lady lying thereon at full proportion, in her Robes of Estate, under a wooden Canopy, curiously painted with Azure, and decked with Stars of Gold, with our Saviour on the Cross; Supported by Wainscote Pillars,
and neatly adorned with excellent car∣ved Spires, and Coats of Arms de∣picted thereon, erected here to con∣tinue the remembrance of Philippa, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of John Lord Mohun of Dunster, who was first married to the Lord Fitz-Walter, afterwards to Sir John Golosre Knight, and lastly to Edward Plantagenet Duke of York, (Son of Edmund of Langley, fifth Son of King Edward III.) who was killed at the Battel of Agincourt; she died, and was buried here in the year 1474. §. 64. Beyond this Tomb, towardsThe Lady Elizabeth Ce∣cill, Daughter of the Earl of Rutland. the West, under an Arch in the Wall, lies the Image of a woman at full pro∣portion, leaning on her left Arm, in a Cypress vail, all of a mouldering stone, which being decayed by reason of its brittleness, and that the Monu∣ment is very plain, seems to be of much greater Antiquity than really it is, ha∣ving no Inscription, Paintings, or adornments but a Coat of Arms, where Cecill with quarterings, Impaling Man∣nors is to be seen, and was here placed for the Lady Elizabeth, sole-Daughter and Heir of Edward Mannors Earl
of Rutland by Isabel his Wife, Daugh∣ter of Sir Thomas Holcroft, of the Vale Royal in the County of Che∣ster Knight; she was Wife of Sir William Cecill Knight, commonly cal∣led Lord Burleigh, Son and Heir ap∣parent to Thomas Earl of Exeter, by whom she had Issue William called Lord Ross; she departed this life the eleventh of May, anno 1591. and lieth here, as the entering thereof in the Heralds Office, and those Arms above, placed over her Effigies do sufficiently testifie. §. 65. Next to this is a MonumentWinifrid Mar∣chioness of Winchester. vid. Ep. 77. of Alabaster, Porphyry, and diverse coloured stones, adorned and gilt with Gold, having on the Pedestal the Image of a young man and woman kneeling, with a little Babe in swadling bands between them, and on a Table suppor∣ted by this Pedestal is a large Statue of a Lady at full proportion combant, in her Robes of Estate of the same Ala∣baster, painted, and gilt with Gold, and environed with a Grate, where the Lady Winifrid, Marchioness of Win∣chester is said to be intombed, she was descended from the antient Family of
the Bruges, first married to Sir Richard Sackvile Knight, Chancellour of the Ex∣chequer, by whom she had the Lord Buckhurst, and the Lady Dacres of the South, with other Children, after∣wards to John Paulet Marquess of Winchester, whose Widow she died in the year 1586. §. 66. On the South side of thisWiiam Sutton, alias Dudley, Bishop of Durham. vid. Ep. 76. Chappel is an antient Tomb in the Wall of grey Marble, with his Por∣traiture ingraven on Brass in his Episcopal habit, with a Miter on his head, and a Crosier Staff in his hand, canopied with an Arch of curious wrought stone, under which William Sutton alias Dudley, Bishop of Durham lies interred; he was the Son of John Lord Dudley, and died about the year 1482. as may be gathe∣thered from part of an Epitaph still remaining in Brass round the Verge of his Tomb. §. 67. Here is a most noble andMildred Cecill Lady Burlegh, and Anne Countess of Oxford her Daughter. vid. Ep. 75. Magnificent Monument towards the Southeast part Angle of this Chappel, set up against the same Wall by the command and charge of William Cecill,
Lord Burlegh to the remembrance of his Wife and Daughter, being twenty four foot high, containing divers Arches and Canopies supported by Corinthian Pillars and adorned with Pyramids, of Porphyry, Lydian, Touch, and various coloured Marble, curiously carved, and gilt with Gold. On the upper part of this Monument under a small Arch is a little figure of an anti∣ent man praying on his knees, and in his Parliament Robes, with the Collar and Jewel of the Order of St. George about his neck, to represent the afore∣said William Cecil Lord Burlegh, Lord High Treasurer of England, Privy Counsellour to Queen Elizabeth, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, who died on the fourth day of August in the year 1598. and lay in state in this Church six days; after∣wards he was translated to Stam∣ford, where in St. Martins Church his body was interred. On the Pede∣stal are two Images at full proportion cumbant in their Robes of Estate of Alabaster, painted, and adorned with Gold, the furthermost of Mildred Lady Burlegh, Wife of the above-said Willi∣am, she was the eldest Daughter of
Sir Anthony Coke Knight, by Anne the Daughter of Sir William Fitz-Williams Knight, who was a Lady of no less eminent in her time for her extraordi∣nary Charity, than for her Piety and great Learning, being well versed in the Greek and Latine Tongues; she had many Children by her Husband, all dying in their Infancy except Anne, Robert, and Elizabeth. She died in her grand Climacterick year on the fourth day of April 1589▪ and was buried from her house at Westminster in this Chappel. The other of her Daughter the Lady Anne, Countess of Oxford, who maried Edward Vere, Lord High Chamberlain of England, and the seven∣teenth (of the name of Vere) Earl of Oxford, by whom she left Issue only three Daughters, who dying at the Queens Palace of Greenwich on the fifth day of June 1588. was brought and interred in the floor of this Chap∣pel. On each side of this Pedestal are two Canopies, supported by some little Corinthian Columns, curious∣ly painted with Azure, and gilt with Gold, underneath each of which is a Deaths-head enchased in Crystal, with with these words, Mors Janua vitae,
and Mors mihi Lucrum; by the latter, at the head of their Mother and Grand∣mother are three little Images of female Children kneeling, the Lady Eliza∣beth, the Lady Bridget, and the Lady Anne Vere, and by the former, at the feet of his Mother and Sister the figure only of a Youth kneeling, for Robert Cecill, Son of the above-mentioned William and the Lady Mildred his Wife, who married Elizabeth Brook, Daughter of the Lord Cobham, all living when this Monument was erected. §. 68. Beyond this, against the EastThe Lady Elizabeth Fane, Daughter of the Lord Spen∣cer. vid. Ep. 73. Wall, is another comly Monument, where under an Artificial Canopy, the Curtains withdrawn, and held up by two Corinthian Pillars of divers colou∣red Alabaster and Marble, adorned and gilt with Gold, are two Images kneeling at a Table, the one of a Knight in Armour, placing his left hand on a Deaths-head: The other of his Lady, with a Book lying before her on the same Table, praying and lifting up their eyes towards the Azure Sky, representing an Artificial Heaven, painted on the roof of the Canopy,
beset with Cherubims, little Angels, and gilded Stars: On the out-side of the same Monument are many larger figures of Angels, naked Youths, and Cupids, all of polished Alabaster, with a Fame standing on a bleeding heart, with a device and Motto, being set up here by Sir George Fane of Buston Knight, in the County of Kent, for the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, who was Daughter of Robert Baron Spencer of Wormleighton, who died in the year 1618. §. 69. Under this Monument, closeNicolas Baron Carew and Margaret his Wife. vid. Ep. 71. to the Wall, is an antient plain raised Tomb of grey Marble, with an In∣scription in Brass round the ledge still remaining, and some Coats of Arms on the Pedestal, whereby may be ga∣thered, that Nicolas Baron Carew, and his Wife the Lady Margaret, who was the Daughter of Sir John Dinham Knight, were here intombed; he dy∣ing on the sixth day of December in the year 1470. and she on the thir∣teenth day of the same month and year following.
§. 70. Next to this Tomb is a mostAnne Dutchess of Somerset. vid. Ep. 71. noble Monument twenty four foot high, admirably adorned with curious wrought stones, Pyramids, and Co∣rinthian Columns of Porphyry, Lydian, and various coloured Marble, where under a large Arch, set forth with di∣vers ingenuities, Coats of Arms, and other Adornments, and rich gildings, is the Image of a Lady, lying at full proportion in her Robes of Estate, painted, and gilt with Gold, and en∣vironed with an Iron Grate, being erected by Edward Earl of Hertford to the remembrance of his Mother the Lady Anne, Dutchess of Somerset, who was the Wife of Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hert∣ford, &c. Knight of the most noble Or∣der of the Garter, and Ʋncle to King Edward VI. She was the Daughter of Sir Edward Stanhope Knight, by Eli∣zabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir Foulke Bourchier Lord Fitz-warin, who by his Father was descended from Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Glocester, Son to King Edward III. She died on the sixteenth day of April anno 1587. in the ninetieth year of her age, having
Issue by her Husband three Sons, and six Daughters, and was here in∣terred. §. 71. Before this Monument of theThe Lady Jane Clifford, Daughter of Wiiam Duke of Somerset. vid. Ep. 72. Dutchess of Somerset, on the Area, is a late erected Tomb of a curious form, whose Pedestal is composed of four large Cherubims of rough Alabaster, which support a square Table of ad∣mirable polished black Marble, rising every way from the Superficies to a convenient height, whose Angles are all conjoyned, and covered by a Ducal Coronet of white Marble, encompas∣sed with an Iron Grate, and gilt with Gold, under which lies the Lady Jane Clifford, Wife of Charles Lord Clif∣ford and Dungarvan, Son and Heir apparent to Richard Earl of Burling∣ton, &c. She was the Daughter of William Duke of Somerset, Grand∣daughter to Edward Earl of Hertford, and Great-grand-daughter to Edward Duke of Somerset, who was Uncle King Edward VI. and therefore had this Monument erected for her hard by her Great-grandmothers. She had Issue five Sons, and six Daughters, de∣parting this life on the twenty third of
November 1679. in the 42. year of her Age. §. 72. On the left hand of the doorThe Lady Eli∣zabeth Cecill, Daughter of William Lord Cobham. vid. Ep. 70. as you come into this Chappel is a lit∣tle Table Monument of one intire black Marble stone placed on a Pedestal of Alabaster, adorned with Arms, Epitaphs, and gilt with Gold, for Elizabeth the Wife of Sir Robert Cecill Knight, Son of William Lord Burlegh, Lord High Treasurer of England, and Privy Coun∣sellour to Queen Elizabeth. She was the Daughter of William Brooke Lord Cobham, and as a remembrance of her had this Tomb placed here by her Husband in the year 1591. §. 73. In the midst of the PavementSir George Vil∣lers, and the Countess of Backingham his Wife. vid. Ep 80. of this Chappel is a most noble Tomb, composed of a black Marble Table, of one intire Lydian stone, curiously po∣lished, and supported by a Pedestal of black and white Marble, embellished with divers carved Figures, Coats of Arms and Masons work. On this Ta∣ble is placed the Image of a Knight in ompleat Armour Cap à Piè, support∣ing his feet by a Lion couchant; with nother of his Lady, her feet resting
on the like Lion, vested with a Man∣tle of Estate, and having on her head the Coronet of a Countess, all wrought and graved out of curious white Mar∣ble, and was set up here by George Vil∣lers, the first Duke of Buckingham of that surname, to the remem∣brance of Sir George Villers Knight, his Father, and the Lady Mary Beau∣mont, Countess of Buckingham, his Mother. §. 74. On the South side of thisThe heart of Anna Sophia, Daughter of Christopher Harlee Count Bellomont, a Frenchman. vid. Ep. 81. Tomb is a small Pyramid of white Marble, on the top of which is placed a golden Cup, whose Pedestal of black Marble, adorned with Arms, Epi∣taphs, and gilt with Gold, informs us, that the heart of Anna Sophia an Infant (Daughter to Christopher Har∣lee Count Bellomont, Praefect of Paris, Privy Counsellour to the French King, and his Embassadour here in England, by the Lady Anne Robota his Wife) is posited in the aforesaid Chalice, who died in the year 1605.
§. 75. On the East side the Pave∣mentSir Humphrey Stanley Knight vid. Ep. 79. of this Chappel, by the base of the Tomb of the Lady Jane Clifford, and not far from that of the Lord Carew, is a plated Grave-stone of grey Mar∣ble, whereon the Effigies of a Knight in Armour is lively engraven, with an Epitaph, and at each corner a Coat of Arms, informing us, that under that Stone lies the body of Sir Humphrey Stanley Knight, one of the Gentlemen of the Bed-chamber to King Henry VII. who died on the twelfth day of March anno 1505. §. 76. Leaving this Chappel, and keeping straight forward we go up by an easie ascent of twelve Greeses or steps of Freestone thorough three Portico's, which lead us to as many brazen doors, nobly and richly ador∣ned with Grate-works, Roses, Port∣cullises, and Flowers de Liz, the several badges of the Founder, which lets us into the
Chappel of the B. Virgin Mary, §. 77. Or King Henry VII. as it isThe Chappel of K. Hen VII. vulgarly called, by reason that he com∣manded it to be erected, and was at the charge thereof. This Chappel, so much admired by Strangers, and esteemed by us, rather exceeds in beauty and ex∣cellent contrivance than equals the same thereof, for if we respect the ad∣mirable Architecture, and most noble Roof, we there behold a most delight∣fulThe Roof. sight. On either side we are enter∣tained with no less than 120 severalStatues. Statues of the Primitive Saints and Martyrs, and round about other lesser Images and Antick figures, so excel∣lently carved, and curiously ingraven, that many experienced in the Art of Painting have not neglected the copy∣ing them; the curious workmanship of the Staules, with the rest of theStaules. fine wrought Wainscot, that serves to adorn this Chappel, ought not to be passed over without your observati∣on; nor are the Windows (whereWindows. with this Chappel is further embelli∣shed) to be neglected, every light composed of Diapered and well painted
glass, each Pane containing either a Red Rose, the Badge or Cognizance of the House of Lancaster, or a Text H, the Initial Letter of this Kings name, each crowned with a Royal Dia∣dem. But above all, the magnificent and glorious Monuments and nobleAnd Monu∣ments there∣in. Tombs of those illustrious Princes who have been interred and depo∣sited here deserve a more particular description. §. 78. To begin then with that ofKing Hen. VII. and his Queen. vid. Ep. 82. the Founder of this admirable Fabrick, which stands at the upper end of this his Chappel, being all of solid Brass, about eighteen foot in length, six in breadth, and nine in depth; open on the top, with a continual Battlement going quite round, where in the midst of every Square, and at each Angle is a great Rose, representing so many Bulwarks encompassing a Royal Fort; whilst on the under part of this state∣ly Structure, supporting these Battle∣ments, are divers Pillars full of Ni∣ches, and in each Nich were as many brazen Statues gilt with Gold, with other Images, of the Apostles, Fathers, and Doctors of the Church; which in
great part are now stolen away: The work that fills up the spaces and squares between each of these Pillars from the bottom to the top is all Grate∣work, representing the nature of a Vine, curling and twining its branches to and fro for the conveniency of the Dragons and Greyhounds to en∣counter or chase on the other, with which Figures the whole work is inter∣laced. Round about the cross bars, which go quite round the midst of this Tonument, is an Epitaph in Latine Verse, made to the commendations of the Founder: On the North and South side of this Case, or Fence, or rather small Chappel, to the noble Tomb within, you have two brazen doors, which are seldom opened by reason the Grate-work gives Spectators a suffici∣ent view of the Tomb: Which Tomb is a Pedestal of about five foot from the ground, of black Marble, every way adorned with gilded brass, of ad∣mirable workmanship: on which Pe∣destal are placed the Images, all of so∣lid Brass, and gilt with Gold, in their Royal Habiliments, of that great King Henry VII. of England, and Elizabeth his Queen, Daughter of Edward IV.
under each of whose Images are divers Inscriptions in Brass gilt, to inform you from whence they derived their Linage and Descent. On the outside of this brazen Monument there be two antient Tables in writing, with many Verses, composed by Skelton, the Kings Orator and Poet Laureat, as he stiles him, in which he blazons forth the com∣mendations and virtues of that excel∣lent Prince and Queen, which I haveVid. Ep. 2. transcribed for your satisfaction, and you may find among the Monumental Inscriptions. §. 79. At the head of his Grand∣fatherEdward VI. K. of England. King Henry VII. was Edward VI. K. of England France, and Ireland, interred under a brazen Altar, artificially wrought, and gilt with Gold, of which there is nothing now remaining. He was Son to Henry VIII. by Jane Seymour his Queen, being crowned the twenty eighth of January 1546. and died the sixth of July 1553. (as it is supposed) of an untimely death. The Altar and Sepulchre, before mentioned, wherein the body of King Henry VII. resteth, was made and finished in the year 1519. by one Peter a Painter of Flo∣rence,
for which he received no more than one thousand pounds sterling for the whole stuff and workmanship, so cheap and so excellent was work in those days. §. 80. On either side of the sameMargaret Countess of Richmond and Derby, mother to K. Hen. VII. vid. Ep. 83. Chappel you have several of the An∣cestors and Successors of the Founder interred. On the South side, behind the staules of the Quire, towards the East, is a noble raised Tomb of black Marble, curiously wrought, and ador∣ned with gilded Brass, Arms, an Epi∣taph round the Verge, and environed with a Grate, whereon is placed the Image of a Lady in her Robes of Estate, all of solid Brass, and gilt with Gold, with the model of two Pillars on each side her, after which form she caused the noble structures which she erected to be composed, under which lies Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby, one of the Daughters and Heirs of John Duke of Somerset, by Margaret the Daughter of the Lord Beauchamp of Powick. She was first married to Edmund the Son of Owen Tuder, by whom she had Henry VII. King of England, and afterwards to
Edward Stanley Earl of Derby. She built two Colledges at Cambridge, Christchurch, and St. Johns, instituted a Divinity Lecture in either University, gave much to religious Houses, and indowed her Foundations with ample Revenues, and after she had seen her Grandson King Henry VIII. crowned, she died in the year 1509. §. 81. At the lower end, towardsMargaret Couness of Levenox, Grandmother to King James. vid. Ep. 84. the West of this side of the Chappel, is a comely Tomb of Alabaster, black and diverse coloured stones, and on the Pedestal six little Images of young men kneeling, with two women all of the same Alabaster, set about with Arms, and gilt with Gold, lies the Image at full proportion, in her Robes of Estate, curiously painted, and gilt with Gold, of Margaret Countess of Levenox, Daughter and sole Heir of Archibald Earl of Auguise, by Marga∣ret, Queen of Scots, his Wife, eldest Daughter to King Henry VII. She married Mathew Stuart Earl of Le∣venox, by whom she had Henry Lord Darly, Father to King James VI. of Scotland, and first Monarch of Great Britain. She died anno 1578.
§. 82. Between these two Monu∣mentsMary Queen of Scots, Mother to King James. vid. Ep. 85. of Margaret Countess of Rich∣mond, and Margaret Countess of Le∣venox, is a most stately Monument, erected by the order of King James for his Mother, Mary Queen of Scots, whose Image in her Royal Habiliments, painted, and gilt with Gold, is placed on a noble Pedestal of curious wrought Alabaster, overshadowed by an arched Canopy, supported by eight Corin∣thian Pillars of black Marble, the Ca∣pitals and Pedestals gilt, the Archi∣trave adorned with Arms, and the whole of an admirable composure. This Lady for whom this Monument was framed was Daughter and Heir to James V. King of Scotland, the Son of James IV. and Margaret his Queen, eldest Daughter to King Henry VII. of England. She was married to Francis the Dauphin, afterwards King of France, by the name of Francis the Second, after whose death she married the Lord Darly, by whom she had James her Son and Heir, during whose minority, being driven by her rebelli∣ous Subjects from her Kingdom, and casting her self upon the protection
of Queen Elizabeth, she underwent the hard fortune to be imprisoned almost twenty years, and at last was beheaded in the forty sixth year of her age anno 1587. being buried at Peterborough, but upon the coming of King James to the Crown of Eng∣land, he commanded her body to be translated from thence, and here ho∣nourably to be intombed in a Vault un∣derneath her Monument. §. 83. On the North side of thisMary and Eli∣zabeth▪ Queens of Egland. vid. Ep. 89. Chappel, behind the Staules, you have another most Magnificent and Royal Monument, made altogether after the same fashion with that of Mary Queen of Scots, the Canopy supported by Corinthian Pillars, set about with Arms, with the Image thereon of Elizabeth Queen of England, in her Royal Habiliments, painted, and gilt with Gold, which was erected like∣wise by the order of King James, for Mary Queen of England, France, and Ireland, (Daughter to Henry VIII. by Katharine, Daughter to Ferdinand King of Spain, who succeeded her Brother King Edward VI. to his Crown and Kingdoms, anno 1553. who after
her marriage with Philip II. King of Spain, died in the year 1558.) and Elizabeth er Sister, Daughter likewise of King Henry VIII. by his second Wife Anne Bullen, who after she had reigned forty four years, four Months, and eight days, died on the twenty fourth day of March anno 1602. and was buried in the same Vault by her Sister, just under this Tomb. §. 84. At the upper end of thisThe Ldy So∣phia, Daughter to King James. vid▪ Ep. 90. North side, towards the East, within a Baluster, or Rail of Iron, you have three small, but curious Tombs; that towards the North is a Child in a Cra∣dle made of Alabaster, finely engra∣ven, and gilt with Gold, being set on a Pedestal of black Marble, and was placed here likewise by the order of King James for his Daughter Sophia an Infant, who was born on the 22 day of June, anno 1606. and died three days after. §. 85. The other towards the South,The Lady Ma∣ry another Daughter of King James. vid. Ep. 91. is a neat raised Tomb of Alabaster and Touch, adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, whereon is placed the Image of a Child lying at length, and
leaning on her left Arm, composed of white Marble, and lively painted, for another Daughter of King James Mo∣narch of Great Britain, viz. Mary, who died on the sixteenth day of De∣cember anno 1607. being two years, five months, and eight days old. §. 86. Between these is the third,Edward V▪ King of Eng∣land, and Rich. Duke of York his Brother. vid. Ep. 92. where, in the Wall is a Nich cut on purpose, and a curious Altar of black and white Marble, admirably polished, with two Crowns, and as many golden branches of Palm, with an Epitaph en∣graven on the Pedestal, informing us, that his present Majesty Charles II. Mo∣narch of Great Britain, commanded this to be erected to revive and per∣petuate the remembrance of his Kins∣men those Princely Youths who were most barbarously smothered to death with Pillows in the Tower of Lon∣don, by the cruelty of their unnatural Uncle King Richard III. viz. Edward V. King of England, and Richard Duke of York his Brother, whose bodies, so long sought for (but in vain) by reason of the sudden death of the Priest who buried them, were lately found by undoubted circumstances on
the seventeenth day of July 1674. afterThei es found  Tower  Ln¦don▪ an an∣slatd hither. 196 years obscurity: For some alte∣rations being ordered to be made in the Tower of London about this time, and h Workmen taking up the steps enring the Chappel belonging to the White Tower, they found these bods there-under deposited; which our most Royal Sovereign, out of his noble and compassionate nature, pitying their unjust punishment, and hard fortune, commanded with all decency and reverence to be transla∣ted, and reinterred here, among ashes equally as Royal as their own, which was performed accordingly, anno 1678. §. 87. At the head of Mary and Elizabeth, Queens of England, in a small Vault, capable of no more than two Coffins, are deposited in leaden Chests George Monke Duke of Albe∣marle, and Edward Mountague Earl of Sandwich. These loyal and most worthy Gentlemen, who as yet have no Monuments erected for them, but their Banners, Pennons, Guidons, and other Ensigns of honour, are hung up here as Trophies of their incomparable
fame. The Statue of the Duke of Al∣bemarle, in compleat Armour, with his Parliament Robes as a Mantle cove∣ring them, with the Collar of the Order of St. George round his neck, a Battoon in his hand, and a Coronet on his head, is likewise placed in a Press of Wainscot further to remember him. §. 88. This George Monke was SonGeorge Monke Duke of Alber∣marle. to Sir Thomas Monke of Potheridge in the County of Devon Knight, who having much delighted from his youth and practised a military course of life as well in forain parts as at home, after the Martyrdom of King Charles I. and the expulsion of his Royal Issue, was intrusted by the Usurpers with the command of one of their Armies, and made General in the North. But such was the integrity of this illustrious Hero, and true loyalty to his Masters Chil∣dren, that he held correspondency with the King during his exile, and only waited the opportunity (which was afterwards put into his hands) of restoring him to his Kingdoms; for which good services, and that by the Lady Frances, Daughter and Coheir
to Arthur Plantagenet, natural Son to King Edward IV. Wife of Thomas Monke Esquire, his lineal Ancestor, he was descended from Edward Grey Vis∣count Lisle, Son to the renowned John Talbot, sometime Earl of Shrewsbu∣ry, by Margaret his Wife, of that va∣liant Earl from the famous Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick and Au∣marle, Regent of France, (whose eldest Daughter and Co-heir she was) he had by Letters Patent, bearing date the seventh day of July, in 12 Car. 2. these several Dignities and Titles of honour conferred upon him, and the Heirs Males of his body, viz. Baron Monke of Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teyes; Earl of Torrington, and Duke of Albemarle, and shortly after instauled Knight of the most noble Or∣der of the Garter. He married Anne the Sister of Sir Thomas Clarges Knight, and died on the fourth of January 1669. leaving Christopher his Son and Suc∣cessor. A Cenotaph was here erected, with his Statue thereon, standing ma∣ny days in the body of this Church, and on the day of his interment there was a most solemn Funeral Pomp, with all the Nobility and chief Gentry
of the Kingdom attending him to the Grave, by the express order, and at the charge of our present Sovereign, to whom he was most dear. §. 89. Edward Mountague, his Com∣paniondwrd Moun∣tague arl o Sandwich. both in life and death, was Son and Heir to Sir Sydney Mountague, de Hinchinbrooke, in the County of Huntingdon Knight, who was youngest Brother to Edward the first Lord Mountague of Boughton. This Edward (no less than his fllow-Soul∣dier the Duke of Albemarle by land) became intrusted with the like power of being Admiral by Sea, and by the same Usurpers, where for a time both of them were forced to dis∣guise their honest thoughts by a seem∣ing compliance with their unjust tyranny. By which means they be∣came the chief and happy▪ Instruments, without any opposition, of restoring again the Laws, Liberties, Peace, and Tranquillity of these Kingdoms, and their lawful Sovereign, after twelve years exile, to his undoubted Right and Inheritance: For which good ser∣vices he was made Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, a Baron of
this Realm, by the Title of Lord Moun∣tague of S. Neots in Com. Hunt. Viscount Hinchinbrooke, and Earl of Sandwich. But being Vice-Admiral to his Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany, in the Sea-fight be∣tween the English and the Dutch, on the twenty eighth of May, Anno 1672. had his Ship, called the Royal Iames, most unfortunately set on ir, where he lost his life in the forty seventh year of his age, his body be∣ing afterwards found on the Sea Coast was taken up and brought to Westmin∣ster in great state, and here honoura∣bly interred. He married Semina Daughter to John Lord Crew de Stene in Com. North. and had Issue six Sons, Edward, Sydney, Oliver, John, Charles, and James, and four Daugh∣ters, Jemina, Paulina, Anne, and Ka∣tharine. §. 90. On each side of the Foun∣dersGeorge Villers, Duke of Buck∣ing and his Lady. vid. Ep. 8. Tomb are two small Chappels: In that on the North is a most Magni∣ficent and stately Monument for George Villers, that Great Duke of Bucking∣ham, who was slain at Portsmouth with a Ponyard (in his Expedition to
the Isle of Rea) by the impious hands of Felton, a Lieutenant under his Command, in the year 1634. e mar∣ried Katharine the Daughter and Heir of the Earl of Rutland, and had se∣veral Children by her, viz. Mry, Charles, (who died in their incy) George the present Duke of Bucking∣ham, and Francis. This Tomb for its admirable composure of Lydian, Touch, and divers rich Marbles, and curious Statues of solid Brass, and gilt with Gold, is scarce to be equalled in all Europe, for on the East Wall of this Chappel there runs up a Com∣partment from the Pavement to the Roof of black and white Marble, richly adorned, wherein all that is ex∣cellent in Architecture, Carving, Ma∣sons work, or Sculpture, is there to be seen; the variety of noble Columns, Embattlements, Arches, Niches, Pe∣destals, Architraves, Statues, and infi∣nite other Figures, all wrought in stone, or burnished Brass, gilt with Gold, make  sweet harmony of com∣posure, the little Hymens extingui∣shing their Torches, and weeping Cu∣pids neglecting their imployments, with those large Statues of Mars,
Neptune, Pallas, and Bounty, that are placed at the four corners of the Pe∣destal, before as many▪ noble Pyramids of black Marble, set about with War∣like Trophies, and supported from their Pedestals by sixteen Deaths heads of gilded Brass, are subjects expressing an universal mourning: But when we behold the Statue of this illustrious Hero himself, with that awful Majestick countenance mixt with greatness and affability; and the Image of his Lady lying by him, with a Fame at their feet, even bursting her self, and Trum∣pets to tell the news of his so sudden fall, we cannot but be concerned, yet pleased to see such lively representati∣ons and speaking figures, which seem really to be affected with a sense of sor∣row and disconsolation. §. 91. On the South side of theLodowick Stu∣art, Duke of Riond, and his Dutchess Cousin▪ Ger∣man to King James. vid. Ep. 86. aforesaid Founders Tomb is the other Chappel, wherein is another Majestick and Prince like Monument, little in∣feriour to that of the Duke of Buck∣ingham, but of another manner of composure, for on a large raised Pede∣stal of black Marble, richly adorned with curious wrought Brass, gilt with
Gold, and set about with Arms, are placed the Images of of Lodowick Stu∣art, Duke of Richmond and Levenox, Earl of Newcattle upon Tine, and Lord Darnley, Lord High Chamber∣lain of Scotland, and hereditary Ad∣miral, Lord High Steward of his Ma∣jesties Houshold, first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, Privy Counsellour, and Cousin German to King James, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter; with the Lady Frances his Wife, Daughter of Thomas Lord Ho∣ward of Bindon, Son to the Duke of Norfolk, &c. The Statues of these two illustrious persons all of solid Brass, gilt with Gold, in their Robes of Estate, lying upon the aforesaid Pe∣destal, under a stately Canopy, tho∣rough wrought, and curiously engra∣ven, of the same gilded Brass, resting it self on an Architrave of black Mar∣ble, supported at the four corners by the Statues of Faith, Hope, Charity, and Prudence, which serve as mour∣ners in their Cypress Vails, continually to attend, and seem to lament their departure, in which posture their Fi∣gures are lively expressed all of the same Brass; on the top of this Canopy
is a Fame and round about divers Cen∣cers, Angels, Hymens, Cupids, and other Imagery work, by which the whole becomes very curious and mag∣nificent. §. 92. At the feet of this Duke andEsme Stuart, Duke of i∣ his Grandson. vid. Ep. . his Dutchess, against the East Wall is a small Pyramid of black and white Marble, with an Urn placed on the top, and a Coronet encompassing the  gilt with Gold, for Esme Stuart, Duke of Richmond and Levenox, who was Son of James Stuart Duke of Richmond, &c. And the Lady Mary his Wife, only Daughter of George Duke of Buckingham. This Esme died at Paris on the fourteenth day of August 1661. in the eleventh year of his Age▪ from whence he was brought and interred here. §. 93. These are all the Monuments and Tombs that we meet with above ground in this stately Chappel, except the Image of Lodowick Stuart Duke of Richmond, as above, and his Dut∣chess, which are placed in a Press of Wainscot, not far from their Monu∣ment, in their Robes of Estate. But
under-ground, and in the Vaults there are many more. §. 94. In a Vault on the North sideJames King of England, and Queen Anne. the Tomb of King Henry VII. was James King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, interred in a Chest of Lead covered with black Velvet, with Anne Queen of Eng∣land his Wife, Grandfather and Grandmother to our present Sove∣reign. §. 95. At the East end of this Chappel, under the great East Win∣dow is another large Vault, with a light belonging thereto wherein are depo∣sited in Chests of Lead, covered with Velvet these persons following, viz. §. 96. Charles Earl of Doncaster,Charles, Earl of oncaster, Son to James Duke of Mon∣moth, Grand∣child (by his natur Son) to K Charles II. eldest Son of James Duke of Mon∣mouth, (Baron of Tinedale, Viscount Doncaster, and Knight▪ of the most noble Order of the Garter, natural Son to his present Mjesty) by the Lady Anne, Daughter nd sole Heir to Fran∣cis Earl of Bucklugh in Scotland, he died on the ninth of February 1673. aged one year five months, and fifteen days.
§. 97. Next to him lies the DutchessThe Dutchess of Southampton, Daughter in∣law (y his na∣tural Son) to K. Charles II. of Southampton, Daughter of Sir Henry Wood, and Wife of Charles Fitz-Roy, (natural Son to King Charles II.) Duke of Southampton, Earl of Chichester, Baron of Newbery, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. §. 98. By whom is posited CharlesCharles Fitz-Charles Earl of , natural Son to K Charles II. Fitz-Charles, (natural Son to his pre∣st Majesty) Earl of Plymouth, Viscount Totnes, and Baron Dart∣mouth, who in the Expedition of Tangier 1680. against the Moors, fell sick of a Fever, and died there, but was afterwards brought and interred here. §. 9. By him lies the noble Earl of Earl of  Son to the Du of  Ossery, one of the Privy Council to our Royal Sovereign, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and eldest Son to James Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. §. 100. On the North side of thisThe Lady Arabella Stu∣art▪ Cousin-German to King James. Chappel is another spacious Vault wherein are these following persons interred, viz. The Lady Arabella Stu∣art,
whose Coffin, wherein her Corps do repose, is the furthest next the North Wall of this Vault, much shat∣tered and broken, that her Skull and great part of her body may be seen, she was only Daughter and Heir to Charles Earl of Levenox, (by the Daughter of Sir William Caven∣dish Knight,) and Cousin-German to King James. §. 101. Upon this of the Lady Ara∣bellaMary Queen of Scots, Mo∣ther to King James. is placed the Chest or Leaden Coffin, wherein Mary Queen of Scots, (Mother to King James, who was decollated by Queen Elizabeth, and was brought from Peterborough hi∣ther,Vid. §. 84. as I have said before) lies in∣tombed. §. 102. Nigher the entrance of theHenry Duke of Glocester, Bro∣ther to King Charles II. Vault by the same North Wall is the leaden Chest of Henry Duke of Glo∣cester, fourth Son to King Charles I. and youngest Brother to his present Majesty, who died of the small Pox, soon after the restauration, anno 1660.
§. 103. On this Coffin of PrinceHenry k▪  Son to King James. Henry Duke of Glocester lies Henry Frederick his Uncle, ho was the dest Son of King James, and Prince of Wales, the l or case wherein is body  unwrapped is shaped after the figure of his body, and so to be distinguished om the rest of the Cof∣fins i th  Vault; he died in the  bowels ar buried in  of the Vault, a the head of the Princess Royal, as may be  by an Inscription graven thereon in §. 104. On the South side of thiss o  vd▪  , at the lower nd, is a large  of Lead, covered with black Velvet, wherein the Corps of Anne (first Wife to his Royal Highness, Prince James Duke of York, only Bro∣ther and Heir now living of his present Majesty,) do repose; She was Daugh∣ter to Edward Earl of Clarendon, and sometime Lord Chancellour of England, who died at her Palace of St. Iames's on the last day of March, anno 1671. in the 34 year of her age.
§. 105. In the midst of the Vault,li. Princess of Orange, el∣dest Sister to K. Charles II. between the Lady Arabella Stuart and this Anne Dutchess of York, lies the Princess Royal (in a large Coffin or Chest of Lead) the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Sister to his present Majesty, and Mother to Henry now Prince of Orange and Nassau; She died on the twenty first of December, anno 1660. §. 106. On this is another leaden Queen of ohmia, Daughter to King James. vid. Ep. 93. Chest for the Princess Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia; she was the only Daughter of King James the sixth of Scotland, and first of England, Wife to Frederick King of Bohemia, and Prince Elector of the Empire, Sister to King Charles the First, A to his present Majesty, and Mother to his Highness Prince Rupert, Count Pala∣tine, and Duke of Cumberland; she died at Leicester-house on the thirteenth of Februarr, anno 1661. in the sixty sixth year of her age.
§. 107. Charles Duke of Cam∣bridge,Charles Duke of Cambridge, Nephew to K. Charles II. vid. Ep 95. eldest Son to his Royal High∣ness James Duke of York, (only Bro∣ther to his present Majesty) by Anne his first Wife, who died at Whitehall on the fifth day of May, anno 1661. aged seven months, his leaden Coffin covered with black Velvet is placed on his great Aunts the Queen of Bo∣hemia. §. 108. James Duke of Cambridge,James Duke of Cambridge, Nephew to K. Charles II. vid. Ep. 96. second Son to James Duke of York, &c. by Anne his first Lady, who died at Richmond on the twentieth day of June, anno 1667. being four years old, whose leaden Coffin, covered with Velvet, is likewise placed on his great Aunts the Queen of Bohe∣mia. §. 109. Charles Duke of Kendale,Charles Duke of Kendale, Ne∣phew to King Charles II. vid. Ep. 79. third Son of James Duke of York, &c. by Anne his Wife, who died at St. Iames's the twenty second of March, anno 1677. bing scarce a year old; he lies in a Chest of lead, covered with Velvet, on his Uncle Henry Duke of Glocester.
§. 110. Edgar Duke of Cambridge,Edgar Duke of Cambridge, Nephew to K. Charles II. vid. Ep. 98. fourth Son of James Duke of York, &c. by the Lady Anne his first Wife, who died at Richmond on the eighth day of June, anno 1671. and in the fourth year of his age; he lies in a leaden Coffin covered with Velvet on that of the Lady Anne Hyde his mother. §. 111. Charles Duke of Cambridge,Charles Duke of Cambridge, Nephew to K. Charles II. vid. Ep. 99. fifth Son of James Duke of York, &c. by the Lady Mary D'Este his second Wife, who died at St. Iames on the twelfth day of December, anno 1677. aged only thirty five days, he lies in a leaden Coffin, covered with Velvet, on the feet of his great great Grandmother Mary Queen of Scots. §. 112. The Lady Henrietta, thirdThe Lady Henrietta, Niece to King Charles II. vid. Ep. 100. Daughter of James Duke of York, &c. by Anne his first Wife, who died at St. Iames's on the fifteenth day of November, anno 1669. aged about ten months, and is deposited in a leaden Coffin, covered with black Velvet, on her great Uncle Henry Frederick Prince of Wales.
§. 113. The Lady Katharine, fourthThe Lady Ka∣tharine Niece to K▪ Charles II vid▪ Ep. 101. Daughter of James Duke of York, &c. and Anne his Dutchess, who died at St. Iames's on the fifth day of De∣cember, anno 1671. scarce ten months old, and is placed in a leaden Coffin, covered with Velvet, on that of her Mothers the Lady Anne Dutchess of York. §. 114. Katharina Laura, eldestThe Lady Ka∣tharine Laura, Niece to King Charles II. vid. Ep. 102. Daughter of James Duke of York, &c. by his second Wife the Lady Mary D'Este, who died at St. Iames's on the third day of October, anno 1675. scarce nine months old, her Coffin of Lead, covered with Velvet, is set on that of her Sister the Lady Katha∣rine. §. 115. Isabella, the sixth DaughterThe Lady Isa∣bea, Niece to K. Charles II. vid. Ep. 103. of James Duke of York, &c. by his se∣cond Wife the Lady Mary D'Este, who died at St. Iames's the second day of March, anno 1680. in the fifth year of her age, and her leaden Coffin, covered with Velvet, is placed on the Area, by the side of her Uncle Prince Henry Duke of Glocester.
§. 116. Note that at the feet of most of these leaden Chests, except those of the smallest Children, are several Urns or Pots of lead, covered with black Velvet, wherein their bowels are conserved. §. 117. There is a small Vault ad∣joyningCharles Earl of Levenox▪ Uncle to King James. vid. Ep. 84. to this, wherein are only two Coffins of lead, the one on the other, the undermost of which is very much shaken and decayed, so that the Ske∣leton and perched skin of the interred is to be seen, being the remains of Charles Earl of Levenox, youngest Son to Matthew Earl of Levenox, and the Lady Margaret his Countess, Grandfa∣ther and Grandmother to King James, he died anno 1576. §. 118. In the other Capsula or ChestMargaret Coun∣tess of Leve∣nox, Grand∣mother to King James. vid. §. 81. & Ep. 84. of lead is the body of the aforesaid Margaret, Mother to Charles Earl of Levenox, and Grandmother to King James, of whom I have said more in the description of her Monument, under which this Vault is made; she died anno 1578.
§. 119. Coming down the stairs of this Chappel the same way we went up, the first place we meet with on the North side is The Chappel of St. Paul, Wherein are these Monuments, viz. onLodowick Rob∣sert Lord Bour∣chier. the right hand of the door as you come in is an ancient Tomb of Freestone, on whose Pedestal are several Coats of Arms, carved and encompassed with the Garter, on each side of which are two Lions sejant, and as many Eagles, each of them supporting a Standard or Banner with the Arms of Robsert and Bourchier, with quarterings: On this Pedestal are two Coffins of lead, in∣closed and covered with Wainscote and Oaken boards of a coped form, under a low arched Canopy of the foregoing stone, without any Inscripti∣tion, Table, or Epitaph, but therein are deposited the remains of Lodowick Robsert Lord Bourchier and his Lady. This Lodowick, or Lewis, being an Ali∣en, born in the parts of Henault, and succeeding Sir John Robsert Knight in the Captainship of St. Saviour le
Viscount in Normandy was made a free Denizen of this Realm in the sixth of Henry V. created Knight of the Bath in the eighth year of his Reign, and was by Letters Patents at Trois in Champaine constituted the Kings Standard-bearer, and afterwards Knight of the Garter, and one of the Executors to that King. He married Elizabeth Daughter and Heir to Bartho∣lomew Lord Bourchier, Widow of Sir Hugh Stafford Knight, and had sum∣mons to Parliament by the Title of Lord Bourchier in the 3, 4, 5, and 7 of Henry VI. he died anno 1431. and had this Monument erected to his memory▪ being adorned and set out with many Arms of the Nobility both of England and Henault, and several Sentences intermixed in letters of Gold. §. 120. On the South side of thisAnne Lady Cottington. vid. Ep. 11. Chappel, next to this Tomb of Lodo∣wick Robsert Lord Bourchier, is a stately Monument, above twenty six foot high, of admirable Workman∣ship, composed of Lydian, Alabaster, and Touch: The joyning of the Com∣partments, with the Capitals and Pe∣destals
of the Ionick and Corinthian Columns are framed of artificial wrought Brass. The demy Effigies of a Lady is placed towards the top, of curious Statuary work of the same brass, gilt with Gold, within an Oval of black Marble, below which is an Altar of the same stone sweetly car∣ved, with other adornments, and was erected by that Loyal Gentleman Fran∣cis Lord Cottington Baron of Han∣worth, to remember the no less ho∣nourable and virtuous Lady Anne his Wife, who was the Daughter of Sir William Meredith of the County of Denbigh Knight, and dying on the twenty second day of February, anno 1633, in the thirty third year of her age was buried here, leaving Issue be∣hind her, only one Son and one Daugh∣ter, viz. Charles, and Anne. §. 121. At the foot of this Monu∣mentFrancis Cot∣tington Baron of Hanworth, and Lord Treasurer of England. vid. Ep▪ 119. is another noble Tomb, lately erected for her Husband, the Lord Francis Cottington of Hanworth, where on a Table of black Marble, supported by six Columns of Lydian and white, placed on an ascent of three Greeses, and environed with a Grate, lies his
Statue at full proportion, on a Quilt, with the Staff of his Office, and co∣vered with a Cloak, all well designed and insculpt in fretted Alabaster. He was Chancellour of the Exchequer to King Charles I. Master of his Court of Wards, Constable of the Tower, Lord High Treasurer of England, and twice Embassadour in Spain, where at length he died in Exile, soon after the bloudy Rebels had murthered his Roy∣al Master, and usurped his Inheri∣tance; but by the pious care of that worthy Gentleman, his Nephew and Heir Charles Cottington Esquire, his body was in the year 1679 translated from Valadolid in Spain, where he died, and honourably interred here, who gratefully erected this Monument to his memory. §. 122. More to the Southeast An∣gleFrances Coun∣tess of Sussex. vid. Ep. 120. of this Chappel is another noble Monument, twenty four foot in height, of Alabaster, Marble, and divers co∣loured stones, set about with Corin∣thian Pillars, supporting a stately Ca∣nopy, all curiously wrought, and gilt with Gold, under which lies the Image of a Lady at full proportion, in her
Robes of Estate, painted and gilt with Gold; for Frances Countess of Sussex, who was the Daughter of Sir William Sydney Knight, and Wife to Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Sussex; whose boun∣teous liberality to all sorts of people▪ but especially to Schools of learning and learned men, hath gained her a never dying fame; she died, and was buried here, anno 1589. with this comely Monument erected over her. §. 123. Next to this, against the EastDudley Carle∣ton Viscount Dorcester. vid. Ep. 120. Wall, is a well composed plain Monu∣ment of black and white Marble, ha∣ving but an half Canopy, supported by Dorick Pillars, with the Image of a man in his robes of Estate and Viscounts Coronet, leaning on a Pedestal, all formed of the like black and white Marble, for a remembrance of Sir. Dud∣ley Carleton Knight, Baron of Imber∣court, and Viscount Dorcester, who (after many imployments, and fre∣quent Embassies, wherein he had served his Prince with great faithful∣ness and honour) died at Westmin∣ster, and was buried here anno 1631.
§. 124. Beyond which is a curiousSir Thomas Bromley Kt. Lord Chan∣cellour of Eng∣land. vid. Ep. 123. Monument, with his Image cumbant, in an embroydered Gown, at full pro∣portion, his feet supported by a Phea∣sant Cock, and on the Pedestal the Images of four Sons, and as many Daughters, all on their knees, covered with a large Canopy, supported by Corinthian Pillars, adorned with Arms, of Alabaster, Marble, and di∣vers coloured stones, painted, and gilt with Gold, for Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, Lord High Chancellour of Eng∣land, and Privy Counsellour to Queen Elizabeth, who died in the year 1587. §. 125. By this, on the North Wall,Sir James Ful¦lerton Knight. vid. Ep. 124. is another neat Tomb of black and white Marble, adorned with Arms, with a Pedestal of the same, whereon are placed the Images of a Knight in Armour, cumbant on a Quilt, with his Lady, whose feet are supported by a Bear couchant, all of white polished Marble, with an Epitaph informing us, that Sir James Fullerton Knight, Gen∣tleman of the Bed-chamber to King Charles I. lies there interred; but the
blank Table, whereon (if I conjecture aright) his Ladies Epitaph was de∣signed to be ingraved, leaves us in the dark concerning her, and hath been neglected by those who had the charge thereof. §. 126. There is a more stately Mo∣numentSir John Puc∣kering Knight. Lord Keeper. vid. Ep. 122. on this North side, about twen∣ty four foot in height, on whose Pede∣stal of white Marble lie the Images at full proportion of Sir John Puckering, in his embroydered Gown, and his La∣dy, with eight lesser Figures of three Boys, and five Girls kneeling at the foot of the said Pedestal, all of various coloured Alabaster, painted, and gilt with Gold, with a large Canopy over∣shadowing them, finely wrought, and supported by Corinthian Pillars, with other Statues of the Purse and Mace∣bearer, Coats of Arms, Pyramids, and adornments of the same coloured Ala∣baster, Lydian, Porphyry, and white Marble. Tis Sir John was Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and Privy Counsellour to Queen Elizabeth, who died anno 1596.
§. 127. On the Pavement of thisSir Giles Dawbney Knight of the Garter. vid. Ep. 117. Chappel is a noble raised Tomb, en∣compassed with an iron Grate, where on a curious Pedestal of Alabaster, set about with Arms, painted with Gold and blue, are the Images of a Knight in Armour, with the Collar, Jewel, and Man∣tle of the Garter, reposing his head on his Helm, and supporting his feet by a Lion couchant; and his Lady, all of white pollished Marble, under which lies buried Sir Giles Dawbney Knight, who was Lord Lieutenant of Calis, Lord Chamberlain to King Henry VII. Knight of the most noble Order of the Gar∣ter, and Father to Henry Lord Dawb∣ney, the first and last of that surname, Earl of Bridgwater, with Elizabeth his Wife, descended from the antient Family of the Arundels in Corn∣wall; he died anno 1507. and she 1500. §. 128. There lie buried likewise in this Chappel Charles de Granada a nobleCharles de Granada. Eliz. Comitiss. Ormond. Spaniard; Elizabeth Countess of Or∣mond, Daughter of Thomas Lord Barkley; John Viscount Thurles, aJohn Son of Tho. Com. Or. Child of Thomas Earl of Ormond, by
the Daugter of John Lord Sheffield; Michael Bishop of St. Asaph; Sir Ar∣thurMichael Episc. St. Asaph. The Lady Gorge. Katharine Com. Northumber∣land. Gorge's Lady, who was the Daugh∣ter and Heir of Henry Howard Viscount Bindon: And Katharine Countess of Northumberland, one of the Daugh∣ters and Co-heirs of John Nevil Lord Latimer, who was the Wife of Thomas Percy Earl of Northumberland, none of them having any Monuments, Tombs, or Grave-stones. From this you are led to The Chappel of St. Iohn Baptist, §. 129. Where on the right hand of the Entrance, along the South side, areGeorge Flaccet Abbot of West∣minster. three ancient Marble Tombs, and a stone Coffin: The first is a plain raised Tomb of grey Marble, about a yard from the ground, Canopied with a comely Arch of Freestone, adorned with Arms and Masons-work, which was made for George Flaccet Abbot of this Monastery, but the Inscription and Epitaph round the ledge is torn away.
§. 130. On this Tomb is placed a stone Coffin, with a lid of the same, and a Crucifix carved thereon, where∣in is yet to be seen the bones and Skel∣liton of an embalmed body, much de∣faced, (as it should seem by the re∣moval of this Capsula from some other place,) but whose body it is that lies therein I will not aver, as meeting no evidence sufficient to confirm it. But that it cannot be the body of Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Essex, Hereford, and Northampton, who was Lord High Constable of England, and the last of that name, (as the Officers of the Church have received it by Tradition) is evident, for that he was buried with his Father, Grandfather, and great-Grandfather, in the Abby Church of Walden in Essex, the antient reposi∣tory of that noble Family, as may be seen more at large in the Monasticon Anglicanum, and in Sir William Dug∣dales Baronage of England; yet two of his Children, which he had by Eliza∣bethHugh de Bohun and Mary his Sister, Grand∣children to Edward I. the Daughter of Edward I. were buried here, viz. Hugh and Mary. And there is a little Monument against the North Wall of grey Marble, under
that of Thomas Curey, erected for them, from whence this story might take its original; I am inclined therefore to think that it were not improbable to believe it the body of Thomas Myl∣ling,Tho. Mylling Abbot of West∣minster, and Bishop of He∣reford. Abbot of Westminster, and Bishop of Hereford, Privy Counsellour, and Favourite to King Edward IV. and Godfather to his eldest Son Prince Ed∣ward, who dying about the year 1493. was buried in the midst of this Chap∣pel, and that when the large Vault and Tomb (which takes up a great part of the Area of this Chappel) was made for Thomas Earl of Exeter, and his Ladies; this Coffin might be taken up and set by here; and the rather for that in Camdens Collection of this Churches Monuments, which were ta∣ken before the erection of the said Tomb, there is no mention of such a Coffin as this, which had it been here in his time, I am persuaded he would not have overpassed without some ob∣servation thereon. Yet further, if we diligently take notice of the Coffin it self, with the form of the Cross on the Cover, and compare it with many more of the like fashion, both at Canterbury, York, Durham, &c. wherein are con∣served
the bodies of some Bishop or Arch∣bishop, it will add to the confirmation of this opinion; but I submit to the more Judicious in Antiquities of this nature. §. 131. The next to George FlaccetThomas Ruthall, Bishop of Durham. Abbot of Westminster lies Thomas Ruthall, Bishop of Durham, (who was Secretary to King Henry VII. and died in the year 1524.) in a comely Tomb of Freestone, with an arched Canopy, variously adorned, and set forth with Arms, both of his See and Family, under which is his Image in his Episcopal habit, with a Miter on his head, and a Pastoral staff in his left hand, placing his feet on the back of a Lion couchant, but there is no Epitaph or Table belonging there∣to. §▪ 132. At whose feet is the thirdWilliam de Coll∣chester, Abbot of Westminster ancient Monument, without a Cano∣py, or any Inscription, where, on a raised Pedestal of Freestone, lies the Image of a Mitered Abbot, in the Vest∣ments wherein he was accustomed to sing or say Mass, with a Miter on his head, a Crosier staff in his hand,
and a Ring on his finger, a Spaniel Dog at his feet, and two Angels sup∣porting his Pillow, all of the same Freestone, curiously ingraved, under which William de Colchester, Abbot of Westminster is said to be in∣terred. §. 133. Against the East Wall of thisHenry Carey, Lord Hunsdon, Cousin Germ. to Q. Eliz. vid. Ep. 129. Chappel is a most magnificent and stately Monument, about twenty six foot high, where by an ascent of Gree∣ses of black and white Marble you are led to a curious fashioned Tomb of an admirable composure, framed of the Porphyry, the Lydian, Touch, Ser∣pentine, Agate, Alabaster, and di∣vers coloured stones, finely wrought, and adorned with Gold: At the four corners whereof are as many Pyramids of black Marble, Supported by Pede∣stals of the same, whereon are placed threescore and four Shields of Arms, painted in their proper colours, with the names, matches, and quarterings be∣longing to that noble Family. These Pyramids and the Tomb are over∣shadowed by a glorious arched Canopy, every where beset with Coats of Arms, Golden Slips, Branches, Pomegranates,
Roses, &c. with other flory and fruit∣work, very pleasant and delightful to behold; on each side of the outward part of this arched Canopy are two Magnificent Pyramids of black Marble, adorned with Shields, Banners, Pen∣nons, Cannon, Culverins, Musquetons, Halberts, Half-pikes, Drums, Fifes, with other Instruments of War, and warlike Trophies, carved on the same Marble, and gilt with Gold. Over the Canopy are no less than twenty several Corinthian Columns, support∣ing and composing various forms of Architecture diversly placed on the noble Arch, whereby the whole be∣comes very beautiful and magnificent; which was erected here by George Ca∣rey Lord Hunsdon (Governour of the Isle of Wight, Knight of the Garter, Privy Counsellour and Lord High Cham∣berlain to Queen Elizabeth) for his Fa∣ther the Lord Henry Carey Baron of Hunsdon, (Governour of Berwick, Captain of the Gentlemen Pensioners, Ju∣stice in Eure on this side Trent, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, Lord High Chamberlain, Privy Coun∣sellour, and Cousin German to Queen Eli∣zabeth, who died in the 71 year of his
age, anno 1596.) and for his Mother the Lady Anne, Daughter of Sir Tho∣mas Morgan Knight. §. 134. By these two illustrious per∣sons,Thomas Carey, Son to the Earl of Mon∣mouth. vid. Ep. 127. in the same Vault, lies Thomas Carey, second Son to Robert Lord Ca∣rey of Leppington, Earl of Mon∣mouth, and Brother to the last Earl of that surname; he was of the Privy Chamber to King Charles I. and greatly favoured by him, but upon the death of that Royal Martyr he fell suddenly sick, and died in the thirty third year of his age, having a little Monument of white Marble against the North-east Angle of this Chappel, placed of late to his memory. §. 135. Next to which, directlyColl. Edward Popham. North, are two large Statues at full proportion; The one, of a man in Ar∣mour; The other, of a Lady in a Cy∣press Veil, of white Marble, both re∣posing themselves, and resting their arms on a Table of black, under a Ca∣nopy, the Curtains withdrawn, with an Atchievement of Arms, all of cu∣rious wrought Alabaster, but there is no Inscription or Epitaph, which was
ordered to be defaced upon the restau∣ration of his Sacred Majesty▪ by rea∣son it was set up for one Collonel Ed∣ward Popham, an opposer of his Ma∣jesties undoubted right to his King∣doms, but by the intercession of some of his Ladies Friends, who had emi∣nently served his Majesty▪ the stone was only turned whereon the Epitaph was insculpt, and the Monument per∣mitted to remain, Sed— —Nigro carbone notanda. §. 136. On the left hand of theSir Thomas Vaughan Kt. Treasurer. vid. Ep. 5. door of this Chappel, towards the West, being the first Tomb on that side, you have under an antient large Arch in the Wall a little Monument of grey Mar∣ble, on which is portraitured and fine∣ly ingraven the Effigies of a Knight in Armour, reposing his head on his Helm, crested with an Unicorns head, coped and crowned, and at each of the four corners a Coat of Arms in∣sculpt of the same brass, with several Caskets and Coffers, with an Inscrip∣tion in part remaining round the Verge of the Tomb, whereby may be gathered, that Sir Thomas Vaughan Knight, who was first Chamberlain to Edward Prince
of Wales, and afterwards Treasurer to his Father King Edward IV. lies un∣derneath. §. 137. Here is a most noble TombThomas Cecill, Earl of Exeter. vid. Ep. 126. in the midst of this Chappel, raised about five foot from the Pavement of black and white Marble, the Pedestal set about with fourteen Escutcheons of Arms, and on the top the Images at full proportion of an Earl in his Par∣liament Robes, with the Collar, George, and Mantle of the Garter, and his Countess in her Robes of Estate, with a Garb supported by two Lions ram∣pant, placed on a Torce under the feet of the Earl, and a Griffon passant un∣der those of his Countess, all of the aforesaid white Marble, admirably po∣lished, and curiously ingraven with an Epitaph round the Verge, expressing that Thomas Cecill, Earl of Exeter, and Baron Burleigh, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and Privy Counsellour to King James, lies there interred, together with his first Wife (whose Image that is on the Tomb) the Lady Dorothy Nevill, Daughter and one of the Co-heirs of the Lord Latimer: As likewise his second Wife
the Lady Frances Bridges, of the no∣ble Family of the Lord Shandois, whose Effigies is not here, though there be left room on the North side of her Husband, as it should seem for that purpose. §. 138. On the South side, by theCharles Ho∣ward, Son to the Earl of Carlile. vid. Ep. 18. foot of this Tomb, at the head f the entrance into the Lord Hunsdons Vault, was Charles Howard, a Child of two years old, interred anno 1670. having a little stone placed over his Grave, he was the third Son of Charles Earl of Carlile. §. 139. Coming from this ChappelJuliana Crew. vid. Ep. 14. of St. Iohn Baptist (on each side the entrance) are two little Monu∣ments of Alabaster, black and white Marble, with some small Figures there∣on, adorned with Arms, and Epi∣taphs. That on the West for Juliana Crew, Daughter of Sir Randolph Crew Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, y Juliana Clepesby his Lady, who was the Daughter and Heir to that antient Family in the County of Norfolk. She died on the twelfth of April, anno 1621.
§. 140. The other on the East for the Lady Jane Crew, one of the Daugh∣tersThe Lady Jane Crew. vid. Ep. 150. and Co-heirs of Sir John Pultney of Mistertonpultney in the County of Leicester Knight, and Wife of Sir Clyppesby Crew Knight, she died in the thirtieth year of her age, anno 1639. and had this little Monument erected by her Husband for her. Pas∣sing from these Monuments, we are led to The Chappel of St. Erasmus, §. 141. Where by opening a door on your right hand you are let into the undercroft, being something dark by reason of the vicinity of the houses erected in the Church-yard, almost ad∣joyning to the Windows: Yet you may see a plain Marble Table, suppor∣ted by four small Pillars of wrought Brass, and fixed to a Pedestal of the same stone, where formerly had been placed the Skeleton in his shrowd, curiously insculpt, and composed of Alabaster, with an Epitaph circum∣scribed, and several Verses thereon, which are all now taken away, ex∣cept the Table, &c. under which was
John Islip, Abbot of Westminster in∣terred.John Islip, Ab∣bot of West∣minster. vid. §. 12. The fame of this Abbot, with his benefactions to this Church, I have discoursed on elsewhere, yet I forgot to tell you how he designed a stately Tower and Lanthorn, with a goodly Chime of Bells to be placed therein, over the midst of the Cross of this Church; but finding the foundation of the old Pillars too weak to support his Structure, the Bells were set up in one of the Western Towers, where they remain to this day: Moreover he cau∣sed this Chappel to be made and dedi∣cated to St. Erasmus, and adorned the Roof with curious Masons work, and neat Carvings, with several de∣vices and intaglio's, and many rebus's (a fancy much in esteem about that time) alluding to his name, as some∣times you have one slipping boughs in a tree; otherwhile, an Eye with a slip of a tree; and again, a Youth slipping from a bough of a tree, with a Label proceed∣ing out of his mouth with I slip thereon, and the like. The whole Vault being interlaced with his Coat of Arms, (viz. Erm▪ a Fess between three Weesels Gules,) and such like devices, as are the Windows in the Oratory above
full of the same. But before we take our leaves of this obscure place, (yet well deserving our pains of seeing,) we must not let pass the memory of a noble Gentleman who hath a Monu∣ment placed here for him. §. 142. Against the East Wall where∣ofSir Christopher Hatton, Knight of the Bath. vid. Ep. 130, 131. is a comly Tomb of black and white Marble, on whose Pedestal is the Epi∣taph, and on one side the Image of a Knight in Armour, lively representing the Original, with his Lady on the other, excellently figured in cu∣rious wrought Alabaster, adorned with weeping Cupids, and mournful Hy∣mens, extinguishing their Torches, with Arms and Paintings, which was erected by the Lady Alice, Daughter of Thomas Fanshaw Esquire, the Kings Remembrancer, for Sir Christopher Hat∣ton Knight of the Bath her Husband, Son and Heir to Sir Christopher, Lord High Chancellour of England, by whom she had twelve Children. He died on the tenth day of September 1619. There is a small Table of black and white Marble against the Wall on the East side of this Chappel, nigh the Windows that let in light from the
South side of the Church, containing a further Encomium of this worthy Gentleman. §. 143. There was likewise buriedThe Lady Anne, Dutchess of York daugh∣ter-in-law to Edward IV. here without any Tomb or Grave∣stone the Lady Anne, sole Daughter and Heir of John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, Wife to Richard Duke of York, Son to King Edward IV. but she dying without Issue, the Dukedom of Norfolk came to the Family of the Howards. §. 144. Ascending from this under∣croft by a pair of stone Stairs into the Oratory it self, wherein nothing re∣mains but some of the rebus's in the Windows, as I have said before: It being at present made use of before. It being at present made use on as a re∣pository for those Statues of our Kings, Queens, and Princes of the Bloud Royal, which lay on their Cenotaphs when their Exequies were celebrated in this Church; being here preserved in their Robes of Estate with their Royal Ha∣biliments and other Ensigns of Maje∣sty, in Presses of Wainscote, viz. Edward III. King of England, and
Philippa his Queen, Henry V. and Queen Katherine, Henry VII. with Elizabeth his Queen, and Henry Frederick Prince of Wales in one Press, with Queen Eli∣zabeth, King James, and Queen Anne his Wife in the other. Descending again by the same Stairs, and leaving this Chappel on our right hand, we cross over the Area to a wooden frame of four or five steps, that brings us in∣to that other most noted Chappel of this Church, viz. The Chappel of St. Edward the Confessor. §. 145. Because his body was translated hither from the old Church of his own erection to this of King Henry III. where he had a new Tomb and Shrine (covered with Gold,) built for him in the midst of this Chap∣pel by the same King, a great part thereof to be seen at this day. It is likewise called the Chappel of the Kings, for that many of our Kings and Queens, until the time of King Henry VII. were accustomed to be bu∣ried therein: But before I shall enter into a description of any of their par∣ticular
Monuments, I shall take leave to say something concerning this reli∣gious King, and the Feretory made here for him. §. 146. He was the Son of KingS. Edward the Confessor, his death, and Shrine. vid. §. 5, 6, Etheldred and Emma his Queen, who (being long deprived of his Inheri∣tance by the usurpation of Canutus, Ha∣rold, and Hardinute the Danes, that had murthered his Brother Edmund, and occasioned his flight into Nor∣mandy for his protection,) at lengh was restored to his Crown and King∣dom, where he became so eminent for his sanctity, and remarkable for his holiness, that he was observed to be the first who obtained that extraordi∣nary priviledge from God in curing a disease of swelling in peoples throats, which was afterwards thereof called the Kings Evil, and hath since been derived to all his Successors. He was so compassionate and pitiful towards his Subjects sufferings and oppressions, that he remitted the annual Pension of 4000 pounds, called Danegelt, to the English Legates; So chaste, that he is said not carnally known his own Wife; and so patient, that he was
scarce ever seen to be angry. But after his death, the many infirmities and cures of all sorts of diseases, which are reported immediately to have followed at his Tomb, was the chief motive that persuaded William the Conquerour to adorn his Sepulchre with a rich Shrine, sparkling with Gold and Sil∣ver. Six and thirty years after this, his body being taken out of the ground, and being found intire and uncorrupt, with his joynts as flexible as if they had been alive, and his Garments pre∣serving their former freshness, struck such an admiration in the beholders, that every where the news thereof ung for a miracle, and therefore his body on the thirteenth day of October, in the year 1163, was translated by Thomas of Becket Archbishop of Canter∣bury, in the presence of King Henry II. and another costly Shrine prepared wherein to place it; and on which day he was solemnly Canonized by the Bull of Pope Alexander III.
§. 147. After this, upon the re∣building of this Church by King Hen∣ry III. his body was removed out of the old Church of his own erection into this Chappel prepared for him, on which day a magnificent and Royal Feast was kept in the Palace hard by as a commemoration of it, and a third Shrine prepared whereon to place the other two and inclose his sacred body, part whereof is remaining at this day. The upper part of this Feretory which we now behold was all covered with Plate of the purest Gold, so artificially wrought by the most cunning Gold∣smiths, and set about with pretious stones, that it amounted to an inestima∣ble value, the under part (which is still in being) was framed by the com∣mand, and at the charge of Richard devid. §. 23. Ware, Abbot of Westminster, with a part of those stones, and by the same workmen, which composed the Pave∣ment before the High Altar, curiously adorning it with chequered and fine shining coloured Marble: On each side the Base of this Feretory are three small Niches divided by Serpentine Co∣lumns, supporting the Arches for the
sick and infirm to repose themselves when they came hither; and I have seen a large Chest or Coffin, bound about with strong bands of Iron, lying about the midst of the inside of this Shrine, where I suppose the body of that pious King may still be conserved. There is now an Inscription in Letters of a late hand, gilt with Gold round the midst of this Marble frame, which you will find among the Monumentalvid. Ep. 109. Inscriptions, but heretofore there were other Verses ingraven on the same stone after this manner: Anno milleno Domini, cum septuageno, Et bis centeno, cum completo quasi deno, Hoc opus est factum, quod Petrus duxit in actum, Romanus civis, homo, causam noscere si vis Rex fuit Henricus sancti praesentis amicus. The Floor of this Chappel was likewise at the same time, and by the same Abbot, inlayed with the like stones, a great part remaining though something defaced at this day.
§. 148. Under which Pavement, onEditha Queen of England. the North side the Feretory of St. Ed∣ward, lies Editha Queen of England his Wife, who was Daughter to Good∣win that treacherous Earl of Kent, she was a Lady of a singular piety and sweet modesty, died in the year 1074. but hath no Monument or Grave-stone erected for her. §. 149. On the South side the sameMatilda Queen of England. Shrine, under this beautious Floor, was Matilda Queen of England inter∣red; she was the Daughter of Mal∣colme King of Scots, and Wife to King Henry I. who brought unto him divers Children, viz. William, Richard, and Mary, who perished by shipwrack, and Maud the Empress, Wife to Henry V. Emperour, and Mother to King Hen. II. of England. This Queen would every day in Lent walk from her Pa∣lace to this Church barefoot and bare∣legged, and wearing a Garment of hair; she would wash and kiss the feet of the poorest people; and give them Alms; she founded the Priory of Christchurch without Aldgate, and the Hospital of St. Giles in the
Fields nigh London; she built the Bridge at Stratford over the River Lea, and repaired many of the Highways, and afterwards anno 1118. dying, was buried in this Church with∣out any Tomb or Monument. §. 150. Under the same PavementTwo Children of William de Valence, Earl of Pembroke. was John and Margaret, two Children of William de Valence Earl of Pem∣broke, interred, having two small stones of grey Marble placed over them without any Inscription, between the Shrine of St. Edward and the Tomb of King Henry V. §. 151. Henry, Son to Richard KingHenry, Grand∣son to John K. of England. of the Romans, and Earl of Corn∣wall, (who was the Second Son of John King of England) returning from the Holy Land, whilst he was hearing Mass at Viterbium in Italy, was slain by Simon and Guido, Sons to Simon Mountford, Earl of Leicester, Anno 1269. his body being buried in the Monastery of Hailes, but his heart placed in the Coffin with St. Edward.
§. 152. On this Pavement is a largeTho. of Wood∣stock, Duke of Glocester, Son to King Edward III. grey Marble stone, beautifully adorned and set about with fine Imagery work in curious wrought Brass, between the Shrine of St. Edward and the Tomb of Philippa his Mother, the Inscripti∣on being torn away, under which lies Thomas of Woodstock, (sixth Son to King Edward III.) who was Earl of Buckingham, and Duke of Gloce∣ster, a man of great Nobility and Re∣nown, whom Richard II. his Nephew betrayed, and afterwards caused him to be barbarously murthered at Calis, anno 1397. He married Elenore, one of the Daughters and Co-heirs of Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, (who lieth buried in St. Ed∣mundsVid. §. 59. Chappel, as I have declared be∣fore) by whom he had Issue one Son, and three Daughters, viz. Humphrey, who died without Issue; Anne, who was Wife of Edmund Earl of Stafford; Joan, who died unmarried; and Isa∣bel, who was a Nun at the Minoresses in London.
§. 153. Towards the North side ofJohn Waltham, Bishop of Sa∣lisbury, and Ld▪ Treasurer. this Chappel at the foot of the Tomb of King Edward I. is another large grey Marble stone, fairly set forth with fine ingraved brass, whereon is the Effigies of a Bishop in the Vestments of his Office, with a Miter on his head, and a Pastoral staff in his right hand, with the Pictures of the twelve Apostles, divided, and embroidered on either side of him, and other artificial Image∣ry work about it; the Epitaph round the Ledge being worn away, but was here placed by the command of Ri∣chard II. (whose Favourite he was) to the memory of John Waltham the twen∣ty sixth Bishop of Salisbury, anno 1388. He was constituted Master of the Rolles 1382, then Keeper of the Privy Seal, and in the year 1391. Lord High Treasurer of England, in which Of∣fice he continued until his death, which hapned in the year 1395. and was buried in this place. §. 154. Here is likewise on the WestThe Chair of Coronations. side the Feretory of St. Edward, hard by the Skreen that separates the High Altar from this Chappel, the Chair or
Seat whereon our Kings are accustomed to be Inaugurated and Crowned. It ap∣pears extreamly antient both in its fa∣shion and materials, being made of so∣lid, hard, firm wood, with a back and sides of the same, under whose Seat, supported by four Lions curiously car∣ved insteed of feet, lies that so much famed stone whereon the Patriarch Jacob is said to have reposed his head in the Plain of Luza, it is of a blewish steel-like colour, mix'd with some eyes of red, triangular rather than any other form, and being broken resem∣bles a Peble. The ruines of the Chair it self shews that heretofore it hath been fairly painted, and gilt with Gold, but at present it is much defaced; you have a small Table of Verses hangingVid. Ep. 116. thereon, but by reason they give us little light concerning the antient story of this stone and Chair, I shall trouble your patience with a short Narrative thereof, which is reported to have been first in Gallicia of Spain at Bri∣gantia; where Gathel King of Scots there sate on it as his Throne. Thence it was brought into Ireland by Si∣mon Brech, first King of Scots, who transplanted it into that Isle about
seven hundred years before Christ. It was brought out of Ireland by King Ferguze, abut 370 years afterwards, into Scotland; and in the year of our Lord 850 was placed at the Abby of Scone (in the Sheriffdom of Perth) by King Kenneth, where the Corona∣tion of his Ancestors usually had been celebrated, who caused this Distich to be ingraven upon it, Ni fallat vatum, &c. And to be inclosed in this wooden Chair; Afterwards when Edward I. King of England had overcome John Balliol King of Scots in many Battels, he returned in the year 1297 to Eng∣land, bringing with him great Spoyls, among which this Throne, with the Crown and Scepter of their Kings, were likewise taken, and offered by him here at the Shrine of St. Edward, and ever since hath been made use on as the accustomed Throne whereon our Kings do usually it on the days of their Inauguration. As to the Pro∣phesie insculpt on this Stone, it seems happily to be accomplished sometime since, when James VI. King of Scot∣land came to the Imperial Crown of England, whose Grandson and Heir,
King Charles II. our present Sovereign, now enjoys it. §. 195. The North side of thisEdw. I. King of England. vid. Ep. 10. Chappel is taken up by three noble Tombs; That towards the West is a plain Monument of grey Marble, rai∣sed about five foot from the ground, being on the right hand of the entrance, without any Inscription or adornments, more than a Table of Verses, hanging by to inform you, that Edward I. King of England, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, Lord of Ireland, and Son to King Henry III. (by Eleanor, Daughter to the Earl of Province) lies there intombed. He took to Wife Eleanor, Daughter to Ferdinand III. King of Castile and Lions, who war∣red often with the Scots, and that successively, won Barwick, &c. and in the years 1308. died, and was buried here. §. 156. Eleanora, first Wife to thisEleanor, Q▪ of England. vid. Ep. 10▪ Edward King of England, lies under that neat Tomb Northeast of the Fe∣retory of St. Edward, whose Pedestal is composed of Freestone and grey Marble, whereon are the Arms of
England, Castile, Leon, and Pon∣tois ingraven, with a Sepulchre painted on the backside, (to be seen in the Area) with divers Monks pray∣ing thereat, all in plano; on this Tomb is her Image in curious wrought Brass, gilt with Gold, her hair dishevelled, and falling in very comly order on her shoulders, her head crowned under a ine Canopy supported by two Cheru∣bims of the same curious gilded Brass, half encompassed (on her left side) with a screen of Iron, wrought through in divers pleasant forms and delightful figures, an Epitaph carved on the ledge in French, and a Table hanging by in La∣tine and English Rhime, to tell us fur∣ther that she was only Daughter to Ferdinand III. King of Castile and Leon, by Joan his second Wife, Heir to Guydo Earl of Ponthieu, by which the Earldom of Ponthieu, devolved of right to the Kings of England▪ She was Mother of King Edward II. and died in the year 1298. §. 157. Between these two lie theHenry III, King of England. vid Ep. 108. Father of this Edward King of Eng∣land, viz. Henry III. under a most sumptuous Monument, made Altar∣wise,
of three ascents, the first, con∣taining only a plain Pedestal of grey Marble, wherein there be several Am∣bries and Lockiers, made use of here∣tofore to lay up the Vestments and rich Copes belonging to the Altar of St. Ed∣ward. The other is a composure of curious work, framed of diverse co∣loured Marbles and glittering stones, re∣sembling those on the Feretory of S. Ed∣ward, chequered, and gilt with Gold, supported at each corner by four twisted or Serpentine Columns of the same speckled Marble, all brought from beyond the Seas by his Son Edward on purpose to adorn this his Fathers Se∣pulchre, on the top whereof is placed his Image in his Royal Habiliments, of solid Brass, curiously wrought and gilt with Gold, having a Lion at his feet, an half Canopy over his head, and an Epitaph in French round the ledge, all of the same gilded Brass, with a Table of Verses hanging by to let us know, that this Henry King of England, Son of King John, by Isabel, Daughter to the Earl of Angolesme, was a pious Prince, and highly to be commended for all virtues. He built the Chappel of our Lady▪ as I have said elsewhere;vid. §. 7▪
pulled down the Church of K. Edward, and erected that which is now standing, giving thereto many Royal Gifts, of Copes, Jewels, and rich Vessels, that it equalled in Riches all the Churches on this side the Alps; he made a goldenVid. §. 146. Chest and Coffin wherein to repose the Reliques of St. Edward, adorned his Shrine, translated his body into this Chappel prepared for him, and was himself, after he had reigned fifty six years and eighteen days, buried on the North side thereof, under this stately Monument, anno 1273. §. 158. There is another small TombEliz. Daughter of Henry VII. vid. Ep. 113. of black and grey Marble, on the North side of this Chappel, at the feet of King Henry III. which hath formerly been adorned with Brass, and a little Image thereon, but at present there is nothing remaining but part of the Model (be∣ing one Pillar thereof) of the Chap∣pel of King Henry VII. to whose Daughter the Lady Elizabeth, which he had by his Queen, the Daughter of King Edward IV. this little Monument was placed, who died in the year 1493. being not much above one year old, and was buried under.
§. 159. There are likewise on thePhilippa Q. of England. vid. Ep. 112. South side of this Chappel, or the Fe∣retory of St. Edward three stately Mo∣numents, and one little Tomb. To∣wards the East lies Philippa Queen of England, Wife to King Edward III. She hath a curious neat black Marble Tomb, with her Image thereon of po∣lished Alabaster, her head crowned, and supported by two Angels of the same; round about the Pedestal are thirty sweetly carved Niches, wherein had been placed as many Images, with their Coats of Arms at their feet, ex∣pressing who they were, in Alabaster painted and gilt with Gold, as the re∣mains of some of them at this day de∣clare, which when intire were as fol∣lows. At the head, William Earl of Henault, Father to the said Queen; John King of France; Edward III. King of England her Husband; Lo∣dowick, the Emperour; and Edward, Prince of Wales, her eldest Son. At the feet, the King of Navarre, the King of Bohemia, the King of Scot∣land, the King of Sicily, and the King of Spain. On the left side of the Tomb, Jone Queen of Scotland;
John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall; Jone, Princess of Wales; Lionel, Duke of Clarence; Isabel, Countess of Bedford; John, Duke of Lanca∣ster; Jone, Dutchess of Clarence; Edmund, Earl of Cambridge; Jone, Dutchess of Lancaster; and Thomas, Earl of Buckingham. On the right side, the Empress, Mother to the said Queen; her Brother also, Marcus, Duke of Gelderland; Eleanora, Dutchess of Gelderland; John, Earl of Henault; Mary, Dutchess of Bri∣tain, Lodowick, Duke of Bavaria; the Countess of Pembroke; Charles, Son to the King of France, and the Duke of Brabant. There is no In∣scription or Epitaph about this Tomb, but a Table of Verses in Latine, and English Metre, declaring her exempla∣ry piety and virtues, and that she was Daughter of William of Bavaria, Earl of Henault, who died in the year 1369. and was buried here. §. 160. By her, in another sum∣ptuousEdward III. King of Engl. vid. Ep. 111. and noble Monument, lies Ed∣ward III. her Husband, whose Image all of solid Brass, and gilt with Gold, in his Royal Robes, is placed on a
frame of the same Brass, circumscribed with an Epitaph in Latine, and fixed to a Pedestal of grey Marble, round about which are many little Images still remaining, all of solid brass, richly en∣amelled, and gilt with Gold, repre∣senting the Sons and Daughters of this mighty Prince; on the right side was Edward, Prince of Wales; Jone of the Tower given in marriage to the King of Spain; Lionel, Duke of Clarence; Edmund, Duke of York; Mary, Dutchess of Britain; and Wil∣liam of Hatfield. On the left side, Isabel, Lady of Coucy; William, of Windsor; John, Duke of Lanca∣ster; Blanch of the Tower; Mar∣garet, Countess of Pembroke; and Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Glo∣cester. This Edward, the third of that name, King of England since the Conquest, was Son to Edward II. by Isabel, Daughter to Philip le Bell King of France, whose Brother dying with∣out Issue, and she being the next Heir, this King Edward first laid claim to the Crown of France in right of his Mother, (notwithstanding their▪ Sa∣lique Law, by which the Females are barred from the Inheritance,) and
prosecuted the War so successfully that he won Calais, recovered Aquitaine and Normandy; took John, King of France; and David King of Scots Prisoners, and adding the Arms and Title of France to his own, after he had reigned fifty years he died, and was buried here under this noble Monument, having a Table of VersesVid. . 111. affixed thereunto in English and Latine meeter. §. 161. At the head of King Ed∣wardRichard II. King of Eng∣land, and Anne his Queen. vid. Ep. 16, . III. is the other stately Monu∣ment on this South side the Feretory of St. Edward, composed much after the like form with that foregoing, having two Images placed on a frame, and circumscribed with an Epitaph, all of solid brass, gilt with Gold, on a Pedestal of grey Marble, meanly adorned, whereunto is a Table affixed, informing us, that Richard II. King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, with his first Wife Anne, who was Daughter to Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, and Emperour of the Germans, who died anno 1394. lie there interred. This Richard was Son to Edward, Prince of Wales, by Jone,
Daughter to the Earl of Kent. After he had reigned twenty two years, he was deposed by Henry of Lancaster, and not long after (anno 1399.) was mur∣thered, and buried at Langley among the Dominicans; but in the year 1414. his body was removed from thence by Henry V. King of England and no∣bly intombed here at Westminster, who caused to be erected this Monu∣ment over him. §. 162. Between this Tomb of KingThe Lady Margaret, Daughter of Edward IV. vid. Ep. 110. Richard and that of Edward III. is a little small raised Monument of grey Marble, whereon hath been the Effi∣gies of a Child engraven on Brass, now taken away, but so much of the Epi∣taph remaining, whereby may be ga∣thered, that under that small Tomb lies Margaret, Daughter and fifth Child to Edward IV. King of Eng∣land and France, and Lord of Ire∣land by the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, who was born the nineteenth day of April, Anno Dom. 1472. and died the eleventh of December following.
§. 163. On this Tomb stands an oldThe Sword and Shield of King Edw. III. rusty Sword, seven foot in length, and eighteen pounds in weight, with a Buckler or deep Shield, which are reported to be made use on by Ed∣ward III. in his Wars in France, and are placed on this Tomb adjoyn∣ing to his Monument as a remembrance thereof. §. 164. The East side of this Chap∣pelHenry V. King of England. vid. Ep. 1▪ 4. of St. Edward is taken up by that magnificent Monument of Henry V. King of England, enclosed within a small Chappel by it self, arched, of cu∣rious worked stone, and set about with admirable carvings, Intaglio's, and de∣vices, as trees of Palm, Harts Royal, and Swans gorged, with Crowns, and chained thereunto. On the South side whereof is graved the Cavalcade and Ce∣remony of his own Coronation, and on the North that of his Queens, with the Archbishops, Bishops, and Nobility of the Realm assisting. On each side the curious Iron doors, composed of grate work, beholding the Shrine of St. Ed∣ward, are two large Statues of Mitered Abbots, with several other lesser Images
of holy men and devout women among the Primitive Christians in the adjoyn∣ing Niches: In the Chappel it self is a raised Tomb of grey Marble, whereon is nothing remaining but part of a wooden Image without the head, which being made (as it is said) of Silver, was sacrilegiously stolen from thence by the impious hands of some pretenders to Reformation, who have likewise deprived and stripped it of the fine embroydered and gilded Plates of brass, wherewith it was all over cove∣red, leaving us nothing now to behold but the frame to which they were affixed On the South side of this Tomb is a Wooden Chest or Coffin, wherein part of the Skelleton and per∣ched body of Katharine Valois hisKatharine Q. of England. vid. Ep. 115. Qu. (from the waste upwards) is to be seen; of whom many fabulous stories are reported for her lying here: But the truth is, that when Henry VII. cau∣sed the old Chappel of our Lady (at the entrance whereof this Queen was in∣terred) to be pulled down, the Work∣men finding her Coffin among others to be well nigh perished and decayed, what remained of her body was ta∣ken thence, and placed in this Capsula
nigh her Husband, where it hath con∣tinued ever since: Which is not fre∣quently shewn to any, but as an espe∣cial favour by some of the chief Officers of the Church. Over this Tomb is the Oratory or Chantry Chappel▪ where the Obiits of this King and Queen used to be celebrated, and their Anniver∣sary's kept, there being two doors on each side the entrance, with stairs to ascend into the same, where the Saddle which this heroick Prince used in the Wars in France, with his Shield and other warlike furniture is to be seen. On the backside of this noble Monu∣ment towards the Area hath been seve∣ral paintings and other adornments, which are now washed away and de∣faced; but there is still remaining an antient Table in Latine and English meeter hanging thereon. This HenryVid. Ep. 114. was the Son of Henry IV. King of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, who vanquished the French in many Battels, was by his Father made Regent of France, and after his death crowned King at Paris, who having married Katharine Valois, Daughter of Charles VI. King of France, leaving Issue by her Henry VI.
King of England, &c. he died anno 1422. and was buried here. His Queen Katharine afterwards married Owen Teudor, descended from Cadwallader, the last King of the Britains, by whom she had Edmund Earl of Richmond, Father to King Henry VII. Jasper Duke of Bedford, and Edward a Monke of Westminster. She died anno 1437. §. 165. The West side of this Chap∣pelThe West side of the Chap∣pel of St. Ed∣ward. of the Kings is wholly taken up by the Skreen that separates the high Al∣tar from this place, on the upper part whereof there is some indifferent Car∣ving in Freestone, wherein much of the Life of St. Edward and the antient History of this Church is represented. There are two doors, one on each side the same Skreen, that serve more particularly on the days of the Coronation of our Kings and Queens for the conveniency of their retiring out of the body of the Church to refresh and recreate them∣selves here, where likewise they are divested of the Crown and Robes of St. Edward, by the Lord High Cham∣berlain of England, after the So∣lemnity ended at the Altar, and again
arrayed in those rich and Royal Robes provided for them to wear that day, for which end there is a Traverse ere∣cted here on those days of Solemnity covered with Tapistry, and hung round with Arras for the greater splendour and Magnificence. §. 166. Coming back again (downThe Area round the Chappel of St. Edward. the same Stairs by which we ascended into this Chappel) into the Area, on the North side we may take notice of these few Monuments and Grave-stones; against the the back of the Tomb of Aveline Countess of Lancaster, is a small neat Monument of white Marble and Alabaster, adorned with Arms, and an Epitaph, nigh which there is a large Grave-stone of black Marble on the Pavement, both placed as a remem∣brance to that eminent and Loyal Pre∣late Brian Duppa, Tutor to his presentBrian Duppa, Bishop of Winchester, vid. Ep. 152, 153. Majesty, who was Dean of Christ∣church, Bishop of Chichester and Sa∣lisbury, and upon the Restauration of the King to his Kingdoms after his Ex∣ile, was made Bishop of Winchester, and Prelate of the Garter, who dy∣ing anno 1662. in the seventy fourth year of his age was interred here.
The Monument against the South Wall, being but lately erected for him. §. 167. In this Area lies John Doughty,John Dough∣ty, S. T. D. vid. Ep. 154. S. T. D. and a Prebendary of this Church, under a black Marble stone hard by the former, he died anno 1672, aged seventy five years. John Windsor, Ne∣phewJohn Windsor. vid. Ep. 155. to Sir William, lies under a stone covered with plates of brass obiit 1414. By whom lies William Amundisham, aWilliam Amun∣disham. vid. Ep. 156. Monk of Westminster, under another plated stone, he died anno 1420. A lit∣tle higher is another fair Marble stone, covered with brass plates, and their Effigies graven thereon, for two more Monks of the same Abby, viz. ThomasThomas Brown. vid. Ep. 158. Humph. Roberts, vid. Ep. 158. Brown, and Humphrey Roberts, dying anno 1508. A fourth plated stone is here to be seen, with Verses thereon, for one William Couper belonging toWilliam Couper. vid. Ep. 157. the Archbishop of York. Something lower is another Grave-stone for George Wild Esquire, who died annoGeorge Wild. vid. Ep. 151. 1649.
§. 168. In the South Area, hard bySir Tho. Ingram. Knight. vid. Ep. 143. the Chappel of St. Nicolas, to∣wards the ascent of King Henry the Se∣venths, is a comely Monument of Ala∣baster and white Marble, with an Urn placed on the top, for to remember Sir Thomas Ingram Knight, Chancel∣lour of the Dutchy of Lancaster, and one of his Majesties most honourable Privy Council; he died anno 1671. There is a small Monument of Alaba∣ster and black Marble, adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, with the Busto or head of Richard Tufton Es∣quire,Richard Tuf∣ton Esquire. vid. Ep. 144. between the Chappel of St. Ed∣mund and St. Nicolas, who died anno 1631, and had this Monument erected here by his Brother Sir Hum∣phrey Tufton for him. Against the North Wall, on this side the Area, adjoyning to the Tomb of Henry V. is another small Monument of Alabaster, adorned with Arms, and plates of brass, several little Images carved thereon, with his head in the midst of the same brass gilt, for Robert Aiton Esquire, famous forRobert Aiton Esquire. vid. Ep. 142. his Writings, Embassies, & exemplary Charity, who died at Whitehall, anno 1638.
§. 169. On the Pavement are theseJames Cran∣field, Earl of Middlesex. . vid Ep. 147. Lionel Cran∣field Earl of Middlesex 3. vid. Ep. 145. Grave-stones, towards the West, James Cranfield Earl of Middlesex, who died anno 1652. And Lionel Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex, one of the Bed∣chamber to his present Majesty, and second Son to Lionel, who was Lord High Treasurer of England, he died anno 1674. By whom likewise lies hisAnne Countess of Middlesex, vid. Ep. 146. Edward Cran∣field Esquire. vid. Ep. 8. Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester▪ vid. Ep. 140. Mother the Lady Anne, who died anno 1669. and Edward Cranfield, who died anno 1649. Not far from these is a grey Marble stone, with a plate of brass thereon for Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester, and Privy Counsel∣lour to King James, obiit anno 1616. There is a large grey Marble stone, with a little part of an Inscription, and a Coat of Arms still remaining in the brass, whereby so much light may be gathered that it was placed there for Sir John Golofre Knight, who was se∣condSir John Golo∣fre Knight. Husband to Philippa Lady Mo∣hun, afterwards Dutchess of York, he died anno 1396. By him is another plated stone for Cecill Ratcliff, chiefCecill Ratcliff. vid. Ep. 141. Gentlewoman to the Lady Dudley. For the rest of the stones I can be at no certainty to whom they belong, and
therefore I shall leave them without troubling you with my conjectures, on∣ly giving you the names of some who areRich. de Bar∣king, Abbot of Westminster. said to be here deposited. Rich. de Bar∣king Abbot of Westm. chief Baron of the Exchequer, and Lord Treasurer of England, who died ano 1246, he was buried in our Ladies Chappel, and had a Tomb of Marble set up for him before the Altar there, which in the time of William de Colchester, Abbot likewise of this Monastery, was taken down by Frier Combe, a Sacrist of this Abby, who laid a fair plain Marble stone over him, with an Epitaph inscribed in brass, which stone (among many others) was removed at the time when King Henry VII. built the new Chappel, and was placed at the foot of the steps ascending towards the same, on the East side of this Area. Henry, eldestHenry, Son to King Hen. VIII. Son of King Henry VIII. by Queen Katharine of Spain, died an Infant, and was buried at the entrance into the Chappel of St. Edward. Ralph Selby▪ Doctor of Laws, who died anno 1420, was buried under a plated stone of grey Marble on the South part of this Area. Anne Buxal, Daughter ofRalph Selby. Anne Buxall, Sir Alain Buxal Knight, and Wife to
Sir John de Beverley, she died on theSir John Be∣verley Knight. second day of October, anno 146, and was buried under a plated Marble stone, not far from Ralph Selby. By her likewise lies her Husband Sir John Beverley Knight, under a like stone. §. 170. In the Chappel of St. Ed∣mund were buried Margaret, Dugh∣terMarg Coun∣tess of Derby. of Henry Clifford Earl of Cum∣berland, Wife of Henry Earl of Der∣by, who died anno 1596. and GeorgeGeorge Bride∣man. Brideman▪ Custos of the Queens Pa∣lace at Westminster, he died anno 1580. By whom is likewise interred his Wife, who died anno 1590. Before the high Altar was buried one JohnJohn Leeke Archbishop. Leeke, said to be an Archbishop, but I can find no such man in my Cata∣logues of the Archbishops of Canter∣bury and York, and therefore I can say no more of him. And now lea∣ving this part of the Church, by the Monument of Brian Duppa, Bishop of Winchester, we are let into the North Cross again, where on the right hand, and against the East side are three small Chappels: The first is
The Chappel of St. Iohn Evangelist, §. 171. The Skreen whereof wasJohn Estney, Abbot of West. vid. Ep. 134. made and adorned with several Car∣vings and Coats of Arms, by John Est∣ney, Abbot of this Monastery, painted, and gilt with Gold, who lies on the South side under a grey Marble Tomb, with his Effigies thereon curiously en∣graven on brass in the Vestments of his Office, with a Miter on his head, and a Pastoral Staff in his right hand, ha∣ving an Epitaph round the Verge, some part only remaining at this time sufficient to inform us that he died on the twenty fourth day of May, anno 1438. §. 172. Next to this is another greySir John Har∣pedon Knight. Marble Tomb adjoyning to the head of Abbot Estney, whereon is the Effigies of a Knight in Armour, curiously engra∣ven on brass, and reposing his head on his Helm, with several Coats of Arms about the Tomb wrought in the same brass, but the Epitaph round the ledge is torn away, under which lies Sir John Harpedon Knight, who died anno 1457.
§. 173. On the South side of thisSir Tho. Parry Knight. vid. Ep. 135. Monument is another grey Marble Tomb, covered with a large stone, be∣ing nine foot long, and four foot broad, where round the Ledge is still remaining in brass an Epitaph, but the Verses and Coat of Arms (wherewith the top of this Marble stone was fur∣ther adorned) are wholly perished, under which lies Sir Thomas Parry Knight, Treasurer of the Houshold, and Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries to Queen Elizabeth, who died on the fifteenth day of December, anno 1560. §. 174. In the midst of the floor ofSir Francis Vere Knight. vid. Ep. 133. this Chappel is a most stately and Soul∣dier-like Monument, every way suta∣ble to the person for whom it was made, viz. for Sir Francis Vere Knight, descended from the illustrious Family of the Veres Earls of Oxford. He was Captain General of the English Forces in the united Netherlands in the time of Queen Elizabeth; and Governour of the Briel and Portsmouth, whose learned Commentaries, set forth by himself in the English Tongue, shews
him no less a Master in the Art of War than learned in other Sciences; he died anno 1698, and had this noble Tomb erected for him by the Lady Eliza∣beth his Wife, where on a Pedestal of well polished black Marble, and an Epitaph in gilded letters round the Verge, lies his Image wrapped in a Night-gown, and reposing himself on a quilt, all of figured Alabaster, over which is a Table of Lydian or Touch, shadowing this Image in the nature of a Canopy, supported at the four Corners by as many Martial Knights in Armour, inclining their right knees towards the ground, and resting the Tomb on their shoulders, whereon is placed his Helm, Corsset, Curiass, Vi∣brace, Gauntlet, Spurs, and Shield, which together, with the Statues themselves at full proportion are all composed of admirable white Mar∣ble: That for curiosity and neat∣ness this Tomb seems little inferiour to any of the more magnificent Monuments I have described else∣where.
§. 175. Against the East Wall of thisSir George Holles Knight. vid. Ep. 132. Chappel, at the feet of his fellow Souldier and Kinsman Sir Francis Vere, is another nument erected by John Earl of Clare, to the remem∣brance of his Broer Sir George Holles Knight, a great Souldier, and Serjeant Major General over the English Forces in the Low-Countries, who dying at London, anno 1626. was buried here. On a Pedestal (whereon is the Epi∣taph, with a Town beleaguered, well designed in basso relievo, and two weep∣ing Pallas's in dejected postures lying on each side thereof, with Owls, the Emblems of Sagacity and Vigilance, standing by them,) is a commanding Statue of curious white polished Mar∣ble, boldly insculpt, and altogether furnitured like a Roman Hero, one of his eyes (supposed to be lost) covered with Sables, a Mantle falling from his shoulders, a Shield on his left Arm, whereon are depicted the Matches of his Family, and a Com∣manders Battoon in his right hand, seeming, like old Nestor, to be directing his Battallions even after his death.
§. 176. In this Chappel, without any Monuments, Tombs, or Grave-stones,The Lord Wentworth. Rich. Knevet. lie Thomas the first Lord Wentworth. Richard Knevet Esquire, one of the Gentlemen Pensioners to Queen Eliza∣beth, who died on the first day of No∣vember,Sir Ed. Rogers. anno 1559. Sir Edward Rogers Knight, Controller of the Houshold to Queen Elizabeth, who died anno 1568.Will. Rogers. William Rogers his Grandson, anno 1593. Sir James Crofts Knight, Controller ofSir James Crofts Knight. the Houshold likewise to Queen Eli∣zabeth, who died anno 1590. Eliza∣beth,Eliz. Fortescue. the Daughter of Sir John For∣tescue Knight, who died on the twenty first of May 1597. And Sir EdwardSir Ed▪ Spragge Knight. Spragge Knight, who lost his life at Sea against the Hollander anno 1673. Next to this is The Chappel of St. Michael, §. 177. Where there is only (on theThe Lady Ka∣tharine St. John's. vid. Ep. 136. East side) one Monument of Alaba∣ster, Marble, and divers coloured stones, with the Image of a Lady in her Robes of Estate, lying at full length, with two Children kneeling on the Pe∣destal, all of the same Alabaster,
adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, for the Lady Katharine St. John's, the Daughter of Sir William Dormer Knight, and Widow of John Lord St. John's of Bletso, by whom she had Oliver, who died an Infant, and Anne, married to William Lord Ho∣ward of Effingham, eldest Son to Charles Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Admiral of England. This Lady caused this Monument to be made in her life time, not long surviving after, who died on the twenty third day of March, anno. 1614. §. 178. There were likewise buriedSir Hugh Vaughan Kt. in this Chappel, without any Monu∣ments, Sir Hugh Vaughan Knight, with Anne his Wife who was the Daughter of Henry Earl of Northumberland, and Widow of Thomas Hungerford. Sir Thomas Wharton Knight, afterwardsThomas Lord Wharton. Lord Wharton, who married the Daugh∣ter of Robert Earl of Sussex, and was buried here Anno 1572. Elizabeth, theThe Lady Eliz. Boorn. Wife of Sir John Boorn Knight, Secre∣tary to Queen Mary, she died on the twenty second day of June anno 1576. And Sir William Trussel Knight, whoSir William Trussel Kt. was Speaker to the House of Com∣mons
at the deposition of King Ed∣ward II. §. 179. This Chappel, with part of the Chappels of St. Iohn Evange∣list and St. Andrew, are now taken up, and the Monuments almost cove∣red by the Scaffolds placed here, be∣ing made use of at present for the lower Convocation House for the Deans, Prebends, and Doctors, &c. as that of King Henry VII. is for the Arch∣bishops and Bishops when the Parliament sits at Westminster, which I should before have informed you, as likewise that in the same Chappel Divine Ser∣vice is celebrated thee every Morning at six of the Clock for the conveniency of the Scholars and the devout peo∣ple thereby inhabiting. The Chappel of St. Andrew. §. 180. Which is the last, yet notThe fine Skreen be∣longing to St. Andrews Chappel. the least for beauty and comliness, the Skreen thereof being richly adorn∣ed with curious carvings and ingra∣vings, and other Imagery work of Birds, Flowers, Cherubims, Devices, Mot∣toes, and Coats of Arms of many of
the chief Nobility painted thereon, as Dukes of York, Bedford, Cambridge, &c. The Earls of Lancaster, Exeter, Derby, &c. The Lords Beachamp, Bardolph, Mohun, Hugerford, Stafford, Ormond Nevil, Grey, Pery. Molineux, Fitz-John, all done by the command, and at the charge and cost o EdmundEdmund Kirton Abbot of West∣mister. vid. Ep. 137. Kirton, Abbot of Westminster (about the time of King Edward IV.) who lies buried on the South side of the Chappel, under a plam grey Marble Tomb, with an Epitaph in brass round the Verge, who died anno 1466. §. 181. Against the East Wall is aSir John Bo∣roughs Knight. vid. Ep. 138. slight Monument of Alabaster and black Marble, adorned, and gilt with Gold for Sir John Bourgh Knight, Son of William Lord Bourgh (descended from the noble Hubert de Bourgh, Lord Chief Justice of England and Earl of Kent, in the time of King Hen∣ry III.) and the Lady Katharine, Daughter of Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln, Lord High Admiral of Eng∣land. This Sir John was eminent or his martial prowess having been twice Knighted in the Field, first by the
Earl of Leicester, Captain General, and Governour of the United Nether∣lands; afterwards at the Battel of St. Andrews by Henry IV. King of France and Navarre, but boarding a Spanish Caract, laden with Gold, Spice, and Pretious stones, he was most un∣fortunately slain on the seventh day of March, anno 1594. in the thirty second year of his age, and had this little Me∣morial placed here for him. §. 172. Here was likewise buriedThomas Lord Boroughs. Thomas Lord Boroughs, Knight of the honourable Order of the Garter, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, who died prosecuting the War against the Earl of Tyroen, then in rebellion,Henry Noell. anno 1597. And Henry Noel, one of the Gentlemen Pentioners to Queen Elizabeth, who died on the twenty sixth of February, anno 1596. both without any Monuments or Gravestones. §. 183. In the midst of this Chap∣pelFrancis Lord Norris. is a most magnificent and noble Mo∣nument, erected for Sir Francis Nor∣ris Knight, afterwards Baron Norris of Rycote, memorable for his warlike actions in the Spanish Netherlands.
On the Pedestal, raised on three ascents, composed of black Marble, and Ala∣baster, is his Effigies, curiously carved, and ingraved all in Armour of white Marble, richly gilt and adorned with Gold, on each side of whom are the Images of three young men kneeling, in Armour, framed of the same Alaba∣ster, and gilt with Gold, over-sha∣dowed by a glorious Arched Cano∣py, supported by eight Corinthian Pillars, of divers coloured stones, set forth with Arms, and other adornments, but there is no Inscri∣ption or Epitaph belonging there∣unto. §. 184. Many more persons of note have been interred in this Church, whose Monuments are decayed and gone, or the Inscriptions worn or torn off from their Grave-stones, as RachelRachel Brig∣ham. Brigham, Daughter of Nicolas Brig∣ham, who had a marble stone laid over her, hard by Chaucers Tomb, anno 1557. William Benson, Abbot of Westmin∣ster,William Benson, Abbot and Dean of West∣minster. and first Dean of this Church, (after King Henry VIII. had disowned the Supremacy of Rome,) was bu∣ried as you go into the Revestry.
William Bedell, who was Treasurer toWilliam Bedell. Cardinal Woolsey (Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellour of England,) with Cicely his Wife; and Sir FrancisSir Fran. Allen. Allen Knight, a famous Souldier in the Low-Country Wars, all these lying in the South Cross. In the North Cross lies John Redman, S. T. D. who wasJohn Redman. Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and a Prebend of this Church, he died anno 1551. Bartholomew Dodington,Bartholomew Dodington. a learned man, and Greek Professor in the University of Cambridge, who died on the twenty second of August, anno 1595. George Burden, ReceptorGeorge Burden. John Gryffith. of this Collegiate Church. John Gryffith, descended of an antient Fami∣ly in Wales, he died anno 1597. And Thomas Brown, first chief Master of theTho. Browne. School, then a Prebend, and afterwards Sub-dean of this Church, who died anno 1585. May 2. § 185. There were likewise buried here other memorable persons, for whom I cannot ascertain any particu∣lar place, ziz. Harold, base Son of KingHarald King of England. Cute, after the death of his Father, was elected King of England by the Danes, who caused Queen Emma, his
Fathers Wife, after he had spoyled her of her riches, to be banished, deprived Prince Aelfred (the Son of King Aethel∣red, and Brother to King Edward the Confessor) of his eyes, and after he had reigned four years, died at Ox∣ford, anno 1040. and was buried here, saith Matthew of Westminster. JohnJohn Lord Wells. Lord Wells, Knight of the Garter, who married Cecily, the Daughter of King Edward IV. and died without Issue, was also here interred. Sir Fulk de Novo-CastroSir Fulk de No∣vo-Castro. or New-castle, a famous Knight, whose body for its Nobility, and re∣lation to the Bloud Royal of England, was commanded by King Henry III. in his own presence, to be buried here, anno 1247. Richard de WendoverRich. de Wen∣dover, Bishop of Rochester. Bishop of Rochester, having the re∣putation of an holy man was inter∣red here by the Kings Order, anno 1250. §. 186. Here was likewise buried Hugolin, who was both ChamberlainHugolin Lord Treasurer. and Treasurer to King Edward the Con∣fessor: Edwin, Abbot of this MonasteryEdwin Abbot of estminster▪ Si Geffey Man S. Geoffrey Man∣devile Jun. in the time of the same King: Sir Geof∣frey Mandevile Knight Seniur, and Athelarda his Wife; and Geoffrey Man
devile Junior: Sir James Berners Knight:Sir James Ber∣ners. Oliver Lord Durdens. Peter Calhan. Tho. Peverel. Sulcardus. Oliver de Durdens, a Baron of this Realm, and Brother to King Henry III. Peter Calhan, a Citizen: Thomas Peve∣rell, Sub-Prior: Sulcardus, that learned Monk and Chronographer, who writ the History of this Church: The Lady Aeleonore, Countess of Barre, andEleonore Daughter to King Edw. I. Rich. Haroun∣den Abbot. Sir Wil. Stoner. Will. Atclyffe. Katharine Daughter to the Dutchess of Norfolk, Walter Hun∣gerford. The Lord Sa∣lisbury. Will. Haverel. Tho. Bounflower. Tho. Romayne. Joh. Alyngreth. Rog. Braharsen. Sir Rich. Rous. Geoff. Haspall, Sir Joh. Shore∣ditch, &c. Daughter to King Edward I. Richard Harounden Abbot of Westminster: Sir William Stoner Knight: William At∣clyffe, Secretary to King Edward IV. The Lady Katharine, Daughter to the Dutchess of Norfolk, married to Ed∣ward Aylmer: Walter Hungerford, Son of Sir Edward Hungerford Knight: The Lord Salisbury: William Haverell; Thomas Bounflower, and Philippa his Wife: Thomas Romayne: John Alyn∣greth: Roger Braharsen: Sir Richard Rous Knight: Geoffrey Haspall: Sir John Shoreditch Knight, and the La∣dy Helene his Wife: James Palmer Clerk, and Joan his Sister; And John Blockley.
§. 187. According to my promise I have now given you what informa∣tion you could reasonably expect in a subject of this nature, without impo∣sing any thing upon you for truth that hath not the stamp and evidence of an∣tiquity to confirm it, I shall there∣fore trouble you a little longer by lead∣ing you out of the Church into the adjoyning Cloysters, which you areThe Cloysters let into by two Doors on the South side thereof, by that towards the West was the Picture of our Saviour Christ nailed to the Cross, the B. Virgin stand∣ing on one side, and S. John on the other, curiously painted, and very pitiful to behold, and round about the sides of these Cloysters were other noble Pain∣tings, with variety of Verses, alludingThe Paintings to the History of the foundation, and the Figures thereon; on every side opposite to the Walls (where now are only frames of wood) was fine glazedThe Win∣dows. Windows of tinctured glass of divers colours; and over the entrance intoThe Chapter∣house. the Chapter-house (on the East-side of this Cloyster, which is now the way likewise into the Library) was placedThe Library. the Statue of the blessed Virgin with
our Saviour in her arms, and two An∣gels on each side, all richly enamelled, and set forth with Gold and blue, some Vestigia or footsteps of all which are still remaining whereby to judge of the former splendour and beauty thereof. §. 188. For those Monuments ofThe Monu∣ments. the dead, which are to be found about these Cloysters, I shall not observe the like order and method as I did in the recital of the foregoing Monuments in the Church and Chappels, esteeming most of them of that inferiour nature, that reading their Epitaphs and In∣scriptions you will receive light enough concerning them. To which I shall refer you, and you will find towards the latter end of this Book among the Monumental Inscriptions: But there are four Grave-stones on the South side of this great Cloyster that deserve our particular inspection, and for that they have no manner of Epitaph or Inscripti∣on now remaining, I shall not only in∣form you to whom they belong, but give you the antient Verses formerly insculpt about them.
§. 189. The first is a plain whiteVitalis, Abbot of Westminster. Marble stone, heretofore covered with Plates of brass, under which lies Vita∣lis Abbot of Westminster in the time of William the Conquerour, who died anno 1082. and had this Epitaph in∣graved thereon. Qui nomen traxit è vita, morte vocante, Abbas Vitalis transiit, hicque jacet. §. 190. At the feet of Abbot VitalisGislebertus Crispinus, Ab∣bot of West∣minster. is a grey Marble stone, the Effigies of an Abbot carved deep thereon, a Pa∣storal Staff in his right hand, but no Miter on his head, under which Gisle∣bertus Crispinus, Abbot of Westmin∣ster, who died anno 1114. in the time of King Henry I. was interred, with these Verses formerly inlaid round the ledge in brass: Hic Pater insignis, genus altum, virgo, senexque, Gisleberte jaces, lux, via, duxque tuis. Mitis eras, justus, prudens, fortis, moderatus, Doctus quadrivio, nec minùs in trivio. Sic tamen ornatus nece sexta luce Decembris Spiramen Coelo reddis & ossa solo.
§. 191. There is another stone oftus, Ab∣bot of Westm. white Marble, at the feet of Gislebertus, whereon is carved the Image of an Abbot, with a Miter, Ring, and Pasto∣ral staff in his right hand, of the same Marble, under which lies Laurentius, another Abbot of this Monastery, who first obtained from Pope Alexander III. to him and his Successors Abbots, the priviledge to use the Miter, Ring, and Gloves, he died anno 1176. and had these Verses ingraven round his Tomb. Clauditur hoc tumulo vir quondam clarus in orbe, Quo praeclarus erat hic locus est, & erit, Pro meritis vitae dedit illi laurea nomen: Detur & vitae laurea pro meritis. §. 192. That large and stately plainGervasius de Blois, Son of King Stephen, Abbot of Westminster. black Marble stone (which is vulgarly known by the name of Long Megg of Westminster) on the North side of Laurentius the Abbot, was placed there for Gervasius de Blois, another Abbot of this Monastery, who was base Son to King Stephen, and by him placed as a Monk here, and afterwards made Ab∣bot, who died anno 1160, and was
buried under this stone, having this Di∣stich formerly thereon. De regum genere pater hic Gervasius ecce Monstrat defunctus, mors rapit omne genus. §. 193. There were likewise buried in this Cloyster P. Vowel, who diedP. Vowell. Gabriel Good∣man. anno 1557. Gabriel, the Son of Gawin Goodman, by Helena his Wife, a Child, he died anno 1576. Anne Birkhed, agedAnne Birkhead. Christopher Birkhead. Edw. Bernard. 102 years, died anno 1568. and Chri∣stopher her Son, anno 1596. Edward Bernard, a Kings Scholar, died anno 1584. Edward Grant, a Child, annoEdward Grant. 1587, And William Punter, anno 1597.Will. Punter, whose Epitaphs are all worn away.
The Epitaphs, Inscriptions, and Coats of Arms, on the Monuments, Tombs, and Gravestones, &c. Over the Monument these Arms, &c. viz. Cavendish. Three Bucks heads Cabosed, a Mullet.A. D. 1676. Duke of New∣castle and his Dutchess. vid. §. 30. difference, quartering Ogle. A Fess between three Crescents, all within a Garter, Crest▪ on a Torce a Snake nowed. Sup∣porters, a Bull gorged, with a Crown, and Lion rampant. Motto, Cavendo Tutus. On each side these Arms, viz. Cavendish and Ogle quarterly as before, impaling Lucas, a Fess between six Annulets. 1. Epitaph. viz. Here lies the Loyal Duke of Newca∣stle, and his Dutchess his second Wife, by whom he had no Issue, her Name was Margaret Lucas, youngest Sister to the Lord Lucas of Colchester, a noble Family, for all his Brothers were vali∣ant, and all the Sisters virtuous: This Dutchess was a wise, witty, and learned
Lady, which her many Books do well testifie; she was a most virtuous, and loving, and careful Wife, and was with her Lord all the time of his Banish∣ment, and Miseries, and when he came home, never parted from him in his solitary retirements. Hic situs est Heros ille inclytus Williel∣mus Cavendish, de Balneo Miles, Baro Ogle, jure materno, Vicec. Mans∣field, Baro Cavendish de Bolesover, Comes de Ogle, Comes, Marchio, & Dux de Novo-Castro super Tinam. Notingh. & Northumb. Comitat. lo∣cum tenens: Praecipuus Regii Cubiculi Generosus: Carolo Principi Curator po∣tissimus, è secretioribus Domini Regis con∣siliis & Nobilissimi Ord. Periscelidis Eques, Vir qui Fidelitatem, ac Fortitu∣dinem, Majestati Regiae ubertim indi∣cans, conjuratione nequissima primitùs ex∣ortâ Legionum omnium in Borealibus Regni Partibus ad tunc conscriptarum Capitaneus Generalis merito consti∣tutus; in praeliiis diversis (ubi prorsus Victor extitit,) ac in Eboraci Civit. ad∣versus Scotos munimine se fidum strenu∣umque militem usquequaque comprobave∣rit, quapropter invalescente Rebellione à
primis morti destinatus totius rei fami∣liaris jacturam longumque exilium (maxi∣mo autem animo) inde sustinuit. Ʋxorem (primò) Elizabetham fili∣liam unicam & haeredem Willielmi Baslet de Blore in agro Staff. Armigeri duxit, è qu Filios Carolum sine prole dejuncum & Henricum honorum haerdem▪ filias∣que Janam Carolo Cheney de Che∣sham Bots, Elizabetham, Johan Co∣mit. de Bridgwater, ac Franciscam, Olivero Comit. Bolingbrochiae enup∣tas susitavit. Diem obiit 25 Decemb. anno salutis humanae 1676. aetatis suae 84. Arms. viz. Scot Parted per pale indented, a Saltire Counter∣changed.A. D. 1645.  Scot. vid. § 3. Impaling Mauleverer. Three Greyhounds currant in pale bar∣ways. 2. Epitaph. viz. Grace, eldest Daughter of Sir Tho∣mas Mauleverer of Allerton Maule∣verer in Yorkshire Baronet, born in the year 1622, married unto Collonel
Thomas Scot, a Member of the honou∣rable House of Commons, 1644. and died the twenty fourch of February, 1645. He that will give my Grace but what is hers Must say her death hath not Made only her dear Scot But virtue, worth, and sweetness Widowers. Ex terris. Arms. viz. Iames. Two Barrs battelle Counterbattelle, ImpalingA. D. 1667. Mary James. vid. §. 30. Killigrew An Eagle displayed with two heads, within a bordure round'lee. 3. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth interred the body of Dame Mary James, late Wife of Sir John James Knight, descended of the antient Family of the Lords of Ho∣strick in the Province of Holland. And Daughter of Sir Robert Killigrew Knight, sometime Vice-Chamberlain to Mary, late Queen of England, and Wife of his Sacred Majesty King Charles I. (of blessed memory) by
whom he had Issue one Son, named John, and one Daughter, named Eli∣zabeth, which died in their Infancy. The said Dame Mary James departed this mortal life on the first day of November in the year of our Lord 1677. Arms. viz. Blagge. Two Bends ingrailed. Impaling a Lion pas∣santA. D. 1660. Thomas Blagge. vid. §. 1. between three Flower-de-luces. 4. Epitaph. viz. Thomas Blagge Armig. in agro Suf∣folciensi nobili & antiquâ familiâ, vir egregiis animi & corporis dotibus quibus artes honestas adjunxerat, clarus militia, & domi Regibus Carolo primo & secundo fidus imprimis, & gratus, à quibus utris∣que, inter honoratiora cubiculi Ministe∣ria adlectus, utilem operam navaverat praecipuè in Bello Arci Wallingfor∣diensi impositus quam caeteris penè omni∣bus expugnatis diu fortiter tenuit, nec nisi Rege jubente è praesidio excessit, nec mino∣ra pertulit Regis causa, diu foras in exilio jactatus, saepè in patria captivus, fidei suae
obstinationem ubique singulari exemplo app. ob hoc sub Regis felicissimo reditu co∣hortis stipatorum Tribunatu, & Praefe∣ctum Tarmuthe & Praesidii Langa∣rensis donatus, potuit majora sperare, sed immatura morte interceptus, Principem suum cui in adversis constantissime adhae∣serat jam muneratorem futurum insecun∣dis deseruit: obiit Christianè, Piè, 14. die Novemb, anno salutis 1660. aetatis suae 47. 5. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Gulielm. Sandersoni, equit. aurat.A. D. 1676. Gul. Sanderson. vid. §. 31. Regiae Camerae Generos. ordinar. viri à natalibus ab eruditione, ab invicta suos er∣ga Principes fide à scriptis, à candore, clari. Scripsit inter alia inque lucem emi∣sit vitarum Mariae Scotorum Reginae. Jacobi & Caroli primi, Magnae Britan∣niae Regum Historias idiomate Anglicana: post varias clades sub nupera perduellium tyrannide acceptas, post diuturnos labores domi peregreque fortiter exantlatos, vitae hujus umbratilis satur plusquam nonage∣narius, animi tamen integer, transiit
ad meliorem. Julii 15. anno Christiano∣rum 1676. H. M. Conjugi optimè de se merito quocum L. annos concorditer vixerat Brigitta Ed∣wardi Tyrelli Equ. aurat. filia, virgi∣numque nobilium sereniss. Catharinae Re∣ginae Ancillantium, ut vocant, Mater. M. P. 6. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Musarum & charitum deliciae, Guli∣elmusA. D. 1666. Gulielm. John∣son. S. T. P. vid. §. 32. Johnsonus, S. T. P. ab eleemo∣synis Carolo secundo, exuvias juxta de∣posuit. Saepè naufragus, hoc tandem in por∣tu quiescit anima cum Deo, cujus elogium erat Deus Nobiscum; imaginem ejus si velis illius librum consule. Denatus erat anno aetat. suae 57. salutis 1666. Mart. 4.
Arms. viz. Edmonds. Argent, a Fess varry, and three Martlets in chief Gules. 7. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth buried the body of Mi∣strisA. D. 1676. Eliz. Edmonds. vid. §. 33. Elizabeth Edmonds Spinster, the Daughter of Walter Edmonds of Bay∣leys Court in the County of Sussex Gent. who departed this life the eigh∣teenth of August, in the year of our Lord 1667, aged 82. Arms. viz. Heylyn. Sable three Naggs heads erased Argent. Impaling, Gules two Barrs, Argent, on a bend, Or, a Torteaux between two Leopards heads Sable. 8. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet è propinquo depositum mor∣talePet. Heylyn. S. T. D. vid. §. 33. Petri Heylyn, S. T. D. Hujus Ec∣clesiae Praebendarii & Sub-Decani, viri plane mirabilis egregiis dotibus, ingenio
acri & facundo, judicio subacto, memeria ad prodigium tenaci, cui adjunxit incre∣dibilem in studiis patientiam, quae cessan∣tibus oculis non cessarunt. Scripsit va∣ria, & plurima quae jam manibus homi∣num teruntur, & Argumentis non vul∣garibus stilo non vulgari sufficit, con∣stans ubique Ecclesiae & Majestatis Regiae Assertor, nec florentis magis utriusque quam afflictae: idemque Perduellium & Schismaticae factionis Impugnator acerri∣mus, contemptor invidiae, & animo in∣fracto plura hujusmodi meditanti mors in∣dixit silentium; ut sileatur efficere non po∣test. Obiit anno aetatis 63. posuit hoc illi moestissima conjux. Arms. viz. Carteret. With quarterings, the first and fourth, Gules, a Fess of four Lozenges Arg. a Crescent Sab. on a Cress. Arg. difference, 2d. Gules on a Bend Arg. 3. Pheons of the first, 3d. B. 9. Billets, Or, Crest on a Torce of his colours, a Squirrel se∣jant Or. 9. Epitaph. viz. To the memory of their most be∣lovedA. D. 1677. Edward de Carteret. vid. §. 33. Son Edward de Carteret Gentle∣man,
(Son of Sir Edward de Carteret Knight, Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, and first Gentleman Usher, daily Waiter in ordinary to the King,) his Father and Dame Elizabeth his Mother have caused this Monument to be erected, his body lieth under the Stone beneath; he died the thirtieth day of October 1677. aged seven years and nine months. Arms. viz. Le Neve. On a cross five Flowers-de-Lucles. 10. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Richard leA. D. 1773. Rich. le Neve. vid. §. 33. Neve Esquire, who after several en∣gagements for his Majesties Service, wherein he behaved himself with ho∣nour and applause, being appointed Commander of his Majesties Ship the Edgar, was unfortunately killed in the flower of his age, being but twenty se∣ven years old, after he had signalized his valour to admiration in that sharp engagement with the Hollanders, which hapned on the eleventh of August 1673.
Arms. viz. Thornburgh. Ermine, fretty, and a chief, Crest on a Torce, a Fox passant. 11. Epitaph. viz. P. M. S. G. T. Qui Deo, Principi, & Amicis semperA. D. 1677. Gilbert Thorn∣burgh. vid. §. 3▪ fidus, ecce jacet Gilbertus Thornburgh, Aulicus, olim terrestris, nunc coelestis. In posterum non dicendum erit —Exeat aulâ Qui volet esse pius— Cum illic tanta reluxerit pietas. Obiit die Mensis Octobris 6. Anno salutis 1677. aetatis 56. . Arms. viz. Stotevile. A Saltire ingrailed, Ermine. Ellis. On a Cross five Crescents, a Mullet difference. Impaling Stotevile. Hili. A Cheveron Ermine between three Garbs. Im∣paling Stotevile.
12. Epitaph. viz. Spe resurgendi hic jacet Sarah Sto∣tevileA. D. 1631. Sarah Stotevile vid. §. 33. filia Thomae Stotevile de Brink∣ley in Comitat. Cantabrig. Armigeri; Ʋxor primò Edwardi Ellis de Chester∣ton in Comitat. Cantabrig. Armigeri, cui peperit 6. filios, & 3. filias: Ʋxor deinde Othowelli Hill, Doctoris in jure civili & Cancellarii Dioces. Lincoln. cujus relicta. Obiit 2. die Aprilis Anno Dom. 1631. aetatis suae 78. Vivit post funera virtus. Mors mihi lucrum. Solus Christus mihi sola slus. Arms. viz. Egerton Gules a Fess Ermine between three Phe∣ons Arg. Impaling Nham. Arg. a Bend ingrailed B. between two Bucks heads cabosed Sable. 13. Epitaph. viz. Penelope filia è pluribus lectissima Ro∣bertiA. D. 1670. Penel. Egerton. vid. §. 33. Dom. Nedham, Vice-com. Kil∣nurray, & Helenae antiquiss. Dutton le Dutton in Comitat. Palat. Chester,
haeredis unicae. Conjux moestissimi Ran∣dolphi Egerton, de Betley Cestri con∣finio Carolino nuper in exercitu Majoris Generalis, supremóque (ut vocant) nunc regni concilio (Parlimento regio) Staffordiensium Delegati, cujus in utrumque Carolum (Britanniar. Mo∣narchas) immobilem fidem resque praecla∣rè gestas posteri non tacebunt, (cui nun∣quam nisi moriendo gravis,) Heic juxta Egertonorum insignia, (illustriss. Ba∣ronum de Malpas) unà cum Randul∣pho filiolo, posita est ex voto: Quin ab illâ magis, (credite) se positum voluit Maritus neque vita functum alibi ponen∣dum optat, filiolae dans vitam perdidit, 13. Kalend. April. anno restitut. Huma∣nae 1670. Britannicae 10. Stat sine pede virtus. Arms. viz. Heskett. Argent on a Bend Sable, three Garbs Or, Crescent difference Gules, Impaling, Argent three Cheveronels Gules between as many Martlets Sable.
14. Epitaph. viz. Memoriae Sacrum. Thomae Hesketto equiti aurato, exA. D. 1600. Thom. Heskett. vid. §. 39. Antiqua & clara familia Heskettorum in Comitatu Lancastrensi oriundo. Cu∣riae Wardorum & liberationum Attor∣nato, & à Regio consilio in Boreali Regni parte constituto, viro & summa juris scientia ita singulari vitae integritate. Juliana uxor moestiss. viro charissimo amoris & observantiae ergo posuit. Obiit anno salutis M. DC. die Octobris 15. Arms. viz. Richardson. On a Chief three Lions heads erased, quartering Ermine, on a Canton a Saltire. 15. Epitaph. viz. Deo. O. M. Thomae Richardsoni Iceni EquitisA. D. 1634. Tho. Richardson vid. §. 38. Aurati, humanum depositum, ille juris municip. omnes gradus, examplavit; con∣ventus tertii ordinis ann. Jacobi Regis 21. & 22. Prolocutor extitit. Fori
civilis (communium placitorum vocant) supremum Magistratum quinquen. gessit, ad summum tandem primarii per Angli∣am Judicis tribunal à Rege Carolo ere∣ctus; expiravit anno aetatis 66. salutis 1634. Thomas Richardson fil. unicus eques aurat. Bar. Scotiae designatus patri in∣comparabili posuit. Arms. viz. Thynne. Barry of ten sable, and Or, quartering Ar∣gent a Lion rampan, the tail nowed Gules, Impa∣ling, Or, on a Fess Gules three Besants, in chief a Greyhound currant sable. 16. Epitaph. viz. Hi situs est Gulielmus Thynne Ar∣miger, 584.  . 38. rater Johannis Thynne Equitis aurati, ex Antiqua Botteviliorum fami∣lia oriurdus: qui in adolescentia magnam Europae partem perlustravit, in praelio ad Maslborough Eques catafractus con∣tra Scotos pugnavit, & tandem aetate consectus placidè in domino obdormivit, 14. e Martii 1584.
Johannes Chamberlaine de Prestbu∣ry Armig. charissimo Affini hoc Monu∣mentum posuit. Christus mihi vita & mors mihi lucrum. Phil. 1. Dies mortis aeternae vitae natalis est. Arms. viz. Owen. Argent a Lion rampant and Canton sable, quartering eleven Coats: Arg. a cross Patonce sable between four Cornish Choughs prop▪ a chief B. 2. Gules, six Flower-de-lucies Arg. 3. Arg. on a bend B. three Garbs Or. 4. Arg. a Chev. Gules between three Scorpions erect. sab. 5. Gules, an Eagle displayed with two heads Or. 6▪ B. three Barrulets, and three Griffons heads erased in chief Or. 7. Gules, three birds, each perching on the stump of a tree erased Argent. 8. Arg. a Fess be∣tween three birds in chief, and one in base sable. . Arg. a Cheveron between three Talbots pas∣sant. sab. 10. Gules a Flower-de-luce Or. 11. B. a Fess between six cross Croslets fitchy Or. Crest on a Torce of his colours, two Eagles heads erased, endorsed Or. On one side. Owen. With quarterings as before, Impaling Bas∣kervile, viz. Argent a Cheveron Gules between three hearts, crescent difference. On the other. Owen. With quarterings as before, Impaling. Argent a Pomegranate tree prop. full of fruit, Or.
17. Epitaph. viz. Deo Trino & uni sacrum. Secundum Christi Redemptoris adven∣tumA. D. 1598. Thomas Owen. vid. § 38. sub hoc tumulo expectat Thomas Owen Armiger, Filius Richardi Owen ex Maria altera filia & haeres Thomae Oteley de Comitatu Salopiae Armigeri: Qui ab adolescentia studiis juris munici∣palis Angliae innutritus, ita industria, in∣genio & judicio claruit ut primum electus fuerit dominae Reginae Elizabethae serviens ad Legem, inde in consessum Justiciario∣rum communium placitorum cooptatus. Inter quos cùm quinque annos singulari in∣tegritatis, aequitatis & prudentiae laude sedisset, & ex Sarah uxore charissima filia & una haeredum Humfredi Baskervile quinque filios & totidem filias suscepisset (Alicia fideli uxore secunda superstite) pi in Christo obdomivit 21. die Decemb. Ann. salutis 1598. Rogerus Owen filius moestissimus Pa∣tri optimo & charissimo officiosae pietatis & memoriae ergô hoc monumentum posuit. Justorum animae in manu Dei sunt. Spes vermis & Ego.
Arms. viz. Gruffith. Gules, a Cheveron Ermine between three old mens heads coped prop. their Perewigs Or. quartering eight Coats: 1. Gules, a Saracens head erased prop. banded about the forehead with a Wreath Or and B. 2. B. three Mullets Or. 3. B. a Lion rampant Argent. 4. Ermine a Lion ram∣pant sable. 5. Per bend sinister Ermine and Er∣miues a Lion rampant Or. 6 B. a Lion rampant per Fess Or and Argent, within a bordure of the last. 7. Gules, a Fess Ermine between three Bucks heads Cabossed, parted per pale Argent and Or. 8. Gules a Lion rampant, and six cross Croslets Argent. 18. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the Body of Peeres Gruf∣fithA. D. 1628. Peeres Gruffith. vid. §. 34. Esquire, Son and Heir to Sir Ree Gruffith, and Grandchild to Sir William Gruffith Chamberlain of North-wales, who died the eighteenth of August 1628▪ Arms. viz. Radley. Argent a Cheveron, Gules between three Adders sable. Impaling vert on a bend indented Or, three Martlets sable.
19. Epitaph. viz. Here lies the body of Mistriss BridgetA. D. 679.  y. vid. §. . Radley the most deservedly beloved Wie of Charles Radley Esquire, Gen∣tleman Usher, daily Waiter to his Ma∣jesty, which place he parted withal, not being able to do the duty of it, by rson of his great indisposition both of body and mind, occasioned by his just srow for the loss of her; she charged this life for a better the twen∣tieth of November 1679. Arms viz. Moland. Sable, a Leopards head jessant, a Flower-de-luce and Lion of England in the Dex∣ter▪ Chief all Or, with Ulster▪ Impaling H. B. two as Danzette Ermine, between six cross Croslets Arg. 3. 2. 1. 20. Epitaph. viz. , , , . .
Carola, Daughter of Roger HarsnetA. D. 1674. Carol. Morland. vid. §. 34. Esquire, and of Carola his Wife, the truly loving (and truly beloved) Wife of Samuel Morland Knight and Baro∣net, bare a second Son October 4. died October 10. Anno Dom. 1674. aeta∣tis 23. 21. Epitaph. viz. To preserve the memory of twoA D. 1672. Sir Charles Harbord, and Clem. Cotterel. vid. §. 34. faithful Friends, who lost their lives at Sea together May 28. 1672. Arms, viz. Harbord. Quarterly three Lions rampant, a Cre∣scent difference. Sir Charles Harbord Kt. third Son of Sir Charles Har∣bord Knight, his Majesties Surveyor general, and first ieutenant of the Royal James, under the most noble and illustrious Captain, Ed∣ward Earl of Sandwich, Vice-Admiral of England, which after a terrible ight, maintained to admiration against a Squadron of the Holland Fleet, for above six
hours, near the Suffolk Coast, having put off two Fire-ships, at last, being ut∣terly disabled, a few of her men remaining unhurt, was by a third unfortunately set on fire. But he, though he swome well, neglected to save himself, as some did: and out of perfect love to that worthy Lord (whom for many years he had constantly accompanied in all his honourable imploy∣ments, and in all the en∣gagements of the former War) died with him at the age of 32. much be∣wailed of his Father, whom he never offended, and much beloved by all for his known piety, virtue, loy∣alty, fortitude, and fidelity.
Arms. viz. Cotterel. A bend be∣tween three Escalop shels, a fille of three difference. Clement Cotterell Esquire, eldest Son of Sir Charles Cot∣terel Knight, Master of the Ceremonies, and his Assistant to have succeeded in that Office, for which he was very fit, having a tall ha∣some prson, a graceful win∣ning behaviour, and great natural parts, much impro∣ved by study, and by converse in most Courts of Europe, were firm to the Church
of England, he learned not their Vices, but Customs and Languages, understanding se∣ven, and speaking four of them as his own, though but 22 years old. Yet not con∣tent to serve his King and Country at home, only his excess of courage, excited by a deep sense of honour, could not be kept from go∣ing Volunteer with the Earl of Sandwich, with whom he had been in Spain when his Excellence was there Embassadour Extraordinary, and with whom, after having returned unwounded into his Ship, from being the first man who had boarded a Dutch one of 60 Guns, and pulled down the Ensign of it with his own hands, he also pe∣rished, universally lamented. Arms. viz. Bingham. Gules, a bend cottised be∣tween six crosses formy Or, quartering Ermine, a Lion rampant Gules crowned Or, Crest on a Torce of his colours, a Rock prop. thereon an Eagle pre∣paring to fly prop.
22. Epitaph. viz. To the Glory of the Lord of Hosts. Here under resteth Sir RichardA. D. 1598. Sir Richard Bingham. vid. §. 34. Bingham Knight, of the ancient Fami∣ly of the Binghams of Bingham Mel∣combe▪ in the County of Dorset, who from his Youth trained up in military affairs, served in the time of Queen Mary at St. Quintins, in the Western Isles of Scotland, and Conquet in Britain. In the time of Queen Elizabeth  Lieth in Scot∣land, in the Isle of Candy, at the burning of Cabochrio in Turkie, in the Civil Wars of France, in the Ne∣therlands, and at Smerwick in Ire∣land. After he was made Governour of Connaght where he overthrew the Irish Scots, expelled the traiterous Ororcke, suppressed divers Rebellions, and that with very small charge to her Majesty, maintaining that Province in a flourishing estate by the space of thir∣teen years. Finally, for his good ser∣vice he was made Marshal of Ireland, and General of Leinster, where at Dublin, in an assured faith in Christ, he ended this transitory life the nine∣teenth
of January Anno Dom. 1598. aetat. 70. This is done by Sir John Bingley, sometime his Servant. Arms. viz. Offic. Regis Armor. Tit. Clarentieux. Argent St. Georges Cross, on a chief Gules a Lion of Eng∣land. Impaling Camden. Argent a Fess ingrailed between six cross Croslets fitchy sable. 23. Epitaph. viz. Qui side antiquâ & opera assidua Bri∣tannicamA. D. 1623. Guliel. Camde∣nus. Vid. §. 35. Antiquitatem indagavit, simpli∣citatem innam honestis studiis excoluit, animi slertiam candore illustravit Gu∣lielmus Camdenus, ab Elizbetha Regi∣na ad Regis Armorum (Clarentii titulo) dignitatem evcatu, hic spe certa resur∣gendi in Christo, S. E. Q Obiit. Anno Dom. 1623. 9. Novemb. aetatis suae 74. Arms. viz, Triplet. An Hind currant regardant, shot through the neck with an Arrow, and chief in∣dented. 24. Epitaph. viz. Hic requiescit vir reverendus Dr. Tho∣masA. D. 1670. Tho. Triplet, S. T. D. vid. §. 35. Triplet, ex agro Oxoniensi Prae∣bendarius
hujus Ecclesiae qui postquam ad annum aetatis septuagesimum pietate & cultus assiduitate Deo, Graecae linguae peri∣tia non vulgari, doctis largitate & con∣tinua beneficentia egenis, morum innocuâ jucunditate, omnibus carum se praebuisset, ab hâc vita ad meliorem commigravit, Anno Dom. 1670. die Julii. 18. Arms. viz. Casaubon. A Lion rampant, debrused by a Fess, thereon three Mullets. 25. Epitaph. viz. Isaacus Casaubonus. (O Doctiorum quicquid est assurgite Huîc tam colendo nomini) Quem Gallia Reip. literariae bono pe∣perit,A. D. 1614. Isac. Casaubon. vid. §. 35. Henricus IV. Francorum Rex invictissimus Lutetiam literis suis evoca∣tum Bibliothecae suae praefecit charumque deinceps dum vixit habuit, eoque terris erepto Jacobus Mag. Brit. Monarcha Re∣gum doctissimus doctis indulgentiss. in Angliam accivit, munificè fovit, posteri∣tasque ob doctrinam aeternum mirabitur, H. S. E. invidia major. Obiit aetern. in Christo vitam anhelans. Kal. Jul. 1614. aetatis 55.
Viro optimo immortalitate digniss. Thomas Mortonus Episc. Dunelm. ju∣cundissime quod frui licuit memor. Pr. S. P. cv. 1634. Qui noscere vult Casaubonum non saxa sed cartas legat. Superfuturas marmori & profuturas posteris. Armes. viz. Coxe. Three barulets, on a Canton a Lions head erased, a Mullet difference, Crest on a Torce a Naggs head erased. 26. Epitaph. viz. Deo Optimo Maximo. Hic in Domino requiescit RichardusA. D. 1623. Sir Rich. Coxe. vid. §. 35. Coxe de Porters Eques aurat. filius ter∣tius Thomae Coxe de Beymonds Co∣mitat. Hertford Armigeri, in Hospitio regio per multos annos Oeconomicus, fide∣litate, diligentia & prudentia probatus, Reginae Elizabethae à Dietis, item & Regi Jacobo, cui tandem factus est Magister ho∣spitii digniss. vir religionis cultu, morum co∣mitate, corporis castitate, affectuum tempe∣rantia imprimis spectatus erga bene meritos amore suos, benificentia pauperes, caritate omnes, aequitate clarus, Anno aetatis 60.
coelebs, postquam se vita meliori multa vi∣gilantia & deductione praeparasset, Deo placidè animam reddidit. 13. Decemb. 1623. Johannes Coxe de Beymonds Ar∣miger, Frater secundus, Fratri è testa∣mento haeres amoris hoc monumentum posuit. Deus non est mortuorum sed viventium. 27. Epitaph. viz. Propè jacet, Gulielmus Outram, S. T. P.A. D. 1679. Gul. Outram. S. T. P. vid. §. 35. ex agro Derbiensi Collegiorum apud Cantabrigienses S. & individuae Tri∣nitatis & Christi socius, hujus Ecclesiae Canonicus, & Leicest. Archidiaconus. Theologus consummatus, & omnibus nu∣meris absolutus, scriptor nervosus & accu∣ratus, concionator egregius & assiduus, primo in agro Lincoln. postea Londini & tandem apud S. Margaretam Westm. ubi confecit postremum vitae suae cursum magnâ cum laude nec minori fructu; sed in tantis laboribus, & animi contentione dum sacrarum literarum & sanctorum pa∣trum studio ardebat, ut in renum dolores inciderit; quibus diu afflictus, & tan∣dem fractus, aequissimo animo è vita
discessit, Aug. 23. Anno Dom. 1679. postquam impleverat annum quinquagesi∣mum quartum. 28. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth (expecting the secondA. D. 1596. Edmund Spen∣cer. vid. §. 36. coming of our Saviour Jesus Christ) the body of Edmund Spencer, the Prince of Poets in his time, whose di∣vine spirit needs no other witness than the works which he left behind him. He was born in London in the year 1510. and died in the year 1596. Arms. viz. Barrow. Two Swords in Saltire, the dexter surmounted by the sinister points upwards between four Flower-de-lucies. 29. Epitaph. viz. Isaacus Barrow S. T. P. Regi Caro∣loA. D. 1677. Isaac Barrow S. T. P. vid. §. 35. secundo à sacris, vir propè divinus, & verè magnus, si quid magni habeat pietas, probitas, fides, summa eruditio, par mo∣destia, mores sanctissimi undequaque & suavissimi, Geometriae Professor Lon∣dini Greshamensis, Graecae linguae & Matheseos, apud Cantabrigienses, suos
Cathedras omnes ecclesiam, gentem ornavit, Collegium S. S. Trinitatis praeses illustra∣vit, jactis Bibliothecae verè Regiae sunda∣mentis auxit, opes, honores, & universum vitae ambitum, ad majora us, non contempsit, sed reliquit seculo. Deum quem à teneris coluit, cum primis imita∣tus est paucissimis egendo, benefaciendo quam plurimis etiam posteris quibus vel mortuus concionari non desinit, caetera ut paenè majora ac scriptis peti possunt. Abi Lector, & aemulare. Obiit 4. die Maii Anno Dom. 1677. aetatis suae 47. Monumen∣tum hoc amici posuêre. Arms. viz. Draiton. Guttée, a Pegasus currant in Bend, Crest on a Torce, the cap, or chapau of Mercury within the beams of the Sun. 30. Epitaph. viz. Michael Draiton Esquire, a Memo∣rableA. D. 1631. Mich, Draiton, vid. §. 37. Poet of this Age exchanged his Laurel for a Crown of glory, 1631.
Do pious Marble, let thy Reader know What they and what their Children ow To Draitons Name, whose sacred Dust We recommend unto thy trust. Protect his Memory, and preserve his Story, Remain a lasting Monument of his Glory, And when thy ruins shall disclaim To be the Treasurer of his name, His name, that cannot fade, shall be An everlasting Monument to thee. Arms viz. Chaucer. Per pale Gules and Argent, aA. D. 1400. Galfr. Chaucer. vid. §. 37. bend counterchanged. 31. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Qui fuit Anglorum Vates ter maximus olim, Galfridus Chaucer, conditur hoc tumulo, Annum si quaeras domini, si tempora mortis, Ecce notae subsunt, quae tibi cuncta notant. 25. Octobris 1400. Aerumnarum requies Mors. N. Brigham hos fecit musarum nomine sumptus, 1556.
32. Epitaph. viz. Abrahamus Cowleius,A. D. 1667. Abra. Cowley. vid. §. 37. Anglorum Pindarus, Flaccus, Maro, deliciae, decus, desiderium aevi sui, Hic juxta situs est. Aurea dum volitant latè tua scripta per orbem Et famâ aeternum vivis, Divine Poëta, Hic placidâ jaceas requie, custodiat urnam Cana fides, vigilenque prenni lampade musae. Sit sacer iste locus, nec quis temerarius ausit Sacrilegâ turbare manu, venerabile bustum. Intacti maneant, maneant pr secula dulcis Cowleii cineres, serventque immobile saxum. Sic vove, Votumque suum apud posteros sacratum esse voluit qui viro incomparabili posuit sepulerale Marmor, Georgius Dux Buc∣kinghamiae. Excessit è vita anno aetatis suae 49. & honorisicâ pompâ elatus ex aedibus Buckinghamiais, viris illu∣stribus omnium ordinum exequias cele∣brantibus, sepultus est Dietertio Men. Aug. Annoque Dom. 1667.
Arms. viz. Cowley. A Lion rampant within a bor∣dureA. D. 1667. Abra. Cowley. vid. §. 41. ingrailed, charged with eight Mullets. 33. Epitaph. viz. Abrahamus Cowleius, H. S. E. 1667. Arms. viz. Thornburgh. Ermine, fretty, and a chiefe. 34. Epitaph. viz. Here lies the body of Gilbert Thorn∣burghA. D. 1650. Gilbert Thorn∣burg. vid. §. 40. Esquire, Gentleman of the Cel∣lar to the King. who died the first day of October 1667. in the 56. year of his age. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace, Psal. 37. 37. Arm. viz. Radcliffe. A bend ingrailed. Impaling Trapps. Three Cheval Trapps.
35. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Anna Radcliff, GeorgiiA. D. 1659. Anna Radcliff. vid. §. 41. Equitis aurati conjux, & Francisci Trappes Equitis aurati, filia è Comi∣tat. Ebor, Obiit anno 1659. aetatis 58. Maii 13. 36. Epitaph. viz. O rare Ben. Johnson.Ben Johnson. vid. §. 41. Arms. viz. Price. A. Lion rampant regardant Impa∣ling a Ship at Anchor, the Sails furled. 37. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the Body of Martha, theA. D. 1678. Martha Price. vid. §. 41. Wife of Gervase Price Esquire, Ser∣jeant of the Office of Trumpets to King Charles II. and Gentleman of his Bows; she died the seventh day of April 1678. in the thirty eighth year of her age.
38. Epitaph. viz. Maria uxor chariss. Tho Willis, M. D.A. D. 167. Maria Willis. vid. §. 43. necnon D. D. Sam. Fell, S. T. P. & Ec∣clesiae Cathed. Christi Oxon. Decani filia: faemina si quae alia pietate, pruden∣tia, & morum suavitate insignis, summo omnium ac imprimis mariti cum desiderio & luctu obiit in vigilia omnium sancto∣rum Anno Dom. 1670. jamque hic condi∣tur festi illius auroram expectans aeternam; in eadem etiam humo Katharina eorum fi∣lia sepulta fuit postridie S. Michaelis Anno Dom. 1667. Arms. viz. Sanchez. On a cross flory five roundles. 39. Epitaph. viz. Hic situs est Didacus Sanchez, de Ri∣ba-de-Neira,A. D. 1557. Did. Sanchez. vid. §. 43. Hispanus, ex equestri Ga∣laicorum stirpe creatus. Obiit Anno Dom. 1557. 16. Kalend. Junii, divis Philippo & Maria Regibus.
Arms. viz. De-Vic. Three Cheval Trapps, Chief with the Escutcheon of Vlster. 40. Epitaph. viz. Here lies the mortal part of Sir Hen∣ryA. D. 1672. Sir Heny De-Vic Baromet. Vid. §. 43. De-Vic Baronet, and Chancellour of the noble Order of the Garter. He departed this life the twentieth of No∣vember 1672. He was married to Mar∣garet Carteret, the Daughter of Sir Philip Carteret of the Isle of Iersey, by whom he had Charles De-Vic Baro∣net, and Anne-Charlotte De-Vic, marri∣eed to John Lord Frescheville Baron of Staveley in the County of Derby, who caused this Stone to be here laid to the memory of her dear Father. Arms. viz. Iames. Two Barrs batelle counter bat∣telle, Impaling, Kilegrw. An Imperial Eagle within a bordure, round'lee.
41. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Here lies the body of Dame MaryA. D. 1677. Mary James. vid. §. 41. James, late Wife of John James Knight, descended of the antient Family of the Lords of Hastritcht in Holland, and Daughter of Sir Robert Killegrew Knight, sometime Vice-chamberlain to Mury Queen of England, and Wife of his Sacred Majesty King Charles I. of blessed memory, by whom she had Issue one Son named John, and one Daughter named Elizabeth, which died in their Infancy. The said Dame Mary James departed this mortal life on the sixth day of November, in the year of our Lord 1677. Arms viz. Morland. A Leopards head jessant, a Flower-de-luce in the Dexter chief point a Lion passant gardant, with the Arms of ulster. Impa∣ling two bars Danzette Ermine, and six cross Croslets. 42. Epitaph. viz. Carola Lady Morland. 1674.A. D. 1674. Carola Morland, vid. §. 41.
Arms. viz. Morland. A Leopards head jessant, a Flo∣wer-de-Luce in the Dexter chief point a Lion passant gardaut, with the Arms of ulster. Impa∣ling on a Fess three Lozenges, a Crescent diff. 43. Epitaph. viz. Anne Lady Morland, 22 Feb. 1679 / 8,.A. D. 1679. Anne Morland. vid. §. 42. 44. Epitaph. viz. Mistris Bridget Radley died Novem∣berA. D. 1674. Bridget Radley. vid. §. 41. 1674. for whom this Monument was erected. Arms. viz. Isham. A Fess, and three Piles wavy in chief. 45. Epitaph. viz. Exuviae Judithae Isham filiae DominiA. D. 1679. Judith Isham. vid. §. 44. Justiniani Isham Baronetti, quae obiit 18 die Maii 1679.
46. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of John Osbold∣stonA. D. 1666. Joh. Osboldston. vid. §. 44. of Leland in the County of Lan∣caster Esquire, Page of the Bedcham∣ber to King Charles II. He died the first of March 1666. and was buried the fifth day of the same month, aged sixty five years. 47. Epitaph. viz.A. D. 1378. Robert Haule. vid. §. 44. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Medolus, ira, furor multorum, Militis atque . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in hoc gladiis celebri pietatis asylo, Dum levita Dei sermones legit ad aram: Proh dolor! ipse meo Monachorum sanguine vultus Aspersi moriens, chorus est mihi testis in aevum. Et me nunc retinet sacer is locus Haule Robertum, Hic quia pestiferos malè sensi primitùs enses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Samuel Bol∣tonA. D. 1668. Sam. Bolton. vid. §. 44. Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty Charles II. and Prebendary of this Cathedral Church, deceased the eleventh of February 1668. 49. Epitaph. viz. Hic situs est Tho. Chiffinch serenissimiA. D. 1666 Tho. Chiffinch. vid. §. 44. Caroli secundi à teneris annis in utraque fortuna fidus Assecla ac proinde à Regiis Cimeliis primo constitutus, vir notissimi candoris & probitatis. Obiit 6. Id. April. A. D. 1666. 50. Epitaph. viz. O Rare Sir William Davenant.Sir Will. Dave∣nant. vid. §. 44.
51. Epitaph. viz. Thomas Par of the County of Sa∣lop,A. D. 1635. Thomas Par. vid. §. 44. born in anno 1483. he lived in the Reigns of ten Princes, viz. King Ed∣ward IV. King Edward V. King Ri∣chard III. King Henry VII. King Hen∣ry VIII. King Edward VI. Queen Ma∣ry, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles. Aged 152 years, and was buried here Novemb. 15. 1635. Arms. viz. Or. on a Pile Gules between six Flower∣de-luces B. three Lions of England, quartering, 1. Gules two wings conjoyned in lewre Or. 2. Var∣ry. 3. Argent, three demy Lions rampant Gules. 4. Parted per bend Argent and Gules, three Ro∣ses in bend counterch. 5. Argent on a bend Gules three Leopards heads Or. Impaling, Gules on a bend between six cross Croslets fitchy Argent, a Mullet sable difference quartering. 1. England and a file of three Argent 2. Cheque Or and B. 3. Gules a Lion rampant, Arg. Crests. 1. Out of a ducal Crown a Phenix burning in her Nest prop. 2. On a chapau Gules turned up Ermine, a Lion passant Or, crowned Argent, on the shoulder a Mullet sa∣ble. 3. On a chapau Gules, turned up Ermine, a Wyverne, viz. the Wings cheque Or and B. 4. Out of a ducal Crown two Wings Gules, on each a bend Argent.
52. Epitaph. viz. D. O. M. & Memoriae Sacrum. Sub hoc tumulo in Christo obdormit ho∣noratissimaA. D. 1598. Franc. Comitis∣sa Hertfordiae. Vid. §. 46. Francisca Comitissa Hert∣fordiae, uxor charissimi & nobilissimi Edw. Comitis Hertfordiae, Baronis de Bello Campo, filiii illustrissimi Prin∣cipis Edwardi Ducis Somerset, Comitis Hertfordiae, Vicecomitis de Bello Campo, & Baronis Seymour. Heroina amplissima familia nata, filia utique clarissimi Gulielmi Baronis Ho∣ward de Effingham praenobilissimi Or∣dinis Garteriani sodalis, summi Angliae Admiralii regnante Maria, Camerarii Re∣gii hospitii & privati sigilli custodis reg∣nante Elizabetha; filius ille fuit illustrissi-Principis Thomae Ducis Norf. Comitis Surriae, Comitis Marescalli Angliae, paterque honoratissimi Caroli Comitis Nottinghamiae Baronis Howard de Effingham, Garteriani Ordinis sodalis & summi Angliae Admiralii.
Clarissima haec domina omnibus virtu∣tibus animi corporisque dotibus ornatissi∣ma, quibus serenissimae Reginae singularem favorem & charissimi mariti summum amorem consequuta est: gravi & diutur∣no morbo confecta, firma in Christo fide, & invicta animi patientia in coelestem patriam demigravit, cùm vixisset annos 44. die 14. Maii, anno salutis 1598. & 40. anno felicissimi regni serenissimae Re∣ginae Elizabethae. Ad cujus perpetuam memoriam in fidei conjugalis, since∣rissimi amoris, & officiosae pietatis te∣stimonium moestissimus maritus Ed∣wardus Comes Hertfordiae, &c. hoc monumentum multis cum lacrymis posuit & consecravit. Foy pour devoir. Desir n'a Repos. Here lieth intombed the noble Fran∣ces Countess of Hertford, dear Spouse unto the noble Edward Earl of Hert∣ford, and Baron Beauchamp, Son of  renowned Prince Edward Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hertford, Vis∣count Beauchamp, and Baron Sey∣mour. A Lady descended of right noble Lineage, being Daughter of the noble Lord William Baron Howard of
Effingham, Companion of the most famous Order of the Garter, High Admiral to Queen Mary, and Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold, and Lord Privy Seal to Queen Elizabeth, Son was he to the right noble Prince Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Earl of Surrey, Earl Marshal of England, and Father to the Noble Charles Earl of Nottingham, and Baron Howard of Effingham, of the said most noble Order of the Garter Knight, and Lord High Admiral of England. This Lady, highly renowned for her many virtuous gifts and graces both of mind and body, greatly favoured by her gratious Sovereign, and dearly be∣loved of her Lord, after long sickness, in firm faith in Christ and constant pa∣tience, departed this life at forty four years of age the fourteenth day of May, anno 1598. in the fortieth year of the most happy Reign of our most gratious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth. To whose memory the said Earl, her loving Lord and Husband, much lamenting her death, in testification of his great love towards her, and of his careful diligence in this doleful duty, doth consecrate this Monument.
Arms. viz. Cranfield On a pale three Flower-de∣luces: 2. On a saltire five Martlets. 3. A Cheveron between three Scalop shells, 4. On a bend three Martlets. Imp. 1. and 4. Billette, and a Fess Dan∣zette 2. and 3. Five Roses in Saltire, Crest to the first, out of a Ducal Crown an Antelops head coped. To the second, a Griffons head and Wings charged with Flower-de-luces. Supporters, an An∣telope, and a Griffon. 53. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Lionelli Dom. Cranfield Middle∣sexiae,A. D. 645. Lyonel. Cran∣field Com. Med. & uxor prima. Vid. §. 46. Comitis, à Jacobo sagacissimo Prin∣cipe in aulam acciti, & pro nativo in∣genii vigore, amplis tum honoribus, tum muneribus munificentissimè decorati à sup∣plicum libellis, rei vestiariae, Orphano∣rum tutelae praefectus, & à sanctioribus consiliis; subiit novissimae totius Angliae Thesaurariae splendidissimam atque lu∣bricam provinciam, in quibus, quam sedulò navarit operam indicant tituli, Equitis aurati, Baronis de Cranfield Middlesexiae demum Comitis atque alii variè collati, hinc gliscente invidiâ urgen∣tur adversae rerum procellae, dum animosè movet lucentes (quae innocentiae consci∣entia) fortè jactatus tamen non naufra∣giis
enatavit, sedatâ hieme figit Anchoram in re lautâ sereno senectutis ocio respiravit; hîc depositus, dum lassum prius jam lux∣atum corpus, nauclerus ille resuscitatum infusiore navigio, & coelesti aeternitatis portu collocarit. Obiit Augusti 6, anno 1645. aetate plus minus 70. Duas successivè conjuges accepit, ex utrisque, suscepit prolem. Elizabetha Prior, peperit foeminas; Elizabetham hodie Comitissam de Maulgrave; Mar∣tham Comitissam de Monmouth; Ma∣riam, quae ante nuptias diem obiit, ex Annâ relictâ hodie Comitissa de Middle∣sex, & communi tumulo (modò Deus ve∣lit) inhumandâ cujus apponitur effigies; rti sunt Jacobus honorum haeres, Mid∣dlesexiae Comes; Lionellus, & Edwar∣dus superstites, Alterius sexus, Francisca Domina Buckhurst; Susanna, ante octennium denata infans, haec Junii 25. 1647. Arms. viz. Westminster. B. a cross Patonce between five Martlets Or, on a chief of the last a pale quar∣terly France and England between two Roses Gules. Impaling Gomn. Parted per pale Ermine and B. an Eagle displayed with two heads Or, on a Canton of the second, a Martlet of the last.
54. Epitaph. viz. D. O. M. Gabriel Goodman Sacrae TheologiaeA. D. 1601. Gabriel Good∣man. vid. §. 46. Doctor, Decanus hujus Ecclesiae quintus, ai cum fumma laude 40. annos praefuisset & Ruthiniae in Comit. Denbighensi ubi natus hospitalem fundasset, Scho∣lamque instituisset, vitae sanctimonia Deo, bonisque charus in coelestem patriam piè emigravit, 17. Julii, anno salutis 1601. aetatis suae 73. Arms. viz. Bill. Ermine two Wood Bills in saltire, on a chief a pale between two Pellicans heads era∣sed, charged with a Rose. 55. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Guliel. Bill, Theologiae Doctor,A. D. 1561. Gul▪ Bill. S. T. P. vid. §. 46. Round the Verge. Decanus Westmonast. Primarius, Collegii Aetonen. Collegii Trinitatis apud Canta∣brigiam, Praefectus, & serenissimae Regi∣nae Elizabethae summus Eleemosynarius. Obiit 15 Julii Anno salutis 1561. Billus & ipse bonus fuit & virtutis Amator,Under his Effigies. Et coluit doctos, doctus & ipse fuit.
Officii Custos erat atque Magister honesti, Et bene perfecit multa loquend paum. Patria prudentem, fidum Regina ministrum Perdidit & patrem pauper abesse gemit. Et tria tale caput collegia moesta reliquit Quale diu rursus non habitura reor. Aut ego dilexi nimium (dum viveret, illum) Aut Patriae magno concidit ipse malo. Arms. viz France and Englan quarterly.A. D. 1367. Sim. Lan. vid. §. 4. B. a cross Patonce between five Martles Or. Gules a cross pattee between three Crowns Or. The Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury. The Episcopal See of Ely. The Abby of Westminiter. viz. Or on a chief, in∣dented B. a Crosier Staff and Miter of the first. 56. Epitaph. viz. Simon de Langham sub petris his tumulatus,Round the Verge. Istius Ecclesiae Monachus fuerit, Prior Abbas; Sede vacante fuit electus Londoniensis Praesul & insignis Ely, sed poe Primas Totius Regni, magnus Regisque Minister: Nam Thesaurarius, & Cancellarius ejus, Ac Cardinalis in Roma Presbyter iste. Posque Praenestinus est factus Episcopus, atque Nuncius ex parte Papae transmittitur ist huc, Orbe dolente pater, quem nunc revocare nequimus, Magdalenae foesto, milleno septuageno, Etter centeno, sexto Christi ruit anno. Hunc Deus absolvat de cunctis quae mala essit Et meritis matris sibi coelica gaudia donet.
Arms. viz. Stokes. Ermine three bars humett. B. each charged with five ears of Corn Or, quartering Or, a Lion rampant Gules. Impaling Brandon. With quarterings, viz. 1 and 4. barry of¦ten, Arg. and Gules a Lion rampant. Or, crowned per pale of the first and second. 2. and 3 quarterly: 1. and 4. B. a cross moline Or. 2. and 3. bendy Lo∣zengy Ermine and Gules. On one side these Arms, viz. France and England within a bordure Gobony Arg. and B. quartering Brandon with quarterings as before. 57. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the Lady Frances Dut∣chessA. D. 1563. Fran. Duciss. Suffolcia. vid. §. 56. of Suffolk, Daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Mary the French Queen, first Wife to Henry Duke of Suffolk, and after to Adrian Stokes Esquire, 1563. In clariss. Dom. Franciscae Suffolciae quondam Ducissae Epicedion. Nil deus aut splendor, nil regia nomina prosunt Splendida divitiis, nil juvat ampla domus. Omnia fluxerunt, virtutis sola remansit Gloria, Tartareis non abolenda rogis. Nupta duci priùs est, uxor post Armigeri Stokes, Funere nunc valeas consociata Deo.
Arms. viz. Holles. Ermine two Piles in point sable,A. D. 1622. Francis Holles. viz. §. 54. quartering, Argent a Lion rampant Gules. 2. Sable a Crescent surmounted by a Mullet Arg. 3. Argent three Cheveronels sab. Crest on a Torce of his co∣lours, a black head coped prop. bound about the forehead with a wreath Argent and B. 58. Epitaph. viz. What so thou hast of Nature, or of Arts, Youth, Beauty, Strength, or what excelling parts Of mind and body; Letters, Arms, and worth, His eighteen years beyond his years brought forth; Then stand and read thy self within this glass, How soon those perish, and thy self may pass. Mans life is measured by the work, not days; No aged sloth, but active youth hath praise. Francisco Holles, Juveni fortissimo qui ab exercitu è Bel∣gio aeger regressus, obiit Prid. Id. Augusti anno Dominic. aetatis 1622. suae 18. Johannes Comes de Clare, filio natu tertio, & merentissimo moerentissimus pa∣ter posuit.
Arms. viz. Russel Argent, a Lion rampant Gules, onA. D. 584. John Dom. Russel. vid. §. 5. a chief sable, three escalop Shels Argent. 2. B. a Cle and Fane Argent. 3. Or, two Barrulets Gules a cresc. difference. 4. Gules three Fishes hauriant barways Argent. 5. Sable a Griffon Ser∣greant, between three cross Croslets fitchy Argent. 6. Sable three Cheverons Ermine a Crescent diffe∣rence. 7. Sable three Dove coats Argent. 8. Argent on a cross Gules, 5 Mullets Or, Impaling Or a Che∣veron Compony Gules and B. between three Cinque∣oyls of the last; quartering 1. Sab. a Fess between three Pheons Argent. 2. Or on the breast on an Eagle displayed with two heads B. a Flower-de∣luce Arg. 3. Three Eaglets displ. in bend between two Coes. 4. Gules, a Fess compony Arg. and sab. between six crosses patte fitchy in the foot Or. 5. Or, two bends, Gules. 6. Bendy of ten Or, and B. 7 B. a Lion rampant within a bordure Argent, Crest to the first, on a Torce of his colours, a Goat passant Arg. armed and ungued Or, Crest to the se∣cond on a Torce of his colours, a Unicorns head co∣ped Or, between two Wings B. 59. Epitaph. viz. Carmina aerumnosae Matris in super∣sties filias. Plangite nunc natae, nunc flebile fundite Carmen, Occidit heu vstrae gloria sola domus. Mors rapit itis storentem stemmate claro, Prae ignem literis, tum pietate patrem, Haerdi comitis quin vos succrescite, tali Ortu qui nituit sed bonitate magis.
, . , . Ejusdem in eundem Latinè. Mors mea crudeli laniatur saucia morsu, Cùm subit oblatae mortis Imago tuae. Vere novo haeres comitis tu floris ad instar, Ʋsque cadens miseras, meque measque sacis. Quippe decor vultus, linguae, moresque probati, Tum doctrina perit, sed viget alma fides. Carmina aerumnosae Matris Dominae Elizabethae Russel in obitum filii. En solamen avi, patris pergrata voluptas, Ipsa medulla mihi tristia fata tulit. O utinam Mater jacuissem lumine cassa Solvissetque prior justa suprema mihi. Conqueror at frustra, statuit quia Numen ad ipsum Orbant terrenis, sola superna petam.
In obitum honoratissimi viri Domini Johannis Russelii soceri sui charissimi Edw. Hobii Militis Epicedion. Mors Russelle tibi somno suffudit ocellos Mens tamen in Coelis nescia mortis agit. Qui vitam sanctam meliori sine peregit Vivit, & evicta morte superstes erit. Quis, qualis quantus fueris tua stemmata monstrant; Integra vita docet, morsque dolenda probat, Sat sit privigno posuisse haec carmina pauca Tu sibi mente parens, filius ille tibi. Right noble twice, by Virtue, and by Birth, Of Heaven lov'd, and honour'd on the Earth. His Countries hope, his Kindreds chief delight, My Husband dear, more than this worlds light, Death hath me reft: But I from death will take His memory, to whom this Tomb I make. John was his name; (ah was!) wretch must I say, Lord Russel once, now my tear-thirsty clay.
Arms. viz. Knowles B. a cross refercile voided, and crucilly Or, quartering Gules on a Cheveron Argent, three Roses of the field. Impaling, Carey. viz. Argent on a bend sab. three Roses of the field. 2. Sab. two bars nebule, Ermine. France and England within a bordure Gobony Arg. and B. 4. Gules, a Fess between six cross Croslets Or. 5. Cheque Or and B. a Cheveron Ermine. 6 Gules, a Cheveron between ten crosses patte Arg. 7. Gules, a Lion passant gardant Arg crowned Or 8. Arg. a Chev. Gules between three Bulls heads coped sab. armed Or. 9. Quarterly Arg. and sab. 10. Or, a chief indent. B. 11. Arg. a Lion rampant sab. crowned, Gules. 12. B. a Fess between six cross Croslets Or. 13. Sab. three dexter hands coped at the Wrists Argent. 14. Arg. on a chief. sab. three crosses patte fitchy Arg. 15. B. a fret Arg and chief Gules. 16. Gules, two bends wavy, Or, crests, 1. On a Torce Or and B. a maidens head prop. 2. Crest, on a Torce Arg. and sab. a Swan prop. with wings expansed. 60. Epitaph. viz. The right honourable Lady Katha∣rineA. D. 1568. Kath. Knowles. vid. §. 55. Knowles, chief Lady of the Queens Majesties Bed-chamber, and Wife to Sir Francis Knowles Knight, Treasurer of her Highness Houshold, departed this life the fifteenth of January 1568. at Hampton-Court, and was honou∣rably buried in the floor of this Chap∣pel. This Lady Knowles and the Lord Hunsdon her Brother were the
Children of William Carey Esquire, and of the Lady Mary his Wife, one of the Daughters and Heirs to Thomas Bullen Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond, which Lady Mary was Sister to Anne Queen of England Wife to King Henry VIII. Father an Mother to Elizabeth Queen of England. Quae Francisce fuit tibi conjux en Katherina, Mrua sub gelido marmore Knollae jacet, Excid ex animo tibi mortua, sat scio nunquam, Viva  vvo semper amata fuit. Illa tibi es sex & bis quinque marito Protulit, aequalis foemina, masque fuit. Haec tecum multos utinam vixisset in aunos, Et tua nunc conjux facta fuisset anus. Noluit at Deus, hoc voluit sed sponsa maritum, In coelis maneas, O Katherina tuum. Armes. viz. Seymour Or, on a pile Gules between six Flower-de-luces B. three Lions of England, this being an augmentation Coat. 2. Gules two Wings conjoyned in lewre, pendant, Or. 3. Varry. 4. Arg. three demy Lions ramp. Gules. 5. Parted per bend Arg. and Gules, three roses in bend coun∣terchanged. 6. Arg. on a bend Gules, three Leo∣pards heads, Or, Crest out of a ducal Crown Or, a Phenix burning in her nest prop.
61. Epitaph. viz. The noble Lady Jane Seymour,A. D. 1560. Jane Seymour. vid. §. 55. Daughter to the renowned Prince Ed∣ward Duke of Somerset▪ Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchampe, Ba∣ron Seymour, and to the right noble Lady Anne, Dutchess of Somerset, his Wife, departed this life in her Vir∣ginity at the age of nineteen years the nineteenth of March Anno 1560. in the second year of the most happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and was honou∣rably buried in the floor of this Chap∣pel, to whose memory Edward Earl of Hertford, and Baron Beauchamp, her dear Brother, hath caused this Mo∣nument to be made. Arms. viz. Pecksal. Argent on a cross flory, ingrai∣led sab. between four Cornish Choughs prop. a Mullet diff. Or, Crest on a Torce of his colours, a Blacks head coped prop. On one side. Pecksall. As before. Impaling Pawlet. viz. Sab. three swords points in point Arg. Hilts and Pomels Or.
On the other. Pecksall. As before, Impaling, Cotgrave. Viz. Gules a Fess danzette Ermine be∣tween three Bugle horns stringed Or. Round about the Tomb. Cotgrave. As before. Impaling Arg. 4. Ermine in cross Crescents diff. Cotgrave. Impaling. B An Eagle displaied Argent. Cotgrave. As before. Impaling, Gules a Lion rampant between three cross Croslets fitchy Or. Pawlet. Impaling barry of 6. Ermine and Gules. Pawlet Impaling, Gules three Water budgets Erm. Pae. With a Crescent difference impaling Pwlet. Pecksall. Impaling sab. a Lion ramp. gardant Or. Then Gules three Bugle horns Or. Arg. on a chief Gules, two Mullets pierced Or. Gules three Pheons Argent. Gues three cose Helmets Or. The last impaling Arg. two bars sab. a Crescent diff. Barry of six Or and Vert a bendlet Gules. Gules two close Helmets in chief Arg. and a garbe in base Or. Impalin, Gules a Lion ramp. within a bordure ring Or. 62. Epitaph. viz. Deo & Posteris. Gloriosam in Christo resurrectionem hicA. D. Sir Richard Pecksall, vid. §. 50. expectat Richardus Pecksall, Eques au∣ratus, prudentia & probitate clarissimus. Qui primo duxit Aeleonoram filiam Guli∣elmi Paulet, Marchionis Wintoniae & summi Angliae Thesaurarii quae illi qua∣tuor filias peperit, postea Aeleonoram
filiam J. Cotgrave, quae Johanni Sauva∣ge, Equiti aurato de comitatu Cestriae re∣nupta, conjugi charissimo officiosae pietatis ergo in perpetuam fidei conjugalis memo∣riam hoc monumentum suis sumptibus Li∣bens Lubensque posuit. Nascendo morimur, vita altera morte paratur, Non mors sejungat, quos Christus junxit amore. Amplior in coelo domus est, ne crede caducis. Ut vivas vitae sit tibi cura tuae. Arms. viz. Bourchier. A cross ingrailed between four waterboudgets quartering billette and a Fess,A. D. Hum. Bourchier. vid. §. 60. over all a file of three, Impaling a Cheveron be∣tween three Griffons heads erased. 2. Three Bar∣rulets, a bend ingrailed. 3. Three Crescents. 4. A Fess between two Cheverons. 5. Three Cheveronels. 6. Three Flower-de-luces within a bordure. 63. Epitaph. viz. Hic pugil ecce jacens Bernet fera bella cupiscens. Certat ut Aeacides, fit saucius undique Miles, Vi cecidit vulnus, Mars porrigit arma cruore, Sparsim tincta rubent, dolor en lacrymabilis hora, Lumine nempè cadit, quo Christus morte resurgit, Bourchier Humfridus clara propagine dictus. Edwardi Regis qui tertius est vocitatus, John Domini Barners proles & parvulus haeres,
Quartus & Edwardus belli tenet ecce triumphum, Quo perit Humfridus, ut regis vernula verus Cyronomon mensae sponsae Regis fuit iste, Elizabeth sibi sic sua virtus crescit honore, Armis conspicuus quondam charusque Britannis Hic fuit: ut coelis vivat deposcite votis. Arms. viz. France and England (within a bordure) quarterly. Impaling a bend cottised, between six Lions rampant, quartering two bends. Then the se∣cond Coat Impaling quarterly, first and fourth a Lion rampant; second and third Cheque. 64. Epitaph. viz. Cy gist Eleonore de Bohun eisne filleA. D. 1399. Eleonore Dut∣chess of Glouc. vid. §. 59. & un des heirs l' honorable Seigneur Mons. Humfrey de Bohun, Conte de Hereforde, d' Essex, & de Northam∣pton, & Conestable d' Engleterre, Femme à puissant & noble Prince Tho∣mas de Woodstock, Fitz à tres excel∣lent & trepuissant Seigneur Edwarde Roi d' Engleterre puis le conquest tierz, Duc de Gloucestre, Counte d' Essexie, & de Buckingham, & Constable d' Engle∣terre; que morrust le tiers jour d' Octo∣ber, l' an du grace M. CCC. XC. IX. de qi alme Dieux face Mercy. Amen.
65. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Bernardus BrocasBernar Bdrocas. miles quondam Cam. Anne Regi∣ne Angl. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Arms. viz. Talbot. Gules a Lion rampant within a bordure ingrailed Or. 2. B. a Lion rampant with∣in a bordure Or. 3. Bendy of ten Argent and Gules. 4. Gules three Garbs within a bordure of Scotland Or. 5. Barulle Arg. and B. an orle of Martlets Gules. 6. Or, three Escutcheons varry, each char∣ged with three Barrulets Gules. 7. Parted per pale Or. and vert, a Lion rampant Gules. 8. Gules two Lions passant Argent. 9. Gules, three Lions pas∣sant Argent. 10. Cheque Or and B. a bendlet Gules. 11. Gules on a Saltire Argent, a Martlet sab. 12. Or fretty of eight pieces Gule, on a Canton parted per pale Ermine, and the first a Ship at anchor sab. 13. Gules a Lion rampant Or. billette sab. 14. Arg. a bend between six Martlets Gules. 5. Or, a fret. Gules. 16. Argent a Lion ram. parted per Fess Gules and sable, Crest on a Chapau Gules, turned up Er∣mine, a Lion passant Or. Supporters, two Talbots Argent. Motto. Prest da Compie. On one side, Talbot, as before▪ Impaling. Nevil Gules on▪ a saltire Arg. a Martlet sab. Talbot and Ormond. viz Or a chief indented B. Talbot and Stafford. viz. 1. France and England quarterly, a bordure Argent. 2. and 3. B. a bend Arg. cottised between six Lions ramp. Or. 4. Or, a a Cheveron Gules.
Talbot and gs viz. Argent a Manch sable. Talbot and . . . . . . viz. Gules 3 Escalops Arg. Tbo and lan. viz. Or two bars B. on a chief quarterly of the last and Gules, in the first and fourth quarter two Flower-de-luces, and in the se∣cond and third a Lion of England, all of the field. On the other side. Ogle. viz. Arg. a Fess between three Crescents Gules. 2. Or, an Orle B. 3. Or, an Eagle diplayed vert, crowned Argent. 4▪ Argent two bars and Canton Gules, thereon a cross moline Or. Impaling Carnby, viz. Arg. two bars B. and three hearts in chief, quartering, parted per pale G. and B. a Lion ramp. gardant Or. Ogle and Radcliff. viz. Argent two bends ingrai∣led sab. Ogle and Lmley. viz. Argent a Fess Gules between three Parrots vert, collared Or. Ogle and Gasco. viz. Argent on a pale sab. a Con∣gers head coped Or Ogle and Rirkeby, viz. Argent two bars and Canton Gules thereon, a cross moline Or. Ogle and Hlton, viz. 1. and 4. Argent two bars B. 2. Gules 6. Annulets Or. 3. Sab. three Swords, their Hilts and Pomels meeting in the Nombrill, and their points extended to the three Angles of the Escutcheon Arg. 66. Epitaph. viz. Memoriae S. Edwardo ex inclyta Talbotorum fa∣miliaA. D. 1617. Edw. Talbot Earl of Shrews∣bury and his Lady. vid. §. 49. Octavo Comiti Salopiae, Weis∣fordiae, & Waterford, Domino Talbot Com de Badenhaugh, Valence, Montchency, Strange de Blakemere,
Gifford de Brimesfield, Clifford de Corsham, Furnival, Verdon, & Lov∣toft, viro omnibus titulis undequaque pa∣ri: moribus etiam adeo integris juxta ac suavissimis ut eorum laudi nihil omnino detraxerit titulorum magnitudo, candore & pietate haud minus quam genere fuit insignis nec ullo procerum solenni vitio tinctus, sine fastu nobilis, sine jactantia po∣tens, fine superstitione religiosus, mente ac manu muniicus: fortunae semper secu∣rus, tota illi vita fuit semita recti & in∣nocentia qualis per invidiam emersit, nec metam nec terminum recepit. Ita demu posteritatis certus per conscientiam (du viator erat,) & fama jain fruitur de∣saecatissima & ea post vitae aerumnis re∣uie cujus se participem in horas exoptat moestissima conjux Jana Cutberti Baronis Ogle Haeredum primogenita, quae lacrymis mmersa piè monumentum hoc P. Obiit ie 8. Februariis, 1617. anno aetatis 57. s. viz. Vlene Barule Arg. and B. MartletsA D. 1304▪ Will. de Valece Com. Penbroc. vid. §. 8. ans number placed in Orle Gules. rgent, a manch Gules. endy Lozengy, Arg. and Gules. rg. 3. Cheverons Gules. rg. a Lion rampant Gules▪ arry of 10 Argent and B. a bendlet Gules. arry of twelve Arg. and Gules a Lion rampant sab▪ les three Lions passan gardant Or▪
B. sm  Flower-de-Luces Or. Opl with two heads sab. d wer▪de-luces Or, a  Argent. Arg▪ a n ramp. Gules crowned Or, within a ordur sble nty. 67. Epitaph. viz. Anglia toa dls, ritur quia regia proles, Qu rer sles▪ qm continet infima moles, Gullmus nomen ne Valentia praebet, cog▪ am tale da ii debet. valuit vadus, vicns v valore, pl moque vigore, s & s lia seans, s ac  devotus praemia specas; Mqe rcentis cum qr inde retentis, , hunc rs proprio ferit ense. repet▪ m sit via plena timore, e  oriturum, & inscius horae. s Christ, coelos ntrt precor iste , q prtulit omnibus hisce. vi  Mrs, Impaling, parted per bend ▪ between three Roses on a chief a Lion dnt between two books, with bos▪ Three  only. 68. Epitaph. viz. Hi jacet Henricus Ferne, S. T. D.. 662. Fer. §. 2. Johannis Ferne militis (civitati
Eboracensi à secretis) filius natu octa∣vus; Collegii S. Trinitatis Cantabrig. Praefectus; simul Cestricensis Episco∣pus, sedit 5. tantum sptimanis. Obiit Martii 16. anno Domini 1662. t∣tis 59. Arms. viz. A cross patonce between five Martlets,A. D. 390. o. . vid. §. 61. Impaling quarterly first and fourth, a fret ingrailed, second and third England. 69. Epitaph. viz. Hic fuit expertus in quovis jure Robertus De Walby dictus, nunc est sb marmore strictus; Sacrae Scripturae Doctor fuit & geniturae, Ingenuus medicus & plebis semper amicus. Praesul Auduren. post haec Archos Dublinen. Hinc Cistertren. tandem primas Eboren. Quarto K. Janu. migravit cursibus anni Sepultus millni ter C. novies quoque den i Vos precor orate, quod sint sibi dona beatae Cum sanctis vitae requiescat & hic sine lite. Arms. Cecill. With quarterings, viz. Barry of tenA. D. 1591. Elizab. Ccil▪ vid. §. 72. Arg. and B. Six Escutcheons sable, each charged with a Lion rampant of the first. 2. Parted per pale B. and Gules a Lion rampant Arg. supporting a tree vert. 3. Sab. a plate between three Towers triple towred Arg. 4. Arg. on a bend Cottised Gules,
three Cinq'foyles Or. 5. Arg. a Cheveron between three Chesrooks Ermines. 6. As the first. Im¦paling. Brooke. With quartering, viz. Gules on a Chevero Arg. a Lion ramp. sab. 2. Gules on a Cheveron O three Lions ramp. sab. 3. Arg. seven masca conjoyned Gules. 4. B. two bars nebule Argen 5. Gules a Fess Arg. between six cross Croslets O▪ 6. Varry and three bendles Gules. 7. Arg. a Che∣veron between three Eagles legs erased a laqui sab. 8. Or▪ on a bend Gules three Goats passant Ar 9. Sab. on a Cheveron between three Bulls hea cabossed Arg. a Flower-de-luce Gules. 10. Gul a Fess compony Arg. and sab. between six cros patte fitchy in the oot Arg. 11. Or, two ben Gules. 12. Barry of ten Arg. and B. 70. Epitaph. viz. Ʋxor. Reginae  ameris, Baronis filia hari Fida Equitis conjux Elizabetha fui, Ʋnus amor nobis, una indivulsa volupta Cor unum, una fides inviolata fuit, Ille mei si quando potest deponere curam Ille potest animae non memor esse suae. Maritus. Si lacrymis constaret amor (charissima conjux) Prosequrer lacrymis funera saepe tua. Nam mihi quàm ueris redamata, tuum pia sponsa Testatur meritum, conscius ipse mihi:
Sed nec amor patitur socia regnante dolore, Et Christi Major t sibi strinxit amor. Ergo tuo dilecta bono um pace fruare, Spero mihi tecum portio pacis erit. A Brooke by name, the Baron Cobham's Child, A Newton was she by her Mothers side: Cecill, her Husband, this for her did build, To prove his love did after death abide. Which tells unto the world that after come, The worlds conceipt whilst here she held a room. How Nature made her wise and well beseeming Wit, and condition, silent, true, and chaste: Her virtues rare wan her much esteeming, In Court with Sovereign still with favour grac'd. Earth could not yield more pleasing earthly bliss, Bless'd with two Babes, the third brought her to this. 1591. Arms. Seymour. With quarterings, viz. Or, on a pile Gules between six Flower-de-luces B. three Lions of England. 2. Gules two wings conjoyned pendant Or. 3. Varry. 4. Arg. three Lions ramp. demy Gules. 5. Per bend Arg and Gules, three Roses in bend counterch. 6. Arg▪ on a bend Gules three Leopards heads Or. Impaling, Stanhoppe With quarterings, viz. Quarterly Er∣mine and Gules. 2. Vert, a out of Wolves currant in pale bar-ways Or. 3. Sab. a bend between six cross Croslets fitchy Argent. 4. Arg. a Cresc. diff. Gules between three salires humettee, ingrailed sab. Crest to the first▪ a Phenix out of a Ducal
Crown Or, burning in her nest prop. Motto, Foy pour Devoir. Crest to the second on a Torce Arg. and Gules, a Castle B. a demy Lion ramp. issuing out of the Battlements Or, holding a Fire-ball prop. Motto, De Di & de Roy. 29. Epitaph. viz. Inclyta conditur hic Anna Somer∣setensisA. D. 87. Anne ss. S. vid. §. . Ducissa, charissima conjux illu∣strissimi Principis Edwardi ducis So∣mersetensis, Comitis Herfordiae, Pro∣comitis Bellicampi & Baronis Sey∣mour, Garteriani ordinis equestris cele∣berrimi sodalis, Edwardi sexti Regis avunculi & Gubernatoris, ejusque regno∣rum, Dominiorum▪ ac suditorum prote∣ctoris dignissimi, exercituumque Praefecti, & lcum-enentis Generalis, Thesaurarii, & Comitis Mariscalli Angliae, Guberna∣ris & Capitanei insularum de Garne∣sey, & Iersey, sub cujus prospero auspi∣o toties & tam foeliciter de Scotis Edinburgi, Lethae, & Musselburgi praelio devictis gloriosè triumphatur. Heroina quidem natalium splendore illustrissima, utpote filia praeclari Equitis Edwardi Stanhoppe, & suae conjugis Elizabethae filiae Fulconis Bourchier Domini Fitz-Warini à quo Batho∣ Comerm sunt orti. Filius  Gulielmi Fitz-warini Baronis
fratris germani Henrici Comitis Essexiae, & Johannis à Berneriis dynastae. Quos Gulielmus Oxinensis  in Norman∣nia Comes eorum genitor susceperat ex Anna filia & sola Haerede Thomae de Woodstock Ducis Gloucestriae, junio∣ris filii magni Regis Edwardi tertii, & Alonrae conorti suae cohaeredis Hum∣fredi decimi de Bohun, Comitis Here∣fordiae, Essexi & Northamptoniae, Constabulari Angliae. Pulchram marit numrosam  tri∣sque sexus prolem ixa es, Edwardum scilicet Hertfordiae Comitem, Hnricum▪ alterum Edwardum, Annam Warwi∣censent Comitissam Margarem Ja∣am, Maram, Katharinam, & Eliza∣betham, & ad fatalm maturae sn∣tis oram cum  ngnaa prve∣ni, aerno nui sp firma in Ch ide pld &   reddidit, 16. Kalend▪ Aprilis, die Pas al   salutis 1587. Edwardus  Hertfordiae Comes acerbo in s▪ d ∣renti hoc mmntum  oris rfo quo abundavit viv, & , sed, amoris causa pro  d∣votissimè consecravit.
Here lieth intombed the noble Dutchess of Somerset Anne, dear Spouse unto the renowned Prince Ed∣ward Duke of Somerset, Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, and Baron Seymour, Companion of the most famous Knightly Order of the Garter, Uncle to King Edward VI, Governour of his Royal Person, and most worthy Protector of all his Realms, Domini∣ons, and Subjects, Lieutenant-General of all his Armies, Treasurer and Earl-Martial of England, Governour and Captain of of the Isles of Guernesey and Iersey, under whose prosperous conduct glorious victory hath been so often and so fortunately obtained over the Scots, vanquished at Eden∣burgh, Leith, and Musselborough field. A Princess descended of noble Li∣nage, being Daughter to the worthy Knight Sir Edward Stanhoppe by Eli∣zabeth his Wife, that was Daughter to Sir Foulk Bourchier Lord Fitz-wa∣rin, from whom our modern Earls of Bath are sprung, Son was he to William Lord Fitz-warin, that was Brother to Henry Earl of Essex, and
John Lord Berners, whom William their Sire, sometime Earl of Ewe in Nor∣mandy, begat on Anne the sole Heir of Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Glou∣cester, younger Son to the mighty Prince King Edward III. and of his Wife Eleonore, Co-heir unto the tenth Humfrey de Bohun that was Earl of He∣reford, Essex, and Northampton, High Constable of England. Many Children bare this Lady unto her Lord of either sort, to wit, Ed∣ward Earl of Hertford, Henry, and a younger Edward, Anne Countess of Warwick, Margaret, Jane, Mary, Katharine, and Elizabeth, and with firm faith in Christ, and in most mild manner rendred she this life at 90 years of age, on Easter day the sixteenth of April, anno 1587. The Earl of Hertford Edward her eldest Son, in this doleful duty careful and diligent, doth consecrate this Mo∣nument to his dear Parent, not for her honour, wherewith living she did abound, and now departed flou∣risheth, but for the dutiful love he beareth her, and for his last testification thereof.
Arms. Boyle viz. Parted per bend crenelle. Seymour. viz. Two wings conjoyned in lewre pen∣dant. 72. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the honourable the Lady Jane Clifford, youngst Daughter toA. D. 1679. Jane Clffrd. vid. §. 71. Willia Duke of Somerset, Grand Daughter to Edwr   Hart∣ford, and great Gnd-Daughter to Edward Duke of Somerset, &c. Un∣cle to King Edward VI rotector of his Realms, and Governour of his Royal Person. She was married to the Right Honourable Charles Lord Clif∣ford and Dungarvan, Son and Heir apparent to Richard Earl of Burling∣ton in England, and Cork in Ire∣land, Lord High Treasurer of Ire∣land, and to Elizabeth his Countess, sole Daughter and Heires to Henry late Earl of Comberland, Lord Clifford, &c. the last Male of that no∣ble Family. She had Issue five Sons, and six Daughters, of whom two Sons and and three Daughters are now living. She lived an honour to the Family she
was descended from; and the great comfort of that into which she was married, and died, much lamented, on the twenty third day of Navember in the year 1679. aged 42 years, 4 months, and 17 days. Arms. Fane With quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. B. three left-hand Gantlets Or. 2. and 3. Gules on a saltire Arg. a Rose of the field. Impling Spencer With quarterings, viz. . and 4. quarterly Arg. and Gules, in the second an third quarter a fret Or, on a bend sab. three escalop shells of the first, and Or, on two bars Gules, three water bud∣gets Arg. Crest to the first on a Torce of his colours a Gantlet Or, holding a Sword Arg. Hilt and Pomel Or, Crest to the second out of a Ducal Crown Or, a Griffons head coped, with wings Arg. gorged with two bars gemells Gules. 73. Epitaph. viz. Domina Elizabeth Fane antiquiss. no∣bilitataA. D. 1618. Eliz. Fane. vid. §. 68. natalitiis, propria virtute clarior. Filia Roberti Baron. Spencer de Wormleighton, praenobilis Georgii Fane de Buston Com. Cant. militis uxor casta, pudica, pia, spiritum Redem∣ptori suo ardentissimis votis voceque forti saepisque iterata commendavit.
Anno Dom. 1618. magna fama. Aetat. 28. superstite. Conjug. 10. prole nulla. Moestissimus Conjux conjugi incompa∣rabili P. L. M. Qui sui corporis figuram tanquam illa mortuus, junxit cineres ossa socianda spondit. Arms. aw. Three Lions passant in pale barway▪ impaling Dh. vz. A Fess of four fusils Ermine. 74. Epitaph. viz. Orate pro animabus Nicolai Ba∣ronisA. D. 1470. ro Ca∣rew & Uxor. vid. §. 69. quondam de Carew, & Domi∣nae Margaretae uxoris ejus filiae Io∣hannis Domini Dinham militis, qui quidem Nicolaus obiit sexto die mensis Decembris, Anno Dom. 1470. & praedicta Domina Margareta obiit 13. die mensis Decembris Anno 1470.
Arms. Cecill. viz. Barry of ten Arg. and B. six Escut∣cheons sable, each charged with a Lion rampant, of the first, all within a Garter of the Order of St. George, Crest on a Torce of his Colours, a Garb Or, supported by two Lions rampant, the one ▪ the other Arg. Supporters two Lions rampant Ermine. Motto, Corunum via una. On one side. Vere. viz Quarterly Gules and Or, in the first quar∣ter a mullet Argent Impaling Cecill as before. On the other. Cecill. As before, Impaling Coke▪ viz. Or, a Che∣veron compony G. and B between three Cinq'foyles of the last. 75. Epitaph. viz. Si quaeratur quis sit hic vir senex genuaA. D. Mildreda Bar∣nissa Burleigh, & Anna filia ejus Comiiss. Oxon. vid. §. 67▪ flectens, canitie venerabilis, toga Parlia∣mentaria amictus, ordinis Garteriani Eques, quae etiam sunt illae duae foeminae nobiles splendidè stolatae, quique sunt ad earum capita & pedes genibus nixi ex sequenti sermone senis & ex inscripti∣onibus cuique subjectis haec omnia intel∣liget. Illa cujus Imago est infima, fuit, heu fuit, mea Mildreda uxor longè charissima, altera mea fuit Anna mea filia dilectissi∣ma.
Mildreda verò uxor mea ab Anno Dom. 1546. vixit mecum perpetuò ad annos 43. conjunctissimè fuitque parti∣ceps omnium fortunarum mearum tem∣poribus & secundis & adversis, regnan∣tibus Regibus Henrico octavo, Edwardo sexto, Reginisque Maria, & Elizabetha jam foelicia sceptra tenente, peperitque mihi multos liberos, sed ad maturam aetatem tantù tres pervenerunt, nempe duae filiae Anna & Elizabetha, ac filius unus Ro∣bertus, Anna autem filia mea semper fuit mihi in deliciis atque in matrimonium data Edwardo Veero illustriss. Comiti Oxoniae, Domino magno Camerario Angliae, ex eoque sit comitissa Oxon. peperitque viro suo praeter aliquot liberos non d superstites, filias tres adhuc vivas quarum imagines visuntur genua flecten∣tes, ad caput matris: prior est Domina Elizabetha, secunda est Domina Brigitta, tertia Domina Susanna, vixit ista mea filia Anna à teneris annis multa cum laude semper apud omnes, tum in aula, tum do∣mi, tam virgo valdè pia & pudica, quàm uxor verè casta suo viro, tandem magno moerore meo ac matris nobis prae∣repta, spiritumque reddidit Deo qui illum dedit, cujus corpus & animam pòst Deo redditum, ego & uxor mea multis cum
lacrymis, sub hac mole lapidea reponi cu∣ravimus, non multò autem post sequitur mater filiam de qua quanquam nunquam sine lacrymis seriò cogito, aliqua tamen occurrunt quae moerorem meum paululum lri ur, nempe cum in memoriam repeto, o per totam vitam suam versain sacrarum literarum, & sanctorum virorum scriptis, iis∣que maximè Graecis, ut Basilii Magni, Chrysostomi, Gregor. Nazianzeni, ac aliorum similium. Maximè autem me consolatur (quod quidem jam post mortem omnibus magis patet quàm cum viveret,) recordari quanta beneficia secretò in doctos quantasque eleemosynas in pauperes contulerit. Quomodo etiam Collegia in utrisque Academiis donariis ornaverit ad susten∣tationem scholarium redditibus perpetuis, praesertim in Collegio divi Jo. Evang. Cantab. dotaverit, de egenis etiam fo∣vendis in villis Rumfordiae unde ortum familiae habuit; & Chestoniae ubi aedes nostrae sitae sunt, curam magnam habuit: Ita ut singulis primis Sabbatis omnium mensium, & commatus, & pecuniam per∣petuò pauperibus, maximeque viduis & Orphanis Chestoniae degentibus, & ad frequentes conciones verbi Dei ibi haben∣das
distribui curraverit; ac in utrisque cisdem villis pauperibus mechanicis perpe∣tuis temporibus singulis bienniis pecunia∣rum bonam summam utendam distribui ordinaverit. Post ista autem multaque alia ejus generis praestita officia & Deo & patriae mihique conjugi ac liberis suis, docisque & pauperibus▪ sponte in anno suo climaterico videlicet 63. spiritum red∣didit Do, quarto Aprilis, anno 1589. ujus corpus ego maritus & pater adjun∣gendum duci corpori filiae nostrae Annae, Paulo antè isto lapide repositae ut conjun∣ctae resrvarentur ad spem resurrectionis, Ecce adhuc quatuor alios viventes Ro∣bertum meum unicum ex Mildreda fili∣um ad pedes matris, ac tres alias virgi∣nes Dominam Elizabetham, Dominam Brigittam, ac Dominam Susannam, Annae meae tres filias ad capita matris & Aviae genibus incumbentes. Sed quò pergo? Fi∣em & loquendi & plorandi faciam, so∣lumque hoc affirmo spectaculum hoc mihi tam plenum esse doloris, ut quanquam ali∣quam mixtam consolationem offerant hi relicti mihi optimae spei dulces liberi, ta∣men neque hi quatuor mihi valde chart, neque dilectus filius meus major natu Tho. Cecilius Eques auratus, neque omnes qui ex eo prognati sunt ac jam vivunt nepotes▪
ac neptes numero undecim, cui etiam jungo puerulum suavem Gulielmum Paulet Lu∣ciae Ceciliae neptis meae filium ex Guil. Paulet Marchionis Winton. filio ac haerede, unquam dolorem meum huic spectaculo adhaerentem deleturi sunt. Hic infra meis oculis lacrymis suffusis animoque maximo moerore oppresse, appa∣rent imagines duarum illustrium foemi∣narum, quae dum vixerant, fuerant mi∣hi supra omne genus humanum longe charissimae. Anna Comitissa Oxon. filia Guliel∣mi Cecilii Baronis de Burghley, nata est quinto Decembris, Anno Dom. 1556. Ʋxor fuit Edwardi Veri illustrissimi Co∣mitis Oxon. anno aetatis suae 15. ex cujus connubio mater fuit plurium liberorum, sed reliquit tantùm tres filias virgines su∣perstites, Dominam Elizabetham Vere, aetate jam 14. Dominam Brigittam Vere aetate 5. annorum, tertiam infantulam Do∣minam Susannam. Vixit haec Anna vir∣go semper pudica & casta, uxor erga vi∣rum in amando mirè constans, filia in pa∣rentes per omnia obsequens, in colendo Deo valdè diligens, & devota, febri ar∣denti cepta certa spe regni coelestis
spiritum ultimum cum anima ardentissi∣mis precibus Deo & Creatori & Re∣demptori suo reddidit quinto Junii Anno Dom. 1588. in Palatio Reginae Elizabe∣thae Grenwici. Robertus Cecilius, filius Gulielmi Domini de Burghley & Mildredae Do∣minae de Burghley natus est primo Ju∣nii Anno Dom. 1563. parùm ante matris obitum ambiebat conscia matre nobilem virginem Dominam Elizabetham Brook n privato Cubiculo Reginae inservientem, filiam praeclari Baronis Regni W. Dom. de Cobham eamque post mortem matris consensu patris in uxorem duxit ultimo Augusti, Anno Dom. 1589. memoriam hic colit magno cum dolore piissimae ma∣tris & charissimae sororis, agnoscitque patrem jam grandaevum, omni obsequio sibi charissimum, in quo si permanebit dies sui prologentur super terram quam Dominus Deus dabit sibi Mildreda primogenita filia Nobilis Dom. Anton. Coci equitis aurati, viri pii & insigniter docti omniumque literatorum Moecenatis optii, matrem habuit Do∣minam Annam filiam Domini Gulielm. Fitz-Williams Equitis aurati, utroque parente propter eorum antiqua stemmata è multis familiis magnatum hujus regni
deducta, clara & nobilis; sed propter eruditionem conjunctam cum constanti Christianae religionis professione, & La∣tinae & Graecae linguarum singularem cog∣nitionem quam solummodò à patre docente accepit non minùs clara, & ab omnibus doctis eximiè laudata. Ʋxor anno aeta∣tis suae 20. fit Domini Gulielmi Cecilii Domini de Burghley, posteaque ratione viri titulo Baronis regni nobilitati facta est Baronissa de Burghley, multos ei peperit liberos, sed tres tantùm qui ad aetatem adultam pervenerunt: nimirum Annam, Robertum, & Elizabe∣tham. Anna conjuncta fuit connubio Edw. Comiti Oxoniae ut hic supra patet: Ro∣bertus jam vivit, hîc ad pedes matris ac sororis genibus flexis, Elizabetha mori∣tur statim à morte viri Gulielmi Wentworthi primogeniti filii Tho. Do∣mini Wentworth sicut supra à patre commemoratur. Ista pia D. Burgh∣leia vixit ad aetatem sexaginta trium an∣norum, multaque testimonia reliquit pic∣tatis in Deum, charitatis in doctos & pauperes, quae dum vixerat, celavit sub aliorum virorum bonorum nominibus, quae tamen coram Deo fuerunt tam cognita, etiam post vitam sine ullo dubio in Coelis
sibi certò reposita. Obiit verò supremum diem quarto die mensis Aprilis, Anno 1589. in aedibus viri sui Dom. Burghleii Westmonasterii. Domina Elizabeth Vere, filia illu∣strissima Comitis Edwardi Oxon. & Annae uxoris filia Domini de Burghley nata 22. Junii anno 1575. agitque annum 14. & dolet gravitèr & non sine causa ob amissam aviam & matrem, sed consolatur quod serssma Regina eam habet in cu∣biclo privato servientem. Dom. Brigitta secunda filia dicti Comitis Oxon. & Annae nata sexto Aprilis, anno 1584. & & quanquam vix excessit annum quartum um mrs corpus in sepulchrum repone∣rtr, tamen nn absque lacrymis agnovit reptam matrem & palò post aviam. Ve∣rm non st relcta Orphana cùm habeat patrem vive & Avum charissimum torem maximè sollicitum. Domina Su∣sanna tertia filia nata 26. Maii anno 1587. quae per aetatem non potuit agnos∣re aut aviam, aut matrem, verùm solum jam agnoscit Avum charissimum qui omni∣um harum curam habet, ita ut nec pia edu∣atione, nec congra vivendi ratione de∣stituntur.
Arms. The Episcopal See of Dtham, viz. A CrossGulielm. de Dudly. via. §. 66. between four Lions rampant, Impaling Duly with quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. Two Lions passant in pale bar-ways. 2. and 3 A cross patonce. 76. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Guilielmus de Dudley e familia Baronum de Dudley, Dunelm. Episcopus, obiit Anno Dom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Arms. Paulet, With quarterings, viz. Sab. threeWinifride Mar∣chionis. Winch. vid. §. 65. swords points in point Arg. Hilts and Pomels Or. 2. B. six Mascalls▪ three and three Argent. 3. G two Lions passant gardant Argent. 4. Barry of six Erm. and Gules. 5. Barry of six, Or and Vert, a bend∣let Gules. 6. Arg. a Fess G. between six Lions ramp. B. 7. Or, two Cheverons and Canton Gules. 8. Or, a Cross voided Gules. 9. Arg. on a chief G. two Mullets pierced Or. 10. Barry of six, Or and B, a saltire Gules. 11. Arg. two bars, and in chief an Escutcheon Gules. 12. Arg. a Fess and three Martlets in chief Gules. 13. B. a Fess between three Flower-de-luces Or. 14. Gules, three water-bou∣gets Erm. 15. Arg a Fret and Canton sab 16. Ar∣gent, six Martlets sab. 3. 2. 1. Impaling Bruges, viz. 1. and 4. Arg. on a Cross sab. a Leo∣pards head Or. 2. Arg. a Fess between three Martlets sab. 3. Arg. three Hatchets prop. Han∣dles G.
77. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet in tumulo clarissima foemina, primùm Fortunata bonis clarisque parentibus, illi Sollicitè aetatem tenerae slexere puellae Ad studium verae virtutis, & optima facta, Externo addentes internum lumen honori. Post adolescentis foelicior extitit aetas, Cùm matura, viro veteri de stemmate nupsit, Qui genus à proavis longè ante trophaea Gulielmi Normanas que acies, patria de gente trahebat, Quo cumjucundè transegit tempora vitae, Donec mors illum rapuit: post fata mariti Moesta diu vitam tenebris luctuque trahehat: Sed melior tandem viduam fortuna revisit, Nobilitate potens, ubi Marchio amabilis illam Connubio accepit frmo, propriamque dicavit: At nunc ter foelix transcendit spiritus astra, Cumque suo regnat, coluit quem ante omnia, Christo. Arms. Dur Eboraci viz. France and England quar∣terly, a file of three, each Label charged with three Torteaux. Impaling Mohun. viz. Or, a Cross ingrailed sable. On one side. Fitz walter. viz. Or a Fess between two Cheverons Gules. Impaling Mohun as before.
On the other. Golofre. viz. Barry Nebulee of eight, Argent and Gules on a bend sable three Bezans. Impaling Mohun as before. 78. Epitaph. viz. Philippa filia & cohaeres JohannisA. D. 1474. Philip. Ducis▪ Eboracen. vid. §. 63. Dom. Mohun de Dunster, uxor Ed∣wardi Ducis Eboracensis moritur Anno Dom. 1474. Armes. Stanly. With quarterings, viz. 1. Quarterly first and fourth, on a bend three Bucks heads cabo∣sed; Second and third on a chief indented three roundles. 2. A Cheveron between three Martlets. 3. Two Houboys Cheveron-ways, and nine cross Croslets. 4. Three Lions passant in pale bar∣ways. 79. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Humfridus Stanley mi∣lesA. D. 1505. Sir Humphrey Stanley. vid. §. 75. pro corpore excellentissimi Prin∣cipis Henrici septimi Regis Angliae qui obiit, 12. Martii anno Dom. millessimo quingentessimo quinto, cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.
Arms. Vl. With quarterings, viz. On a Cross five Escalop shells. 2. A Fess between three Cinq∣foyls. 3. Six Lions rampant. 4. Three Martlets. 5. A Cheveron between three cross Croslets sithy. 6. Parted per pale a Lion rampant. 7. A bend be∣tween six ullets of six points. 8. A Cross in the first and last quarter an annulet. These three Crests on as many Helms and Torces; viz. 1. A Li∣on rampant crowned. 2. A plume of Ostrich fea∣thers. 3. A Saggs head erased billette. At the feet in a Lozenge Shield these, Beaumont. With quarterings, viz. Semy de Flower∣de-luces and a Lion rampant. 2. A Cross potent between four Crosetts. 3. Three Garbs. 4. A Cross. 5. Seven Mascals conjoyned. 6. A Cinq'foyle Er∣mine. 7. Fretty of eight pieces and bordure round'lee. 8. A pale. 9. A Lion ramp. crowned. 10. Semy Flower-de-luces and fretty. 11. Three piles in point, on the midst an Escutcheon. 12. A Lion rampant. 13. A Saltire. 14. Three Garbs. 15. A Wolves head erased. 16. An Eagle display∣ed. 17. A Lion rampant. 18. A Fess between three Cinq'foyls. 19. Three Cockatris displayed. 20 On a Cheveron three Boars heads erased▪ up∣ported by two Lions rampant. 80. Epitaph. viz. Bonae Memoriae Georgio VillerioSir Georg. Vil∣lers & Comit. Buckingh. vid▪ §. 73. Equiti aurato marito B. M. juxta se P. charissima conjux Maria Comitissa Buc∣kinghamiae. S. P. F. F.
D. O. M. Ossa Mariae de Bellomonte, Comitissae Buckinghamiae, è quinque potentissi∣morum totius Europa regnorum Regibus: idque per totidem immediatos descensus, oriundus. Vixit annos 62. menses 11. dies 19. hoc mon. V. I. C. Arms. Harle. viz. Argent two pales sable. obo. viz. Or, five piles wavy, three descending from the chief, and two ascending from the base, Gules on a chief B, a Lion passant of the field. 81. Epitaph. viz. D. O. M. Adsta Vator & misertus humanae sortisA. D. 1605 Cor Annae So∣phiae Harlee. vid. §. 74▪ haec prlege. Annae Sophiae primo aetatis di∣luculo festinâ fatorum saevitiâ extinctae cor∣culum in hac urna jussit recondi Christo∣pherus Harlaeus, A. F. Bellomonte comes Praefect. Palat. Paris, à secretis Reg. consiliar. & nunc apud S. Magnae Bri∣tanniae Reg. Christianiss. Gal. Regis le∣gatus, una cum uxore dilectis. Anna Ro∣bota: hoc leve graviss. luctus monumen∣tum manibus chariss. filiolae & posteritatis
memoriam pietatis laudem & melioris vitae expectationem ambo parentes jun∣ctis lacrymis moestiss. P. anno Domini 1605. Hoc te volebam, abi & vale. Quod nuper igne spiritali turgidum, Vitam ciebat aureo in corpusculo Tactum potente conditoris dextera Isto recumbit frigidum cor marmore Solo creatum flosculum Britannico Suo revulsum corde corculum pater Ʋltro relinquens propris natalibus Custodiendum pignus urnae credidit, Donec remissa lenis aura oelitus Venis redonet palpitare denuo Et membra cordi copulata in posterum Non separanda coelitum inserat choro. Arms. France and England quarterly. Impaling quar∣terly,A. D. 1509. Hen. VII. Rex. Vid. §. 78. 1. France and England quarterly. 2. and 3. A Cross. 4. Barry of six, an Escutcheon on a chief, a Pallet between two Esquires based dexter and si∣nister, all within the Order of St. George, viz. the Garter supported by a Dragon and a Greyhound collared. 82. Epitaph. viz. Septimus Henricus tumulo requiescit in istoRound the bars of the outward Tomb. Qui Regum splendor, lumen & orbis erat;
Rex vigil & sapiens, comes, virtutis amator, Egregius forma, strenuus atque potens. Qui peperit pacem regno, qui bella peregit Plurima, qui victor semper ab hoste redit: Qui natas binis conjunxit Regibus ambas Regibus & cunctis foedere junctus erat. Qui sacrum hoc struxit templum statuitque sepulchrum Pro se, proque sua conjuge, proque domo. Lustra decem atque annos tres plus compleverit annis: Nam tribus octenis regia sceptra tulit. Quindecies domini centenus fluxerat annus Currebat nonus, cum venit atra dies, Septima ter mensis lux tunc fulgebat Aprilis Cum clausit summum tanta corona diem. Nulla dedere prius tantum tibi saecula Regem Anglia, vix similem posteriora dabunt. Septimus hic situs est Henricus Gloria RegumRound the Ledge or Verge of the inner Tomb. Cunctorum, ipsius qui tempestate fuerunt, Ingenio at{que} opibus gestarum & nomine rerum, Accessere quibus naturae dona benignae: Frontis honos, facies augusta, Heroica forma: Junctaque ei suavis conjux perpulchra, pudica, Et foecunda fuit, foelices prole parentes, Henricum quibus octavum terra Anglia debes.
Hic jacet Henricus ejus Nominis sep∣timus,Under the Kings Image. Angliae quondam Rex Edmun∣di Richmondiae comitis filius, qui die 22. Augusti Rex creatus statim post apud Westmonasterium die 30. Octo∣bris Coronatur, Anno Domini 1485. moritur deinde 21. die Aprilis, anno aetatis 53 Regnavit annos 23. menses 8. minus uno die. Hic jacet Regina Elizabetha Edwar∣diUnder the Image of the Queen. quarti quondam Regis filia, Edwardi quinti Regis quondam nominati soror: Henrici septimi olim Regis conjux, at∣que Henrici Octavi Regis mater incly∣ta. Obiit autem suum diem in Turri Londoniarum die 2. Febr. Anno Dom. 1502. 37 annorum aetate functa. EULOGIUMOn a Table adjoyning to the Monu∣ment. Per Skeltonida laureatum Oratorem Regium. Huc pia Calliope propera mea casta puella Et mecum resona carmina plena Deo: Septimus Henricus Britonum memorabilis heros, Anglica terra tuus magnanimus Priamus. Attalus hic opibus, rigidus Cato, clarus Acestes Sub gelido clausus marmore jam recubat. Sic honor omnis, opes, probitas, sic gloria Regum, Omnia mutabunt mortis ad imperium.
Anglia num lacrymas? rides, lacrymare quid obstas? Dum vixit lacrymas: dum moritur, jubilas. Tanta tamen penses, dum vixerat Angligenenses Vibrabant enses: bella nec ulla timent, Ʋndique bella fremunt nunc, undique praelia surgunt. Noster honor solus filius ecce suus. Noster honor solus, qui pondera tanta subire Non timet: intrepidus arma gerenda vocat. Arma gerenda vocat, superi sua coepta secundent Ʋt quatiat Pallas aegida saepe rogat: Srs tamen est versanda diù, sors ultima belli Mirmidonum Dominus Marte silente ruit. Et quem non valuit, validis superare sub armis Mars: tamen occubuit insidiis Paridis: Nos incerta quidem pro certis ponere rebus Arguit, & prohibet Delius ipse pater. Omnia sunt hominum dubio labentia fato, Marte sub incerto militat omnis homo: Omne decus nostrum, nostra & spes unica tantùm, Jam bene qui regnat, hunc Jovis umbra tegat. Ʋt quamvis mentem labor est inhibere volentem, Pauca tamen liceat dicere pace sua; Pace tua liceat mihi, nunc tibi dicere pauca Dulce meum decus, & sola Britanna salus. Summa rei nostrae remanet, celeberrime Princeps, In te praecipuo qui modò sceptra geris. Si tibi fata favent, faveant precor atque precabor, Anglia tunc plaude, sin minùs, ipsa vale. Polichronitudo Basileos.
Tetrastichon veritatis. Foelix qui bustum formasti Rex tibi cuprum, Auro si tectus fueras, fueras spoliatus, Nudus prostratus, tanta est rabiosa cupido Ʋndique nummorum: Rex pace precor requiescas. Amen. Orator Regius Skeltonis laureatus inAnother Ta∣ble hanging on the same Monument. singulare meritissimumque praeconium no∣bilissimi Principis Henrici septimi nuper strenuissimi Regis Angliae, hoc Epitaphi∣um edidit. Ad sinceram contemplatio∣nem Reverendi in Christo Patris ac Do∣mini Johannis Islippe Abbatis West∣monasteriensis optimè meriti. Anno Domini 1512. pridie Divi Andreae Apo∣stoli, &c. Tristia Melpomenes cogor modò plectra sonare, Hos Elegos foveat Cynthius ille meos. Si quas fata movent lachrymas: lacrymare videtur, Jam bene maturum si bene mente sapis. Flos Britonum, Regum speculum, Salomonis imag, Septimus Henricus mole sub hac tegitur, Punica (dum regnat) redolens rosa digna vocari, Jamjam marec celevis umbra fugit. Multa noverans ortunae, multa faventis, Passus: & inractus tempus utrunque tulit.
Nobilis Anchises, armis metuendus Atrides, Hic erat: hunc Scotus Rex timuit Jacobus. Spiramenta animae vegetans dum vescitur aura, Francorum populus conticuit pavidus. Immensas sive divitias cumulasse quid horres? Ni cumulasset opes forte Britanne luas. Ʋrgentes casus tacita si mente volutes: Vix tibi sufficeret aurea ripa Tagi Ni sua te probitas consulta mente laborans Rexisset satiùs, vix tibi tuta salus. Sed quid plura cano: meditans quid plura voluto, Quisque vigil sibi sit, mors sine lege rapit: Ad Dominum qui cuncta regit pro principe tanto, Funde preces quisquis carmina nostra legis. Rifrigerii sedem, quietis Beatudinem, Luminis habeat claritatem. Amen. Arms. France and England quarterly. Impaling semiA. D. 1509. Marg. Comiss. Richmond & Derby. vid. §. 80. de Flower-de-luces. France and England quarterly Impaling Quarter∣ly 1. France and England quarterly. 2. and 3 A Cross. 4. Barry of six, an Escutcheon on a chief, a pale between two Esquires based dexter and sini∣nister. France and England Impal. Quarterly 1. and 4. Quar∣terly 1. and 4. A Castle. 2 and 3. A Lion ramp. 2. and 3. Three Pallets. Impal. four Pallets, and two Flanches, each charged with an Eagle displayed. Quarterly, 1. and 4. Quarterly 1. and 4. on a bend three Bucks heads cabosed. 2. On a chief inden∣ted three roundles. 3. Cheque. 2 and 3. Three armed Legs conjoyned in triangle; over all an Escutcheon of pretence, thereon a Lion rampant: all these Impaling France and England quarterly within a bordure Gobony.
83. Epitaph. viz. Margaretae Richmondiae septimiRound the Verge of the Tomb in brass. Henrici matri Octavi aviae, quae stipendia constituit tribus hoc cno∣bio monachis, & doctori Gramma∣tices apud Wimborn, perque Angli∣am totam divini verbi praeconi: duobus item interpretibus litera∣rum sacrarum, alteri Oxoniis, alteri Cantabrigiae, ubi & collegia, duo Christo & Iohanni ejus discipu∣lo struxit. Moritur An. Dom. 1509▪ tertio Calend. Iulii. Elegia. In serenissimae Principis, & Dominae,A Table ad∣joyning to the Tomb. Dominae Margaretae nuper Comitissae de Derby, strenuissimi Regis Henrici septi∣mi Matris sunebre ministerium per Skel∣tonida laureatum Oratorem Regium 16 die mensis Augusti, Anno salutis 1516. Aspirate meis Elegis pia turma sororum, Et Margaretam collacrimate piam. Hac sub mole latet Regis celeberrima mater Henrici magni quem locus iste fovet. Quem locus iste sacer celebri celebrat Polyandro, Illius en genitrix hac tumulatur humo.
Cui cedat Tanaquil (Titus banc super astra reportet.) Cedat Penelope carus Ulissis amor; Haec Abigail velut Hester erat pietate secunda, En tres jam procers nobilitate pares. Pro domina precor implora, pro principe tanta Flecte Deum precibus qui legis hos apices. Plura referre piget, calamus torpore rigesit, Dormit Moecenas, negligitur probitas: Nec juvat aut modicum prodest nunc ultima versu Fata recensere (mortua, mors reor est) Quaeris quid decus est? Decus est modo dicier hircus Cedit honos hirco, cedit honorque capro. Falleris ipse Charon, iterum surrexit Abyron, Et Stygios remos despicit ille tuos. Vivitur ex voto, mentis praecordia tangunt Nulla sepulchra, ducum nec monumenta patrum, Non Regum non ulla hominum labentia fato Tempora, nec totiens mortua turba ruens. Hinc statuo certè periture parcere chartae, Seu Juvenalis ovat eximius Satyrus. Distichon execrationis in fagolidoros▪ Qui lacerat, violatque, rapit, praesens Epitoma, Hunc laceretque voret Cerberus absque mora. Hanc tecum statuas Dominam precor O sator orbis Quo regnas rutilans Rex sine fine manes. CALON AGATON CUM ARETA RE IN PA.
Arms. Quarterly 1. and 4. quarterly, 1. and 4. France within a bordure Gules, semi de frmaulx Or. 2, and  Or, a Fess Chequee Arg. and B. within a bordure ingrailed Gules. Over all an Escutcheon of pretence Arg. thereon a Saltire ingrailed be∣tween four Cinq'soyles Gules. Over all a file of three Argent. 2. Gules three armed Legs joyned in triangle prop. 3. Gules, three Lions rampant Argent. Impaling Scotland. Supporters a Fox and a Unicorn. Motto. In my defence. At the feet in a Lozenge Shield these Arms, viz. Quar∣terly, 1. B. a Lion ramp Arg. crowned Or. 2. Or, a Lion rampant Gules. 3. Or, five piles meeting in point B. 4. Or, a Fess Chequee Arg. & B. on a bend Gules, three Fermaux of the field. Over all, an Escutcheon of pretence Arg. Thereon a mans heart Gules, on a chief B. three Mullets Or. Sup∣porters▪ a Savage man and a Buck. Motto. Jamai Dariere. 84. Epitaph. viz. Margaretae Duglasiae Matthaei Stu∣artiA. D. 1578. Margareta Comitis.  vid. §. 81. 18. Levonisiae comitis uxori Henrici VII. Angliae Regis ex filia nepti potentiss. Re∣gibus cognatione conjunctissimae, Jaco∣bi VI. Scotorum Regis Aviae, matronae sanctissimis morib. & invicta animi pati∣entia incomparabili, P. Margareta Potens virtute potentior ortu Regibus ac proavis nobilitata suis
Inde Caledoniis, australibus inde Britannis, Edita principibus, principibus{que} parens. Quae mortis fuerant solvit laetissima morti, Atque Deum petiit: nam fuit ane Di. Henry, second Son to this Lady, wasVid. §. 17. King of Scots, and Father to James VI. now King. This Henry was mur∣thered at the age of 21 years, and is here entombed. Absolutum cura Thomae Fowler hujus Domini Executoris Octob. 24. 1578. Here lieth the noble Lady Margaret, Countess of Levenox, Daughter and sole Heir of Archibald, Earl of Angus, by Margaret Queen of Scots his Wife, that was eldest Daughter to King Hen∣ry VII. who bare unto Matthew Earl of Levenox her Husband four Sons, and four Daughters. This Lady had to her Great-Grand∣father, King Edward IV. to her Grand∣father King Henry VII. to her Uncle King Henry VIII. to her Cousin-Ger∣man, King Edward VI. to her brother King James, of Scotland the Fifth; to her Son, King Henry I. and to her Grandchild, King James VI.
Having to her Great-grand mother, and Grand-mother two Queens, both named Elizabeth; to her Mother, Mar∣garet Queen of Scots; to her Aunt, Mary the French Queen; to her Cou∣sin-Germans, Mary and Elizabeth, Queens of England; to her Niece and Daughter-in-law, Mary Queen of Scots. Arms. Scotland. viz. Or, a Lion rampant within a double tressure flory, counter flory Gules, within the Order of St. Andrew. Supported by two Uni∣corns chained, &c. Motto. In my defence. Scotland. Impaling France and England Quar∣terly. Scotland. Impaling quarterly, 1. Barry of 8. Arg▪ and Gules. 2. B. semy de Flower-de-luces Or▪ 3 Arg. a cross potent between four Croslets Or. 4. Or, three Pallets Gules. 5. France within a bor∣dure ingrailed Gules. 6. Parted per pale Or and Arg. two Lions ramp. combatant: The one fable, crowned Argent; the other Gules crowned Or. 7. B. crusilly, and two Dolphins hauriant, endorsed Or. 8. As the first, over all an Escutcheon of pre∣tence; Gules on a bend Or, three Eagles display∣ed sab. Scotland. Impaling Or, three bars wavy, Gules. Scotland. Impaling France and England quarterly, within a Bordure Gobony Arg. and B.
85. Epitaph. viz. D. O. M. Bonae Memoriae Mariae Stuartae Scotorum ReginaeA. D. 1587. Maria Regina Scot. vid▪ §. 2. 101 Franciae dotariae, Jacobi V. Scotorum Regis filiae, & haeredis unicae, Henri∣ci VII. Ang. Regis ex Margareta majori natu filia (Jacobi IV. Regni Scotorum matrimonio copulata) proneptis, Ed∣wardi IV. Angliae Regis ex Elizabetha filiarum natu maxima abneptis, Fran∣cisci II. Gallorum Regis conjugis, coro∣nae Angliae, dum vixit, certae & indu∣bitatae haeredis, & Jacobi Magnae Britan∣niae monarchae potentissimi matris. Stirpe verè Regia & antiquissima prog∣nata erat, maximis totius Europae Prin∣cipibus agnatione & cognatione conjuncta, & exquisitissimis animi & corporis doti∣bus & ornamentis cumulatissima: verum ut sunt variae rerum humanarum vices, postquam annos plus minus viginti in cu∣stodia detenta, fortiter & strenuè (sed frustrà) cum malevolorum obtrectaio∣nibus, timidorum suspicionibus, & inimi∣corum capitalium insidiis consicta esset,
tandem inaudito & infesto Regibus ex∣emplo securi percutitur. Et contempto mundo, devicta morte, lassto Carnifice, Christo servatori animae salutem, Jacobo filio spem regni & poste∣ritatis, & universis caedis infaustae specta∣toribus exemplum patientiae commendans piè intrepidè cervicem Regiam securi ma∣ledictae subjecit, & vitae caducae sortem cum cl ss regni perennitate commuta∣vit. Ʋt. Idus Febr. Anno Christi 1587. aetatis 46. Si generis splendor pare si gratia ormae, Probri nescia mens, inviolata sides, Pctoris invicti robur, sapientia, candor Nixque solantis spes pietate Dei: Si morum probitas, duri patientia fraeni, Majess, bonitas pura, benignae manus, Pallida ortunae possint vitare tonantis, Flminaque montes templaque sancta petunt; Non praematura fatorum sorte perisset Ne firet moestis trisis Imago genis. Jure Scotos, Thalamo Francos, spe possidet Anglos, Triplice sic triplex jure corona beat. Foelix e nimium foelix si turbine pulsa Viina sero conciliasset opem. Sed cadit ut terram teneat nun morte triumphat Fructibus ut sua sirps pullulet inde novis.
Victa nequit vinci nec carcere clausa tenenti Non occisa mori sed neque capt capi. Sic vitis succisa gemit oeundior uvis, Sculptaque purpureo gemma decore micat. Obruta frugifero sensim sic cespite surgunt Semina per multos quae latuere dies. Sanguine sancivit foedus cum plebe Jehov Sanguine placebant numina sancta pares: Sanguine conspersi quos praeterit ira penates▪ Sanguine signata est quae modo credit huus. Parce Deus, satis est, inandos siste dolores Inter unstos pervolet ill dies. Sit Reges mactare nesas, ut sanguine posthc Purpureo nunquam terra Britanna flut. Exemplum pereat aesae cum vulnere Christae; Inque malum praeceps author & actor eat. Si meliore sui post mortem parte triumphet, Carnifices sileant, tormina, clausra, cruces, Quem dederant cursum superi regina peregit: Tempora laeta Deus, tempora dura dedit. Edidit eximium fato properante Jacobum Quem Pallas, Musae, Delia fata colunt. Magna viro, major natu, sed maxima partu, Conditur hic Regum filia, sponsa, parens, Det Deus ut Nati & qui nascentur ab illa Aeternos videant hinc sine nube dies. H. N. gemens
1 Pet. 2. 21. Christus pro nobis passus est relinquens exemplum ut sequamini vestigia ejus. 1 Pet. 2. 22. Qui cum malediceretur non maledicebat, cum pateretur non comminabatur, traje∣bat autem judicanti juste. Arms. Stuart. Quarterly. 1. and 4 B. three Flo∣wer-de-Luces Or, on a bordure. G. semy de fer∣maux of the second. The 2d. and 3. Or, a Fess Chequee A. and B. within a bordure ingr. G. Over an Escucheon of pretence A. thereon a Saltire ingr. between four Roses G. Impaling Howard. 1. G. on a bend between six cross Croslets fitchy, A an Escucheon, O. thereon a demy Lion in a double tressure flory counterstory, with an Arrow struck through the mouth, all of the first. 2▪ England, and a file of three A. 3. Chequee Or and B. 4. Ga Lion ramp. Ar. 86. Epitaph. viz. Depositum illustrissimi & excellen∣issimiA. D. 1639. Lodowick Stuart Dux Richmondiae. viz. §. 91. 93. Principis Lodovici Stuarti Esmei Leviniae ducis filii, Joannis propatrui sereniss. Regis Jacobi Nepotis, Rich∣mondiae & Leviniae ducis, Novi Castelli ad Tinam & Darnliae
Comitis, &c. Magni Scotiae camerarii & Thalassiarchae hereditariè. Sacri Palatii Jacobi Regis seneschalli, cubiculariorum∣que Principalium primi. Regi à sanctio∣ribus consiliis. San-Georgiani Ordinis Equ. Scoticorumque per Gallias Cata∣phractorum Praefecti, viri excelsi ad om∣nia magna & bona nati, ad meliora defuncti. Vixit annos 49. menses 4. dies 17. 2 Sam. 3. 38. Chronog. An IgnoratIs, qƲIa prInceps, & VIr MagnƲs obIIt hoDIe. 16. Februar. primo generalium Regni comitiorum de∣signato. Illustrissima & excellentissima Prin∣ceps Francisca Richmondiae & Levi∣niae Ducissa Domini Thomae Howardi Bindoniae filia, Thomae Howardi Norfolciae Dis, ex Elizabethae Ed∣wardi Ducis Buckinghamiae filia, nep∣tis, Lodovici Stuarti Richmondiae & Leviniae Ducis uxor. Charissimi conjugii nunquam non memor conjugi optimè me∣rito sibique posuit hoc monumentum.
Obiit 8. die Mensis Octob. Anno Dom. 1639. 87. Epitaph. viz. S. M. H in urnâ includitur cor, infra re∣quiescitA. D. 1661. Esme Stuart. Dux Richmond vid. §. 92. corpus Illustrissimi Ducis Esme Stuart; parentes qui quaerit, sciat illum à patre Jacobo primum Leviniae deinde Richmondiae & Leviniae duce eun∣dem honoris titulum accepisse, à matre ve∣ro Maria, Georgii ducis Bucking∣hamiae filia unica, vitam & spiritum hausisse, quem postea Parisiis efflavit, aetatis suae anno 11. Mensis Augusti die 14 anno salutis humanae, 1661. Arms. Villiers. On a Cross five Escalop shells Im∣paling Mannor. Two bars on a chief quarterly, two de lizes, the first and fourth, and a Lion of England in the second and third.
88. Epitaph. viz. Perenni Memoriae Celsissimi Potentissimique PrincipisA. D. 1634. George Villiers Dux Buckingh. vid. §. 90. Georgii Villiers, Ducis, Marchionis. Comitis Buckinghamiae, Comitis Co∣ventriae, vice-comitis Villiers, Baronis Waddon, Angliae, Hiberniae, Walliae Thalassiarchae, omnium artium propugna∣culorumque maritimorum ac classis Regiae moderatoris, Equorum▪ Regiorum Magi∣stri, Quinque portuum & appendicum domini tutelarii, Castri Dovernensis Praefecti, omnium Regiorum saltuum, the∣riotrophiorum ac nemorum cis- Trenta∣norum Justiciarii, Castri Regii Vin∣desorii Praesidis, Monarchae Britannico ab intimis cubiculis, senatuum sanctiorum Angliae, Scotiae, & Hiberniae consiliarii, Equitis nobilissimi ordinis Periscelidis, consilii polemici Domini Praesidis, Acade∣miae Cantabrigiensis Cancellarii dig∣nissimi. Tantus tamen Heros, omnibus corporis & animi dotibus memorabilis, duobus po∣tentissimis invicem Regibus intimus, cha∣rissimus omnibus, togae juxta sagique arti∣bus florentissimus literarum & literatorum
fautor amplissimus in omnes bene meritos, liberalitatis inexhaustae, denique singulari humanitate & omni morum suavitate in∣comparabilis, immani teterrimi paricidae facinore trucidatus. Communi invidiae, quae semper virtutis & honoris comes in∣dividua innocentissimo sanguine suo im∣meritissimo litavit. Katharina verò Heroina splendidissima comitis Rutlandiae filia & haeres unica prolis, summae spei utriusque sexus, D. D. D. D. Mariae, Caroli, (qui in cunis obiit) Georgii, Francisci, no∣vissimi posthumique felicissima ab ipso ma∣ter facta: suavissimam charissimi conjugis sui memoriam qa pietate, quo honore po∣tuit prosecuta. Hos titulos (non vani∣tati litatura sed optimorum principum munificentiam testatura) praefigendos cu∣ravit: tristesque exuvias &▪ quicquid ipsius adhuc coelo non debetur, honorario hoc monumento moestissima inclusit anno Ephochae Christianae, 1634.
P. M. S. Vanae multitudinis improperium hic jacet cujus tamenOn a small plate of Brass against the Wall on the East side this Chappel by the Monument Hispania Gallia Belgia Prudentiam, Fortitudinem, Industriam. Tota Europa mirata est Magnanimitatem. Quem Daniae, & Sweviae, Germaniae, Transil∣vaniae, & Nas∣sauviae. . . . . . Veneta Respub. Sabaudiae & Lo∣tharingiae Palatinus Comes Imperator Turca Papa Reg. integerrimum, Princip. ingenuum, Philo-basilea, Duces Politicum, Fidelem, Pacificum, Christianum, Protestantem, Experti sunt. Quem Anglia Cantabrigia Buckinghamia Archithalassum habuit. Cancellarium habuit. Ducem habuit. Verum siste viator, & quid ipsa invidia sugillare nequit audi.
Hic est ille calamitosae virtutis Buck∣inghamius maritus redamatus, pater amans, filius obsequens, frater amicissi∣mus, affinis beneficus, amicus perpetuus, dominus benignus, & optimus omnium servus. Quem Reges adamarunt, opti∣mates honorarunt, Ecclesia destevit, vul∣gus oderunt. Quem Jacobus & Caro∣lus Regum perspicacissimi, intimum ha∣buerunt, à quibus honoribus auctus & negotiis onustus, fato succubuit antequam par animo periculum invenit. Quid jam Peregrine? Aenigma mundi moritur; omnia suit, nec quidquam habuit, Pa∣triae, Parens & Hostis audiit. Deliciae idem & querela Parlamenti. Qui dum Papistis bellum infert insimulatur Papi∣sta, dum Protestantium partibus consulit, occiditur à Protestante. Tesseram specta rerum humanarum, at non est quod serio triumphet malitia, interimere potuit, lae∣dere non potuit, scilicet has preces un∣dens expiravit. Tuo ego sanguine potiar (mi Jesu) dum mali pascuntur meo.
Arms. On one side. France and England. Quarterly within a Garter▪ supported by a Lion rampant gardant Or, crowned with a Royal Diadem, and a Dragon Gules. Motto, Dier & Mon Droit. On the other. Scotland Impaling France and England quarterly, supported by a Unicorn Arg. gorged, with a Crown and Chain reflexed over the back, Or, and a Lion ramp. Arg. Motto, Beati Paciici. 89. Epitaph. viz. Memoriae Aeternae Elizabethae, Angliae, Franciae, & Hi∣berniaeA. D. 1602. Elizabetha Re∣gina Angliae. vid. §. 83, Reginae R. Henrici VIII. fil. R. Hen. VII. nept. R. Edw. IV. pronept. Pa∣triae, Parenti, Religionis, & honorum Artium altrici, plurimarum linguarum pe∣ritia, praeclaris tum animi tum corporis dotibus regiisque virtutibus supra sexum Principi incomparabili Jacobus Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Rex virtutum & Regnorum haeres bene merenti pie posuit.
Memoriae Sacrum. Religione ad primaevam sinceritatem re∣staurata, pace fundata, moneta ad justum valorem reducta, rebellione domestica vin∣dicata, Gallia malis intestinis praecipiti sublevata, Belgio sustentato, Hispanica classe profligata, Hibernia pulsis Hispanis & Rebellibus ad deditionem coactis pa∣cata, redditibus utriusque Academiae lege Annonaria plurimum adauctis, toto de∣nique Anglia ditata, prudentissiméque annos 45. administrata: Elizabetha Re∣gina victrix, triumphatrix, pietatis stu∣diosissima, foelicissima, placida morte Septuagenaria soluta, mortales reliquias dum Christo jubente resurgant immorta∣les, in hac Ecclesia celeberrima ab ipsa conservata, & denuo fundata, deposuit. Obiit 24. Martii, anno salutis. M. DC. II. Regni XLV. Aetatis LXX. Regno consors & urnâ hic obdormimus Elizabetha & Maria sorores in spe resurrectionis.
Arms. in a Lozenge Shield, France and England quarterly. 2. Scotland. 3. Ireland. viz. B an Harp. Or, strings Arg. 4. As the first. 90. Epitaph. viz. Sophia Rosula Regia, praepropero fatoA. D. 160. Sophia Stuart. vid. §. 84. ecerpta & Jacobo, Magnae Britanniae, ranciae, & Hiberniae Regi, Annaeque Reginae, parentibus erepta, ut in Christi Rosario reflorescat, hic sita est, Junii 23. Regni Regis Jacobi 4. 1606. rms. The same with those of her Sister before▪ going. 91. Epitaph. viz. Maria filia Jacobi Regis Magnae Bri∣nniae,A. D. 1607. Maria Stuart▪ vid. §. 8. Franciae, & Hiberniae & Annae Reginae primaeva infantia in Coelum re∣epta, mihi gaudium inveni, parentibus esiderium reliqui, die 16. Decembris 607. congratulantes condolete. Vixit nos 2. Menses, 5. dies 8.
92. Epitaph. viz. H. S. S. Reliquiae Edwardi V. Regis AngliaeA. D. 1483. Edward V. Re Agl. & Ri. D Ebor. vid. §. 86. & Richardi Dis Eboracensts. Hos fratres Germanos, Turre Lndonensi conclusos, injesque culitris sufocatos, abditè &  tumulari jussit Patrus Richardus peridus regni praedo, ossa de∣sideratorum din & tum quaesita, pst annos 190. &c. Scalarum in ruderibus (slae istae ad sellum Turris albae nuper dbant) alè desossa, judiciis certissi∣mis reperta 17. die Julii, Anno Dom. 1674. Carolus II. Rex clementissimus acer∣bu sortem miratus inter via monu∣meta, Principibus insliissimis justa perolvit, Anno Dom▪ 1678. Annoque Regni sui 30. In the great Vault on the North side this Chappel are these Inscripti∣ons following engraved, some on Plates of Silver, others on Brass, fixed to the leaden Chests, viz.
93. Depositum Serenissimae & potentissimae principissaeA. D. 1661▪ Eliz Queen of Bemi. vid. . 106. Elizabethae Reginae Bohemiae, relctae Frederici Dei gratia Bohemiae Regis Archidapieri & principis Electoris scri Romani Imperii, Filiae unicae Jacob, sororis Caroli primi & amitae Caol ejus nominis scundi Mag. Brit. Fn & Hib. Regum. Quae in aedibus obs Licestriae die Jovis 13. eb. piissmè in Domino obdormivit, Anno à Chro  1661. aetatis suae sexagesimo sexto. 94. Depositum Illustrissimae Principissae Annae xorisA. D. 67▪ A  of  vid. §. 1 potentissimi Princ. Jacob. Duc. Ebo Fratris unici Caroli istius nominis seun∣di Angl. Scot. Franc. & Hbern Regis Serenissimi, & filia nobilissimi Dom. Ed∣wardi Comitis Clarendonis dudu summi Angliae Cancelari quae in l Reg. St. Jac. dicta ultimo die Martii i Domino obdormivit, tatis suae tricesi∣mo quato Anno Dom. 11▪
95. Depositum Celsissimi Principis Caroli DucisA. D. 1660. Charles Duke of Cambridge. vid. §. 107. Cantabrigiae filii Primogeniti Jacobi Ducis Eboracensis qui natus 22. di Octobris 1660. Obiit in aula Whitehall quinto die Maii, 1661. 96. Depositum Illustrissimi Principis Jacobi DucisA. D. 667. James Duke of Cambridge. vid. §. 108. Cantabrigiae, &c. filii secundogeniti & haredis potentissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci qui in Aula Regia Rich∣mondiae vigesimo die Junii in Domin obdormivit aetatis suae quarto, annoqu Dom. 1667. 97. Depositum Illustrissimi Principis Caroli DuciA. D. 1677. Charles Duke of Kendale. vid. §. 109. Candaliae, &c. filii tertiogeniti Poten∣tiimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eborac qui in Aula regia St. Iacobi dicta vig simo secundo die Maii in Domino obdor∣mivit, vix annumhabens. An. Dom. 1677.
98. Depositum Illustrissimi Principis Edgari DucisA. D. 1671. Edgar Duk of Cambridge. Vid. §. 10▪ Cantabrigiae & filii quartogeniti & haeredis Potentissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci, qui in Aula Regia Richmondiae, 8. die Junii in Domino obdormivit aetatis suae quarto. Anno Dom. 1671. 99. Depositum Serenissimi Principis Caroli DucisA. D. 677. Charles Duke of Cambridge. Vid. §. 111. Cantabrigiae filii quintogenti Sere∣nissimi Principis Jacobi Ducis Ebora∣ci, &c. ex conjuge Maria D'Este, qui in Aula regia St. Iacobi dicta duodecimo die Decembris Anno Domini Milessimo sexcentessimo septuagessimo septimo in Do∣mino obdormivit, aetatis suae tricessimo quinto die. 100. Depositum Illustrissimae Dominae Henriettae filiaeA. D. 1669. The Lady Henriet. Stuart. vid. §. 112. natu tertiae Potentissimi Principis Ducis
Eborati. Quae in Aula regia St. Ia∣cbi dica 15 die mensis Novembris in Domino obdormivit decem circiter men∣sium is. Anno Dom. 1669. 101. Depositum Illustrissimae Dominae Katharinae filiaeA. . 171. The Lady  Vid. §. 1. quartogenitae Potentissimi Principis Ja∣ci Ducis Eboraci, in Aula Regia St. Iacobi dica, quinto die Decembris in Domino obdormivit vix decem menses habens, anno 1671. 102. Depositum Illustrissimae Dominae Katharinae Lau∣raeA. D. 675. The Lady Kthr. Lara. vid. §. 14. ex secundis nuptiis filiae primogenitae Potentissimi Ppincipis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci quae in Aula Regia St. Iacobi dica trtia die Octobris obdormivit vix novm menses habens. Anno Dom. M. CD. LXXV.
103. Depositum Illustrissimae Dominae Isabellae filiaeA. D. 1680. The Lady Isabella Stuart. vid. §. 115. septimogenitae Srenissimi Principis Ja∣cobi Ducis Eboraci, &c. & conjuge Maria D'Este quae in Aula Regia St. Ia∣cobi dicta secundo die Martii Anno Do∣mini Millssimo sexcentessimo octogessimo in Domino obdormivit, aetatis suae nno currente quinto, annoque Dom. 1680. 104. Edwardi Primi Regis AngliaeA. D. 1308. Ew. I. King of England. vid. §. 15. Epitaphium. Mors est moesta nimis magnos quae jungi in imis,On a Table adjoy∣ning to the Tomb. Maximamors minimis▪ conjungens ulima primis▪ Nullus in orbe fuit homo vivens nec valet esse Qui non morte ruit: est hinc exre necesse. Nobilis & fortis, tibi tu considere noli, Omnia sunt mortis, sibi subdit sinula soli, De mundi medio magnum mors ipia movit, Anglia prae taedio sais anxia plangere nvi: Corruit Edwardus vario venratus honore, Rex nuper ut Nardus fragrans virtutis odore, Corde Leopardus, invictus & absque pavore Ad rixam ardus, discretus & Eucharis ore,
Viribus armorum quasi gigas ardua gessit, Colla superborum prudens per praelia pressit, Inter Flandrenses fortuna sibi benè favit, Ʋt quoque Wallenses, & Scotos suppeditavit, ex bonus absque pari strenè sua regna regebat: Quod natura dare potuit bonitatis habeba, Acio jutitiae, pax Regni, sanctio legis, t fga nequitiae premunt praecordia Regis: Gloria tota rit, Regem cpit hae modo fossa, Rex quanoque fuit, nunc nil nisi pulvis & ossa, ie Dei quem corde coleba, & ore, e nullo permista dolore. Rex & valuit sua magna potestas, uit, pax magna fuit, regnavit honestas. wardus Primus Scotorum malleus hic est. 1308. Pactum serva. Edward I. King of England his Epitaph. Death is too doleful, which doth joyn T high estate full lo: Which coupleth greatest things with least, And last with first also; N man hath been in world alive, or any there may be, Which can esape the dint of death, Needs hence depart must we. O noble and victorious man. Trust not unto thy strength,
For all are subject unto death, And all must hence at length. Most cruel fate from worldly stage Hath rest a worthy Wight; For whom all England mourned loud To see his doleful plight: Edward is dead, which was adorn'd With divers graces here, A King or fragrant Nardus hight, A gratious Princely Peere. In heart, the which was Lybard like, Right puissant, void of fear: Most ow to strife, discreet, and wise, And gracious every where. In Arms a Gyant fierce and fell, Attempting famous Facts, Most prudent did subdue the proud By feat of martial Acts: In nders Fortune gave to him By lot right good success; In Wales he wan: the Scottish rout With Arms he did suppress. This King without his like alive Did firmly guide his Land: And what good nature could conceive, He had it plight at hand. He was in justice, and in peace, Excelling: Laws took place, Desire to chase all wicked works Did hold this Kings good grace.
He now doth lie intombed here, Which frthered each good thing, Now nought he is but dust and bones, Which was a worthy King. The very Son of God, whom erst This King did love right deere Hath given to him immortal blisses For his good living here. Otherwise. Whil's liv'd this King, by him all things Wre in most godly plight: Fraud lay hid, great peace was kept, And honesty had might. Pactum Serva. 105. Epitaph. viz. Ycy gist Alianor jadis RenneA. D. 1298. Elanor Qu. of England. vid. §. 156. Round the edge. de Angletere Femme al Ren. Ed∣ward Fitz. &c.
Aeleonorae Reginae uxoris Edwardi Primi Epitaphium. Nobilis Hispani jacet hîc soror inclyta Regis,On a Ta∣ble. Eximii consors Aleonora thori Edwardi primi Wallorum Principis uxor, Cui pater Henricus Tertius Anglus erat. Hanc ille uxorem nato petit omie Princeps Legati munus suscipit ipse bono. Alphonso fratri placuit foelix Hymenus, Germanam Edwardo nec sine dote dedit, Dos praeclara fuit, nec tali indigna marito, Pontivo Princeps munere dives erat. Foemina consilio prudens, pia, prole beata, Auxit amicitiis, auxit honore virum. Obiit Anno Domini 1298. & anno Edwardi Regis primi 26. Disce mori. The Epitaph of Queen Aleonore Wife of Edward I. Queen Elenor is here interr'd, A worthy noble Dame, Sister unto the Spanish King, O Royal bloud and fame. King Edwards Wife first of that name, And Prince of Wales by right:
Whose Father Henry just the third, Was sure an English Wight, Who crav'd her Wife unto his Son, The Prince himself did go On that Embassage luckily As chief, with many moe. This knot of linked marriage, Her Brother Alphonse lik'd; And so ▪tween Sister and this Prince The marriage up was strikd. The Dowry rich and Royal was, For such a Prince most meet: For Pontive was the marriage gift, A Dowry rich and great. A woman both in counsel wise, Religious, fruitful, meek, Who did encrease her Husbands friends, And larg▪d his honour eke. She died in the year of our Lord 1298. &c. Learn to die. 106. Richardi secundi Regis AngliaeA. D. 1399. Richardus II. Rex Angliae. vid. §. 161▪ Epitaphium. Prudens & mundus Richardus jure secundusRound the Verg. Per fatum victus, jacet hic sub marmore pictus. Verax sermone fuit, & plenus ratione: Corpore procerus, animo prudens ut Homerus.
Ecclesiae favit, elatos suppeditavit, Quemvis prostravit regalia qui violavit, Obruit haereticos, & eorum stravit amicos: O clemens Christe, tibi devotus fuit iste, Votis Baptistae salves quem protulit iste. Hic jacet immiti consumptus morte Richardus. Fuisse foelicem miserrimum. On a Table. Perfect, and Prudent, Richard by right the Second, Vanquish'd by fortune, lies here now graven in stone, True of his word, and thereto well resound; Seemly in person, and like to Homer, as one In worldly prudence, and ever the Church in one Vpheld and favour'd, and casting the proud to ground, And all that would his Royal State confound. Anno Dom. 1399. 107. Annae Ricardi secundi Regis AngliaeAnne Queen of England on a Table. vid. §. 161. uxoris Epitaphium. Sub petra lata nunc Anna jacet tumulata, Dum vixit mundo Richardo nupta secundo, Christo devota, fuit haec facilis, bene nota Pauperibus prona semper sua reddere dona, Jurgia sedavit, & praegnantes relevavit, Corpore formosa, vultu mitis, speciosa Praebens solamen viduis, aegris medicamen. Anno milleno, ter centum, quarto nonageno, Julii septeno mensis migravit amaeno.
Hoc jacet Anna loco Britonum redimita corona, Cui vr Richardus jure secundus erat: Cui Pater illuris, gnata, generoque superbus, Romae ter foelix induperator erat. Wenceslaus illam magna comitante caterva, Londinum mist laetus ovansque pater: Cujus in adventu ludi, spectacula fiunt, Regali pompa, regia virgo venit: Sed bona sunt hominum tenui pendentia fîlo, Reges, Regnas mors capit, omne rapit. Haec Regina fuit magna de stirpe Quiritum, Omnibus illa fuit foemina chara viris. Larga coloratis virtutum splendida gemmis, Nunquam laeta parens, nam sine prole jacet. Forma fragilis. An Epitaph on Queen Anne, Wife to King Richard the Second▪ Queen Anne, Richard the Seconds Wife, Lieth buried in▪ this place: Adorned with the Britains Crown▪ With whom she found much grace. Whose noble Sire of Daughter proud, Of Son-in-law full glad, Of Rome thrice happy Emperour was, And that large Empire had▪ Wenceslaus, so call'd by name, Who thus in joyful plight
Sent her to London guarded well With valiant men of might. Against whose coming Plays were made, And Sights and Shews were seen, With Princely pomp to gratifie This noble Virgin Queen. But all mens treasures last not long, They hang but on a twine, Or slender thread; death Kings and Queens Doth all catch up in fine. This Queen was of the Royal Race Of Romans by descent: Of all belov'd, most dear to most, In honour relucent. Full liberal and bountiful, Adorn'd with virtues rare: No Child she had, but issueless She lies without such care. Favour fadeth. 108. Epitaph. viz. Iy gift Henri jadis Ren. de An∣gleterre,A D. 1273. Round the erge. vid. §. 157▪ Seigneur de Hirlande e Du de Aquitanne le fiz. l▪ Ren. Iohn, &c.
Tertius Henricus jacet hic pietatis amicus Ecclesiam stravit istam, quam post renovavit.On a Table. Reddet ei munus qui regnat trinus & unus. Tertius Henricus est Templi conditor hujus. 1273. Dulce bellum inexpertis. The friend of pity and almsdeed, Henry the Third whilom of England King, Who this Church brake, and after his meed Again renewed into this fair building: Now resteth here which did so great a thing, He yield his meed that Lord of Deity, That as one God, reigns in Persons three. 109. Epitaph. viz.A. D. 1065. St. Edw▪ Confes. vid. §. 145. 146. Omnibus insignis virtutum laudibus heros, Sanctus Edwardus Confessor, Rex venerandus Quinto die Jani moriens super aethera scandit. Sursum corda. Moritur, Anno Domini, 1065.
110. Epitaph. viz. Margareta illustrissimi Regis AngliaeA. D. 1472. Margaret. fil. Edw. IV. vid. §. 162. & Franciae Domini Edwardi quarti & Dominae Elizabethae Reginae serenissimae sortis ejusdem filia, & quinta proles, ae nata fuit 19. die mensis Aprilis Anno omini 1472. & obiit 11. die Decem∣is, cujus animae propitietur Deus. men. obilitas & forma, decorque, tenella juventus simul hîc ista mortis sunt condita cista, t genus & nomen, sexum, tempus quoque mortis, oscas cuncta tibi manifestat margo sepulchri. 11. In obitum Edwardi Tertii RegisA. D. 1377. Edward II. Rex. Angl. vid. §. 160. invictissimi Epitaphium. Round the Verge, and on a Table ic decus Anglorum, flos Regum praeteritorum, rma futurorum, Rex clemens, pax populorum, rtius Edwardus Regni complens Jubilaeum victus Pardus, pollens bellis Machabaeus, sperè dum vixit regnum pietate revixit, mipotens rexit jam coelo coelice Rex sit.
Tertius Edwardus fama super aethera notus. Of English Kings here lies the beautiful flower Of all before passed▪ and a mirrour to them A merciful King▪ of peace conservator, shall sue; The third Edward: the death of whom may rue All English men▪ for he by Knighthood due Was Libard invict, and by feat martial To worthy Machabe in vertue peregall▪ Pugna pro patria. Anno Dom. 1377. 112. Philippae Reginae uxoris EdwardiA. D. 1369. Philip. Regin. Angl. vid. §. 159. tertii Epitaphium. Gulielmi Hannonis soboles postrema Philippa,A Table. Hic roseo quondam pulchra decore jacet. Tertius Edwardus Rex ista conjuge laetus Materno suasu nobiliumque fuit, Frater Johannes, Comes Mavortius heros, Huic illam voluit consociare viro. Haec junxit Flandros, conjunctio sanguinis An∣glis, In Francos venit hinc Gallica dira lues. Dotibus haec raris viguit Regina Philippa, Forma praestanti, Religione, fide. Foecundae nata est proles numerosa parenti, Insignes peperit magnanimosque duces.
Oxonii posuit studiosis optima nutrix Regineas aedes, Palladiamque Scholam. Conjux Edwardi jacet hic Regina Philippa. Obiit Regina Philippa Anno Dom. 1369. Disce vivere. The Epitaph of Queen Philippe, Wife of Edward the Third. Fair Philip William Henaldes Child, And youngest Daughter deere▪ Of roseat hue and beauty bright, In tombe lies hilled here. Edward the third through Mothers will, And Nobles good consent, Took her to Wife, and joyfully With her his time he spent. His Brother John, a martial man, And eke a valiant Knight, Did linck this Woman to this King In bonds of marriage right. This Match and Marriage thus in bloud, Did bind the Flemmings sure To English men, by which they did The Frenchmens wrack procure. This Philip flow▪d in gifts full rare, And treasures of the mind: In Beauty bright, Religion, Faith, To all and each most kind.
A fruitful Mother Philip was, Full many a Son she bred, And brought forth many a worthy Knight▪ Hardy and full of dread. A careful nurse to Students all, At Oxford she did found Queens Colledge, she, dame palace School▪ That did her fame resound. Queen Philippe died in the year of our Lord. 136▪ Learn to live. 113. Epitaph. viz. Dormit non mortua est. Foeliissimae Memoriae sacrum Eliza∣bethaeEliz. Rsse. vid. §. 53. Russelliae posuit Anna soror m∣rens. 114. The EpitaphA. D. 1422. Henrics . R▪ Angl. vid. §. 164. On Henry V. King of England.On  Table. Gallorum mastix jacet hic Henricus in Urna, 142 Domat omnia virtus. Pulchra virumque suum sociat tandem Katherin▪ Otium fuge.
O merciful God what a Prince was this, Which his short time in martial acts spent, In honour of conquest that wonder to me it is, How he might compass such deeds excellent, And yet for that his mind nothing detent, All ghostly health for his soule to provide, Out of this world ere he fatally should slide. So though I had Tully his eloquence, Or of Seneca the grave morality, Or of Solomon the perfect sapience, Or the sweet Ditties of Dame Calliope; Yet might I not in Prose, or other ditty, Accordingly advance this Princes fame, Or with due honour to enhance the same. Considering his Acts, whereof parcel appear In this rude work, with many more left out, The time also was less than ten year▪ That he so shortly brought all things about, By divine grace furthered out of doubt, That mightful Lord he holy his ghostly knight With grace & honour to pass this worlds ight: And to have reward double and condign, And first for martial Ats by im done, To be advanc'd amonst the Worthies nine, And for his virtues us'd by him eftsoon, done: With many good deeds which he on earth had Above the Hierarches▪ he is I trust now stalld, That was in earth King of Kings calld.
115. Katherinae Reginae uxoris HenriciA. D. 1437. Katherin Qu. of England. vid. §. 164. quinti Epitaphium. Hic Katherina jacet Francorum filia Regis, Haeres & regni Carole sexte tui, Henrici quinti thalamo bis laeta jugali, Nam sic vir duplici clarus honore fuit. Jure suo Anglorum, Katherinae jure triumphans Francorum obtinuit jus, decus imperii. Grata venit laetis foelix Regina Britannis, Perque dies celebrant quatuor ore Deum. Edidit Henricum gemebunda puerpera Regem, Cujus in imperio Francus & Anglus erat, Non sibi nec regno foelici sidere natum, Sed patri & matri religione parem. Post ex Owino Tiddero tertia proles, Nobilis Edmundus te Katherina beat, Septimus Henricus quo non praestantior alter Filius Edmundi gemma Britanna fuit. Foelix ergo uxor, mater ter, filia foelix, Ast Avia haec foelix terque quaterque fuit. Otium fuge. Obiit Anno Domini. 1437.
The Epitaph Of Queen Katherine, Wife of Henry V. Here lies Queen Katherine clos'd in grave, The French Kings Daughter fair, And of thy Kingdom Charles the Sixth, The true redoubted Heir: Twice joyful Wife in marriage match'd, To Henry Fifth by name; Because through her he nobl'd was, And shin'd in double fame; The King of England by descent, And by Queen Katherines right. The Realm of France he did enjoy, Triumphant King of might. A happy Queen to English men, She came right grateful here: And four days space they honoured God, With mouth and reverend fear. Henry the Sixth, this Queen brought forth, In painful labours plight, In whose Empire a Frenchman was, And eke an English wight. Vnder no lucky Planet born, Vnto himself, nor Throne: But equal with his Parents both, In pure Religion. Of Owen Tiddor after this, Thy next Son Edmund was,
O Katherine a renowned Prince, That did in glory pass. H the Svth a Britain Pearl, A  of Englands joy, A ss Prince was Edmunds Son, A good and gratious Roy. Therefore a happy Wife this was, A happy Mother pure: Thie happy Child, but Grandam she, More than thrice happy sure. 116. Solium Regni Scotici. Rex Edwardus I. cùm devictis Scotis, tri∣umphatorVid. §. 14. 1297. rediisset Sceptrum & coronam Regum Scotiae, unà cum solio in quo Scotorum Reges inaugurati so∣lebant in Ecclesia Westmonasteriensi Deo obtulit. Si quid habent veri vel chronica, cana sidesve, Clauditur hac Cathedra nobilis ecce lapis. Ad caput eximius Jacob quondam Patriarcha Quem posuit cernens numina mira poli; Qm tulit ex Scotis spolians quasi victor honoris, Edwardus Primus, Mars velut armipotens, Scotorum domitor, noster validissimus Hector, Anglorum decus, & gloria militiae.
Arms. viz. Carteret. A Fess of four Lozenges cress. on a Cressant diff. 117. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Edward deEd. de Carteret vid. §. 41. Carteret, Son of Sir Edward de Car∣teret, Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod. 118. Epitaph. viz. Dedicated to the Memory of Anne,A. D. 1635. Anne Cottingt. Vid. §. 120. the pious and beloved Wife of Francis Lord Cottington Baron of Hanworth in the County of Middlesex, Daugh∣ter of Sir William Meredith of the County of Denbigh Knight, and of Jane his Wife, Daughter of Sir Thomas Palmer of Wingham in Kent Knight and Baronet, who having lived in long and perfect conjugal affection died full of Christian comfort the twenty second day of February 1633. aetatis 33. having had one Son and four Daughters, of which Fances, Elizabeth, and Anne died before her; Charles and Anne now living, 1635.
Arms. Cottington viz. A Fess between three Roses. Crest, a Bucks head coped. Supporter, two Eagles. 119. Epitaph. viz. Here lies Francis Lord Cottington ofA. D. 1652. Francis Lord Cottington. vid. §. 121. Hanworth▪ who in the Reign of King Charles I. was Chancellour of his Ma∣jesties Exchequer, Master of his Court of Wards, Constable of the Tower, Lord High Treasurer of England, and one of his Majesties Privy Council. He was twice Embassadour in Spain, once for the said King, and a second time for King Charles II. now reigning. To both which he most signally shew∣ed his allegiance and fidelity during the unhappy Civil Broyls of those times, and for his faithful adherence to the Crown (the Usurpers prevailing) was forced to fly his Country, and during his Exile died at Vallidolid in Spain on the nineteenth day of June, Anno Dom. 1652. aetatis suae 74. whence his body was brought, and here interred by Charles Cottington Esquire, his Nephew and Heir, Anno Dom. 1679.
Arms. Sidney, With quarterings, viz. Or, a Pheon B. 2. arry of ten Arg. and Gules, a Lion rampant Or, crowned parted per pale of the first and second. 3. Arg. two bars and three Escutcheons in chief sab. 4. Arg. three Cheverons Gules and file of three. B. 5. Arg. on a bend sab. three Lozenges of the field. 6. Quarterly Arg. and G. an Ecarbuncle pomette and Horette Or. 7. B. a Chev. between three Mul∣lets Or. 8. Argent three Lions rampant Gules. Impaling Raclfe With quarterings, viz. Arg. a bend ingrailed sab. 2. Or, a Fess between two Chev. G. 3. Arg. a Lion ramp. sab. crowned Or, within a bordure B. 4. Or, a Saltire ingrailed sab. 5. Gules, three Fishes hauriant Arg. 6. Arg. three barrulets G. 7. Or, semy de Flower-de-luces sab. 8. Arg. an Eagle sab. perching on a Child in swadling bands, Gules, Crest on a Torce of his colours, a Porcupine B. Quils, Collar, and Chain reflexed over the back, all Or. 120. Epitaph. viz. Inclytae Heroinae Franciscae ComitissaeA. D. 1589. Frances Com. Sussex. vid. §. 122.  Sussex ex nobili & Antiqua Sydnei∣orum familia ortae, illustrissimo, sapien∣tissimo, & bellicosissimo viro Domino Henrici Ratcliffe Comiti Sussex nuptae, faeminae multis rarissimisque dotibus, tum animi tum corporis ornatae, in sanguine conjunctos, in amicos, in pauperes, in cap∣tivos, & praecipuè in verbi divini mini∣stros liberalitate & charitate prae caeteris insigni, quae lectionem sacrae Theologiae
in Ecclesia Westmonasteriensi Collegiata legendam instituit, & quinque millia li∣brarum per testamentum legavit, quibus vel extrretur Collegium novum in Aca∣demia Cantabrigiensi, vel (ad augmentum Aulae Clarensis in eadm Academia) perquireretur annuus census: de quo per∣petuò ali pssint magister unus, decem socii, & Scholares viginti. Opus certè praeclarum & nunquam satis ladatum. ixit annos 58. mot. est 9. Mart. & sepulta fuit die 15. Aprilis. Anno Dom. 1589. Here lieth the most honourable Lady Frances▪ sometimes Countess of Sussex, Daughter of Sir William Sydney of Pensehurst Knight, Wife and Widow to that most noble, most wie, and most martial Gen∣tleman Thomas Ratclie Earl of Sussex▪ a woman whilst she lived adorned with many and most rare gifts both of mind and body, to∣wards God truly and zealously re∣ligious to her Friends and Kins∣folk most liberal▪ to the poor Pri∣soners, to the Ministers of the Word of God always most chari∣table. By her last Will and Te∣stament she instituted a Divinity
Lecture to be read in this Colle∣giate Church, and by the same her Testament, gave also 5000 lib. towards the building of a new College in the Vniversity of Cam∣bridge, with sufficient yearly re∣venue for the continual mainte∣nance of one Master, ten Fellows, and twenty Schollars, either in the same College, or else in another House in the said Vniversity alrea∣dy builded, commonly called Clare-Hall. She lived 58 years, and died the ninth of March, and was buried the fifteenth of April, 1589. Misericordia & Charitate, Pietate & Prudentia, Fide Conjugali. Beati mortui qui in Domino moriuntur. Omnia plena malis, fert Deus unus opem, Veni Domine Jesu, veni citò.
Arms. Crleon. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. on a bend three Mascals. 2. On a bend three Martlets. 3. A Pallet wavy between six Roses and canton Er∣mine, Crest. out of a ducal Crown an horse-head coped. Supporters an Horse and Mastive. Motto, Non ad perniciem. On one side. Carleton. Impaling Garrard. viz. On a Fess, a Lion passant. On the other. Carleton. Impaling a Cheveron between three roundles. 121. Epitaph. viz. AE. M. S. Dudleius Carleton, Antonii ex Jo∣cosâA. D. 1631. Dudley Carleton vid. §. 123. Goodwin, filius secundus. Martii Anno Christ, 1573. Brightweili in agro Oxoniensi natus, exactâ variarum Europae nationum, linguarum, morum, jurium, legum notitiâ quaesitâ frequenti∣bus pro serenissimis suis Regibus Jacobo (inclytissimae memoriae) atque Carolo (qui diutissime regnet) ad Christianos Reges, Principes, Republicas legatio∣nibus susceptis & absolutis, primario ne∣gotiorum secretiorum & maximè arduo∣rum
munere sanctiorumque consiliorum arcanis fideliter aequè ac prudenter admi∣nistratis; atque ob multam virtutem pri∣mum Equitis aurati, post Baronis ab Imbercourt & tandem vicecomitis Dor∣cestriae titulo & honore; & (quod multo majus) omnium quotquot vidêre, amore, ornatus. Bino (ferente vitae curriculo) conju∣gio: priori & diuturniori cum Annâ Garrardâ; posteriori & breviori cum Annâ Vice-comite Bayning (utrâque & genere & formâ splendida viduâ) contra∣cto, & alterutro nec sterili nec tamen fertili donatus. Tandem die 15. Febr. Anno Christi, 1631. Westmonasterii denatus, animam Deo, exuvias terrae reddens, triste sui de∣siderium Regi, regno & bonis omnibus reliquit, ex priore conjuge, quae in aliqui∣bus defunctis legationibus fida, viro vivo fuit, atque etiam mortuo, hic sepulta manet comes: tulit purum paucis▪ diebus hâc luce fruentem, ex posteriore conjugio quod (jam Regis Caroli secretarius pri∣marius) vix iennio ante obitum subiit in utero reliquit nturam posthumam, quae & ipsa paucis mnsbus genitorem ex hac vita in meliorem est subsecuta.
Arms. Puckering. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 6. Sab: a bend of five Fusils cottised Arg. 2. Arg. a Mul∣let peined Sab. 3. Erm. on a Fess G. three Annu∣lets Or. 4. Arg. three Pallets Vert 5. Arg. two bends, the one ingrailed, the other plain sab. Crest on a Torce of his colours, a uck springing for∣ward Or. On each side in Lozenge Shields. Gules, three Rakes in pale bar-ways Arg. Handles Or. 122. Epitaph. viz. Juris prudentia, pietate, consilio, mul∣tisqueA. D. 1596. Sir John Puc∣kering. vid. §. 126. aliis virtutibus insignis Johannes Puckering miles à sreniss. Elizabetha Angliae Regina in secretius consilium ac summum magni sigilli Angliae Custodiis munus ascitus, cùm 4. annis singulari fide & aequitate jus dixisset, placidè in Domi∣no obdormiens hîc situs est. Vixit annos 52. Obiit 30. Aprilis anno 1596. Causarum Imperii, & curarum pondere fesso Vivere poena fuit, mors mihi somnus erat. Divitiae, fasces, legiones, stemmata, honores, Temporis haec spolium, praedaque mortisatrae. Virtus incendit vires. Hanc posuit statuam dilecto sponsa marito, Foederis & fidei testem pignusque jugalis. Spero videre Dominum in terra viventium.
Arms. romley. With quarterings▪ viz 1. and 4. Quarter∣ly per Fess indented G. and Or. 2. Arg. on a Chev. within a bordure ingrailed Gules five Bezans. 3. Gules on a Fess Arg. between six Flower-de∣luces Or, three cross Croslets sable. Over all a Cres∣cent difference Or. Crest on a Torce of his colours, a Phesant Cock prop. On the Pedestal these Arms. romley. Impaling Arg. a Cheveron Gules fretty, Or. Bromley Impaling Arg. on a Cheveron sab. three Besants. Bromley. Impaling Arg. a bend ingrailed B. cotti∣sed, Or. 123. Epitaph. viz. Consilio, Pietate, ac jurisprudentia, in∣signisA. D. 1587. Sir Thomas Bromley. vid. §. 24 Thomas Bromley Miles, à sere∣nissima Elizabetha Angliae Regina in se∣cretius consilium, ac summum Cancellariae munus ascitus, cùm octo annos singulari ide, animi moderatione, ac aequitate jus dixisset, praepropero ato lugentibus bonis omnibus ereptus, hic situs est. Vixit annos 57. obiit 12. Aprilis, anno 1587. reliquit ex Elizabetha è Fortescuorum familia xore superstites liberos octo. Henricus filius patri optimo posuit. Justicia & Aequitate. Labore & Industria. Studio & Diligentia.
Arms. Fullerton. Quartering, viz. 1. and 4. Or, three Bears heads coped Gules. 2. and 3. Arg. on a Fess sab. three Mullets of the first, annulet difference. Impaling a bend inrailed. Crest on a Torce of his colours, A Bears head coped. 124. Epitaph. viz. Here lies the remnants of Sir JamesSir James Fullerton. vid. §. 125. Fullerton Knight, first Gentleman of the Bed-chamber to King Charles I. Prince and King, a gracious rewarder of all virtue, and severe reprover of all vice; a profess'd renouncer of all vanity. He was a firm Pillar to the Common-wealth, a faithful Patron to the Catholick Church, a fair Pattern to the British Court. He lived to the welfare of his Country, to the honour of his Prince, to the glory of his God: He died fuller of faith than of fears, fuller of resolution than of pains, fuller of honour than of days. Arms. Quarterly, 1. and 4. A Saltire. 2. and 3. A bend ingrailed between two Flower-de-luces.
125. Epitaph. viz. Thomas Vaughan . . . . . . &Sir Thomas Vaughan. vid. §. 136. Thesar, Camer. Edwardi quarti, a Camerer. Principis & primoge∣niti dicti . . . . . . . . . requiescat in pace. Amen. Arms. Cecill. With quarterings viz. 1. and 6. BarryThomas Cecill. Earl of Exeter. VIZ. §. 137. of ten, six Escutcheons, each charged with a Lion rampant. 2 Per pale a Lion ramp. supporting a Tree. 3. A roundle between three Towers triple towred. 4. On a bend cottised three Cinq'foyls. 5. A Chev▪ between three Chesrooks Ermines, all within the Garter. Cecill. Impaling on a Cross a Leopards head, a Cre∣scent difference. Cecill. Impaling, quarterly, 1. On a Saltire an Annu∣let. 2. Fretty on a Canton parted per pale, a Ship at Anchor. 3. A Fess between six cross Croslets. 4. Quarterly in the first quarter a Mullet. Cecill. Impaling fretty a Canton Ermine. Ccl Impaling, on a Chev. between three Roses slipped, three Flower-de-luces. Cecll. Impaling, quarterly 1. and 4 two bars, a chief quarterly▪ in the first and second a deliz, in the third and fourth a Lion passant gardant. 2. and 3. Three three water-budgets. Cecil. Impaling, a Fess, two roundles in chief, and a Martlet in base. Three Swords points in pile, a Crescent difference impaling Ccll. A Griffon sergreant, holding an Escutcheon between the legs, charged with another Griffon sergreant. Impaling Ccl. A Saltire between twelve crosses patte, Impaling Cecll▪
A bend ingrailed between six Billets Impaling Cecill. A Chev. between three Garbs, Impaling Ccl. On a pale an Eagle displayed. Impaling Ccll. 126. Epitaph. viz. Thomas Cecill Comes Exeter, BaroRound the  de Burleigh ordinis Garterii Eques, Re∣gi Jacobo à sanctioribus consiliis, cum charissis dbus uxoribus ejus Doro∣thea Nevil ex nobili Domini Latimeri familia, & una cohaeredibus prima uxore, & Francisca Bridges ex nobili familia Chandois secunda uxore, cum firma sp resurreconis hee in monumento compost obdormiunt. Ames. Cy With quarterings, viz. 1. On a ben three Roses. 2 England within a bordure. 3.  Fess between six cross Croslets. 4. Chequee a Cheveron Ermin, Crest on a Torce a Swa crowned. 127. Epitaph. viz. H. S. E. Magnae stirpis vir majoris indolisA. D. 1648. Thmas Cary. vid. §. 13. Thomas Cary, qui obiit anno aetatis s 33. quod est nobilitatis Comitis Mon∣mouth filius natu secundus, quod vero vrttis illusre documentum, quod Ca∣rolo primo Regi, cui à cubiculis servie▪
bat erat dilectissimus, cujus pio in affect, usque superstes non ante annum 1648. quo omnia eximia interire necesse rat, penitus defunctus est. Nobilissima familia quasi natura in eo formando, totas prosapiae vires prodiga consumpsisset, Haerede defi∣ciente masculo expiravit, extincta est, Abi viator luctusque, & venerationis stuporm mise. 128. Epitaph. viz. Charles Howard, third Son of theA. D. 1668. Charles Howard vid. §. 138. Right Honourable Charles Earl of Carlile, who was born the fifth day of September Anno Dom. 1668. and died the third of April 1670. and lieth here interred. Arms. Carey With quarterings, viz. 1. Arg. on a bend sab. three Roses of the field, a Crescent diffe∣rence. 2. Sab. two bars neb. Erm. 3. France and England quarterly within a bordure Gobony, Arg. and B. 4. Or, six Lions rampant sab. 5. Eng∣land within a bordure Arg. 6. Or, two bars Gules, and three Torteaux in chief. 7. G. a Fess between six cross Croslets Or. . Cheq▪. Or. and B. a Chev. Erm. 9. G. a Chev. between ten Crosses patte Arg. 10. Or. a Fess between two Chev▪ sab. 11. G. a Lion passant Arg crowned Or. 12. Arg. a Chev. Gules
between three Bulls heads coped sab. armed Or▪ 13. Quarterly sa▪ and Arg. 14. B. three Dexter hands coped at the Wrist Arg. 15. B. a fret. Arg. and chief Gules. 16. Arg. On. a chief sab. three Crosses patte of the first. 17. Or. a Cross G. and file of three B. 18. Or. a chief indented B. 1. Three covered Cups Or. 20 Gules two bars wavy, Or. Crest on a Torce a Swan prop. all within the Garter supported by. On the Pyramids about the Monument. viz. Gules a Fess between six cross Cros∣lets Or. Cheque Or and B. a Cheveron Ermine. Gules, a Lion passant Argent, crowned Or. Argent two Lions passant in pale B. crow∣ned Or. ar B, a Cheveron Arg. between three Pears Or. Or. a Fess between two Chev. sab. Md. Argent two bars Gules. Gwre A bend ragule coped. ent. England, a bordure Argent. France and England quarterly within a bor∣dure Gobony Arg. and B. Barry of six, Or. and B. a bendlet Gules. Wk, Or, two bars Gules, three Torteaux in chief. Or. two bends wavy Gules. ec▪ Or. two bars Gules. Sene. Sab. two bars nebulee, Ermine. Carey. Arg. on a bend sab. three Roses of the field, Crescent difference. ia▪ Or, three piles in point B. ursey. Arg. three Eagles displayed Gules. Hrcourt Or, two bars Gules. Holland. B. a Lion ramp. gardant, and five Flower-de∣luces Arg. Arg. a manch Gules. Eville. Barry of ten G. and Arg. a Lion ramp. Sab. Parted per pale Or and Gules, three roundles counterchanged. Nwurg. Bendy Lozengy, Or and B. a bordure Gules platte.
Bracton. Sab. three Mullets Or and chief indented Ermine. Hankfort. Sab. Chev. barry nebulee of four Arg. and Gules. Barkley. G. a Chev. between ten crosses patte Arg. P Arg. two bars and Canton B. thereon a Cinq'∣foyle Or. Ormond. Or, a chief indented B. Ho. Quarterly Sab. and Argent. Bull. Arg. a Chev. G. between three Bulls heads coped sab. armed Or. Cict. Or, an Eagle displayed G. on a chief of the last, a Swan between two Annulets Gr. Fstf. Quarterly Or and B. on a bend Gules. three Escalops Arg. Holway. Gules a Fess between three Crescents Arg. Mama. B. three dexter hands coped at the Wrist Argent. Wingham. Erm on a chief sab. three Crosses patte Argent. Mcmc. Sab. three Garbs Arg Fitz Iohn. Quarterly Or and Gules▪ a bordure varry. Mrshal Gules a Lin ramp. Arg. Stronbw. Or, six Lions rampant. 3. 2. 1. sab. 129. Epitaph. viz. Sepulturae familiae de Hunsdon consecratum. In domino hîc obdormit Henricus Ca∣rey,A. D. 1596. Hen. Carey, Baro nsdon. vid. §. 133. Baro de Hunsdon, villae Berwici limitisque tam orientalis quàm medi ver∣sus Scotiam olim Praefectus: Pentiona∣riorum Generosorum Capitaneus; Foresta∣rum cis Trentam Justiciarius summus; Garteriani ordinis Eques Auratus; Do∣minae Reginae Camerarius; à sacris con∣siliis,
eidmque consobrinus. Ʋnà cum illo conditur uxor charissima filia Thomae Morgan equitis aurati, quae plures ill li∣beros peperit, è quibus sunt superstites, Gregorius, Johannes, Edmundus, Ro∣bertus, Equites Aurati: Catharina, Co∣mitissa Notinghamiae, Philadelphe, Bronissa Scroope, & Margareta, Do∣mina Hoby, obiit 23. Julii 1596: aeta∣tis 72. Ptri optimo Georgius Carey filius, Bro de Hunsdon, ordinis Garterii socius, Vectae insulae Praefectus, Reginae Elizabethae Camerarius, & à sacris consi∣liis: maritoque charissimo Anna uxor, honoris & memoriae ergo, sibique & suis mortalitatis memores posuerunt. Am. ton. With quarterings, B. a Cheveron be∣tween three Garbs Or. 2. Barry bendy Lozengy indented one within the other Arg. and Gules. Arg. a Cross Patonce between four Martlets Gules. 4. Arg. an Eagle displayed sab. 5. Arg. on a bend sab. three covered Cups Arg. 6. Sab. a Cross in∣grailed Ermine. 7. Sab. a Saltire Or. 8. Sab. a Fess Humet. Arg▪ a Crescent diff. 9. B. five Cinq'foyles in cross Arg. 10. Arg. three Bendlets and Canton sab. thereon a Tower triple towred of the first. 11. Arg. on a chief Gules, three Flower-de▪luces Or. 12. Erm. on a Fess B. three Crosses moliné Or. Im∣paling Fanshaw, viz▪ Or, a Cheveron between three Flower∣de-luces sab.
130. Epitaph. viz. Christopherus Hatton ordinis BalneiA. D. 169. Sir Christopher Hatton. vid. §. 142. Eques cognominis summi Angliae Cancel∣larii Haeres, foeliciter duxit uxorem Ali∣siam Fanshaw, Thomae Fanshaw Armi∣geri Regiae Majest▪ à memoriis filiam: ex qua liberos suscepit 12. reliquit 6. Chri∣stopherum, Johannem, Franciscum, & Gulielmum, Elizabetham, & Janam. ipse praeiit Septemb. 10. 1619. illa sequu∣tura adhuc anno 1623. expectat socianda viro & Christo. 131. Epitaph. viz. Ʋbi vota saepe fervida hîc gelidos semel deposuit artus vividae plnos spei. Christopherus Hatton ille CancellariiSir Christopher Hatton. vid. §. 14. florentis haeres, ipse flos Equitum, boni quem vivum amabant mortuum desiderant, nam fuerat ille vir amicorum trahax te∣nax amorum, comitus expers doli simplex sine hamo prominens benignitas, ut mensa sic mens obvia & semper patens, quin & beatus prole multiplici tamen fratres & orbus iliorum suppares dilexit, auxit,
fovit, exemplum supra pia charitatis ea∣rendo seniunt quam solida pietas, quan∣tus in doctos amor, clerique cultus, clericis doctis, piis ubique notum, reliqua fletus obruit. Futura tumuli socia quae thalami fuit Alisia, moerens statuit hoc viro ac sibi Non dividendum morte contubernium. Arms. oll. With quarterings viz. Ermin two piles in point sab. 2. Argent a Lion ramp. Gules. 3. Sab. a Crescent surmounted by a Mullet Arg. 4. Arg. three Cheverons sab. 132. Epitaph. viz. Georgio Holles, Eq▪ Anglo-Brit. cla∣riss▪A. ▪ 16. Sir Gs vid. §. 15. peni. oriundo rerum militar. sic à pueritia dedito ut castror. Alumnus nasci videretur, qui post G. cuncta quae deernt nobilem stipendia in Belgia fe∣cerat ordin. ductor suae gentis supremus vulgò Sergiant Major Generalis, de∣claratus est. Augustaeque Trinobantum pacificè excessurus. Hic propter Franc. Verum Imper. suum & consanguin. cui tamen periculis quam sanguine conjunctior ambitu honestiss. componi voluit. Joannes Fr. Comes de Clare Fr. meritissimo mae∣rentissimus.
P. vixit A. 50. M. 3. D. 4. obiit. 14. Kal. Junii. A. D. 1626. Arms. Vre. With quarterings, viz. Quarterly a Mul∣let in the first quarter. 2. A Lion ramp. vulned on the shoulder. 3. Barry wavy of six. 4. A Salre between twelve Apples sliped. 5. A bar between two bars gemels. 6. Three Cheverons. 7. A fret on each joynt a roundle. 8. A Lion ramp. debu∣sed by a Fess, therein three crosses patte fitchy. Crest on a chapau. a Boar passant. 133. Epitaph. viz. Francisco Vero Equiti auroto, Galre∣diA. D. 1608. Sir Fran. Vere. vid. §. 174. F. Joannis Comitis Oxoniae nepoti, Brieliae & Portsmuthae Praefecto, Anglicarum copiarum in Belgio Ductori summo: Elizabetha uxor viro charissimo, quocum conjunctissimè vixit, hoc supre∣mum amoris & fidei conjugalis monumen∣tum moestissima & cum lacrymis gemens, posuit. Obiit 28. die Augusti An▪ salutis 1608. Aetatis suae 54. Am. Esner. viz. on a Fess ingrailed between three Crosses patte, three Martlets. Two Keys in Saltire with a Miter in chief. On a chief indented a Cro∣sier Staff and Miter.
134. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Dominus Johannes EstneyA. D. 1438. John Estney. Vid. §. 171. quondam Abbas hujus loci, qui obiit 24. die mensis Maii, Anno Dom. 1438. cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen. 135. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Thomas Parrey, miles, The∣saurariusA. D. 1560. Sir Tho. Parry. vid. §. 173. Hospitii ac Magister curiae Wardorum & Liberationum Eliza∣bethae Reginae. Obiit 15. Decemb. Anno Dom. 1560. Arms. Dormer. With quarterings, viz. B. ten Billets. 4. 3. 2. 1. Or. On a chief of the last a demy Lion ramp. issuant sab. 2. Gules on a Chev. between three Fishes naiant Arg. three Martlets sab. On a chief indented of the second three Escalop shell▪ of the first. 3. Arg. on a Chev. sab. between three Ogress. three Roses of the field. 4. Arg. three Flower-de-luces, B.
136. Epitaph. viz. Memoriae. S. Catherina Domina St. John filia Gu∣lielmiA. D. 1614. Kath. St. Johns. vid. §. 177. Dormer de Eithrope Equitis Aurati, vidua Joannis Baronis St. John de Bletnesto cui peprit Oliverum filio∣lum tenella tate dsunctum, &. Annam uxorem Gulielmi Domini Howard de Effingham, primogeniti filii Caroli Comitis Nottinghamiae Angliae The∣saurarii, &c. cum mors sit certa, & poste∣rorum cura incerta mortalitatis memor certissima spe in Christo resurgendi hoc sibi monumentum vivens posuit. Obiit die 23. Mensis Martii anno salutis 1614. 137. Epitaph. viz.A. D. 1466. Edmund Kirton vid. §. 180. Pastor pacificus, subjectis vir moderatus, Hac sub marmorea petra requiescit humatus Edmundus Kirton, hic quondam qui fuit Abbas Bis Denis Annis cum binis connumerandus, Sarae scripturae Doctor probus, immo probatus, Illustri stirpe de Cobildic generatus: Coram Martino Papa proposuit iste, Ob quod multiplices laudes habuit & honores. Qui obiit tertio die Mensis Octob. An. Dom. 1466.
138. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Coelis coelestis, pars terris reddita terrae: Ʋt grave descendit, sic leve summa petit. Corporis hoc fanum, Burghensis nominis orbis Est Mausolaeum, spiritus ipse Polus. Magnanimus & illustrissimus vir Jo.A. D. 1594. Sir Jo. Bourgh. vid. §. 181. Bourgh nobilissimi Baronis Dom. Guliel. Bourgh à fortissimo Heroe Huberto de Burgho, olim Cantiae Comite oriundi, & nobiliss. foeminae D. Cat. Clinton filiae D. Edward. Clinton Lincoln. Comitis nuper Angliae Admirallii filius, ob res terra & mari gestas clarissimus, Duisburgi Gubernator, bis Equitis Aurati honore donatus, primùm in Belgio ab illustriss▪ Comite Licestriense Reginae Ma. & Ord. Belgiorum Imperatore, de∣inde ab Henrico quarto Gal. Rege post victoriam in agro St. Andreano. De∣mum ob expugnaum & in Angl. invectam ingentem Hisp. avem caraca vul. de gem∣mis▪ auro, argnto, aromatibus Indi∣cis, &c. onsa  vali dignus corona & applausibus exceptus. Dum nimis hostes
cordatum licèt & strenuum, tanquam viribus suis imparem, fatali animi securitate contemnit, multo cum suorum luctu, & patriae damno morte immatura an. viz. aetatis suae 32. Martii 7. 1594. praereptus, hîc universae resurrectionis tu∣bam expectat. Tanti interim viri memo∣riam fugitivam revocans hoc qualeunque amoris pigus, donec magnificentius vir∣tutibus, genio & nomine monumentum dignius paretur. G. B. A. M. P. Anno Dom. 1595. Gladius meus non salvabit me, Psal. 43. Tu es enim Domine qui vitae & mortis habes potestatem & deducis ad portas mortis & reducis. Sap. Cap. 6. 139. Epitaph. viz. Labilitas, brevitas mundanae prosperitatis,Sebert R. Ore∣ent. Saxonum. vid. §. 26. A Table. Coelica praemia, gloria, gaudia danda beatis Sebertum certum jure dedere satis. Hic Rex Christicola verax fuit hac regione Qui nunc coelicola gaudet mercede coronae,
Rex humilis, docilis, scius, & pius, inclytus iste Sollicitè, nitidè, tacitè, placidè (bone Christe) Vult servire tibi perficiendo sibi. Orat mores, spernit flores, lucis avarae Glcens multùm, Christi cultum latiscare Ecclesiam nimiam nimio studio fabricavit, Hae illaesa manus quae fundamenta locavit Hic sptingentis annis terra cumulatus Christi lemenis instinctibus inde levatus. Isto sub lapide nune jacet ipse, vide. Atque domum Christo quia mundo fecit in isto Nunc pro mercede coeli requiescit in aede. Respie mortalis promissio sit tibi talis. Accipies si des, nil capies, nisi des. Es Christo qualis, Christus erit tibi talis. Dapsilis esto sibi, largus eritque tibi. Effectus non affectus si reddere possis Debet censeri; si nihil reddere possis Tunc bonus affectus pro facto debet haberi. Sicut de lignis per aquam depellitur ignis Sic mala commissa fiunt donando remissa, Reddet ad usuram quod quis dat nomine Christi, Nam vitam puram pro parvo dat Deus isti.
140. Epitaph. viz. Memoriae sacrum. Hic jacet Thomas Bilson Wintoni∣ensisA. D. 1616. Tho Bilson. vid. §. 169. nuper Episcopus & serenissimo Principi Jacobo Magnae Britanniae Regi otentissimo à sanctioribus consiliis, qui quum Deo & Ecclesiae ad nnos undevi∣inti fideliter in Episcopatu deservisset, mortalitatem, sub certa spe resurrectionis xuit, decimo octavo die mensis Junii Anno Dom. 1616. aetatis suae 69. 141. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth Cecill Ratcliff, some∣timeCecil Radcliffe vid. §. 169. chief Gentlewoman with my Lady of Dudley, one whose soul God have mercy upon. Amen. Mercy, grace and forgiveness, Arms. Alton. viz. on a Cross ingrailed between four Crescents a Rose.
142. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Clarissimi omnigenaque virtute & eru∣ditione,A. D. 1638. Sir Rob. Aiton. vid. §. 168. praesertim Poësi ornatissimi Equi∣tis, Domini Roberti Aitoni, ex antiqua & illustri gente Aitona, ad castrum Kin∣nadinum apud Scotos, oriundi, qui à Sereniss. R. Jacobo in cubicula interiora admissus, in Germaniam ad Imperato∣rem, Imperiique Principes, cum libello Regio Regiae authoritatis vindice legatas ac primum Annae demum Mariae serenissi∣mis Britaniarum Reginis ab Epistolis, Consiliis & Libellis supplicibus, necnon Xnodochio Sanctae Katharinae Praefectus, anima Creatori reddita hîc depositis mor∣talibus exuviis secundum Redemptionis adventum expectat. Carolum linquens, repetit parentem Et vale dicens Mariae revisit Annam, & aulai decus alto Olympi mutat honore. Obiit Coelebs in Regia Albaula, non sine maximo bonorum omnium luctu & moerore, aetatis suae 68. salut. humanae. 1638.
Hoc devoti gratique animi testimonium optimo paro Jo. Aitonus. M. L. P. Musarum decus hic; patriaeque, aulaeque, domique, Et foris exemplar, sed non imitabile honesti. Arms. Ingram. viz. A Cheveron between three Tal∣bots passant. Impaling Bllsi. viz. A Cheveron between three Flower∣de-luces. 143. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth interred, in full assuranceA. D. 1671. Sir Tho. Ingram. vid. §. 168. of a glorious Resurrection, the body of the Right Honourable Sir Thomas In∣gram Knight, who for his eminent loy∣alty, sufferings, and services to and for their Majesties King Charles I. and II. was (by the later) made Chancellour of the Dutchy of Lancaster, and one of his most honourable Privy Council. He married Frances, Daughter of Thomas Lord Viscount Fawconberge, by whom he had Issue Mary, (his only Child) who died in the twelfth year of her age Anno Dom. 1651. and lies like∣wise here interred, he was primitively religious, and eminently (without ostentation) charitable, an excellent
Subject, a most affectionate Husband, and a faithful Friend, and to the great grief of his Lady and Relations, and loss to his Prince and the Publick, he exchanged his earthly for an heavenly habitation the thirteenth day of Febr. 1671. to whose dear memory this Mo∣nument was erected by his disconsolate Lady. Arms. Tufo. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 6. Sab. an Eagle displayed Ermine within a bordure Arg. 2. Gules a Cross Arg. and file of five B. 3. Gules, a Cheveron between three Lions gambs, erected and erased in bend, within a bordure all Argent. 4. B. a Cheveron Or, between three Swans Arg. 5. Per bend sinister Sab. and Or, a Lion ramp. counter∣changed, over all an Escutcheon of pretence, quar∣terly 1. and 4 Sab. three Leopards heads Or, jessant as many Flower-de-luces Arg. 2. G. a Fess Ermine. 3. Arg. on a bend B. between two Lions ramp. Gules three bezants. Cres on a Torce of his colours, a Lion marine Sjant Arg. 144. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Richard Tuf∣tonA. D. 1631. Rich. Tufton. vid. §. 168. Esquire▪ third Son of Sir John Tuf∣ton of Hothfield in Kent Knight and Baronet: by Christian Brown his Wife, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Humphrey Brown Knight, one of the Justices of the Common-pleas, and
Anne his Wife, Daughter to George Earl of Kent. Which Sir John Tufton left Issue married, by the aforesaid Christian his Wife, Nicolas Baron of Tufton, and Earl of Thanet, Humphrey Tufton Knight, the aforesaid Richard Tufton and William Tufton Baronet of Ire∣land, Cicely Countess of Rutland, and Mary Viscountess of Dunbar, the rest died unmarried. This Richard married Crisogon, youngest Daughter and Coheir of Herbert Morley of Gline in Sussex Esquire. The other Daughter of the said Morley being Margaret; and the eldest was married unto Sir Humphrey Tufton before named, who occasioned this Monument to be erected in memory of his Brother Mr. Richard Tufton, who departed this mortal life, leaving isue John, Mary, and Christian, the fourth of October, Anno Dom. 1631. Arms. Cranfield. viz. On a pale three Flower-de∣luces. Crest out of a ducal Crown an Antelops head coped. 145. Epitaph. viz. Near interred lieth the body ofA. D. 1674. Lyonel Cranfield Vid. §. 169. Lyonell Earl of Middlesex, Baron
Cranfield of Cranfield, in the County of Bedford, one of the Gentlemen of his Majesties Bedchamber. He was se∣cond Son to Lyonel Earl of Middlesex, Lord High Treasurer of England, the last of that honourable Family; he died the 26 day of October in the year of our Lord, 1674. 146. Epitaph. viz. Under this Marble lieth the body ofA. D. 1669. Anne Com. Mid. Vid. §. 169. Anne Countess Dowager, Wife to Lyonell Earl of Middlesex, Lord High Treasurer of England; She departed this life the third day of February in the year of our Lord, 1669. 147. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth James Cranfield Earl ofA. D. 165. James Cranfield Com. Midd. Middlesex, who died the sixteenth of September, Anno Dom. 1652. 148. Epitaph. viz. Mr. Edw. Cranfield lieth here, he diedA. D. 1647. Edw. Cranfield. vid. §. 169. March 16. 1647.
Arms. Cree. With quaterings, viz. a Lion ramp. 2. Semy de Cinq'oyles and fretty of eight pieces. 3. Quarterly, on a bend, three Mullets. 4. Three Martlets within a bordure ingrailed. 5. An Eagle displayed debrused by a Bendlet. 6. A Fish hau∣riant with two Rings in the mouth. 7. A Saltire between twelve Crosets. 8. As the third. 9. On a chief three roundles. 10. A Lion mp. 11. arry of six. 12. Quarterly Erm. in the second and third three Pallets within a bordure. 149. Epitaph. viz. Juliana Crewe, virgo pientissima, cha∣rissima,A. D. 1621. Juliana Crewe. vid. §. 139. & unica filia Ranulphi de Crewe Equitis aurati, Regii tribunalis Capi∣talis Justiciarii, ex Juliana de Cleppesby conjuge, vetustae familiae de Cleppesby in agro Norfolciensi cohaerede suscepta. Redemptoris adventum hic ex∣pectat, vernante aetate, in patriam abiit, 22 April. 1621. Arms. Crewe A Lion ramp▪ on the shoulder a file of three on a Crescent diff. Impaling Pltney▪ viz. A Fess danzette and three Leopards heads in chief. 150. Epitaph. viz. Dominae Janae Crewe pietate, foa,A. D. 1639. Jne Crew. vid. §. 40. pudicitia inter paucas egregiae iliae & co∣haeredi D. Johannis Pultney de Mister∣on
Pultney in Com. Leic. militis, nepti D. Johan. Fortescu de Salden in Com. Bucking. militis ex Margeria filia, matri Johannis▪ Annae, Ranulphi Crewe superstitum & Franciscae Crewe prima infantia praemortuae & consepultae optimae uxori amore & admiratione virtutum moerens maritus Clippesby Crewe miles hoc monumentum posuit. Obiit aetatis suae anno trigesimo secundo die mensis Decem∣bris 1639. Arms. Wld. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. on a chief three Martlets, 2. and 3. a Cross, a Crescent difference. 151. Epitaph. viz. Here lies the body of George WildA. D. 1649. George Wild. vid. §. 167. Esquire, lately a Member of the ho∣nourable House of Commons in Par∣liament, Son of George Wild, late Ser∣jeant at Law, deceased, and youngest Brother of John Wild Lord Chief Ba∣ron of the Exchequer. Obiit 15 die Jan. 1649. In vita honest. in lege & literis erudit. in morte fortis & pius.
Arms. Winchester Epsc. See, viz Gules two Keys indorsed, the one Or▪ the other Arg. a Sword in∣terposing in bend sinister of the last Hilt and Pomel of the second. Impaling Duppa. viz. B. a Lions Gamb erased in Fess between two bars chance Or, on a Canton of the last a Rose Gules. 152. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Mortalitatis exuvias hic deposuit virA. D. 1662. Brian Duppa. vid. §. 166. immortali memoriae sacratus Brianus Duppa qui Grenovici natus Anno Dom. 1588. exunte nempe die Martii 10. Scholae Regiae Westmonasteriensis pri∣mulùm (ubi à Lanceloto Andrews tum decano Hebraicem didicit) mox aedis Christi apud Oxonienses Alumnus; Ma∣gister artium in Collegium omnium anima∣rum cooptatus, dein sanctae Theologiae Do∣ctor & Capellanus Palatinus factus aedi Christi postliminio redditus est, cui praefuit Decanus per decennium; at virum tantum sublimiores expectabant curae, majora desi∣derabant munia, admotus Augustissimae spei Principi tutor; exinde triplici infulâ or∣natus, totidem ipse ornavit Ecclesias, Ci∣cestrensem, Sarisburiensem, &
demum reduce Carolo, Wintonien∣sem▪ quo nomine & auratae Periscelidis antistes audiit, 74. aetatis annum ingressus Anno Dom 1662. jam ineunte nimirum Martii die 26. Richmondiae, ubi erudi∣endo Principi operam antea navârat, ubi calamitosis temporibus benè latuerat, ubi & Hospitium insigne ex voto exstruxerat, inter ipsos penè pupili Regis amplexus piam animam efflavit. Arms. Winchester Epsc Se. Impaling Duppa as before within the Garter, ensigned with a Miter. 153. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Brianus Winton.Vid. §. 166. 154. Epitaph. viz. Johannes Doughty, S. T. D. hujusA. D. 1672. John Doughty. vid. §. 167. Ecclesiae Praebendarius. Obiit 25. Decemb. 1672. aetatis suae 75. 154. Epitaph. viz. In obitum Johannis Windsore Epita∣phium.A. D. 1414. John Windsore. Vid. §. 167.
Est bis septenus M. Christi. C. quater annus, Vespera Pascalis dum septima lux fit Aprilis Transiit à mundo Johannes Windsore nomine notus, Corde gemens mundo, confessus crimine lotus, Fecerat haeredem Gulielmus avunculus istum, Miles & Armigerum dignus de nomine dignum. Dum juvenilis erat bello multos perimebat: Postea poenituit, & eorum vulnera levit, Recumbens obiit, hic nunc in carcere quiescit. Vivat in aeternum Spiritus ante Deum: 106. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Frater Gulielmus Amun∣dishamA. D. 1420. Guliel. Amun∣disham. Vid. §. 167. quondam Monachus hujus loci, Receptor nostri canonici, qui obiit Anno Dom. 1420. mense Julii, die decimo quarto, cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen. 157. Epitaph. viz.Guliel. Couper. vid. §. 167. Totius hoc tumulo sepelitur scriba Britannis, Et Eboracensis praesulis Oeconomus. Couper erat nomine Gulielmus, sudor acerbus Augusti hinc nonis sustulit è medio.
Incumbat mollis tellus facilisque sepulto Nam durus nulli, difficilisve fuit. Miserere mei Deus, secundum magna misericordiam tuam. 158. Epitaph. viz.A. D. 1508. Tho. Brown, and Hmph. Roberts. vid. §. 167. O Deus aeterno donetur munere vitae, Thomas Brown Monachus juncta sepulchra tenens Illius hic pietas rogat hoc te spesque fidesque, Te rogat hoc verus religiosus amor. Surreptum monachi fraterni deplangite mundi, Proque illo crebras fundite quaeso preces. Libera me Domine de morte aeterna in die illa tremenda, cùm coeli movendi sunt, cùm veneris judicare seculum per ignem. Domine ne memineris iniquitatum nostrarum antiquarum. Robertus Monachus jacet hic Humphrey vocitatus▪ Quem dolet extinctum religiosa cohors. Nam bonus & prudens & Thesaurarius olim, Contulit huic sacro commoda multa loco. Virgine nate dea, Deus O qui vota, precesque Exadis, famulum transfer ad astra tuum. Obiit Idus Februarii. 1508.
Credo quod Redemptor meus vivit & in novissimo die de terra surrecturus sum, & in carne mea videbo Deum Salvatorem meum. Citò anticipent nos misericordiae tuae quia pauperes facti sumus nimis. In the Cloisters. Arms. Godfrey. With quarterings, viz. 1. and 4. Sab.A D. 1640▪ Edw. Godfrey. a Cheveron between three Pellicans heads erased, Or, a Crescent diff. 1. B. a Fess Or, between three cross Croslets fitchy Arg. 3. Arg. a Fess between six Escalops Gules. Crest on a Torce of his colours, a Pellicans head erased Or. Motto, Post spinas palma. On one side. Godfrey. As before. Impaling Lambard, viz. Gules a Cheveron Varry, between three Lambs passaut Argent. Word, Christus Pellicanus & Agnus. On the other. Godfrey. Impaling Isl, viz. Argent a Fess ingrailed, and three Flower-de-luces in chief sab▪ Word, Rara est ut lilia nigra. 159. Epitaph. viz. P. M. S.A small Mo∣nument of Ar labaster ador∣ned with Arms and gilt with Gold against the East wall. Edwardi Godfrey qui Patri suo Thomae Godfrey de Hodiford in Sel∣linge in Agro Cantiano Arm. filius
erat 13. proles verò 15. matri autem 11. & 13. quem primum ex 16. natis mater lactabat, qui licet plus triennio lactebat, foelici tamen evasit ingenio, puer optimae spei & indolis dux & decus 5. classis hu∣jus Scholae. Obiit 8. die Junii, anno sa∣lutis 1640. aetatis 12. Honoratiss. Reverendissimoque in Chri∣sto patre Johan. Dom. Episc. Lincoln. Decano Rich. Busby Archi. —Subnotat mortuos Adnotat electos in Regios Alumnos. Margarita Lambard, Lambardus, Thomas, Sarah Isles, Filii Gemini filius Jana, Thomas, Petrus, Richardus, Jo∣hannes, Edmundus, B. Eliz. Michael, Thomas, Edwardus, Katharina, Benja∣min, Sarah. Ecce possessio Jehovae sunt filii merces est fructus ventris, Psal. 127. 160. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of KatharineA. D. 1620. Kath. Stopes. A plain stone in the East wall▪ Stopes, the loving Wife of William Neile: She was the kind Mother of
seven Children, whom she brought up with her own breasts, her life and be∣haviour may be a pattern for the Ages following; she was pretty without pride, modest without sullenness, a good houswife without curstness, ex∣quisite at her needle, courteous of be∣haviour, and right godly of conversa∣tion, whose soul resteth in Jesus Christ, to whom she committed it at her death. Obiit August 24. 1620. Also by her are buried Mr. Roger Parker, a Servant to Queen Elizabeth: Dorothy Neile, one of her Daughters, and Cibell Clarke, her Daughter Mildreds Daughter. Arms. Agard. viz. A Cheveron ingrailed between threeA. D. 1610. Arthur Agard▪ Boars heads erased, quartering three Boars heads coped. Impaling on a chief indented three co∣vered Cups. Crest to the first. On a Torce a Bu∣gle-horn stringed▪ To the second on a Torce a co∣vered Cup. 161. Epitaph. viz. . . . . .A small Monu∣ment by the door of the Chapter house against the East wall. . . . . . Arthurus Agard antiquor . . . . . hic prope reposit . . . . . 62. annos . . . . . diligens scrutator . . . . . & Margareta uxor ejus qui Obiit . . . . . Decemb. 1610 . . . . .
Arms. Fox. viz. Erm. on a Cheveron three FoxesA. D. 1677. Edward, John, and Stephen Fox. heads erased, on a Canton a Flower-de-luce. 162. Epitaph. viz. Hic infra situs est, juxta Edwardi, Jo∣hannis,A small Monu∣ment against the North wall of Alabaster and black Marble. & Stephani, trium fratrum ci∣neres, selectissimus Adolescentulus Jaco∣bus Fox, honoratissimi Domini Steph. Fox equiti Aurati & Elizabethae uxoris, filius natu quintus, parentes filio & filius parentibus quam dignissimus. Summa pie∣tate, vel puer quoad Deum; singulari stu∣dio erga parentes, prisca simplicitate inter omnes, percarum Veneri & Apollini ca▪ put, indubitatus Adonis & Hyacinthus necnon per dotes animi & corporis, nunc Dei olim hominum amasius. O parentes miseremini parentum. O filii ex illo trans∣cribite filium! O posteri vestrum deflete damnum. Vario literaturae genere excultus admirandi sua floruit Antithesis. Sub pue∣ro vir delituit alter in vitae cunabulis & in morte Hercules, dum morbillorum per∣fidia sublatus, videatur ex igne & tunicâ molestâ evolasse ad coelos. A. D. 13. Cal. Decemb. Anno Dom. 1677. aetatis 12. cum semisse.
163. Epitaph. viz. Here lie interred two Children ofA grave▪ stone on the North side▪ Edward and John Fox. the right Worshipful Sir Stephen Fox of Farley in the County of Wilts Knight, viz. Edward Fox, his fourth Son, aged six years and one month, who died on the nineteenth day of Octob. 1669. and John Fox his sixth Son of the age of one year, who deceased upon the seventeenth day of Novemb. in the year of our Lord 1667. 164. Epitaph. viz. Franciscus Newmannus è Collegio om∣niumA. D. 1649▪ Fran. Newman Another small stone in the North wall. animarum apud Oxonienses nuper socius, H. S. E. diem obiit Prid. Id. Dec. nno partae salutis, 1649. Exutâ jam carne animarum in sede receptus vere Neander factus est, Arms. Gawen. viz. Erm. on a Saltire ingrailed B. fiveAnother small Monument against the North wall by the West door. Flower-de-luces Or. Impaling Winchcombe, viz. B. on a Cheveron ingrailed between three birds Or. Three Cinq'foyles of the field. On a chief of the second a Spears head between two Flower-de-luces of the first.
165. Epitaph. viz. Anne the eldest Daughter of JohnA. D. 1669. Anne Winch∣combe. Winchcombe of Berks Esquire, Wife of William Gawen, the younger of Westminster Gent. died in Childbed of her first Child the eighth of Novemb. Anno Dom. 1669. and lies interred un∣der this stone. Vraye femme obeissante jusques à la morte. Arms. Gawen. As before, Impaling Bush. viz. Sab. a Cross botony between four Lions ramp. Arg. within a bordure Gobony of the second and first. 166. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Mrs. AnneAnother small Monument by the former. A. D. 1659. Anne Gawen. Gawen, Wife of Mr. William Gawen, who died the twenty sixth of Novemb. 1659. Near her lie also five of her Children, and also Mr. Isaac Bush, and Frances his Wife, Father and Mother of this Anne.
167. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Richardi Booker, qui in Agro Hor∣samiaeAnother co∣ly Monument of Alabaster and black Marble against the North Wall. A. D. 1655. Rich. Booker. Sussexiensi Anno Dom. 1630. natus, post jacta apud suos bonarum lite∣rarum fundamenta in Collegio primum Regio Westmonasteriensi, Dein SS. Trinitatis quod apud Cantabrigienses est educatus, utrumque ornavit, illustraturus etiam si vixisset, quippe ingentis planè spei juvenem: Stupendi si quis unquam alius ingenii, judicii vel in pubertate plusquam virilis, memoriae usque ad invidiam foe∣licis, Musis & Apollini percharum caput, sertoque brevi redimendum lreo ce flosculum caeteris laetiorem. Invida mors primo statim vere decussit. Heu quanto vel tuo etiam Lector si quid sapis cum dispendio. Anno scilicet aetatis 25. Domini ver 1655. à morbillis crudeliter extinctus est, praeclarum seculi lumen & decus alioquin futurus, ut ab hoc discas, ista qui legis marmore magna repente ruere summisque negari stare diu.
168. Epitaph. viz. In memoria aeterna erit Justus. Underneath lieth buried the bodyAnother stone in the North wall. A. D. 1659. Rich. Gouland. of Mr. Richard Gouland, Master of Arts, and the first keeper of the Li∣brary of this College, to which he hath given a large Legacy to be be∣stowed on some choice Books. A man truly Orthodox, of an undissembled piety and uprightness, of a singular candor and fidelity to his friends, well skilled in the Languages, and other∣wise very well furnished with the best and choicest learning, who after a pain∣ful and wearisom Pilgrimage in a weak and sickly body, departed this life to the seat of the blessed the tenth of Novem∣ber 1659. 169. Epitaph. viz. Memoriae sacrum.On a Grave∣stone on the North side. A. D. 1659. Rich. Gouland. Sub hoc Marmore requiescit D. Richar∣dus Gouland artium Magister & Biblio∣thecar.
hujus Collegii nuper custos, &c. 1659. 170. Epitaph. viz. Underneath lieth the bodies of threeA black stone by the North∣west door against the wall. Sons of Mr. Christopher Chapman, Ri∣chard, Christopher, and Peter Chapman: Peter died the eleventh of September 1672. Richard, the first of Feb. 1672. and Christopher Chapman, Master of Arts, died the twenty fifth of March 1675. Arms. Palmer. viz. Per Fess Argent and sab. a pale counterchanged three Lewres in the first of the second. impaling Partridge. viz. Gules on a bend between two Lions ramp. Or. three birds vert. 171. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth interred the body of Ka∣therineA small Mo∣nument against the West wall. A. D. 1675 Kath. Palmer. Palmer Widow, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of John Par∣tridge late of London Gent. who was the second Wife of Andrew Palmer Es∣quire, Assay-Master of England to Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles I. She departed this life in full assurance of a glorious Resurrection the
fourth day of January in the 75. year of her age, Anno Dom. 1675. Arms. Wadrn. viz Argent, three Bulls heads trun∣ked sable, armed Or. 172. Epitaph. viz. Elizabeth Waldron, the third Daugh∣terA small Monu∣ment against the South wall A. D. 1675. Eliz. Waldron. of Dr. Thomas Waldron, Physician in Ordinary to King Charles II. and his Houshold, died Feb. 5. 167 5 / 6. being aged nineteen years, four months, and four days, and here underneath was buried the ninth day of the same month being Ashwednesday. Arms. Man. On a Fess battelle counterbattelle be∣tween three Goats passant, three roundles. 173. Epitaph. viz. Here underneath lies buried ThomasA Gravestone on the East∣side. A. D. 1676. Thomas Man. Man Gentleman Sewer to the King; who died the twenty first day of Ja∣nuary 1676. beloved by all good men that knew him for being ever loyal to his Prince, and faithful to his Friend, aged 55 years.
174. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Hic jacet quicquid mortale fuit MariaeAnother. A. D. 1661. Mary Bulmer. Bulmer Guil. Greene de Lanmoth in Comitatu Eboracens. Armig. filia; quae tamen virtutum magis quam natalium splendore claruit, habuit Gulielm. Bul∣mer Generosum, quem nullo unquam do∣lore affecit praeterquam moriendo. Guil. tantum peperit sed instar multorum filium probae spei, adolescentem aedis Christi Ox∣oniensis brevi nimis alumnum juxta quem immatura prius morte abrept. sentiri vo∣luit amantissima mater ut quem vivum unicè dilexerat, vel mortuè amplecteretur mortuum: pridiè Calendas Feb. anno salu∣tis 1661. aetatis suae . . . . . Animam Deo reddidit, corpus sepulchro, famam posteris.
Arms. Bulmer. viz. A Lion rampant billette. 175. Epitaph. viz. M. S. Charissimi juvenis Gulielmi Bulmer, èAnother by the former. A. D. 1658. Will. Bulmer. Comitatu Eboracensi quem ob ingent. corporis & animi vires, nativo candore, & morum suavitate conjunctas: sed dum Londini parentes reviserat, febre subla∣tus studiosi omnes aedis Christi Oxoniensis inter quos literis incumbens medicinae de∣signatus fuerat unicè deflent: iidem moe∣stissimi parentes Gulielmus & Maria Bulmer, P. P. 1658. Arms. Humphrey. On a Cross botony, charged with Escalop shells ans number. Impaling three Lions heads erased collered. 176. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth interred the body ofAnother. A. D. 1674. Pl. Humphrey. Mr. Pelham Humphrey, who died the fourteenth of July, Anno Dom. 1674. and in the twenty seventh year of his age.
Arms. Coke. viz. Per pale three Eagles displayed. 177. Epitaph. viz. Clemens Coke Collegii Westmona∣steriensisAnother on the North side A. D. 1668. Clement Coke. Alumnus Regius, filius Roberti Coke armig. filii▪ Clementis Coke de Langeforde in Comitatu Derbiae inte∣rioris templi socii, filii natu minimi Edw. Coke Equ. aurati nup. capitalis Justicia∣rii ad placita coram Rege tenenda assigna∣ti. Diem suum clausit extremum octavo Augusti 1668. aetatis suae 18. 178. Epitaph. viz. Hic jacet Tho. Nurse, M. D. fideAnother of grey Marble inlayed with white at the foot of the steps of the Northeast door. A. D. 1668. Tho. Nurse. spectator, hoc spectaculum judica sed ut tu judicaberis, discede & cogita. Obiit anno Dom. 1668. mensis Jun. die 19. aetatis suae 69. Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15. Pater noster mortuus est, nec fuit in seditione Corae quae concitata est contra Dominum. Num. 27. 3. Quando Dathan & Abiran contra Domi∣num rebellarunt. Ch. 26. 9.
179. Epitaph. viz. Donec expergiscetur è somno suo, subAnother on the North side A. D. 1670. Thomas Legat. hoc mormore requiescit quicquid mori po∣tuit Thomae Legat ex agro Essexiensi Armig. mariti, patris, subditi, amici, vici∣ni, (ah! quid dicam) viri profectò un∣dequaque desideratiss▪ qui placidè obdormi∣vit in Domino, Aprilis 15. anno salutis reparatae Milless. Sexcentess. sexagessimo, aetatis suae 63. 180. Epitaph. viz. Here lie the bodies of three Sons ofAnother. A. D. 1670. 1674. 1677. Thomas, Thomas and Gilbert Knip. Mr. Thomas Knipe, the first Thomas who died the twenty fourth of Febr. 1670. being six days old; the second also Tho∣mas who died the second of Nov. 1674. being a year and nine months old; the third Gilbert Knipe, who died the 25 of January 1677. being eight months old. 181. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Anne FitchAnother. A. D. 1670. Anne Fitch. who departed this life, June 12. 1670.
182. Epitaph. viz. Mary Tucker. 1670.Another. A. D. 1670. Mary Tucker. 183. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth interred the body of Wil∣liamAnother. A. D. 1670. William Blount. Blount a Kings Schollar, Son of Anthony Blount Gent. who departed this life the sixth day of May 1670. aged eighteen years. 184. Epitaph. viz. Here lies the body of John Oxen∣hamAnother▪ A. D. 1680. John Oxenham. of the Inner Temple London Esq his life was most eminent, and death truly pious, he was married almost five years to the youngest Daughter of Ri∣chard Newman Esquire, he was near thirty years of age, and departed this life the third of October 1680. one Bro∣ther and three Sisters of his Wives lie by him.
185. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of LewkenorAnother. A. D. 1676. Lewkenor Hal∣sey. Halsey, a Kings Scholar, Son of Richard Halsey of the County of Sussex Clerk, who departed this life the 28. day of Septemb. 1676. aged 19 years. 186. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Mr. EdwardAnother on the South side. A. D. 1665. 1675. Edward and Marg. Wood∣roofe. Woodrooof who deceased Nov. 16. Anno Dom. 1675. in the 54 year of his age, and of Margaret his Wife, who depar∣ted this life the tenth of Feb. 1665. 187. Epitaph. viz. Under this stone lies buried the bo∣diesAnother. A. D. 1676. Mary and Do∣rothy Pipe. of Mary and Dorothy Pipe; Mary died in the year 1665. and Dorothy the sixteenth of June 1676. 188. Epitaph. viz.Another. A. D. 1648. Elen. Lyne. Mrs. Elenor Lyne, June 5. 1648.
191. Epitaph. viz. John Gavan of St. Pauls Covent-Gar∣den,Another. A. D. 1666. John Gavan. departed this life the 21. of Aug. 1666. aged 58 years. His flesh interred here contain'd a spirit Who by Gods mercy and his Saviours merit, Departed in that constant hope, of dust, Eternally to reign among the Just. To live, die well was his whole endeavour. And in a span di'd to live for ever. 190. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Frances andAnother. A. D. 1659. Frances and Eliz. Riggs. Elizabeth the Daughters of Edmund Riggs Gent. which said Frances died the 31. of Octob. 1659. of the age of four years; And Elizabeth the . . . April 1660. aged three years. 191. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of . . . . . Aston,Another. A. D. 1644. . . . Aston. Clerk of her Majesties Robes, he ended this mortal life the eighth of May, 1644.
191. Epitaph. viz. Depositum Johannis Evans Gen. quiAnother. A. D. 1657. Joh. Evans. vitam hanc pro aeternitate foeliciter muta∣vit, Jan. 26. Anno Dom. 1657. virtus pro Pyramide. Arms. Faireborne. viz. An Hawk or Falcon with Bells and Wings expansed within a bordure invect. Erm. Crest on a Torce, a Gantlet holding a Sword, on the point of which a Moors head. 192. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth John Faireborne, the sixthAnother. A. D. 1679. Joh. Faireborne. Son of Sir Palmes Faireborne Knight, and Dame Margaret his Wife, who died at the age of two months and two weeks, and was buried here Feb. 25. 167 8 / 9. Arms. Thompson. viz. On a Fess wavy three Estoyles, on a Canton a Sun in its glory. Crest on a Torce an hand and arm coped at the elbow, holding three Ears of Genny Wheat. 193. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth interred the body of John,Another on the West side. A. D. 1679. John Thompson. Son of John Thompson of St. Martins in the fields Gent. and Anne his Wife, who
was born upon the fifth of July 1676, and died the 21. of Feb. 167 8 / 9. Arms. Baber. viz. On a Fess three birds heads erased, a Mullet difference. Impaling Erm. on a Cheveron, three Foxes heads erased▪ a file of three over all. Crest, on a Torce a Cock, the Wings erect. 194. Epitaph. viz. Here lieth the body of Stephen Ba∣berAnother on the North side A. D. 1679. Stephen Baber. Gent. only Son and Child of Benja∣min Baber Gent. one of the Aldermen of the City of Bath, by Elizabeth his Wife, who was born Octob. 19. 1663. and departed this life March 23. 1679. In the Little Cloyster. 195. Epitaph. viz. In memory of Mr. Thomas Smith ofA little stone against the North wall to∣wards the West. A. D. 1663. Thomas Smith. Elmely Lovet in the County of Worcester, and Batchelour of Arts, late of Christ Church, Oxford, who through the spotted vail of the small Pox, rendered a pure and unspotted Soul to God, expecting, but never fearing death, which ended his days
March the tenth Anno Dom. 1663/4;. aeta∣tis suae 27. The virtues which in his short life were shown Have equall'd been by few, surpass'd by none. 196. Epitaph. viz. John Wilson Doctor in Musick hereA Gravestone on the East∣side. A. D. 1673. John Wilson. interred died the 22. of February 1673. aged seventy eight years, ten months, and seventeen days. FINIS.
These Monuments and Grave-Stones follow∣ing have been Erected in Westminster-Abbey since the first of April, Anno Domini 1681. viz. in the Chappel of King Henry VII. IN the great Vault on the South∣side the same Chappel was lately Interred (in a Coffin of Lead covered with black Velvet) the Bo∣dy of Charlotta Maria, seventhThe Lady Charlotta Ma∣ria, Niece to K. Charles II. Vid. Ep. 206. Daughter of his Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany, &c. (only Brother and Heir to his present Majesty) by his second Lady Maria d' Este, who died at S. James's the sixth day of Octob. Anno Dom. 1682. aged only seven weeks and three days. Her Cof∣fin stands on that of her Brothers Charles Duke of Cambridg. In the
Chappel of S. Edmund. Lies Edward Lord Herbert, Ba∣ronEdward Lord Herbert. Vid. Ep. 204. of Cherbury▪ having a Grave-Stone of Black▪ Marble laid over him just before the sumptuous Mo∣nument of Edward Earl of Shrews∣bury. He died on the 9th. of De∣cember, 1678. Before the Door of the Chappel of S. Nicholas. Lies Ann, Lady Apseley, whoAnn, Lady Apseley. Vid. Ep. 205. was Wife to Sir Peter Apseley. She died on the 5th. day of September, Anno Dom. 1681. and was Buried under a Black Marble Stone before the entrance into this Chappel. In the Body of the Church. On the South-side are these Mo∣numents and Grave-Stones, be∣tween the Arms of Johannes de Dreux comes Richmondiae, and Hen∣ricus de Hastings, is a noble Mo∣nument of White Marble environ∣ed with a Grate, erected by the
Right Honorable Robert ViscountRob. and Rich. Cholmondeley. Vid. Ep. 199, 200. Cholmondeley, for to remember his two Sons, Robert and Richard. Robert died on the 10th. of Febr. 1678. and Richard on the 5th. of June, 1680. There is a Grave-Stone hard by the same Monument of Black Marble farther to remem∣ber them. Next to this is an other curious Monument of White Mar∣ble encompassed with a Grate for Edward the Son of Sir EdwardEdw. Mansel, Vid. Ep. 201. Mansel, Baronet, who died on the 20. of June, 1681. Not far from which Monument, but more to∣wards the East is a Stone of Black Marble to remember, MargaretMargar. Strad∣ling. Vid. Ep. 207. the Wife of Dr. George Stradling, who died Sept. 19. Ann. Dom. 1681. And then at the lower end of this North Isle you have a Grave-Stone of Black Marble placed on the remains of Col. Rand. Egerton,Rand. Egerton, Vid. Ep. 203. of whose Quality and Employ∣ments his Epitaph gives you a par∣ticular. He died on the 20th. of October, 1681. On the South-side by the Mo∣nument of Bridget Radley is a most
curious Monument of White and Black Marble, with some Figures in Basso ▪ relievo for Sir PalmesSir Palmes Fairborne. Vid. Ep. 198. Fair-born Knight, Governor of Tan∣gier, who was shot by the Moors on the 24th. of October, 1680. Not far from this is an other comely Monument of Black and White Marble for the Lady Ann Morland,Ann Morland, Vid. Ep. 197. with an Epitaph in Hebrew, Ethio∣pick, and English: She died on the 20. of Feb. 167 9 / 8 0. To the Monu∣ment of Sir William Sanderson in the North Cross there is an additi∣on, for to remember his Lady, whoBridg. Sander∣son, Vid. Ep. 202. died on the 17. of Jan. 1681. in the 88th. year of her Age, and Mo∣ther of the Maids of Honor to her present Majesty. In the Cloysters. On the North side the great Cloyster is lately revived an old In∣scription which for some years hathWill. Lawrence, Vid. Ep. 211. not been legible, for one William Lawrence, who died Anno Domini 1621. and by which Stone in the Wall is another Inscription placed to the Monument of Edward,
John and Stephen Fox, Sons of Sir Stephen; further to inform us, that two other Children William andWill▪ and James Fox, Vid. Ep. 210. James lie likewise there interred; the old Epitaph being wholly ta∣ken away. There is a little Stone on the West-side for John Bane∣ster,John Banester, Vid. Ep. 208. a man curious in the Compo∣sition of Musick; another on the South for John Collins, and Grave-StonesJohn Collins, Vid. Ep. 209. Nich. Johnson, Vid. Ep. 212. Ann Tufton, Vid. Ep. 213. Sackv. Whittle, Vid. Ep. 214. for Nicholas Johnson Esq Mrs. Ann Tufton, and Sackvil Whittle Esq who all lie on the North-side this great Cloyster. Their Qualities and times of their Deaths you will find in their re∣spective Epitaphs, &c. Arms. Morland, viz. Sable a Leopards∣head jessant a Flower-de-luce, and Lion of England, in the dexter chief point all, Or, with the Escutch▪ of Ulster. Impa∣ling, Fielding, viz. Argent on a Fess B. 3. Lozenges Or, a cressant difference Gules. 197. Epitaph, viz. Being in Hebrew and EthiopickA. D. 1680. Ann Morland. Characters, is here left out.
ANNE, Daughter of George Fielding, Esq and of Mary his Wife, the truly loving (and as truly beloved) Wife of Samuel Morland, Knight and Baronet: died Feb. 20. Anno Dom. 167 9 / 8 0. Aetat. 19. Arms. Fairborne, viz. An Hawk prepa∣ring to fly with Bells, within a bordure Ermine. Crest, An armed Hand or Gant∣let holding a Dagger erect thereon, a Turks head with a Turbant. The Word, Tutus si fortis. 198. Epitaph, viz. Sacred To the immortal memory of SirA. D. 1680. Sir almes Fairborne. Palmes Fairborne, Knight, Gover∣nor of Tangier; in execution of which Command he was mortally wounded by a Shot from the Moors, then besieging the Town, in the 46th. year of his Age. Octo∣ber 24th. 1680.
Ye sacred Relicks which your Marble keep, Here undisturb'd by Wars in quiet sleep: Discharge the trust which when it was below Fairborne's undaunted Soul did undergo, And be the Towns Palladium from the Foe. Alive and dead these Walls he will defend, Great Actions great Examples must attend. The Candian Siege his early labor knew, Where Turkish Blood did his young hands im∣brew. From thence returning with deserv'd Ap∣plause, Against the Moors his well-flesh'd Sword he draws; The same the Courage, and the same the Cause. His Youth and Age, his Life and Death com∣bine, As in some great and regular design, All of a piece throughout and all Divine. Still nearer Heaven his Virtues shone more bright, Like rising flames expanding in their height, The Martyr's Glory crown'd the Soldiers Fight. More bravely Brittish General never fell, Nor Generals Death was e're reveng'd so well, Which his pleas'd Eyes beheld before their close, Follow'd by thousand Victims of his Foes. To his lamented loss for time to come, His pious Widow consecrates this Tomb.
Arms. Cholmondeley, viz. Two close Hel∣metsA. D. 1678. Ro. Cholmon∣deley. in chief and a Garb in base, a cres∣sant diff. And again the same Arms with a Martlet difference. 199. Epitaph, viz.A. D. 1680. Rich. Cholmon∣deley. Hic jacet sepulti duo ex filiis nobilissimi Domini Roberti Vice-co∣mitis Cholmondeley, qnorum alter Robertus, natu secundus, annorum nondum quatuordecim, Puer optimae spei, Virginalis vericundiae, Ingenii virilis, hujusce Collegii Regius A∣lumnus, & nobile ornamentum: lau∣dabiles in literis Latinis, Graecis, Hebraicis progressus generosâ indole honestavit. Scires, antiquâ Chol∣mondeleiorum familiâ ortum, Obiit 4. Non. Feb. An. Salutis. 2678. Al∣ter, Richardus natu quartus anno∣rum duodecim, tanta bonae indolis edidit specimina ut facile agnoscas fratrem. Obiit Non. Jun. An. Dom. 1680. Arms. Cholmondeley, twice with the same Arms and difference as before, &c.
200. Epitaph, viz. Here lieth interred the BodiesA. D. 1682. Ro. and Rich. Cholmondeley. of Robert and Richard Cholmon∣deley, Sons to the Right Honorable Robert Lord Cholmondeley, 1682. Arms. Mansel, A Cheveron between three Manches. Crest on a torce, an Eagle pre∣paring to fly. 201. Epitaph, viz. Here under is buried the Body of Edward Mansel, eldest Son ofA. D. 1681. Edw. M Sir Edward Mansel of Morgan in the County of Glamorgan, Baronet, who died the 20th. day of June, 1681. and in the 15th. year of his age. 202. Epitaph, viz. Huic adjacet lectissima matrona Domina Brigitta, Prosapiâ & connu∣bioA. D. 1681. Brigit Sr∣son. nobilis, nobilior virtutibus; er∣ga Principes fide, pietate in conju∣gem,
beneficentiâ omnibus, cui, Jan. 17. Anno Aetatis 88. Christi 1681. vitâ defunctae Christianâ, Domina Esthera Nurse, ex sorore Neptis te∣stamento haeres, & dignatione rega∣li nobilium virginum Praefecturae succedaneo. H. M. S. P. Arms. Egerton. A Fess Ermine between three Pheons. Over all an Escutcheon of pretence with Banning and Murray. Quarterly, viz. 1 and 4. 2 Bars, on each as many Escalop-shells. 2 and 3. Three Mullers, within a double trea∣sure flory counterflory. Crest, on a Torce a plume of ive Ostrich-feathers. Motto. Supra spem spero. 203. Epitaph, viz. Randolph Egerton of Betley inA. D. 1681. Rand. Egerton. Staffordshire, Esquire; Major-Ge∣neral of Horse to King Charles the First, and eldest Lieutenant and Lieutenant-Colonel of his Majesty Charles the Second's own Troop of Guards, under the Command of his Grace James Duke of Mon∣mouth. First Married to Penelope Daughter of the Right Honorable Robert Viscount Kilmurrey of the
Kingdom of Ireland, and now to Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Henry Murray, Esq (one of the Gentlemen of his Majesties Bed∣chamber, King Charles the First) by Ann Vicountess Banning. Obiit 20. Octob. 1681. Arms. Herbert. Parted per pale. Three Lions Rampant. Motto, Fortitudine, & Prudentia. 204. Epitaph, viz. Edward Lord Herbert Baron ofA. D. 1678. Edward Lord Herbert. Cherbury in England and Castle-Islands in Ireland, died the 9th. of December 1678. in the 46th. year of his Age, and lies Buried under this Stone. 205. Epitaph, viz. Ann, the Wife of Sir PeterA. D. 1681. Ann Apseley. Apseley, Knight, who departed this life September 5. 1681.
206. Epitaph, viz. Depositum Illustrissimae Dominae Charlottae-Mariae,A. D. 1682. Charlotta-Ma∣ria Stuart. filiae septimo-genitae serenis∣simi Principis Jacobi Ducis Eboraci, &c. ex conjuge Maria D'Este, Quae in Aula Regia St. Jacobi Dicta, sex∣to die Octobris, anno Domini Mille∣simo, sexcentesimo, octogesimo secun∣do in Dimino obdormivit. Aetatis suae septimâ hebdomade & tertio die, Anno{que} Domini, MDCLXXXII. 207. Epitaph, viz. Here lieth the Body of Marga∣retA. D. 1681. Ma. Stradling. Stradling, Wife to Dr. George Stradling, Prebendary of this Church, who died September 19. Anno Dom▪ 1681.
In the Cloysters. 208. Epitaph, viz. Here lieth the body of Mr. JohnA. D. 1679. John Banester. Banester, who departed this life the Third of October, 1679. 209. Epitaph, viz. Here lieth the Body of JohnA. D. 1681. John Collins. Collins, born the 7th. day of Sept. Anno Dom. 1657. and deceased the 18th. day of May, 1681. Arms. Fox. Ermine on a Cheveron three Foxes heads erased. A Canton charged with a Flower-de-luce. 210. Epitaph, viz. Hic juxta obdormiunt, inter Ed∣wardi,A. D. 1677. A. D. 1680. James and William Fox. Johannis, & Stephani trium fratrum cineres, Gulielmus & Jaco∣bus Fox, honoratissimi Domini Ste∣phani
Fox Equitis aurati & Elizab. uxoris filii: parentes filiis, & filii parentibus quàm dignissimi. Quos vivos amor, morientes mor∣bus, & mortuos sepulchrum conjun∣xit, uter{que} variâ literaturâ excultus, admiranda sui floruit Antithesis, & sub juvene maturans virum; patriae & honoribus nasci habebatur, quos major natu ardis par negotiis, in regiarum copiarum quaesturâ per to∣tam Angliam sibi conciliavit. Ʋterque in vitae cunabulis, & in morte alter Hercules, dum morbillo∣rum perfidiâ sublatus ex igne & tu∣nicâ molesta ad oelos evolâsse videa∣tur. Gulielmus, Obiit Apr. 17. 1680. Aet. An. 20. Jacobus, Obiit Nov. 19. 1677. Aet. An. 13. 211. Epitaph, viz.A. D. 1621. Will. Lawrence. With diligence and trust most exemplary, Did William Lawrence serve a Prebendary, And for his pains now past, before not lost, Gain'd this remembrance at his Masters cost. O read these Lines again! you seldom find A Servant faithful and his Master kind.
Short-hand he wrote, his Flower in prime did fade, And hasty Death short hand of him hath made. Well couth he Numbers, and well measur'd Land, Thus doth he now that Ground whereon you stand; Wherein he lies so Geometrical, Art maketh some, but thus will Nature all. Obiit Decemb. 28. 1621. Aetat. suae 29. Arms. Iohnson. A Fess of five Lozenges between three Lions heads erased. Crest, out of a Ducal Crown an Horse head co∣ped. 212. Epitaph, viz. Here lieth Nicholas Johnson EsqA. D. 1682. Nich. Johnson. Pay-master of his Majesties Land-Forces, who died the 20th. of Apr. 1682. 213. Epitaph, viz. Here lieth the Body of Mrs. AnnA. D. 1680. Ann Tufton. Tufton, Daughter of Sir Richard
Tufton and Margaret his Lady (his second Wife) who died in the Year of our Lord 1680. 214. Epitaph, viz. Here lieth the Body of SackvilA. D. 1680. Sackv. Whittle. Whittle, Esq Chirurgeon to his Majesties Person, who departed this Life the 19th. of February, 1680. being in the 50th. year of his Age. FINIS.
THE TABLE. Note that Abb. after a name stands for Abbot; Ar. Episc. for Archbishop; Bar. for Baron, or Broness; Com. for Countess; D. for Duke or Dut∣chess; Dom. for Lord; E. for Earl; Episc. for Bishop; Ebor. for York▪ Fil. for Son or Daughter▪ Marq. for Marquess; R. for King or Queen; S. for Saint; and Visc. for Viscount. A. ADymerus, Abb. Page 20 Aelianore, Vide Elianor Agard 351 Aiton 160, 337 Albemarle, E. 29▪ 39. D. 96 Alexander III. R. Scot. 28 Alfgarus, Abb. 20 Alfnodus, Abb. ibid▪
Alfricus, Abb. 20 Alfwinus, Abb. ibid. Allen 174 Alphonsus, fil. E. I. 56 Alyngreth 176 Amundisham 159, 347 Anduren, Episc. 243 Andrewes 21 Angus, E. 89, 275 Angolesme, E. 37, 147 Ann, R. Angl. uxor R. II. 301 Ann, R. Angl. uxor R. III. 33 Ann Cleve, R, Angl. uxor H. VIII. 34 Ann Bullen, R. Angl. uxor H. VIII. 92 Ann, R. Angl. uxor Jacob. I. 103, 134 Ann D. Ebor. fil. D. Norf. 133 Ann D. Ebor, fil. E. Clarnd. 106 Ann, D. Somrset 7 Ann, Com. Monmouth 103 Ann, Com. Middlesex 55 Ann, Com. Oxford 74 Ann, Bar. Hunsdon 125 Ann, fil. E. Northumb. 169 Apsley 2. 11 Aptot 326 Aquitaine, D. 145 Archibald, E. Angus 89 Arabella, fil. E. Lenox. 105 Arthure, fil. E. IV. 96 Artois, E. 36 Arundel 119 Asaph, Episc. 120 Aston 365 Atcliffe 176
Anduren, Episc. 43 Aveline, Com. Lancast. 36, 39 Aumarle, E. 96 Aylmer 176 Aymer, Vide Valence. B. BAber 36 Balliol, Visc. 30 Balliol, R. Scot. 141 Bonning 319 Banester 5. 13 Barrow 45, 208 Barners, Dom. 69. 237. 249 Barkley 327 Barkley, Dom. 119 Barking, Abb. 21, 162 Bardolph, Dom. 171 Barr▪ E. 38. 176 Basset 184 Baskervile 197 Bath, E. 248 Bavaria, D. 150 Bayning, Visc. 319 Beatrix, Com. Pembroke 38 Beauchamp 326 Beauchamp, E. of Warw. 96 Beauchamp, Visc. 221. 235. 248 Beauchamp, Bar. 54. 221. 235 Beauchamp; Dom. de▪ Powick 88. 171 Beauford 32
Beaumont, Com. Buckingh. 8, 265 Bedford, E 61, 50 Bedford, D 171, 157 Bedel 174 Bellmont 265. Vide Beaumont Bmp Vid Beauchamp Bllss 339 Bnsn▪ Abb. 15, 21, 173 Bernard 181 Berners 176 Beuerley 163 Bigod 29 Bill 53, 21, 26 Bilson 161, 337 Bingham 44, 203 Bingley 204 Bindon, Visc. 10 Birkhead 181 lgge 41, 186 Blanche de la Tour, fil. E. III. 66, 151 Blnohe, Com. Lancast. 36 Blount 363 Blockley 176 Bohun, E. Heref. and Essex 29, 68, 121, 141, 238 Bohemia, R. 107, 149, 152, 291 Bolingbrock, E. 184 Bolton 51, 219 Bokr 355 Boorn 169 Boroughs, Dom. 172 Bottevile 196 Bourchier, Dom 112, 113 Bourchier, E. Essex 70
Bourchier, Dom. Berners 60 Bourchier, Dom. Cromwel 70 Bourchier, Dom. Fitz waren 248 Bourchier, fil. Dom. Berners 37 Bourgh 171 Bourgh, E Kent. and Dom. 334 Boughtn, Bar. 97 Bounflower 176 Boyle, Dom. Ciffod, & 250 Brandon, D. S. 65, 28 Bracton, 327 Braharsen 176 Brabant, D 150 Brewer 36 Brech, R. Scot. 143 Bridgwater, E. 19, 184 Bridges. Vide Bruges Brigham 173, 210 Brian. 326 Britain▪ D. 150, 151 Britains, R. 157 Brideman 163 Brocas 60, 39 Brooke, Dom. Cobham 81 Bromley 117 31 Brown 159, 174, 340, 348 Bruges, Marq. Winch. 74, 261 Bruges, Com. Exer 1, 34 Bruges, Dom. Shandois 19▪ 34 Brun, E Marche 37 Bry, E. 37 Buckingham, E. 141, 150, 238, 264, 283. Marq. 283. D. 68, 99, 211, 81, 282, 283
Buckhurst, Dom. 74, 225 Bucklugh, E. 103 Bullen 327 Bullen, E. Wiltsh and Ormond 234 Bullen, Ann R. Angl. 92, 234 Bulmer 359, 360 Burlington, E. 80, 240 Burleigh, Bar. 73, 74, 257, 324 Burcheston, Abb. 21 Burden 174 Bush 354 Buxal 162 C. CAdwallader, R. Britt. 157 Calhan 176 Camden 45, 204 Cambridg, E. 150 D. 171. 292, 293 Candale, D. Vide Kendale. Canterbury, Arch. Episc. 54 Carteret 42, 49, 190, 215 Carey, Bar. 125, 233 Carey, E. Monmouth 126, 324 Carew, Bar. 78, 252 Carnaby 240 Carleton, Visc. Dorcest. &c. 116, 318 Carlisle, E. 325 Carict 327 Cavendish, Bar. and D. Newcastle, &c. 183, 40 Casaubon 45, 205
Casnake 326 Castilion, E. S. Paul 38 Castle-Island Bar. Castile, R. 145 Cecil, Dom. Burleigh 75▪ 81. 128. 243. 253. 257 324 Cecil, E. Exeter 128. 324 Cecily, fil. E. IV. 174 Chamberlain 197 Chaucer 46▪ 210 Chair of Coronations 142▪ 312 Chandois, Bar. 324 Chapman 357 Champaigne, E. 36 Charles, E. Lenox 111 Charles, E. Doncaster 103 Charles, E. Plymouth 104 Charles, D. Camb. 108, 109 Charles, D. Kendal 108 Charles, fil. R. Gall. 150 Charles de Granada 19 Charlotta-Maria, fil. D. Ebor. 12 Cheney 184 Chester, Episc. 70, 243 Chester, E. 36 Cherbury, Bar. 2 Chiffinch 51. 219 Chichester, Episc. 70. 243. 158. 345 Chichester, E. 104 Cholmondeley, Visc. Clarentieux, R. Arm. 204 Clare, E. 29, 63. 167. 229, 230 Clarendon, E. 106. 291 Clarke 351
Clarges 96 Clarence, D 150, 151 Cleppesby 129. 343 Cleve, D. 34 Clifford 29. 33 Clifford, E. Cumberl. 163. 250 Clifford, Dom. 250. 241. 80 Clinton, E Lincoln 171 334 Cobam, Bar. 77 245. 258 Coke 61. 76. 253. 258. 361 Colchester, Abb. 21. 123. 162 Collias 13 Comin, Dom. 240 Comberland▪ Vide Cumberland. Combe 162 Corke, E. 250 Cornwal, E. 28, 6. 140. 150 Cotterel 44 201 Cotgrave 59. 236 Cottington, Br. Hanworth 114, 115, 313, 314 Coventry, E. 283 Couper 159 347 Coucy, Dom. 151 Cowley 46 49. 211, 212 Coxe 21 45 206 Cranfield, Bar▪ and E. Middl 5. 161. 224. 241. 342 Crewe 129, 130. 343 Crewe, Dom. 98 Crispine, Abb. 20. 179 Crokesley, Abb. 21 Cromwel, Dom. 70 Crofts 168
Crouchback. Vide Edmund Cumberland, E. 193. 250. D. 107 Cursey 326 Curlington, Abb. 21 D. DAcres, Dom. 74 D'avenant 51. 219 Darley, Dom. 89, 90. E 280 Dartmouth, Bar. 14 Dawbney, E Bridgwater 119 De-carteret 190 Derby, E. 28. 88, 89. 163. 17 D'Este, D. Ebor. 109. 293 De-vi 215 Devon, Com. 39 Dewalby 24 Dinham 78 252 Dodington 14 Dolbn 21 Dorcester, Visc. 116. 319. Maq. 6 Dormer 169. 333 Dorothea, Com. Exeter 28 Doncaster, Visc. and E. 103 Doughty 19. 346 Draiton 46. 209 Dreux, E. Richm. 30 Dublin, Ar. Episc. 243 Dudley, Dom. 74. 261. 337 Duglas, E. Angus, 274 Dungarvan, Bar▪ 250
Dunbar, Visc. 341 Dunstan, S. 6 Duppa 158. 345 Durham, Episc. 70. 74. 123. 206. 261 Durdens, frat. H. III. 176 Dutton 193 E. EArle 21 Edgar, R. Angl. 6 Edgar, D. Cantabr. 109 Editha, R. Angl. uxor. S. Edw. 139 Edmonds 42. 189 Edmond Crouchback, E. Lancast. fil. H. III. 30. 36 Edmond of Langley, fil. E. III. 72 Edward, S. and Confess. R. Angl. 7. 27. 135. 304 Edward I. R. Angl. 12. 145 295 Edward II. R. Angl. 12. 151 Edward III. R. Angl. 149, 150. 133. 305 Edward IV. R. Angl. 153 Edward V. R. Angl. 93. 290 Edward VI. R. Angl. 87 Edward, Monk of Westm. 52. 157 Edward, D. Ebor. 72 Edwinus, Abb. 20. 175 Effingham, Bar. 222 Egerton 43. 193 Ellis 43. 192
Elianore, R. Angl. uxor. E. I. 145. 298 Elianore, Com. Bar. fil. E. I. 176 Elianore, fil. Edw. I. 56 Elizabeth, R. Angl. uxor. H. VII. 86. 134 Elizabeth, R. Angl. uxor. E. IV. 157 Elizabeth, R. Angl. fil. H. VIII. 92 287 Elizabeth, R. Bohem. 107. 291 Elizabeth, fil. E. I. 121 Elizabeth, fil. H. VII. 148 Elizabeth, P. Orange, fil. Car. I. 107 Elizabeth, Com. Ormond 119 Elizabeth, fil. E. Rutland 72 Elizabeth, fil. Dom. Russel 62 Elizabeth, fil. Dom. Bourchier 113 Ely, Episc. 54 Essex, E. 29. 68. 238 248, 249 Estney, Abb. 14. 21. 164. 331 Estovile 226 Ethelgoda, R. or. Sax. 35 Evans 366 Ewe, E. 249 Exeter, E. 73. 171. 324 F. FAirborne 366 Fane 78. 251 Fardinand, R. Hispan. 91 Fardinand III. R. Cast. & Lyon 145 Fastolfe 327 Fanshaw 132. 328
Fawconberg, Visc. 339 Fecknam, Abb. 17, 21 Fielding 6 Fell 50. 214 Ferne 71. 242 Ferrers, E. Derby 28 Ferguze, R. Scot. 144 Fitch 362 Fitz-Charles, E. Plym. fil. Car. II. 104 Fitz-John 177. 327 Fitz-Roy, D. Southamp. fil. Car. II. 104 Fitz-Walter, Dom. 72. 30 262 Fitz-Waren, Dom. 29 79 248 Fitz-Williams, 76. 258 Flaccet, Abb. 21. 120 Fortescue 168. 321. 344 Fortibus, E. Albemarle 29. 39 Fowler 275 Fox 352, 353 Frescheville, Dom. 215 Fredericus II. Imp. 29 Fredericus, R. Bohem. 107 Francis II. R. Gall. 90 France. Vid Gallia. Francis, D. Rich. and Lenox 101 Francis, D. Suffolk 65 Frances, Com. Hrtf. 54 Frances, Com. Suss. 116 Frances, Com. Exeter 129 Fullerton 117. 322 Furnival, Dom. 241
G. GAlfridus, Abb. 20 Galliae, R. 29. 36. 90 Garrard 318 Gascoine 240 Gathel, R. Scot. 143 Gaunt 326 Gavan 365 Gawen 353, 354 Gelderland, D. 150 Gervasius de Blois, Abb. fil. R. Steph. 20. 180 Gerard 326 Gifford, Dom. 241 Gislehertus, Abb. 20. 179 Gloucester, D. 68. 105. 141. 141. 238. 249. E. 29 Godfrey 349 Golofre 72, 161. 263 Goodman 21. 53. 181. 225 Goodwin 139. 318 Gorge 120 Gouland 356 Grant 181 Green 359 Grey, Marq. Dorchest. 65. Visc. Lisle, 96. 171 Griffith 174 Gruffith 44, 199 Gulick, D. 34 Gware 326
H. HAlsey 364 Hanworth, Bar. 114. 313 Hankford 327 Harsnet 44. 201 Harbord ibid. Harle 82. 265 Harcourt 326 Haronden, Abb. 21. 176 Harpedon 164 Harold, R. Angl. 174 Hastings 30. 240 Haspal 176 Hatton 132. 328 Haule 50. 218 Haverel 176 Henry II. R. Angl. 139 Henry III. R. Angl. 11. 27. 303. 137 Henry V. R. Angl. 134. 155. 308 Henry VI. R. Angl. 156 Henry VII. R. Angl. 14. 86. 134. 157. 266 Henry VIII. R. Angl. 162 Henry IV. R. Gall. 172 Henry V. Imp. 139 Henry, R. Scot. 275 Henry, R. Scot. 275 Henry, R. Navarre 37 Henry, fil. E. I. 56 Henry, fil. Rich. R. Rom. 140
Henry, fil. E. Lancast. 37 Henry, fil. H. VIII. 162 Henry-Frederick, P. Wa. fil. Jacob. 106. 134 Henry, D. Glocest. fil. Car. I. 105 Henrietta, fil. D. Ebor. 109. 293 Henault, E. 149, 150 Henley, Abb. 21. 33 Hertford, E. 221. 235. 248, 249, 250 Hereford, E. 29. 238. 249 Hereford, Episc. 122 Herebertus, Abb. 20 Herber Dom. 2 Hesket 48. 194 Heylyn 42. 189 Hill 43. 192 Hilton 240 Hinchinbrooke, Visc. 98 Hispaniae, R. Vide Spain Hobby 61. 232. 328 Holles, E. Clare 63. 167. 229. 230 Holland 326 Holway 327 Holderness, Com. 39 Holcroft 73 Hoo 327 Howard, D. Norf. 101. 133. 281. 223 Howard, E. Surrey 223 Howard, E. of Nottingh. 169. 223. 333 Howard, E. of Carlile 129. 325 Howard, Bar. Effingham 169. 222. 333 Howard, Dom. Bindon 101. 281 Howard, Visc. Bindon 120 Hugh, fil. E. Essex 121
Hugolin 175 Humphrey 360 Humes, Abb. Hunsdon, Dom. 327. 3 Hungerford 169. 171. 1 I. JAmes 40. 49. 185, 215 James, R. Angl. 90. 103. 134 James, D. Ebor. 106 James, D. Cantab. 108 James, D. Monm. 103 James, E. Ossery 104 Imbercourt, Bar. 116. 319 Ingram 160. 339 John, R. Gall. 149, 150, 152 John, fil. E. I. 56 John, fil. H. III. 56 John of Eltham, D. Cornw. fil. E. II. 67 John, fil. E. Pemb. 140 John, fil. E. Lanc. 37 John, D. Somers. 88 John, Visc. Thurles 119 Johnson, Will. 42. 188 Johnson, Ben. 49. 213 Johnson, Nich. 5 Jone de la Tour, fil. E. III. 151 Isabella, R. Angl. uxor. Johan. 37. 147 Isabella, R. Angl. uxor. E. II. 67. 151 Isabella, fil. D. Ebor. 110. 195 Isham 50. 217
Islip, Abb. 14. 21. 131. 70 Isles 349 Isle of Wight, Com. 39 K. KAtherine, R. Angl. uxor. H. V. 156. 134. 310 Katherine, R. Angl. uxor. H. VIII. 34. 91. 162 Katherine, fil. H. III. 56 Katherine, fil. D. Ebor. 110. 294 Katherine-Laura, fil. D. Ebor. ibid. Katherine, D. Buckingh. 99 Katherine, Com. Northumb. 120 Katherine, fil. D. Norf. 176 Kedington, Abb. 21 Kendal, D. 108. 292 Kent, E. 139. 153. 171. 326. 334. 341 Killigrew 40. 184. 215 Kilmurray, Visc. 43. 193 Kirkeby 240 Kirton, Abb. 21. 171. 333 Knevet 168 Knipe 362 owls 63. 233
L. LAcy 28 Lambard 329 Langham, Abb. 13. 21. 54. 227 Lancaster, E. 30. 36. 38. 171. D. 150, 151 Latimer, Dom. 120. 128, 324 Laurentius, Abb. 20. 180 Laurence 4 Leek 163 Legat 362 Leicester, E. 29. 140. 172. 291. 334 Leneve 43. 191 Lenox, E. 89. 111. 274. D. 280.  282 Leppington, Bar. 126 Levisham, Abb. 2 Lewis, V. R. Gall. 36 Lincoln, E. 28. 171. 334 Lions, R. 145 Lisle, Visc. 96. 326 Litlington. Abb. 13. 21. 52 Lodowick, Imp. 149 London▪ Episc. 54 Longespée, E. Salisb. 28 Lovetoft, Dom. 241 Lucas, Dom. 41. 182 Lucius, R. Britt. 3
Lumley 240 Lyne 364 M. MAcmurch 327 Mailmans 327 Malpas, Bar. 30. 194 Man 358 Mansfield, Visc. 40. 183 Mannors, E. Rutland 73. 282 Manduit 326 Mandivile 175 Mansel 9 Margaret, R. Scot. fil. H. VII. 89, 90. 275 Margaret, fil. E. IV. 153. 305 Margaret, fil. Comb. Pemb. 140 Margaret, Com. Rich. & Derb. 88 Margaret, Com. Derb. 163 Margaret, D. Newcastle 40 Margaret, Com. Lenox 89. 111 Margaret, Com. Shrewsb. 96 Margaret, Bar. Carew. 78 Mary, R. Scot, fil. Jac. V. 90. 105. 277 Mary, R. Angl. fil. H. VIII. 91 Mary, fil. H. I. 139 Mary, fil. H. VII. 65 Mary, fil. Jacob 92. 289 Mary, Com. Pemb. 38 Mary, fil. Marq. Dorch. 6
Mary, fil. E. Essex 121 Marshal, E. 223 Marshal 37 March, E. Matilda, R. Angl. uxor. H. I. 139 Maud, Imp. fil. H. I. ibid. Mauleverer 40. 184 Meredith 114, 33 Meschemes 36 Michael 1 Middlesex, E. 161. 224. 341, 342 Mildred, Bar. Burleigh Milling, Abb. 21▪ Mohun, Dom. de Dunster 72. 171, 6 Moilley 6 Molineux 71 Monmouth, E. 126. 225. D. 3 Monchency, Dom. 240 Monteine 31 Monte-alto 29 Monte-forti, E. Leic. 29. 4 Monte-chency Mocke, D. Albemarle 95 9 Morland 44. 49, 50. 201. 26▪ 217 Morton 6 Morgan 126. 328 Morley 4 Mortuo-mari 8 Mountford. Vide Monte-forti. Mountague, E. Sandwich Mowbray, D. Norf. 30▪ 1 Mulgrave, E. 25 Murray
N. NAssau, P. 107 Navarre, R. 37. 149, 172 l 38 e 43. 191 il, E. Warwick 33 il, Dom. Latimer 120. 128. 171. 234. 239 castle, B. 101. 280. Marq. 183. D. 40. 182 ton 244 burgh 326 Newman 353 Newberry, Bar. 104 Nl 172 Nolk, E. 29. D. 133. 176. 223. 281 thampton, E. 238. 249 rthumberland, E. 120. 169 rmandy, D. 140 rris, Bar. de Rycot 172 ttingham, E. 169. 223. 228. 333 vo-castro 175 rse 361 O. OGle, Bar. 58. 182, 183, 240, 241. E▪ 40. 183
Orange, P. 107 Orchard 326 Ordbruthius, Abb. 20 Ormond, E. 119. 171. 234. 239. 327 D. 104 Osboldston 51. 218 Ossery, E. 104 Oteley 198 Outram 45. 49. 207 Owen 47. 197 Oxenham 363 Oxford, Episc. 50 Oxford, E. 29. 76. 165. 254. 257. 331 P. PALmer 176. 313. 357 Papilon, Abb. 20 Par 51. 220 Parry 332 Parker 351 Partridg 357 Pawlet, Marq. Winch. 59. 74. 236. 261 Pecksal 59. 236 Pembroke, E. 28. 37. 150, 151 Percy 28. 171. E. Northumb. 120 Peverel 176 Philippa, R. Angl. uxor. E. III. 149. 133. 306 Philippa, D. Ebor. 72 Philip II. R. Hispan. 92
Philip lé Bell, R. Gall. 151 Picard 327 Pipe 364 Plantagenet. D. Ebor. 72. 96 Ponthieu, E. 146 Poole 16 Popham 127 Postard, Abb. 20 Potheridg, Bar. 96 Praenest, Episc. 54 Price 49. 213 Province, E. 28. 145 Puckering 114. 320 Pultney 130. 343 Punter 181 Q. QƲiney, E. Winchest. 28 R. RAdley 44. 49. 199. 217 Radcliffe 49. 213. 240 Ramond, E. of Provence 28 Ratcliffe 161. 337. E. Sussex 116. 316 Redman 174 Richard II. R. Angl. 31. 152. 300 Richard, E. Cornwal 28. 140
Richard, Fil. Hen. III. 56 Richard, D. Ebor. 93. 133 R. E. Roths. 28 Richmond, E. 30. 88. 157. 268. 272. D. 101. 280. 282 Richardson 48, 195. Bar. 196 Riggs 365 Robote 82. 265 Robert, E. Artois 36 Robsert. Dom. Bourchier 112, 113 Roberts 159. 348 Rochester, Episc. 21. 175 Rogers 168 Romain 176 Ross, Dom 30. 73 Rothsai, E. 28 Rous 176 Rupert, P. 107 Russel 308. Dom. 61. 230 Rutland, E. 73. 99. 240, 241. 284 Ruthal 123 Rycot, Bar. 172 S. SAcvile, Com. Buckhurst 74 Saint-Johns, Dom. 169. 333 Saint Paul, E. 38 Saint-Neots, Bar. 98 Salisbury, Episc. 142. 145. 158 Salisbury, E. 28. Dom. 176 Sanderson 41. 187
Sanchez 50. 214 Sandwich, E. 97, 98 Savage 59. 237 Scot 40. 184 Scotland, R. 28. 89. 143, 144. 149. 152 Scroop, Bar. 328 Sebert, R. or Sax. 5. 35. 335 Selby 162 Seymour, Bar. 64. D. Som. 79. 221 E. Herf. 235 248. 250 Shandois, Dom. 129 Sheffield, Dom. 120 Shoreditch 176 Shrewsbury, E. 58 96. 240 Sicily, R. 36. 149 Sidney 116 315 Silvardus, Abb. 20 Skelton 268 Smith 367 Somerset, D. 79. 88. 222. 235. 248 250 Somery 29 Sophia, fil. Jac. R. Angl. 92. 289 Southampton, D 104 Spain, R. 91, 92▪ 149, 150 Spencer 49. 208. 326. Bar. 78. 251 Spragge 168 Staveley, Bar. Stafford 30. 113. 171 239 E. 68. 141. Stanhope 79 248 Stanley 83. 263. E. Derby 89
Stotevile 43. 192 Stokes 228 Stopes 350 Stoner 176 Strange, Dom. 240 Stradling 3 Strongbow 327 Stuart 104. E. Lenox, 89. 274 D. Richm. 101, 102 Sudbury, Abb. 21. 33 Suffolk, D. 65. 228 Sulcardus 176 Surrey, E. 29. 223 Sussex, Com. 116. 169. 316 Sutton 74 T. TAlbot 30. E. Shrewsb. 58. 96. 239 Tedor 157. 88 Teyes, Bar. 96 Thanet, E. 341 Thornborough 43. 49 192. 212 Thomas de Woodstock, D. Gloc. fil. E. III. 68. 141. 151. 238. 249 Thomas, fil. E. Lancast. 37 Thompson 366 Thurlby 21. 16 Thurles, Visc. 119 Thwenge 29 Thynne 48. 196
Tilney 9 Tindale, Bar. 103 Tompson 21 Toney 326 Torrington, E. 96 Tons, Visc. 104 Trapps 49. 212 Triplet 45. 204 Trussel 169 Tucker 363 Tuder 88. 157 Tufton, Bar. 160. 340, 341. E. Than. 341 Tyrel 188 V. VAlence 240, 241. 38. E. Pemb. 28. 56. 37. 242 Valois 156 Vaughan 127, 169, 323 Venables 2 Verdon 28. 241 Vernon 30 Vere 165. 253. 331. E. Oxf. 30 Vic 50 215 Villers 82. 264. Visc. & Buckingh. D. 98. 283 Vitalis, Abb. 20. 179 Vowel 181
W. WAddon, Bar. 283 Wake 326 Walby 70. 253 Waldron 358 Walterus, Abb. Wales, P. 106. 149, 150, 151 Waltham 142 Warwick, E. 33. 96. 249. 326 Ware, Abb. 21. 32, 33. 137 Warren, E. 29 Waterford, E. 240 Weixford, E. ibid. Wells, Dom. 175 Westminster, Abb. 225. 227 Wentworth, Dom. 168. 259 Wenlock, Abb. 21. 33 Wenceslaus, Imp. 152 Wendover 175 Weston 21 Wharton, Dom. 169 Whittle 16 Wichingham 327 Willis 50. 214 Wiltshire, E. 234 Wild 159. 344 Wilson 368 Williams 21 William, D. Cleve 34 William of Windsor, fil. E. III. 66. 151
William of Hatfield, fil. E. III. 151 Winchester, E. 28. Marq. 73. 59. 236. 257. 262 Winchester, Episc. 158. 161. 337. 345 Windsor 195. 346 Winefrid, Marq. Winch. 73 Winchcomb 353 Wolsine, S. Abb. 6. 20 Wolnothus, Abb. 20 Woodroof 364 Wood 104 Y. YOrk, Ar. Episc. 70. 252 York, D. 72. 93. 106. 133. 161. 171. 151. 262. 290, 291 FINIS.
