K544 13166348 98244
DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD. Relating to the present CONTROVERSY Concerning the Epistles of Phalaris. By the Author of the Journey to London. LONDON: Printed, and Sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms-Inn in Warwick-Lane. 1699.
TO THE READER. THE following Dia∣logues were wrote by a Gentleman Residing at Padua, upon some Intelli∣gence he receiv'd there of one Bentivoglio, a very Trouble∣some Critick in the World. The Author wrote 'em to di∣vert his Spleen, after having had a taste of those Criticisms. He was so kind, as to send them to me, to make me some small amends for his absence. The Freedom that is between
us, suffers me to let them go out of my Hands in the Dress that I receiv'd 'em; with a design to try whether other People may have the same Opinion of him that I have. Adieu. Virgil Aeneid. Lib. 6. NEC procul hinc partem furi Monstrantur in Omnem; Lugentes Campi. Sic illos nomine dicunt, Hic quos durus Amor crudeli tabe peredit Secreti celant calles, & Myrtea circum Sylva tegit: Curae non ipsâ in Morte relinquunt. NOT far from thence, the Mournful Fields ap∣pear So call'd from Lovers, that inhabit there. The Souls, whom that unhappy Flame invades, In secret Solitude and Myrtle Shades, Make endless Moans, and pineing with desire, Lament too late their unextinguish'd Fire.
Et postea. Hic genus antiquum Teucri pulcherrima proles Magnanimi Heroes, nati Melioribus annis: Ilusque, Assaracusque & Trojae Dardanus Auctor, Arma procul, currusque virum miratur Inanes Stant Terrae defixae hastae, passimqne soluti Per Campos pascuntur equi. Quae Gratia currûm. Armorumque fuit Vivis, quae cura nitentes Pascere Equos, eadem sequitur tellure reposto. Here found they Teucer's old Heroick Race; Born better Times, and happier Years to grace. Assaracus and Ilus here enjoy Perpetual Fame, with him who Founded Troy. The Chief beheld their Chariots from atar; Their shining Arms and Coursers train'd to War. Their Launces fix'd in Earth, their Steeds around, Free from their Harness, graze the Flow'ry Ground. The Love of Horses which they had alive, And Care of Chariots after Death survive. Mr. Dryden's Translation.
DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD. INTRODUCTION▪ Charon and Lycophron. Lycophron. WHY, Charon, what did you bring hither last Week? Charon. Ay what indeed! I am like to lose my place for it. I hear there is such a stir among the Criticks, that the three Judges have much adoe to ratifie Bonds of Arbitration between 'em. But pray tell me what I have done, for I am ignorant of my own Crime. Lycophron. Why you brought over young Schrevelius, and he had with
him the Works of the Snarling Cri∣tick Bentivoglio. Charon. I can't tell whose Works they were, but I am sure they were confounded heavy. They had like to have sunk my Skuller—But I hope the Troubles are compos'd on this side the Water. Lycophron. No, worse than ever; it is a Mercy that no Blood can be spilt among them; and having no Weapons they can't come to Daggers drawing. Charon. Pray what may be the reasons of their Dissentions? Lycophron. Why some are of your Opinion, that indeed Bentivoglio is a Heavy Writer; and say further, That he is too Bulky, and too Tedious, that he argues upon Trifles only with great Gravity, and manages Serious Things with as much Lightness. That he has pillag'd Authors to gain a Repu∣tation, but has so manag'd his Con∣trivance that he has lost his end. In short, there are mighty Disputati∣ons whether he has least Wit, Judg∣ment, or Good-manners; Rhadamanthus
is their Umpire, who finding the case difficult, has taken a considerable time to deliberate concerning it. Charon. But pray, Sir, what do you say as to this Affair? Lycophron. Why indeed I am not wholly Impartial in this matter, for Bentivoglio has very much oblig'd me throughout his Works. He has imi∣tated me even without reason, for as it was my choice, so his natural Ge∣nius leads him to be unintelligible. A Man may as soon understand his La∣tin as his English, and his English as my Greek; his Prose is as Fantastick as my Verse; and my Prophecies carry more light with 'em than his demonstrations Charon. Why then he may have more Worth and Learning in him than the generality of Mortals can ea∣sily comprehend. Lycophron. That is possible, but it is harder to search for 'em than to dig in the Mines of Potosi. The Great Dionysius has found his worth; I mean the same Dionysius, who from being Ty∣rant of Syracuse, became a School-master, and a Pedant. He, upon reading Benti∣voglio's
Dissertation upon Johannes An∣tiochenus,Vide Dis∣sert p. 32 from thence to p. 145. wherein he had started a new Obsevation about the measures of Anapaestick Verse; has call'd a hun∣dred little Youthful Shades, that had formerly mispent their time thro' the negligence of their Fathers, and the fondness of their Mothers, to come all under his Correction, where Brandishing his Wodden Authority, he commands 'em to scan Anapaestick Verses; and if they find any Verse ending with a short Syllable, they are immediately, right or wrong, to Cor∣rect it, under the severe Penalty of committing two Pages of Bentivolio's Works to their Memory. Buchanan, who was likewise a School-master of great Sense and Parts, though of much Passion, has sent for a Detach∣ment of School-boys from Grotius; and another from Scaliger, which with some Numbers from his own Country, and the Moderns, he has drawn up against Dionysius: and this latter Squadron affirm, that the last Syllable of an Anapaestick Verse may be short, notwithstanding Bentivog∣lio's
Dissertation. Proserpine only knows the event of these Troubles; for till this matter be decided, Poetry must lye still since in such dubious times no Person can make an Anapae∣stick Verse with any sfety. Charon. Very true▪ Sir, a mistake in such a quantity may be of fatal consequence. Lycophron. But, Charon, the heat of my Discourse had almost made me forget the very business I had with you. I have some Requests to you from the Emperor Claudius, he is ex∣treamly enamour'd with the Works of Bentivoglio, and has set forth his Edict concerning some important Matters, which, if you please, I will read to you. Claudius. To the Lovers of the Belles Lettres, Greet∣ing: All the World know how much I was concern'd, and what brave and valiant Things I acted for the Grandeur of the Roman Empire; but my greatest Glory was the adding of Letters to the Roman Alphabet, and it shall be the utmost of my endeavours to esta∣blish
the purity of Languages, and the exactness of Spelling throughout all Nations. Therefore considering the great Service which the most fa∣mous Bentivoglio has done his native Country by raising the credit of several admirable Proverbs: I do order all Persons to use the same as often, or oftner than they have occasion; for nothing can be more Edifying than the following Max∣ims.Dis. p. 75. That Leucon carries one thing, and his Ass another.p. 39. A Man of Cou∣rage and Spirit should not go with Fin∣ger in Eye to tell his Story.p. 75. A bungling Tinker makes two holes while he mends one. I likewise by the same Authori∣ty order, That in all Books and Pre∣faces whatsoever, such words be us'd as have receiv'd the stamp of that Great Author; for I do declare and Concede,p. 85. that we ought to Repudiate whatever is Commentitious, but that to Aliene what is Vernacular is the Putid Negoce of a Timid Idiom. I have moreover, taken into my se∣rious consideration the duty of true Spelling, and do Order and Com∣mand,
That no School-Mistress, Writing-Master, Gentleman, Young Lady, or Others, do by vertue, or under pretence of any Metathesis, Syncope, Metastoichie, Synecdoche, or any other Figure whatsoever,Farnaby's Rhetorick. Dis. p. 92. pre∣sume to write Cruds for Curds, Delphos for Delphi. Ynuph for Enough, Yf for Wife; but more particularly,Dis. p. 86. that no one presume to use Cotemporary for Contemporary, the Letter n being in that place of the utmost importance: but he may with Delight and Pleasure to his Readers transgress the Rules of Orthography,Ibid. and use the word Co∣gratulate in a Jocose Sense, as it is apply'd in the Writings of the most excellent Author beforemention'd. All this I establish under the Penal∣ty of Bentivoglio's irresistable Cri∣ticisms, and the utmost Displeasure of Claudius. This Edict Claudius desires may be set up beyond the Stygian Lake, that
the Shades may know how to act when they come hither. Charon. Sir, your Request shall be comply'd with, but I must make hast away, for you know I am expected with impatience. If these are the Disputes of the Persons of Belles Let∣tres, I am sure an Honest Skuller loses precious Time and Tide, whilst he stays to hear 'em.
IMPUDENCE: OR, THE SOPHIST. Phalaris and the Sophist. Phalaris. I Am told lately, since the coming over of Schrevelius, where-ever I go, that you lay claim to my Epistles, and say they were wrote by you. Sophist. Perhaps, I may have done so, Sir, without Offence. Phalaris. Without Offence! Shall a Prince be rifled of his Honour by a Pedant? Be told to his Face that his Works are not his own? Daggers, Bulls, and Torments! Sophist. Not so Angry, good Sir, you know that here in the Shades all Persons are equal. Besides, Sir, it was always my Humour to Plume my self
with borow'd Feathers, and I never knew that the Cuckow did not lye In as decently as other Birds, though she never put her self to the trouble of building her Nest. And besides, Sir, though Bentivoglio took whole passages from Nevelet, and Vizzanius, yet they make no disturbance amongst the Shades, but here is such a stir be∣cause I am pleas'd to own your Epi∣stles. Phalaris. Were you in the other World, you would not have dar'd to have talk'd so to me. Sophist. Nay, were you in the o∣ther World, Bentivoglio would not have spoke as he has done of you. Phalaris. Impudence in perfection! Could such a Wretch as thou wast, be able to express such things as I have done. That Honour of Learned Men and Esteem of Good;Sir Will. Temples's Essays. That scorn of my Enemies, that Bounty to my Friends, that Knowledge of Life, and Contempt of Death. Don't my Thoughts flow with Free∣dom, and my native Firceness give Vigour to my Words, and animate all my Expressions.
Sophist. These Arguments might convince another Person, and per∣haps you writ such a Book indeed, but I have Encouragement to take it upon me, and I will take it upon me. Phalaris. What are the Reasons by which you will convince other People that my Epistles are yours. Sophist. Look you, Sir, I am resol∣ved to own them, and however im∣probable the thing may be, I have a Doctor to stand by me. And then, Sir, I shall endeavour to pacifie you with Reasons, if that will do it; my Arguments are from the uncertainty of the Time in which you liv'd, and consequently of such Persons who might be your Cotemporaries, because you know there could never have been two of the same Name. Ano∣ther Argument I draw from the Names of Sicilian Towns and Villages; which amongst the variety of little Common-wealths, and Changes of Principalities must needs be the most certain Rule imaginable to judge of time by, because we know the great∣est Nations are in dispute concerning
their own Originals. Then you, who are a Dorian, pretend to write Attick, which is as absurd as if a Ber∣wick-man should write English; And lastly, you have four Sayings, and six Words, that were not us'd till several Ages after you were born, as I am credibly inform'd. Phalaris. Well, have you any more Arguments. Sophist. Yes, Sir, I shall throw you in one Argument more that must con∣found you. Throughout all your E∣pistles, There is not one word relating to the Old Gentlewoman, your Mother, which a Man of your Benevolence and Affection to your Family,Dis. 520. could hardly have omitted; and in your Letters to your Son, there is no mention made either of the young Man's Duty to his Grand-Mother, or of her Love to him, and in your Letters to your Wife there is as great a silence about the Mother's kindness to her Daughter-in-law. Besides, Where∣as all the Ancients us'd to date their Let∣ters, yours are without any Note, Place, or Time, that one cannot tell where, or when they were written.
Phalaris. Radamanthus grant me Patience. Sophist. Stay, Sir, but one Word more; you say the Epistles are your own, I say they are my own, and that Bentivoglio has prov'd them to be so, by Arguments that are his own.
Modern Atchievements. Butcher and Hercules. Butcher. WELL, for all your blustring, were we in the other World, I would not have turn'd my Back to you, and if I had but a Quarter-staff, I would have ven∣tur'd you with your Club for coming in with me. Hercules. Did not I cleanse the Au∣gean Stables, and conquer the Bull of Marathon? Butcher. And I have slav'd and tail'd at the Bank-side when the stout∣est He would not venture; Was it not I that when Tom Dove broke lose, and drove the Mob before him, took him by the Ring, and led him back to the Stake, with the universal Shouts of the Company? Besides, I question whether you ever saw a Bull-dog. Hercules. You talk of mean Per∣formances; But I subdu'd the Laestri∣gons,
who us'd to Banquet upon Man's Flesh, and destroy'd Horses; that after they had eat the Meat from a Humane Body, would crash the Bones as other Palfries do Horse-beans. Perhaps, you never heard of these Stories. Butcher. Not I. Hercules. No, not you! Do you know what Authors say? That Pha∣laris long'd to eat a Child,Dis. 512. 513. and at last came to devour sucking Children, taking them from their Mothers Breasts to eat 'em; and that his own Son did not escape his Hunger. Do you know in what Olympiad the famous Emperor Xerxes Butcher'd the Empress Atossa,p. 536. Sister to Cambyses, Wife to Darius, and his own natural Mother, and then eat her? No not you! Your Stature and Strength of Body makes you Proud, but your Ignorance in History ren∣ders you Contemptible. Read the Works of the Great Bentivoglio that are lately come over, and be Wiser. Butcher. I don't know any thing a∣bout your Man-Eaters, but I know when, and where the Fellow run for
the great Bag-Pudding, and eat it when he had done; and I am sure, if this Story was well told, it would seem the more probable. Hercules. You enrage me! Now by the Gods I have taken the Thermodoon∣tiack Belt from the Princess Thalestris. Butcher. Hold a little, good Sir, I have flung down the Belt in Moor-fields when never a Lincolns-Inn-Fields Wrestler durst encounter me. Hercules. What think you of Hyl∣lus,Dis p. 52, 53, 54. Lycon, and Plato the Wrestlers, Cleanthes the Cuffer, and twenty more of 'em. Oh the Glory of the former Ages! what Racing, what Running, what Wrestling, what Boxing at the Olympiads, the Pythick and Nemean Games, when the Oak, the Pine and Parsly Garlands remain'd the Re∣ward of their Victories. Butcher. In truth, Sir, I believe the Cornish Hug would have puzzl'd the Art of your Philosophers; and that a Prize at Back Sword, with the o∣ther Weapons, as Dagger, Faulchion, and the rest, may be as well worth admiration, as your hard nam'd 'Lym∣piads
that you make such a rout with. Hereafter I would have all the Wenches that win the Smock at A∣strop, and the Fellows that get the Hat and Feathers throughout Eng∣land by Boxing and Cudgle-playing to be put in the Chronicle, and take place above the High-Constable. Hercules. What can you have seen like the Horse-racing in Greece; for after the Apene, which was drawn by Mules, and first was us'd at the Olympicks in the 70th Olympiad, was cried down in the 84th Olympiad; the Race of Horses was improv'd to admiration. Butcher. This may be true; but as poor a Fellow as I was, I could have laid my Leg over a good piece of Horse-Flesh, and with a hundred Guineas in my Pocket have rod to New-Market, where Dragon, or Why-not, Honey-cum-punch, or Stiff-Dick, should have run for it against any Gre∣cian Horse that you, or any of your Forefathers could have produc'd. Hercules. You would still pretend to out-do the Ancients; but let me tell you one thing, which I did, which
I must own my Thanks to Bentivoglio, is by him Recorded to Posterity. I had a mind to go to Erythraea,Dis. p. 114, 115, 116. an I∣sland in the Western Ocean, and how do you think I got thither? In a Ship, you will say; No! in a Brazen Ship? No, In a Cauldron? No! In a Brazen Cauldron? No! In a Golden Bed? No! How then, you will say in the Name of Wonder? Why, in short, I got the Sun to lend me his Gol∣den Cup to sail in, and I scudded away as well as if I had had all the Wind and Sail imginable. Butcher. And no such great matter at last! I remember as I was boast∣ing one day of my Exploits to a good jolly Muscovite at the Bear-Garden, he told me that St. Nicholas came to their Country sailing upon a Mill-Stone, which I thought as humoursome a Passage as your Cup. But to be short and plain with you, I have Witnesses both on this side and t'other side of Styx, that saw me Row my self from the Horse-Ferry to the other side of the Water in my own Tray, with a couple of Trenchers; and there is a
Tray and a Mill Stone for your Cup and your Cauldron. Hercules. I find you will have the last word. Butcher. Well, since he is gone, I think I may say, That the Persons who have liv'd lately, are only wan∣ting to themselves, and that it is the Negligence of our Ballad-Singers that makes us be talk'd of less than others, for who almost, besides St. George, King Arthur, Bevis, Guy, and Hicka∣thrift, are in the Chronicles? Our great Scholards are so much taken up with such Fellows as this Hercules, Hyllus the Wrestler, Cleanthes the Cuffer, Pha∣laris and Xerxes the Man-Eaters, that they never mind My Actions, nor se∣veral others of their own Country-Men.
SELF-LOVE, OR THE BEAU. Ricardo, Narcissus. Ricardo. AUgustus died in a Comple∣ment,Lord Ba∣con's Essays. Tiberius in Dis∣simulation, Vespasian in a Jest, Galba with a Sentence, Severus in Dispatch, and you in Love. Narcissus. I think my self happy in my Death, since it was in pursuance of so justifiable a Passion as that of Self-love; for all the World must own that I was charmingly Beautiful. Ricardo. Why truly, I think, That a Critick, as Bentivoglio for Example, has as much reason to value himself upon, as you had, or rather more. And indeed, are not his Works full of himself,Dis. Pref. from p. 1, to p. 112. and is he at all sparing in his own Com∣mendations?
Does he blush to hear himself prais'd,Dis. from p. 1, to p. 549. or rather spread his gayest Feathers to the best advantage, and then Amplifies,Pref. p. 80, 84. Expatiates and Comments upon himself that belov'd Subject?Pref. Dis. p. 59, 60. In short, has he not done himself True Honour by his improve∣ment of the Parodia of the Salt-cellar, and then assuming that warmth and haughti∣ness,Pref. p. 101. 102. which are the Companions of such as are Conscious of their own Merit. Well, I am satisfy'd you could never have been so hand∣some as he is Learned and Ingenious in his own Eyes. Narcissus. Might three Pimples at once have seiz'd my Complexion, if you don't amaze a Person of my Fond∣ness for my own Accomplishments! Did not my Perfections occasion me the Envy of my Sex? Ricardo. And will not even Envy it self be forc'd to allow that Bentivoglio's Discovery concerning Anapaests is no inconsiderable one?Dis. p. 13. And does not he speak Truth, when he says the Cri∣ticks tell him That Rumpantur ut ilia Codris.Praef. p. 55, 48. Altho' the Codri burst with
Spleen, yet he will be esteem'd by all that Cultivate Humanity. Narcissus. All the Nimphs ad∣dress'd to me in the softest Words, and most languishing Expressions. Ricardo. And can any thing be more tender than what the Criticks tell Bentivoglio, That they keep his Epistles more carefully than dry'd Grapes, or preserv'd Pine-Apples: That he arrides to the Palate as soon as tasted,Praef. p. 53 Qui omnia Tuae Custo∣dio diligen∣tius Nigris Vvis. Praef. p. 80. Videbis hic Lector studiose Musicarum Cupediarum & aliud quod Tuo palato simul ac gustaris, sat scio arridebit mirifice. and is the very Oglio of all Musical Dainties. Narcissus. Did not Sighs and Tears attend my Neglect, and was not Death the Companion of my Dis∣dain? Ricardo. And does not Bentivoglio's All-correcting Pen, when once drawn forth, make all the Criticks tremble? Is Vossius secure?p. 281, 282, 283. Is Scaliger without his Faults? Don't Stobaeus and Pollux know their distance? Nay, can even the Etymologicon, or the Scholiast be
then suppos'd to be unblameable. Narcissus. Eccho, declares the force of my Charms, and tho' a miserable, yet is a lasting Monument of my Con∣quest. Ricardo. Eccho repeats only the last and dying sounds of Sentences, whereas Bentivoglio knows that he has the full Voice of Fame, He has receiv'd Thanks from all the Lovers of Polite Learning,Praef. p. 48, 49. and his worth has long ago reach'd these Shades, and has put the Ghost of Reubenius to an uneasi∣ness to know how to return the Obli∣gations receiv'd from him. Narcissus. The Gods took care that I should not be forgotten in the other World, each Spring revives my Flo∣wer which preserves my Name, and is the greatest Beauty in the Garlands of all Nymphs that lament my ab∣sence. Ricardo. But the Great Bentivoglio has more sublime Glory! What Em∣perors were flatter'd with when Dead, That he has gain'd deservedly whilst living, He is a Star already, and if he proceeds in his Learned Labours may
become a Constellation.Praef. p. 79, 81. He is Re∣verenc'd by all for being the New and Rising-Star, and the brightest light of Britain; Whereas, Sir, for your Flo∣wers a Man may have a Basketful of you in the Market for Sixpence. Narcissus. Well, I will hide my self in the thickest Shades of Myrtles; there Contemplate upon my own Perfections, and ever now and then in some neighbouring Foun∣tain (since I cannot fear a second Death) gaze upon my own Beauty. Farewel fond Critick: Languish in thy Misfortune, since thou dost not comprehend my worth, which I alone know how to value. Ricardo. Alas he flies! And now methinks I begin already to repent of what I have done. How unsincere are all Humane Pleasures, something still intervenes to Tarnish the lustre of our Triumphs. I may have gain'd the Better of Narcissus, but then I greive to think that after his Example, some day or other, even my Friend Ben∣tivoglio's Self-Love may chance to be put out of Countenance.
THE DICTIONARY. Hesychius and Gouldman. Hesychius. OH! Brother Gould∣man, I am heartily glad to meet you. You must have heard the News; Bentivoglio has vindicated the Worth and Honour of all Dictionaries: He has read half of me, and has made Honourable men∣tion of me in all his Works,Dissert. Throughou. he has re∣stor'd me in ten Thousand places, and Collated me with all the Manuscripts in the World but those in the King of Poland's Library. Methinks you don't seem so pleas'd with the News as you ought to be. Are you not concern'd for the Wit, Reputation, and Honour of one that can write a Dictionary? You seem so unconcern∣ed, as if you had no Opinion of the Matter.
Gouldman. Prethee Brother Hesy∣chius, don't trouble me with the Sto∣ry of a Fellow that has read your La∣bours, for I am perswaded that he must have a very small Library, and little to do, that reads a Dictionary, Hesychius. Not read a Dictionary! Why I knew a Man that read all the Volumes of Stephen's Thesaurus thrice over. Gouldman. I thought Dictionaries had been made not to have been read, but turn'd to. Besides, some are too Voluminous. There came out in Ara∣bia some Cees ago, a Dictionary of three or four Folio's, which con∣tains nothing else but the several parts of a Camel▪ and the words that are properly us'd in the Dressing and Equipping of it. Do you think it would be worth while to make one of equal bulk concerning Horses, for the use of the Europeans? How many Grooms in the Meuse, or Jockies in Smithfield, do you think would read it? Hesychius. You are the most pro∣voking Shade that walks. What no Wit, Breeding, Complaisance, Poli∣ticks,
Knowledge of Men and Man∣ners, to be learn'd out of Dictiona∣ries. Prove it, prove it. Hear him, hear him. Gouldman. I grant that all Wit, Arts, Genteel and Mannerly Conver∣sation, are contain'd in Dictionaries just as they are in the Alphabet, and in some measure, more properly: Be∣cause they contain Words, but then the joyning them is the Art our Dicti∣onaries will never teach a Man; for suppose I was to discourse in Politicks, my first word I find in your 119th Page, your second in the 204th, and the third perhaps, an 100 Pages af∣ter, now this is too much for mortal Man to carry in his Memory. Hesychius. So then, you would have a Man put words together, properly to make sence of 'em! Very fine! How then could I▪ or my Friend Ben∣tivoglio be Authors? But let me hear you, as to the Wit of Dictionaries. Gouldman. Why,  that the Person who pretend to have disco∣ver'd any Wit, eve  you Brother,
has found out more tha ever you de∣sign'd to teach . Hesychius. Astonishme! Does not more of Homers Wit appear in his Eusathius and Dydimus than in his Iliads? And is not Clavis Homerica better than either? And Seberus's In∣dex a wiser Book than any of them all? What Man won't own that Erythraeus has done more service to Virgil, than Ogylby has by Translating him? Gouldman. At the same rate, I sup∣pose, you will Compliment me, and tell me that the proper Names at the end of my Dictionary, are a better History than Hollingshead, Heylin and Howel, altogether. Now you see the use of my Letter H. Hesychius. Why so they are! But can there be more Wit than in an Ety∣mology, of which, you are full from all Languages? Gouldman. Etymologies may in∣deed furnish Materials for Quiblers, Punsters, and Conundrum-Makers, but these sorts of Wit are as much out of use as Hammer'd Money.
Hesychius. But I hope they will be in Esteem again, when my Works are restor'd by the hand of the Great Bentivoglio. But is not the Order of a Dictionary admirable?Dis. 4. Has not Ju∣lius a  incomparable Fluen∣cy? Is not  a exquisite Politician?  Glossary of the Greek and Barbarou Words, most Harmonious? Does not Passer con∣tend with Schrevelius, and Schrevelius with Passer, and both observe the Conquest? But you on't seem to have a just esteem for your own Works; Tti eris aliis quanti tibi fueris, as the Poet Calepin has it. Be sure think as well of Your self for wri∣ting a Dictionary as Bentivoglio does of himself for reading one, and the World must think well of you.
AFFECTATION OF THE Learned Lady. Bellamira, Calphurnia. Bellamira. YOU seem, Madam, to have been strang∣ly delighted with the Belles Lettres whilst you were in the other World. Calphurnia. Why truly, Madam, I was thought to have had a Relish for 'em, and not to have been Sans quelque goût in the Belle Maniere. Bellamira. Reading may be allow∣able in our Sex, when we have little else to do, especially if the Subject be diverting, but your Toilette us'd al∣ways to be heap'd with such Books as frighted me to look into 'em. Calphurnia. Having an Acquain∣tance among the Learned, sometimes
I had spread before me the Works of Jansenius, and Mr. Arnaud, Stephens's Thesaurus, des Cartes, Causabon's Athe∣naeus, Kircher, Lipsius, Taubmannus, with such like Authors and Manuscripts in∣numerable. Bellamira. Indeed, Madam, you us'd to make such an appearance a∣broad, as if you bestow'd your time in your Dressing-Room different from other Ladies. Calphurnia. I was so Visited in a Morning by the Virtuosi, Criticks, Poets, Booksellers, so taken up with my Correspondence with the Learned both at Home and Abroad, that I had little time to talk with my Milliner, Dresser, Mantua-Maker, and such Il∣literate People. Bellamira. Such a Levee for a Lady is not very common, but they who had a Capacity for such Company, must needs have been very well en∣tertain'd. Calphurnia. Oh infinitely! The Company most charming! I could have wish'd for your sake, Madam, that you had understood Latin and
Greek, I could have recommended to your Acquaintance so profound a Scholar. Bellamira. To what intent, Ma∣dam? Calphurnia. Why you, Madam, were a Person very Nice and Exact in your Dress, your Table and Apartments. I have heard him, Madam, give such a Description of a Commode from a Satyr of Juvenal, that your Ladyship could not have found fault with the Air of it. Then he illustrated the Text with the Comments of Lubin, Holyday, and others, to that degree, Madam, Compagibus altis aedificare Ca∣put; Madam! Oh charming! beyond any thing, even of the French Ma∣dam. Bellamira. You are obliging to as∣sist me in this matter; for I igno∣rantly took the Fashion as I found it. Calphurnia. A Gentleman came one Morning with several various read∣ings upon Vitruvius▪ and from thence perswaded me that the Frame of my Looking-Glass was the most injudici∣ous Piece of Architecture that could
be, that the Bases were Dorick, the Capitals Corinthian, and the Archi∣trave perfectly Barbarous, for which reason I went abroad without Patches, till such Absurdities were en∣tirely Mended and Corrected by his Direction. Bellamira. I remember in Don Quixote, one of my Authors, the Marquiss of Mantua, when he had sworn to revenge the Death of his Nephew Valdovinos, was not to Eat on a Table-cloth till he had perform'd it. But was not yours too severe a Mortification for the Ignorance of your Cabinet-maker? But, Pray, Ma∣dam, who was this knowing Person? Calphurnia. It was the same great Virtuoso Signior Bentivoglio, a Per∣son of the most known Merit then Breathing. I did nothing in my Fa∣mily without his direction. He has often taken his Bill of Fare out of Athenaeus, and cover'd my Table with the most surprizing Dishes imagina∣ble. Ordinary Persons content them∣selves with modern Soupes, but after my acquaintance with him, nothing
but the Black Lacedaemonian Broth might be set before us.p. 377, 379. He gave the bravest sounding Greek Names from Simon's Art of Cookery, and the Ga∣stronomia, such Oulions, Groulions, Floios and Toios, to the end of every thing, that it was most charming. He made the most delicious Alphiton of the Ancients,379. far exceeding our Hasty-Pudding. I remember once at the sight of a Piece of Roast-Beef he repeated such a rumbling description out of Homer of the Beef sent up to Agamemnon, that I profess my Lady Cornelia's Children ran away fright∣ned, long before the Melimela and Ma∣la Aurea, which the Ignorant call the Desert, could possibly be set upon the Table. Bellamira. I profess, Madam, I had rather have gone without a De∣sert, nay, a second Course, than have had things with such Hidious Names set before me. But, Madam, do Learned Men trouble themselves a∣bout such Affairs as these are? Calphurnia. Oh! Madam, No Man can be a Scholar without being Expert in
the whole method of Athenaeus's Cookery. What Quarrels, Madam, do you think there have been between Grave and Learned Men, about spelling a Greek Word, that has been only one single Ingredient of a Patty-pan. Pray read Athenaeus, Madam, and you will be convinc'd of it. Bellamira. Sure, Learned Men won't quarrel about Trifles? Calphurnia. Oh! Madam, rather than any thing. Why as I have read in several Authors, Timothias, a Grammarian, upon a Dispute con∣cerning a Greek to a Chechine, with the great Scho∣lar Philelphus. The old Gentleman lost, and his Adversary was so un∣merciful as to cut it off, and hang it upon his Chair, as a Monument of his Victory. Bellamira. A Cruelty in my Opi∣nion too insulting. Calphurnia. Oh! Madam, I had forgot one thing, I most heartily beg your Pardon. Bentivoglio one day show'd me the Name of a Pudding in one of Aristophanes his Plays;
which, if it were wrote at its full length, would be as long as your La∣dyship's Tippet. Bellamira. I fancy this Outlandish way of furnishing your Table, was the reason why Persons of Quality a∣voided eating with you, especialiy having Company that discours'd so much above 'em. Calphurnia. I was so involv'd in the Greek, that I protest, Madam, I had entirely forgot the necessary Ingredi∣ents for Lemmon Cream, and Jelly of Harts-horn. Bellamira. Perhaps, that might be the reason you appear'd so seldom in the Park, and were so very long be∣fore you return'd a Visit that had been paid you. Calphurnia. My Day for the La∣dies was but once a Fortnight, but every day for the Virtuosi. But, pray, Madam, how did you spend your time, and fit your self for Conversa∣tion? Bellamira. Why, Madam, my own Affairs took up some part of my time; Musick and Drawing diverted
me now and then; I had sometimes a fancy for Work, I now and then went to see a Play, when I lik'd the Company I went with better than those I usually found there; I made my self as easie as I could to my Ac∣quaintance, and I have still the vani∣ty to think I was not disagreeable to them, and I did not find but if one of us make out in Civility what we want in Learning, but we might pass our time well enough in the World. Calphurnia. If you can satisfie your self with such Trifles, I am your Servant Madam, and Adieu.
CHRONOLOGY. Lilly the Astrologer, Helvicus. Lilly. WHY as Matters go now with Chronology, it sig∣nifies nothing what we do. There is no value for Exactness; To what end have we Studied? what becomes of our Decimals, Sexagesimals, Algo∣rithms of Fractions, Parabolisms, Hy∣pobybasms, Paralelopipeds, and Zen∣zes; when we have flung away a Day, nay, sometimes a Week, to pre∣serve the least imaginary part of a Moment, What Honours are at last confer'd upon us? Father Time may e'en bestow his Hour-Glass upon what Parish-Church he pleases, and next Hay-Harvest for want, or else diver∣sion, Mow his way down from Pa∣dington to Cumberland. Helvicus. Why in such a Passion, Brother Lilly?
Lilly. Brother Lilly! You make very free with me. I am none of your Brother, the Great Bentivoglio may indeed call me Brother, since the Publication of his Eternal Labours. He equals the Chronological Tables that I yearly Publish'd,See Diss. and then he is the most exact Man at the Original of a Sicilian City, that amidst never so great variety of Authors. He can tell you the Man that laid the first Stone of it. There was not a Potter in Athens, or a Brasier in Corinth, but he knows when he set up, and who took out a Statute of Bankrupt against him. Helvicus. Why this is great Learn∣ing indeed! Lilly. Why so it is, Sir; Do you know whether Thericles made Glass or Earthen-ware,Dissert. a∣bout Theri∣clean Cups. or what Olympiad he liv'd in? Helvicus. Truly not I, but do the Fortunes of Greece depend upon it? Lilly. Thus you would encourage Ignorance; my Brother Bentivoglio and I, have Studied many years upon things of less Importance; some of
which I shall name to you, as that Carp and Hops came into Eng∣land the same Year with Heresie. That the first Weather cock was set upon the Tomb of Zethys and Calais, Sons of Boreas, in the time of the Ar∣gonautick Expedition. That Mrs. Turner brought up the Fashion of yel∣low Starch. That the Sybarites first laid Rose-Cakes and Lavender among their Linnen. That Sardanapalus was the Inventor of Cushions, which ne∣ver before this last Century have been improv'd into easy Chairs, by the Metamorphosis of cast Mantuas and Petti-coats, to the ruin of Chamber-Maids. And yet we thought our time well spent, I must tell you. Helvicus. Are any of these things in Vsher's Annals, or Simpson's Chro∣nicon? Lilly. Perhaps not; but we stand up∣on their Shoulders, and therefore see things with greater exactness, perhaps never Man came to the same pitch of Chronology as the much Esteem'd Bentivoglio. He has got the true Standard by which to judge of the
Grecian time: He knows the Age of any Greek Word unless it be in the Greek Testament, and can tell you the time a Man liv'd in, by reading a Page of his Book, as easily as I could have told an Oyster-Woman's Fortune when my hand was crost with a piece of Silver. Helvicus. This is admirable! why then it seems Words have their Chro∣nology and Phrases, their Rise and Fall, as well as the four Monarchies. Lilly. Very right; let Bentivoglio but get a Sentence of Greek in his Mouth, and turn it once or twice up∣on his Tongue, and he as well knows the growth of it, as a Vintner does Burgundy from Maderas. Helvicus. For shame, give over. You and Bentivoglio are a disgrace to Chronology; which is a Study that has, and does employ the care of the greatest Men in Church and State. Nothing can be of more use than the Periods they fix, both for the Illustra∣tion of History, and the Service of Religion. But I must own that The∣ricles's
Crockery-ware does not fall un∣der these grave Enquirers Notice. Consider farther, That Men of true Learning will always be Honour'd whilst their Mimicks are despis'd.
THE IMPOSTURE. Heraclitus, Democritus. Heraclitus. ALas! Alas! The World it seems con∣tinues still the same,Diss. 331, 239, 339▪ 374. &c. Lies, Mistakes, Cheats, Forgeries, and Impostures, are Publish'd, and Defended amongst the Learned, as much as ever; Alas! Alas! Democritus. Chear up your Spirits, Old Spark, the World owes half its Ease, Content and Happiness to De∣ceit. " So to his Cure we the Sick Youth betray,Tasso from Lucretius. " And round the Cup persuasive Ho∣ney lay; " The Bitter Draught thus by the Boy receiv'd, " Preserves his Life for being well de∣ceiv'd.
A Coxcomb is the Object of Envy, rather than Pity. When you weep to see Sharpers impose upon his Sense, Bullies upon his Courage, and Pe∣dants upon his Understanding. He laughs at your Tears, and I laugh at his Follies. Heraclitus. Who without concern will consider that Pythagoras should write Verses,p. 15. and put Orpheus's Name to 'em. That Heraclides should be such an Imposture as to Counterfeit Thespis's Plays,245. and impose upon Clemens Alex∣andrinus, Pollux, and Plurarch altoge∣ther. Alas! the very Laws of Cha∣rondas and Zaleucus are spurious Cheats,334. Diss. p. 335. to 376. and foul Impostures, whilst Diodorus, Stobaeus, and Others, have as much as in them lay, contributed to the Vil∣lany. Democritus. Defer your Passion, the other side of these Propositions may chance to be true: Besides, you pass no great Compliment upon Learning, when you would show your Learned Men of Antiquity to be either Fools or Rascals. You may easily guess by this Smile what the generality of By-Standers
will be apt to do upon this occasion. Heraclitus. But O! Phalaris! Pha∣laris! Notwithstanding the Disserta∣tions of Bentivoglio, the Sophist im∣poses his spurious Epistles upon the World, under his Name, and the Examiner, who has undertaken his Defence, has met with a kind Recep∣tion from the World whilst none complain but I and Bentivoglio. Democritus. Whilst Life, Spirit, and a great Genius, shine throughout the Epistles, and whilst Wit, Judgment, and Learning go along with the Exa∣miner, Men will read 'em. In the mean time dry your Eyes, and assure your self, your Friend Bentivoglio will never be useless as long as there are any Grocers. You seem more pale than ordinary all of a sudden! What is the matter? Heraclitus. The Stone! the Stone! the Stone! Democritus. You can't be troubl'd with that, since your Shade can feel no Pain.
Heraclitus. It is the Marble, that is the thing that grieves me. Democritus. Pray, what has this Marble done? Heraclitus. Time has devour'd it. Democritus. If that be all, that is a thing common to all Marble. Heraclitus. Oh! but this which is eaten is in the most material place for the purpose. For without a Man can make sense of—ppotonistha— d—arsicho—noinow—er— nos—&c.Diss. p. 20. and read whole Lines where no Letters can be seen, the Age of Tragedy, which is an important Matter can never be determin'd.p. 389. Democritus. You are much besides the Mark old Friend, if you would have a Stone legible. A huge Mar∣ble would sell for nothing, if it had a∣bove a dozen Letters on it,Pref. That's the Stone for Money that requires Specta∣cles, and an Iron-Feskew to make Letters where a Man can't find 'em. It is not a Criticks business to read Marbles, but out of Broken pieces to guess at 'em, and then positively to restore 'em. As the misunderstand∣ing
of this at present, has caus'd you some disturbance; so the Contempla∣tion of an Antiquary for the future, may create you very good Diversion. Heraclitus. You seem not to have a just Relish of Antiquity, whilst I de∣plore those irreparable losses which time has occasion'd. Not a Mortal now Breathing knows the shape of Nestor's Cup,p. 115. nor what were the Dis∣putes of the Old Grammarians about it, since them any Treatises which were written upon that Subject are now perish'd and sunk in Oblivion. Democritus. Well, I will procure you a Catalogue from Bentivoglio of such Books as have been lost and are found, such as have been lost and are not found; and in short, of such as have neither been lost nor found. But my Heart won't break as long as there are such Dissertations remaining, as The History of Coffee, Tea, Chocolate, and Tobacco. The Theological Collation occasi∣on'd by the words, Tirez, Mirez, Beus, that is, Take, Look, Drink, by the profound Scholar, Adrian Vander Blict.
The Treatise of Northallerton Ale. The Interlude of Ale, Toast, Sugar, Nutmeg and Tobacco, with the Contest of Toast for having rub'd himself against Nutmeg. Learn to lie warm, proving the ne∣cessity for a Young Man to Marry an Old-Woman. These Writings to me supply the place of all Authors that have writ about the shape of Cups since the Reign of Saturn. Heraclitus. Whilst in the mean time my Grief is insupportable! Democritus. Come, put off your Chagrin, and take a little of my good Humour along with you. I will *1. Rail with you, 2. Quible with you, 3. Quote Proverbs with you, 4. Dispute with you, 5. Pun with you, 6. Cut Greek Capers with you, 7. tell a Gossips Tale with you, 8. Sing a Smutty Catch with you. Any thing to divert you, and yet all shall be according to Art, and the exact Method of your Friend Ben∣tivoglio. I see you look sowre, and begin to frown upon me. How true a saying is it that one Man may
steal a Horse with less danger, than a∣nother look over the Hedge. Should I do any of these things of my own Head, I know how I should be cen∣sur'd, and what would become of me. But when I act under the pretence of being a great Scholar, and the open protection of such an Authority as that of Bentivoglio, I dare be as Fan∣ciful as any Dissertator of 'em all. *(1.)P. 408. If I say that Grass is green, or Snow is white, I am still at the Cour∣tesie of my Antagonist; for if he should rub his Forehead, and deny it, I do not see by what Syllogism I should refute him. (2.) p. 361. In a Body of Laws any Metaphor at all makes but an odd Figure. p. 277. Mr. B. is pleas'd to call that Dissertation my soft Epistle to Dr. Mill, which is Ironi∣cally said for hard, and indeed to confess the Truth, it is too hard for him to bite at. (3.) p. 351. Such a Trade would have been as unprofitable as to carry Sylphium to Cyrene, or Frankincense to Arabia, or Coals to Newcastle. (4.) p. 297. It is as if some Boy should thus argue with his Master, Pomum may signifie Malum, an Apple, and Pomum may signifie Ce∣rasum
a Cherry; therefore Malum an Apple, may signifie Cerasum a Cherry. (5.) p. 203. Stratonicus the Musician, made a Quibble about it, for as he once was in Mylasa, a City that had few Inhabi∣tants in it, but a great many Temples, he comes into the Market place as if he would Proclaim something, but instead of , as the Form us'd to be, he said . which is so good in Greek that it cannot be Transla∣ted. (6.) From p. 264. to 269. Make room there, for I am beginning a Dance that's enough to strain a Man's side with the violent Motion. Pollux says of the Dances of Women, they were to kick their Heels higher than their Shoulders. And in Phrynichus's way, Frisk and Caper, so as the Spectators seeing your Legs aloft, may cry out with admiration: With a Dissertation concerning an Error in Ari∣stophanes, which has continu'd ever since Adrian's time, whether Phryni∣chus sneaks like a Cock, or rather strikes like a Cock. A very material Question! (7.) p. 224. A certain Gossip of Old, as the Story goes, would needs tell her Comrades what Jupiter once whisper'd
to Juno in her Ear. The Company was inquisitive how she could know it then: But Mr. B. would have answer'd for her, That they might as well ask her how she came to know his Name was Jupiter. Fame that told her the one, must tell her the other too. (8.) p. 357. A Greek Song in Athaeneus. They are the words of a Woman to her Lover, that he would rise before her Husband comes home and catches 'em.
Modern Learning. Signior Moderno, Signior In∣differentio. Indifferentio. WHere have you been Moderno? in the Name of Wonder! you make such a hideous Figure, and are so Dirty, that no Gentleman would come near you? What has your Horse thrown you? Or what's the matter? Moderno. The matter! Why I have been in a Ditch. Indifferentio. By some Accident, I suppose. Moderno. Accident! No, you know better sure than that. Gentle∣men of my Estate, Fortune, Educa∣tion, Parts and Learning, don't use to go into a Ditch by Accident, but choice. There has been more true Experience in Natural Philosophy gather'd out of Ditches in this latter Century, than
Pliny and Aristotle were Masters of both together, though one was of the first Quality in Rome, and the other was Master to the Founder of the third Monarchy *. * This is what our Age has seen;Reflections upon An∣cient and Modern Learning. p. 313, 314. and it is not the less admirable, because all of it, perhaps, cannot be made immedi∣ately useful to Humane Life: It is an excellent Argument to prove, That it is not Gain alone which biasses the Pur∣suits of the Men of this Age after Knowledge; for here are numerous In∣stances of Learned Men, who, finding other parts of Natural Learning taken up by Men, who, in all probability would leave little for After-comers, have, ra∣ther than not contribute their proportion towards the Advancement of Knowledge, spent a World of Time, Pains and Cost, in Examining the Excrescencies of all the Parts of Trees, Shrubs and Herbs, in observing the Critical Times of the Changes of all sorts of Caterpillars and Maggots, in finding out, by the Knife and Microscopes, the minutest Parts of the smallest Animals, Examining every Crevice, and goring in every Ditch, in
tracing every Insect up to its Original Egg; and all this with as great Dili∣gence, as if they had had an Alexander to have given them as many Talents, as he is said to have given to his Ma∣ster Aristotle. Indifferentio. But what may have been your Diversion in this Ditch? Moderno. Why I have been a Tad∣pole hunting, and have had very good sport, only at last the Rain disturb'd it, just as I had found out the seat of their Animal Spirits. Indifferentio. Is it not a little too soon in the Season for Tadpoles? Moderno. Something too soon, but a Man is sosatiated with the Winter Sports within Doors,Reflections upon An∣cient and Modern Learning. v. p. 312. as Rat-catching, Mouse-fleying, Crevice-searching for Spi∣ders, Cricket dissecting, and the like; that the Spring leads us into the Fields upon its first approaches. Indifferentio. Pray, Sir, have you not some Diversions peculiar to the Summer? Moderno. Oh! yes! infinite, in∣finite! Maggots, Flies, Gnats, Buzzes, Chaffers, Humble-Bees, Wasps, Gras∣hoppers,
and in a good Year Catter∣pillars in abundance. Indifferentio. I thought some of these things did harm, especially Mag∣gots and Catter-pillars. Moderno. How extreamly a Man may be mistaken that has not Learn∣ing; the most useful Knowledge ima∣ginable may be gather'd from 'em by a Philosopher.Reflections upon An∣cient and Modern Learning. p. 310. 311. Goedartius and Swam∣merdam became Eminent for this business. Goedartius has given exact Histories of the several changes of great Numbers of Catterpillars into Butter-flies and Worms; and Maggots into Flies, which had never before been taken notice of as specifi∣cally different. Indifferentio. You inform me of things I was not so well vers'd in before. Moderno. A Friend of mine has Studied all those Excrescences and Swellings which appear in Summer-time upon the Leaves of tender Twigs,Ibid. p. 310. Fruits, and Roots of many Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs, from whence several sorts of Insects spring, which are all caus'd by Eggs laid there by full grown Insects of their own
Kinds. Another Friend of mine has made many Observations upon Insects that live,Reflections upon Anci∣ent and Modern Learning. p. 310. and are carry'd about upon the Bodies of other Insects, and oftentimes upon the Bodies of Rational Beings, whence he has given admirable Rea∣sons, why Idle dirty Boys scratch their Heads,Ibid. p. 309. and Beggars shrug their Shoulders. He has examin'd likewise abundance of those Insects which are be∣liev'd to be produc'd from the Putrefacti∣on of Flesh, those he found to grow from Eggs laid by other Insects of the same Kinds. He told me they were a very Prolifick and Voracious sort of Ani∣mal, and that as for their Eggs, a Butcher would not give a Groat for ten Millions of them. Indifferentio. So that it seems the Ancients eat their Meat as soon as they had kill'd it, but in after Ages the Women not being so good House-Wifes left the Maggots of Putrify'd Meat to be discern'd by the Glasses of their Husbands. Moderno. You seem to smile. Indifferentio. I protest, Sir, I am as Grave as the things you discourse
of will possibly give me leave. You may imagine I am better bred than to laugh at a Man that talks seriously as you do, in my Conscience. Moderno. I am very glad to find you so well dispos'd.Reflections upon An∣cient and Modern Learning. p. 27, 419. For I think that all these excellent Men do highly deserve Commendation for these seemingly use∣less Labours, and the more, since they run he hazard of being laugh'd at by Men of Wit. For nothing wounds so much as Jest, and when Men once be∣come Ridiculous, their Labours will be slighted, and they will find few Imita∣tors. How far this may deaden the In∣dustry of the Philosophers of the next Age, is not easie to tell. Indifferentio. I hope I shall be no oc∣casion of so great a Mischief as the deadning the Industry of the Philosophers in a Design so truly Noble. But, pray, since you have been so kind to inform me, let me understand some∣thing farther concerning the Know∣ledge of the Ancients, for I hitherto took them to be Men of Letters. Moderno. Scarce that Sir, for I take Grammar to be necessary in the first place.
Indifferentio. Certainly, Sir! Moderno. Now,Reflections upon An∣cient and Modern Learning. p. 58. I suppose it will be granted that if a Stranger under∣stand the Language of a Native bet∣ter than the Native himself, he ought to be prefer'd to him. Now I dare confidently affirm, That the Scholars of latter Ages, as Sanctius, Scioppius, Caninius and Clenard, have given evi∣dent Proofs how well they understood the Greek and Latin Tongue; besides, there are abundance of Grammatical Treatises, such as, Scholia upon Difficult Authors, Glossaries, Onomasticons, Etymolo∣gicons, Rudiments of Grammar, and the like. From all which, there seems Rea∣son to believe that these Criticks may have understood the Grammatical Construction of Latin, as well as Varro and Caesar, and of Greek, as well as Aristarchus, or Herodian. Indifferentio. I had always such an Honour for Caesar, that I thought he was beyond being compar'd with Sci∣oppius. But if it is so, I shall rest contented. Moderno. It cannot well be other∣wise, seeing there has been extraordi∣nary
Industry us'd in these latter Ages, insomuch, that Volumes have been written against some Letters, and in fa∣vour of H. and Z. that were in diffi∣cult Circumstances. Indifferentio. I am glad those Letters got the better, for I have always had a particular Respect for 'em. Moderno. As for Caesar, poor Gen∣tleman, he is not so much to be bla∣med, for he did what he could, consi∣dering the Age he liv'd in: But that Age which others think so great for Learning and Empire, lay under se∣veral apparent Disadvantages. For I have often read Xenophon, Polybius, Tully, Q. Tacitus, to see what Raggs might have been among the Ancients, but I cannot find (though I learn from Terence they had some) what use They put them to. 'Tis Demonstration that they made no Paper of their Lin∣nen Rags,Reflections upon Anci∣ent and Modern Learning. p. 15. and Caesar when he had Sub∣du'd France, and wrote his Commen∣taries, could not have Printed them if he would have pawn'd his Conquests. Indifferentio. Were they so unhap∣py in all other Matters?
Moderno. Yes, Sir; I really pity the Ancients as to their Opticks, Di∣vinity, Tobacco, Cydar, Coffee, Punch, Sugar, and several other things, of which they were ignorant. Indifferent. As how, Sir, I beseech you? Moderno. It is undoubtedly to be be∣liev'd,Ibid. p. 189, 190, That Spectacles were not ancient∣er than Friar Bacon. Insomuch, that it must be a great loss to Learning, when old Gentlewomen could not Re∣cord their Receits to Posterity. Besides, it is certain, That Monsieur Nuck first found out how the Watry Humour of the Eye may be,Ib. p. 219. and is constantly supply'd; for he discover'd a particular Canal of Water arising from the internal Carotidal Artery, which creeping along the Sclero∣tick Coat of the Eye, perforates the Con∣rea near the Pupil, and then branching it self curiously about the Iris, enters in∣to, and supplies the Watry Humour. Indifferentio. The most ignorant may apprehend this very easily. Moderno. To pass by the Philolo∣gical Learning of the Moderns,p. 374. See Chap. 29. throughout. I cannot but pity the Ancients as to their Di∣vinity; They did not make Controver∣sies
so easie as the Moderns, and the Fa∣thers, especially St. Chrysostom, seem to have been but indifferent Preachers. Indifferentio. Hold, Sir, I beseech You doe as You please, as to other things, but don't intermeddle with Religion. I that am a Lay-man will as soon give You leave to Publish Apol∣lonius Tyanaeus. But, Pray, Sir, to proceed, let me hear what You have to say as to their Tobacco. Moderno. Certainly that Tobacco ought here to be mention'd,Ibid p. 298. can be que∣stion'd by none who know what a delight and refreshment it is to so many Nati∣ons, so many several ways. So that from Virginia and Brasil, we may be assur'd that the Modern Husbandry, is a larger, if not a more exact thing than the Ancient. It is strange to think what Inconveniences they were put to, Socrates was forc'd to ride upon a Hobby-Horse, and Scipio, and Laeli∣us to play with Bounding Stones; be∣cause none of 'em had the Happiness to blow a Pipe with their Neighbours. Indifferentio. This was Extremely hard for Men of their Quality.
Moderno. It was the faults of their Gardens. Indifferentio I thought their Gar∣dens had been Extremely fine,Ibid p. 302. being spacious plats of ground, fitted and surrounded with stately Walks of Plantans, built round with Portico's, finely pav'd, No∣ble Rows, of Pillars, with Fish-Ponds, Aviaries, Fountains, and Sta∣tues. Moderno. This is True But then where were their Auriculas,P. 304. Tulipas, Car∣nations, Jonquilles, Narcissuss, and that almost infinite diversity of Beautiful and Odoriferous Flowers,P. 305. that now adorn our Gardens. Besides we have no Rea∣son to think they understood much of that Beautiful Furniture which Dwarfs and ever Greens afford us. Indifferentio. Their Gardens then could never have been pleasant. Moderno. Impossible, when instead of the Sweet-smelling Holly, the shady Juniper, the Beautiful House-leek, the most Fragrant Box-Trees in Pots, they (like our English Ancestors) had no∣thing but Huge Walnut, Chesnut, and Warden Pear, and Pipin Trees
in their Orchards, as high as their Garret Windows. But to return to Tobacco, their want of that spoilt all their Wit, Judgment, and Industry; for Consequently they could have no Tobacco-Boxes, Tobacco-Stoppers, or Snuff-Boxes; all which are the Tests, and Indications of a Mans Genius. A Large Tobacco-Box shows a Man of Great and Extensive Trade and Con∣versation, a small one well Japan'd, shows a Gentleman of good Hu∣mour, that would avoid smoaking for the sake of the Ladies; and yet out of Complaisance does it to oblige the Persons he Converses with. So as to Stoppers, if made of the Royal-Oke, it shows Loyalty; Glastenbury-Thorn, Zeal extraordinary: a Piece of Pipe, Humility: Silver, Pride; Black-thorn, Adversity: And the use of the little Fin∣ger, if the Pipe be well lightn'd, great Patience. Snuff-Boxes, were like∣wise wanting to the Ancients so that I cannot imagine how they could well have a Beau among them. The largeness of a Snuff-Box is a great Recommendation to a
Young Gentleman; I knew a Person that got a great Fortune by the Me∣rit of the Spring and Joynt of his Snuff-Box, the Charms of it were ir∣resistable, I would sooner take my Character of a Man from the En∣graving, Painting, Enameling of his Snuff-Box, and the Choice of his Oran∣gerie and Bergamott, than from his Discourse and Writings. Indifferentio. I could not have thought the Ancients had been so Bar∣barous. Moderno. Why then, Sir, I must declare freely, that I take them to be the most miserable People in the World. For as for Coffee, the most wholsome and pleasant Liquor in the World, they had not one drop of it,p. 298, 299. which was the Reason why Cato, one of their Wisest Men was so often Overtaken with his Wine. Indeed what was an Empress without her Tea-Table? What Con∣versation could she have? I have known Ladies that would would not have Ri∣val'd Statira in the favour of Alex∣ander, if they might not have had
their Quart of Chocolate in a Morning: But then it was impossible for the Greeks or Romans, to have had any good Sea-Commanders, since they could not have had any Aqua Vitae, or Brandy, since the Arabs first Ex∣tracted Vinous Spirits from Fermented Liquours. Indifferentio. But then they had a vast affluence of other Delicacies for the use of Humane Life. Moderno. Truly but moderate as to them, for in the first place, they had no Cydar,P. 296. at least the Method of chusing the best Apples, such as Red-streaks, was unknown to them. Indifferentio. Why then had I ra∣ther have been Vnder-Sheriff of Here∣fordshire than have had the Universal Votes of the Roman Senate, to have been Proconsul of Asia! Moderno. But I will suppose they had several delicious Dainties. Yet what did they all signifie without Su∣gar,P. 217. which they did not know how to pre∣pare. Apicius was a Man that under∣stood eating after their Fashion, but it was Course and Ungenteel. No∣thing
that could be call'd a Sweet-Meat came to his Table. Nay they were so unhappy, that when Cleopa∣tra Treated Anthony with that which they then reputed to be Luxury, she was not able, when he came in Hot, to make him a Cool-Tankard. Nay, she had not an Orange or Limon to her Veal.P. 305, Not a good Glass of Small-Beer, or Oat-Ale at the Table:397, 204, 305. No Rose-Wa∣ter to her Codlings: No Chiney-Orange for her desert, Nor Orange-flower-water to wash with after Dinner. Indifferentio. These things would put any Person into a Passion. I shall endeavour to wait upon you some other time, to learn more of so kind an Instructer. Moderno. I shall be glad to Com∣municate (though it were a large Volume of this kind) to the Publick upon occasion. In the mean time, I think I have demonstrated, from the Ditches, Crevices, Tadpoles, Spiders, Divi∣nity, Catterpillars, Opticks, Maggots, To∣bacco, Flies, Oranges, Limons, Cydar, Coffee, and Linnen-Rags of the Mo∣derns,
that The Extent of Know∣ledge is at this time vastly Greater than it was in Former Ages.Reflections upon An∣ient and Modern Learning. P. 405.
THE DISSERTATOR. Mac Flecknoe, Decker. Decker. YOU seem Thoughtful, Brother Flecknoe. Flecknoe. Yes, I am Thoughtful. Decker. What may you have been doing? Flecknoe. Doing! Why the same as other Learned Men do, I have been Studying a great while, and doing nothing; for to tell you the truth, Bro∣ther Decker, I have been considering why the World should think my Poems, or your Works to be dull. Decker. Why if I had had the Ad∣vantage of French Dancing-Master's, Italian Eunuchs, and fine Scenes, my Plays, might for the Sense of 'em, have taken as much as some Modern Opera's. But
" Our Aged Fathers came to Plays for Wit,Prologue to the Ge∣nerous E∣nemy. " And sate knee-deep in Nutshels in the Pit. " Course Hangings then, instead of Scenes were worn; " And Kidderminster did the Stage adorn. And then Johnson,Epilogue to the Mai∣den-Queen. By a Person of Honour. and the rest of the Criticks, were all my Enemies, but I took Heart of Grace, as well knowing, that Criticks were the Scourge, and I the Top. " For as a Top will Spin the more you Baste her; " So every lash they gave I wrote the faster. But what think you of the Great Critick Bentivoglio? Flecknoe. Why, I think my Epi∣grams to be as Witty as those he has retriev'd from His Manuscript Antho∣logy only, the Sense is more obscur'd by the Greek, and mine lies more
open, because they are in my Na∣tive Language; would any one but Turn my Verses into Greek,Pref. p. 59. I would play 'em against e'er a Callimachus,Dissert. p. 209. 233. 302. 458, 459. 356, 357. Dioscorides, Simonides or Nossis of them All. I have taken the pains to Translate one or Two of them that are most admired by Bentivoglio. Decker. I have been upon the same Author, I have read above a hun∣dred pages of him, about the Age of Comedy and Tragedy, and as we Wits are apt to be fir'd with Emulation, so I have made some few Notes to∣wards an Essay, endeavouring at a Dissertation concerning Puppet-Shows. Which Remarks I will ob∣lige you with, if you will please to communicate one of your Epigrams to me. Flecknoe. You know, Brother, I can't deny you any thing. Sir, The case was this, Callimachus made an Epigram,Pref. p. 59. as it was supposed upon a Shipwrack. The Learned Madam Da∣cier was betray'd into this mistake, by the Greek Word Epelthon, and so was the Critick Bentivoglio, till at last, by the
Sagacity of his Parts, and the Strength of his Genius, he found out, that Cal∣limachus did not write upon a Ship∣wrack, but a Saltcellar, and that Eudemus must not be suppos'd to be de∣livered from storms at Sea, but that ow∣ing a great many Debts, he paid them off, by living sparingly upon Bread and Salt. The Diet of Poor People, and in Memo∣ry of it, he Dedicated his Saltcellar to the Samothracian Gods: The Epigram, he says, is very ingenious, and the Hu∣mour lies in the double meaning, and like∣ness of some Greeks Words, and the Whole is a Parodia. If you please, you shall have a Translation as I have made of it. " Eudemus, eating little Salt, set free " From Great and dangerous Storms of Usury. " To Samothracian Gods like Honest Feller, " Preserv'd by Salt, here offers his Saltcellar.
Decker. I suppose Eudemus was a Country-Man, and therefore you use the Word Feller, rather than Fellow, out of choice, and not because the Rhime constrain'd you to it. Flecknoe. You take me right. Decker. Well, if we were not of ne∣cessity to Commend the Wit of the Ancients, especially when restored by Learned Hands, I could have ad∣mir'd one of your Epigrams as much as this. Since you have been so ob∣liging, I must perform my pro∣mise, although I have made but a small Scetch concerning Puppet-Shows. It is wonderful to think,Puppet-Shows. Dissert. p. 309. that we should have so little an account a∣mong the Ancients of a matter of such moment, no Periods of time fix'd, no Marble extant, nor any Ma∣nuscripts concerning these little Ma∣chines which approach Human Na∣ture, in the next degrees to Mon∣kies. I have often reprov'd the Negligence of the Magistrate up∣on this Occasion, that no Memo∣rials
should have been kept in their publick Archives: No not so much as in the Py-Powder Court at Smithfield. I am sensible, that when I Print my Dissertation,Dissert. p. 309. I shall detain the Reader very long upon this Subject, tho' I hope the pleasure and importance of it,Schol. Arist. Hephast. will excuse the Prolixity. When fair Ro∣soman first appear'd as a Puppet, there was nothing between her and the Spectator, to hinder or amuse the Eye-sight. Sandy's Water-Works, at first had the same Simplicity, but the Water flowing perpetually, gave the Spectators great Diver∣sion,Swid. in Prat. afterwards strings were found out by Devaux, and several other Scenes were introduc'd, the French Court was represented, Sarabrands were Danc'd, and Punch appear'd with Quick and lively Moti∣on in his Eyes,Schol. ▪ Activity in his Ges∣ture, and Vivacity of Wit in his Expressions. Devaux increased the Stature of the Puppets, to almost the Bigness of Children. But that was after he had represented that admi∣rable design of Love in a Pipkin.
Though, I must confess, that after this, the Dutch Fight was represent∣ed and several Men of War were Sunk, with their Admiral, in an open Cistern.Plut. Afterwards, as the Luxury of the Age increas'd, they brought Artificial Butter-Flies upon the Stage, and Serpents issued from Punch's Eyes, to the Amazement of the Spectators; Then Sedgemore came to the publick View, Guns in Minia∣ture manag'd the attack, and Bells of the Bigness of those at Horses-Ears, Proclaim'd the Triumph. Thus they ran on to excess, and consequently to Poverty and Licentiousness,Athen. till at last the Operator was forc'd to Snow Brown Paper instead of White, and Merry Andrew, who manag'd the Mob without Doors, was sent to Bride-Well, for making free with his Betters. All this I design to Illu∣strate, with Infinite Scraps of lost Au∣thors, and innumerable Quotati∣ons. Flecknoe. The Design is most Ad∣mirable. When you publish, I will be ready with a Copy of Encomi∣asticks.
In the mean time let me re∣peat you another Epigram. Decker. You know at all times how to be Agreeable. Flecknoe. There was one Nossis a Poetress, little known in the World, who might have lain still in obscuri∣ty, if Bentivoglio had not discover'd Her. He found out, that she was a Locrian,P. 355. 356. that she liv'd about the hundred and fourth Olympiad; Her Mothers Name was Theuphilis, and Cleocha was her Grand-Mother. Decker. Great Discoveries! Of a greater Family. Flecknoe. Nay farther, she had a Daughter call'd Melinna, Or she might not have a Daughter so call'd, As a M.S. Epigram seems to show, for its possible she may mean there anothers Daughter, and not her own. This Epigram Bentivoglio commends for its singular Elegancy. I have endeavour'd that it may not lose any Spirit by my Ver∣sion.
" Melinna's self! How Charming is the Face " How soft the Look, How ten∣der every Grace; " The Daughters Features do the Mothers strike, " How fine for Parents to have Children like! Decker. Why this is the common flattery of the Mid-Wife at every Gossipping. Flecknoe. Besides, the Epigram con∣tradicts the Known Proverb, that Boys should be like the Mother, and Girls their Fathers, if Born to good For∣tune. Indignation hereupon flung my Muse into this Sarcastick Epigram. " Melinna is so like her Mother may be " It may forebode no kindness to the Baby. " Boys should be like the Mother, Girls should rather " (If they would Fortune have) be like their Father.
Decker. Since you have oblig'd me so much, Brother Flecknoe, I cannot but communicate to you another Essay of mine concerning Strolers. Greece is Happy that it can settle the time when a Stage fix'd,Plut. was by Aeschylus, and Thespis's Cart be∣came to be disus'd: But it is not so with the Britains, for indeed their Stage has never been so tir'd,Tzetz. but that Strolers, or Ambulatory Representa∣tions have had great share in their Interludes.Versteg. The Wassail has been as ancient as the Saxons; It is a Ly∣rick Poem, compos'd in Honour of the Good-man and Dame of the Fa∣mily, sometimes it entred into Af∣fairs of State, and sung of King Henry and the Miller; the Amours of King Edward and Jane Shore; together with her Misfortunes;Athen. sometimes it spake of Heroick Actions, as Chivy-Chase, and the London Prentice.Swid. It generally concluded with the praise of Hospitality, and good House∣keeping,Schol. Ars. and presenting one Bowl of Liquor in hopes of having it re∣plenish'd with another.
It was sung by one Voice, some∣times reliev'd by a second, and often∣times, Persons of less Skill were a∣ble so to joyn as to fill up the Chorus, the Ode began at the Vestibule, or Porch of each considerable Farmer in the Parish, and the Epilogue was ge∣nerally perfom'd with Minc'd-Pyes, and Roast-Beef, in the Hall of the same Mansion.Rym. Afterwards when the Parish-Clerks of London, had for a great while together Acted several Interludes, the Clerks and Sextons of the Villages thought themselves not to be out-done in Ingenuity, and there∣fore reviv'd that Diversion of Mum∣ming, the Original of which is ob∣scure, at least, must be search'd for in Germany, where it continues in per∣fection. These appear'd with Masks and unusual Habits, least otherwise the meaness of their Persons might take away from the Character of those they represented. The Actors seldom more than Three; they gene∣rally went first to the Lord of the Mannor, their place of Action in the Parlour, and their Reward usually
enlarg'd with Plumb-Porridge and Cold Pudding. Another sort of Inter∣lude is the Acting of Proverbs, its Antiquity is obscure, it is an Extem∣pore Drama, the number of its Actors uncertain, they generally consist of the Children, Servants, and Te∣nants of a Family, and their reward good Cheer in general. There are very few of these, if any of the two latter committed to Writing. The two former seem'd to have a stated time, as Christmas for their per∣formance, the latter to have been occasional, as Wit and good Humour offer'd. The Whitsun-Ale seems to have been of the next Age to the Wassail. The Lord and Lady, their Hall, their Hospitality of Cakes and Ale, their Son, their Pages, their Organs, added extremely to the Gran∣deur of their performance. Their place of Action generally some Barn or Out-House, for the Conveniency of Reception, not but that the whole Company go round to the Neigh∣bouring Gentry, where the Acti∣on,
besides the Moris-dancing, seems to be Mono-Prosope, the whole lies up∣on my Lords Son, who raises Mirth by Proverbs, Riddles, Comick and Satyri∣cal Expressions, not without the Ap∣plause of his Parents and their Pages. The Reward is generally Cool Ale, with Borrage and Sugar, Gammon of Bacon, and New Cheese-Cakes. But to come to the more perfect Art of the Stage. Our Ancestors knowing what they were wanting in, gene∣rally contriv'd their Drama, so as to have least need of Decoration; of this sort is Gammer Gurton's Needle, where the Whole Epitrope, or turn of Affairs, depending upon Hodges's being prick'd with the Needle in his Leathern Breeches, saves the trouble of costly Scenes and Ma∣chines; Grim the Collier of Croyden, though of latter Date, yet had the same Advantage, and consequently both were Acted in any place as there was occasion. Crispin and Crispianus cost some more trouble, the Princes could ever borrow their
Tools from any Journey-Man Shoo-Maker, but then the Robes and De∣corations of the Queens and Nobles, were forc'd to be carry'd up & down in Knapsacks. Notwithstanding the Stage had been setled for many Years, yet the Art of stroaling did, and will still continue: Nor has Shake∣spear thought it unfit to introduce 'em as a Beauty in his Play of Ham∣let. Nay, in these latter times the New-Market Company has diverted Corporation after Corporation, and for the use of the Town-Hall, pla∣ced the Mayor, his Lady and Off-spring in the side Boxes for Nothing. Bateman has not disdain'd to go from Smithfield to Southwark, and often down to Sturbridge. Nay, Greater Persons have from the Glories of the Theatre, retir'd into the Country, where the Kings of Brenford have been forc'd in the Rehearsal to come in the common way, for want of Clouds to come down withal, and the Fa∣mous Othello, together with his Fa∣ther Brabantio, in a Callico Night-Gown,
have pleaded their Cause before a Venetian Senate, Assembled in a place little bigger then a Par∣lour Chimney. I have shown you my Draught which I design to Illustrate with the Chronology of each Play, and an Account of such Interludes as have been Acted upon the Stages of Mountebanks which had infalli∣bly been lost, if they had not been Collected into One Volume, by the industrious Mr. Kirkman, a∣bout the middle of this last Cen∣tury. Decker. Very Natural, I protest. You will oblige the World extremely with these Works. Flecknoe. Well, Brother Decker, let us remain in hopes; who knows what time may do; as to the retriev∣ing or gaining a Reputation. You have us'd hard Words, and they may stir up the Spirit of some Person in times to come, to write a Scholiast upon you as well as Aristophanes, and that may be a Rival to the Labori∣ous Tzetzes. Who knows but I may
have the fate of Nossis, and some Library-keepers, among his Dust, find∣ing me out of Print, may oblige the World with a New Edition of my Works and discover that Wit and E∣legancy, which was deny'd me by my Cotemporaries. FINIS.
INDEX. TO THE DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD. Introduction. Dial. I. BY Charon and Lyco∣phron Page 1 Dial. II. Impudence, or the Sophist; By Phalaries and the Sophist 9 Dial. III. Modern Atchievements. By Butcher and Hercules 14 Dial. IV. Self-Love, or the Beau. By Ricardo and Narcissus 20 Dial. V. The Dictionary. By Hesy∣chius and Gouldman 25
Dial. VI. Affection of the Learned Lady. By Bellamira and Calphur∣nia 30 Dial. VII. Chronology. By Lilly the Astrologer and Helvicus 38 Dial. VIII. The Imposture. By He∣raclitus and Democritus 43 Dial. IX. Modern Learning. By Signior Moderno, and Signior In∣differentio 52 Dial. X. The Dissertator. By Mac Flecknoe and Decker. 68
