L2089 12954343 96031
IOHN LILBURNE. AETAT: SVAE 23. Ano 1641. G: Glo: fecit. portrait of John Lilburne Gaze not vpon this shaddow that is vaine. But rather raise thy thoughts a higher straine. To GOD (I meane) who set this young-man free. And in like straits can eke deliuer thee.
THE CHRISTIAN MANS TRIALL: OR, A TRVE RELATION of the first apprehension and severall ex∣aminations of IOHN LILBVRNE, With his Censure in Star-Chamber, and the manner of his cruell whipping through the Streets: where∣unto is annexed his Speech in the Pillory, and their gagging of him: Also the severe Order of the Lords made the same day for fettering his hands and feet in yrons, and for keeping his friends and monies from him, which was accordingly executed upon him for a long time together by the Wardens of the Fleet, with a great deale of barbarous cruelty and inhumanity, &c. Revel. 2. 10. Behold, the Divell shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be tryed, and you shall have tribulation ten dayes: be thou faithfull unto death, and I will give thee a Crowne of life. Matth. 10. 19. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how, or what you shall speake; for it shall be given you in that houre what you shall say. The second Edition, with an addition. LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LARNAR, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Signe of the Golden Anchor, neere Pauls-Chaine, 1641.
To the READER. CHristian Reader, here is presented to thy view, a part of these cruell and grievous sufferings imposed upon this Author, by the malignant malice of the Prelacy and that faction, wherein thou mayest likewise see the twonder full gracious dealings of a good God carrying this Author through them all with boldnesse and cou∣rage, being not daunted, neither at their frownes nor whippings, nor pil∣ories nor closoe prisons no, nor yrons: so that we may see the faithfull romises of our God before our eyes made good in this young man who path promised to be with his people in six troubles, and seven; and to hew himselfe strong in the behalfe of all those whose hearts are perfect before him, that so hee might out of the mouthes of Babes and Suck∣ings perfect his owne praise, to the astonishment of all those who shall lift up heart or hand against him, or the least of his holy ones; and to the comfort and encouragement of all the Saints, who, from the consideration of the sweet supporting power of God, appearing to others in their bonds, are the more encouraged publiquely to hold forth their profession of the truths of the Lord Iesus with much more boldnesse and confidence, as knowing that that God which hath appeared to others of the Saints in times of sufferings, even before their eyes, will also appeare to them in the like condition; and therefore wee may a little see and take notice of the follyes of wicked mens wisdomes, who thinke by their hellish wits, to raze downe Syon and the truth of God to the ground▪ and therefore they labour by the imprisonments and tortures of some to dash the rest out of heart, that they should feare to shew any countenance to such a persecuted way, whereas in∣deed the Saints have by this meanes a fairer object to pitch their faith and confidence upon, namely, the power and wisedome and grace and mercy of their God appearing in a more fuller vision before their eyes; for the afflictions and persecution that are imposed by wicked men upon the Saints, causeth them to see a spirit of glory resting upon
them, even in this condition: here 1 Pet. 4. 13. 14, and a weight of glory provided for them hereafter, 1 Cor. 4. 18. So that we may daily see the God of heaven fulfilling of his owne Word, even in this thing, which is that hee will confound the wisedome of the wise, and bring to nought the understanding of the prudent, and catch the wicked in their owne snares, making the rage of man turne to his owne praise his peoples comforts and their ruins, wherefore let the servants of God comfort one another with these words: That we may not feare the feares of men, which, that we may be the more strengthened against them, let us consider the cloud of witnesses which hath gone before a way of suffering, even in these our times, amongst whom the Author of this booke hath had his share with the deepest of them therefore to this end hath he published to the world this Tract, that he might keepe alive to all posterities the goodnesse, and mercy and love of God manifested to him under those cruell barbarous and tyrannical dealings of the prelaticall hierarchie, that so all the Saints of God ma hate that wicked calling and power of theirs, and never give ov crying to God and men, till it be razed downe to the ground, that so the Lord Iesus may be set up as Lord and King, which ought to he the de∣sire and endeavour of all the chosen ones of God, and is the desire of him who desires the good of the servants of God, in all things, in for Christ. WILLIAM KIFFEN. This is the first Part.
A CHRISTIAN MANS TRIALL. VPon Tuesday last the 11. or 12. of December, 1637. I was treacherously and Judasly betraied (by one that I supposed to be my friend) into the hands of the Pur∣sevant, with foure of his assistants, as I was walking in a narrow lane, called Soper-lane, being walking with one Iohn Chilliburhe, servant to old Mr. Iohn Whar∣ton, in Bow-lane a HotpresserAnd was since advan∣ced by the Bishop of London to be his  Licencer for his paines. Which Iohn had laid the plot before for my apprehension, as I am able for to prove and make good, that he shall not be able with truth to deny it. And at my taking the Pursevants were very violem me and having by force got me into a shop, they throw me over a Sugar-chest, to take my Sword from me, and cried out for helpe, and said he had taken one of the notoriousest dispersers of seandalous bookes that was in the Kingdome▪ for (saith he) he hath dispersed them from one end of the Land to the other. And from thence I was had to the Pole-head Taverne neere to the Dr. Commons, where the Pursevants called freely for wine to make themselves merry, thinking they had got a great prise; Being not long there with my Pursevant Flamsted, who apprehended me, in came Bonnragge, the great Prelates Pursevant, and he looking upon me, said, Mr. Lilburne, I am glad with all my heart that wee are met, for you are the man that I have much desired for a long time to see. To which I replied are you so? And for my owne part, I am not much unglad, But you thinke, you have got a great purchase in taking me, but it may be you may be deceived. Come (saith he) give us some wine, and with that he swore an Oath, he would give me a quart of Sacke, for joyfulnesse of our meeting, and so he called for it and dranke to me: And I told him, I would drinke no wine. To which hee replied, and said in these words: Come (said he) be not sad, you are but fallen into the Knaves hands. To which I said, I am not sad in the least; and for my falling into Knaves hands, I verily beleeve without any questio∣ning,
that which you have said. And then he swore another Oath, and said, it was true enough. (So good Christian Reader, take notice of thus much by the way, that the Prelates and their Creatures are a company of Knaves, by Bo∣niragge his owne confession.) That night I was kept at Elamstedds house where I blesse God, I was merry and cherefull, and nothing at all danted at that which had be∣falne me. And about twelve of the clocke the next day, I was commit∣ted to the Gatehouse, by Sir Iohn the Prelate of Canterburies Chancellour with others without any examination at all, for sending of factious and fcandalous Bookes out of Holland into England. And having not beene at the foresaid prison above three dayes, I was removed, by a Warrant from the Lords of the Counsell to the Fleet, where I now remaine. And after my being there some time, I drew a Petition to the Lords of the Counsell for my liberty: and their answer to it was, that I should be examined before Sir Iohn Bankes, the Kings Atturney: The Coppy of which examination thus followes. Vpon Tuesday, the 14. of Ianuary. 1637. I was had to Sir▪ Ioh Bank the Atturney Generall's Chamber (now Lord chiefe Justice of the of Pleas) and was referred to be examined by Mr.  his chi Clerke; And at our first comming together, he did kindly intreat me; and made me sit downe by him, and put on my hat, and began with me after this manner: Mr. Lilburne, what is your Christian name? I said, Iohn, Did you live in London before you went into Holland? Yes, that I did, Where? Neare Londonstone. With whom there? With Mr. Thomas Hewson, What Trade is he? A dealer in Cloath, I told him. How long did you serve him? About five yeares. How came you to part? After this manner: IBut the greatest ground was Canterbu∣ries malice, who sent his Pursevants to my Ma∣sters to ap∣prehend me, for my visi∣ting of (and welwishing to) Noble Dr. Bast∣wicke, which forced me to fly to save my selfe from thse cruell blood∣suckers. perceiving my Master had an intention to desist his Trade, I often moved him that I might have my liberty, to provide for my selfe, and at the last hee condescended unto it; and, so I went into the Country, to have the consent of my friends; and after that departed into Holland. Where were you there? At Rotterdam. And from thence you went to Amsterdam? Yes, I was at Amsterdam What Bookes did you see in Holland? Great store of Bookes, for in every Bookesellers shop as I came in, there were greate store of Bookes. I know that, but I aske you, if you did see Dr. Bastwicks An∣swer to my Masters Information, and a Book called his Letany? yes, I saw them there, and if you please to goe thither, you may buy an hundred of them at the Bookesellers, if you have a minde to them Have you seene the Vnbishopping of Timothy and Titus, the Lookingglasse, andWhich Book proves them guilty of high trea▪ a Breviate of the Bishops late proceedings. Yes, I have, and those also you may have there, if you please to send for them. Who Printed all those Bookes? I doe not know. Who was at the charges of Printing of them? Of that I am ig∣norant.
But did you not send over some of these Bookes? I sent not any of them over. Doe you know one Hargust there? Yes, I did see such a man. Where did you see him? I met with him one day accidentally at Amsterdam. How oft did you see him there? Twise upon one day. But did not he send over Bookes? If he did, it is nothing to me, for his doings is unknowne to me. But he wrote a Let∣ter over by your directions, did he not? What he writ, I know no more than you. But did you see him no where else there? Yes, I saw him at Rotterdam. What conference had you with him? Very little; But why doe you aske me all these questions; These are besides the matter of my imprisonment, I pray come to the thing for which I am accused, and imprisoned. No, these are not besides the businesse, but doe belong to the thing for which you are imprisoned. But doe you know of any that sent over any Bookes? What other men did, doth not belong to me to know or search into, sufficient it is for me to looke well to my owne occasions. Well, here is the examination of one Ed∣mond Chilington, doe you know such a one? Ye How long have you beene acquainted with him? A little before I went away, but how long I doe not certainely know: Doe you know one Iohn Wharton? No, Doe you not, he is a Hot-presser: I know him, but I doe not well re∣member his other name: How long have you beene acquainted with him: And how came you acquainted? I cannot well tell you: How long doe you thinke? I doe not know: What speeches had you with Chillington since you came to Towne? I am not bound to tell you: But Sir (as I said before) why doe you aske me all these questions, these are nothing pertinent to my imprisonment, for I am not imprisoned for knowing and talking with such and such men: But for sending over Bookes: And therefore I am not willing to answer you to any more of these questions: because I see you goe about by this ex∣amination to insnare mee, for seeing the things for which I am imprisoned cannot be proved against me, you would get other matter out of my examination, and therefore i you will not aske me about the thing laid to my charge, I shall answer no more: but if you will aske me of that, I shall then answer you, and doe answer, that for the thing for which I am imprisoned: which is for sending over Bookes, I am cleare▪ for I sent none: And of any other matter that you have to accuse me of, I know it is warrantable by the Law of God, and I thinke by the Law of the Land, that I may stand upon my just defence, and not answer to your intergatorie; and that my accusers ought to be brought face to face, to justifie what they accuse me of; And this is all the an∣swer that for the present I am willing to make: And if you aske me of any more things I shall answer you with silence. At this he was excee∣ding angry, and said: There would be course taken with me to make me answer, I told him I did not way what course they would take
with me; onely this I desire you to take notice of that I doe not refuse to answer out of any contempt but onely because I am ignorant what belongs to an examination, (for this is the first time that ever I was ex∣amined.) and therefore I am unwilling to answer to any importinent questions for feare that with my answer I may doe my selfe hurt. This is not the way to get liberty. I had thought you would have answered punctually, that so you might have beene dispatched as shortly as might be. So I have answered punctually to the thing for which I am impriso∣ned and more I am not bound to answer, and for my liberty I must waite Gods time. You had better answer, for I have two examinati∣ons where in you are accused Of what am I accused? Chillington hath ac∣cused you for printing ten or twelve thousands of Books in Holland, and that they stand you in about eighty pound, and that you had a Chamber at Mr. Iohn oots, at Delst, where he thinks the Bookes were kept, and that you would have printed the Vnmasking of the Mystery of Iniquity, if you could have got a true Copy of it. I doe not beleeve that Chillington said any such things and if he did, I know, and am sure, that they are all of them lies. You received money of Mr. Wharton since you came to Towne, did you not? What if I did? It was for Bookes? I doe not say so. For what sorts of bookes was it? I doe not say it was for any, and I have already answered you all, that for the present I have to answer and if that will give you content, well and good, if not, doe what you please. If you will not answer no more (here I told him if I had thought you would have insisted upon such impertinent questions, I would not have given him so many answers) wee have power to send you to the place from whence you came. You may doe your pleasure, said I. So hee called in anger for my Keeper, and gave him astrict charge to looke well to me. I said they should not feare my running away. And so I was sent down to Sir Iohn Bankes himself. And after that he had read over what his man had writ, he called me in, and said, I conceive you are unwilling to confesse the Truth. No Sir, I have spoken the Truth This is your Examination, is it not? What your man hath writ I doe not know. Come neare and see that I read it right. Sir, I doe not owne it for my Examination for your man hath writ what it pleased him, and hath not writ my answer, for my answer was to him, and so is to you that for the thing for which I am imprisoned (which is for sending over bookes) I am cleare, for I did not send any, and for any o∣ther matter that is laid to my charge. I know it is warrantable by the Law of God, and I thinke by the Law of the Land, for me to stand upon my just defence, and that my accusers ought to be brought face to face, to justifie what they accuse me of And this is all that I have to say for the present. You must set your hand to this your Examination. I beseech you Sir pardon me, I will set my hand to nothing but what I have now said. So he tooke the Pen and writ, the examined is unwil∣ling
to answer to any thing but that for which hee is imprisoned. Now you will set your hand to it? I am not willing in regard I doe not owne that which your man hath writ, but if it please you to lend me the Pen. I will write my Answer, and set my hand to it. So he gave mee the Pen, and I begun to write thus: The Answer of me Iohn Lilburne is, And here hee tooke the Pen from me, and said he could not stay, that was sufficient. Then one of my Keepers asked him if they might have me backe againe? And he said yea: for he had no Order for my inlarge∣ment, and so I tooke my leave of him, and desired the Lord to blesse and keepe him, and came away. And then about ten or twelve dayes after, I was had forth to Grayes Inne againe, but when I went, I did not know what they would doe with me there: And when I came there, I was had to the Starre-Cham∣ber Office; and being there, as the Order is, I must enter my appearance, they told me, I said, to what, for I was never served with any Subpoena; neither was there any Bill preferred against meNo legall proceeding in Star-Cham∣ber. that I did heare of. One of the Clarkes told me, I must first be examined, and then Sir Iohn would make the Bill: it seemes they had no grounded matter against me for to write a Bill, and therefore they went about to make me betray my owne innocency, that so they might ground the Bill upon my owne words: but my God shewed his goodnesse to me, inkeeping me, (a poore weake worme) that they could not in the least intangle mee, though I was altogether ignorant of the manner of their proceedings: And at the entrance of my appearance, the Clarke and I had a deale of pritty discourse; the particulars whereof for brevity sake I now preter∣mit, but in the conclusion he demanded mony of me for entring of my appearance: and I told him I was but a young man, and a prisoner, and money was not very plentifull with me, and therefore I would not part with any money upon such termes. At which answer the man be∣gan to wonder that I should speake so to him, and with that the whole company of the Clarkes in the Office began to looke and gaze at me. Well (said he) if you will not pay your see, I will dash out your name againe. Doe what you please (said I) I care not if you doe. So he made a complaint to Mr. Goad, the Master of the Office, that I refused to en∣ter my appearance. And then I was brought before him, and he deman∣ded of me what my businesse was? I told him, I had no businesse with him, but I was a prisoner in the Fleete, and was sent for but to whom and to what end I doe not know, and therefore if he had nothing to say to me, I had no businesse with him. And then one of the Clarks said, I was to be examined. Then Mr. Goad said, tender him the booke. So I looked another way, as though I did not give eare to what he said; and then he bid me pull off my glove, and lay my hand upon the booke. What to doe Sir? said I. You must sweare said he. To what? That you Iust in quisition like. shall make true answer to all things that is asked you, Must I so Sir? But
before I sweare, I will know to what I must sweare. As soone as you have sworne, you shall, but not before. To that I answered. Sir, I am but a young man, and doe not well know what belongs to the nature of an Oath, and therefore before I sweare, I will be better advised. Saith he, how old are you? About twenty yeares old, I told him. You have received the Sacra∣ment, have you not? Yes that I have. And you have heard the Mini∣nisters deliver Gods Word, have you not? Yes, I have heard Sermons. Well then, you know the holy Evangelist? Yes that I doe. But Sir though I have received the Sacrament, and have heard Sermons, yet it doth not therefore follow that I am bound to take an Oath, which I doubt of the lawfulnesse of. Looke you here, said he; and with that he opened the booke, we desire you to sweare by no forraigne thing, but to sweare by the holy Evangelist. Sir, I doe not doubt or question thatonely I question how lawfull it is for me to sweare to I doe not know what. So some of the Clarks began to reason with me, and told me every one tooke that Oath; and would I be wiser than all other men? I told them, it made no matter to me what other men doe; but before I sweare, I will know better grounds and reasons than other mens pra∣ctises to convince mee of the lawfulnesse of such an Oath, to sweare I doe not know to what. So Mr. Goad bid them hold their peace, he was not to convince any mans conscience of the lawfulnesse of it, but onely to offer and tender it; Will you take it or no, saith he? Sir, I will be better advised first; with this there was such looking upon mee, and censuring me for a singular man, for the refusing of that which was never refused before: whereupon there was a Messenger sent to Sir Iohn Bankes, to certifie him, that I would not take the Star-Chamber Oath. And also to know of him what should be done with me. So I looked I should be committed close prisoner or worse. And about an houre after came Mr. Cockschey, Sir Iohns chiefe Clarke; what (said he) Mr. Lilburne, it seemes you will not take your Oath, to make true answer? I told him, I would be better advised before I took such an Oath. Well then (saith he) you mustThis is the Divinities of the Prelates and their Creatures. goe from whence you came and then I spoke merrily to my Keepers, and bid them, let us be gone, we have beene long enough here. Thus have I made a true Relation of that dayes worke. But before I proceede, I desire to declare unto you, the Lords good∣nesse manifested unto me in being my counsellour and director in my great straights. The Prelates intendment towards me was carried so close, that I could not learne what they would doe with me, onely I supposed they would have mee into the Star-chamber, in regard I was removed by the Lords of the Counsell; and also tidings was brought unto me by some friends, what cruelty their Creatures did breath out a∣gainst me, but I incouraged my selfe in my God, and did not feare what man could doe unto me. Esay 1, 12. 13. for I had the peace of a
good conscience within me, and the assurance of Gods love reconciled unto me in the precious blood of his Sonne JESVS CHRIST; which was as good as Shield and Buckler unto me, to keepe off all the assaults of my enemies, and I was, as it were, in a strong walled Towne, nothing dreading but lightly esteeming the cruelty of my Adversaries, for I knew God was my God, and would be with me, and inable me to undergoe whatsoever, by his permission they could inflict upon me, and to his praise I desire to speak it: I found his gracious goodnesse and loving kindnes so exceedingly made known unto me, that he enabled me to undergoe my captivity with contentednesse, joyfulnesse, and chere∣fulnesse: And also was pleased, according to his promise, to be a mouth unto me, whensoever I was brought before them, and gave me courage and boldnesse to speake unto them, his holy and blessed name be praised and magnified for it. Vpon the Fryday next, after this, in the morning, one of the Officers of the Fleete came to my Chamber, and bid mee get up and make mee ready to goe to the Star-Chamber-barre forth with, I having no time to fit my selfe, made me ready in all haste to goe; (yet when I came there, the Lord according to his promise was pleased to be present with me by his speciall assistance, that I was inabled without any dantednesse of spirit, to speake unto that great and noble Assembly, as though they had beene but my equalls;) And being at the barre, Sir Iohn Bankes laid a verball accusationBut there was never a∣ny Bill as there ought to have been. against me, which was, that I refused to answer, and also to enter my appearance, and that I refused to take the Star-Chamber Oath: and then was read the Affidavit of one Edmond Chillington, Buttonseller, made against Mr. Iohn Warton and my selfe;Who they forced by cruelty so to doe, having almost star∣ved him in prison, and also removed him into se∣verall pri∣sons to tor∣ment him to make him bend to their ow. The summe of which was, that he and I had Printed at Rotterdam in Holland Dr. Bastwickes answer, and his Letany, and divers other scandalous Bookes. And then after I had obtained leave to speake, I said: My noble Lords, as for that Affidavit, it is a most false lie, and untruth. Well, said the Lord-keeper, why will you not answer? My Honorable Lord (said I) I have answered fully, before Sir Iohn Bankes to all things that belongs to me to answer unto, and for other things, which concerne other men, I have nothing to doe with them. But why doe you refuse to take the Star-Chamber Oath? Most Noble Lord, I refused upon this ground, because that when I was examined, though I had fully answered all things that belonged to me to answer unto, and had cleared my selfe of the thing for which I am imprisoned, which was for sending bookes out of Holland, yet that would not satisfie and give content, but other things was put unto me, concerning other men, to insnare me, and get further matter against me, which I perceiving refused, being not bound to answer to such things as doe not belong unto me; and withall I perceived the Oath to be an Oath of inquiry; and for the lawfulnesse of which Oath I have no warrant, and upon these grounds I did, and doe still refuse the
Oath: with this some of the Kings Counsell, and some of the Lords spoke, would I condemne and contradict the Lawes of the Land,There is no Law in this Land for warran∣ting of thu Oath. and be wiser than all other men, to refuse that, which is the Oath of the Court, administred unto all that come there? Well, said my Lord Keeper, tender him the booke. I standing against the Prelate of Canterburies backe, he looked over his shoulder at me, & bid me pull off my glove, and lay my hand upon the book. Unto whom I replied, Sir, I will not sweare; and then directing my speech unto the Lords, I said: Most Honorable and Noble Lords, with all reverence and submission unto your Honours; submitting my body unto your Lordships pleasure, and whatsoever you please to inflict upon it yet must I refuse the Oath. My Lords, said the Arch Prelate (in a deriding manner) doe you heare him, hee saith, with all reverence and submission he refuseth theThis Pre∣late cannot lie. Oath. Well, come, come (said my Lord Keeper) submit your selfe unto the Court. Most Noble Lords, with all willingnesse I submit my body unto your Ho∣nours pleasure, but for any other submission, most Honourable Lords, I am conscious unto my selfe, that I have done nothing, that doth de∣serve a convention before this illustrious Assembly; and therefore for me to submit, is to submit I doe not know wherefore. With that up stood the Earle of Dorset, and said: My Lords, this is one of their private spi∣rits; Doe you heare him, how he stands in his owne justification? Well my Lords, said the great Prelate; this fellow (meaning me) hath been one of the notoriousest disperser of Libellous bookes that is in the Kingdome, and that is the Father of them all (pointing to old Mr. Whar∣ton.) Then I replied, and said, Sir, I know you are not able to prove, and to make that good which you have said. I have testimony of it, said he. Then said I produce them in the face of the open Court, that wee may see what they have to accuse me of; And I am ready here to answer for my selfe, and to make my just defence. With this he was silent, But sat downe in a fury having o more to say. and said not one word more to me: and then they asked my fellow Souldiour old Mr. Wharton, whether he would take the Oath, which hee refused, and began to tell them of the Bishops cruelty towards him; and that they had had him inO cruell persecutors five severall prisons within this two yeares, for refusing the Oath. And then there was silence, after which was read a long peece of businesse how the Court had proceeded against some that had harboured Jesuits and Seminary-Priests (those Traitors) who refused to be examined upon Oath, and in regard that we refused like∣wise to be examined upon Oath, it was fit they said, that we should be proceeded against, as they were, so they were the president by which we were censured, though their cause and ours be much unlike, in re∣gard theirs were little better than Treason; but our crime was so farre from Treason, that it was neither against the glory of God, the honour of the King, the Lawes of the Land, nor the good of the Common∣wealth: but rather for the maintaining of the honour of them all, as
all those that read the bookes without partiall affections, and prejudicate hearts, can witnesse and declare, and if the bookes had had any Treason, or any thing against the Law of the Land in them, yet we were but sub∣posedly guilty, for the things were never fully proved against us; indeed there was two Oathes read in court, which they said was sworne against us by one man but he was never brought face to face, and in both his Oathes he hath forsworne himselfe, as in many particulars thereof wee both are able to make good. In the conclusion, my Lord Keeper stood up, and said, My Lords, I hold it fit, that they should be both for their contempt committed close prisoners till Tuesday next; and if they doe not conforme themselves betwixt this and then to take the Oath, and yeeld to be examined before Mr. Goad, then that they shall be brought hither againe, and censured, and made an Example;O brave Iustice. Unto which they all agreed; and so we were committed close prisoners, and no friends admitted to come unto us. And upon Munday after we were had to Grayes Inne, and I being the first there, Mr. Goad said to me, according to the Lords Order upon Friday last, I have sent for you to tender the Oath unto you. Sir, I beseech you, let me heare the Lords Order. So he caused it to be read unto mee, and then tendered mee the Booke. Well Sir, said I, I am of the same minde I was, and withall I understand, that this Oath is one and the same with the High Commission Oath, which Oath I know to be both against the Law of God, and the Law of the Land; and therefore in briefe I dare not take the Oath, though I suffer death for the refusall of it. Well, said he, I did not send for you to dispute with you about the lawfulnesse of it, but onely according to my place to tender it unto you. Sir I dare not take it, though I loose my life for the refusall of it. So he said, he had no more to say to me; and I tooke my leave of him and came away. And after that came the old Man, and it was tendered unto him, which he refused to take: (and as he hath told me) he declared unto him how the Bishops had him eight times in prison for the refusall of it, and he had suffered the Bishops mercilesse cruelty for many yeares together, and he would nownever take it as long as he lived; and withall told him, that if there were a Cart ready at the doore to carry him to Tiburne, he would be hanged, before ever hee would take it. And this was that dayes businesse. Upon the next morning about seven a clocke, we were had to the Star-Chamber-bar againe to receive our Censure; and stood at the Bar about two boures before Sir Iohn Bancks came; but at the last hee began his accusation against us, that we did still continue in our former stub∣bornenesse: and also there was another Affidavit of the foresaid Edmond Chillingtons read against us; the summe of which was, that I had confessed to him, that I had printed Dr. Bastwickes Answer to Sir Iohn Bancks his In∣formation, and his Letany; and an other booke, called, An Answer unto certaine Objections; and another booke of his, called the Vanitie and Impiety
of the old Letany; and that I had divers other bookes of Dr. Bastwickes a Printing; and that Mr. Iohn Wharton had beene at the charges of Prin∣ting a booke called A breviate of the Bishops late proceedings; and an other booke, called Sixteene new Quertes, and divers other factious bookes; and that one James Ouldam, a Turner in Westminster-Hall, had dispersed di∣vers of these bookes. So it came to me to speake; and I said after this manner: Most Noble Lords, I beseech your Honours, that you would be pleased to give me leave to speake for my selfe, and to make my just defence; and I shall labour so to Order my speeches, as that I shall not give your Honours any just distaste; and withall shall doe it with as much brevitie as I can. So having obtained my desire, I began, and said, My Lords, it seemes there was divers bookes sent out of Holland, which came to the hands of one Edmond Chillinton, which made this affi∣davit against us: and as I understand, he delivered divers of these bookes unto one Iohn Chilliburne, servant to this old Man Mr. Wharton (I, said he, my Lords, and I had given him a strict charge, that he should not meddle with any,) and his Master being in Prison, he dispersed divers of them for the foresaid Chillingtons use, whereupon the bookes were taken in his Custody, and he being found dispersing of them, gos to one Smith, a Taylor in Bridewell (as I am informed) & desires him to get his peace made with the Bishops, whereupon he covenants with some of the Bishops Creatures, to betray me into their hands, being newly come out of Holland, which (as he said) did send over these bookes. So my Lords, he having purcha∣sed his owne libertie, layes the plot for betraying me, and I was taken by a Purfevant and foure others of his assistance, walking in the streets with the foresaid Iohn Chilliburne, who had laid and contrived the plot before (as I am able to make good) and the next morning I was com∣mitted by Sir Iohn Lamb to the Gate-house, (now my Lords, I doe pro∣test before your Honours in the word of a Christian that I did not send over thefe bookes, neither did J know the Ship that brought them, nor any that belongs to the ship, nor to my knowledge did never see with my eyes, either the ship, or any that belongs unto it. (But before I proceede with my Speech, I desire to digresse a little, in regard that Iohn Chilliburne doth yet stifly maintaine, that he did not be∣tray me, nor laid the plot, and therefore I doe him wrong for accusing him, he saith. To which I answer, and say, in this, he is worfe than Iu∣das himselfe; for after he had betrayed Christ, he came and confessed his sinne, and said; I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood; and this man hath betraied Christ in betraying me his member, for what is done to his servant, he takes it as done to himselfe: but he is not so good as Iudas, who confessed his fault, but he hides and justifies his sinne, and there∣fore I will declare my Grounds and Demonstrations, whereupon I am sure he was the Judas: The first is thus, He and I appointed to meete one day upon the Exchange at] two a clocke, unto which place I
came, and staid long for his comming, but hee came not: and I verily thinke, he sent two or three in his place, two of them being Arminians, living in Cornehill, which J my selfe knew, who passed againe and again by me, vewing very narrowly my apparell, visage and countenance, as J thinke for that end that they might know mee againe: and when J sat downe, they would passe by, and goe a little from me, and sit downe and fix their eyes upon me, insomuch that J was afraid that J should there have beene taken▪ which forced me to depart. And at our next meeting J told him of it, and how that (unlesse J had knowne him well) J should have beleeved he had betrayed me. Unto which hee gave me no satisfactory answer, but put it off, and said his libertie was as precious as mine; and if he should betray me, he must betray him∣selfe, and therefore J needed not to doubt any such thing: the Lord ha∣ving blinded my eyes; J could not see into his treacherous heart, but tooke this for a currant answer, J knowing that he had had a deepe hand in the dispersing of bookes, and therefore J gave credite to that which he had said, as being a reall Truth, the Lord having a secret hand of provi∣dence in it, (J hope at the last for his glorie and my good) did so Order it, that I should not take notice, or perceive his perfidiousnesse, though I had an incling given me of it before by some friends, yet J could not beleeve it, till the event manifested it, for that day J was taken, he hearing (by what meanes I doe not know) that I was to meete one at the Temple, and understanding that I had a desire to see his Master at his owne house (being newly let out of prison) we came towards the Temple, and met me in Fleet-streete, and so we went backe towards the Temple, and had some discourse there, in which he put me forward to goe see and speake with his Master, unto whom I declared, how fearefull I was to goe thither (in regard I heard they laid waite for me) least I should be taken; but he made all things cleare, and contrived a way, by meanes of which he said, I might without any feare goe speake with him. So we parted, and appointed to meete at the staires that goes from Bridewell to Black-Fryers. I came to the Staires, and stood a great while, but he came not, till I was a comming away; and I expecting him to come out of Bridewell, I having sent him in thi∣ther, to speake with one, unto whom I thinke he did not goe, but yet he told me, he was with him; but rather he went to Flamsted the Purse∣vant to get him in a readinesse, for he came to me from Flamsteds-house∣ward, downe from Black-Fryers, being a cleane contrary way to that I sent him. So we went towards his Masters house, and parted againe, and appointed to meet at Tantlins-Church; and when I came there, I saw one walking with him, which I verily beleeve was one of the five that tooke me; and when I came to him, I declared unto him that com∣ming downe Soper-lane, I saw a fellow stand in a corner, very suspici∣ously, who looked very wishfully at me, and I at him; and therefore I
desired him to goe, and see who it was, and whether I might goe safely to his Masters or no. So he went, and came backe, and told me his Master was come to the doore, and I might goe without any danger, and as we went, I declared unto him my fearefulnesse, to goe to his Masters; and I told him, I would halfe draw my sword, that I might be in a readinesse; and he went before towards his Masters; and I doe verily thinke acquainted them how it was with me; and I going after him in the narrow Lane, I passed by two great fellowes, suspecting no∣thing; and by and by they seazed upon my backe and shoulders, and cried out in the Kings Name for helpe, they had taken the Rogues Whartons men, and Iohn was the third man that seized upon me, laying fast hold of my left shoulder, and they three pulled my cloake crosse, o∣ver my armes, that so, though I had my sword halfe drawne, yet by no meanes could I get it out; which if I had, and got my backe against the wall, I doe not doubt but I should have made them be willing to let me alone; for though they had fast hold of me, they quaked and trembled for feare; and though they were five or sixe, yet they cryed out for more helpe to assist them. I being but one, and when they all seased on me, then they called me by my name, and though we were in the darke, yet they knew my habit, that I was in as well as my selfe, and shewed me their warrant with my name in it. I have beene forced of necessity to recite these things in regard of his dayly speeches against me, and his writing to me in justification of his innocency though as yet, for all I have sent for him, hee would never come face to face: Tart Letters likewise I have received from Smith and Chillington, for speaking that which I have said in publique of them: and as for Smith, take no∣tice what I said of him; and I here give my reasons for that I said, it is knowne that at the last time the bookes were taken at Mr. Whartons, part of them was not taken; which Iohn can not deny, but he carried them unto Smith; and what passed betwixt them, they themselves best know: but this is sure, Iohn was never troubled for the bookes, though hee was taken dispersing of them; and I am sure, his libertie was obtained by Smiths and Sam, Bakers the Prelate of Londons Chaplaines meanes. Also Smith is not ignorant, but doth very well know that promise that Iohn made to Mr. Baker about twelve moneths agoe, to doe him speciall ser∣vice about such things, which promise I doe verily beleeve he hath faithfully kept; for he hath confessed to his Master since the beginning of my trouble, that he hath used to carry to Baker all new bookes he could get, as soone as they came out, and how for the which he gave him mo∣ney, but how much he best knowes. Also, what free and samiliar accesse Iohn hath had to him, and he and Iohn to Baker, and for those secrets which Iohn from time to time hath re∣vealed to him and Baker, what they are I name not, but appeale to their owne consciences: for it is too manifest that hee is a darling both to
Smith and Baker, in regard they stand so stoutly for him as they doe; for Mr. Wharton, being not long since with Baker, he told him hee heard he was about to put away his Man Iohn. Yea (said he) what should I do with him else? Well (said he) if you doe it, and put him away, the Chamberlaine will make you take him againe. Will he so (said he) he can not doe it, for he is a Iudas, and a Theefe, for he hath stolne money from me, and I can prove it said the Old Man; and therefore he can not make me take him againe. Baker could not well tell what to say to it; but yet did perswade him to keepe him. This the Old man told me himselfe, it seemes they have kept him at his Masters, as a private and secret servant for their owne turnes above this fourteene Moneths and they would still, if they could keepe him there. But what secret mischiefe hee hath done by his so frequent resorting to Baker and Smith, is not yet fully knowne, but I hope it will come out by degrees: Therefore, let all that heares of it take notice of it, and let some of those that were in the information with the three Worthies, cast back their eyes and see if they can finde and spie out who was their Origi∣nall Accuser and Betrayer. These things may be worth the making knowne, though I may incurre hatred and spite from them for it, yet I weigh not that, for I have not declared these things out of any revenge, for I commit that unto God. And for that wrong they have done unto mee, I freely forgive them; and if any of them belong to God, I pray him to call them home unto him. But these things I have set downe, being forced thereunto for vindicating my good name from their bitter reproaches and calum∣niations, and all you that read this, judge and censure what I have said. But now after my Digression I will returne againe to our former matter. And being at the Gatehouse I was removed by (sixe of your Honours) to the Fleete, at which time the said Chillington was removed from Bride∣well to Newgate, and being keptAnd al∣most starved. close there: then he by their threats and perswasions and the procuring of his owne liberty, goes and accuses me for printing ten or twelve thousand Bookes in Holland. And at my Ex∣amination before Sir Iohn Bankes I cleared my selfe of that, and upon Fryday last he made an Affidavit against me, in which hee hath most falsly forsworne himselfe, and to day he hath made another, which is al∣so a most false untruth: And withall my Lords, he is knowne to be a notorious lying fellow, and hath accused mee for the purchasing of his owne liberty, which he hath got. And therefore, I beseech your Honours, to take into your serious consideration, and see whether I am to be cen∣sured upon such a fellowes Affidavits or no. Then said the Lord Keeper, thou art a mad fellow, seeing things are thus, that thou wilt not take thine Oath, and answer truely. My Honourable Lord I have declared unto you the reall Truth, but for the Oath, it is an Oath of Inquiry, and
of the same nature of the High-Commission-Oath; Which Oath I know to be unlawfull; and withall, I finde no warrant in the Word of God, for an Oath of Inquiry, and it ought to be the director of mee in all things that I doe, and therefore my Lords at no hand, I dare not take the Oath (when I named the Word of God, the Court began to laugh, as though they had had nothing to doe with it) my Lords (said Mr. Goad) he told me yesterday, he durst not take the Oath, though he suffered death for the refusall of it. And with that my Lord Privy Seal spoke: Will you (said he) take your Oath, that that which you have said is true? My Lord (said I) I am but a young Man, and doe not well know what belongs to the nature of an Oath (but that which I have, said is a reall truth) but thus much by Gods appointment, I know an Oath ought to be the end of all controversie and strife, Heb. 6. 16. And if it might be so in this my present cause, I would safely take my Oath, that what I have said is true. So they spoke to the Old man my fellow partner, and asked him whether he would take the Oath. So he desi∣red them to give him leave to speake; and he begun to thunder it out against the Bishops, and told them they required three Oathes of the Kings Subjects; namely, the Oath of Churchwardenship, and the Oath of Canonicall Obedience, and the Oath Ex Officio; Which (said he) are all against the Law of the Land, and by which they deceive and perjure thousands of the Kings Subjects in a yeare. And withall, my Lords, (said he) there is a Maxime in Divinity, that we should prefer the glory of God, the good of our King and Country, before our owne lives: but the Lords wondering to heare the Old Man begin to talke af∣ter this manner, commanded him to hold his peace, and to answer them, whether he would take the Oath or no? To which he replied, and desired them to let him talke a little, and he would tell them by and by. At which all the Court burst out of a laughing; but they would not let him goe on, but commanded silence, which if they would have let him proceed, he would so have peppered the Bishops as they were never in their lives in an open Court of Iudicature. So they asked us againe, whether we would take the Oath? which we both a∣gaine refused; and withall I told them, that for the reasons before I durst not take it. Then they said, they would proceed to Censure. I bid them doe as they pleased, for I knew my selfe innocent of the thing for which I was imprisoned and accused; but yet notwithstanding did submit my body to their Honours pleasure. So they censured us 500. pound a peece; and then stood up Judge Ioans, and said: It was fit, that I being a young man for example sake, should have some-corporall So my youth was the cause of my whipping by Iudge ones his Law. punishment inflicted upon me. So my Censure was to be whipt, but neither time nor place allotted. And for the Old Man, in regard of his age, being 85. yeares old, they would spare his corporall punishment, though (said they) hee deserves it as well as the other (meaning me)
yet he should stand upon the Pillory; but I could not understand or perceive by Censure, that I was to stand upon the Pillory. So we tooke our leaves of them. And when I came from the Bar, I spoke in an au∣dible voice, and said: My Lords, J beseech God to blesse your Ho∣nours, and to discover and make knowne unto you the wickednesse and cruelty of the Prelates. So here is an end of my publike proceedings, as yet, which I have had since I came into my troubles, the Lord sanctifie them unto me, and make me the better by them, and put an end to them in his due time, and make way for my deliverance, as I hope he will. After our Censure we had the libertie of the prison for a few dayes; but the Old Man, my fellow partner, went to the Warden of the Fleete; and told him the summe of that which he intended in the Star-Chamber, to have spoken against the Bishops, if the Lords would have let him; So he told the Warden, how the Bishops were the greatest Tyrants that ever were since Adams Creation; and that they were more crueller than the Cannibals, those Men-eaters, for (said he) they presently devouted men, and put an end to their paine, but the Bishops doe it by degrees, and are many yeares in exercising their cruelty and tyranny upon those that stand out against them; and therefore are worse than the very Canibals; (and in this he saith very true, for the Holy Ghost saith: They that be slaine with the Sword, are better than they that be slaine with Hunger; and he gives the reason of it: For those pine away, striken through, for want of the fruits of the field, Lamen. 4. 9 Whereas those that are slaine out-right, are soone out of their paine;) and said he, they have persecuted mee about forty yeares, and cast mee into eight severall Prisons; and all to undoe me, and waste my estate, that so I might not be worth a penny to buy me meate, but starve in prison, for want of food, and yet were never able to lay any thing to my charge, that I had done ei∣ther against Gods Law, or the Law of the land; and (said he) they are the wickedest men that are in the Kingdome; and I can prove them (saith he) to be enemies of God, and of the Lord Iesus Christ, and of the King and Common-wealth; Or else I will be willing to loose my life; and also told him that they did thrust the Lord Jesus Christ, out of his Priestly, Propheticall and Kingly Offices, and hath set up a will worship of their owne invention, contrary to the Holy Scriptures; and that they led by their wicked practises the greater halfe of the Kingdome to Hell with them; and that they rob the King of a million of money in a yeare, and the subjects of as much by their powling, sinfull wicked Courts; and that their living by which they lived was got byVery sa∣table to their constant pra∣ctise. lying and cozning of poore ignorant Children; for (said he) the Pope and the Priest did promise the Children of deceased Parents, if they would give so much to the Church, they would pray their Parents out of Purgatory, and so cozened them of their estates; & (said he) by such dissemblings and
cozening wayes and meanes, as this, were their livings at the first raised, Yea, but Sir, (saith the Warden) what is that to them, that was in time of Popery? Yea, but Sir, (said he) their livings hath continued ever since, and they live still to this day upon the sweetnesse and fatnesse of them. This and much more he then told the Warden, as Mr. Wharton himselfe since then hath told me. And there being a Papist with foure or five more in the roome, the Warden said; Papist come hither, and heare what the Old Man saith. So it came to the Lords of the Counsels eares, whereupon we were the next Munday after brought both together and locked upclose prisoners in one Chamber, without any Order or Warrant at all, but only Warden INGRAMS bare Command and Pleasure. But the Old Man, about three weekes after, made a Petition to the Lords of the Counsell, that he might have some liberty, and being very weake, more likely to dye than to live, hee had his libertie granted till the Tearme; but I doe still remaine close Prisoner; but for my owne part, I am as cheerefull and merry, and as well contented with my present condition (in regard I see the over-ruling hand of my good God in it) as ever I was with any condition in my life, I blesse his holy name for it; for in all my troubles I have had such sweete and comfortable refresh∣ings from my God, that though my imprisonment, and those straights that I have beene in, might seeme to the World, to be a great and heavy burthen, yet to me it hath beene a happy condition, and a cause of ex∣ceeding joy and rejoycing. From the Fleete, the place of my joy and rejoycing the 12. of March 1637. By me JOHN LILBVRNE. Being close Imprisoned by James Ingram the Warden of the Fleete, who locked me up within few dayes after my Sentence, untill the day of my suffering, and would never suffer me to walke in the Prison yard with a Keeper, though I often sent to him, and desired it of him, but told me all was little enough, because I was so refractory.
A VVORKE OF THE BEAST. OR, A Relation of a most unchristian Cen∣sure, executed upon IOHN LILBVRNE, (Now Prisoner in the Fleete) the 18. of April, 1638. with the Heavenly Speech uttered by Him at the time of his Suffering. VPon Wednesday the said 18. of April, Having no cer∣taine notice of the execution of my Censure, till this present morning, I prepared my selfe by prayer un∣to God, that he would make good his promise, to be with me▪ and enable me to undergoe my affliction with joyfulnesse and courage: and that hee would be a mouth and utterance unto me to enable me to speake that which might make for his greatest honour. And in my Meditations my soule did principally pitch upon these three places of Scripture. First, That in Esay 41. 10. 11. 12. 13. Feare thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismaid, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will helpe thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousnesse. Behold all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perish, Thou shalt seeke them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thee, they that warre against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of naught. For the Lord thy God will hold thee by thy right hand▪ saying unto thee, feare not, I will helpe thee, Feare not thou worme Jacob, and yee men of Israel, I will helpe thee, saith the Lord, and thy redeemer the Holy one of Israel, &c. Secondly, that place in Esay 43. 1. 2. Where God speakes thus to his Elect. Feare not, for I have redeemed thee▪ I have called thee by thy name, thou
art mine. When thou passest through the wters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee, when thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Thirdly, that in Heb. 13. 5. 6. In these words, For he hath said I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, So that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, I will not feare wht man can doe unto me. With the consideration of these and other gracious promises, made to his people. I being one of his chosen ones, did claime my share and interest in them, and the Lord of his infinite goodnesse enabled me to cast my selfe upon, and rest in them, knowing and stedfastly beleeving that he is a God of faithfulnesse and power, who is able and willing to make good these his promises to the utmost, and (to his praise be it spoken, I desire to speake it) my soule was that morning exceedingly lifted up with spirituall consolation: and I felt within me such a divine supportation, that the basenesse of my punishment. I was to undergoe did seeme as a matter of nothing to me. And I went to my suffering with as willing and joyfull a heart as if I had been gog to solemnize the day of my marriage with one of the choisest creatures this world could afford. The Warden of the Fleete having sent his men for my old fellow souldier Mr. Iohn Wharton, and my selfe being both in one Chamber, we made our selves ready to goe to the place of Execution. I tooke the Old Man by the hand and led him downe three paire of staires, and o along the yard till we came to the gate. And when we came there, George Harrington the Porter told me I must stay a little, and after our partin (commending one another to the protection of our alsufficient God) I was bid goe to the Porters Lodge, no sooner was I gone in, but came Iohn Hawes. the other Porter to me using these words. Mr. Lilbourne, I am very sorry for your punishment, you are now to undergoe, you must strip you, and be whipt from hence to West-minster. I replied, The will of my God be done, for I know he wil carry me through it with an undanted Spirit; but▪ I must confesse it seemed at the first a little strange to me, in regard I had no more notice given me for my preparation for so sore a punishment. For I thought I should not have beene whipt through the streete, but onely at the Pillory. And so pas∣sing a long the Lane, being attended with many Staves and Halberts, as Christ was when he was apprehended by his enemies, and led to the High Priests Hall, Mt. 26. we came to Fleete-bridge, where was a Cart standing ready for me; and I being commanded to strip me▪ I did it with all willingnesse and cheerefulnesse, whereupon the Executioner tooke out a cord and tied my hands to the Carts-Arse, which caused me to utter these words, Welcome be the Crosse of Christ. With that there drew neere a young man of my acquaintance, and
bid me put on a couragious resolution to suffer cheerefully, and not to dishonour my cause, for you suffer (said he▪ for a good cause I gave him thanks for his Christian encouragement, I replying I know the cause is good ▪ for it is Gods cause, and for mine owne part, I am cheerfull and merry in the Lord, and am as well contented with this my present por∣tion as if I were to receive my present liberty: For I know my God that hath gone along with me hitherto, will carry me through to the end. And for the affliction it selfe, though it be the punishment in∣flicted upon Rogues, yet▪ I esteeme it not the least disgrace, but the greatest honour that can be done unto mee, that the Lord counts mee worthy to suffer any thing for his great Name. And you my brethren that doe now here behold my present conditi∣on this day▪ be not discouraged, be not discouraged at the wayes of god∣linesse, by reason of the Crosse that accompanies it, for it is the lot and portion of all which will live godly in Christ Jesus, to suffer per∣secution. The Cart being ready to goe forward, I spake to the Executioner (when I saw him pull out his Corded whip out of his pocket) after this manner; Well, my friend, doe thy office; to which he replyed, I have whipt many a Rogue, but now I shall whip an honest man, but be not discouraged (said hee) it will be soone over. To which I replyed, I know my God hath not onely enabled me to believe in his Name, but also to suffer for his sake. So the Carman drove forward his Cart, and I laboured with my God for strength to submit my backe with cheerfulnesse unto the smiter, and he heard my desire, and granted my request; for when the first stripe was given, I felt not the least paine, but said, Blessed be thy Name, O Lord my God, that hast counted mee worthy to suffer thy glorious Names sake; and at the giving of the second, I cryed out with a loud voyce, Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Glory, Honour and Praise be given to thee, O Lord, for ever, and to the Lambe that sits upon the Throne. So wee went up to Fleetstreet, the Lord enabling me to endure the stripes with such patience and cheerefulnesse, that I did not in the least manner shew the least discontent at them, for my God har∣dened my backe and steeled my reynes, and tooke away the smart and paine of the stripes from mee. But I must confesse, if I had had no more but mine owne naturall strength, I had sunke under the burthen of my punishment; for to the flesh the paine was very grievous and heavie, but my God in whom I did trust, was higher and stronger than my selfe▪ who strengthened and enabled mee not onely to undergoe the punishment with cheereful∣nesse but made mee triumph, and with a holy disdaine, to insult over my torments. And as wee went along the Strand, many friends spoke to mee and asked how I did, and bid me be cheerfull, to whom I replied I was mer∣ry
and cheerfull, and was upheld with a divine and heavenly supporta∣tion, comforted with the sweet consolations of Gods Spirit. And about the middle of the Strand, there came a friend, and bid mee speake with boldnesse; to whom I replied, when the time comes so I will; for then if I should have spoken and spent my strength, it would have been but as water spilt on the ground, in regard of the noyse and presse of people: And also at that time I was not in a sit temper to speake; because the dust much troubled me, and the Sunne shined very hot upon mee; and the tipstaffe-man at the first would not let me have my hat to keepe the vehement heate of the Sunne from my head: Also hee many times spake to the Cart-man to drive softly, so that the heate of the Sunne exceedingly pierced my head, and made me some∣what faint. But yet my God upheld mee with courage, and made mee undergoe it with a joyfull heart: And when I came to Chearing Crosse, some Christian friends spake to me, and bid me be of good cheere; so I am (said I) for I rest not in mine owne strength, but I fight under the Banner of my great and mighty Captaine, The Lord Iesus Christ, who hath conquered all his Enemies, and I doubt not but through his strength I shall conquer and overcome all my sufferings for his power upholds me, his strength enables mee, his presence cheeres mee, and his Spirit comforts me, and I looke for an immortall crowne, which ne∣ver shall fade nor decay; the assured hope and expectation whereof makes mee to contemne my sufferings, and count them as nothing; for my momentany affliction will work for me a farre more exceeding crowne and weight of glory. And as I went by the Kings Palace, a great multitude of people came to looke upon me; and passing through the gate unto Westminster, many demanded what was the matter. To whom I replyed, My brethren, against the Law of God, against the Law of the Land, against the King or State have I not committed the least offence that deserves this punishment, but onely I suffer as an object of the Prelates crueltie and malice; and hereupon one of the Warden of the Fleets-officers, began to interrupt inee, and tols me my suf∣ferings were just, and therefore▪ I should hold my tongue; whom I bid meddle with his owne businesse, for I would speake▪ come what would, for my cause is good for which I suffered, and here I was ready to shed my dearest blood for it. And as wee went through Kings-street, many encouraged mee, and bid mee be cheerfull; others▪ whose faces (to my knowledge) I never saw before, and who, I verily thinke, knew not the cause of my suffer∣ing, but seeing my cheerfulnesse under it, beseeched the Lord to blesse me and strengthen me. At the last we came to the Pillorie, where I was unloosed from the Cart, and having put on some of my clothes, wee went to the Taverne, where I staid a prettie while waiting for my Surgeon, which was
not yet come to dresse mee, where were many of my friends, who ex∣ceedingly rejoyced to see my courage, that the Lord had enabled me to undergoe my punishment so willingly, who asked mee how I did. I told them, as well as ever I was in my life, I blesse my God for it; for I felt such inward joy and comfort, cheering up my soule, that I lightly esteemed my sufferings. And this I counted my wedding day, in which I was married to the Lord Jesus Christ; for now I know hee loves me, in that hee hath be∣stowed so rich apparell this day upon mee, and counted mee worthy to suffer for his sake. I having a desire to retire into a private roome from the multitude of people that were about mee, which made mee like to faine; I had not beene there long, but Mr. Lightborne, the Tipstaffe of the Star-Chamber, came unto me, saying, the Lords sent him to me to know if I would ac∣knowledge my selfe to be in a fault, and then hee knew what to say un∣to me. To whom I replyed, Have their Honours caused mee to be whipt from the Fleet to Westminster, and do they now send to know if I will acknowledge a fault? they should have done this before I had beene whipt; for now, seeing I have undergone the greatest part of my punishment, I hope the Lord will assist me to goe through it all: and besides, if I would have done this at the first I needed not to have come to this; But as I told the Lords when I was before them at the Barre, so I desire you to tell them againe, that I am not conscious to my selfe of doing any thing that deserves a submission, but yet I doe willingly submit to their Lordships pleasures in my censure. Hee told mee, if I would confesse a fault, it would save mee a standing in the Pillorie, otherwise. I must undergoe the burthen of it. Well (said I) I regard not a little outward disgrace for the cause of my God, I have found alreadie that sweetnesse in him in whom I have believed, that through his strength, I am able to undergoe any thing that shall be inflicted on me; But me thinks that I had very hard mea∣sure, that I should be condemned and thus punished upon two Oathes, in which the partie hath most falsly forsworne himselfe; and because I would not take an Oath to betray mine owne innocencie. Why Paul found more mercy from the Heathen Romane Governours for they would not put him to an Oath to accuse himselfe, but suffered him to make the best defence he could for himselfe, neither would they condemne him, before his accusers and hee were brought face to face to justifie, and fully to prove their accusation; but the Lords have not dealt so with me, for my accusers and I were never brought face to face to justi∣fie their accusation against me: it is true two false Oaths were sworne against me, and I was thereupon condemned; and because I would not accuse my selfe. It is true (said hee) it was so with Paul, but the Lawes of this Land is otherwise than their Lawes were in those dayes.
Then said I, they are worse and more cruell, than the Lawes of the Pa∣gans and Heathen Romanes were, who would condemne no man with∣out witnesses, and they should be brought face to face, to justifie their accusation, and so he went away, and I prepared my selfe for the Pil∣lory, to which I went with a joyfull courage; and when I was upon it I made obeysance to the Lords, some of them (as I suppose) looking out at the Star-chamber window towards me, And so I put my necke into the hole, which being a great deale too low for mee, it was very pain∣full to me, in regard of continuance of the time that I stood on the pil∣lorie, which was about two houres, my backe also being very sore, and the Sunne shining so exceeding hot, and the Tipstaffe-man not suffering mee to keepe on my hat to defend my head from the heate of the Sunne, so that I stood there in great paine; yet through the strength of my God I underwent it with courage▪ to the very last minute; and lifting up my heart and spirit unto my God. While I was thus standing on the pillorie; I craved his powerfull as∣sistance, with the Spirit of wisedome and courage, that I might open my mouth with boldnesse, and speake those things that might make for his greatest glory, and the goood of his people; and so casting mine eyes on the multitude, I began to speake after this manner: My Christian Brethren, to all you that love the Lord Jesus Christ, and desire that he should raigne and rule in your hearts and lives, to you especially, and to as many as heare me this day, I direct my speech. I stand here in the place of ignominy and shame; yet to me it is not so, but I owne and embrace it, as the Welcome Crosse of Christ, and as a badge of my Christian Profession: I have beene already whipt from the Fleete to this place, by vertue of a censure, from the Honourable Lords of the Star-Chamber hereunto, the Cause of my censure I shall declare unto you as briefly as I can. The Lord by his speciall hand of providence, so ordered it, that not long agoe I was in Holland, where I was like to have settled my selfe in a course of trading that might have brought me in a pretty large porti∣on of earthly things, (after which my heart did too much runne) but the Lord having a better portion in store for me, and more durable riches to bestow upon my soule, by the same hand of providence, brought me backe againe, and cast mee into easie affliction, that thereby I might be weaned from the world, and see the vanity and emptinesse of all things therein. And hee hath now pitched my soule upon such an ob∣ject of beautie, amiablenesse and excellencie, as is as permanent and endurable, as Eternity it selfe, namely, the personall excellencie of the Lord Jesus Christ, the sweetnesse of whose presence, no affliction can ever be able to wrest out of my soule. Now, while I was in Holland, it seemes there were divers Bookes, of that noble and renowned Doctor Iohn Bastwicke sent into England,
which came to the hands of one Edmond Chillington, for the sending over of which I was taken and apprehended, the plot being before laid, by one Iohn Chilliburne (whom I supposed, and tooke to be my friend) servant to my old fellow soldier, Master Iohn Wharton, living in Bow∣lane, after this manner. I walking in the street with the said Iohn Chilliburne, was taken by the Pursevant and his men; the said Iohn, as I verily believe, having given direction to them where to stand, and hee himselfe was the third man that laid hands on mee to hold mee. Now at my censure before the Lords, I there declared upon the word of a Christian, that I sent not over those Bookes neither did I know the Ship that brought them, nor my of the men that belonged to the Ship, nor to my knowledge did I ever see, either Ship, or any apper∣taining to it in all my dayes. Besides this, I was accused at my examination before the Kings At∣turney at his Chamber, by the said  Chillington,) Button-seller, living in Canon-street, neere Alchurch Lane, and late prisoner in Bride∣well and Newgate, for printing ten or welve thousand Bookes in Hol∣land, and that I woud have printed the Vnmasking the mysterie of Ini∣quitie; if I could have gotten a true copy of it, and that I had a Chamber in Mastor Iohn Foots house at Delfe, where he thinks the Books were kept. Now, here I declare before you all, upon the word of a suffering Christian, that hee might as well have accused me of printing a hundred thousand hookes, and the one been as true as the other; and for the prin∣ting the Vnmasking the Mysterie of Iniquitie▪ upon the word of an honest man, I never saw, nor to my knowledge heard of the Booke; till I came backe againe into England: and for my having a Chamber in Master Iohn Foots house at Delfe, where he thinks the Bookes were kept; I was so farre from having a Chamber there, as I never lay in his house but twice or thrice at the most: and upon the last Friday of the last Terme, I was brought to the Star-Chamber Barre, where before me was read the saidIt hath beene an or∣dinary thing in the Star-chamber and high Com∣mission, ei∣ther to forge Affidavits, or to make addition un∣to them. Edmond Chillingtons Affidavit, upon Oath, against Mr. Iohn Whar∣ton and my selfe; the summe of which oath, was, That hee and I had printed (at Rotterdam in Holland) Doctor Bastwicks Answer, and his Letany, withdivers other scandalous Bookes. Now, here againe, I speake it in the presence of God, and all you that heare mee, that Master Wharton and I never joyned together in prin∣ting either these, or any other Bookes whatsoever, neither did I receive any money from him toward the printing any. Withall, in his first Oath, hee peremptorily swore; that wee had printed them at Rotterdam, unto which I likewise say, That he hath in this particular forsworne himselfe; for mine owne part, I never in all my dayes either printed, or caused to be printed, either for my selfe, or for Master Wharton any Bookes at Rotterdam; neither
did I come into any Printing-house there, all the time I was in the Citie. And then upon the Tuesday after, he swore against both of us againe. The summe of which Oathes was, that I had confessed to him (which is most false) that I had printed Doctor Bastwicke Answer to Sir Iohn Bancks his Information, and his Letany; and another Booke, called, Cer∣taine Answers to Certaine Objections: and another Booke, called, The Vanity and Impiety of the old Letany; and that I had divers other Bookes of the said Doctor Bastwicks in printing, and that Master Wharton had been at the charges of printing a Book called A Breviate of the Bishops late proceedings; and another Booke called sixteene new Queries, and in this his Oath hath sworne they were printed at Rotterdam, or some∣where else in Holland; and that one Iames Oldam, a Turner, keeping Shop at Westminster-hall-gate, dispersed divers of these Bookes. Now, in this Oath he hath againe forsworne himselfe in a high degree; for whereas he tooke his Oath that I had printed the Booke called The Vanity and Impiety of the old Letany; I here speake it before you all, that I never in all my dayes did see one of them in print, but I must confesse, I have seene and read it in written hand, before the Doctor was censured, and as for other Bookes, of which he saith, I have divers in printing. To that I answer, that for mine owne particular. I never read nor saw any of the Doctors Bookes; but the forenamed foure in English, and one little thing more of about two sheets of paper, which is annexed to the Vanity of the old Letany and as for his Latine Bookes, I never saw any but two. Namely, his Flagellum, for which he was first censured in the High Commission Court, and his Apologeticus, which were both in print long before I knew the Doctor. But it is true, there is a second edition of his Flagellum, but that was at the presse above two yeeres agoe: name∣ly, Anno 1634. and some of this impression was in England before I came out of Holland. And these are the maine things for which I was censured and con∣demned, being two oathes in which the said Chillington hath palpably forsworne himselfe; and if hee had not forsworne himselfe, yet by the Law (as I am given to understand) I might have excepted against him, being a guiltie person himselfe, and a prisoner, and did that which he did against mee for purchasing his owne libertie, which hee hath by such Judasly meanes got and obtained; who is also knowne to be a lying fellow, as I told the Lords I was able to prove and make good. But besides all this, there was an inquisition-oath tendered unto mee (which I refused to take) on foure severall dayes; the summe of which Oath is thus much: You shall sweare that you shall make true answer to all things that shall be asked of you: So helpe you God. Now this Oath I refused as a sinfull and unlawfull Oath: it
being the High-Commission Oath, with which the Prelates ever have, and still doe, so butcherly torment, afflict and undoe, the deare Saints and Servants of God. It is an oath against the Law of the Land (as Master Nicholas Fuller in his Argument doth prove: And also it is ex∣pressely against the Petition of Right an Act of Parliament Enacted in the second yeere of our King. Againe, it is absolutely against the Law of God; for that Law requires no man to accuse himselfe, but if any thing be laid to his charge, there must come two or three witnesses at the least to prove it: It is also against the practice of Christ himselfe, who in all his examinations before the High Priest, would not accuse himselfe, but upon their demands, returned this answer: Why aske you me? goe to them that heard me. Withall, this Oath is against the very law of Nature; for nature is alwaies a preserver of it selfe, and not a destroyer: But if a man takes this wicked oath, he destroyes and undoes himselfe, as daily experience doth witnesse. Nay, it is worse than the Law of the Heathen Romanes, as wee may reade, Acts 25. 16. For, when Paul stood before the Pagan Go∣vernours, and the Iewes required judgement against him, the Governour replyed, it is not the manner of the Romans to condemne any man, before he and his accu∣sers be brought face to face to justifie their accusation. But for mine owne part, if I had beene proceeded against by a Bill, I would have answered and justified all that they could have proved against me, and by the strength of my God, would have sealed whatsoever I have done with my blood, for I am privie to mine owne actions, and my conscience beares mee witnesse, that I have laboured ever since the Lord in mercy made the riches of his grace knowne to my soule, to keepe a good conscience, and to walke inoffensively both towards God and man. But as for that oath that was put upon mee, I did refuse to take it, as a sinfull and un∣lawfull oath, and by the strength of my God inabling me, I will never take it, though I be puld in pieces with wilde horses, as the ancient Christians were by the bloody Tyrants, in the Primitive Church, neither shall I thinke that man a faithfull Subject of Christs Kingdome, that shall at any time hereafter take it, seeing the wickednesse of it hath been so apparently laid open by so many, for the refusall whereof many doe suffer cruell persecution to this day. Thus have I as briefly as I could, declared unto you, the whole cause of my standing here this day, I being upon these grounds censured by the Lords at the Star-chamber on the last Court day of the last Terme, to pay 500. pounds to the King, and to receive the punishment which with rejoycing I have undergone, unto whose censure I doe with willing∣nesse and cheerefulnesse submit my selfe. But seeing I now stand here at this present, I intend, the Lord assi∣sting me with his power, and guiding me by his Spirit, to declare my minde unto you.
I have nothing to say to any mans person, and therefore will not meddle with that, onely the things that I have to say in the first place, are concerning the Bishops and their calling: They challenge their cal∣lings to be Iure Divino, and for the oppugning of which, those there re∣nowned living martyrs of the Lord, Doctor Bastwicke, Master Burton and Master Prin, did suffer in this place, and they have sufficiently proved, that their calling is not from God, which men I love and ho∣nour, and doe perswade my selfe that their soules are deare and preci∣ous in the sight of God, though they were so cruelly and butcherly dealt with by the Prelates; and as for Master Burton and Master Prin, they are worthy and learned men, but yet did not in many things write so fully as the Doctor did, who hath sufficiently and plentifully set forth the wickednesse, both of the Prelates themselves and of their callings (as you may reade in his Bookes) that they are not Jure Di∣vino, which noble and reverend Doctor I love with my soule; and as he is a man that stands for the truth and glory of God, my very life and heart-blood I will lay downe for his honour, and the maintain∣ing of his cause for which hee suffered, it being Gods cause. As for the Bishops, they used in former times to challenge their jurisdiction, callings and power from the King; but they have now openly in the High Commission Court renounced that, as was heard by many, at the censure of that Noble Doctor. And as you may fully reade in his Apologettcus; and in his Answer to Sir John Bancks his Information. Now I will here maintain it before them all, that their callings is so far from being, Jure Divino, (as they say they are) that they are rather jure Diabolico, which if I be not able to prove, let mee be hanged up at the Hall gate. But my brethren, for your better satisfaction, reade the 9. and 13. Chapters of the Revelation, and there you shall see, that there came Locusts out of the Bottomlesse Pit, part of whom they are, and they are there lively described. Also you shall there finde, that the Beast (which is the Pope, or Romane State and government) hath given to him by the Dragon (the Divell) his power and seate, and great authoritie, So that the Popes authoritie comes from the divell, and the Prelates, and their Creatures in their printed Bookes, doe challenge their authoritie, jurisdiction and power, (that they exercise over all sorts of people) is from Rome. And for proving of the Church of England, to be a true Church, their best and strongest argument is, that the Bishops are lineally desten∣ded from his Holinesse (or Impiousnesse) of Rome, as you may reade in Pocklingtons Booke, called Sunday no Sabbath. So that by their owne con∣fession they stand by that same power and authority that they have re∣ceived from the Pope. So that their calling is not from God, but from the Divell. For the Pope cannot give a better authoritie or calling to them then he himselfe hath; but his authority and calling is from the
Divell, therefore the Prelates calling and authority is from the Divell also, Revel. 9. 3. And there came out of the smoake, Locusts upon the earth, and unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of the earth have power to hurt and undoe men, as the Prelates daily doe: and also, Revel. 13. 2. And the Beast which I saw (saith Saint Iohn) was like unto a Leopard, and his feete were as the feete of a Beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon (that is to say, the Divell) gave him his power, his seat and great authoritie; and verse 15. 16, 17. And whether the Pre∣lates as well as the Pope, doe not daily the same things, let every man that hath but comon reason judge. For, doe not their daily practises and cruell burthens imposed on all sorts of people, high and low, rich and poore, witnesse that their discent is from the Beast, part of his state and kingdome: So al∣so Revel. 16. 13, 14. all which places doe declare, that their power and authoritie being from the Pope, (as they themselves confesse) therefore it must needs originally come from the Divell; for their power and callings must of necessitie proceed either from God, or else from the Divell; but it proceeds not from God, as the Scrip∣tures sufficiently declare, therefore their calling and power proceeds from the Divell, as both Scripture and their owne daily practises doe demonstrate and prove, and as for that last place cited, Rev. 16. 13. 14. If you please to reade the second and third parts of Doctor Bastwicks Letany, you shall finde, hee there proves, that the Prelates practices doe every way suit with, and make good that portion of Scripture to the utmost. For in their Sermons that they preach before his Ma∣jestie, how doe they incense the King and Nobles against the people of God, labouring to make them odious in his sight, and stirring him up to execute vengeance upon them, though they be the most harmelesse generation of all others. And as for all these officers that are under them, and made by them, for mine owne particular, I cannot see, but that their callings are as un∣lawfull as the Bishops themselves; and in particular, for the callings of the Ministers, I doe not, nor will not speake against their persons, for I know some of them to be very able men, and men of excellent gifts and qualifications, and I perswade my selfe, their soules are very deare and pretious in the sight of God. Yet notwithstanding, this proves not their callings to be ever the better, as it is in civill government: If the King (whom God hath made a lawfull Magistrate) make a wicked man an officer, hee is as true an officer, and as well to be obeyed, comming in the Kings name, as the best man in the world comming with the same authority; for in such a case, hee that is a wicked man, hath his calling from as good authoritie as the godliest man hath; and therefore his calling is as good as the others.
But on the other side, if hee that hath no authority make officers, though the men themselves be never so good and holy, yet their holi∣nesse makes their calling never a whit the truer, but still is a false cal∣ling, in regard his authority was not good not lawfull that made them: and even so the Ministers be they never so holy men, yet they have one and the same calling with the wickedest that is amongst them, their holinesse proves not their callings to be ever the truer, seeing their au∣thority that made them Ministers is false, and therefore they have more to answer for than any of the rest, by how much the more God hath bestowed greater guifts upon them than upon others, and yet they de∣taine the truth in unrighteousnesse from Gods people, and doe not make knowne to them as they ought, the whole Will and Counsell, of God. And againe, the greater is their sinne, if their callings be unlawfull (as I verily believe they are) in that they stil hold them and do not wil∣lingly lay down and renounce them, or they do but deceive the people, and highly dishonour God, and sin against their own soules, while they preach unto the people by vertue of an Antichristian and unlawfull calling; and the more godly and able the Minister is that still preaches by vertue of this calling, the more hurt he doth; for the people that have such a Minister will not be perswaded of the truth of things, though one speake and informe them in the name of the Lord, but will be rea∣dy to reply, Our Minister that preaches still by vertue of this Calling, is so holy a man, that were not his calling right and good, I doe assure my selfe he would no longer preach by vertue thereof. And thus the ho∣linesse of the Minister is a cloake to cover the unlawfulnesse of his calling, and make the people continue rebels against Christ his Scep∣ter and Kingdome, which is an aggravation of his sinne: for by this meanes the people are kept off from receiving the whole truth into their soules, and rest in being but almost Christians, or but Christians in part. But, Oh my brethren, it behoves all you that feare God, and tender the salvation of your owne soules, to looke about you, and to shake off that long security and formality in Religion, that you have laine in: For God of all things cannot endure Lukewarmnesse, Rev. 3. 16. and search out diligently the truth of things, and try them in the Bal∣lance of the Sanctuary. I beseech you take things no more upon trust, as hitherto you have done, but take paines to search and find out those spirituall and hidden truths that God hath enwrapped in his sacred Booke, and find out a bottome for your owne soules: for if you will have the comforts of them, you must bestow some labour for the get∣ting of them, and you must search diligently before you finde them, Prov. 2. Labour also to withdraw your necks from under that spirituall and Antichristian bondage (unto which you have for a long time sub∣jected your soules) lest the Lord cause his plagues, and the fiercenesse
of his wrath to seize both upon your bodies and soules; seeing you are now warned of the danger of these things. For he himselfe hath said, Rev. 14. 9. 10, 11. That if any man worship the Beast and his Image and receive his marke in his forehead, or in his hand; the same shall drinke of the wine of his wrath, which is powred out without mix∣ture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall he tormented with fire and brim∣stone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lambe, and the smooke of their torment ascended up for ever and ever, and they have no rest, day nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receiveth the marke of his name. Therefore, as you love your owne soules, and looke for that immortall Crowne of happinesse in the world to come, looke that you withdraw your selves from that Antichristian power and slavery that you are now under, even as God himselfe hath comman∣ded and injoyned you in Rev. 18. 4. saying, Come out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sinnes, and that you receive not of her plagues, for her sinnes have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembred her iniquities. Here is the voyce of God himselfe commanding all his chosen ones, though they have lived under this Antichristian slavish power and estate along time, yet at last, to withdraw their obedience and subjection from it. My brethren, we are all at this present, in a very dangerous and feare∣full condition, under the Idolatrous and spirituall bondage of the Pre∣lates, in regard wee have turned traytors unto our God, in seeing his Almighty great name, and his heavenly truth troden under foot, and so highly dishonoured by them, and yet wee not onely let them alone in holding our peace, but most slavishly and wickedly subject our selves unto them, fearing the face of a piece of dirt, more than the Almighty great, God of Heaven and Earth, who is able to cast both body and soule into everlasting damnation. Oh repent, I beseech you therefore repent, for that great dishonour you have suffered to be done unto God by your fearefulnesse and co∣wardlinesse, and for the time to come, put on couragious resolutions like valiant souldiers of Iesus Christ, and fight manfully in this his spiri∣tuall battell, in which battell some of his souldiers have already lost part of their blood, and withall, study this Booke of the Revelation, and there you shall find the mysterie of iniquitie fully unfolded and ex∣plained; and also you shall see what great spirituall battels have beene fought betwixt the Lambe and his Servant, and the Dragon (the Divell) and his vassals, and some are to fight. Therefore, gird on your spirituall armour, spoken of, Ephes. 6. that you may quit your selves like good and faithful souldiers, and feare no colours, the victory and conquest is ours already; for wee are sure to have it (I doe not speake of any bodily and temporall battell, but onely of a spirituall one) and be not discouraged and knocked off from the study of it, because of the obscurity and darknesse of it, fore Lord
hath promised his enlightening Spirit unto all his people that are labo∣rious and studious to know him aright, and also hee hath promised a blessing, and pronounced a blessednesse unto all that reade and labour to keep the things contained in this booke, Rev. 1. 3. My Christian bre∣thren, in the bowels of Jesus Christ, I beseech you doe not contemne the things that are delivered to you, in regard of the meannesse and weake∣nesse of me the instrument, being but one of the meanest and unwor∣thiest of the servants of Jesus Christ, for the Lord many times doth great things by weake meanes, that his power may be more seene; for we are too ready to cast our eye upon the meanes and instrument, not looking up unto that Almighty power that is in God, who is able to doe the greatest things by the weakest meanes, and therefore out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings he hath ordained strength, Psal. 8. 2. And he hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weake things of the world to confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the world, and things which are despised hath God chosen, yea, things which are not, to bring to nought things that are, 1 Cor. 1. 27. 28. And he gives the reason wherefore he is pleased so to doe. That no flesh should glory in his presence. So you see God is not tyed to any instrument and meanes to effect his owne glory, but hee by the least instrument is able to bring to passe the greatest things. It is true, I am a young man, and no Scholler, according to that which the world counts Schollership, yet I have obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithfull, and bee by a divine providence, hath brought mee hither this day; and I speake to you in the name of the Lord being assisted with the spirit and power of the God of heaven and earth, and I speake not the words of rashnesse or inconsideratenesse, but the words of sobernesse, and mature deliberation; for I did consult with my God, before I came hither, and desired him that hee would direct and en∣able me to speake that which might be for his glory, and the good of his people. And as I am a souldier, fighting under the banner of the great and mighty Captain, the Lord Iesus Christ, and as I looke for that crowne of immortality, which one day I know shall be set upon my temples be∣ing in the condition that I am in, I dare not hold my peace, but speake unto you with boldnesse in the might and strength of my God, the things which the Lord in mercy hath made knowne unto my soule, come life come death. When I was here about, there came a fat Lawyer, I doe not know his name and commanded me to hold my peace, and leave my preach∣ing. To whom I replyed and said, Sir, I will not hold my peace, but speake my mind freely, though I be hanged at Tiburne for my paines. It seems he himselfe was galled and touched as the Lawyers were in Christs time, when he spake against the Scribes and Pharisees, which made them
say, Master, in saying thus, thou revilest us also. So he went his way, and (I think) complained to the Lords, but I went on with my speech and said: My brethren, be not discouraged at the wayes of God for the affliction and crosse that doth accompany them, for it is sweet and comfortable drawing in the yoake of Christ for all that▪ and I have found it so by experience; for my soule is fild so full of spirituall and heavenly joy, that with my tongue I am not able to expresse it, neither are any capable (I think) to partake of so great a degree of consolation, but onely those upon whom the Lords gracious afflicting hand is. And for mine owne part, I stand this day in the place of an evill doer, but my conscience witnesseth that I am not so. And herea∣bout I put my hand into my pocket, and puld out three of worthy Dr. Bastwicks Books, and threw them among the people, and said, There is part of the Bookes for which I suffer, take them among you, and reade them, and see if you find any thing in them against the Law of God, the Law of the Land, the glory of God, the honour of the King or State. I am the sonne of a Gentle man, and my friends are of ranke and qualitie in the Countrey where they live, which is 200. miles from this place, and I am in my present condition deserted of them all, for I know, not one of them dare meddle with mee in my present estate, being I am stung by the Scorpions (the Prelates) and for any thing that I know, it may be, I shall never have a favourable coun∣tenance from any of them againe, and withall, I am a young man, and likely to have lived well, and in plenty, according to the fashion of the world; yet notwithstanding, for the cause of Christ, and to doe him service, I have, and doe bid adue to father, friends, riches, pleasures, ease, contented life and blood, and lay all downe at the foot-stoole of Iesus Christ, being willing to part with all, rather then I will disho∣nour him, or in the least measure part with the peace of a good conscience, and that sweetnesse and joy which I have found in him, for in naked Christ is the quintessence of sweetnesse, and I am so farre from thinking my affliction and punishment which this day I have in∣dured, and still doe endure and grone under (a disgrace) that I receive it as the welcome Crosse of Christ, and doe thinke my selfe this day more honoured by my sufferings, then if a crowne of gold had beene set up∣on my head; for I have in some part beene made conformable to my Lord and Master, and have in some measure drunke of the same Cup which hee himselfe dranke of, while he was in this sinfull world; for hee shed his most pretious blood for the salvation of my poore soule, that so I might be reconciled to his father, therefore am I willing to undergoe any thing for his sake, and that inward joy and consolati∣on within me that carries me high above all my pains and torments and you (my brethren) if you be willing to have Christ, you must owne him, and take him upon his own termes, and know that Christ and the crosse
is inseparable; for he that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution and affliction, it is the lot and portion of all his chosen ones, through many afflictions and trialls we must enter into glory; and the Apostle saith, that if wee be without afflictions, whereof all are partakers, then are yee Bastards, and not Sonnes. And therefore, if you will have Christ, sit downe and reckon before ever you make profession of him, what hee will cost you, lest when you come to the triall, you dishonour him, and if you be not willing and contented with all, and let all goe for his sake, you are not worthy of him. If Parents, Husband, Wife or children, lands or livings, riches or honours, pleasure or case, life or blood, stand in the way, you must be willing to part with all these, and to entertaine Christ naked and alone, though you have nothing but the Crosse, or else you are not worthy of him, Matth. 10. 37. 38. Oh, my brethren, there is such sweetnesse and contentednesse in en∣joying the Lord Jesus alone, that it is able, where it is felt, to make a man goe through all difficulties, and endure all hardships that may possibly come upon him. Therefore, if he call you to it, doe not deny him, nor his truth in the least manner; for he hath said, Hee that denyes him be∣fore men, him will he deny before his Father which is in Heaven. And now is the time that wee must shew our selves good souldiers of Iesus Christ, for his truth, his cause and glory lies at stake in a high degree, therefore put on couragious resolutions, and withdraw your necks and soules from all false power and worship, and fight with courage and bold∣nesse in this spirituall battell, in which battell, the Lord before your eyes hath raised up some valiant Champions that fought up to the eares in blood, therefore be couragious souldiers and fight it out bravely, that your God may be glorified by you, and let him onely have the service, both of your inward and outward man, and stand to his cause, and love your owne soules, and feare not the face of any mortll man; for God hath promised to be with you, and uphold you, that they shall not pre∣vail against you, Esay 41. 10, 11. But alas, how few are there that date shew any courage for God and his cause, though his glory lies at the stake, but thinke themselves happy and well, and count themselves wise men, if they can sleepe in a whole skin, when Christ hath said, Hee that will save his life shall lose it, and he that will lose his life for his sake, shall find it. What shall it profit a man, if he gaine the whole world, and lose his owne soule? Therefore it is better for a man to be willing and contented to let all goe for the enjoying of Christ, and doing him service, then to sit downe and sleepe in a whole skinne, though in so doing hee gaine all the world, and see him dishonoured, his glory and truth troden un∣der foot, and the blood of his servants shed and spilt? Yes without doubt it is: but many are in these times, so farre from
suffering valiantly for Christ, that they rather disswade men from it, and count it a point of singularity and pride, and selfe-ends for a man, to put himselfe forward to doe God service; asking, what calling and warrant any private man hath there unto seeing it belongs to the Mini∣sters to speake of these things. Yes, so it doth, but alas, they are so co∣wardly and fearfull that they dare not speake. And therefore it belongs also to thee, or me, or any other man, if thou beest a souldier of Jesus Christ, whatsoever by place or calling thy rank or degree be, be it higher or lower, yet if he call for thy service, thou art bound, though others stand still, to maintaine his power and glory to the utmost of thy power & strength, yea, to the shedding the last drop of thy blood, for hee hath not loved his life unto the death for thy sake, but shed his precious blood for the redemption of thy soule: hath hee done this for thee; and darest thou see him dishonoured, and his glory lie at the stake, and not speake on his behalfe, or doe him the best service thou canst? If one of a base & cowardly spirit thus thou dost, let me tell thee here, and that truly to thy face, thou hast a Dalila in thine heart, which thou lovest more than God, and that thou shalt one day certainly finde by wofull experience. Alas, if men should hold their peace in such times as these, the Lord would cause the very stones to speake to convince man of his cowardly basenesse. Having proceeded in a manner thus far by the strength of my God, with boldnesse and courage in my speech, The Warden of the Fleet came with the sat Lawyer and commanded me to hold my peace. To whom I replyed, I would speake and declare my cause and minde, though I were to be hanged at the gate for my speaking. And hee caused procla∣mation to be made upon the pillory, for bringing to him the bookes: so then he commanded mee to be gagged, and if I spake any more, that then I should be whipt againe upon the Pillory. So I remained about an houre and a halfe gagged, being intercepted of much matter, which by Gods assistance I intended to have spoken; but yet with their cruelty I was nothing at all daunted, for I was full of comfort and courage, being mightily strengthned with the power of the Almighty, which made me with cheerefullnesse triumph over all my sufferings, not shewing one sad countenance or discontented heart. And when I was to come downe, having taken out my head out of the Pillory, I looked about mee upon the people, and said, I am more then a conqueror through him that hath loved mee, Vivat Rex, Let the King live for ever, and so I came downe and was had backe againe to the Taverne, where I, together with Mr. Wharton, staid a while, till one went to the Warden to know what should be done with mee, who gave order we should be carryed backe againe to the Fleete, and as I went by land through the streets, great store of people stood all along, to be∣hold
me, and many of them blessed God for enabling me to undergoe my sufferings with such cheerefulnesse and courage as I did, for I was mightily filled with the sweet presence of Gods Spirit, which caused me notwithstanding the paines of my sufferings to goe alone the streets with a joyfull countenance not shewing the least discontentednesse▪ as if I had been going to take possession of so ne great treasures. After I came back to the prison, none were suffered to come at me but the Surgeon to dresse mee, and I feeling my selfe somewhat feverish, I went to bed and my Surgeon doubting the same also gave me a Glister, and appointed to come the next morning and let me blood, but when he came▪ he could not be permitted to come at me, nor any else, for the Porter kep the key and lock'd me up very close, saying, the Warden gave him straight command so to doe. Whereupon I desired the Surgeon to goe to Westminster to the Warden and certifie him how it was with me, (being very ill) and that he might have liberty to come at me to let me blood and dresse me which could not be obtained, till the Warden him∣selfe came home. About one of the clock Iohn Hawes the Porter came to me, to know what I had to say to the Warden, to whom I said, Master Hawes this is very cruell and harsh dealing, that after so sore whipping, my Surgeon shall not be admitted to come and dresse me, nor any other be suffered to administer to my necessities, having not eaten all this day, nor the last evening but a little Caudlè, I hope the Lords will be more mercifull, than after the undergoing the extremity of my censure to take my life from me by letting me perish for want of looking to, therefore I pray speake to Mr. Warden, that he would be pleased to give leave to my Chirurgion to come to dresse and let me blood, otherwise I was in dan∣ger of a Feaver, which might take away my life; So hee wished me to haye written to the Warden; I told him, if he would help me to Pen, Ink and Paper so I would. No (said he) I dare not doe that. Then I desired him to deliver my mind to the Warden by word of mouth, who then went away, and after I was in my bed, he came to me againe, and said thus unto mee: Mr. Lilburne, I have one suite to you. What is that, said I? It is this, said he, that you would help me to one of those bookes that you threw abroad at the Pillory, that I might read it, for I never read any of them; I speake not for it to doe you any hurt, only I have a great desire to reade one of them. Sir, I thinke you doe not (said I) but I can∣not satisfie your desire for if I had had more of them, they should yester∣day have all gone. I verily believe you, said he, and so wee parted. And in a very little while after, came the Warden himselfe with the Porter, and I being in my bed, hee asked me how I did? Said I, I am well, I blesse my God for it, and am very merry and cheerefull. Well said he, you have undone your selfe with speaking what you did yester∣day. Sir, said I, I am not sorry for what I have said, but am heartily glad that the Lord gave me strength and courage to speake what I did,
and were I to speake againe, I would speake twice as much as I did, if I could have liberty, though I were immediately to lose my life after it. Wouldst thou so, said hee? Ey indeed Sir would I, with the Lords assistance, said I, for I feare not the face of Man. And concerning what I yesterday spake, I did not in the least manner speake against any of the Lords▪ but did openly declare, that I did willingly with all contentednesse submit my selfe to their cen∣sure; and as for the Bishops, I said nothing against any of their persons, but onely against their Callings. Ey, said the Warden, and thou saidst their Calling was from the Divell. Yes Sir, so I did, said I, and I will prove it, and make it good, or else I will be wil∣ling to lose my dearest blood; For if you please to reade the 9. and 13. Chapters of the Revelations, you shall there finde, that the Beast which ascended out of the bottomlesse pit (which is the Pope and Romane State, hath his power and authority given him by the Dra∣gon, (the Divell.) So that all the power which the Pope hath, and doth exercise, originally comes from the Divell: If you reade al∣so some Bookes lately set out by the Prelates themselves, and their Creatures, you shall there finde, that they claime their jurisdiction, standing and power from the Pope: Now, if their power and cal∣ling be from the Pope (as they themselves say it is) then it must needs be from the Divell also; For the Popes power and calling is from the Divell; And he cannot give a better power and calling to them than hee himselfe hath; And I pray Sir, if the Bishop of Canterbury be offended at that which I spake yesterday, tell him, I will seale it with my blood; And if hee please to send for mee, I will justifie it to his face, and if I be not able to make it good be∣fore any Noble man in the Kingdome, let mee lose my life. Ey, but it had beene a great deale better, said hee, for thine owne par∣ticular good to have beene more sparing of thy speech at that time. No Sir, said I, nothing at all; for my life and blood is not deare and precious to mee, so I may glorifie God, and doe him any service therewith. I assure thee, said he, I was exceedingly chid about thee; and also there were old businesses rubb'd up aginst mee concerning Doctor Laiton and Master Burton, for that liberty that they had. Wherefore were you chid for me said I? About the Bookes, said hee, that you threw abroad, in regard you were close prisoner, and yet had those bookes about you; I would aske you one question: Did you bring those bookes to the Fleet with you, or were they since brought to you by any other? I beseech you Sir▪ pardon me for revea∣ling that said I. Then he would have knowne who they were that most resorted to me. I desired I might be excused in that also. Ey, but you must give me an answer, said he, for I must certifie the Lords thereof. Then said I, I pray you tell their Honours, I am unwilling to tell you.
What were those bookes, said he, that you threw abroad, were they all of one sort? Those that have them, said I, can certifie you of that I my selfe have one of them, said he, and have read it, and can find no wit in it▪ there is nothing but railing in it. Sir, said I, I conceive you are mistaken, for the booke is all full of wit; it is true, this booke which which you lighted on, is not so full of solidity as other of his bookes are; but you must understand, that at that time when the Doctor made that booke he was full of heavinesse and in danger of a great punishment for the Prelates had breathed out more cruelty against him for writing his Apologie; and at that time also hee was compassed about on every side with the Pestilence; therefore hee made that booke to make himselfe merry. But, said he, hee doth not write any thing in it to the purpose against the Bishops callings. Sir, said I, I must confesse, you lighted on the worst of the three. And it is true, there is not much solidi∣tie and force of argument in it, but onely mirth; but the other two are as full of soliditie as this is of mirth. What, were they of three sorts, said he? Yes Sir, that they were, said I. What were the other two called, said he? The one said I, was his Answer to Sir Iohn Banks his information, The other is an Answer to some Objections that are made against that books which you have; but if ever you reade his Latine bookes, you shall there find solidity enough, and the wickednesse and unlawfulnesse of the Bi∣shops callings and practises set forth to the full. What Latine bookes be they, said he? His Flagellum, for which hee was first censured, said I. What, hath hee beene twice censured, said hee? Yes, said I, hee was censured in the High Commission Court, for writing his Flagellum; and af∣ter that he wrote his Apologie; and that little booke which you have, which were the cause of his censure in the Star-Chamber. But hast thou any more of those bookes, said hee? Sir, said I, if I had had twenty of them▪ more, they should all have gone yesterday. But hast thou any more of them now, said hee? Sir, said I, I verily thinke that if I should tell you I had not, you would not believe mee, and therefore, if you please, you may search my Chamber. So I must (said he) for the Lords have commanded me so to doe, therefore open your Trunke. Sir, said I, it is open already. Search it Iohn Hawes, said he. So he search'd it, and found nothing there. Open the Cubbard, said he. So I gave the Porter the key of my Cubbard to search it and he found nothing there but my victualls. Search his pocket, said the Warden. Indeed, Sir said I, there is none in them; yet he searched them and found as I said. Then he sear∣ched all my Chamber over, but found nothing at all. Well Sir, said I, now you can certifie the Lords how you find things with mee; but I pray Sir, must I still be kept close prisoner? I hope now the Lords have inflicted their censure on me, they will not still keep mee close. No, said he, within a little time you will be eased of it; so wee tooke our leaves each of other, and he went away.
And the next day, being Friday, and a Star-Chamber-day, I hoped I should have had the liberty of the Prison; but in stead thereof, newes was brought me at evening, that I must be removed to the Comon-Gal, or a worse place, and that I must be put in yrons. Well for all this my God enabled me to keepe my hold still; and not to let my confidence goe; for, (blessed be his name for it) this newes did not in the least manner trouble me. And upon Saturday morning, Iohn Hawes the Porter came with the woman that looked to me, to my Chamber, to stand by her, that none might speake with me till shee had made my bed, and done other things for me, and he told me, hee was sorry to heare such newes as he did concerning me. What is it, said I? I heare said he▪ that the Lords have ordered that you must be put into the Wards, and kept close priso∣ner there, and lie in yrons, and none must be suffered to come at you to bring you any thing; but you must live upon the Poore Mans Box Sir, that's very hard, said I, but the will of my God be done; For mine owne part it nothing at all troubles me; for I know in whom I have believed, and I know, not one hayre of my head shall fall to the ground without his providence; and I have cast up my account already, what it wil cost me; therefore, I weigh not any thing that can be inflicted on mee; for I know, that God made Paul and Silas to sing in the Stockes at midnight, will also make mee rejoyce in my chaynes; but it is very much that they will let none come to me, to bring me any thing; it seemes, they will be more cruell to me than the very Heathens and Pagan Romans were to Paul, who when he was in Prison, did never refuse to let any come to him to administer to his necessities; but I weigh it not, for I know my God is and will be with me, to make me goe through all my afflictions with cheerfulnesse, for I feele his power within me so mightily suppor∣ting and upholding me, that no condition in this world can make mee miserable; and for mine own part I do no more set by my life & blood in this cause, then I doe a piece of bread when I have newly dyned. Afterwards the woman telling me she hoped I should not have so sore a punishment laid on me but that I might have things brought me from my friends, I told her, I did not much care how it went with me, for Ieremyes Dungeon, or Daniels Den, or the three Childrens Fornace, is as pleasant and welcome to me as a Palace; for wheresoever I am, I shall find God there, and if I have him, that is enough to me; and for victu∣alls, I told her, I did not doubt, but that God that fed the Prophet Esiah by a Raven, would preserve me, and fill me to the full by the way of his providence; and if no meat should be brought me, I knew, if they take away my meat, God will take away my stomack; therefore I weighed not their cruelty, and thereupon uttered to her these foure verses: I doe not feare nor dread the face of any mortall man, Let him against me bend his power, and do the worst be can,
For my whole trust, strength, confidence, My hope, and all my aide, Is in the Lord IEHOVAS fence, which Heaven and earth hath made. The rest that I intended by the strength of my God to have spoken (if I had not beene prevented by the Gag) I now forbeare to set downe, in regard I heare I am to come into the field again to fight a second battel, unto which time I reserve it, if the Lord so order it that I may have li∣berty to speake, I doubt not but by the might and power of my God, in whom I rest and trust, valiantly to display the weapons of a good soul∣dier of Iesus Christ; Come life, come death; and in the meane time, to what I have here said and written, I set to my name by mee IOHN LILBVRN, being wiritten with part of mine owne blood; The rest of which, by the Lords assistance I will willingly shed, if he call for it, in the maintaining of his Truth and Glory, and that which I have here said and written: by me, JOHN LILBVRNE. At the Inner Star-Chamber the 18th. of April, Anno Dom. 1638. Present: Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seale. Earle Marshall. Earle of Salisbury. Lord Cottington. Lord Newburch. M. Secretary Cooke. M. Secretary Windebanck. WHereas Iohn Lilburne, Prisoner in the Fleet, by sentence in Starchamber, did this day suffer condigne punishment for his severall offences, by whipping at a Cart, and standing in the Pillory, and as their Lordships were this day informed, during the time that his body was under the said execution, audaciously and wickedly, did not only utter sundry scandalous speeches, but like∣wise scattered divers copies of seditious bookes among the people that beheld the said execution, for which very thing, among other offences of like nature, he hath beene censured in the said Court by the afore∣said sentence: It is therefore, by their Lordships ordered, that the said Iohn Lilburne should be laid alone, with yrons on his hands and legges in the Wards of the Fleet, where the basest and meanest sort of prisoners are used to be put; and that the Warden of the Fleet take especiall care to hinder the resort of any persons whatsoever unto him. And parti∣cularly, that he be not supplyed with money from any friend, and th
hee take especiall notice of all letters, writings and bookes brought un∣to him, and seise and deliver the same unto their Lordships; and take notice from time to time who they be that resort unto the said prison to visit the said Lilburne, or to speake with him, and informe the Board thereof. And it was lastly ordered, that all persons that shall be here∣after produced to receive corporall punishment according to sentence of that Court, or by order of the Board, shall have their garments searched before they be brought forth, and neither writing nor other thing suffered to be about them; and their hands likewise to be bound, during the time they are under punishment. Whereof, together with the other premisses, the said Warden of the Fleet is hereby required to take notice, and to have especiall care, that this their Lordships order be accordingly observed. Examined per DVDLY CARLETON. FINIS.
