L3208 99827928 32353
Love in a MAZE OR The Young-Man put to his dumps. Here in this Song you may behold and see a gallant Girl obtain'd by Wit and Honesty; all you that hear my song, and mark it but arights, will say true love's vvorth gold, and breeds delight. To a pleasant New Tune, called, the true lovers delight; or, the Cambridge horn LAte in the morning as I abroad was walking, All in a Meadow green, I heard two Lovers talking With kisses sweet the young-man her Saluted, Then I drew near to hear what they disputed: Then I drew near to hear what they disputed. Young-man. Fair Maid, quoth he, this merry morning, Present one smile to me, and be no longer ronig, Him who hath vow'd to be thine own orve, O say but to me, Our Loves shall never s O say but to me, &c. Maid Indeed Sir, quoth she, it is a misty morning, But I would have you to know I always hd ornng, And as for love, as yet I mean to smother, I know not one as yet I love better than another I know not one, &c. Young-man. True love, sweet-heart, qd. he, if e're you chance to know it, It cannot smothered be, but at last you'll show it; The first time I beheld thy sweet and comely carriage, I ever since desired that we were joyn'd in marriage: I ever since desired, &c. Maid. Love Sir, quoth she, is like a Fishers Angle, Which oft hath golden baits silly Maidens so intangle, Are cunningly cast out by young mens lasse inventions, Then marriage they'll pretend where 'tis not their inten∣tions, then marriage they'll pretend, &c. Young-man. O 'tis so, my Dear, true love is like a fountain That casts out water clear out of a Rocky Mountain, Whose stream for to stop you'll say it is a wonder, Likewise 'tis as strange to cleave the Rocks in sunder: Likewise 'tis as strange to cleave the Rocks in sunder. Such is my  to thee, and shall he No unconstant thoughts or fickle mind can My eart from the, which  be inging Fountains clear & fresh, that  is springing, Fountains clear and fresh &c. Maid. Your comparison, said she, , To stay the stream of Love it meer But your heart you compare indeed For stony t they , and stony oft  &c. As from some fountain  ar running, So many figned lovs  runing, 'Tis hard to pierce yo  heat asunder, And stop your fickle steamer, it is a wner; And stop your, &c. Young-man. Fie, fie, Sweet-heart, your wideth over-mach me, No words I can impart but presently you catch me: You Maidens now each day do grow so  and witty, Let young-men beg & pra ou'll take of them  try. Let young-men beg, &c. Maid Fie, away for shame you young-men can dissemble, Your wits are ripe, your tongues are quck and nimble, Indeed you'll beg & pray sometimes to  your pleasure, Then leave us in the lurch, & we may repent at : then leave us in the lurch, &c. Young-man. Confest it is, there's many are so minded, Bue if thou wouldst prove my Constancy thou'lt find it, Do thou but command, through danger I will enter, And for to gain thy love, through an army I would venter And for to gain thy love, &c.
I never nd  complements are slow my tongue makes me come unto the, I i not for thy  but vertue that I love thee. for y walth but ertue that I love thee Wit that a  this lovely Maid espyed, to a ban of Time, whereto she quickly hyd, she pluckt the  that was so green and ender, And up she pluckt the time with her pritty Arms so slen∣der: and up she pluckt, &c. Sh uck the  of May in Time, and did preent it Unto this  which was soon discontented; Here Sir, quoth  that you will be eased, Read but this Riddle, Sir, perhaps you may be pleased. Read but, &c. g-man. He  it from er and and deceiv'd it as a token The in a dump did std  never a word was spoken; Blusing, then at last  modestly repired, Your Riddle  can read. Love, and shall not be deed, Yor Riddle, &c. This May uck in Time, which is to me presenting, Shews that I ma in  gain your love & not contenting I may,  your time and leisure. No time Ill think too long,  last I gain the treasure, n time, &c. He took her by he ha and lovingly they walked, But tied in Cupids bands most amorously they talked, Then on each other  with interchanging kisses, O 'tis pitty time beguiled such Lovers o their blisses. O 'tis pitty, &c. Perhaps, sweet Sir, you by this Riddle reading May think you ganed me b little or no perswading, Which if you did, it is yet a my pleasure, I am not bound to you yet, but you must stay my leisure. I am not, &c. Then let this heart within this he cst lies panting, No happiness e're see, but let  be ever wanting, If e're I think an Evil thought upon thee, Let mirth be banisht quite, and sorrow wait upon me. let mirth, &c. , quoth she, thou bearest such true affection I'll agree to be rul'd by thy direction; shall sever or break our loves asunder, For loyal loving hearts will be the worlds wonder. or loyal, &c. The Time that late was mine to thee shall be presented, All that I have is thine, then rest thy self contented, Thy  wit, thy Modesty and Carriage, Hath won my heart, we will be joined in marriage. hath won, &c. Young-man. He took her at her word, and modestly replied, Short time I will afford, long time shall be denied; This being the first of May, our hearts being join'd and wedded Before the fifth day in wedlock we'll be bedded. before &c. Nine hundred pound with this maiden he obtained, On marriage day was paid, which by his wit he gained; Altho' no means he had, she never a whit repented, He was a gallant Lad, and she was well contented. he was, &c. Now all you prity Maids that live in Town or City, The Author you perswades to learn from this his ditty, If a young man you love, look not then for his treasure, For if he honest prove in him is wealth and pleasure: for if, &c. You Young-men I'll perswade to hear my motion, For if you affect a maid, regard not then her portion; Hang ten pounds, give me the Lass that loves me, If a good wife thou'st found, no Joy on Earth's above thee if a good, &c. Young-men and maids that lately went a Maying, Mack the Nightingale, one tune he's always playing, Iug, jug, jug, sweet, is all the note she singeth, As when loyal Lovers meet, no double tongues they bring e as when, &c. All you pritty Maids that are civil in your carriage, This Song is sent to you to be wary in your marriage Try before you trust, be careful in consenting, That when the knot is tied, there may be no repenting that when the knot is tied, there may be no repenting. FINIS Printed by and for Alex. Milbourn, at the Stationers-Arms in Green Arbor-Court, in the Little Old-Baily
