L3504A 11967538 51768
Lusts Dominion; OR, THE Lascivious Queen. A TRAGEDIE. Written by Christofer Marloe, Gent. LONDON, Printed for F. K. and are to be sold by Robert Pollard, at the sign of Ben. Johnsons head, on the back-side of the Old-Exchange. 1657.
The Actors Names. Eleazar the Moor, Prince of Fesse and Bar∣bary. Philip King of Spain, Father to Fernando, Philip, and Isabella. Fernando King of Spain Philip Prince of Spain Sons to Philip. Alvero a Nobleman, and Father in Law to Eleazar, and Father to Hortenzo and Maria. Mendoza the Cardinal. Christofero Roderigo two Noblemen of Spain. Hortenzo Lover to Isabella, and son to Al∣vero. Zarack, Baltazar two Moor, attending Eleazar. Cole & Crab two Friers. Emmanuel King of Portugal. Captain, Souldiers, cum aliis. Two pages attending the Queen. The Queen Mother of Spain, and wife K. Philip. Isabella the Insanta of Spain. Maria wife to Eleazar, and daughter Alvero. The Scene, SPAI
Lusts Dominion. OR, The Lascivious Queen. A TRAGEDY. Written by Christopher Marloe, Gent. LONDON: Printed for Fr. Kirkman at the John Fletchers Head over against the Angel-Inn on the backside of St. Cle∣ments without Temple-Barre, 1661.
To my worthily honored Friend William Carpenter, Esquire. SIR! MY Ambition hath long soared so high, as to prompt me to somewhat whereby I might in part render to you my gratitude: and not yet finding any service I can act for you, a sufficient or compe∣tent return of any part of those ma∣ny favours you have still honored me withall; I took on me the reso∣lution
(rather then to be thought wholly negligent of you) to lay hold on this means of rendring you my service. SIR! This Piece, which without your favour and command had never past the Presse, I here present to you with this con∣fidence, that as you were instru∣mental in its production to the world, so your name and favour will be sufficient to protect it from the calumny of this censorious age In doing of which you will multi∣ply those obligations you have con∣ferred upon Your devoted Servan FRA. KIRKMAN. Jun
Lusts Dominion; OR, THE Lascivious Queen. A TRAGEDIE. Act. Imus. Scena Ima. Enter Zaracke, Baltazar, two Moors taking tobacco musick sounding within: enter Queen Mother of Spain with two pag, Elear sitting on a chair suddenly draws the curtain. Eleaz. ON me, do's musick spend this sound on me That hate all unity: hah: Zarack Baltazar? Que. Mo. My gracious Lord. Eleaz. Are you there with your Bagles? hark you slaves,
Did not I bind you on your lives, to watch that none disturb'd us. Qu. Mo. Gentle Eleazar. Eleaz. There, off: Is't you that deass me with this noise? Exeunt 2 Moors. Queen. Why is my loves asspect so gim and horrid? Look smoothly on me: Chyme out your softest strains of harmony, And on delicious Musicks silken wings Send ravishing delight to my loves ears, That he may be enamored of your tunes. Come let's kisse. Eleaz. Away, away. Queen. No, no, saies I; and twice away saies stay: Come, come, I'le have a kiss, but if you rive For one denial you shall forfeit five. Eleaz. Nay prithee good Queen leave me, I am now sick, heavie, and dull as lead. Queen. I'le make thee lighter by taking something from thee. eaz. Do: take from mee this Ague and these fits that hanging on me Ske me in pieces, and set all my blood A boiling with the fire of rage: away, away Thou believ'st I jeast: and laugh'st, to see m wrath wear antick shapes: Be gone, be gone.
Queen. What means my love, burst all those wyres? burn all those Instruments? For they displease my Moor. Art thou now pleas'd, Or wert thou now disturb'd? I'le wage all Spain To one sweet kisse, this is some new device To make me fond and long. Oh! you men Have tricks to make poor women die for you. Eleaz. What die for me; away. Queen. Away, what way? I prithee speak more kindly; Why do'st thou frown? at whom? Eleaz. At thee. Queen. At me? Oh why at me? for each contracted frown A crooked wrinkle interlines my brow: Spend but one hour in frowns, & I shal look Like to a Beldam of one hundred years: I prithee speak to me and chide me not, I prithee chide if I have done amisse, Kiss But let my punishment be this, and this. I prithee smile on me, if but a while, Then frown on me, I'le die: I prithee smile: Smile on me, and these two wanton boies, these pretty lads that do attend on me, Shall call thee Jove, shall wait upon thy cup And fill thee Nectar: their enticing eies
Shal serve as chrystal, wherein thou maist see To dresse thy self, if thou wilt smile on me. Smile on me, and with coroners of pearle, And bells of gold, circling their pretty arms In a round Ivorie fount these two shal swim, And dive to make thee sport: Bestow one smile, one little little smile, And in a net of twisted silk and gold In my all-naked arms, thy self shalt lie. Eleaz. Why, what to do? Lusts arms do stretch so wide. That none can fill them? I'le lay there away. Queen. Where hast thou learn'd this lan∣guage? that can say No more but two rude words; away, away: Am I grown ugly now? Eleaz. Ugly as hell. Queen. Thou lovd'st me once. Eleaz. That can thy bastards tell. Qu. What is my sin? I will amend the same. Eleaz. Hence strumpet, use of sin makes thee past shame. Qu. Strumpet. Eliaz. I Strumpet. Qu. Too true 'tis, woe is me; I am a Strumpet, but made so by thee. Eleaz. By me; no, no; by these young bauds; fetch thee a glasse And thou shalt see the bals of both thine eies Burning in fire of lust; by me? there's here
Within this hollow ciern of thy breast A spring of hot blood: have not I to cool it Made an xaction to the quintessence Even of my soul: melted all my spirits, Ravish'd my youth, deflour'd my lovely cheeks. And dried this, this to anatomy Only to feed your lust, (these boies have ears): Yet wouldst thou murther me. Queen. I murder thee? Eleaz. I cannot ride through the Castilian streets But thousand eies through windows, and through doors Throw killing looks at me, and every flave At Eleazar dars a finger out, And every hissing tongue cries, There's the Moor, That's he that makes a Cuckold o our King, there go's the Minion of the Spanish Queen; That's the black Prince of Divels, there go's hee That on smooth boies, on Masks and Re∣vellings Spends the Revenues of the King of Spain. Who arms this many headed beast but you, Murder & Lust are twins, and both are thine; Being weary of me thou wouldst worry me,
Because some new love makes thee loath thine old. Qu. Eleazar! Eleaz. Harlot! I'le not hear thee speak. Queen. I'le kill my self unless thou hear'st me speak. My husband King upon his death-bed lies, Yet have I stolne from him to look on thee; A Queen hath made her self thy Concubine: Yet do'st thou now abhor me, hear me speak! Else shall my sons plague thy adult'rous wrongs, And read upon thy heart for murd'ring me, Thy tongue hath murd'red me (Cry mur∣der boyes) 2 Boies Murder! the Queen's murd'red! Eleaz. Love? slaves peace? 2 Boies Murder! the Queen's murd'red! Eleaz. Stop your throats? Hark Hush you Squales; Dear love look up: Our Chamber window stares into the Court, And every wide mouth'd ear, hearing this news Will give Alarum to the cuckold King. I did dissemble when I chid my love, And that dissembling was to try my love Queen Thou call'dst me strumpe. Eleaz. I'le tear out my tongue From this black temple for blaspheming
thee. Queen And when I woo'd thee but to smile on me, Thou cri'dst, away, away, and frown'dst up∣on mee. Eleaz. Come now I'le kiss thee, now I'le smile upon thee; Call to thy ashy cheeks their wonted red: Come frown not, pout not, smile, smile, but upon me And with my poniard will I stab my flesh, And qaffe carrowses to thee of my blood, Whil'st in moist Nectar kisses thou do'st pledge me. How now, why star'st thou thus? Knock, Enter Zarack. Zarack. The King is dead. Eleaz. Ha! dead! you hear this, is't true, is't true, the King dead! Who dare knock thus? Zarack. It is the Cardinall, making in∣quiry if the Qeen were here. Eleaz. See? shee's here, tell him? and yet Zarack stay.
Enter Baltazar. Baltaz. Don Roderigo's come to seek the Queen. Eleaz. Why should Roderigo seek her here? Baltaz. The King hath swounded thrice, and being recovered, Sends up and down the Court, to seek her grace. Eleaz. The King was dead with you; Run? and with a voice. Erected high as mine, say thus, thus threaten To Roderigo and the Cardinall. Seek no Queens here, I'le broach them if they do, Upon my falchions point. Again more knocking! Knock again Zarack. Your father is at hand, my Gra∣cious Lord. Eleaz. Lock all the chambers, bar him out you apes. Hither, a vengeance; stir Eugenia, You know your old walk under ground, away. So down hye to the King, quick, quick, you Squalls Crawle with your Dam, i'ch dark, dear love farewell,
One day I hope to shutt you up in hell. Eleazar shuts them in. Act. Imus. Scena IIda. Enter Alvero. Alvero. SOn Eleazar, saw you not the Queen? Eleaz Hah! Alvero. Was not the Queen here with you? Eleaz. Queen with mee; because my Lord I'me married to your daughter: You (like your daughter) will grow Jealous, The Queen with me, with me, a Moore, a Devll, A slave of Barbary, a dog; for so Your silken Courtiers christen me, but father Although my flesh be tawny, in my veines, Runs blood as red, and royal as the best And proud'st in Spain, there do'es old man: my father, Who with his Empire, lost his life, And left me Captive to a Spanish Tyrant, Oh! Go tell him! Spanish Tyrant? tell him, do? He that can loose a kingdom and not rave, He's a tame jade, I am not, tell old Philip
I call him Tyrant here's a sword & arm, A heart, a head, and so pish, 'tis but death: Old fellow shee's not here. But ere I dye, Sword I'le bequeath thee a rich legacy. Alvero Watch fitter hours to think on wrongs then now, Deaths frozen hand hold's Royal Philip's heart, Halfe of his body lies within a grave; Then do not now by quarrells shake that state, Which is already too much ruinate. Come and take leave of him before he dye. Exit. Eleaz. I'le follow you, now purple villany; Sit like a Roab imperiall on my back, That under thee I closelyer may contrive My vengence; foul deeds hid do sweetly thrive: Mischief erect thy throne and sit in state Here, here upon this head; let fools fear fate. Thus I defie my starr, I care not I How low I tumble down, so I mount high. Old time I'le wait bae-headed at thy heel, and be a foot-boy to thy winged hours; They shall not tell one Minute out in sands, But I'le set down the number, Ie stil wake, And wast these bals of sight by tossing them; In bue observations upon thee.
Sweet opportunity I'le bind my self to thee in base apprentice-hood so long, Till on thy naked scalp grow hair as thick As mine: & all hands shal lay hold on thee, If thou wilt lend me but thy rusty sithe, To cut down all that stand within my wrongs, And my revenge. Love dance in twenty formes Upon my beauty, that this Spanish dame May be bewitch'd, and doat, her amorous flames Shall blow up the old King. Consume his Sons, And make all Spain a bonefire. This Tragedie beeing acted hers does begin, To shed a harlots blood can be no sin. Exit.
Act. Imus. Scena 3ti•. The Courtains being drawn there appears in his bed King Phillip, with his Lords, the Prin∣cesse Isabella, at the feet Mendoza, Al∣vero, Hortensio, Fernando, Roderi∣go, and to them Enter Queen in hast. ueen. WHose was that Screech-Owls voic, that like the sound Of a hel tortur'd soul rung through mine ears Nothing but horrid shreiks, nothing but death? Whil'st I, vailing my knees to the cold earth, Dwning my withered cheeks in my warm tears, And stretching out my arms to pull from heaven Health for the Royal Majestie of Spain, All cry'd, The Majestie of Spain is dead: That last word [dead] struck through the ecchoing air, Rebounded on my heart, and inote me down reathlesse to the cold earth, and made me leave
My praiers for Philips life, but thanks to heaven I see him live, and lives I hope to see Unnumbred years to guide this Empery. K. Phil. The number of my years ends in one day, E're this Sun's down all a King's glory sets, For all our lives are but deaths countereits. Father Mendoza and you Peers of Spain, Dry your wet eies, r sorrow wanteth force T'inspire a breathing soul in a dead coarse; Such is your King: Where's Isabel our Daughter? Mendo. At your beds-seet consounded in her tears. K. Phil. She of your grief the heaviest bur∣then bears; You can but lose a King, but she a Father. Queen. She bear the heaviest burhen; Oh say rather I bear, and am born down, my sorrowing Is for a husbands losse, losse of a King. K. Phil. No more, Alvere call the Princess hiher. Alvero. Madam, his Majestie doth call for you. K. Ph. Come hither Isabella, reach a hand; Yet now it shall not need, in stead of thine Death shoving hee back claspe his hands in mine,
And bids me come away, I must, I must; Though Kings be gods on earth, they turn to dust. Is not Prince Philip come from Portugal? Roder. The Prince as yet is not return'd, my Lord. K. Ph. Commend me to him, if I ne're be∣hold him: This tells the order of my funeral, Do it as 'tis set down? Embalm my body; Though worms do make no difference of flesh; Yet Kings are curious here to dig their graves, Such is man's frailty; when I am embalm'd, Apparel me in a rich Roial Robe, According to the custome of the Land; Then place my bones within that brazen shrine Which death hath builded for my ancestors: I cannot name death, but he strait steps in, And pulls me by the arm. Fern. His Grace doth faint: help me my Lords softly to raise him up. Enter Eleazar, and stands sadly by. K. Phil. Lift me not up, I shortly must go down, When a few dribling minutes have run out; Mine hur is ended: King of Spain farewell:
You all acknowledg him your Soveraign. All. When you are dead we will acknow∣ledg him. K. Phil. Govern this kingdom well: to be a King Is given to many: but to govern well Granted to few: have care to Isabel, Her virtue was King Philips looking-glasse. Reverence the Queen your mother. Love your sister, And the young Prince your brother; even that day When Spain shall solemnize my Obsequies, And lay me up in earth; let them crown you. Where's Eleazar, Don Alvero's son? Fernand. Yonder with crost arms stands he malecontent. K. Phil. I do commend him to thee for a man Both wise and warlike, yet beware of him, Ambition wings his spirit, keep him down; What wil not men attempt to win a crown. Mendoza is Protector of thy Realm, I did elect him for his gravity, I trust hee'l be a father to thy youth: Call help Fernando, now I saint indeed. Fern. My Lords. K. Phil. Let none with a distracted voice
Shreik out, and trouble me in my departure: Heavens hands I see are beckning for my soul; I come, I come; thus do the proudest die, Death hath no mercy, life no certainty. Mendo. As yet his soul's not from her temple gone. Therefore forbear loud lamentation. Queen. M. Oh he is dead, hee's dead! la∣ment and die, In her King's end begins Spains misry Isa He shall not end so soon; Father, dear Father! Fern. Forbear sweet Isabella, shreiks are vain. Isa. You crie forbear, you by his losse of breath Have won a kingdom, you may cry forbear: But I have lost a Father, and a King; And no tongue shal controul my sorrowing. Horten. Whither, gd Isabella? Isa. I will go, Where I will languish in eternal wo. Horten. Nay, gentle Love. Isa. Talk not of love to me. The world and the Wolds pride henceforth I'le scorn. Exit. Hort. My love shall follow thee, if thou deny'st To live with poor Hortenzo as his wife;
I'le never change my love, but change my life. Enter Philip Hastily. Phillip. I know he is not dead, I know proud Death Durst not behold such sacred majesty. Why stand you thus distracted? Mother, Brother, My Lord Mendoza, where's my Royal father? Qu. Here lyes the temple of his Royall soul. Fernan. Here's all that's left of Philips Majesty. Wash you his tombe with tears; Fernandoes mone, Hating a Partner, shall be spent alone. Exit. Phil. Oh happy father, miseble Sonne! Philip is gone to Joy Philip's forlorn: He dies to live; my life with woe is torn. Qu. Sweet sonne. Phil. Sweet mother: oh! how I now do shame To lay on one so foul so fair a name: Had you been a true mother, a true wife, This King had not so soon been robb'd of life. Qu. What means this rage, my sonne? Phil. Call not me your sonne:
My father whil he liv'd tyr'd his strong armes In bearing christian armour, gainst the Turk's And spent his brains in warlike straagems To bring Confusion on damn'd Infidels; Whil'st you that snorted here at home be∣traid His name to everlasting Infamy; Whilst you at home suffered his bed-cham∣ber To be a Brothelry, whilst you at home Suffered his Queen to be a Concubine; And wanton red cheekt boy's to be her bawds Whilst shee reeking in that leachers armes. Eleaz. Me! Phil. Villaine 'tis thee, thou hel-begotten fiend at thee I stare. Qu. Philip thou art a villain to disho∣nour me. Phil. Mother I am no villain; 'tis this villain Dishonours you and me, dishonours Spain, Dishonours all these Lords, this Divell is he, that— Eleaz. What! Oh pardon me I must throw off All chains of duty: wert thou ten Kings sons, Had I as many soules as I have sins: As this from hence, so they from this should fly;
In just revenge of this Indignity. Phil. Give way, or I'le make way upon your bosoms. Eleazer. Did my dear Soveraigne live, sirrha that tongue. Queen. Did but King Philip live, traytor I'de tell,— Phil. A tale, that should rid both your soules to hell. Tell Philip's ghost, that Philip tells his Queen, That Philip's Queen is a Moor'sConcubine: Did the King live I'de tell him how you two, Rip't up the entrails of his treasury: With Masques and antick Revellings. Eleaz. Words insupportable; do'st hear me boy? Que. Stand you all still, and see me thus trod down. Phil. Stand you all still, yet let this divell stand here. Mendo Forbear sweet Prince; Eleazar, I am now Protector to Fernando King of Spain: y that authority and by consent Of all these peers, I uterly deprive thee Of all those Royalties thou hold'st in Spain, Qu. M. Cardinall, who lends thee this Commission?
Ele. Cardinall, i'le shorten thee by th head for this. Phil Forward my Lord Mendoza, damn the feind: Eleaz. Princes of Spain, consent you to this pride? All. wee doe. Qu. For what cause? let his faith be try'd Men. His treasons needs no tryal, they're too plain; Come not within the Court, for if you do, To beg with Indian slaves I'le banish you. all, but Alvero, Queen, and Ele Act. I. Scena IV. Alvero. WHy should my sonne be ba∣nished? Enter Maria Qu. Of that dispute not now Alvero, I'le to the King my sonne, it shall be try'd If Castiles King can cool a Cardinall's pride. Exeunt Queen and Alvero. Eleaz. If I disgest this Gall; Oh! my Maria: I am whipt, and rackt, and torn upon the wheel Of giddy fortune: She and her Minions Have got me down; and treading on my bo∣some.
They cr, lye still: the Cardinal (Oh! rare) would bandy me away from Spain, And banish me to beg; I, beg with slaves. Maria. Conquer wih patience these in∣dignityes. Eleaz. Patience; ha, ha: yes, yes: an honest Cardinall. Ma. Yet smoher the grief & seek revenge. Eleaz. Hah! banish me, s'foot, why say hey do; Ther's Portugal a good air, & France a fine Country; Or Barbary rich, and has Moors; the Turke Pure Divell, and allowes enough to fat The sides of villany; good living there: I can live there, and there, and there, Troth 'tis, a villain can live any where: But say I goe from hence, I leave behind me A Cardinall, that will laugh, I leave behind me A Philip, that will clap his hands for joy; And dance levaltoes through the Castile Court. But the deep'st wound of all is this, I leave My wrongs, dishonours, and my discontents, Oh! unrevenged; my bed-rid enemies Shal never be rais'd up by the strong Physical,
Curing of my sword, therefore stay still; Many have hearts to strike, that dare not kil Leave me Maria: Cardinall, this disgrace, Shall dye thy soule, as Inky as my face: Pish, hence Maria. Enter Alvero Maria. To the King I'le fly. He shall reveng my Lord's indignity. Exit. Alve. Mendoza woo's the King to bani thee; Startle thy wonted spirits, awake thy sou And on thy resolution fasten wings, Whose golden feathers may out-strip thei hate, Eleaz. I'le tye no golden fethers to my wings. Alvero. Shall they thus tread thee dow which once were glad, To Lacquey by thy conquering Chari wheeles. Eleaz. I care not, I can swallow mo sower wrongs: Alve. If they triumph o're thee; they spurn me down. Eleaz. Look, spurn again. Alve. what Ice hath coold that fire, Which sometimes made thy thoughts heaven aspire; This patience had not wont to dwell wi thee:
Enter. Fernando & Maria. Eleaz. 'Tis right, but now the World's chang'd you see; Though I seem dead to you, here lives a fire, No more, here comes the King, & my Maria; The Spaniard loves my wife, she swears to me, Shee's chast as the white Moon, well if she be. Well too if shee be not, I care not, I, I'le climb up by that love to dignitye. Fernan. Thou woo'st me to revenge thy husbands wrong, I woo thy fair self not to wrong thy self; Swear but to love me, and to thee I'le swear To crown thy husband with a diadem. Maria. Such love as I dare yeeld, I'le not deny. Fernan. When in the golden armes of Ma∣jesty. I am broke off; yonder thy husband stands, I'le set him free, if thou nite my bands, Soe much for that. Durst then the Card'nall, Put on such insolence; tell me fair Madam, Wher'es your most Valiant Husband? Eleaz. He see's me, and yet inquires for me. Maria. Yonder's my Lord. Fernan. Eleazar I have in my brest wri down
From her Report your late receiv'd disgrace: My father lov'd you dearly, so will I. Eliaz. True, for my wife's sake. aside. Fernan. This Indignitye will I have In∣terest in for being your King, You shall perceive I'le curbe my underling: This morning is our Coronation And father's funerall solemnized, Be present, step into your wonted place; ee'l guild your dim disgraces with our grace. Exeunt. Eleaz. I thank my Soveraign that you love my wife; I thank thee wife that thou wilt lock my head In such strong armour, to bear off all blows; Who dare say such wives are their husband foes: Let's see now, by her falling I must rise. Cardinal you die, if the King bid me live; Philip you die for railing at me: proud Lord you die, That with Mendoza cry'd, Banish the Moor And you my loving Liege, you're best it sa If all these live not, you must die at last. The end of the first Act.
Act. II. Scena. I. Enter two Lords, Philip his brother, Mendo∣za, Eleazar with him, the King Crown'd, Queen mother, Alvero, Zarack, Baltazar, and attendants. Mend. WHy stares this Divell thus, as if pale death Had made his eyes the dreadfull messengers To carry black destruction to the world. Was hee not banisht Spain? Phil. Your sacred mouth, pronoune'd the sentence of his banishment: Then spurn the villain forth. Eleaz. Who spurns the Moor, were better set his foot upon the Devill, Do; spurn me? and this confounding arm of wrath Shal like a thunderbolt breaking the clouds Divide his body from his soul. Stand back. Spurn Eleazar? Rode. Shall wee bear his pride. Alve. Why not, he under went much Injurie,
Mendo. What injury have we perform'd proud Lord? Eleaz. Proud Cardinall; my unjust ba∣nishment. Mendo. 'Twas wee that did it; and our words are laws. King 'Twas wee repeal'd him, and our words are laws. Zara. Baltaz. If not these are. All the Moors draw Phil. How! threatned and out-dar'd? King Shal we give arm to hostile violence? Sheath your sword, sheath them, it's wee command. Eleaz. Grant Eleaz. justice my dread Leige Mendo. Eleazar hath had justice from our hands, And he stands banish'd from the Court o Spain, King Have you done justice? why Lor Cardinall, From whom do you derive authority, To banish him the Court without our leav Mendo. From this, the Staffe of our Pro; From this, which the last will of your dea Father Committed to our trust: from this hig place
Which lifts Mendoza's spirits beyond the pitch Of ordinary honour, and from this. King Which too much over-weening Insolence Hath quite ta'ne from you, Eleazar up, takes the staff from Mendoza and gives it to Eleaz. And from us sway this Staffe of Regency. All. How's this? Phil. Dare sons presume to break their fathers will? King Dare Subjects counter-check their Soveraigns will? 'Tis done, and who gainsaies it is a Traitor. Phil. I do Fernando, yet I am no Traitor. Mendo. Fernando I am wrong'd by Peters Chair, Mendoza vows revenge. I'le lay afide My Cardinals hat, and in a wall of steel The glorious livery of a souldier; fight for my late lost honour King Cardinall. Mend. King, thou shalt be no King for wronging me. The Pope shall send his bulls through all thy Realm, And pul obedience from thy Subjects hearts, To put on armour of the Mother Church, Curses shal fal like lightnings on your heads:
Bell, book and candle, holy water, praiers, Shalallchim vengeance to the of Court Spain Till they have power to conjure down that feind; That damned Moor, that Devil, that Lucifer, That dares aspire the staffe, the Card'nall swaid. Eleaz. Ha ha ha, I laugh yet, that the Cardinall's vxt. Phil. Laughts thou base slave, the wrin∣ckles of that scorn Thine own heart blood shall fill; Brother farewell, Since you disprove the will our father left, For base lust of a loathed Concubine. Eleaz. Ha, Concubine; who does Prince Philip mean? Phil. Thy wife, thy daughter, base aspi∣ring Lords, Who to buy honour, are content to sell, Your names to infamy, your souls to hell: And stamp you now? do, do, for you shal see, I go for vengeance, and she'l com with me. Eliaz. Stay, for she's here already, see proud boy. They both draw. Q. Mo. Hold, stay this fury, if you long for blood, Murder me first. Dear son you are a King: Then stay the violent tempest of their wrath.
King. Shall Kings be overswaid in their desires? Roderi. Shall Subjects be opress'd by tyranny? Q. Mother. No State shall suffer wrong, then hear mee speak, Mendo, you have sworn you love the Queen, Then by that love I charge you leave these arms: Eliaz. for those favours I have given you, Embrace the Cardinall, and be friends with him. Eliaz. And have my wife call'd strumpet to my face. Qu. Mo. 'Twas rage made his tongue erre, do you not know The violent love Mendoza bears the Queen: Then speak him fair, for inthathonied breath I'le lay a bait shall train him to his death. Come, come, I see your looks give way to peace; Lord Cardinall begin, and for reward, Ere this fair setting Sun behold his bride; Be bold to challenge love, yet be deni'd Aside. Mendoz. That promise makes me yeild; my gracious Lord: Although my disgrace hath graven its me∣mory
On every Spaniards eye, yet shall the dty I owe your sacred Highness; and the love My Country challengeth, make me lay by Hostile intendments, and return again To the fair circle of obedience. King Both pardon and our favour bids you welcome, And for some satisfaction for your wrongs, We here create you Salamanka's Duke, But first as a true signe all grudges dye; Shake hands with Eleazar and be friends; This union pleaseth us, now brother Philip, You are included in this league of love, So is Roderigo to forget all wrongs: Your Castle for a while shall bid us welcom, Eleazar shall it not? It is enough, Lords lead the way, that whil'st you feast your selves, Fernando may find time all means to prove, To compasse fair Maria for our love. Exeunt Omnes. Act. II. Scena II. Enter Queen Mother, and Eleazar. Eleaz. MAdam a word now, have you wit or spirit? Qu. Mother. Both.
Eleaz. Set them both to a most gainfull task, Our enemies are in my Castle-work. Qu. Mother. I; but the King's there too, it's dangerous pride, To strike at those; that couch by a Lyons side. Eleaz. Remove them: Qu. Mother. How? Eleaz. How? a thousand ways; By poison, or by this, but every groom Has skill in such base traffick; no our pol∣licies Must look more strange, must flie with lof∣tier wings: Venge ance the higher it falls, more horror brings: But you are cold, you dare not do. Qu. Mother. I dare. Eleaz. You have a womans heart, look you this hand, Oh! 'tis too little to strike home. Qu. Mother. At whom? Eleaz. Your son. Qu. Mother. Which son, the King? Eleaz. Angels of heaven, stand lik his guard about him, how? the King Not for so many worlds as here be stars, Sticking upon th'imbroidred firmament.
The King? he loves my wife and should he die; I know none els would love her, let him live. (in heaven) good Lord Philip. Aside Queen Mother He shall die. Eleaz. How? good good. Qu. Mo. By this hand. Eleaz. When, good good; when? Qu. M. This night if Eleazer give consent; El. Why then this night Philip shal notlive, To see you kill him. Is he not your son? A mother be the murd'rer of a brat, That liv'd within her; hah! Qu. Mother 'Tis for thy sake. Eleaz. Puh! What excuses cannot dam'd sin make To save it self, I know you love him wel, But that he has an eye, an eye, an eye, To others our two hearts seem to be lock'd Up in a case of steel, upon our love others Dare not look, or if they dare, they cast Squint purblind glances; who care though all see all, So long as none dare speak, but, Philip Knows that the Iron ribs of our villains Are thin: Hee laughs to see them like this hand, With chinks, and crevises, how a villanous eye,
A stabbing desperate tongue, the boy dare speak, A mouth, a villanous mouth, lets muzzle him. Qu. Mo. How? Ele. Thus. Go you, and with a face well set do In good sad colours; such as paint out The cheek of that fool penitence, and with a tongue Made clean and glib, Cull from their lazy swarm; Some honest Friers, whom that damnation gold, Can tempt to lay their souls to 'th stake; Seek such, they are rank and thick. Qu. Mo. What then, I know such, what's the use? Eleaz. This is excellent. Hire these to write books, preach and pro∣claim aboad, That your son Philip is a bastard. Qu. Mo. How? Eleaz. A bastard; do you; know a bastard? doo't; Say conscience spake with you, and cry'd out, doo't By this means shall you thrust him from all hopes
Of wearing Castiles diadem, and that spur Galling his sides, he will flye out, and fling, And grind the Cardinals heart to a new edg Of discontent, from discontent grows treason, And on the stalk of treason death: he's dead By this blow, and by you; yet no blood shed. Doo't then; by this trick, he gon! We stand more sure in climbing high; Care not who fall 'tis reall policie: Are you arm'd to do this? hah! Queen Mo. Sweet Moor it's done. Eleaz. Away then, work with boldness, and with speed; On greatest actions greatest dangers feed. Ezit Qu. Mother. Ha, ha, I thank thee provident creation, That seeing in moulding me thou did'st in∣tend, I should prove villain, thanks to thee and nature That skilful workman; thanks for my face, Thanks that I have not wit to blush. What Zarack? ho Baltazar. Enter the two Moors.
Both. my Lord. Eleaz. Nearer, so silence; Hang both your greedy ears upon my lips, Let them devour my speech, suck in my breath; And in who lets it break prison, here's his death, This night the Card'nall shall be murd'red. Both. Where? Ele. And to fill up a grave Philip dies: Both. Where? Ele. Here. Both. By whom? Ele. By thee; and slave by thee: Have you hearts and hands to execute? Both. Here's both. 1 Moor. He dies were he my father. Ele. Ho away? Stay, go, go, stay, see me no more till night; Your cheeks are black, let not your souls look white: Both. Till night. Eleaz. Till night, a word, the Mo Qu. Is trying if she can with fire of gold, Warpe the green consciences of two co∣vetous Friers, To preach abroad Philip's bastardy. 1 Moor. His bastardy, who was his father? Eleazar. Who?
Search for these friers, hire them to work with you; Their holy callings will approve the fact. Most good and meritorious; sin shines clear, When her black face Religions masque doth wear. Aside. Here comes the Queen, good; and the Friers. Act. II. Scena. III. Enter two Friers, Crab and Cole; and Queen Mother. Cole. YOur son a bastard; say we do, But how then shall we deal with you? I tell you as I said before; His being a bastard, you are so poor In honour and in name, that time Can never take away the crime. Qu. Mo. I grant that Frier, yet rather I'le endure The wound of infamy, to kill my name, Then to see Spain bleeding, with civil swords The boy is proud, ambitious, he woo's great∣nesse, takes up Spanish hearts on trust, to pay them
When he shall finger Castiles Crown: Oh then Were it not better my disgrace were known, Then such a base aspirer fill the Throne. Cole. Ha brother Crab, what think you? Crab. As you dear brother Cole: Cole. Then wee agree, Coles Judgment is as Crabs you see. Lady we swear to speak and write, What you please so all go right. Queen. Mo. Then as wee gave directions, spread abroad, In Cales, Madrid, Granado, and Medyna; And all the Royall Cities of the Realm: Th' ambitious hopes of that proud bastard Philip, And somtimes as you see occafion, Tickle the ears of the Rude multitude, With Eleazars praises; guild his virtues, Naples recovery and his victories Atchieved against the Tutkish Ottoman: Will you do this for us? Eleaz. Say will you? Both I. Eleaz. Why start you back and stare? ha? are you afraid. Cole Oh? no Sir, no, but truth to tell; Seeing your face, we thought of hell. Eleaz. Hell is adream.
Cole. But none do dream in hell. Eleaz. Friers stand to her; and me; and by your sin, I'le shoulder out Mendoza from his seat; And of two Friers create you Cardinalls, Oh! how would Cardinalls hats on these heads sit. Cole. This face would look most goodly under it: Frier, Crab and Cole do swear, In those circles still to appear: In which she, or you, do charge us rise; For you, our lives wee'l sacrifice. Valete, Gaudete; Sipereamus flete; Orate pro nobis, Oramus pro vobis. Cole will be burnt, and Crab be prest; Ere they prove knaves, thus areyoucrost and blest. Exeunt Frters. Eleaz, Away; you know now Madam none shall throw Their laden envie in an opposite scale, To weigh down our true golden happiness. Queen Mo. Yes, there is one. Eleaz. One, who? give mee his name and I will
Turn it to a magick spell, To bind him here, here, who? Queen Mo. Your wife Maria. Eleaz. Hah! my Maria. Qu. Mo. She's th' Hellespont divides my love and me, Shee being cut off. Eleaz. Stay, stay, cut off; let's think upon't, my wife? Humh! Kill her too! Qu. Mo. Do's her love make thee cold? Eleaz. Had I a thousand wives, down go they all: She dies, I'le cut her off: now Baltazar. Enter Baltazar. Baltaz. Madam, the King intreats your company. Qu. Mo. His pleasure be obey'd, dear love farewell; Remember your Maria. Exit Qu. Mo. Eleaz. Here a dieu; With this I'le guard her, whil'st it stabs at you. Balt. My Lord! the Friers are won to joine with us. Eliaz. Be prosperous about it Baltazzar. Balt. The watch word. Eleaz. Oh! the word let it be treason;
When we cry treason, break ope chamber doors: Kill Phillip and the Cardinall; Hence Balt. I fly. Exit. Eleaz. Murder, now ride in triumph, darknesse, horror; Thus I invoke your aid, your Act begin; Night is a glorious Roab, for th'ugliest fin. Exit. Act. II. Scena. IV. Enter Cole and Crab in Trouses, the Car∣dinall in one of their weeds, and Philip putting on the other. Both Friers. PUt on my Lord, and flye or else you die. Phil. I will not, I will die first; Cardinall, Prithe good Cardinal pluck off, Eriers, slave, Murder us two, he shall not by this sword. Car. My Lord, you will endanger both ou lives. Phil. I care not; I'le kill some bfeore I die: Away, s'heart take your raggs; Moor, Devill, come. 2. Friers. My Lord put on, or else.
Phil Gods foot come help: Card. Ambitious villain. Philip, let us fly Into the chamber of the Mother Queen. Phil. Thunder, beat down the lodgings. Card. Else let's break into the chamber of the King: Phillip. Agreed, A pox upon those Iowzy gaberdines, Agreed, I am for you Moor; stand side by side, Come, hands off, leave your ducking, hell cannot fright, Their spirits that do desperately fight. Cole You are too rash, you are too hot, Wild desperateness doth valour blot; The lodging of the Kings beset, With staring faces black as Jett, And hearts of Iron, your deaths are vow'd If you fly that way, therefore shrow'd, Your body in Frier Coles gray weed, For is't not madnesse man to bleed: When you may scape untouch'd away, Here's hell, here's heaven, here if you stay You're gon, you're gon, Frier Crab and I, Will here dance friskin whilst you flie: Gag us, bind u, come put on The Gags too wide, so gon, gon, gon. Phil. Oh! well, I'le come again, Lord Cardinall Take you your Castle, I'le to Portugall:
I vow I'le come again, and if I do: Card. Nay good my Lord! Phil. Black Devill I'le conjure you. Exeunt Act. II. Scena. V. To the Friers king a noise, gagg'd and bound, Enter Eleazar, Zarack, Baltazar, and other Moors, all with their Swords drawn. Eleazar. GUard all the paages, Zarack stand there, There Baltazar, there you, the Friers, Where have you plac'd the Friers? Alvero. My Lord a noise. Baltaz. The Friers are gagg'd and bound. Eleaz. 'Tis Phil. and the Cardinal, shoot; hah stay! Unbind them; where's Mendoza, and the Prince. Cole. Sancta Maria who can tell: By Peters keys they bound us well, And having crack'd our shaven crowns, They have escap'd you in our gowns. Eleaz. Escap'd; escap'd away? I am glad, it's good,
I would their arms may turn to Eagles wings, To flye us swift, as time sweet air give way, Winds leave your two and thirty pallaces, And meeting all in one, join all your might, To give them speedy and a prosperousflight, Escap'd Friers, which way? Both. This way. Eleaz. Good: Alas; what sin is't to shed innocent blood; For look you holy men, it is the King; The King, the King, see Friers sulphury wrath Having once entred into Royall brests: Mark how it burns, the Qu. Philip's mother; Oh! most unnaturall, will have you two Divulge abroad that hee's a bastard. Oh! Will you doo't. Crab. What says my brother Fer? Cole. A Princes love is balm, their wrath a fire: Crab. 'Tis true, but yer I'le publish no such thing; What fool would lose his soul, to please a King? Eleaz. Keep there, good there, yet for it wounds my soul, To see the miserablest wretch to bleed. I counsell you (in care unto your lives)
T'obey the mother Queen, for by my life I thinke shee has been prick'd, her consci∣ence Oh! it has stung her, for some fact mis∣don, She would not else disgrace her selfe and son Doo't therefore, harke, shee'l work your deaths else, hate Bred in a woman is insatiate. Doo't Friers. Crab. Brother Cole? Zeal sets me in a flame, I'le doo't. Cole. And I, His basenesse wee'l proclaim Exeunt Friers. Eleaz. Do, and be damn'd; Zarack and Baltazar. Dog them at th' hee'ls, and when their poi∣sonous breath Hath scattered this infection, on the hearts Of credulous Spaniards, here reward them thus, Slaves too much trusted do grow danger∣ous; Why this shall feed, And fat suspition, and my pollicy I'le ring through all the Court, this loud alarum:
That they contriv'd the murder of the King, The Qu. and me; and being undermin'd, To scapethe blowing up, they fled. Oh good! There, there, thou there, cry treason; each one take A severall door, your cries my musick make. Balt. Where's the King? treason persues him: Enter Alvero in his shirt, his sword drawn. Ele. Where's the sleepy Qu. Rise, rise, and arm, against the hand of treason. Alv. Whence comes this sound of treason? King. Who frights our quiet slumbers, Enter King in his shirt, his sword drawn. With this heavy noise: Qu. Mo. Was it a dream? or did the sound Enter Queen in her night attire. Of monster treason call me from my rest. King. Who rais'd this rumour Eleaz. you? Eleaz. I did my Liege, and still con∣tinue it, Both for your safety, and mine own discharge. King. Whence coms the ground then? Eleaz. from the Cardinall, And the young Prince, who bearing in his mind The true Idea of his late disgrace,
In putting him from the Protectorship, And envying the advancment of the Moor Determined this night to murder you; And for your Highnesse lodg'd within my Castle, They would have laid the murder on my head. King. The Cardinall, and my Brother bring them forth Their lives shall answer this ambitious practice. Eleaz. Alas my Lord it is impossible, For when they saw I had discovered them They train'd two harmlesse Friers to their lodgings; Disrob'd them, gagg'd them, bound'em  two posts, And in their habits did escape the Castle. King. That Cardinall, is all ambition, And from him doth our Brother gather heart. Que. Mo. Th' ambition of th' one in∣fects the other, And in a word they both are dangerous; But might your mothers counsell stand force, I would advise you send the trusty M To fetch them back, before they had seduc
The squint ey'd multude from true alle∣giance, And drawn them to their dangerous faction. King. It shall be so, therefore my States best prop, Within whose bosome I durst trust my life, Both for my safety and thine own discharge. Fetch back those traitors, and till your re∣turn Our self will keep your Castle. Eleaz. My Leige; the tongue of true obe∣dience Most not gainsay his Soveraigns impose, By heaven; I will not kiss the cheek of sleep, Till I have fetch'd those traitors to the Court. King. Why; this sorts right, he gon; his beauteous wife Shall sail into the naked arms of love. Qu. Mo. Why, this is as it should bee, he once gon, His wife that keeps me from his marriage bed, Shall by this hand of mine be muthered. King. This storm is well nigh past the swelling clouds, That hang so full of treason by the wind, In awfull Majestie are scatt'red.
Then each man to his rest; good night sweet friend, Whil'st thou persu'st the traitors that are fled, Fernando means to warm thy marriage bed. Exit Ele. Many good nights, consume and dam your souls. I know he means to Cuckold mee thi night; Yet do I know no means to hinder it. Besides, who know, whether the lustful King Having my wife and Castle at command, Will ever make surrender back again: But if he do not, with my falchions point I'le lance those swelling veins in which ho lust Does keep his Revels, and with that warm blood Where Venus's bastard coold his sweltrin spleen, Wash the disgrace from Eleazars brows.
Act. II. Scena. VI. Enter Maria. Maria. DEar Eleazar; Ele. If they lock the gates I'le tosse a ball of wild-fire o're the walls. Maria. Husband, sweet husband: Eleaz. Or else swim o're the moat, And make a breach through the inty sides Of the rebellious walls: Maria. Hear me, dear heart. Eleaz. Or undermine the chamber where they lie, And by the violent strength of gunpowder, Blow up the Castle, and th' incetious couch, In which lust wallows; but my labouring thoughts, Wading too deep in bottomless extreams; Do drown themselvs in their own strata∣gems. Maria. Sweet husband! dwell not upon circumstance, When weeping sorrow like an Advocate Importunes you for aid; look in mine eyes There you shall see dim grief swimming in tears,
Invocating succor. Oh succor! Eleaz. Succor. Zounds for what? Maria. To shield me from Fernando's un∣chast love, Who with uncessant praiers importun'd me. Eleaz. To lie with you I know't. Maria. Then seek some means how to prevent it. Eleaz. 'Tis possible; for to the end that his unbridled lust Might have more free accesse unto thy bed, This night he hath enjoined me To fetch back Philip and the Cardinall. Maria. Then this ensuing night shall give an end To all my sorrows, for before foul lust Shall soil the fair complexion of mine ho∣nour, This hand shall rob Maria of her life. Eleaz. Not so dear soul, for in extre∣mities Choose out the least, and ere the hand of death Should suck this Ivorie pallace of thy life: Imbrace my counsell, and receive this poison Which in the instant he attempts thy love, Then give it him: do, do, Do pon him, he gon, thou'rt next;
Be sound in resolution; and farewell; By one, and one, I'le ship you all to hell. Spain I will drown thee with thine own proud blood, Then make an ark of carcasses farewell. Revenge and I will sail in blood to hell. Exit. Maria. Poison the King, Alas my trem∣bling hand Would let the poison fall, and through my cheeks Fear suted in a bloodless livery, Would make the world acquainted with my guilt, But thanks prevention, I have found a means Both to preserve my Royall Soveraignes life, And keep my self a true and Loyall wife. Exit. The end of the second Act.
Act. III. Scena I. Enter Queen Mother, with a Torch, solus. Qu. Mo. FAir eldest child of love, thou spotlesse night, Empresse of silence, and the Queen of leep; Who with thy black cheeks pure comple∣xion, Mak'st lovers eyes enamour'd of thy beau∣ty: Thou art like my Moor, therefore will I a∣dore thee, For lending me this opportunity, Oh with the soft skin'd Negro! heavens keep back The saucy staring day from the worlds eye, Untill my Eleazar make return; Then in his Castle shall he find his wife, Transform'd into a strumpet by my son; Then shall he hate her whom he would not kill? Then shall I kill her whom I cannot love? The King is sporting with his Concubine. Blush not my boy, be bold like me thy mo∣ther,
But their delights torture my soul like De∣vills, Except her shame be seen: Wherefore awake Christophero, Verdugo, raise the Court, Arise you Peers of Spain, Alvaro rise, Preserve your country from base infamies. Enter severally at severall doors, with lights and Rapiers drawn, Alvero, Roderigo, and Christophero, with others. All. Who rais'd these exclamations through the Cour? Qu. Mo. Sheath up your Swords, you need not swords, but eyes To intercept this treason. Alv. What's the treason? Who are traitors? ring the larum bell; Cry arm through all the City; once before The horrid sound of treason did affright Our sleeping spirits. Qu. Mo. Stay, you need not cry arm Arm, for this black deed Works treason to your King, to me; to you, To Spain, and all that shall in Spain ensue. This night Maria (Eleazars wife) Hath drawn the King by her Lascivious looks
Privately to a banquet, I unseen Stood and beheld him in him in her lustfull arms. Oh God! shall bastards wear Spains Dia∣dem? If you can kneel to basenesse, vex them not; If you disdain to kneel, wash of this blot. Roder. Lets break into the chamber and surprize her? Alve. Oh miserable me! do, do, break in, My Country shall not blush at my childs sin. Queen Mo. Delay is nurse to danger, follow me, Come you and winesse to her villany. Alvero. Haplesse Alvero, how art thou undone, In a light daughter, and a stubborn son. Exeunt omnes.
Act. III. Scena II. Enter King with his Rapier drawn in one hand, leading Maria seeming af∣frighted in th' other. Maria. OH! kill me ere you stain my chastity. King. My hand holds death, but love sits in mine eye, Exclaim not dear Maria, do but hear me; Though thus in dead of night as I do now The lustfull Tarquin stole to the chast bed Of Collatines fair wife, yet shalt thou be No Lucrece, nor thy King a Romane slave, To make rude villanie thine honours grave. Maria. Why from my bed have you thus frighted me? King. To let the view a bloody horrid Tragedy. Maria. Begin it then, I'le glaldly loose my life, Rather then be an Emperours Concubine. King. By my high birth I swear thou shalt be none, The Tragedy I'le write with my own hand, A King shall act it, and a King shall dye;
Except we mercies beam shine from thine eye. If this aight thee it shall sleep for ever, If still thou hate me, thus this Noble blade, This Royall purple temple shall invade. Maria My husband is from hence, for his sake spare me. King. Thy husband is no Spaniard, thou art one, So is Fernando, then for countries sake Let mee not spare thee, on thy husbands face Eternall night in gloomy shades doth dwel; But I'le look on thee like the guilded Sun, When to the west his fiery horses run. Maria. True, true, you look on me with Sun set eyes, For by beholding you my glory dies. King. Call me thy morning then, for like the morn, In pride Mara shall through Spain be born. This  I prepar'd thine ears, musick plays within. Loue mee and thou shalt hear no other sounds, Lo here's a banquet set with mine own hands; A banquet brought in. Love me, and thou shalt feast thee like a Queen:
I might command thee being thy Sove∣raign; But love me and I'le kneel and sue to thee, And circle this white forehead with the Crown Of Castile, Portugall, and Arragon, And all those petty Kingdoms which do bow Their tributarie knees to Philip's heir. Maria. I cannot love you whilst my hus∣band lives: King. I'le send him to the wars, and in the front Of some maine army shall he nobly dye. Maria. I cannot love you if you murder him. King. For thy sake then, I'le call a Par∣lament And banish by a law all Moors from Spain. Maria. I'le wander with him into ba∣nishment. King. It shall be death for any Negroes hand, To touch the beauty of a Spanish dame. Come, come, what needs such cavells with a King? Night blinds all Jealous eyes, and we may play, Carowse that le to me, I'le pledg all this,
Being down, we'l make it more sweet with a kiss. Begin, I'le lock all doors, begin Spains Queen, Locks the doors. Loves banquet is most sweet, when 'tis least seen. Maria. Oh thou conserver of my honours life! Instead of poisoning him, drown him in sleep, Because I'le quench the flames of wild de∣sire, I'le drink this off, let fire conquer loves fire. King. Were love himselfe in reall sub∣stance here, Thus would I drink him down, let your sweet strings, Speak lowder (pleasure is but a slave to Kings) In which love swime. Maria kiss thy King, Circle me in this ring of Ivory. Oh! I grow dull, and the cold hand of sleep Hath thrust his Icie fingers in my brest, And made a frost within me; sweet, one kiss To thaw this deadnesse that congeales my soul. Maria. Your Majestie hath overwatch'd your self, He sleeps already, not the sleep of death;
But a sweet slumber, which the powerfull drugg Instill'd through all his spirits. Oh! bright day Bring home my dear Lord, ere his King awake, Else of his unstain'd bed he'l shipwrack make. Offers to go. Enter Oberon, and Fairyes dancing before him, and musick with them. Maria. Oh me! what shapes are these? Oberon. Stay, stay, Maria. Maria. My Soveraign Lord awake, save poor Maria. Oberon. He cannot save thee, save that pain, Before he wake thou shalt be slain; His mothers hand shall stop thy breath, Thinking her own son is done to death: And she that takes away thy life, Does it to be thy husbands wife. Adieu Maria, we must hence, Imbrace thine end with patience; Elves and Fairyes make no stand,
Till you come in Fairy Land. Exeunt dancing and singing. Maria. Fairyes or Divels, whatsoe're you be, Thus will I hide me from your company. Offers to be gone. Act. III. Scena. III. To her, Enter Queen Mother suddainly, with Alvao, and Roderigo, with Rapiers. Q Mo. LAy hold upon the strumpet, where's the King? Fernando, son; ah me your King is dead! Lay hand upon the murdresse. Maria. Imperious Queen, I am as free from murder as thy self, Which I will prove, if you will here me speak: The King is living. Roder. If he liv'd his breath would beat within his breast. Q. Mo. The life he leads, Maria thou shalt soon participate. Maria. Oh father save me! Alvero. thourt no child of mine, had'st thou been owner of Alvero's spirit.
Thy heart would not have enterain'd a thought That had converst with murder: yet mine eyes (Howe're my tongue want words) brim full with tears, Intreat her further tryal. Verdugo. To what end: here lies her tryall: from this royall brest Hath she stolne all comfort, all the life Of every bosom in the Realm of Spain. Roder. She's both a traytor and murdrefs. Q. Mo. I'le have her forthwith strang∣led. Alv. Hear her speak. Q. Mo. To heaven let her complain if she have wrong, I murder but the murdresse of my son. Alv. We murder the murdreffe of our King. Alv. Ah me my child oh! Oh cease your torturing! Maria. Heaven ope the window, that my spotlesse soul, Riding upon the wings of innocence, May enter aradice, Fairyes farewell; Fernandoes death in mine you did retell. She dyes King wake, King. Who calls Fernando? love, Maria, speak:
Oh! whither art thou fled? whence flow these waters That fall like winter storms, from the drown'd eyes. Alv. From my Maria's death! King. My Maria dead? Damn'd be the soul to hell that stop'd her breath; Maria, Oh me who durst murder her? Q. M. I thought my dear Fernando had been dead, And in my indignation murdred her. King. I was not dead untill you murdred me By killing fair Maria. Qu. Mo. Gentle son. King Ungentle mother, you a deed have done, Of so much ruth that no succeeding age Can ever clear you of; Oh my dear love, Yet heavens can witnesse thou wert never mine: Spains wonder was Maria. Qu. Mo. Sweet have done: King. Have done! for what, for shedding zealous tears Over the tomb of virtues chastitie; You cry have done, now I am doing good,
But cri'd do on, when you were shedding blood: Have you done mother; yes, yes, you have done, That which will undo your unhappy son. Roder. These words become you not my gracious Lord. King. These words become not me, no more it did Become you Lords to be mute standers by, When lustfull fury ravish'd chastity. It ill becomes mee to lament her death, But it became you well to stop her breath: Had she been fair and not so virtuous, This deed had not been halfe so impious. Alv. But she was fair in virtue, virtuous fair, oh me! King. Oh me! she was true honours heir. Hence beldame from my presence, all flye hence, You are all murderers, com poor innocence, Clasp thy cold hand in mine, for here I'le lye, And since I liv'd for her, for her I'l die.
Act. III. Scena. IV. Enter Eleazar with a Torch and Rapier drawn. Eleazar. BAr up my Castle Gates; fire and confusion Shall girt these Spanish Currs; was I for this, Sent to raise power against a fugitive: To have my wife deflowr'd. Zounds where's my wife, My slaves cry out, she's dallying with the King? Stand by, where is your King? Eleazars bed shall Scorn to be an Emperours brothelrie. Qu. Mo. Be patient Eleazar, here's the King, Eleaz. Patience and I am foes, where's my Maria? Alu. Here is her haplesse coarse that was Maria. King. Here lies Maria's body, here her grave, Her dead heart in my breast a tomb shal have.
Eleazar. Now by the proud complexion of my cheeks, Tan'e from the kisses of the amorous sun; Were he ten thousand Kings that slew my love, Thus shou'd my hand (plum'd with revenges wings) Requite mine own dishonour, and her death. Stal the King. Qu. Mo. Ah me! my son. All. The King is murdred, lay hold on the damn'd traitor. Eleaz. In his brest that dares but dart  finger at the Moor, I'le bury this Sharp steel yet reeking warm, With the unchast blood of that lecher King, That threw my wife in an untimely grave. Alv. She was my daughter and her time∣lesse grave Did swallow down my joies as deep as yours: But thus. Eleaz. But what? bear injuries that can, I'le wear no forked crest. Roder. Damn this black feind, crie trea∣son through the Court. The King is murdred. Eleaz. He that first opes his lips, I'le drive his words
Down his wide throat upon my rapiers point. The King is murdred and I'le answer it; I am dishonour'd, and I will revenge it. Bend not your dangerous weapons at my brest: Thinke where you are, this Castle is the Moors, You are inviron'd with a wall of flint. The Gates are lock'd, Purcullees let down If Eleaz. spend one drop of blood, Zarack and Baltazar above with Calivers. On those high turret tops my slaves stand arm'd, And shall con found your souls with mur∣dring shot. Or if you murder me, yet under ground A villain that for me will dig to hell, Stands with a burning limstock in his fist, Who firing gunpowder up in the air, Shall fling your torn and mangled carcasses. Qu. Mo. Oh! sheath your weapons, though my son be slain, Yet save your selvs, choose a new Soveraign. All. Prince Philip is our Soveraign, choose him King. Eleaz. Prince Philip shall not be my So∣veraign, Philip's a bastard, and Fernando's dead;
Mendoza sweats to wear Spains Diadem, Philip hath sworn confusion to this Realm, They both are up in arms, warrs flames do shine Like lightningin theair, wherefore my Lords Look well on Eleazar; value me not by my sun-burnt Cheek, but by my birth; nor by My birth, but by my losse of blood, Which I have sacrificed in Spains defence. Then look on Philip, and the Cardinall: Look on those gaping currs, whose wide throats Stand stretch'd wide open like the gates of death, To swallow you, your country, children, wives. Philip cries fire and blood, the Cardinall Cries likewise fire and blood, I'le quench those flames, The Moor cries blood and fire, and that shall burn Till Castile like proud Troy to Cinders turn. Roder. Lay by these Ambages, what seeks the Moor? Eleaz. A Kingdom, Castiles crown. Alve. Peace divell for shame.
Qu. Mo. Peace doting Lord for shame, Oh miserie! When Indian slaves thirst after Empery; Princes and Peers of Spain wee are beset, With horror on each side; you deny him, Death stands at all our backs, we cannot flye him. Crown Philip King, The Crown upon his head, Will prove a fiery Meteor, Warr and ven∣geance And desolation will invade our land, Besides Prince Philip is a bastard born. Oh! give mee leave to blush at mine own shame; But I for love to you, love to fair Spain, Choose rather to rip up a Queens disgrace, Then by concealing it to set the Crown Upon a bastards head. Wherefore my Lords By my consent crown that proud Blacka∣more, Since Spains bright glory must so soon grow dim; Since it must end, let it end all in him. All. Eleazar shall be King. Alv. Oh treachery! have you so soon ra out Fernando's love; So soon forgot the duty of true Peers; So soon, so soon buried a mothers name,
That you will crown him King that slew your King. Eleaz. Will you hear him or me, who shall be King. All. Eleazar shall be Castiles Sovereign. Alv. Do, do; make hast to crown him! Lords . Here hell must be when the Divel governs you. Exit. Eleaz. By heavens great Star, which In∣dians do adore, But that I hate to hear the giddy world; Shame that I waded to a Crown through; blood, I'de not disgest his pills, but since my Lords You have chosen Eleazar for your King? Invest me with a generall applause. All. Live Eleazar, Castiles Royall King. Roder. A villain and a base born fu∣gitive. Aside. Christo. A bloody tyrant, an  slave. Aside. Eleaz. Thanks to you all, 'tis not the Spanish Crown That Eleazar strives for, but Spains peace. Amongst you I'le divide her Empery; Christofero shall wear Granado's Crown;
To Roderigo I'le give Arragon: Naples, Navar and fair Jerusalem, I'le give to other three, and then our vice Roys, Shall Shine about our bright Castilian crown, As stars about the Sun. Cry all, arm, arm; Prince Philip and the Cardinall do ride Like Jove in thunder, in a storme we'l meet them; Go levy powers, if any man must fall, My death shall first begin the funerall. Exeunt. Act. III. Scena. V. Enter Zarack and Baltazar with Calivers. Baltaz. IS thy cock ready, and thy pow∣der dry. Zarack. My cock stands pearching, like a cock o'the game; With a red cole for his crest instead of a colme; And for my powder, 'tis but touch & take. Baltaz. I have tickling geer too, anon I'le cry here I have it,
And yonder I see it; But Zarack is't poli∣cie for us To kill these bald-pates. Zarack. Is't pollicy for us to save our selves, If they live, we die. Is't not wisdom then To send them to heaven, rather then be sent our selves; Come you black slave, be resolute. This way they come, Here they will stand, and yonder wil I stand. Baltaz. And in yonder hole I. Zarack. Our amiable faces cannot be seen, if we keep close: Therefore hide your cocks head, left his burning cocks-comb betray us. But soft, which of the two shall be thy white. Baltaz. That black villain Frier Cole. Zarack. I shall have a sharp piece of service. Frier Crab shall be my man. Farewell and be resolut. Baltaz. Zounds Zarack I shall never have the heart to doo't. Zarack. You rogue think who commands, Eleazar. Who shall rise Baltazar? Who shall die, a louzy Frier?
Who shall live our good Lord and Master? The Negro King of Spain. Baltaz. Cole, thou art but a dead man, And shall turn to ashes. Exit. Zarack. Crab, here's that shall make vi∣negar of thy carcasse. Ezit. Enter Crab and Cole, two Friers, with a rout of Stinkards following them. Frier Crab. I brother 'tis best, so now we have drawn them to a head, We'l begin here i'th market place. Tut so long as we be commanded by the Mother Queen. We'l say her son is a bastard, and he were ten Philips. F. Cole. Take you one market form, I'le take another. F. Crab. No, Gods so; we must both keep one form. F. Cole. I in oration, but not in station mount, mount? 1 Well my masters, you know him not so well as I; on my word Frier Crab is a sowr fellow: 2 Yet he may utter sweet doctrine by your leave; but what Think you of Frier Cole?
1 He all fire, and he be kindled once a hot Catholick. 3 And you mark him, he has a zealous nose, And richly inflam'd. 1 Peace you Rogues, now they begin. Crab. Incipe Frater? Cole. Non ego . Crab. Nec ego. Cole. Quare? Crab. Quia? Cole. Quaeso, All. Here's a ueaxy beginning me thinks; silence, silence. Crab. Bthren, Citizens, and market∣folks of Sivell. Cole. Well beloved and honoured Castili∣ans. Crab. It is not unknown to you! Cole. I am sure you are not ignorant. Crab. How vianous and strong? Cole. How monstruous and huge? Crab. The faction of Prince Philip is; Cole. Philip that is a bastard: Crab. Philip that is a dard. Cole. Philip that ki'd your King. Crab. Onely to make himself King. Cole And by Gads bleed Lady you are all damn'd, and you suffer it.
1 Frier Cole says true, he speaks out of the heat of his zeal; Look how he glows. 2 Well Frier Crab for my money, he has set my teeth an edge Against this bastard. 1 Oh! his words are like Vergis, to whe a mans stomach. All Silence, silence. Crab. Now contrariwise. Cole. Your Noble King the Moor. Crab. Is a valiant Gentleman. Cole. A Noble Gentleman. Crab. An honourable Gentleman. Cole. A fair black Gentleman. Crab. A friend to Castilians. Cole. A Champion for Castilians. Crab. A man fit to be King. Cole. If he were not born down by hi that would be King, Who (as I said before) is a bastard, and n King. 1 What think you my masters? do you mark his words well. Crab. Further compare them together. All. S'blood, there's no comparison between them. Cole. Nay, but hear us good Country men.
All. Hear Frier Cole, hear Frier Cole. Cole. Set that bastard and Eleazar toge∣ther: 1 How? mean you, by the ears. Crab. No, but compare them. Colê. Do but compare them. 2 Zounds, we say again comparisons are odious. 1 But say on, say on. Pieces go of, Friers dye. All. Treason, treason, every man shift for himself. This is Philips treason. Arm, Arm, Arm. Exeunt.
Act III.S cena. VI. Enter Eleazar, Zarack, and Baltazar. Eleazar. ZArack and Baltazar, are they dispatch'd? Zarack. We saw'em sprawl, and turn up the white of the eye. Elea. So shall they perish, that lay coun∣termines; To erosse our high designments: by their habi, The Cardinall and Philip scap'd our nets. And by your hands they tasted our revenge. Enter Queen Mother. Here come the Queen, away! under our wings, You shall stand safe, and brave the proudest Kings. Exeunt. Qu. M. Oh! flie my Eleazar, save thy lite. Else point a guard about thee, the mad people Tempestuous like the Sea run up and down Some caing kill the bastard, some the M;
Some cry, God save King Philip; and some cry, God save the Moor; some others, he shall die. Eleaz. Are these your fears, thus blow them into air. I ruhe amongst the thickest of their crowds, And with a countenance Majestical, Like the Imperious Sun disperst their clouds; I have persum'd the rackness of their breath, And by the magick of true eloquence, Transform'd this many headed Cerberus, This py'd Camelion, this beast multitude, Whose power consists in number, pride in threats; Yet melt likenow when Majestie shines forth This heap of fools, who crowding in huge, swarms, Stood at our Court gates like a heap ofdung, Reeking and shouting out contagious breath of power to poison all the elements; This Wolf I held by 'th ear, and made him tame, And made him tremble at the Moors great name. No, we must combate with a grimmer foe, That damn'd Mendoza over-turns our hopes. He loves you dearly. Qu. Mo. By his secret Letters he hath in∣treated
me in some disguise to leave the Court, and fly into his arms. Eleaz. The world cannot devize a stra∣tagem Sooner to throw confusion on his pride: Subscribe to his desires, and in dead night Steal to his Castle, swear to him his love Hath drawn you thither; undermine his soul, And learn what villanies are there laid up, Then for your pleasure walk to take the air: Near to the Castle I'le in ambush lie, And seem by force to take you prisoner; This done, I have a practice plotted here, Shall rid him of his life, and us of fear: About it madam, this is all in all; We cannot stand unlesse Mendoza fall. Act. IV.
Scena. I. Enter Emanuel King of Portugal, Prince Phi∣lip, Mendoza, Alvaro, with Drums and Souldiers marching. King Port. POor Spain, how is the body of thy peace Mangled and torn by an ambitious Moor! How is thy Prince and Counsellors abus'd, And trodden under the base foot of scorn: Wrong'd Lords, Emanuel of Portugal par∣takes A falling share in all your miseries: And though the tardy-hand of slow delay With-held us from preventing your mishaps; Yet shall revenge dart black confusion Into the bosom of that damned fiend. Phil. But is it possible our Mother Queen Should countenance his ambition. Alv. Her advice is as a Steers-man to di∣rect his course. Besides, as we by circumstance have learnt, She means to marry him. Phil. Then here upon my knees I pluck allegiance from her; all that love
Which by innative duty I did owe her, Shall henceforth be converted into hate. This will confirm the worlds opinion That I am base born, and the damned Moor Had interest in my birth, this wrong alone Gives new fire to the cinders of my rage: I may be well transformed from what I am, When a black divel is husband to my dam. K. Port. Prince, let thy rage give way to patience, And t a velvet brow upon the face Of wrinkled anger, our keen swords, Must right these wrongs, and not light airy words. Phil. Yet words may make the edge of rage more sharp, And whet a blunted courage with revenge. Alv. Here's none wants whetting, for our keen resolves Are steel'd unto the back with double wrongs; Wrongs that would make a handlesse man take arms; Wrongs that would makea coward resolute. Card. Why then join all our severall wrongs in one, And from these wrongs assume a firm resolv, To send this divell to damnation. Drums afar off.
Phil. I hear the sound of his approaching march, Stand fair; Saint Jaques for the right of Spain. To them, Enter the Moor, Roderigo, Chri∣stofero, with drums, colours, and soul∣diers, marching bravely. Eleaz. Bastard of Spain? Phil. Thou true stamp'd son of hell, Thy pedigree is written in thy face. Alarum, and a Battail, the Moor prevails: All Exeunt.
Act. IV. Scena. II. Enter Philip and Cardinall. Phil. MOve forward, with your main battalion, Or else all is lost. Card. I will not move a foot. P. S'eart, wil you lose the day. Card. You lose your witts, You're mad, it is no pollicy. Phil. You lye. Card. Lye? Phil. Lye, a pox upon't Cardinall com on, Second the desperate vanguard which is mine, And where I'le dye or win, follow my sword The bloody way I lead it, or by heaven I'le play the Devill, and mar all, we'l turn our backs Upon thee Moors, and set on thee; I thee, Thee Cardinall, s'heart thee. Cardi. Your desperate arm Hh almost thrust quite through the heart of hope;
Our fortunes lye a bleeding by your rash and violent On set. Phil. Oh! oh! s'life, s'foot, will you fight? Card. We will not hazard all upon one cast. Phil. You will not? Card. No. Phil. Coward. Card. By deeds I'le try, Whether your venemous tongue says true, fare well. Courage shines both in this, and policy. Exit. Phil. To save thy skin whole, that's thy policy; You whorson fat-chopt guts. I'le melt away That Iarded body by the heat of fight, Which I'le compel thee to, or else by flying; To work which I'le give way to the proud foe, Whilst I stand laughing to behold thee run. Cardinall I'le do't, I'le do't, a Moor, a Moor, Philip cries a Moor, holla! ha! whoo!
Enter King of Port. King of Port. Prince, Philip, Philip, Phil. Here, plague where's the Moor. K. Port. The Moor's a Devill, never did horrid feind Compel'd by som Magicians mighty charm, Break through the prisons of the solid earth, With more strange horror, then this Prince of hell, This damned Negro Lyon-like doth rush, Through all, and pite of all knit opposi∣tion. Phil. Puh! puh! where? Where? I'le meet him, where? you mad me. 'Tis not his arm, That acts such wonders, but our cowardise, This Cardinall, oh! this Cardinall is a slave. Enter Captain. Captain. Sound a retreat, or else the day is lost; Phi. le bat that dog to death, that sounds; retrat. K. Port. Philip.
Phil. I'le tear his heart out, that dares name but Sound. K. Port. Sound a retreat. Phil. Who's that? you tempt my sword Sir. Continue this alarum, fight pell mell? Fight, kill, be damn'd? this fat-back Cow∣ard Cardinal, Lies heavie on my shoulders; this, I this Shall fling him off: Sound a retreat! Zounds, you mad me. Ambition plumes the Moor, whilst black despair Offering to tear from him the Diadem Which he , make, him to cry at all, And to act deeds beyond stonishment; But Philip is the night that darks his glories, This swords yet reeking with his Negro's blood, Being grasp't by equity, and this strong arm Shall thugh and through. A Aay then. Phil. From before mee; Stay, std, stand fast, ? A Moor, a Mr.
Act. IV. Scena. III. To them enter Eleazar, Zarack, Baltazar, Roderigo, Christofero, and others, they fight, Moors are all beat in, Exeunt omnes, manet Eleazar weary; staies, a Moor lies slain. Eleaz. OH for more work, more souls to post to hell; That I might pile up Charons boat so full, Untill it topple o're, Oh 'twould be sport To see them sprawl through the black slimy lake. Ha, ha; there's one going thither, sirrah, you, You slave, who kill'd thee? how he grins! this breast, Had it been tempered, and made proof like mine, It never would have been a mark for fools To hit afar off with their dastard bullets. But thou didst well, thou knew'st I was ty Lord; And out of love and duty to me here, Where I fell weary, thou laidst down thy self
To bear me up, thus: God a-mercy slave. A King for this shall give thee a rich grave. As he sits down, enter Philip with a broken sword. Phil. I'le wear thee to the pommel, but I'le finde The subject of mine honour and revenge. Moor 'tis for thee I seek; Come now, now take me At good advantage: speak, where art thou? Eleaz. Here. Phil. Fate and revenge I thank you rise. Elea. Leave and live. Phil. Villain, it is Philippe that bids rise. Eleaz. It had been good for thee to have hid thy name. Forthe discovery, like to a dangerous charm, Hurts him that finds it, wherefore do's those blood hounds Thy rage and valour chase me? Phil. Why to kill thee. Eleaz. With that! what a blunt axe? think'st thou I'le let Thy fur take a full blow at this head, Having these arms, be wise; go change thy weapon. Phil. Oh, Sir!
Eleaz. I'le stay thy coming. Phil. Thou't be damn'd first. Eleaz By all our Indian gods. Phil. Puh, never swear; Thou know'st 'tis for a kingdome which we fight; And for that who'l not venture to hell∣gates. Come Moor, I am arm'd with more then compleat steel, The justice of my quarrel: when I look Upon my Fathers wrongs, my brothers wounds, My mothers infamie, Spains miserie, And lay my finger her, Oh! 'tis too dull, To let out blood enough to quench them all. But when I see your face, and know what fears. Hang on thy troubled soul, like leaden weights, To make it sink; I know this fingers touch Has strenght to throw thee down, I know this iron Is sharp and long enough to reach that head Fly not di, if thou do? Eleaz How fly; Oh bast! Phil Come then Eleaz. Stay Philip, whosoe're begat thee.
Phil. Why slave, a King begat me. Eleaz. May be so. But I'le be sworn thy mother was a Queen; For her sake will I kill thee nobly: Fling me thy word, there's mine, I scorn to strike A man disarm'd. Phil. For this dishonoring me e give thee one stab more. Eleaz. I'le run away, Unlee thou change that weapon, o take mine. Phil. Neither. Eleaz. Farewel. Phil. 'heart, stay, and if you dare, Do as I do, oppose thy naked breast Against this poniard; see, here's this for thine. Eleaz. I am for thee Philip. Phil. Come, nay take more ground, That with a full career thou mai strik home. Eleaz. Thou't run away then. Phil. Hah! Eleaz. Thou't run away then. Phil. Faith, I will, but first on this I'le bear Thy panting heart, thy head upon thy spear. Eleaz. Come.
Enter on both sides, Cardinall, and King of Portugal, on the one side, and Moors on the other side. Card. Side upon the Moors. Moor. Side upon the Cardinall. Phil. Hold Cardinall, strike not any of our side, Eleaz. Hold Moors, strike not any of our side, Phil. wee two will close this battail Eleaz. Come, agreed. Stand armies and give aim, whil'st wee two bleed. Card. With poniards; 'tis too desperate, dear Philip. Phil. Away, have at the Moor, s'heart let me come? K. Port. Be arm'd with manly weapons, 'tis for slaves, To dig their own and such unworthy graves. Eleaz. I am for thee any way, thus, or see thus, Here try the vigour of thy finewy arm, The day is ours already, brainless heads And bleeding bodyes like a crown do stand,
About the temples of our victory. Yet Spaniards if you dare we'l fight it out, Thus man to man alone, I'le first begin, And conquer, or in blood wadeup toth' chin. Phil. Let not a weapon sti, but his and mine. Eleaz. Nor on this side, conquest in blood shall shine. Alarum. They fight a Combate, The Moor is struck down, which his side seeing, step all in and rescue him; The rest joine and drive in the Moors. Alarum continuing, Spaniards and Moors with drums and colours flye over the stage, persued by Philip, Cardinall, King Port. And others. Enter Zarack Christofero, and Eleazar at severall doors. Christo. Where is my Lord? Zarack. Where is our Soveraign? Eleaz. What news brings Zarack and Christofero? Zarack. Oh flye my Lord! flye; for the day is lost. Eleaz. There are three hundred and odd days in a year, And cannot we lose one of them, com fight.
Christo. The Lords have left us, and the souldiers faint, You are round beset with proud fierce ene∣mies; Dh cannot be prevented but by flight? Eleaz. He shall Christofer I have yet left, , atagem that in depite of fate, Sh the whel of warabout once more, The Mother Queen hah all this while  sadly, Within our tent, exp cting to whose bosom, White winged peace and victory will flie, Her have I us'd as a fit property, To stop this dangerous current; her have I sent, Arm'd with loves magick to inchant the Cardinall; And bind revenge down with  charms. By this time does she hang about his neck, And by the witchcraft of a cunning kiss; Has she diarm'd him, hark, they sound Retreat. She has prevail'd, a womans tongue and eye; Are weapons stronger then Artillery. Exeunt.
Act. IV Scena. IV. Enter Cardinall, Queen Mother. Souldi∣ers, drums, and colours. Queen Mo. BY all those sighs which thou (like passionate tunes) Hast often to my dull ears offered, By all thy hopes to enjoy my roial Bed; By all those mourning lines which thou hast sent, Weeping in black to tell thy languishment: By loves best richest reaure, which I swear, I wil bestow, and which none else shal wear, As the most pris'd Jewell, but thy selfe, By that bright fire which flaming through thine eyes; From thy love scorched bosom does arise. I do conjure thee, let no churlish sound, With wars led horror mydesires confound; Dear, dear Mendoza, thus I do intreat, That stil thou would'st con inue this retreat; I'le hang upon thee till I hear thee say, Woman prevail; or chiding, cri'st away. Card Is there no trick in this, forg'd by the Mr?
Qu. M. I would the Moors damnation were the ransom, Of all that innocent blood, that has been shed In this black day; I care not for the Moor, Love to my kingdom peace makes me put on This habit of a suppliant; shall I speed? Card. You shall, were i to have my bo∣som bleed: I have no power to spare the Negroes head, When I behold the wounds which his black hand Has given mine honour: but when I look on you, I have no power to hate him, since your breath Disolves my frozen heart, being spent for him; In you my life must drown it self or swim, You have prevail'd: Drum swiftly hence? cal back Our fierce pursuing troops, that run to catch The lawrel wreath of conquest: Let it stand A while untouch'd by any souldiers hand. Exit drum. Away? stay you and guard us, where's the Moor? I'le Iose what I have got, a victors prize, Yielding my self a prisoner to your eyes.
Qu. Mo. Mine eyes shall quickly grant you liberty, The Moor stays my return, I'le put on wings, And fetch him, to make peace belongs to Kings. As she goes out, Enter Eleazar, Zarack, Baltazar, and souldiers well arm'd, at sight of each other all draw. Card. Souldiers call back the drum, wee are betraid. Eleaz. Moors stand upon your guard, a∣void, look back. Qu. Mo. What means this jealousie? Men∣doza, Moor, Lay by your weapons, and imbrace the fight, Of this, and this; begets suspition, Eleazar by my birth, he coms in peace, Mendoza by mine honour so coms he. Car. Discharge these souldiers then. Eleaz. And these. Souldiers stand a loof. Cardinall. Away. Eleazar. Go. Q. M. Soul, rejoice to see this glorious day. She joins them together, they ibrace.
Car. Your virtues work this wonder: I have met, At her most dear command, whats your desires? Eleaz. Peace and your honour'd arms: how loathingly I sounded the alarums, witnesse heaven 'Twas not to strike your breast, bu to let out, The rank blood of ambition: That Philip Kakes you his ladder, and being climb'd so high As he may reach a diadem, there you lie. He's base begotten, that's his mothers sin. Q Mo. God pardon it. Eleaz. I, amen, but he's a bastard, And rather then I'le kneel to him, I'le saw My leggs off by the thighs, because I'le stand In spite of reverence: he's a bastard, he's, And to beat down his usurpation, I have thn about this thunder, but Men∣doza, The people hate him for his birth, He only leans on you, you are his pillar; You , he walks on crutches, or else falls; Then shrink from under him, are not they Fools, that bearing others up themselvs seem low, Because they above sit high, why you do so.
Card. 'Tis true. Qu. Mo Behold this error with fixt eies. Card. 'Tis true, well. Eleaz. Oh! have you found it, have you smelt The train of powder that must blow you up, Up into air, what air? why this, a breath, Look you, in this time may a King meet death; An eye to't, check it, check it. Card. How? Eleaz. How! thus: Steal from the heat of that incestuousblood, Where ravisht honor, and Philippo lies; Leave him, divide this huge and monstrous body Of armed Spanyards into limbs thus big; Part man from man, send every souldier home, I'le do the like; Peace with an Olive branch Shall flie with Dove-like wings about all Spain: The crown which I as a good husband keep, I will lay down upon the empty chair; Marry you the Queen and fill it, for my part These knees are yours, Sir. Card. Is this sound? Eleaz. From my heart.
Card. If you prove false. Eleaz. If I do, let fire fall— Card. Amen. Eleaz. Upon thy head, and so it shall. Card. All of my self is yours; souldiers be gone. Eleaz. And that way you. Card. The rest I will divide: The Lords shall be convented. Eleaz. Good. Card. Let's meet. Qu Mo. Where. Eleaz. Here anon, this is thy winding∣sheet. Exit Cardinal. The Moor walks up and down musing. Qu. Mo. What shape will this prodigi∣ous womb bring forth, Which groans with such strange labour. Eleaz Excellent. Qu. Mo. Why, Eleazar, art thou wrap't with joyes, Or does thy sinking policy make to shore. Eleaz. Ha! Qu. Mo. Eleazar, mad man! hear'st thou Moor. Eleaz. Well, so; you turn my brains, you mar the face Of my attempts i'h making: for this chaos, This lump of projects, ere it be lick't over,
'Tis like a Bears conception; stratagems Being but begot, and not got out, are like Charg'd Cannons not discharg'd, they do no arm, Nor good, true policy breeding in the brain Is like a bar of Iron, whose ribs being bro∣ken, And softned in the fire, you then may forge∣it Into a sword to kill, or to a helmet, to de∣fend life: 'Tis therefore wit to try All fashions, ere you apparel villany; But, but I ha suited him, fit, fit, Oh fit! Qu. Mo. How? prethee how? Eleaz. Why thus; yet no, let's hence, My heart is nearest of my counsel, yet, I scarce dare trust my heart with't, what I do, It shall look old, the hour wherein 'tis born, Wonders twice seen are garments over∣worn. Exeunt.
Act. IV. Scena. V. Enter Cardinal at one door, Philippo half arm'd, and two souldiers following him with the rest of the armour: the Cardinal seeing him, turns back again. Phil. SIrrah, you Cardinal, coward, run∣away: So ho ho, what Cardinal. Card. I am not for your lure. Exit. Phil. For that then, Oh! that it had nail'd thy heart Up to the pommel to the earth; come, arm me, Ha! foot, when all our swords were roy∣ally guilt with blood, When with red sweat that trickled from our wounds, Wee had dearly earn'd a victory! when hell Had from their hinges heav'd off her iron gates To bid the damn'd Moor and the divels en∣ter; Then o lose all, then to sound base retreat; Why souldiers, hah? 1. Sould. I am glad of it my Lord.
Phil. Hah! glad; art glad I am dish ono∣red? That thou and he dishonored. 1. Sould. Why? my Lord; I am glad, that you so cleanly did come off. Phil. Thou hast a lean face, and a carrion heart: A plague on him and thee too: then, s'heart then, To crack the very hearts-strings of our Army, To quarter itin pieces, I could tear my hair, And in curfing spend my soul, Cardinal; what Judas! come, wee'l fight, Till there be left but one, if I be hee, I'le die a glorious death. 1. Sould. So will I, I hope in my bed. 2. Sould. Till there be but one left, my Lord, why that's now; for all our fellows are crawl'd home; some with one leg, some with ne're an arm, some with their brains beaten out, and glad they scap't so. Phil. But my dear Countrymen, you'l stick to me. 1. Sould. Stick! I my Lord, stick like Bandogs, till wee be pull'd off. Phil. That's nobly said, I'le lead you but to death,
Where I'le have greatest share, we shall win same, For life and that doth crown a souldiers name. 1. Sould. How! to death my Lord? not I by galed: I have a poor wife and chil∣dren at home, and if I die they beg; and do you think I'le see her go up and down the wide universal world. Phil. For every drop of blood which thou shalt lose, Coward I'le give thy wife a wedge of gold. 2. Sould. Hang him meacock, my Lord, arm your self, I'le fight for you, till I have not an eye to see the fire in my touch-hole. Phil. Be thou a King's companion, thou and I Will dare the Cardinal, and the Moor to fight, In single combate, shall we? hah! 2. Sould Agreed. Phil. Wee'l beat 'em to hell gate, shall we? hah! 2. Sould. Hell gate's somwhat too hot, somewhat too hot; the Porter's a knave: I'de be loath to be damn'd for my consci∣ence; I'le knock any bodies costard, so I knock not there, my Lord; hell gates!
Phil. A pox upon such slaves. 1. Sould. Hang him, a peasant, my Lord, you see I am but a scrag, my Lord; my legs are not of the biggest, nor the least, nor the best that e're were stood upon, nor the worst, but they are of God's making; And for your sake, if ever we put our ene∣mies to flight again, by Gad's lid if I run not after them like a Tiger, hoffe me. Phil. But wilt thou stand to't e're they flye? ha! wilt thou? 1 Soul. Will I quoth a? by this hand, and the honour of a souldier. Phil. And by a souldiers honour I will load thee Whith Spanish pistolets: to have this head, Thy face, and all thy body, stuck with scars, Why 'tis a sight more glorious, then to see A Lady hung with Diamonds: If thou lose A hand, I'le send this after, if an arm, I'le lend thee one of mine, com then lets fight. A mangled Lame true souldier is a jem, Worth Cesars Empire, though fools spurn at them. 1 Soul. Yet my Lord I ha seen lame soul∣diers, not worth the crutches they leant up∣on, hands and arms quotha? Zounds not I, I'le double my files, or stand centry, or so; But I'le be hang'd and quartred, before I'le
have my members cut off. 2 Sould. And I too, hold thee there. Beats 'em both in. Phil. Hold you both there, away you rogues, you durt, Thus do I tread upon you, out, begon? One valiant is an host, fight then alone. Enter Cardinall, Alvero, Christofero, and Souldiers. Car. Prince Philip. Phil. For the Crown of Spain, come all. Car. We come in love and peace. Phil. But come in warr: Bring aked swords, not lawrell boughs, in peace? Plague on your rank peace, will you fight and cry Down with the Moor, and then I'm yours: I'le dye, I have a heart, two arms, a soul, a head, I'le lay that down, I'le venture all; s'foot, all Come tread upon me, so that Moor may fal. Car. By heaven that Moor shall fall. Phil. Thy hand, and thine, Flings down his weapons.
Give me but hae your hearts, you have all mine, By heaven, shall he fall? Car. Yes, upon thee Like to the ruines of a tower, to grind Thy body into du, traitor, and bastard, I do arrest thee of High treason. Phil. Hah! Traitor? and bastard? and by thee? my weapons? Car. Lay hands upon him. Phil. I, you're best do so. Car. Alvero there's the warrant to your hands, The prisoner is committed, Lords lets part, Look to him on your life Exeunt Cardinall &c. Manen, Philip and Alvero. Phil. Hart, hart, hart, hart, Tears the warrant. The Devill, and his dam, the Moor, and my Mother, Their warrant? I will not obey, Old gray beard, Thou shalt not bee my Jayler, there's no prison, No dungeon deep enough, no grates so strong,
That can keep in a man so mad with wrong. What do'st thou weep? Alve. I would fain shed a tear, But from mine eyes so many howrs are gon, Grief drinks my tears so fast, that here's not one, You must to prison. Phil. Do'st thou speak to me? Alve. You must to prison. Phil. And from thence to death; I thought I should have had a tomb hung round, With tored colours, broken spears, I thought My body should have fallen down, full of wounds. But one can kill an Emperor, fool then why Would'st thou have many? curse, be mad, and dye, Exeunt. The end of the fourth Act.
Act. V. Scena I. Enter Ronerigo, and Christofero; two bare∣headed before them, Alvero, Cardinall alone, Zarack, and Baltazar bearing the Crown on a cushion, Eleazar next, Queen Mother after him other Lords after her, Alvero sad, meets them. Card. A Lvero 'tis the pleasure of the King, Of the Queen Mother, and these honoured States, To ease you of Philip, there's a warrant Sent to remove him to a stronger guard. Alve. I thank you, you shall rid me of much care. Eleaz. Sit down, and take your place! Alve. If I might have the place I like best, it should be my grave. Sits down. The Moors stand aside with the Crown, Eleazar rising, takes it! Eleaz. Stand in voice, reach, away!
Both Moors. Wee are gon. Exeunt. Eleaz. rinces of Spain if in this royall Court, There sit a man, that having laid his hold, So fast on such a jewel, and dare wear it, In the contempt of envie as I dare, Yet uncompeli'd (as freely as poor pilgrims, Bestow their praiers) would give such wealth away; Let such a man step forth; what do none rise? No, no, for Kings indeed are deities. And who'd not (as the sun) in brightnesse shine? To be the greatest, is to be divine: Who among millions would not be the mightest? To sit in God-like state, to have all eyes, Dzled with admiration, and all tongues Showing lowd Praiers, to rob every heart Of love, to have thest ength of every arm. A Soveraigns name, why 'tis a Soveraign charm. This glory round about me hath thrown beams, I have stood upon the top of fortunes wheel, And backward turn'd the Iron screw of fate, The destinies have spun a silken thread About my lef, et Noble Spaniards see? Hoc tantum tati, thus I cast aside
The shape of Majestie and on my knee, Kneels: the Car∣dinall fetches the Crown and sets it on the chair. To this Imperiall State lowly resigne, This usurpation, wiping off your tears, Which stuck so hard upon me, let a hand A right, and royall hand take up this wreath, And guard it, right is of it self most strong, No kingdom got by cunning can stand long. Car. Proceed to new election of a King. All. Agreed. Eleaz. Stay Peers of Spain, if young Philippo, Be Philips son, then is he Philips heir, Then must his Royall name be set in gold, Philip is then the Diamond to that ring; But if he be a bastard, here's his seat, For basenesse has no gall, till it grow great. First therefore let him blood, if he must bleed, Yet in what vein you strike him, best take heed: The Portugall's his friend, you saw he came At holding up a finger, arm'd; this peace Rid hence his dangerous friendship, he's at home, But when he hears, that Philip is ty'd up, Yet hears not why, he'l catch occasions lock, And on that narrow bridg make shift to lead
A scrambling army through the heart of Spain, Look to't being in, he'l hardly out again. Therefore first prove, and then proclaim him bastard. Alve. How shall we prove it? Eleaz. He that put him out to making, I am sure can tell, if not, Then she that shap'd him can, here's the Queen Mother Being prick'd in conscience, and preferring Spain, Before her own respect, will name the man, If he be noble & a Spaniard born, hee'l hide, The apparent scarrs of their infamies With the white hand of marriage; that and time, Will eat the blemish off, say? shall it? All. No. Card. Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall dye. Hort. Death is too easie for such villany. Eleaz. Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall dye. I would he might, I know my self am clear As is the new born Infant. Madam stand forth, Behold to speak, shame in the grave wants sence:
Heaven with sins greatest  can dispence. Q. Mo. Would I were covered with the vail of night, You might not see red shame sit on my cheecke; But being Spains common safety stands for truth, Hiding my weeping eyes, I blush, and say; Philippo's father sits here. Roder. Here! name him? Q. Mo. The Lord Mendoza did beget that son, Oh! let not this dishonour further run? Alve, What Cardinall Mendoza? Qu. Mo. Yes, yes, even h Eleaz Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die. Car. I Philips father?— Coms down, the rest talk. Q. M. Nay! deny me not? Now may a kingdom and my love be got. Car. Those eyes and tongue bewitch me, shame lie here; That love has sweetest tast that is bought dear. Christo. What answers Lord Mendoza to the Queen? Car. I confesse guilty, Philip is my son, Her Majestie hath nam'd the time and place.
Alv. To you, but not to us, go forward Madm. Q. Mo. Within the circle of twice ten years since, Your  King made warr in Barbarie, Wn Tunis, conquered Fesse, and hand to hand, Slew great Abdela, King of Fesse, and father To that Barbarian Prince. Eleaz. I was but young, but now me∣thinks I see m fathers wouns, poor Barbaria! No mre. Q. Mo. In absence of my Lord mourning his want, To me alone, being in my private walk, I think at Salamanca; I, 'twas there; Enters Mendoza under shew of shrift, Threatens my death if I deni'd his lust, In fine by frce he won me to his will, I wept, and cd for help, but all in vain; Mendoza there abus'd the bed of Spain. E'eaz Spaniard or Moor, that saucy slave  die. Ave. Why did not you complain of this vile act? Q Mo. Alas! I was alone, young, full of fear; Bashful, and doubtfull of my own defame;
Knowing King Philip rash and jealous, I hid his sins, thinking to hide my shame. Horten. What says the Cardinall? Car. Such a time there was; 'Tis past, I'le make amends with marriage, And satise with Trentalls, dirges, praiers, The offended spirit of the wronged King. Queen and they talk. Eleaz. Spaniard or Moor, that saucy slave shall die; Oh! 'twould seem best, it should be thus Mendoza: She to accuse, I urge, and both conclude, Your marriage like a comick interlude. Lords will you hear this hatefull sin confest? And not impose upon the ravisher death, The due punishment, oh! it must be so. Alve. What does the Queen desire? Qu. Mo. Justice, revenge, On vile Mendoza for my ravishment: I kiss the cold earth with my humbl'd knees, From whence I will not rise, till some just hand, Cast to the ground the Traitor Cardinall. All. Stand forth Mendoza. Eleaz. Swells your heart so high? Down Lecher; if you wil not stand, then lie. Car. You have bretai'd me, by my too much trust,
I never did this deed of Rape and Lust. Roder. Your tongue confest it. Car. True, I was intic'd. Eleaz. Intic'd? do you beleeve that? Qu. Mo. Justice Lords! sentence the Cardinall for His hatefull sin. Alve. We will assemble all the States of Spain, And as they Judge, so Justice shall be done. Eleaz. A guard! to prison with the Cardinall. Car. Dam'd slave my tongue shall go at liberty Enter Zarack, Bal∣tazar & others. To curse thee, ban that strumpet; Doggs keep off. Eleaz. Hist, hist, on, on. Qu. Mo. I cannot brook his sight. Alv. You must to prison, and bee patient. Card. Weep'st thou Alvero? all struck dumb? my fears, Are that those drops will change to bloody teares. This woman, and this Serpent. Qu. Mo. Drag him hence. Car. Who dares lay hands upon me, Lords of Spain Let your swords bail me, this false Queen did lye.
Eleaz. Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die. Card. I'le fight with thee, damn'd hell∣hound for my life. Eleaz. Spaniard or Moor, the saucy slave shall die. Card. I'le prove upon thy head. Eleaz. The slave shall die. Card. Lords stop this villains throat. Eleaz. Shal die, shall die. Card. Hear me but speak. Eleaz. Away. Alve. Words are ill spent, Where wrong sits Judg, you'r arm'd if in∣nocent. Card. Well, then I must to prison: Moor, no more: Heavens thou art just, Prince Philip I betraid, And now my self fall: Guile with guile is paid. Exit. Qu. Mo. Philip being prov'd a bastard; who shall sit Upon this empty throne? Eleaz. Strumpet, not you. Qu. Mo. Strumpet! and I not sit there! who then? Eleaz. Down; Back, if she touch it shee'l bewitch the chair; This throne belongs to Isabel the fair,
Bring forth the Princes drest in royal robes, The true affecter of Alvero's son, Virtuous Hortenzo. Lords, behold your Queen. Act. V. Scena. II. Enter Isabella led in, in royal robes. Hortenzo. Qu. Mo. THou villain! what intendst thou, savage slave? Eleaz. To advance virtue thus, and thus to tread On lust, on murther, on adulteries head. Look Lords upon your Sovereign Isabel, Though all may doubt the fruits of such a Womb, Is she not like King Philip? let her rule. Qu. Mo. She rule? Eleaz. She rule? I shee. Qu. Mo. A child to sway an empire? I am her Protectress; I'le pour black curses on thy damned head, If thou wrongst me. Lords, Lords! Eleaz. Princes of Spain, Be deaf, be blind, hear not, behold her not, She kill'd my virtuous wife.
Qu. Mo. He kill'd your King. Eleaz. 'Twas in my just wrath. Qu. Mo. 'Twas to get his Crown. Eleaz. His Crown! why here 'tis: thou slewst m Maria, To have accesse to my unstained bed. Qu. Mo. Oh heaven! Eleaz. 'Tis true, how often have I stopt Thy unchast songs from passing through mine ears? How oft, when thy luxurious arms have twin'd About my jetty neck, have I cry'd out Away, those scalding veins burn me 'tis true. Qu. Mo. Divel, 'tis a lie. Eleaz. Thou slewst my sweet Maria; Alvero 'twas thy daughter, 'twas: Hortenzo, She was thy sister; Justice Isabella! This Serpent poison'd thy dear fathers bed, Setting large horns on his Imperial head. Qu. Mo. Hear me. Eleaz. Hah! why? Alv. Madam you shall be heard, Before the Courts, before the Courts of Spain Eleaz. A guard, a guard. Enter two Moors, and others. Qu. Mo. A guard; for what? for whom? Hort. To wait on you, So many great sins must not wait with few.
Qu. Mo. Keep me in prison! dare you Lords? Alv. Oh no! Were your cause strong, we would not arm you so; But honor fainting needeth many hands, Kingdoms stand safe, when mischief lies in bands: You must to prison. Exeunt. Qu. Mo. Must I? must I, slave! I'le dam thee, ere thou triumph'st o're my grave. Exit with a guard. Act. V. Scena. III. Manet Eleazar. Eleaz. DO, do! my jocund spleen; It does, it will, it shall, I have at one throw, Rifled away the Diademe of Spain; 'Tis gone, and there's no more to set but this At all, then at this last cast I'le sweep up My former petty losses, or lose all. Like to a desperate Gamester; hah! how? fast? Enter Zarack. Zarack. Except their bodies turn to airy spirits,
And fly through windows, they are fast my Lord: If they can eat through locks and barrs of Iron, They may escape, if not? then not. Eleaz. Ho! Zarack! Wit is a thief, there's pick-lock policie, To whom all doors flye open: therefore go, In our name charge the Keeper to resign His office; and if he have tricks of cruelty, Let him bequeath'em at his death, for kill him; Turn all thy body into eyes, And watch them, let those eyes like fiery comets Sparkle ou nothing but the death of Kings. And. ah! now thus thou know'st I did invent, A tortuing Iron chain. Zarack. Oh! for necks my Lord. Eleaz. I that, that, that, away and yoak them, stay Enter Baltazar. Here's Balt. go both, teach them to preach, Through an Iron Plory: I'le spread a et, To catch Alvero, oh! he's is old and wise, They are onfit to live, that have sharp eyes, Hortenzo, Roderigo, to', to't all: They have supple knees sleack'd brows, but hearts of gall:
The bitterness shallbe wash'd off withblood, Tyrants swim safest in a crimson flood. Blt I com to tel your grace that Isabella, Is with Hortenzo arm in arm at hand, Zarack and I may kill them, now with ease, Is't done. and then 'tis done. Zarack. Murther thou the man, And I'le stab her. Eleaz. No, I'le speed her my selfe, Arm in arm, so, so, look upon this Ring, Who ever brings this token to your hands Regard not for what purpose, seiz on them, And chain them to the rest, they com, away, Murder be proud, and Tragedy laugh on, I'le seek a stage for thee to jett upon. Enter Isabella, Hortenzo, seeing the Moor turn back. Eleaz. My Lord! my Lord Hortenzo. Hrtenzo. Hah! is't you, Trust me I saw you not. Eleaz. What makes your grace so sad? Hor. She gievs for the imprisoned Queen her Mother, And for Philip, in the sandy heap, That wait upon an hour, there are not found So many little bodies as those sighs And tears, which she hathevery Minutespent, Since her lov'd Brother felt Imprisonment.
Eleaz. Pity, great pity, would it lay in mee, To give him liberty. Isabel. It does. Eleaz. In me? Free him, your Mother Queen, and Cardi∣nall too. In me? alas! not me, no, no, in you; Yet for I'le have my conscience, white and pure, Here Madam take this Ring, and if my name Can break down Castle walls, and open Gates, Take it, and do't, fetch them all forth: and yet, 'Tis unfit you should go. Hor. That happy office I'le execute My selfe. Eleaz. Will you? would I, Stood gracious in their sight: well, go, Do what you will Hortenzo, if this charm Unbinds them, here 'tis; Lady, you and I Aloof will follow him, and when we meet, Speak for me, for I'le kisse Philippo's feet. Hort. I shall be proud to see all reconcil'd. Exit. Eleaz. Alas! my Lord, why true, go, go. Isabel. Make hast dear love. Eleaz. Hortenzo is a man
Compos'd of sweet proportion, ha's a foot, A leg, a hand, a face, an eye, a wit, The best Hortenzo in the Spanish Court. Oh! he's the Nonpareil. Isabel. Your tongue had wont, To be more sparing in Hortenzo's praise. Eleaz. I, I may cue his praises, rather ban Mine own nativity, why did this colour, Dart in my flesh so far? oh! would my face Were of Hortenzo's fashion, else would your Were as black as mine is. Isabel. Mine like yours, why? Eleaz. Hark! I love you, yes faith, I said this, I love you I do, leave him. Isabel. Damnation vanish from me. Eleaz Coy? were you as hard as flint Oh! you shou'd yield Like softned wax, were you as pure as fire, I'le touch you, yes, I'le taint you, see yo this, I'le bring you to this lure. Isabel. If I want hands To kill my self, before thou do'st it; do. Eleaz. I'le cut away your hands: wel my desire Is raging as the Sea, and mad as fire, Will you?
Isabel. Torment me not good Devill. Eleazar. Will you? Isabel. I'le tear mine eyes out if they temp thy lust; Eleaz. Do. Isabel. Touch me not, these knives. Eleaz. I, I, kill your selfe, Because I jest with you: I wrong Hortenzo? Settle your thoughts, 'twas but a trick to try, That which few women have, true con∣stancy. Isabel. If then my speeches tast of gall. Eleaz. Nay faith, You are not bitter, no, you should have rail'd, Have spit upon me, spurn'd me, you are not bitter; Why do you think that I'de nurse a though, To hurt your honour? If that thought had brains, I'de beat them out, but come, by this, Hr∣tenzo Is fast. Isabel. Hah! fast? Eleaz. I fast in Philip's arms. Wrestling together for the price of love; By this, they're on the way, I'le be your guard,
Come follow me, I'le lead you in the van, Where thou shalt see four chins upon one chain. Exeunt. Act. V. Scena IV. Enter Hortenzo, Queen Mother, Cardinall, and Philip chaind' by the necks, Zarack, and Baltazar busie about fast∣ning Hortenzo. Hort. YOu dmned Ministers of villa∣ny, Sworn to damnation by the book of hell; You map of night, you element of Devills, Why do you yoak my neck with Iron chains? Baltaz. Many do borrow chains, but you have this Gratis, for nothing. Card. Slaves unbind us. Both. No— Exeunt two Mo Phil. I am impatient, veins why crack you not? And tilt your blood into the face of heaven
To make red clouds like Ensignes in the sky, Displaying a damn'd tyrants cruelty; Yet can I laugh in my extreamest pangs, Of blood, and spirit, to see the Cardinall, Keep ranck with me, and my vile Mother Queen, To see her self, where she would have mee seen. Good fellowship I'faith. Hort. And I can tell, True misery, loves a companion wel. Phil. Thou left'st me to the mercy of a Moor, That hath damnation dy'd upon his flesh; 'Twas well, thou Mother did'st unmotherly Betray thy true son to false bastardy: Thou left'st me then, now thou art found; and staid, And thou who did'st betray me, art betraid. A plague upon you all. Card. Thou cursest them, Whom I may curse; first may I curse my self, Too credulous of Loyalty and love; Next may I curse the Moor, more then a Devill. And last thy Mother, mother of all evill. Queen Mo. All curses, and all crosses light on thee,
What need I curse my selfe, when all curse mee. I have been deadly impious I confesse, Forgive mee, and my sin will seem the less: This heavie chain which now my neck aault, Weighs ten times lighter then my heavie faults. Phil. Hortenzo, I commend my self to thee, Thou that art near'st, stand'st furthest off from mee. Horten. That mold of Hell, that Moor has chain'd me here, 'Tis not my self, but Isabel I fear. Act. V Scena V. Enter Eleazar, Zarack, and Baltaz. Eleaz. IT's strange! will not Prince Philip come with Hortenz. Zrack. He swears he'l live and die there. Eleaz. Marry, and shall; I pray perswade him you, to leave the place, A prin? why its hell; Alas here they be, Hah! they are they i'faith, see, see, see, see. All. Moor, Devill, oad, serpent. Eleaz. Oh sweet airs, sweet voices. Isabel. Oh my Hortenzo! Eleaz. Do not these birds sing sweetly Isabella? Oh! how their spirits would leap aloft and spring, Had they their throats at liberty to sing. Phil. Damnation dog thee. Card. Furies follow thee. Qu Mo. Comes confound thee. Horten. And hell swallow thee. Eleaz. Sweeter and sweeter still, Oh! harmony, Why there's no musick like to miserie.
Isabel. Hast thou betrai'd me thus? Eleaz. Not I, not I. Phil. Sirrah, hedge-hog. Eleaz. Hah! I'le hear thee presently. Isabel. Hear me then, Hell-hound; slaves, Unchain my love, Or by— Eleaz. By what? is't not rare walking here. Me thinks this stage shews like a Tennis Court; Do's it not Isabell? I'le shew thee how: Suppose that Iron chain to be the line, The prison doors the hazard, and their heads Scarce peeping ore the line suppose the bals; Had I a racket now of burnish'd steel, How smoothly could I bandy every ball, Over this Globe of earth, win sett and all. Phil. How brisk the villain jetts in villa∣ny? Eleax. Prating? he's proud because he wears a chain: Take it off Baltazar, and take him hence. They unbind him. Phil. And whither then you dog? Isabel. Pity my brother. Eleaz. Pity him, no; away I come, do, come. Phil. I pray thee kill me: come.
Eleaz. I hope to see Thy own hands do that office, down with him. Phil Is there another hell? 2 Moors. Try, try, he's gone. Eleaz. So him next, he next, and next him; and then? All. Worse then damnation, feind, mon∣ster of men. Eleaz. Why, when? down, down. Card. Slave, as thou thrusts me down, Into this dungeon, so sink thou to hell. Q. Mo. Amen, Amen. Eleaz. Together so, and you. Isabel. O pity my Hortenzo! Horten. Farewel sweet Isabel, my life adieu. All. Mischief and horror let the Moor pursue. Eleaz. A consort, that amain, play that amain. Amain, Amain. No; so soon fallen asleep, Nay I'le not loose this musick, sirrah! sirrah! Take thou a drum, a Trumpet thou, and Hark; Mad them with villanous sounds. Zarack. Rare sport, let's go. Exeunt Zarack, Baltazar. Eleaz. About it. Musick will doe well, in woe;
How like you this? Isabel. set my Hortenzo free, And I'le like any thing. Eleaz. A fool, a fool? Hortenzo free; why look you, hee free? no; Then must he marry you, you must be Queen, Hee in a manner King, these dignities Like poyson make men swell, this Ratsbane honour O 'tis so sweet, they'le lick it till all burst. Hee will be proud, and pride you know must fall. Come, come, he shall not; no, no; 'tis more meet, To keep him down, safe standing on his feet. Isabel. Eleazar? Eleaz. Mark: the imperial chair of Spain, Is now as empty as a Misers Alms; Be wise, I yet dare fit in't, it's for you, If you will be for me, there's room for two. Do meditate, muse on't: it's best for thee To love me, live with me, and lye with me. Isabel. Thou knowst I'le first lye in the arms of death, My meditations are how to revenge, Thy bloody tyrannies; I fear thee not Inhumane slave, but to thy face defie Thy lust, thy love, thy barbarours villany. Eleaz. Zarack. Enter Zarack.
Zarack. My Lord! Eleaz. Where's Baltazar? Zarack. A drumming. Elea. I have made them rave, and curse, and So; guard her: Your Court shall be this prison, guard her slaves, With open eyes; defie me? see my veins, Sruck'd out, being over heated with my blood, Boyling in wrath: I'le tame you. Isabel. Do, do. Eleaz. Hah! I wil, and once more fil a kingdoms Throne Spain I'le new-mould thee, I will have a chair Made all of dead mens bones, and the as∣cents Shall be the heads of Spaniards set in ranks; I will have Philip's head, Hortenzo's head, Mendoza's head, thy Mothers head, and this, This head that is so crosse, I'le have't: The Scene wants Actors, I'le fetch more, and cloth it In rich Cothurnall pompe. A Tragedy Ought to be grave, graves this shall beautifie. Moor execute to'th life my dread cōmands,
Vengeance awake, thou hast much work in hand. Exit. Zarack. I'm weary of this office, and this life, It is too thirsty, and I would your blood, Might scape the filling out: By heaven I swear, I scorn these blows, and his rebukes to bear. Isabel. Oh! Zarack pity me, I Iove thee well, Love deserves pity, pity Isabel. Zarack. What would you have me do? Isabel. To kill this Moor. Zarack. I'le cast an eye of death upon my, face. I'le be no more his slave, swear to advance me; And by yo'n setting sun, this hand, and this Shall rid you of a tyrant. Isabel. By my birth; No Spaniards honour'd place shall equall thin. Zarack I'le kill him then. Isabel. And Baltazar. Zarack. And hee, Isabel. I pray thee first, setch Philippo & Hortenzo Out of that Hell; they two will be most glad To ayd thee; in this Execution;
Zarack. My Lord Philippo; and Hortenzo; rise; Your hands; so, talk to her; at my return This sword shall reek with blood of Balta∣zar. Exit. Phil. Three curses (like three comenda∣tions To their three soules) I send; thy tortur'd brother Does curse the Cardinall, the Moor, thy Mo∣ther. Isabel. Curse not at all dear soules; re∣venge is hot, And boyles in Zaracks brains; the plot is cast, Into the mold of Hell: You freemen are; Zarack will kill the Moor; and Baltazar. Hort. How can that relish? Isabel. Why? I'le tell you how? I did profess; I, and protested too: I lov'd him well, what will not sorrow do? Then he profest; I, and protested too To kill them both, what will not devils do? Phil. Then I profess; I, and protest it too, That here's for him, what will not Philip do? Hort. See where hee coms. Enter the two Moors. Balt. Zarack, what do I see? Hortenzo and Philip, who did this? Zarack. I Baltazar.
Balt. Thou art halfe damn'd for it, I'le to my Lord. Zarack. I'le stop you on your way, lie there; thy tongue shal tel no tales to day Stabs him. Phil. Nor thine to morrow, his revenge was well. Stabs him. By this time both the slaves shake hands in hel. Isabel. Philippo and Hortenzo stand you still, what; doat you both? cannot you see your play? well are a woman then, to lad the way. Once rob the dead, put the Moors bit on, and paint your faces with the l of hell, so waiting on the Tyrant. Philip Come no more, 'tis here, and here; room there below, stand wide, bury them well since they so godly di'd. Hort. Away then, fate now let revenge be plac'd. Philip. Here. Hort. And here, a tyrants blood doth sweetly tast. Exeunt. Act V. Scena VI. Enter Eleazar, Alvero, Roderigo, Christofero, and other Lords. Eleazar. WHat, I imprison, who? All. Philip nd Hortenzo. Eleax. Philip and Hortenzo, Ha, ha, ha.
Roder Why laughs the Moor? Eleaz I laugh because you jest; laugh at a jest, who I imprison them? I prize their lives with weights, their necks with chains, their hands with Manacles? do I all this, because my face is in nights colour dy'd. Think you my conscience and my soul is so, Black faces may have hearts as white as snow And 'tis a generall rule in morall rowls, The whitest faces have the blackest souls. Alvero. But touching my Hortenzo. Eleaz. Good old man, I never touch'd him, do not touch me then with thy Hortenzo. Christofero. Where's Philip too? Eleaz. And where's Philippo too? I pray I pray, is Philip a tame Spniard, what can I philip him hither, hither make him ve. First where's Hortenzo, where's Philippo too? Roderigo. And where is Isabel, she was with you. Eleaz. And where is Isabel, she was with me, and so are you, yet are you well you see but in good time, see where their keepers come. Come hither Zarack, Baltazar, come hither; Zarack, old Lord Al∣vero asks of thee, where young Hortenzo is. Enter Philip and Hortenzo like Moos. Horten My Lord! set free. Eleaz Oh is ; come hither Baltazar,
Lord Christofero here would ask of thee where Prince Philippo is. Phil. My Lord set free. Eleaz. Oh is he so! Roderigo asketh mee for Isabel, Philip I say my Lord shee's free. Eleaz. Oh! is she so. Phil. Believe me Lords. Hortenzo. And mee. Philip. I set Philippo. Hortenzo. I Hortenzo free. Eleaz. My Lords because you shal believe me too, Go to the Castle, I will follow you. Alv. Thanks to the mighty Moor, and for his fame, Be more in honour, then thou art in name; But let me wish the other prisoners well, The Queen and Cardinall, let all have right, Let law absolve them or disolve them quite. Eleaz. Grave man, thy gray hairs paint out gravity, Thy counsells wisedom, thy wit pollicie. There let us meet, and with a general brain, Erect the peace of spirit and of Spain. Alv. Then will Spain flourish. Eleaz. I, when it is mine. Roder. O heavenly meeting! Eleaz. we must part in hell.
Chri. True peace of joy. Exeunt manent Ele. Phil. Hor. Ele. 'Tis a dissembling knel. Farewell my Lords, meet there so ha, ha, ha. Draws his Rapier. Now Tragedy thou Minion of the night, Rhamnusias pew-fellow; to thee I'le sing Upon an harp made of dead Spanish bones, The proudest instrument the world affords; When thou in Crimson jollitie shalt Bath, Thy limbs as black as mine, in springs of blood; still gushing from the Conduit-head of Spain: To thee that never blushest, though thy cheeks are full of blood. O! Saint re∣venge to thee: I consecrate my Murders, all my stabs, my bloody labours, tortures, stra∣tagems: The volume of all wounds, that wound from me; mine is the stage, thine is the Tragedy. Where am I now? oh at the prison? true, Zarack and Baltazar come hither see, survey my Library. I study, I, whil'st you two sleep, marry 'tis villany. Here's a good book, Zarack behold it well, it's deeply written for 'twas made in hell. Now Baltazar, a better book for thee, but for my selfe, this, this, the best of all; and therefore do I chain it every day, for fear the Readers steal the art away. Where thou stand'st now, there must Hortenzo hang, Like Tantalus in a maw-eating pang: there
Baltaza must Prnce Philip stand, like dam∣n'd Prmetheus, and to act his part; shal have a dagger sticking at his heart. But in my room I'le set the Cardinall, and he shalpreach Repentance to them all. Ha, ha, ha. Phil Damnation tickles him, he laughs a∣gain, Philip must stand there and bleed to death: Well villan I onely laugh to see, that we shal live to out-laugh him and thee. Eleaz. Oh! fit, fit, fit, stay a rare jest, rare jest. Zarack, suppose thou art Hortenzo now? I pray thee stand in passion of a pang, to see by thee how quaintly he would hang. Hort. I am Hortenzo, tut, tut, fear not man, thou lookest like Zarack. Eleaz. I Hortenzo, here hee shall hang here, I'faith, come Zarack come, and Balta∣zar take thou  room. First let me see you Phil. We're plac'd. Eleaz. Slaves, ha, ha, ha, you are but players, they must end the play: how like Hortenzo and Philippo ha, stand my two slaves, were they as black as you. Well Za∣rack I'le unfix thee first of all, thou hale help me to play the Cardinall; This Iron engine on his head I'le clap, like a Pope Miter, or a Cardinalls Cap. Then Manacle his hands as thou dost mine: so, so, I pray
thee Zarack set him free, that both of you may stand and laugh at mee. Phil. 'Tis fine I'faith, cal in morecompany, Alvero, Roderigo, and the rest, Who will not laugh at Eleazars jest. Eleaz. What? Zarack, Baltazar. Phil. I, anon, anon, we have not laught enough, it's but begun. Who knocks. Eleaz. Unmanacle my hands I say. Phil. Then shall we mar our mirth and spoil the play. Who knocks, . Alv. Alver. Phil. Let Alvero in. Eleaz. And let me out. Enter all below. Phil. I thank you for that flout, To let Alver in, and let you out. Eleaz. Villains, slaves, am I not your Lord the Moor, and Eleazar. Qu. Mo. And the Devi of hell, And more then that, and Eleazar too. Eleaz. And Devills dam, what do I here with you. Qu. Mo. My tongue shall torture thee. Eleaz. I know thee then, all womens tongues are tortures unto men. Qu. Mo. Spaniards his ws the villain, this is he who through enticements of allu∣ring lust, and glory which makes silly wo∣men proud, and men malicious, did incense
my spirit beyond the limits of a womans mind, to wrong my self and that Lord Car∣dinall; And that which sticks more near unto my blood, he that was nearest to my blood; my son to dispossesse him of his right by wrong. Oh! that I might embrace him on this brest, which did enclose him when he first was born. No greater happi∣nesse can heaven showre upon me; then to circle in these arms of mine, that son whose Royall blood I did defame, to Crown with honour an ambitious Moor. Phil. Thus then thy happinesse is com∣pleat: Embraces her. Behold thy Philip ransom'd from that prison In which the Moor had cloistered him. Hor. And here's Hortenzo. Eleaz. Then am I betray'd and cozen'd in my own designs: I did contrive their ru∣ine, but their subtil policie hath blasted my ambitious thoughts: Villains! where's Za∣rack? where's Baltazar? what have you done with them. Phil. They're gon to Pluto's kingdom to provide a place for thee, and to attend thee there; but least they should be tyr'd with too long expecting hopes. Come brave spirits of Spain, this is the Moor the actor of these
evils: Thus thrust him down to act amongst the devills. Stabs him. Eleaz. And am I thus dispatch'd; had I but breath'd the space of one hour longer, I would have fully acted my revenge. But oh! now pallid death bids me prepare, and hast to Charon for to be his fare. I com, I com, but ere my glasse is run, I'le curse you all, and cursing end my life Maist thou Lascivious Queen whose dmned charms, bewitch'd me to the circle of thy arms, unpitied dye, consumed with loathed lust, which thy venereous mind hath basely nurst. And for you Philip, may your days be long, but clouded with perpetuall misery. May thou Hortenzo, and thy Isabell, be fetch'd alive by Furies into hell, there to be damn'd for ever, oh! I faint; Devills com claim your right, and when I am, confin'd within your kingdom then shall I, out-act you all in perfect villay. Dyes. Phil. Take down his body while his blood streams forth, his acts are past, and our last act is done. Now do I challenge my Here∣ditary right, to th' Royall Spanish throne usurp'd by him. In which, in all your sights I thus do plant my self. Lord Cardinall, and you the Queen my mother, I pardon all those crimes you have committed.
Qu. Mo. I'le now repose my self in peacefull rest, And flye unto some solitary residence; Where I'le spin out the remnant of my life, In true contrition for my past offences. Phil. And now Hortenzo to close up your wound, I here contract my sister unto thee, With Comick joy to end a . And for this Barbarous Moor, and his black train, Let all the Moors be banished from Spain. Exeunt. The end of the fifth Act. FINIS.
