M1545 12926896 95534
Comfort in DEATH. A Funeral Sermon PREACH'D Upon the DEATH OF Mr. Timothy Cruso, LATE PASTOR of a Church in London, Who Died Novemb. 26. 1697. By MATTHEW MEAD. LONDON: Printed by S. Bridge, for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside: And John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry. 1698.
A Funeral Sermon On the Death of Mr. Timothy Cruso. ROMANS viii. II. If the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; He that ruised up Christ from the dead, shall al∣so quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. IT is the great Privilege and Advantage of all that are United to Christ, that however things go with them in this World, it shall be sure to go well with them in the next. The great Care of God is about their Eternal State, that whatever befals them in the Way, they may not miss of Happiness in the End; and this Happiness is asserted here Negatively, in verse the first. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
NOW this eleventh verse, with the former, is a Pro∣lepsis, or a Pre-occupation of a secret Objection or Doubt, arising from the fore-going Assertion. The Objection or Doubt is this: How can it be said, There is no Con∣demnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, since Death, which is the Fruit of Sin, yet seises the Godly as well as others? NOW this the Apostle makes Answer to in this, and the foregoing Verse, both by way of Concession, and by way of Correction. I. BY way of Concession. The body is dead because of sin. He doth not say only it is Mortal, and subject to Death; it shall and must die; but in the Present Tense, (which carries great Emphasis in it) the Body is dead; and he Expresseth it thus for Three Reasons. 1. Because of the Divine Determination, It is ap∣pointed for all men once to die, Heb. 7.29. And there∣fore the Bodies of Believers are as Mortal, and as subject to Death, as other Mens. 2. It is dead, because Death is begun; Mortality seises upon us betimes, by the many Infirmities that attack us; how many Deaths do we die daily by Gout, Stone, Col∣licks, Asthma's, Catarrhs, Fevers, &c. before Death it self comes to relieve and release us. 3. Because of the Ground whereupon it proceeds, and that is Sin. The body is dead because of sin. We do not die as the Beasts die; Death is not a natural Accident, but a Punishment; it is an effect of the Justice of God for Sin. By one man sin enter'd into the world, and death by sin, Rom. 5.12.
II. HE Answers by way of Correction, opposing a double Comfort against this dying of the Body.Verse 10. The Spirit is Life, because of Righteousness. That is one Com∣fort. BY the Spirit here we are to understand the Soul, yet not simply and absolutely considered, but as renewed by Grace. So it doth live for the present, and it shall live for ever. AND mark the ground of the Benefit. Because of Righteousness. Because of Imputed Righteousness, which gives us tight to this Life, or because of Inherent Righ∣teousness, which is the beginning of this Life. AND then the other Comfort is in the Text, and that is, If the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus front the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. The Sum of all is this: IF you are Believers indeed, though your Bodies die, yet your Souls shall live, and that for ever; and your Bodies, though they die, yet they shall not die out-right, they shall not finally perish, for they shall be raised again. SO that though Sin infers Death; yet that Death is neither total, nor final. 1. NOT total, It is but an half Death, it seiseth only upon the Flesh. The Spirit is Life, because of Righ∣teousness. 2. NOT final. Death is not such a Night as hath no Morning. It is for a limited time, and then the dead shall return again. As the Life of Man is for an appointed time, so is his Death too. As Life is a Lease, which when a Man hath lived out, then he dies. So Death is a Lease too, which when a Man hath died out, then he shall Live again.
JOB calls it a Set Time, chap. 14.13. O that thou wouldst hide me in the Grave: But how long would he be hid there? Not for ever; No, but for the set time, That thou wouldst appoint me a Set Time, and remember me; and in v. 14. he calls it an appointed time, All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change comes. This Change is not meant here of a Change by Death (as many interpret it) but of a Change by Rising again, as appears by the Context. It is the great Change when we shall all be changed (1 Cor. 15.51.) when Christ will change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body. After this Change we shall hear no more of Chang∣ing, for when this Mortal shall have put on Immortality, then Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. But how shall this Change be brought about? That is Answered in the Words of the Text, If the Spirit of him that Raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. In which Words you have Two General Parts. I. A happy Resurrection Promised, He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall quicken your mortal bodies. II. The Condition upon which the Promise is made, If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you. In the Resurrection promised, you have Two Things. I. The Author of it, or the Efficient Cause, and that is God the Father, Described by this Periphrasis, or Emi∣nent Work of Power, He that Raised up Jesus from the Dead.
II. The Way or Manner of bringing it about, and that is, By his Spirit that Dwelleth in you. The Doctrine that I intend to Insist on, upon this Oc∣casion is this. Doct. That the Bodies of all the Saints shall at the the last day be quickened, and Raised by that Spirit which Dwells in them. I shall speak to this under Two Heads. I. That the Spirit of God Dwells in the Children of God. II. He Dwells in them as a Principle of Resurrection Power, and is the Ground and Cause of their Happy Re∣surrection. 1. That the Spirit of God Dwells in the Children of God. This is plain in the Scripture, 1 Cor. 3.16. Know you not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. 2 Tim. 1.14. That Good Thing which was committed to thee, keep by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us. John 14.17. The Spirit of Truth, — He Dwel∣leth with you, and shall be in you. So in the Verse but one before the Text, If so be the Spirit of God dwell in you, there is no Truth more plainly attested in Scripture than the Indwelling of the Spirit in Believers. And there are Three Things implyed in the Expression, Presence, Pow∣er, and Continuance: He is in them, He Rules in them, and He Remains and Abides in them. 1. It implies a Presence. There is a Special Presence of the Spirit in every Believer. All Men have a share in His General and Essential Presence; Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or, Whither shall I flee from thy Presence?Psal. 139.7. But there is a Special Presence made up of Grace and Favour, which none share in but Believers, for it is derived to them from Christ as Head of the Body.
2. It implies Power and Activity. Where the Spirit is, he is an Operative Principle.Isa. 30.21. Psal. 32.8. He Teaches us the Way of Duty, He quickens and stirs us up to the Doing of it, He mortifies Sin in us, helps us against Temptations, makes the Means of Grace Effectual, Works all our Works in us, and for us. 3. THIS dwelling of the Spirit in us implies Abi∣ding and Continuance. He is not in them as an Inmate, but as an Inhabitant. Not as one that truns aside to tarry for a Night, but as one that takes up his constant Rest. He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you, John 14.17.— And ver. 16. He shall abide with you for ever. And there is a double ground for this. 1. THE unchangeableness of his Nature; where He takes up his Abode, it is for ever. This is my rest for ever,Jam. 1.17. Heb. 13.8. here will I dwell, Psal. 132.14. There is no shadow of Change in Him. He is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. 2. THE Infiniteness of his Power; which is such as that none are able to dispossess Him. He that can dis∣possess all, can be dispossessed by none. He is stronger than the strong Man, and therefore casts him out; but there is none stronger than the Spirit of God, and there∣fore where He once takes up his Abode, He will never with-draw more. Q. BUT how is the Spirit said to dwell in us? that must be a little Inquired into, because it is Twice men∣tioned in the Text. If the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you,— He shall quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. A. 1. THE Spirit of the Lord dwells in Believers,
not only by his Gifts and Graces, but He dwells in them by his Person, He is really in them, and united to them. I know it is disputed by many, whether the Spirit dwells Personally in Believers, or whether He dwells in them only by his Gifts and Graces. But to me it seems plain; for the Indwelling of the Spirit is one of the greatest Pro∣mises of the Covenant of Grace. Ezek. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes. NOW what is that which is called my Spirit? it can't be the work of Grace, for that is promised in the former Verse, under the Terms of a new Heart, and a new Spirit. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. And then it follows, And I will put my spirit within you. The new spirit, that is the Work of Grace; but this, my spirit, that is the Spirit of Grace that effects the Work. 2. THE Spirit of God dwells in Believers, consider∣ed in a large and general Sense, i.e. with respect to their whole Persons. For as the whole Man is the Subject of Sanctifying Grace, (1 Thess. 5.23.) so the whole Man is the Habitation of the Spirit of God. 3. THE Spirit of God may be said to dwell in Be∣lievers in a more restrained Sense, with respect to the Soul, which is the chief Subject of Grace. BUT the dwelling of the Spirit here in the Text, re∣fers to the Bodies of Believers, distinct from the Soul; that is, to their Bodies, not whilest living and united to the Soul, but to their Bodies whilest dead, and having their Souls separated from them. He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall quicken your dead bodies, by his spirit which dwells in you; that is, that dwells in you when dead.
SO that the Words hold out to us this Truth, That the Bodies of the Saints are the dwelling place of the Holy Ghost, even while they are dead and lying in the Grave. And it must necessarily be so. FOR 1. If it were not so, then the Relation of God to his People would be either Empty or Changeable, but it is neither. It is not an empty Relation; no, God fills up every Relation as becomes a God. NOR is it a changeable Relation, Death it self hath no Power to break it. Therefore it is said, when we die we are the Lord's: i.e. that part of us that dies is his Portion and Right,Rom. 14.8. as well as that which lives; the dead Body as well as the living Soul. 2. If it were not so, then our Relation to the Holy Ghost as his Temples would cease. For the Scripture calls our Bodies, the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost? Now either this Relation must cease in the Grave; or if not, then these Temples must stand empty, and forsaken of the Spirit; or else He must still dwell in them, even in the Dust. They are still appropriated to the Spirit, and must be possessed by Him. 3. The Proportion that is between the Personal Union and the Mystical may make out this: For when the God∣head of Christ was once United to the Man-hood Perso∣nally, they were never separated again. When the Body of Christ was dead, and in the Grave, the Soul was sepa∣rated from it, but the Divine Nature was not. So when the Bodies of Believers are lying in the Grave, their Souls are separated from them, but the Spirit of Christ is not: As it dwelt in them when they were living, so it main∣tains its possession and right when the Body lies rotting in the dust. 4. If the Spirit of Christ be not in Union with the Flesh of a Believer in the Grave, then Death is as really a Curse
to the Saint as to the Sinner; and as Solomon says in ano∣ther Sense, so it may be said in this, As dies the wicked,Eccles. 2.16. so dies the righteous. The wicked dies accursed, and so doth the righteous. For what is the Curse of Death, but to be separated from the Lord? And if there be no Uni∣on between the Spirit of the Lord, and the dead Body of a Saint in the Dust, then the Body is under a Curse; and if so, the Believer would be Blessed and Cursed at the same time; the Soul would be blessed, being in Union to the Spirit in Heaven, and the Body at the same time Cursed, being separated from the Spirit in the Grave. But how can this be, when the Scripture says expresly, That the dead Saints are blessed, Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord? You'll say, they are blessed, because their Souls are gone to Heaven, and en∣joy God. I, but that is not all, for then it would rather have been said, Blessed are the Souls of them that die in the Lord. But pray mind, it is that which dies that hath the Blessing affixed to it. Blessed are the dead. Now the Soul is not dead, that lives; and who knows not, that the Soul that lives in Heaven is blessed? But the design of the Holy Ghost here is to Comfort Believers concerning their bodies when in the Dust. Doth the Body die? why yet it partakes of a blessing in Death. Blessed are the dead. Nothing of a Saint dies but his Body, why then Blessed are the dead. And mark how his Right to the Blessing accrues, He dies in the Lord: i. e. in Union to the Lord; Death makes no separation. And if so, then as what Union there was between the Spirit of Christ and the Soul of a Saint, remains still; so what Union there was between the Body of a Saint, and the Spirit of Christ, remains still. He dies in the Lord. 5. IT must be so if we do but duly consider the Sub∣ject of Sanctification, and what is that? Not the Soul on∣ly, but the whole Person, that is, Body and Soul; it is
not any one part only that is Stamped with the Image of God, but the Intire Nature of every Believing Person, the whole Soul, and the whole Body. For Sanctification is a Repair of the Decay of the Ʋpright State of our Creation. Now in the First Creation, our whole Nature was stampt with God's Image, not only the Soul, but the Body too was Interested in the Image of God, by a Participation of Original Righteousness. AND when Man Sinned, the Image of God, so far as it was our Righteousness and Holiness, was utterly Defaced and Lost, it departed from our whole Nature Body and Soul; and hence the whole Person is said to be Polluted and Defiled by Sin, not only all the Powers of the Soul, but all the Members of the Body. (As you may see, Rom. 3.13, 14, 15. Rom. 6.19.) NOW this being the Case of all Men, therefore our Sanctification (which is the Reparation of God's Image) must Respect the whole Man equally, and the Image of God must be stamped upon the Body, as well as the Soul; and so it is wherever Sanctification is wrought. This is Evident from the Apostle's Prayer, 1 Thessal. 5.23. The God of Peace Sanctifie you throughout, i. e. in your whole Man, for so he Explains it in the next words, in body and soul, and spirit. It is not a Sanctifi∣cation thoughout, if the Body be not made Holy as well as Soul and Spirit. NOW do but see how Christ Argues about his Lying in the Grave, from the Holiness of his Body, Psal. 16.9, 10. My Flesh shall rest in Hope, for thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell, (that is, my Body in the Grave) nor suffer thine Holy One to see Corruption. What is meant here by thy Holy One? it is meant only of the Body of Christ, for his Soul was in Heaven, nor was that capable of seeing Corruption. NOW God would not Suffer the Dead Body of Christ to see Corruption, and why? Because it was Origi∣nally
and Perfectly Holy, never Tainted with the least Sin, and therefore saw not the least Corruption in the Grave, which else it would have done; and which the Bodies of the Saints do. BUT that other Argument of Christ, is common to all Believers with him; My Flesh shall Rest in Hope, for thou wilt not leave my body in the Grave. And this Not leaving the Body in the Grave, speaks Two Things. I. The Abiding Ʋnion of the Eternal Spirit with the Body. II. THE Future Resurrection of the Body, by the Spi∣rit, from the Grave, and why? Because the Body is God's Holy One. NOW I would Querie, Whether was the Spirit of God separated from the Dead Body of Christ, or no? That his own Soul was separated from his Body, that is certain, for that he recommends to his Father, Luke 23.46. Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. There∣fore it is evident his Soul was separated from his Body; but yet the Spirit of God was not, and the Reason was, because in that Covenant that passed between the Father and the Son, the Father engaged to take Care of him in Death, and to Raise him again to Life: And for this Cause, though his Soul was Separated, yet the Spirit of God was not, his Holy Body continued in Union to, and under the Special Care of the Spirit of God every moment it lay in the Grave, and in the Faith and Comfort of This Christ died; so he tells you, Therefore my heart is glad, my glory rejoyceth, myflesh also shall rest in hope. Now mark the Reasons he gives, they are Two-fold. ONE is from His State in Death. THE other, is from his Certain Restauration to Life. I. FROM His State in Death, which is a State of U∣nion to the Eternal Spirit, Thou wilt not leave my body, Lisheol, in the Grave. It is not only meant of his Re∣maining
there; but of his being left of the Spirit while he was there: Tho' my Body lye in the Grave, thou wilt not leave me when I am in that state. II. THE other is from his Certain Resurrection to Life, v. 11. Thou wilt shew me the Path of Life. Herein he points to the Covenant between Father and Son, where∣in God promises that He shall prolong his Days. Now, therefore,Isa. 53.10. says Christ in the highest Considence and Assu∣rance, Thou wilt not leave my Body in the Grave. There is the Union asserted. Thou wilt shew me the Path of Life. There is the Resurrection secured. NOW then, I assume the Querie again, Was the Spi∣rit of God separated from the Body of Christ when Dead in the Grave, or not? If it be said that it was, then it will undeniably follow, That there was a part of Christ's Suf∣ferings that was not Meritorious, yea, the greatest Part, for his Death was the Chief Part of his Sufferings, the Compleating Act; and there could be no Merit in Christ's Death, if his Body was not in Union to the Spirit of God, for what should give the Value and Virtue to his Death? That which gave Value and Virtue to his Death, was the Eternal Spirit. AND if the Dead Body of Christ was in Union to the Spirit when in the Grave, then so must the dead bo∣dy of every Believer be also; and that upon a Two-fold Account. 1. Because every Believer is a Member of Christ, Body and Soul are in Membership; and therefore, if the Spirit was in Union to Christ as Head, so it must be to the Members also, for we have the Spirit from Christ, it is in us derivatively from him, as he is the Head of Influence to every Member. I know not how this can be answered, but by saying, either That the Dead Body of a Saint is not in Member∣ship with Christ; or by saying, That though it be in
Membership, yet it is not in Union to the Spi∣rit. Now as to the First, if the Dead Body of a Believer be not in Membership with Christ, then the Death of every Believer Maims Christ's Mystical Body; he sustains a Loss as well as we: And he hath said, Nothing shall be Lost. AND as to the Second, if it be said, The Body of a Saint may be in Membership to Christ, and yet not in Uni∣on to the Spirit, that is Absurd and Impossible, for we are no longer Christ's, than as the Spirit of Christ Dwells in us. It is the Spirit that Unites Christ and the Saint to∣gether, and he it is that maintains the Union, it holds no longer between Christ and the Believer than the Spirit dwells in Him, If any have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Therefore, either the Spirit must maintain a Union to the Dead Body of a Saint, or else it cannot be in Union to Christ, it is none of his, for it is destitute of the Spirit. 2. The Believer is as really in Covenant with God as Christ was; his Soul, as really as the Soul of Christ; and his Flesh, as really as the Flesh of Christ; both are in Covenant; and by this Covenant the Union between the Spirit of God, & the Flesh of Christ remained firm & inviolable: and is there not the same reason why it should remain so between the Spirit of God, and the Flesh of the Believer? The Spirit would not leave Christ when in the Grave, no not for a Moment; and will it leave the Believer when laid there? Where then is his Cove∣nant Faithfulness, who hath said, I will never, never, never leave thee, nor never forsake thee?Heb. 13.5. The Promise is Extensive to every part, and every state of the Believer. Never here, never hereafter, never in life, never in death, never in thy Soul, never in thy Dust. So that Death
can't touch the Union that is between the Spirit and the Saint, neither as to Flesh nor Soul. Indeed, when Death comes and pulls down this earth∣ly Tabernacle, it forces the Soul out of Doors, and it quits it. But doth it force out the Spirit of God too? Is it stronger than He? The Scripture says, That Death shall not be able to separate us from the Love of God which is in Christ.Rom. 8.38, 39. But if the indwelling of the Spirit be lost while the Body lies in the Grave, then Death can separate us from the Love of God in great part, that is, as to the Body, so long as it lies in the Grave. For the Love of God can no way be enjoyed but through Union to the Spirit; and this is the only thing wherein the dead Body of a Believer can be any way capable of receiving Love from God, the preserving it in the Union of the Spirit to a glorious Resurrection State. Most evident therefore to me it is, that the Union be∣tween the Spirit of Christ and a Saint, cannot be broken in any part of it, neither as to Soul nor Body, no not by dying; for if the Spirit of God should be separated from the Body in Death, what a dreadful thing would Death be to a Believer? As to his Flesh it would be no better than a falling from Grace, and what a sad Contradiction would that be, that the Soul in death should be receiv'd to Glory, and the Body in the mean time fall from Grace, and this by an Act of God, for Death is God's Act? While the Believer lives, the Spirit of God dwells in Soul and Body both; now if at Death he utterly separates from the Body, then it is fallen from Grace, and that by God's Act only. What a sad Consequence is this? I say therefore, that the Union between the Spirit of Christ and the Body of a Saint, is never broken; no, not in Death: For why more in Death than in Sleep? The Spirit of God dwells in the Body of a Believer when it sleeps, and yet then it is uncapable of any Act of Com∣munion with Him, uncapable of Service and Obedience,
Whatever the Soul in that case may do, yet the Senses are locked up, and the Body, as to any Duty, is but as a dead thing. And yet the Body is the Temple of the Ho∣ly Ghost when it is asleep, as really as when awake; and so it is when dead as well as when living. And it must be so, if you consider but the nature of the Union that is between the Spirit of God and the Believer in those two Essential Properties of it, viz. total and indissoluble. 1. It is total, and of the whole Person; the Covenant is made with the whole Person, and so is the Union that comes by it, with Body and Soul. God owns the Body as really as the Soul; He loves the Body as really as the Soul; He Sanctifies the Body as really as the Soul; He Re∣deems the Body, and will glorifie the Body, as really as the Soul; for the Union is a total Union. 2. It is indissoluble, and can no way be broken off; as it takes in Body and Soul both to make it total; so it takes them in for ever to make it indissoluble. The Body is for ever in Union to the Spirit, as well as the Soul, and as really in the Grave, as in Grace or Glory. I pray what else is the meaning of Sleeping in Jesus, 1 Thes. 4.14. Them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. Why are the dead Bodies of Believers called the dead in Christ? ver. 16. The dead in Christ shall rise first. The Body, tho' dead, yet it is said to be still in Christ, because of the indwelling of the Spirit in it. AND so much for the first thing, That the Spirit of God dwells in Believers: And how He dwells in them, not only in the Soul, but in the body; and not only in Grace, but in the Grave. 2. HE dwells in them as a Principle of Resurrection Power; and this is one great end of the Union he main∣tains with the Dust of a Saint while in the Grave, that He may raise it to Glory at last. For as the Resurrection of every Believer is secured by
the Resurrection of Christ, Because I live, ye shall live al∣so. So the Spiritual Union is the great Foundation upon which it stands.John 19.19. It is one of the great Works of the Spi∣rit of God to Raise the Bodies of the Saints at last, and He hath given the highest Evidence of it in His Raising Christ, for this was His peculiar Work. THO' the Resurrection of Christ is ascribed to each Person in the Trinity. To the Father, Gal. 1.1. To the Son, John 2.19, 21.Acts 2.32. John 10.17, 18. Yet the peculiar Efficiency in Rai∣sing Christ was from the Spirit. He was put to Death in the Flesh, but Quickened by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. De∣clared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spi∣rit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead, Rom. 1.4. And this is the sense of that in 1 Tim. 3.16. Justified in the Spirit. How was He Justified in the Spirit? Why the Spirit by Raising Him from the Dead, did therein de∣clare him acquitted from all the Guilt he was charged with, and all the Reproaches he underwent. NOW as Christ arose, so doth every Believer rise by the same power, and that is, the Power of the Spirit of God, so the Apostle tells you, 2 Cor. 4.14. He which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus. He dwells as a Principle of Resurrection Power in every Be∣liever, and holds a Union with the Flesh for that very Purpose, that while it is in the Grave He may preserve it, and at last raise it again. NOW pray mind the Text again: If the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you; He that raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies by His Spirit that dwells in you. The Dead Body of a Saint is designed for quickening, .e. for a Resurrection to Life. And that is not all, but it is to be conformed to the likeness of Christs Resurrection in its quickening: This the Prophet intimates, Isa. 26.19. Thy Dead Men shall Live: Together with my Dead Body shall they Arise, So we Read it, but the Hebrew
is, Nebelathi jekumun, cadaver meum resurgent. Thy dead Men shall live: They shall arisc my dead Body. The Natural body of a Believer belongs to the Mystical Body of Christ; and shall arise as a part of his Body; and therefore shall arise as his Natural Body did. How is that? By the Spi∣rit dwelling in him. AND the Spirit is said, in the Text, to dwell in the Dead Body of a Believer for that purpose: He shall quic∣ken your Mortal Bodies by His Spirit that dwells in you, Your Margent reads it, Because of His Spirit that dwells in you. And that makes the Thing more plain, viz. That the Great Reason why the Spirit dwells in the dead bodies of Believers, is to be a Resurrection Principle in them, to raise them again to Life. This the words speak out plainly, He shall quicken you because of His Spirit that dwells in you. SO that a Resurrection to Glory is made plainly de∣pendant upon the indwelling of the Spirit in such Bodies as shall be so Raised; I don't speak of a Resurrection ab∣solutely and simply, but of a Glorious Resurrection. For though the Resurrection of the Body, considered in the thing it self, be a business Absolute and Determined, yet the Resurrection to Glory (which is the thing intended) is Conditional, and not vouchsafed to any, but upon an an∣tecedent Work of Grace wrought in their hearts, where∣by they have the Spirit of the Lord dwelling in their per∣sons; and hereby he becomes a Resurrection-Principle in the Dust of a Saint, to quicken his Dead Body to a Glori∣ous Life. Therefore you have a double dwelling of the Spirit mentioned in the Text, If the Spirit dwell in you, he shall quicken your Mortal Bodies by his Spirit that. dwells in you. There is a Dwelling in you to sanctifie the Person of the Believer, & then a dwelling in you to raise the dead body of the Believer. So that the Sense of the Text is this, If the Spi∣rit of God dwell in you now, to Sanctifie your Persons
here, the same-Spirit shall dwell in your Bodies in the Grave, to Raise them to Glory hereafter. AND so I come to the Application of this Truth. IS it so, that the Bodies of all the Saints shall at the Last Day be Quickened and Raised again by the Spirit of God which dwells in them? THEN the First USE that I would make of it, shall be for Caution, and that is, That you would take heed of slighting this Truth, or any other Truth of the Gospel, be∣cause it may seem New or Strange. This was the Spirit of the Learned Men of Athens, when Paul Preached up Jesus and the Resurrection: What New Doctrine is this? say they, for thou bringest certain strange things to our Ears, Acts 17.19, 20. Many are very apt to slight Things, though of the Greatest Weight, because they do not understand them, the Line of their Reason is too short to Fathom them. Do you think to Ketch the Sea into your Nut-shell? Or to take a full Prospect of the Mysteries of God by the Dim-light of Pur-blind Reason? Alas! it can never be, for these are Things, the evidence whereof lies in Reve∣lation, and therefore we ought to believe them because God says them; and to take comfort in the Truth of them, tho we are not able to see the reason of them. As we should not undervalue any Truth, because it is common; so we ought not to disown any Truth because it is to us new; but if the Scripture doth confirm it, it is our Duty to believe it. This is a Truth of great Concern; so great, that the not believing of it takes away all the comfort of the Grave. For what difference is there be∣tween the Death of a Saint and a Sinner? The one hath no more Priviledge in the Grave than the other; but only in this. Solomon says, The righteous hath hope in his death. This is a hope that springs from Christ's hope,Pro. 14.22 for he had
hope in his Death, my flesh shall rest in hope Psal. 16.9. & 23.4., shall dwell confidently, i.e. confident of its Union, confident of its Resurrection. This was the confident hope of Christ in his Death; and from hence it is that the righteous hath hope in his Death: It is the same hope Christ had. Now take away this Truth, and what hope hath the Righteous in his Death then? He hath hope after Death; but what hope hath he in Death? The Union of the Spirit with the Dust of a Believer gives hope in Death. Tho I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me. Who then would slight so useful, and so com∣fortable a Truth as this is, that doth so sweeten Death, and make the Grave so easie? 2. This Truth shews us the great disterence between the Resurrection of Man and Man, of Saint and Sinner; tho all shall rise, yet they shall not rise alike. Some shall have a better Resurrection than others shall; there is a Re∣surrection both of the Just and the Ʋnjust, Acts 24.15.He. 11.35. There is a Resurrection that ends in Misery, and a Resurrection that runs into Glory. Daniel calls the one an awaking to everlasting life; and the other, a waking to shame and con∣tempt.Dan. 12.2. And Christ calls the one, the Resurrection of Life; and the other,Joh. 5.29. the Resurrection of Damnation. There∣fore there is a great difference between the one and the other: And it will appear in Four Things. I. THE Resurrection of the Believer is Founded in the Covenant of Grace; And what is the Tenour of that Covenant? It is, That God will be our God for ever. Now this Covenant is not made with the Soul of a Be∣liever only, but with the Person, Soul and Body; and therefore from this Covenant our Lord proves the Resur∣rection against those Sadducees, Matth. 22.32. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. The Ar∣gument, like a Two-edged Sword, cuts both ways, it proves the Immortality of the Soul, in that God is said
to be the God of the living: And it proves the Resurre∣ction of the Body, in that God is said to be the God of Abraham. And therefore not the God of his Soul on∣ly, but of his Person, Soul and Body; therefore whole Abraham must live for ever, because of the everlasting Co∣venant of God. He is thy God as much when thou art dead in the Grave, as when thou art asleep in thy Bed, because of the Covenant which cannot be dissolved; and if he dies in Covenant, he shall rise in Covenant. NOW it is not thus with Unbelievers; they arise too, but not by virtue of any New Covenant Interest. They lived out of this Covenant while they lived, and died out of this Covenant when they died; and they shall rise out of this. Covenant when they rise again. And that is a sad difference; as much as is between Heaven and Hell. II. THE Body of the Saints rise by Virtue of their Union to Christ. He is the Head, and they the Mem∣bers. This Oneness is the great Foundation upon which the Saints Resurrection stands; if the Head be risen, the Members cannot always lie rotting in the Grave. As the Effect is bound up in the Cause, so is the Resurrec∣tion of the Believer in the Resurrection of Christ. Be∣cause I live,Joh. 14.19 ye shall live also. BUT the Wicked don't rise by virtue of Union to Christ, and therefore the Life and Power of his Resur∣rection doth not animate and quicken them. No, they rise by the Power of Christ, as Lord of the Dead, but not by virtue of Union to Christ. They rise by the Power of Christ as Judge, but not by the advantage of his Mediation. III. THE Bodys of the Saints arise as a part of the Harvest belonging to Christ, as he was a First-Fruits in his Resurrection. So he is called, 1 Cor. 15.20. Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that sleep. But to whom is Christ a First-Fruits? to all? No, but only to Believers. Under the Law the
First-Fruits were offer'd to God for the sanctifying and blessing the whole Harvest; and as the First-Fruits are, so is all the rest, if the first-fruits be holy, the lump is holy.Ro. 11.16. If the First-Fruits be safe, not a Shock, nor a Sheaf, nor an Ear, nay, not a Grain shall be lost. So our Lord Christ testifies, This is the Fathers will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose no∣thing, but should raise it up again at the last day.Joh. 6.39. Belie∣vers arise then as a part of that Harvest of which Christ is a First-Fruits. But Sinners do not arise thus. Christ is no First-Fruits to them. Tho the First-Fruits bless the Corn, yet it don't bless the Tares, and Cockle, and Weeds that grow among the Corn. You know what their Sentence is, Matt. 13.30. Gather together the Tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them. And this is a sad Difference. IV. BELIEVERS arise by a Power within them; the Wicked arise by a Power upon them. The Spirit of Christ dwells in every Believer as a Principle of Re∣surrection Power, and by virtue of this Power they rise again. But the Wicked rise not by virtue of the Spirit of Christ in them, but by the Power of Christ upon them, as he is the Lord of Death, and the Judge of the World. O! HOW great is the difference between the Re∣surrection of Saints and Sinners! Believers shall rise perfect from all Sin. The Wicked shall rise loaded with all their Sins and Lusts. Believers will rise, like Pha∣raoh's Butler, to great Exaltation, and the Wicked, like the Baker, to be Sentenced to Execution. Believers rise to be gathered as Wheat into the Garner, the Wicked as Chaff for the unquenchable Fire. 3. Let us labour to make a due Improvement of this Truth, especially in Four Things. I. Admire the condescending Love of the Spirit of God in this Work, for it is truly admirable. To take our Bodies for his Temple while they are living; to
dwell in them, and that personally, this is great conde∣scention: But that he should own them when dead, and continue his Union to our Flesh, when our own Soul hath forsaken it, and abide with it in Dust and Rotten∣ness. O, What amazing Love is this! Don't let us slight this Truth therefore, but admire it. For it is the greatest condescention of the Spirit that we read of in all the Scriptures. O! How much doth it make for the Honour and Dignity of Believers, that he whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, should vouchsafe to take up his Residence in our flesh. Had it been in our Souls only, that had been great condescention, but not like this; for the Soul is of a more excellent Na∣ture than the Flesh. But he dwells in our Flesh, and not only so long as we live, but in Death too, and holds his Union with it through the whole course of the Grave, from the first Moment of Dissolution, to the blessed Day of our Resurrection. O what condescention is this! II. Improve this Truth by getting an Interest in Jesus Christ. Here is a double Motive to inforce it, in this and the foregoing Truth. The Interest both of Soul and Body is concerned in it. Here is a Motive from the Soul, it se∣cures the life of that, tho the Body dies, v. 10. If Christ be in you, the body dies, because of sin, but the Spirit lives be∣cause of Righteousness; And then here is a Motive from the Body too, tho it dies, yet it dies in Union to the Spi∣rit, who will quicken it again, He shall quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you. Therefore, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord. III. Improve this Truth with respect to the Spirit of God, (1.) By begging and praying for the Spirit to dwell in you now as a Principle of Sanctification, or else he will neve 'dwell in you as a Principle of the Resurrection. If your Bodies be not his Temples now; if he doth not dwell in them, and purge them from filthiness, and pre∣pare them for Glory here, he'll never raise them at the last day, and then better never rise again.
I tell you, meerly to Rise from the Dead is no Priviledge, no, Judas, and Herod, and Pilate, shall rise again, and Cain that slew his Brother; and so shall Gardner, and bloody Bonner, all the Wicked that dyed in their Sins shall rise again; but alas! it will be a Dreadful Rising, Daniel says,Dan. 12.2. some shall rise to shame and everlasting Contempt.John 5.29. And Christ speaks of a Resurrection to Damnation. And were it not better that the body should lye and Rot in the Dust for ever, then to rise from the Grave to be thrown into Hell, and made Fuel to feed the Fire that never goes out? yet this shall be the lot of all the Wicked; they rise by the Power of Christ, that they may be Damned by the Wrath of Christ. I say therefore, to Rise again may be no Priviledge, but a Judgment and a Curse; the Priviledge lies in Rising again by the Spirits power quickening your dead bodies. This is a Pri∣viledge indeed, for here begins the Glory and Salvation of your bodies, therefore it is called a Resurrection to Life Ever∣lasting,Dan. 12.2. and hereby your Blessedness comes to be made perfect, for though your Souls are Glorified with God at Death, yet they are not compleat in Glory till the Resurrection. II. CARRY your selves Worthily to the Spirit of God, for he dwells in you, he dwells in the soul, he dwells in the body, and he dwells in both for ever. Therefore carry it be∣comingly to him. 1. BY following his Leadings, living and walking in the Spirit. If we believe in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit.Gal. 6.25 2. BY fetching our Comforts from the upper Springs, we are too sensual in our Respects and Aims; we consult the ani∣mal Life more than is meet, while we fetch our Refreshment and Satisfaction from any of these Nether Springs. Are not Spiritual Pleasures more Noble and Sweet than Bodily? Sure they are, or else we must say, that Sensual Men have more Pleasure and Joy in their Life, then God hath in his. 3. BY Avoiding every Thing that may Grieve the Spirit. WHEN you neglect Duty you Grieve the Spirit. WHEN you don't keep your Gifts and Graces in Conti∣nual Exercise, you Grieve the Spirit.
WHEN you suffer Spiritual Slumber to seize upon you, you Grieve the Spirit. WHEN you Indulge Fleshly Lusts, and yield your Members to be Instruments of Sin, you Grieve the Spirit; for you defile the Temple which the Holy Ghost hath taken up to dwell in, and will hold in a Union to himself when it lies in Dust and Rottenness, and will raise it to Glory at the last. IV. LET us improve this Truth for Comfort, it hath in it that which is matter of Great Comfort. 1. AGAINST all present Sufferings & Afflictions. What can Sweeten the Bitterness of any Cup, and lighten heavy Bur∣thens, and make present Distresses easie, and support in all Ca∣lamities, like Faith in a Resurrection? There is a Resurrection State will Free us from All,2 Cor. 4.17. and in the mean time, Our light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, work for us a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory. 2. IT is a great Comfort under the loss of the Faithful Mi∣nisters of Christ, & of Godly Relations & Friends, for they are not lost for ever; the Spirit of God hath the care of them, and he'll quicken them again, and therefore we may say with Mar∣tha when her Brother was dead,Matt. 11.14. I know that he shall Rise again at the Resurrection. You shall see them again, and know them again, and enjoy them again, and that in a better manner than ever, And is not this Comfort? 3. IT is a great Comfort against our own Dissolution, the thing which Nature so much abhors; the Horrour of a Grave is very Affrighting and Dreadful to many. That this Flesh of mine, this tender Flesh, this delicate Flesh, that now the Wind must scarce blow on, that I spend so much precious time to feed, and pamper, and dress, and adorn, that this very Flesh must be turned to Stench and Corruption, and become loathsome to my Dearests Friends, and be Prostituted to Worms and Rottenness, this makes the very thoughts of Death a Disease. NOW how would the Belief of this Truth relieve & Com∣fort against such Thoughts as these.Revel. 14.13. 1 Thes. 4.14. If I Dye, I Dye in the Lord; Death is but a Sleep, and I Sleep in Jesus too, when my
my Body is laid in the Grave, it is laid into the arms of the Spirit; if it doth rot in the Dust, its Union to the Spirit can't rot. And therefore, farewel my Flesh; While I go into the immediate blessful Presence of God, go thou to Bed in the Dust, I commit thee into the Arms of the Spirit, and do wil∣lingly leave thee in that Union, till he sees good to raise thee, and bring us together again; For this he will do in the Last Day: And therefore, Go my Flesh, and rest and hope,Joh. 6.4 and wait the appointed time till thy change comes, for then this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality,1 Cor. 1 53. and Death shall be swallowed up of Life. IN this Faith you may triumph over the Grave, you may resign your Bodies to the Earth chearfully, and to the Guardi∣anship of the Spirit of God there, for he who hath it in an in∣dissoluble Union, will preserve it to a glorious Resurrection, as he did the dead Body of Christ;Psal. 1 10.11. for he did not leave it in the Grave, but shewed it the path of life. HOW willing to die should this make every Believer, and to say with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved. And yet Alas!Philip. 23. what Cowards are we! How fearful are we of dying? You may as well be afraid of going to Bed. Let them be afraid to die, that never knew how to live; that are dead whilst they live, and that have no hope after this life. He that hears of the Glory of a Resurrection-State, and yet is afraid to die, either he hath but a little Faith, or he hath an ill Conscience. WHAT was it that revived and supported Job's Spirit amidst all his Griefs, but this very thing? I know that my Re∣deemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and tho after my Skin Worms destroy this body,Job 19.2 26, 27. yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self. This was such a reviving to his Soul, that you never find him in his impati∣ent, despairing Fits after it.Pool Loc. I beg of God therefore, that when-ever I die, I may die in this Faith, That my Soul shall immediately enter into the full frui∣tion of God, And, That my Body shall lie down in the Dust, in an everlasting Ʋnion to the Sprit of God, who will at last quicken-it, because he dwells in it. For if the Spirit of him that raised Je∣sus
from the dead, dwell in us, he that raised up Christ from the dead, Thes. 4.18. shall also quicken our mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwell∣eth in us. Wherefore comfort ye one another with these words. I KNOW you expect that I should say something of the Person Deceased, and not pass him by in silence. But I ac∣knowledge my self to be very unfit for this Province; it being a Work I rarely engage in; as having no Authority to take the Commission out of the hand of his own Works;Grov. 31. lt. They are to praise him in the Gates, and not I. And yet it is not fit, When every mean Virtue in others hath its Funeral Trumpet, that so much Excelling Worth as was in him should be forgotten, and the Memory of it buried with him. Should I speak of his Carriage and Behaviour in the various Relations he stood in, As a Son to his surviving Mother. As a Husband to his Wife. As a Father, while he had Children. As a Master to Servants. As a Friend to his Friend. I might herein propound him as a Pattern to many, for he excelled most. And that is a Good Man indeed, who is good in all Relations. BUT his Great and Chief Care was to fill up his Relation to God in Christ, and that not only as a Christian and a Belie∣ver, but as a Minister of Christ, and a Pastor to that Flock which the Holy Ghost had committed to his Charge. I must say, God had fitted him for this Work & Service above many of his Brethren, in betrusting him with such Gifts and Ta∣lents as but very few have received. AND how Diligent and Faithful was he in laying them out, and so improving them in his Master's Service? How Zealous was he for Christ! How Laborious in his Work! how sound in the Faith! How great in Prayer! How apt to Teach! And how All was Crowned with Success, is Evident in the many Comfortable Seals which God gave to his Ministry a∣mong you.
AND tho' his Natural Parts were great, and made much greater by the Blessing of God upon his Unwearied Industry; yet that he neither Leaned upon them, nor Trusted to them, appeared by his constant Labour and Study for every Sermon. THEY that were Discerning Christians, and did Wisely Ob∣serve the suitable Matter he prepared, the exact Method in which it was ordered, the taking Dress with which it was clothed; the Charming Manner in which it was uttered, could not but say, That he did not offer to God that which cost him nothing. His great Delight was in his Work, for he knew how well it becomes a Disciple to be as his Lord, whose Delight was to do the Will of God. And therefore he was fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. And this made him willing to spend,Rom. 12 11. and to be spent, till by degrees he wasted and consumed himself. I would have said no more of him, were it not to Obviate some False and Malicious Whispers; as if he Dyed in great Darkness, and under much Trouble of Conscience. I was with him the day before he Dyed, and among other things, I asked him, How it was with him concerning his Spiritual State. He told me, That he had a Firm Confidence of Hope in the Infinite Righteousness of Jesus Christ. I then asked him (and desired that he would be as Plain with me, as I desired to be Faithful to him) If there was any particular Thing that lay as a burden upon his Conscience. HE replied, No, he blessed God, there was not. But that which Troubled him in general was, That in the Course of his Mi∣nistry he had not Honoured God as he ought to have done; nor had he been so Faithful to the Souls of Men as he should have been: But yet in this he could appeal to God, that whatever By-Ends might come in, and mingle themselves, which he Renounced, yet the Glory of God in the Conversion and Salvation of Souls was the great End he Aimed at in the whole Course of his Ministry. And Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.
What I have else to say, is to you that were his Flock, over which the Holy Ghost made him Overseer, but are now as Sheep without a Shepherd. 1. Labour to be Truly Sensible of your LOSS, and let it be deeply laid to heart, for it is a Great, a very Great Loss; it is so to the whole Church of God, but it is so more parti∣cularly to you, especially if the Circumstances of it be consi∣dered, for the Lord hath taken him from you in the midst of his Days, and in the Prime of his Ministry. And God hath not done this without a Cause, and therefore you should eve∣ry one reflect upon himself, What have I done? Wherein have I offended God? Have not my Sins, my Barrenness, my Ʋnpro∣fitableness under his Ministry provoked God to take him away? as that good Woman said, when she heard that the Minister of the Place had broke his Leg, Oh! said she, My Sins have broken my Ministers Leg. 2. Remember, and keep in mind the Seasonable Counsel he gave you, not only from the Pulpit, but from the Press too, by which, though he it Dead, he yet Speaketh; Lay them up in your hearts, and Practice them in your Lives. Let me tell you, that God expects much Fruit from you after such a Sower, and such a Seeds-time as you have had. Tho' you shall never hear him Preach more, yet what he hath Preached you shall hear of again. Not one Sermon that ever he delive∣red from this Pulpit, but you must Account for it in the Day of Judgment, and it will be a Dreadful Account now that The Bellows are burnt, and the Lead is consumed of the Fire, if the Founder hath Melted in vain.er. 6.29. AND therefore, 3. IMPROVE this Providence, this Sad and Severe Providence. If you have hitherto turned a Deaf-Ear to the Word of God, yet now Hear the Rod of God, what that speaks; for it speaks aloud. When so many Faithful Ministers, Emi∣nent Servants of Christ, are taken away in a few Months,
Dr. An∣nesly, Mr. Oldfield, Mr. Vin∣cent, Mr. Mather, Mr. Cole, and now your Pa∣stour, and since him Mr. Day. This is a Crying Voice, it crys to this City, it crys to this Place. And what doth it say? IT says, That the Prophets don't Live for ever: That they have their Heavenly Treasure but in Earthen Vessels. That the Lamps are within the Pitchers, and when the Pitchers break, the Lamps go out, and therefore Walk while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you. IT says that, When the Means of Grace are Undervalued. WHEN the Loud Calls of God are Slighted. WHEN the Great Truths of the Gospel are Corruped WHEN Deism in Contempt of the Son of God is Coun∣tenanced. WHEN all Revealed Religion is Disowned, and there∣by the Gospel of Christ, and the Ordinances of Christ, and the Ministry of Christ rendered Vain and Useless, Then God will soon Remove them. This is what the Rod says. NAY, It says, That unless we are Awakened and Refor∣med by these Judgments, God will yet bring greater. If there be not a speedy Repentance and Returning to God from all these Abominations, he who hath put out so many of our Lights, will put out all; and and not only put out the Lights, but remove the Candlesticks, nay,Hof. 1.9 Write a Lo-ammi against us, and say, Ye are not my People, and will not be your God. THE Lord Teach us therefore, now His Voice crys so loud to the City, to Hear the Rod, and who hath appoint∣ed it. 4. BE Earnest in Prayer to God to make up to you this Great LOSS; for He only can do it,Eph. 9.11 Faithful Pastours are a peculiar Gift of the Lord Christ, and they are a Gift that comes under a Promise,Jer. 3.1 I will give you Pastours according to mine own heart, which shall feed you with Knowledge and Ʋnder∣standing. Go away and plead this Promise with God, Pray in Secret, in Private, in Publick, let each one make it his Duty, let the whole Church make it their Duty.
Set some time a-part to meet together and Pray, that he that hath in Judgment made this Breach, would in Mercy make it up, That He who hath took away Elijah to Heaven, would send an Elisha to succed him. This is the Mercy and Blessing which you now Want, and none can Supply this Want but that God who hath the Resi∣due of the Spirit; Therefore cry to Him in the Words of Dy∣ing Moses, Numb. 27.16, 17. Let the Lord, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, set a Man over the Congregation, which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, and which may lead them out, and bring them in, that the Congregation of the Lord be not as Sheep which have no Shepherd. Amen. FINIS. BOOKS Written by the Reverend Mr. Mead, Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheap-side. THE Almost Christian Discovered: Or, The False Professor Try'd and Cast. Spiritual Wisdom Improved against Temptation. The Good of Early Obedience: Or, The Advantage of bearing the Yoke of Christ betimes. Excellency of Unity: A Sermon Preached before the Ministers of the Congrega∣tional and Presbyterian Perswasion. There is newly Re-printed Two scarce Books, one, A Discourse of the Foun∣tain of Life; the other, A Treatise of the Soul of Man, both by the Reverend Mr, John Flavel. BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry. MR. Buxter's Life, published by Mr. Silvester, Folio. Mr. Showers Sermon, Preached to the Societies for Reformation of Man∣ners, Nov. 15th. 1697. Octavo. Mr. Woodhouses Sermon to the same Societies, Octavo. Mr. Addys Stenographia: Or, The Art of Short-Writing, compleated in a far more Compendious Way than any yet extant, &c. In which Character is also Printed the whole Bible, by Mr. Addy. Cambridge Concordance, in Folio.
