M1834 R217812 99829455 33895
MEROVEUS A PRINCE OF THE Blood-Royal of FRANCE. A NOVEL. depiction of a globe LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel-Street in Covent-Garden, 1682.
TO THE Right Honourable THE COUNTESSE OF OXFORD. THE Universal Admiration Your Ladyship has ob∣tained in the World, hav∣ing
inspired a young Prince with a Curiosity to see so many Wonders as Fame does Your Ladyship the Ju∣stice to relate, He is come from beyond Sea with hopes not only of having leave to satisfie the Ambition He has of paying Homage to so many Excellencies, but
likewise, if you can think fit, Madam, to allow Him a favourable Audience, He does not question but to make appear, that his Mis∣fortunes are of such a Na∣ture as both to merit and engage Your Ladyships Pi∣ty and Protection. Both His Commission and Pass∣port
to Your Ladyship have something in them so extra∣ordinary, that as One has wherewith to raise Compas∣sion, so the Other has to create Veneration in all People. For He is ad∣dressed, Madam, to a La∣dy whose Family has ever, and is still at this day
fruitful in Hero's, and who has likewise the advan∣tage of being united to One that has filled the Chroni∣cles of all Ages with its Extraordinary Performan∣ces, and miraculous Instan∣ces of a Constant Loyalty, wherein they have been so zealously followed by the
present Earl, that the Best of Subjects and Greatest of Men may be proud of imi∣tating his Conduct and A∣ctions: Yet, notwithstand∣ing all these Invitations, this Prince does acknow∣ledge that he was incited to this Address more by Your Ladyships own Merit
and Lustre, than all these Advantages of Extraction and Alliance: It was a Beauty, Madam, above de∣scription, a Wit beyond all imagination, and these at∣tended by a benign Disposi∣tion, an Affability, a Good∣ness, and all and none but those Qualities which pro∣cure
Respect and Acclama∣tion, that made him ambi∣tious of laying himself at Your Ladyships Feet, and to beg leave to declare the Devotion with which I am, Madam, Your Ladyships Most humble and most obedient Servant, F. S.
MEROVEUS A PRINCE OF THE Blood-Royal OF FRANCE. THE Posterity of Clovis the Great begun to possess the Throne; Clotarius the youngest of his Children, remaining alone of all his Brothers to settle the rising Monarchy of the
French, left for his Successours four Sons, who shared the Crown between them. Cherebert, being the eldest, had for his part the Kingdom of Paris, and its depencies. Gon∣tran, that of Orleans: Chilperic, that of Soissons; and Sigebert that of Metz. Though that Union is something rare between persons of their Rank, those four Princes lived a long time in a perfect intelligence in the Go∣vernment of their States, and the tendernesses of Blood were ever more powerful in their hearts, than any sentiment of ambition and jealousie. They did not think the alliance of any neighbouring Prince, was ne∣cessary to them for the support of their Thrones; wherefore when they resolved to leave Heirs, they sought not for Women elsewhere than amongst their Subjects, and as merit was the only thing that they considered, they applyed them∣selves indifferently to Persons in
whom they found most Charms, Beauty and Wit. Cherebert, whom Clotarius his Father had caused to marry Ingo∣berga against his will, divorced him∣self from her to take in her place Merofleda, a Merchants Daughter: Gontrand made the like choice in his States: Sigebert lived a long time without any engagement; and as for Chilperick, he marryed Andeu∣era, the truth is a Maid of mean Birth, but whom Heaven had only deprived of the advantages of Blood, that the quickness of her Wit, the greatness of her Soul, and the Charms of her Beauty might be the more admired: Chilperick had by her several Children and amongst others a Prince called Meroveus. Cherebert after having reigned six years, dyed in the Castle of Blaye in Xaintonge: he left no male Chil∣dren: Insomuch that the three Princes his Brothers shared his King∣dom between them: but as not one
of them would consent to yield Paris to an other, it was resolved that City should remain neutral, that it should be equally to all three, and that not one might enter it with∣out the consent of the others, upon pain of losing the part he had in the succession of Cherebert. This Affair thus regulated, those Princes passed still several years in an agreeable Society, and only made use of their Arms to repulse the at∣tempts of Strangers their common Enemies. But Fortune that usual∣ly takes delight in destroying all that is not its Work, let them only so long injoy this sweet tranquility that their Division might be the more sensible to them. Prince Meroveus was seventeen years old, when one Fredegonda came into the service of Queen An∣douera. Meroveus and Fredegonda having the greatest part in this Hi∣story, it will not be out of the way to give a light Idea of them, that
they may be the better known. It may be said that Fredegonda was one of the most capricious Works that Nature was capable of produ∣cing: there was in her a confused heap of good and ill Qualities, all of them extraordinary: but as her Virtues possessed but the least part in her Soul, they ever served only to set off her Vices. That which rendered the world sometimes pre∣possessed in her favour, was that what she had best, discovered it self at first. Those who had once seen her and heard her discourse, could hardly persuade themselves afterwards that Heaven would mingle so rare Per∣fections amongst so great Defects. And it must be avowed that she knew admirable well how to set off the Talents she was Mistress of. Ne∣ver was Beauty in all its lustre better managed and more ingeniously im∣ployed to its Designs. Never did Wit with more artifice use all the graces of eloquence to persuade; and
never any heart so cunningly dispo∣sed the language of its sighs, for the gaining the tenderness of a Prince. She thought it indifferent to follow the course of Virtue or to stray from it, and she only sought it when she judged it might favour her enter∣prizes. Ambition, Revenge, and Jealousie disposed by turns of her Soul. Love was not unknown to her, but he had never so great an Empire over her as to betray any of these passions. The greatest crimes raised no horrour in her, she resol∣ved of them without pain for the satisfying her desires. Fear had lit∣tle place in her heart, because that her Policy was to prevent all those whom she believed might do her hurt, and a light suspition was suffi∣cient for the sacrificing them to her safety. Her resentments could not be softned by time. Her hatred was only extinguished in the blood of the person from whom she ima∣gined to have received any outrage.
Deceit, dissimulation, perfidiousness and lying, were also many Veils which concealed from the most pe∣netrating Eyes, all the foldings of her heart. In fine to give her Pi∣cture with one stroke, it is sufficient to say that self-love was the only rule she thought worthy of being imbraced in the world. Meroveus, on the contrary, was one of the most accomplished Princes that France had yet seh. It was to have been wished that Heaven had brought him into the world in a less elevated degree; that not be∣ing invironed with that dazling pomp, all his perfections might have been more nearly contemplated, and his merit judged of by it self. It was not necessary to proceed to his Soul to find something in him worthy of admiration. From all the Features that Nature had printed in his Face, there resulted I know not what kind of Air which inspired love and respect in all those who
approached him. Never any Prince gave so fair hopes, and in whose Eyes were read greater things. At so tender an age he had already sig∣nalized himself in Arms, and the Lawrels he had gathered in several, & important, occasions, made all the world doubt if the easiness of fight∣ing was not rather born with him, than formed by a long habit. It seemed that so many fair quali∣ties ought to have subdued Fortune to the happiness of this Prince: Yet that cruel Enemy of Virtue made it on the contrary appear that it is in vain that Nature strives to main∣tain its Works, when Fortune un∣dertakes to attack them: It was its will that the unfortunate Meroveus should search Posterity for a famous example of its power, as well as in∣justice. Fredegonda had not seen him twice when she became infinitely in love with him; and as she saw that this passion was but too conformable
to her ambition, she wholly aban∣doned her self to it with all manner of joy. She fancied that he being of an age that has little force to re∣sist passions, and wherein a heart is easily surprized by Love when it meets with a proper object, he would hardly escape her artifices: but all her cunning and all her ad∣dress was in vain: Meroveus, after having a long time avoided her snares, at length seeing that she one day spake to him openly of her love, rallied her publickly for it, and told her that to acknowledge the affecti∣on she had for him, he would marry her to one of his Officers. These words produced in Frede∣gonda's Soul a furious vexation and an immortal hatred, which was the source of all the disgraces of Mero∣veus, and which led him to his Grave. But as the force of this wicked Woman lay in artifices, she knew so well how to dissemble in that occasion, that she smiled at the
Princes answer, and even thanked him very civily. As she knew that on the first impressions, good or bad, that others have received from us, depend oftentimes all the judgments that are made in the sequel; she at first affected a conduct with Andou∣era, which procured her the esteem and confidence of her Mistress, and the jealousie of her Companions. All her actions were governed by a complaisance full of sweetness, a re∣spectful submission to all that was exacted from her, and an earnestness ever new to acquit her self of the least things her devoir engaged her to. It is an usual defect in all good Souls to judg of others by them∣selves: as they are incapable of any disguise, they fancy they see in the actions of others as much fincerity as in their own, and this imprudent goodness makes them oftentimes take for an effusion of heart, what proceeds only from an address of Wit.
The false and deceitful appea∣rances of Fredegonda, so surprized all the affections of Andouera, that this good Princess fancyed that she could not do enough to make known to her the sense she had of her services. She proposed her for a model to all her other Maids of Honour, she filled the Court with her praises, and the King was especi∣ally dayly importuned with them; so true it is that we often run pre∣cipitately to our own ruine, and we become our selves the contrivers of our own unhappiness. Though the Princess Andouera had already spent more than eight∣teen years in marriage, she was still capable of charming, and neither that long space of time, nor her Ly∣ings In, which are usually the de∣stroyers of Beauty, had worn out any thing of that surprizing lustre which conquers hearts. But as desires and hopes are the only things which maintain Love, and that nothing is
more capable of making us disrelish an object than a long and peaceable possession. Chilperick's passion for the Queen did nothing now but lan∣guish, and those devouring flames which the first fight of that Princess had kindled in his Heart, were as ex∣tinguished in the injoyment of her pleasures. The reputation of Fredegonda's Wit and Beauty gave him one day the curiosity of considering and dis∣coursing her attentively. It was in that occasion that this cunning Maid neglected nothing of all she judged proper for engaging the King. She fought for Darts in her Eyes fit to discover the way to his Heart, and drain'd all the lights of her Wit to charm the Princes. It was not necessary to imploy so much address upon a man who ran to meet his Chains, and who longed that a new passion might renew his desires. Chilperick told Fredegonda upon his leaving her, that he was
very much satisfied with her dis∣course, and that he would do her some kindness in a very short time. In effect, he sent for her some days after by his trustiest Officer, and af∣ter having repeated to her the same thing, he added for the declaring to her his passion, that he had found in her more Beauty and Wit than he ought to have. desired for his re∣pose; that it was to Love she was going to owe all the favours he should heap upon her; but as his happiness depended on her, she ought to contribute to it in giving him sensible and convincing marks of a mutual tenderness; and above all, that she should carefully conceal this Gallantry from the Queen, who would not fail to be enraged at it. As Fredegonda changed, as she pleased, the motions of her Face, she seemed at that moment so modest, that it helped to inflame the Kings desires. She made him know that she desired nothing so ardently as to
make appear to him the joy she felt to see her self beloved by so great a Prince; but that he was not to ex∣act any thing from her that her vir∣tue might disallow. The King was not yet so blinded with his passion, but that he consi∣dered that it ever becomes a Woman to make some resistance, and not to yield so soon. He was not willing to press her more that day: he con∣tented himself with telling her that they would talk of it more than once, and that he would give her time to think of it. Having spoken these words, he took out a Table-Book with Gold-Covers set with Di∣amonds, which he made her a Pre∣sent of. He had hardly left her, than that his imagination representing her to him yet more fair than she was, made him sensible of new returns of Love, and was extream impatient to see her again; so that the next morning, while the Queen rested,
he sent his Confident to tell her he desired to speak with her, and she immediately went to the Cabinet where he waited for her. Fredegonda knowing better how to dive into the hearts of others than they into hers, easily perceived that Chilperick was too much a slave to his Love, to be able ever to master it. Wherefore, as it was Ambition that made her act, she did not amuse her self to flatter his passion with frivoulous hopes, but had the bold∣ness to tell him, that if he desired she should answer it, he must mar∣ry her; that her birth was not in∣feriour to Andouera's; that nothing was so common with all Princes, as divorce, that neither reasons nor pretext would be wanting for the furthering the design; that this procedure towards Andouera, was not unjust, that it was enough for her to have held so glorious a rank near twenty years; that for her part when she should as long have
shared his Crown, with him, she would endeavour to comfort her self if an other took her place; that in fine, he might assure himself, that nothing but his Faith could obtain from her what he pretended. Af∣ter these words she went out of the Cabinet, and left the Prince in a mortal trouble. Though it be easie for Love to become all on a sudden Master of a Heart, and that one moment alone is sufficient for it to chase away all that opposes its designs, yet it does not reign there soveraignly, until af∣ter several strifes, for the rendring its Victory the more illustrious, and the more powerfully engage reason to support its interests. Chilperick found his mind a long time wavering between his Devoir and his new passion: if the pleasures he hoped to injoy in the possession of Fredegonda, inclined him towards her; on the other side the Image of his Glory stained by so shameful
a Divorce, and the innocence of Andouera were powerful curbs to stop the rapidity of his Vows. The great marks of Love that he had re∣ceived from that good Princess, her passionate tenderness, her ardent sighs, her transports ever new, her application; cares and complaisance, knocked every Moment at the Door of his Heart, to put him in mind of recovering a lawful Empire. But as it is much more easie to stray from our Devoir, than to re∣turn to it when we have been once out of the way, all these objects, after having for some time shaked Chilperick's mind, disappeared at length to let Love triumph. All that virtue could obtain from him, was that he should do what he could to persuade Fredogonda, before that he resolved to be divorced from An∣douera. Whereupon he besieged that imperious Mistress with all manner of Arms. He joyned to the lustre of his person all the discourses
of the most submissive Lovers; and without doubt, a woman less ambi∣tious than Fredegonda, would not have been able to have held out a∣gainst so many importunities; but that haughty passion had too deep roots in her heart, to suffer her to be seduced by other impressions. She was ever deaf to the Prayers of Chil∣perick, and after having a long time denyed him, and even refused the Presents he would have made her; She once told him very sharply that he was very scrupulous, and very fearful, not to dare to take that liber∣ty to become happy, which the ex∣ample of so many Princes authori∣zed, and which Cherebert his Bro∣ther had himself practised. There is no injury which so sensi∣bly touches Kings, as the reproach of fear: as boldness is the first mark of courage, they imagine for the bet∣ter, making appear the greatness of their Souls, they ought to give their power its full scope, insomuch that
what moves them to unlawful acti∣ons, is oftentimes only a vain glory of making known that they are capable of undertaking all things. Frede∣gonda's words had so much force up∣on Chilperick's heart, that they part∣ly determined him intirely to marry her. His pride represented to him, that to make the impression in the mind of that Maid, and of all his People, of a strong Idea of his inde∣pendence, he ought not to defer his Divorce from Andouera; and Love applauding the sentiments of his pride, persuaded him that he ought no longer to ballance the establish∣ing his happiness, since it would on∣ly cost him one crime, which the most natural of all passions had ever rendered excusable. He told his Mistres that he very well foresaw, that he must consent to what she de∣sired, and that he would quickly make her see, that it was not a mo∣tion of fear that had made him re∣sist so long.
This discourse so puft up Frede∣gonda's vanity, that she began from that moment to fancy her self Crowned, and to act like a Sove∣raign with all people. The Queen who was not long without percei∣ving it, was the most of all concer∣ned at this Change. As she had ne∣ver found any thing but submission, and respect in Fredegonda, the im∣perious Air with which she spake to her, could not enough surprize her. She several times made her gentle remonstrances, and seeing it was to no purpose, she one day pro∣ceeded to threatnings. Fredegonda, being no longer de∣tained by any confideration, answer∣ed her sharply, and left the Cham∣ber, telling her, that she had no longer right to use those terms, that her time was passed, and that others was going to begin. These words were clear enough to explain to the Queen, Chilperick's new engage∣ment; but being still blinded by her
easiness, they only plunged her into a great disquiet. As she was in these agitations, Meroveus, her Son, came to her A∣partment, to make known to her the first news of her Disgrace. Me∣roveus having a penetrating Wit had a long time perceived Fredegonda's Designs; but being he had ever be∣lieved, that the King would have no less power than he, to resist her ar∣tifices, he had not thought fit to a∣larm the Queen with the recital of a thing of little consequence, and wherein he did not foresee, that the Glory and Love of that Princess were to be one day equally interres∣sed. An Officer of the Kings Bed-Chamber, deploring the approach∣ing misfortune of Andouera, having given notice to the Prince of what passed, Meroveus believed it neces∣sary to acquaint the Queen sudden∣ly with it, that she might joyn with him to avoid the storm that was go∣ing
to powder upon her. The poor Princess having learn'd Meroveus fa∣tal discourse, fell into a swoon in his arms, and it was to little purpose, that the Prince remained pious in this Rencounter, and that he left her not in that oppression, being, when she came to her self, she was the more sensible of her misfortune, and delivered her mind up to the most cruel attacks of Grief. They resolved to go find the King out immediately, and to remonstrate to him the disorders this unhappy passion would produce, if he resol∣ved to satisfie it at the expence of his Glory. Approaching the Kings A∣partment they perceived at a di∣stance through the Glass Windows Fredegonda holding a Table-Book in her hands. After having stole softly to the Window, Andouera perceived it was the Kings Table-Book, in which he ever set down his most secret De∣signs.
At this sight the Queen was seiz∣ed with a lively resentment; she commanded Fredegonda to open to her the Door, which she refused to do, threatning she would complain to the King if any violence was done her. These insolent words increased the Queens vexation; and Mero∣veus being transported with anger, having broken the Windows, leap'd furiouslly into the Cabinet, snatch'd the Table-Book out of Fredegonda's hands, and went to the Queen, who returned with him, to her Chamber to examine it. After having turned over several Leaves without finding any thing, she read in one place these Verses written by Chilperick's one hand, and which he had com∣posed in the beginning of his passi∣on for Fredegonda:
Love only pleases for a time, At length we're weary of its Chain. Virtue the most severe, sublime, From a new choice can't oft restrain. And below these Verses, Andou∣era found these of Fredegonda's hand writing. When we have charm'd a great and mighty King, Must we have nothing but his pant∣ting Heart? His Empire ought to be our Offering, E're we do ease his fiery raging smart; Yes, yes, ambition is the brightest Flame, What Woman wants it, is I'me sure to blame. What became of her after having read these stabbing words? It was then that this deplorable Princess took a full view of her misfortunes,
and that she no longer doubted that Chilperick was charmed with Frede∣gonda, but even that this wicked Maid had already much shaken his Virtue, to engage him to marry her. She run as distracted, accompanied by Meroveus, to the Kings Apart∣ment. When they came to his Chamber Door, the Guards refused to let them in, and told them they had Orders not to let any one so∣ever enter without acquainting the King. After having learn'd that they were there, he came to them contra∣ry to his custom. Andouera, at the sight of Chilperick, let fall a torrent of Tears; all the Graces painted at that time, in her Face, an eloquent Grief, capable of moving the most barbarous heart; and without doubt Chilperick's would not have been in∣sensible, if he had not been full of Fredegonda's Charms, whom he had newly quitted. The Queen with a languishing
Voice, and which was every moment interrupted by her sighs, told the King, that the love she bore him, rather than her own interests, engaged her to make known to him how shame∣fully he was going to stain his Glory by the irregularity of his Passion. She pray'd him to consider what could be the nature of the affection that Fredegonda had for his Person, and to judg of it by the Verses she had made upon that subject. Having spoken these words, she presented the Table-Book to the King. That Object filled his Soul with spite and confusion, and made him fall into furious motions of choler against the Queen. He did not per∣mit her to speak any more; but in∣terrupting her, he told her angrily, that he could never have believed, she would have been so bold as to have done violence to persons whom he honoured with his affection, even to force from them, the Testimonies he had been willing to give them
thereof; that she as well as Mero∣veus should pay dear for this affront. That as for his passion for Fredegon∣da, if she found it was so great a crime, it was for her herself to expiate it, since she had been the principal cause; that he should never have conceived the least desire of speaking to that Maid, if she had not dayly stun'd him with her praises; that it was her great importunity alone that had stirred up her curiosity; that her dayly discourses repeated in fa∣vour of her Rival, had made him insensibly love her before he had considered her; in fine, that she had no body to blame but her self for her misfortune, since she had woven with her own hands the Bonds which were going to break theirs. This outraging reproach pierced the very Soul of poor Andouera: all the words it contained were so much the more sensible to her, for that they were true, and that she acknow∣ledged she had been the fatal instru∣ment
of her own ruine. The ex∣cess of grief did not leave her force enough to speak: but her eyes and sighs declared all the just indignati∣on with which she was seized. Me∣roveus was not so moderate as she, or rather his resentment was not ca∣pable to deprive him of the use of his voice; he told the King that since he was resolved to push things to that extremity, he saw himself constrained to be once wanting in the respect that he owed him as his Son and his Subject, for the prevent∣ing a disorder that was going to fall upon all the Royal Family. This menace inflamed Chilperick's anger; he caused the Queen and Meroveus to be seized, commanded they should be shut up apart, and caused Guards to be set at their Chamber doors, with express order to let no body enter. After which he returned to the Cabinet where Fredegonda expected him. She at first affected a false pity for Andouera,
and told Chilperick that it was a∣gainst her will that she caused so much disorder in the Court; but since it was for the better setling the happiness of her King, she did not repent it: but that it was con∣venient and even necessary, sudden∣ly to make an end of the Work, and to remove the Queen while that people's minds were already prepa∣red for that rupture. The too easie Chilperick, besotted with his passion, consented to all Fredegonda's propositions, and would not follow any other rule than her will. He agreed with her to send the Queen to the City of Mans. After having hastily made her a small Equipage, he caused her to depart at two days end, without suffering her to bid him farewel, nor even to speak with Meroveus. That innocent and deplorable Prin∣cess went thus from Soissons, and ap∣peared as a wretched Victim, that her love for an unfaithful Man was
going to consume by little and little. So long as she could perceive the Walls of that City, she eyed it, & sent it continually her sighs. But as soon as she was out of sight, she passed over in her thoughts all that had passed at Court: she re-called into her memory, all the Graces and Favours she had so often so prodigally be∣stowed upon her Rival, and for which she had not expected so fatal a recompence: but that which in∣creased her pain was, that she was not allowed at her departure to em∣brace the Prince her Son, whom she cherished with a tenderness worthy of her. When she arrived at Mans, though that Fame had already car∣ryed thither the news of her Dis∣grace, all the City was in Arms to receive her, and did her all the ho∣nours that they owed, not only to their true Queen, but as to a Per∣son who had ever reigned more so∣veraignly over all their minds by
her Virtues, than by the Title she had born. Meroveus having learn'd his Mo∣thers removal, conceived a mortal hatred against Fredegonda, and re∣solved to be revenged on her, let what would come on it: but his imprisonment not permitting him to attempt the execution of his Pro∣jects, he was constrained to stifle them. The King not being willing to keep always from the Eyes of the Court, a Prince upon whom all the people founded their greatest hopes, bethought himself of an artifice to set him at liberty: but he put him in such a posture, as not to appre∣hend any thing he could do against Fredegonda: He made known to Meroveus, that if he made any at∣tempt upon her, he would immedi∣ately revenge himself on the Princess his Mother, and that the least Me∣nace that should escape from him, should be the sentence of Andouera's's Death. It was upon these harsh
Conditions that the Prince was let out of Prison. The sight of his E∣nemy did every moment increase his hatred, and he would not have been able to have forborn the abandoning himself to some violence, if the Queens interest had not ever retain∣ed him. In the mean time the pomp of the Kings Marriage with Fredegonda was preparing. This ambitious Wo∣man triumphing in her self, floated then in joy, and imagined her self already at the point of Soveraignty. But fortune which delights in selling her Favours dear, still exacted from her great Crimes, before it mounted her upon the Throne. The Huns, who placed all their glory in making Courses and Inva∣sions upon their Neighbours, took a resolution of seizing Austrasia. To that end they marched out of Pan∣nonia, and came with powerful Troops to attack King Sigebert, who prepared to repulse them courage∣ously:
But at the same time there happened to him other Affairs which constrained him to treat of Peace with the Huns, not very ad∣vantageous to him, and such as his great courage would not have suf∣fered in another conjuncture. Fredegonda whose ambition in∣creased, and seeing no more obstacles to hinder her from reigning with Chilperick, carryed her desires much farther, and believed she ought not to let so fair an occasion slip, of en∣larging the bounds of an Empire she fancied already belonged to her. She remonstrated to Chilperick, that while the King of Austrasia was bu∣sied in defending himself against the Huns, it would be easie for him to invade his Territories, that he ought not to be retained by any vain scruple, and to stop at weak conside∣rations of Friendship and tenderness; that nothing was so glorious as the Title of Conquerour; In fine, that it was great to be in a posture of gi∣ving
Law to others, and of making Subjects, even upon the Throne. It was Ambition that dictated this discourse to Fredegonda, but she had likewise other very powerful considerations to move her to it. As Policy was the principal resort that set her mind agoing, her pas∣sion for a Scepter, did not hinder her from fore-seeing that her Marriage would not fail to displease the Princes her Brothers, and upon their persuasion he would sooner or later be obliged to be divorced from her; Insomuch that she had already for some time sought means fit for the breaking the Union that was be∣tween them when this was present∣ed. She did not at all doubt but that Gontran King of Orleans, who loved Peace and Justice, would ardently imbrace Sigebert's Party, when be came to know the equity of his Cause; and thus she judged that the success of this War, let it be what it would, must needs be advantage∣ous to her.
Chilperick, who did nothing but by Fredegonda, listened to her, took Fire, and his Love making use of a sentiment of Ambition, for the con∣cealing from him the base and ser∣vile complaisance he had for a Wo∣man, he resolved with her to attack Sigebert, in hopes of suddenly con∣quering his Territories. Whereup∣on he raised Forces secretly, and marched himself at their Head, ac∣companied by Meroveus, towards Austrasia, after having left the ad∣ministration of all Affairs to Frede∣gonda. Meroveus went not to this Expe∣dition without regret, because he naturally hated Injustice: and he also made appear, he only fought for Peace, and did but shew his cou∣rage for the preparing the two Kings to a Reconciliation. The Army came in a few days to the Walls of Rheims, which after having main∣tained some Assaults, was at length constrained to open its Gates, and
suffer the victorious Enemy to come in. Sigebert was acquainted some days after with this sad News, and was obliged, as we have already said, to make Peace with the Huns. He sent immediately to Gontran, to give him notice of this surprize, and to de∣sire his Aid to defend himself against Chilperick's Treachery. He likewise sent to demand Succours of Athana∣gildus, King of the Goths in Spain, to whom he had formerly given the like against Agila, King of the Visi∣goths. Athanagildus, in whom ser∣vices made a great impression, did not stick to acknowledge those that Sigebert had done him, and was willing to go succour him in per∣son: After having setled his Af∣fairs, and trusted the Conduct of them in Persons he judged the most capable, as it was a very usual thing to the Kings of that time, to carry with them their Wives and Chil∣dren, he marched out of his Terri∣tories,
with a very powerful Army, accompanied with the Queen, and the two Princesses his Daughters. In the mean time Sigebert return∣ed towards Rheims, in all haste, of which he became Master in a few days: Chilperick, who was gone from thence, having left in it but a weak Garrison. The King of Au∣strasia was not contented with ha∣ving recovered that place; it was his turn, he thought, to make some attempts upon his Enemies Territo∣ries. He went and attacqued him in Fismes, where he then was for the appeasing some Sedition that was raised there; he pressed him so vigorously, that Chilperick quickly saw himself in a condition of im∣ploring his Clemency, rather than irritating his valour: Wherefore he had recourse to Gontran, to soften him in his Favour. Gontran was arrived a little time before in Sige∣bert's Camp: as Peace and Union were the only things he breathed,
he favourably heard the persons Chil∣perick sent him, and made such in∣stances to Sigebert, that he obliged him to compose with his Brother, and to that effect to make a suspen∣sion of Arms. There was an Inter∣view of these three Princes, and through Gontran's intercession, the Peace was at length concluded, and published. The truth is, it was something a shameful one for Chilpe∣rick; but such as he merited. In the mean time Athanagildus approaching nearer and nearer, ha∣ving learn'd this reconciliation, dis∣missed the best part of his Troops, but upon the Princes desire he ad∣vanced towards them with his Fa∣mily. They sent the Principal Lords of their Court to meet him, and received him in the Palace with great marks of esteem and af∣fection. Sigebert, above all, particu∣larly thanked him for the part he had taken in his Interests. There were several gallant Feasts made, of
which Brunchaut and Galsuinta were ever the greatest Ornaments. Sports, Shows and Treats reigned then in all their lustre, and never did any Court, composed of so many Kings, appear so neat and so magnificent. While that so sweet a Calm en∣chanted all their minds, and that they all strove to dissipate, in so in∣nocent Divertisements, the troubles and alarms of War; Love, being willing to contribute to the happi∣ness of those Princes, fancied that so tranquil pleasures were not touching enough, and that for the augmenting their force, he ought to mingle with them some of his trou∣ble. Sigebert's indifference had al∣ways appeared to him injurious to his Glory, insomuch that he resolved to revenge himself in that occasion, but he would make him at the same time find that that liberty that an insensible heart does sometimes va∣lue it self for, is but an imaginary good, and that it is necessary to feel
the effects of so fair a passion, to in∣joy a perfect felicity. Nothing can be imagined more ac∣complished, than this Princess was, at that time when she was seen & heard to speak, it was not known which one ought most to admire in her, her Beauty or her Wit. The surpri∣zing lustre of her Face did so ba∣lance the Charms of her Discourse, that a heart remained suspended be∣tween these two Objects, and it would have been difficult to say, which made it the soonest sigh. Si∣gebert at each look she fixed upon him, and at each word she uttered, felt a flaming Dart which penetra∣ted into his Soul, and inflamed all his Desires. His passion was too fair, and his Vows too well placed to dissemble them. After having assured himself of Brunchauts heart, who according to the custom of young Women only sighed for a Throne, he spake thereof to Athana∣gildus.
The King of the Goths, who be∣sides the singular esteem he had for the King of Austrasia, was very glad to procure powerful Allies, hearkned to him with all possible favour, and after having communicated it to the Queen his Wife, and to some persons of his Council, he made him a posi∣tive answer, and gave him his word for that Marriage. As all these Princes were willing to return, each one to his State, the preparations for this Nuptial pomp were made with all speed, but it was not the less splendid; and it appear'd that those who had had the managing of it, had foreseen at first, that on one and the same day would be made a double Feast. Gontran had learnt with a sensi∣ble displeasure Chilperick's divorce from Andouera; and as the glory of his Blood was dear to him, he could not suffer that Fredegonda should mount upon his Brothers Throne, by so unjust and shameful means.
Seeing that it would have been al∣most impossible to have re-establish∣ed Andouera, he bethought himself of another expedient, which might in some manner repair Chilperick's Crime, which was to make him marry Galsuinta, Brunchauts Sister, imagining that the lustre of the Blood, and likewise of the Vertues of that Princess, might deface the Stain wherewith so unhappy a pas∣sion had newly stained his Brother. He acquainted Sigebert with his de∣sign, and told him, that they both ought to interess themselves in this affair, and not to let so favourable an occasion escape. Sigebert, whose inclinations were conformable to his Brothers, was of his opinion: they went together to find out Chilperick, and remon∣strated to him that Kings Marriages ought to be the effect of a wise Po∣licy, and not of a blind passion, that when he was to associate a Woman to his Throne, he ought only to
consult the good of the State, and that the heart ought not to have any part in it, that he did not en∣tirely blame him for having put a∣way Andouera, since that alliance had been very useless to him, but that he ought to make choice, in her place, of an illustrious person, and who might bring into his Interests the Princes of her Blood; that for the setling and cementing the Peace they had newly sworn, it was con∣venient he should marry the Princess Galsuinta; that it would be the means to stifle, by so near an union, all the difference that might arise in the future between the two Bro∣thers; In fine, if he was desirous their Reconciliation should be intire, he must resolve on that Marriage. Chilperick being of a soft and fear∣ful nature, durst not resist the Princes propositions; he consented they should agree the Affair with the King of the Goths, and promised to ratifie all they should do.
Athanagildus was over-joyed with this second Alliance; but a scruple troubled him in favour of his Daughter, and he could not defend himself against the alarms that Chil∣perick's love for Fredegonda gave him: Insomuch that this Prince was obliged to swear upon the Altars, that Galsuinta should be hence-forward the only object of his passion, and that he would wholly stifle the tenderness he had had for his favourite: a frivolous Oath, which he quickly fancied Love might dispence him from. In the mean time, Meroveus, in the midst of so much publick rejoy∣cing, had his Soul alone delivered up to grief and sadness. The Queen his Mothers misfortune, and Frede∣gonda's happiness, had rendred him uncapable of any sentiments of joy: but he was not insensible of it when he learn'd, that a Princess was going to possess the place designed for his Enemy; and if a change so favour∣able,
and so little hoped, could not wholly extinguish his resentment, at least he received no small comfort to see Fredegonda's designs brought to nothing, in the moment she fan∣cied she was above the capricious∣ness of fortune. He made Galsuinta several Visits, and always made ap∣pear to her, with sincere protestati∣ons, the desire he had to see her reign with his Father. He went al∣so to see Brunchaut from time to time, and had with her several par∣ticular conferences, in which he was never wearied with admiring her Beauty, and the extraordinary Charms of her Wit, but it was ever without trouble and emotion: the fatal hour not being yet come, that Love would employ that fair one for the ruine of this young Prince. These Nuptials being celebrated with all manner of magnificence, they all returned towards their States. Athanagildus went towards Spain; Gontran towards Orleans;
Sigebert with Brunchaut took the way of Austrasia; and all the Gran∣dees of Chilperick's Court, obliged him to return to Soissons, to make, in the Capital of his Kingdom, a Triumphant entry with his new Bride. It must be avowed that Love is something very capricious, that this fierce Tyrant of Souls is extream jealous of his Power and his Rights. Galsuinta had so lively and touch∣ing a Beauty, that no body could support the lustre of it without a∣mazement; and to give a perfect Idea of her, it is sufficient to say that she was an exact portraict of her Sister Brunchaut. But though all the Graces should have transformed themselves into her, though Nature should have drained it self in forming her, Chilperick had married her with∣out consulting Love, and this was enough to make him conceive for her sentiments of contempt and a∣version. Those sweet eagernesses
which usually follow the first days of Marriage, and which appear with so much the more violence, in that they are often as the Tombs of Kind∣ness, those passionate transports, those impatient desires, those troubles ever new, those charming disquiets, in fine, all that a heart ought to be sensible of, in the first moments of the possession of what it loves, all this was unknown to Chilperick's; and if he sighed near the Princess, it was for regret of not being able to keep his word with Fredegonda. The domineering Charms of that Maid came every moment into his imagination; they were as a Vail, which hid from him Galsuinta's Per∣fections; and if it happened by chance that he discovered some of them, they only helped to set off those of Fredegonda, and to put that unhappy Prince in mind, that she possessed them with much more ad∣vantage. In the midst of his Court, he seemed to be in a vast solitude,
and his vexations, and his mortal fears, were the only Objects which took up his Soul. The more he ap∣proached Soissons, his toruble and his disquiets were the more encreased: but how horrible soever the torment was he suffered in this cruel agita∣tion, he could have wished to have remained eternally in it. He alrea∣dy represented to himself Fredegon∣da, who with those imperious words which she was used to make use of in her resentments, came to assassi∣nate him with reproaches, accused him of weakness, and swore to him an irreconcileable hatred. And it must likewise be avowed, that no∣thing has ever equalled the vexati∣on of that ambitious Woman, and that as soon as she had received the news of this Marriage, she abandoned her self to all the sentiments of rage and despair that a woman can be ca∣pable of. Some days before Chilperick's ar∣rival, she pretended to be sick, that
she might not be obliged to go ren∣der respects and submissions to a per∣son, whom she could hardly support the sight of, without dying for grief. In fine, that great day being come that the King entred Soissons, after having received there, with the new Queen, all the honours that Subjects use to do their Princes in such oc∣casions, he retired into his Palace, where having immediately asked for Fredegonda, he was told she was very sick. This news gave him the more boldness to see her, but on the other side it strangely alarm'd him. He stole from Galsuinta, while that flocks of people invironed her, and ran all transported to Fredegonda's. As soon as she perceived the King and that she had observed in his Eves and his Face, the Empire she had still over his heart, she prevented him, and told him that she foresaw, that the Disease she laboured under would carry her to her Grave; but that she should enter it with joy, since
she was precipitated into it by the excess of her love: that however she should have dyed more content∣ed, if her virtue had permitted her to have given him more sensible marks of her passion. Nothing is more surprizing to a Lover, than to hear kind things, and flatteries, from his Mistresses mouth, when he expected nothing but re∣proaches and threatnings, neither is there any thing more capable of ma∣king him detest his infidelity, and in∣spire him with more love. This flattering and artificious dis∣course of Fredegonda, so moved Chil∣perick, that all the powers of his Soul remained a long time in disor∣der. He had so little force left, that he had recourse to his sighs, and e∣ven to some tears, for the explain∣ing to his Mistress the despair her illness reduced him to. Striving at length to speak to her, he begged of her not to renounce life, and swore to her, that if she would promise
him to take care of it, he would put her, notwithstanding the present conjuncture, in a state in a short time of reconciling her glory with her Love. He was not willing to stay any longer with her that day, lest all his Court should know he was still in love. Fredegonda then recovered firm hopes of mounting upon the Throne, and as the reputation of Galsuinta's Beauty and Merit, made her appre∣hend the King might become insen∣sibly charmed, she resolved to dis∣patch that Princess as soon as possi∣bly she could. But because she would be present her self, at that fatal execution, for the making it the more sure, she was obliged to wait sometime, for fear her sickness should be discovered to have been feigned, if she quitted her Bed all of a sudden. In the Visits that the King dayly made her, she assured him that she grew better and better, and that the obliging words he had
said to her, had been more healing than all the remedies of the world. In fine, the certainty of her reco∣very being spread through all the Palace, after having prepared her self for that horrible Sacrifice, she went one day to make the Queen a Visit; and chose the time that she was only attended by two of her Maids of Honour. The two Guards that were placed at her Chamber Door were Fredegonda's Creatures. Some moents after her being there, a young Man to whom she had pro∣mised great Favours, came likewise thither, and coming briskly up to the Queen, he on a sudden plunged his Dagger into her Breast, and cau∣sed that unfortunte Princess to fall at his Fet. Fredegonda thereupon feigning a great surprize, cryed out like mad, that they should seize the Murderer; the two Guards running into the Chamber seized him, and cut him to pieces, according to the order she had given them, for fear
that the Rack and remorse might make that Wretch tell what moved him to so detestable a Parricide; so true it is, that great Ones, who make use of other men to execute their pernicious Designs, often re∣solve at the same time to sacrifice them also to themselves, that the death of these blind Ministers may serve for a Vail and Cloud to their Designs. The noise of this Tragical Death being spread through all the Palace, the King run to see this pitiful Spe∣ctacle. Though he did not love Galsuinta, and that by the irregula∣rity of his passion, there arose in his Soul, I know not what malign Joy, in that he saw a person so conveni∣ently dispatched, who traversed his happiness; however the innocence of that fair Queen, her Blood all smoaking, which came in great Floods from her Wound, her Bosom which seemed still to heave; in fine, her Eyes which seemed to recollect
their greatest lustre, before they clo∣sed for ever, objects so tender and so touching, excited in his heart a strong pity, and a just resent∣ment against the Assassinate. Fredegonda would make him know that she was no less sensible than he for this misfortune; she e∣ven shed Tears, but it was rather for joy than grief. Yet as there is no∣thing more natural than to let our selves be persuaded by those we love, Chilperick fancyed she was innocent, and that she had not had any part in the murder. A Tomb was erected for the Prin∣cess, and Fredegonda to take away all suspicion was careful it should be the most glorious of all those that had yet appeared. She affected at Gal∣suinta's Funeral, all the regrets that are usual to persons really afflicted. But the clear-sighted did not fail to discover, through this disguise, that it was she who had caused her death; and her Marriage with the King,
which was celebrated some short time after, opening the Eyes of the most credulous, inspired in all peo∣ple sentiments of hatred and indig∣nation against her. Meroveus especially to whom her new Dignity, and the Death of the Princess, were equally sensible, fell into a kind of rage against her: he resolved to be revenged at the peril not only of his Life, but even of that of the Queen his Mother, who still led, at Mans, a languishing and un∣fortunate Life. In the mean time Fredegonda ap∣prehending that Sigebert, doubting of the truth, would revenge the Death of his Sister in Law, instead of Athanagildus, whom a Feaver had lately taken out of this World; wherefore she bethought her self of preventing him. And thereupon remonstrated to the King that it was of the utmost importance to make reflexion upon the consequences that Galsuinta's death might have
that the malignity of Men made them often treat as criminal the most innocent actions upon the least ap∣pearances; that she already foresaw that her Marriage would establish in base minds, a firm belief, that she had caused that attempt; that these false reports making a strong impres∣sion on the minds of Sigebert and his Ministers, he would not fail to form the Design of attacquing him; that the remembrance of their past dif∣ferences would be a powerful Spur to excite his vengeance; In fine, that it was policy and prudence to prevent him and not to stay till he came and over-run their Territories with a powerful Army. Chilperick whose blind passion had made him forget the misfortune that Fredegonda's councels had plunged him into, did not ballance to follow her sentiments: He caused his Coun∣cil to assemble, but it was only to keep a vain formality. The War against Sigebert was there resolved
on notwithstanding the opinions of those of best sense; and on a sud∣den Orders were given for the rai∣sing Forces, and to be in a posture of marching with the soonest. The preparations of this War be∣ing made, Fredegonda was willing to go to it in person, for the anima∣ting the Kings courage; and to hin∣der him from making any Peace with his Brother; She prayed him to leave Meroveus at Soissons. Chil∣perick granted that willingly, be∣cause he knew that this young Prince had ill intentions against his Mother-in-Law, and was likewise very willing to confide the admini∣stration of his Affairs in a person of Name and Authority. Wherefore he ordered his Son to be careful in his absence of the necessities of his State, and made him in that Place Depositer of his Almightiness. Meroveus received this Commis∣sion both with joy and displeasure. As he knew the injustice of that War,
he was very glad to see himself di∣spensed from going to fight against persons whose quarrel he would have run to imbrace, if nature had not opposed: but on the other side his resentment was extream, when he considered that his Victim esca∣ped him. The first consideration, joyned to his Duty, prevailed how∣ever over his resentment. He di∣sposed himself to fill worthily Chilpe∣rick's place, & to make appear to the people that Fate was unjust to him in letting him be so long a Subject. Fredegonda seeing the Army quite ready, assigned her self the day of departure, and obliged the King to it, who sleeping in the bosom of a sweet and soft idleness, did not quit without regret the Walls of Soissons, she mounted with him into a Cha∣riot, wherein magnificence and lux∣ury made appear all that they had most splendid. The Army, which environed this proud pomp, march∣ed the second time towards Rheimes.
In the mean time Sigebert was busied with making head against the Huns, who were returned to thun∣der upon his Territories. He ha already for some time been assured of Fredegonda's Crime, and he wait∣ed with impatience for the end of the War, to go and demand of Chilperick, Justice for so horrid an Attempt. But as soon as he was acquainted that he himself advanced with a great Army against him, he could not delay any longer his ven∣geance, and was willing to sacrifice part of his Glory to so just a resent∣ment. Wherefore he once more made Peace with the Huns, yielding up much more of his Interests than he would have done in another jun∣cture. He advanced with speed to∣wards his Enemy, followed by sixty thousand Germans. The two Armies met near Rheimes, where there was a terrible Checque, but Fortune contra∣ry to its custom favoured the justst Party. She made in a little time the Vi∣ctory
incline on Sigebert's side. All Chilperick's Army was put to the Rout. That wretched King having rallied some Troops, fled with Fredegonda to Tournay, that they might not fall in∣to hands of the Conquerour. Gontran having learn'd the fatal success of this Battel, could not for∣bear having some sense of pity for Chilperick, though he had been be∣fore odious to him for all the crimes which his Love for Fredegonda had again stained him with. He was willing to be a second time the Medi∣ator of a Peace betwixt his two Bro∣thers; wherefore he used all his efforts to make the King of Austrasia agree to it, on whom it depended. Sigebert whose heart was great and generous, seemed at first to in∣cline to his Prayers: but it is so dif∣ficult, even to the fairest Souls, to stop on a sudden the course of their Passions, and stifle all the motions of a legitimate vengeance, that this Prince silenced his clemency, for to
exercise the severity of his justice. He heard the cryes of all his Soul∣diers, who could not suffer to be stopped in the midst of their carreer; and he listned more than to the cryes of his Souldiers, to sentiments of ambition which now and then rose in his heart. Wherefore he made known to Gontran, that he could not consent to what he exacted from him, since that it was but too just that Chilperick should be punished for his Treachery. He went to Paris, which opened to him its Gates, and wherein he entred victorious and tri∣umphing. Queen Brunchaut his Wife came thither likewise, after which he thought of going to pur∣sue his Enemy. The Queen at his departure earnestly conjured him not to spare Fredegonda, which he wil∣lingly promised her. He went im∣mediately to encamp at Vitry, where all the Nustrian Lords coming to him, made Oath of Fidelity to him, acknowledged him for their King,
and Crowned him. After which he marched towards Tournay, which he quickly brought to extremity by a pressing Siege. Chilperick, wholly terrified, waited only for the fatal hour that was to deliver him into his Enemies hands, when he saw him∣self in a moment secured from the danger that threatned him, by a Crime worthy of Fredegonda. That cunning Woman might that day brag she had satisfied him for all the ills she had made him suffer. She so well knew how to gain by her pro∣mises, two Inhabitants of the City, that they offered themselves to un∣dertake blindly what she exacted from them. Whereupon they found the means of going into the Besiegers Camp, where they asked to see Si∣gebert, for the communicating to him a Design of great importance. The Guards by an imprudence, which is pretty usual in such encoun∣ters, introduced them into his Tent. As soon as the Murderers perceived
that unfortunate Prince, they fell furiously upon him, and each of them gave him two stabs with their Daggers, of which he dyed immedi∣ately. This Parricide was hardly execu∣ted, than that all the Besiegers, be∣ing taken with a mortal fear, fell in∣to an unexpressible consternation. They thought of nothing more than the imploring the Mercy of the Be∣sieged, and this Camp wherein joy was so generally spread, appeared only then a fatal Stage of despair. Chilperick and Fredegonda, seeing their Fate changed in an instant by so favourable a reverse, went out of the City in Triumph. They return∣ed with all speed towards Paris, where, upon the report of Sigebert's Death, Brunchaut had been secured to be delivered to them. Fredegon∣da would have had her lost her Life. but Chilperick once wanted that complaisance, and contented himself with banishing that unfortunate
Princess to Roan. After having cau∣sed Meroveus to come to him, he sent him to take possession of Poitou, which made part of Sigebert's King∣dom. This young Prince had learn'd the death of the King of Austrasia, with all the grief and all the regrets that can be expected from a person who hates injustice. This new Em∣pire, of which he was Heir, had not Charms enough to flatter his trou∣ble, he never had a thought unbe∣coming his Virtue and his Glory. That which most sharpned his grief, was the Commission that the King gave him, which would in some manner render him an Accomplice of Fredegonda's Crimes. Wherefore he could never resolve to execute it. He had however so much command o∣ver himself as to dissemble before Chilperick. He took leave of him to go into Poitou: but, after having tra∣velled some dayes, he left that Road to go to Mans. He was willing
once more to speak to his Mother, and injoy before her Death the em∣braces of that good Princess. The sight of Meroveus caused in her in∣credible transports and extasies. She made them appear by her Tears and her Sighs, that were the first dis∣courses that she held with him. Af∣ter having entertained themselves with their misfortunes, and of what they had to do, they were to part. As Fredegonda had the Title of Queen, Andouera thought it unbe∣coming her Virtue to dispatch her by cunning and base means. She did not believe that all the Crimes of that wicked Woman, could au∣thorise an action that should have any resemblance with hers. Where∣fore she proposed to the Prince to go see Brunchaut for to confer with her, and to engage, by her means, the greatest Men of Austrasia, to de∣mand Fredegonda of Chilperick, to sacrifice her to their King, and upon his refusal, should make War upon
him, whose success would be per∣haps more happy than it had been. Meroveus consented with joy to this proposition, and took leave of the Princess. It seem'd at their part∣ing, that Andouera had a secret pre∣sage of her Son's misfortune: a great shivering went through all her Body, her fancy was filled with fa∣tal objects, and her tears were dryed up, as too weak to express the vio∣lence of her grief, she embraced the Prince several times, and felt her self fixed to him by something more strong and more extraordinary than the tendernesses of Blood. In fine, Meroveus having forced himself from her Arms, as against her Will, he immediately left Mans to go in all speed to Roan. It was there that Love and For∣tune expected this young Prince, to make him sensible of all that they have most cruel, and to perfect his ruine, which they had conspired to∣gether.
In all the way he felt himself agi∣tated with an unknown trouble, and which he could not attribute to any of the passions he had felt. Af∣ter having been received in Roan with all the illustrious marks of ho∣nour that were due to his quality and his merit, he would go make a visit to Brunchaut. The nearer he ap∣proached the place where she was, the more his trouble and his agita∣tions encreased. By a very capri∣cious effect two contrary motions led him on and stopped him at the same time. In fine, that secret timi∣dity suffering him to do his Devoir, he entred the Princesses Chamber, whom he found plunged into a deep melancholy. Of all the Darts of Love, there are none whose stroaks we receive with less resistance than those which issue from the misfortunes of the person we are to love. The affection of a fair one is so touching a Charm to a ge∣nerous heart, that it is almost impos∣sible
for it to interess it self in her Fate, by the sole sentiments of pity. The Soul softned by so sad an object, easily forgets it self to consider it on∣ly: its desires are stirred up, its powers are in motion, and in the midst of this disorder I know not what kind of languishing, mingled with grief and displeasure together, penetrates all its foldings. If it was a happiness for Brunchaut to be beloved by Meroveus, it may be said the state she was then redu∣ced to, was the greatest favour she had received from Fortune. Her Eyes through Rivers of Tears which run incessantly, sent fearful and lan∣guishing looks to the Prince, which immediately found an easie passage to his very heart: The paleness and alteration of her Face did not hin∣der the admiring still those secret Graces, which procured her as many Adorers, as there were persons who approached her. It even seemed that Love for the better securing his
Conquest, had raised the lustre of them. Meroveus was a long time mute before her, and only answered her Tears with his Sighs. Brunchaut took his sadness and silence for an ill augure. She fancyed that he came to execute some fatal sentence that Chilperick, or rather Fredegonda, had pronounced against her; that the sight and Idea of her miseries touch∣ed the young Prince: but that his generosity and compassion, would not be cap of over-coming the obedience he owed the King his Fa∣ther; insomuch that she thought of nothing else than of preparing her self for Death. After having strove to stop for some moments the course of her Tears, she told the Prince, sighing, that amongst all the ills she had foreseen, she had never expect∣ed from the utmost rigour of For∣tune, what it was going to act a∣gainst her; that she perceived her fatal hour was come; that she had
courage enough not to murmur at it, and to go without regret to find out her Husband in the Grave: But that she could not suffer without complaining, that a Prince whom she had ever esteemed for his Virtue, should have charged himself with the care of her Death; that she was but too well assured of it, by those marks even of pity that he gave her, and that he made it enough known by his silence that it was all that he could grant her. This reproach quite oppress'd Me∣roveus, it put him entirely out of a condition of explaining his senti∣ments to Brunchaut: Nothing but his Eyes had been able to have dis∣covered something to her, if she had well consulted them. The new trouble she observed in his Face con∣firmed her in the errour she was in. She persuaded her self that the per∣plexity she saw this Prince in, was a tacite confession of all she had said to him; when she made a strong re∣flection
upon her misfortunes, the ex∣cess of her grief made her fall into a swoon. Her Maids who retired out of respect, run all in at the noise they heard, and brought her to her self again. Meroveus received the first glan∣ces of her Eyes half open. His sighs then permitting him to break a silence, that had been so injurious to her, he told the Princess that she was very cruel and unjust to have such low thoughts of him; that no design was formed against her, that the desire only of seeing her had brought him to Roan: But though that Chilperick and Fredegonda should have conspired her ruine, he would not ballance to embrace her defence against them; that he was not only animated to it by his Glory and his Virtue, that he found himself tyed to her by Bonds much more power∣ful than those of Nature, that she ought not to attribute to his pity a∣lone, the fatal estate her sight had
reduced him to; that nothing but so strong a passion as Love was ca∣pable of producing so strange effects; that he was resolved to procure her her liberty, even at the peril of his Life; that he would not force her heart to any acknowledgment for his Services; but that if without doing violence to her inclinations she could suffer his Vows, he prayed her to favour them, and consent to the happiness of a Prince who might one day make her reign upon the chiefest Throne of France. Brunchaut was so surprized with so unexpected a discourse, that the excess of joy made almost in her the same effect that grief had done. Af∣ter having remained a long time mute, she answered the Prince that she should be very credulous to add faith to his words, the present jun∣cture of affairs little permitting them to think of such a design; but that if he would give her real marks of his Love, he ought to endeavour her
liberty, as he had newly promised her; that they might afterwards ad∣vise more at leisure, of what would be convenient for them to do, for both their repose. Meroveus too much respected the Princesses will to contradict it: he even stole away from the plea∣sures, that he should have relished in a longer conversation, to run and give her marks of his obedience and his zeal. He sent for the Go∣vernour of the Castle the Princess was in, and told him that he desired she should go out and be at liberty, that he would be responsible, the King should not take it ill, and that he would charge himself with his Conduct. This Officer too much respected his Kings eldest Son, not to consent to what he demanded, he presented him with the Keys of the Castle, and told him that he might use them as he should think fit. A reflexion which came into Me∣us's
mind, hindered him from re∣turning then to the Princess. Never had any fair passion in a great heart been so violent in so little a time as this was. It seemed as if Love had only spared him till then for the making him feel at once all the transports that can agitate a Lover, during several years. The possessi∣on of Brunchaut appeared to him so perfect a happiness, that it is not to be wondred, if he thought more of securing that than any thing else. By a motion of distrust, very usual to Lovers, he apprehended that the Princess once released out of Prison, would immediately vanish out of his sight; wherefore he fancyed that he ought, before all things, em∣ploy all his efforts to get her consent to their Marriage. Whereupon he went to see her the next day: The sight of her did not cause in him any new encrease of Love, his passion being uncapa∣ble of receiving any. He told her
he had found the Captain of the Guards inflexible to his Prayers; hat that Officer durst not dispose of any thing without express Or∣ders from Court; but upon his ha∣ving assured him, that he would publickly marry the Princess as soon as ever she was set free, he had made known to him he would favour his Design; that she could not then recover her liberty but at that rate; that, since time pressed, she ought to declare her self with the soonest, and to examine her self if it was not more advantageous for her to enter into Sacred Bonds with a Prince, who would make it eternally all his happiness to please her, than to languish sadly in an ob∣scure Prison. Though Meroveus should have dived into all the most secret thoughts of Brunchaut, he could not more agreeably have flattered her desires. She had made several re∣flexions upon the first visit of this
Prince. As she had apprehended his Love was only a passing flame, which would be the more easily extinguished, in that it had appear∣ed at first with too much violence, she was displeased with her self that she had not made better use of the occasion, for the deeper en∣gaging him, and that she had too exactly observed scrupulous decen∣cies out of season. She had considered that she could not find a firmer sup∣port against the hatred of Fredegonda, her mortal Enemy; that even Chilpe∣rick could not dispence himself from protecting her, when he saw her his Sons Wife; that her glory was interessed in this Alliance, since it was the highest Rank she could then aspire to. Neither was this young Prince so indifferent to her, but that Love made her give him the ten∣derest of her Vows. Wherefore she told him that since she saw her self forced to open to him all her heart, liberty was not the greatest
good she desired; that she should even consider it as the worst of ills, if it only served to absent her from a person who could alone make her good or ill Fortune; that she had been no less troubled at the sight of the Prince, than he had been at hers; that in fine, the sighs of two hearts were never so well met. Meroveus, whom this discourse put into an extasie, interrupted it, to make known to the Princess the transports of his joy, by all the terms that Love can put into the mouth of the most passionate Lo∣vers. After which he told her she must hasten so longed for mo∣ments, and endeavour without cea∣sing the establishment of their mu∣tual happiness; that he was go∣ing to the Archbishop, Pretextat, his God-father, to obtain from him the Dispensation that was necessary for them; that he did not believe he would refuse it him, having al∣ready
received from that Prelate, in other rencounters, several marks of a particular affection. After these words he left her, and run to Pretextat's house, to whom he communicated his Designs, praying him to bring no obstacle to them. The Prelate strangely surprized with such a piece of News, remon∣strated to the young Prince, that he better ought to command his passion and moderate his desires; that what he demanded of him could not be done; that it would cause too great a scandal in the world; and that it would likewise expose them both to the Kings re∣sentment. This cruel refusal reduced this poor Lover to despair: he begged and threatned by turns, but his prayers and his threatnings were equally in vain, and Pretextat, to avoid the ill effects they might pro∣duce, left him angrily, and run to
shut himself up in the most secret place of the House, Meroveus went away in such furious transports that he was not himself. He went to Gailan his Confident, whom he ask∣ed what he should do in that sad case, and that if he judged it not convenient to go seize the Pretex∣tat cunningly, for to frighten him, and constrain him to consent to his Marriage with Brunchaut. Gai∣lan was a man of a ripe and setled judgment, who rather deplored the blindness of his Master than inclined to flatter his passion. He told him that he ought not to act with so much precipitation, in an Affair of that importance; that he ought to foresee the ills he would bring upon himself; that Fredegonda had already but too much imbittered the King against him, without gi∣ving him still so just a subject of complaint. Meroveus, whose anger was in∣flamed at so free a discourse, silenced
his Confident with furious threat∣nings. He told him, that if he o∣pened his heart to him, it was to learn what way he should take to arrive at the possession of what he loved, and not to know what con∣sequences his Love might have; that he had foreseen them as well as himself, but that they allarmed him but little, that he should esteem himself too happy, let what would happen, if he once saw himself Brunchauts Husband; that, in fine, he forbid him upon pain of Life, ne∣ver to make him the like remon∣strances. The passion of this unfortunate Prince proceeded to such an excess, that his great Soul, which had ever been capable of embracing so many things at once, was then wholly possessed with it, it remained in a kind of insensibility for all other objects, and it was not known if it was still susceptible of reason but in entertaining Brunchaut. Gailan
perceiving that this Lover was not in a condition to relish any mode∣rate counsel, fancied that the most useful service that he could do him, was to facilitate to him the possession of his Mistress, since if he came to miss of her, it was to be feared his despair might carry him to attempt something against himself. After having asked him pardon for the boldness his zeal had made him take, he told him that the surest means to move Pre∣textat, was not to use rigour and threatnings; that he ought on the contrary renew more and more to him his prayers and submissions, and make known to him that if he shew∣ed himself inexorable, it would in∣fallibly cost the Princes Life, that he only saw two objects capable of giving him repose, his Marriage with Brunchaut, or Death. What weaknesses is not Love ca∣pable of making a heart guilty of? And what low sentiments does it
not inspire it with? Meroveus whom the fear of the greatest dangers, nor even death before his Eyes, had ever been a∣ble to make him stoop to his Ene∣mies, embraces Gailan, and does himself beg his excuse for his pas∣sion. He returned immediately to Pretextat's house, to whom he sent up word, that he beseeched him to hear him yet once more, and that he needed not to apprehend any thing from him. The Prelate loving this young Prince, was not insensible to his misfortune. He was willing to give him the satisfaction he de∣manded, and expose himself once more to his sight. He came to him, and observing in his Face a a little more tranquility than before, he asked him if he begun to be cu∣red of his passion. Meroveus viewing him with lan∣guishing Eyes, replyed, that Brun∣chaut reigned too soveraignly in his
heart, to believe he could ever re∣nounce her possession; that this serenity which appeared in his Face, was rather a mark of his despair, than of the tranquility of his Soul; that before he abandoned himself entirely to it, he returned to im∣plore his goodness; that Pretextat had his Life and his Fate in his hands, that as soon as he should have assured him that he ought not to pretend to the marriage of the Princess, he would run to Death. This discourse uttered with an action wholly passionate, so moved Pretextat, that he could hardly for∣bear shedding tears. He begged the Prince to believe that he sha∣red in his grief, and that it was not without regret that he found himself unable to grant what he de∣sired. At these fatal words, Meroveus, seized-with a blind fury, drew his Sword, and would have run him∣self
through in that Prelate's sight, if he had not been hindred. Pretextat, who really found by this action, that it concerned the Princes Life to marry him to Brun∣chaut, told him, to re-assure him, that since he saw this Marriage was so important to him, he would not resist it any longer; that how∣ever as he would not do any thing against his conscience, and which might displease the Holy See, he was willing to consult first the most understanding Divines of Roan, and that within three days at the farthest he would give him a posi∣tive answer. But Meroveus, who, besides the impatience of his Love, feared with reason some obstacle on Chilpe∣rick's and Fredegonda's part, was not satisfied with these promises. He would not go from Pretextat's house till he had assured him he would go that moment to consult such persons as were fit to clear his doubt.
In effect this Prelate lost not a∣ny time: He caused several Do∣ctors to assemble in all haste, they all told him it was their opinion, he might celebrate the Princes Mar∣riage without wounding his con∣science. Pretextat after having settled all on Gods side, was likewise wil∣ling to keep peace with the King as well as he could, or at least to procure himself Defenders against his resentment. Wherefore he pro∣posed this Alliance to the most con∣siderable of the City, and told them that he would do nothing without their advice. Fredegonda's Crimes reflecting upon Chilperick, begun to render him as well as she an object of hatred and contempt to all his Subjects. There was not one but looked with Eyes of pity upon Brunchaut's Captivity: Inso∣much that Pretextat agreeably sur∣prized all those he spoke to of this Affair. Very far from opposing it,
they encouraged him to procure as soon as possible the happiness of these Lovers, and vowed to him that they would secure him from the King and Fredegonda's anger, or that it should cost them their Lives. Pretextat, after so general a con∣sent, did not balance any longer. He sought for Meroveus to ac∣quaint him with this favourable News. This Prince whose passion was more and more irritated, ex∣pected with as much fear as impa∣tience the sentence that was to be given him. When he perceived Pretextat, he felt his Soul agi∣tated with new allarms, his gree∣dy curiosity was damped on a sud∣den, and he durst not ask to be in∣formed of his Fate, imagining that he should be too soon instructed with his misfortune. But as soon as the Prelate had assured him that all favoured his Designs, he cast himself at his Feet, and vowed he
would eternally remember the ser∣vice that he disposed himself to do him: he prayed him to ap∣point the next morning for his Mar∣riage with the Princess, and to be himself the sacred Depositor of their mutual Oaths. Pretextat ea∣sily granted him what he demand∣ed, insomuch that the Prince up∣on this assurance left him, to go and give notice to his Mistress of what passed. Brunchaut, who was already ac∣quainted with the Prelates oppo∣sing Meroveus's desires, was ex∣treamly grieved at it: but when this Lover had pronounced to her their mutual happiness, her Tears, with which her Face was all bathed, were dryed up in a moment, her griefs vanished, and if there remained any trouble in her Soul, it was on∣ly what Love and Joy excited there. During several hours that the Prince stayed with her, ardent sighs and passionate looks, those elquent
Interpreters of the sentiments of the heart, were even their principal dis∣course. Decency having at length part∣ed these two Lovers, Meroveus re∣turned home to pass the rest of the night. It was then that this Prince felt more than ever in his Soul those uneasie desires, those lively ea∣gernesses, those impatient trans∣ports, those sweet agitations ever blooming; In fine, all that an a∣mourous heart can be sensible of, when itisi suddenly to possess what it loves. That so longed for hour being come, he returned to the Princesses House, whom he told that it was time she should go out of Prison, and that she ought no longer to wear any other Chains than those of Love. Brunchaut, being willing to make the Empire she had over Merove us, to further her Designs, viewed him with a sad Eye, and which made it
apparent that there was something wanting to her Vows. The Prince much startled, pres∣sed her to explain the subject of her grief. Whereupon she made all the persons retire who were in the Chamber, and told that Lover that since he had left her, she had made a serious reflexion upon the im∣portant Affair she was going to engage her self in; that a second Marriage so precipitated would in some manner wound her Glory; that this might make several be∣lieve that she had been of intelli∣gence with Sigebert's Murderers; that she fancyed to have heard the Voice of that Husband, who cryed Vengeance to her, and reproach∣ed her with her weakness and ingra∣titude. This Lover, to whom all these Words were as so many Darts
piercing his Soul, interrupted the Princess, crying, that if she was so cruel as solely to oppose his hap∣piness, by considerations meerly frivolous and chimerical, he would give himself, in her sight, marks of his despair. Brunchaut, having prayed the Prince to hear her yet one moment, added to what she had told him, that she was too far ingaged to give back, and though she could consent to it, she found that she had not force enough over her self, to hinder her from following the in∣clination of her heart; but that it was necessary that an illustrious re∣venge should justifie her carriage, and should persuade all people that she would not have returned so soon to the Laws of Marriage, but for the better performing what she owed to Sigebert's Manes; that in fine, Victimes were required, and
that before they went to the Al∣tar, she exacted a faithful promise from him, that he would deliver to her such as she thought her due. Meroveus answered Brunchaut, that her Will should be eternally the only Rule of his Actions, be∣cause that he knew very well that in following them, he should only follow what Glory would inspire him with, whereupon putting a Fence to the ground, he took one of the Princesses hands, and swore he would sacrifice to her such Vi∣ctims as she should think fit, pro∣vided she always excepted the King his Father. She told him that she only aimed at Fredegonda and her Creatures: Insomuch that these Lovers did easily reconcile all their sentiments. They went from the Castle to the
Great Church where the Prelate ex∣pected them. Never was Nuptial Pomp prepared with so much haste, but one may say that it was more charming than all that Art or Luxu∣ry had yet shewn, since Love ap∣peared in triumph there in its great∣est lustre. The crowd of people which run to see so fine a Sight, was so great, that the Souldiers could hardly make a free passage for the Chariot that carryed these Lovers; and the joy was so generally spread in all hearts, that all places ecchoed the Vows every one sent to Heaven for their prosperity. That holy Ceremony being finish∣ed, the Prelate would treat the new marryed; he invited them to a Feast that he had caused to be prepared, with as much neatness and magnificence, as so short a time
could permit. Several of the chief∣est persons of the City were like∣wise of the Feast. They strove with a kind of emulation to com∣pliment this Royal Pair, and to testifie, especially to Brunchaut, the extream displeasure they had had in seeing her so unjustly languish in a hard Captivity. The Beauty of this Princess was then in its greatest splendour; it seemed as if all the Graces were met in her; and there issued from her Eyes and her Face, I know not what lustre, that had never been observed be∣fore, and wherein haughtiness and sweetness made together an agree∣able mixture. Meroveus fixed all his looks up∣on her, and could not be satisfied with contemplating her; the more he saw her, the more new Charms did he discover; and though he had already formed a strong Idea
of them, he avowed in himself that the presence of so rare an object effaced all that his imagination had represented to him in her absence. He waited with an extream impa∣tience for the end of that day, which ought to be the beginning of his happiness, when that illu∣strious company was told that Chil∣perick and Fredegonda were entred the City, followed by a Body of Horse, and that several Squadrons were perceived at a distance coming on. Meroveus, as struck with Thun∣der at that fatal News, remained a long time without motion. When he had recovered his Spirits, he did not doubt but that the King, animated by Fredegonda, would force the House in which they were, and that his Mother-in-Law would use all her efforts to ruine Brunchaut. So that to preserve a
Life that was much more dear to him than his own, he obliged the Princess to fly immediately away with him. These two poor Lovers run to take refuge in the same Church, and at the Feet of the same Altars where they had newly entred into so holy Bonds. Chilperick, notwithstanding all that Fredegonda could say to him, durst not draw them out by force; he was still so much the Master of his resentment, as not to violate the Sacred Asile of all the unhap∣py. He sent word to those Lovers that they might come out with all safety, that being far from doing them any violence, he would rati∣fie this Marriage, provided the Church consented to it. How cre∣dulous is Love, and how easily does it fall into the Snares that are laid for it? Brunchaut having still pru∣dence enough to foresee what
would happen, remonstrated to Me∣roveus, that they ought not to re∣lye on so suspected and deceitful promises, and that Fredegonda's strength lay ordinarily in Treache∣ries and Artifices. But this Lover, whom his passi∣on rendred no longer capable of any reflexion, told the Princess that this distrust would only help to ir∣ritate the King, whose sight they could not long avoid; that he hoped Nature would be still so strong in his Heart, as to overcome his resentment. The too easie Princess yielded to the Prayers and Persuasions of Me∣roveus. They both went to deli∣ver themselves as unhappy Vi∣ctims into the hands of their Ene∣mies. When they appeared before Chil∣perick,
it was to no purpose their Tears spoke and raised the pity of all the People. This barbarous King, inspired by his Wife, caused them instantly to be shut up in the Castle, but each in a Chamber a∣part; Insomuch that the unfortu∣nate Brunchaut seemed to have breathed only some moments of li∣berty, to be afterwards the more lively sensible of the rigours of her Prison. These Lovers were treat∣ed with so much indignity, as that they were even refused the persons whose service was necessary to them. They were deprived of the conso∣lation they might have had in com∣municating their thoughts, and in learning what was resolved of a∣gainst them; In fine, such as were obliged to come into their Cham∣bers, to carry them the necessaries of Life, were forbidden to speak to them, and they had no other en∣tertainment than their Complaints.
In the mean time Chilperick cau∣sed Pretextat to be seized, whom he accused of High Treason. For trying him he caused an Assembly of several other Prelates to be held, of whom the most part were the blind Ministers of Fredegonda's pas∣sions. Pretextat defended himself so couragiously, and by such strong reasons, that his Judges, acknow∣ledging themselves his innocence, had recourse to Artifice to con∣demn him. They remonstrated to him, in secret, that this obstinacy to defend himself would but th more irritate the King, who would have him owe his safety to hi Clemency, and that as soon as h should see in him the marks of  submissive Subject, he would ceas to trouble him. Pretextat suffered himself to b seduced by these captious Remon∣strances. When that he returne
to the Assembly, he confessed before Chilperick the Crimes with which he was charged, and made himself, by this imprudent avowal, the Sentence of his Condemnation. For these words were hardly escaped from him, than that the King demand∣ed High Justice of the Prelates, and said that the accused ought to be judged upon his Deposition. Whereupon this innocent Wretch was immediately degraded, and ba∣nished to a little Desart Island, near the City of Coutance, from whence af∣ter a long Bondage he was at length re-called, and re-established in his Dignity. But Fredegonda not knowing what it was to forget an injury, cau∣sed him to be at last assassinated, e∣ven as he was celebrating Divine Service. That wicked Woman made use of all her Addresses and Power with the King, to oblige him to put Brun∣chaut
and Meroveus to death. As she saw that Nature was not yet whol∣ly extinguished in Chilperick's heart, and that it did not permit him to shed so unjustly his own Blood, she only demanded that of Brunchaut: But her hatred was deceived, and her Victime escaped from her when she least mistrusted it. The Lords of Austrasia, who yet knew nothing of what had passed, sent Deputies to Chilperick to re∣demand of him their Queen, and re∣monstrate to him that they could not suffer she should be detained longer from them, without any reason; and that they were rea∣dy to implore Succours of all the neighbouring Princes, to procure satisfaction in this point. The Affair being seriously treated of in the Kings Council, this Demand was found so just and reasonable, that, notwithstanding all that Fre∣degonda
could say, it was resolved that Brunchaut should return unto her Territories, and should depart with the Ambassadours. Where∣upon she was released out of Pri∣son, and Meroveus likewise out of his at the same time. Fredegonda, in whom this de∣parture caused transports of rage and despair, did all that she could to moderate them by an imperfect vengeance, since that she could not entirely exercise it. As it was impossible for her to find any com∣fort, but in the unhappiness of these Lovers, she ordered they should be released together out of the Castle; and that they should see one another once more; this cruel pleasure she only granted them that they might be the more lively sensible of their fatal separation, and that they might have the Idea of it the more present.
Meroveus fixing his looks upon the Princess, met with hers, which for the last time sought the Princes heart, to explain to it her Love and her Grief. Never was a farewel so tender and so mourning: Seve∣ral confused sighs were almost the language that these Lovers held. Brunchaut at length disappearing from the Eyes of Meroveus, he was shut up in a Cloyster, where, by a Capricio as fantastical as un∣just, the King caused him to be shaved, and engaged him in the Or∣ders against his Will, believing thereby to deprive him of all means of ever intriguing in the World. A strange and pernicious Policy of Men! who abuse Religion e∣ven for the execution of their Crimes, and make use of the most Sacred Mysteries, as easie Instru∣ments for their bringing to pass their unjust enterprizes.
Chilperick, after having sent Brun∣chaut away, returned to Paris, with Fredegonda, and left his Son to di∣gest at leisure his vexations in his solitude. It was then that the heart of this Prince was wracked by allarms much more cruel than all those with which he had been yet sei∣zed, and that he found himself agitated with all the other passions that are the usual effects of an un∣happy Love. When he thought how treacherously Fortune had dealt with him, that he considered that it had only brought him near his happiness, to make his loss of it the more sensible, he fell under his Grief. That charming Image of the Princesses Beauty that was so deeply impressed in his heart, and which incessantly offered it self to his Eyes, did only help to encrease his ills, and augment his regrets.
But his main trouble was the un∣certainty he was in of Brunchaut's Fate, and was in a mortal fear that Fredegonda had caused her to be assassinated upon the Way. He could not conceive this Idea with∣out despair, and it was however what hindred him from attempting any thing himself, because he would not abandon his Life, without be∣ing assured of that of the Princess. It was to no purpose he inquired News of her, all People were deaf to his Prayers, and the continual Favours that Fredegonda bestow∣ed upon that House, stopped the mouths of all the Religious. He likewise tryed all manner of ways to escape from that place; but his endeavours were still fruitless, till that his Enemy her self facilitated to him the execution of this Design to compleat his ruine. Fredegonda had lately brought
forth a Son to Chilperick, whom she designed for the Throne, and fore-seeing that Meroveus, after the Kings Death, might return from his Vows with so much the more ease, in that his heart had e∣ver disavowed them, she fancyed that nothing but this Princes Death could secure the Crown to her Son: Wherefore she resolved of it, let what would happen. Of all the Creatures she had made, the most powerful was Bozon, Lieute∣nant-General of Sigebert's Armies. This man since the Death of that Prince had ever remained at Sige∣bert's Court, who considered him upon Fredegonda's recommendati∣on. She one day told this Favou∣rite, that she must exact an impor∣tant Service from him, and that she would fully acknowledge it. Bozon assured her that he was rea∣dy to undertake all things for her. Whereupon she communicated to
him her Design of dispatching Me∣roveus, and proposed to him the proper means for that end: He ap∣proved them, and they resolved to cast so horrid a Crime upon Gailan the Princes Confident, and to per∣plex him in this Affair. Bozon went privately away from Court, taking such persons with him as he had an absolute power over. He went to find out Gailan, to whom he said he was resolved to attempt Meroveus's Liberty, whose misfortune he deplored, that he had several Friends in the House he was in; that he hoped to oblige the Religious to leave him to him, and that he would then conduct him into Austra∣sia, where the Queen his Wife would be sure to receive him with joy. Gailan's Affection for his Ma∣ster
was too great to refuse so fair a Proposition. He encoura∣ged Bozon to so fair and generous an enterprize, and assured him that if he was happy enough to bring it to pass, the Prince would not be ungrateful. They went to∣gether to the place where he was, and Bozon made Gailan to expect him at the Door. Bozon, seeing the Prince, told him that the resentment that he had of the ills that his Enemies made him suffer so unjustly, had brought him to that place, where, by the means of Prayers and Pro∣mises, he was suffered to come to him. Meroveus immediately interrup∣ted him, to ask News of Brun∣chaut. Bozon assured him that she reign∣ed
peaceably in Austrasia, and re∣newing his discourse, he related to the Prince that he was upon the point of returning thither; that if he would suffer himself to be con∣ducted by his zeal, he would pro∣cure his liberty; that Gailan ex∣pected them twenty Paces from thence with a Troop of trusty Men; that they would go together into that Country, where he did not doubt but the Queen would receive him with open Arms. Meroveus, transported with joy, at this obliging Discourse, embra∣ced Bozon, told him that he would follow him where ever he would lead him, and swear to him that he would equal the recom∣pence to the greatness of the Service. Bozon told him that he needed only to come out, and that the Re∣ligious,
who had care of the Door, attended. Meroveus marched im∣mediately with him, they traver∣sed all the Cloisters, and likewise passed the Door without any ob∣stacle; insomuch that this Prince then fancied that Fortune, after so many outrages, would be at length reconciled to him. They went to Gailan and the other persons with him. Gailan was in an extasie to see his Prince again, for whom he had so tender and so sincere an affe∣ction. This little Troop, without losing any time, marched with all speed towards Austrasia. When they were within a League of Metor, Bozon remonstra∣ted to the Prince, that it was not convenient to pass further without giving the Queen notice, because that the sight of the Prince might allarm all the Court, who would imagine, with some appearance of
reason, that it would be a new sub∣ject of War with Chilperick; that therefore it was fit Gailan should be sent, who, being unknown, might the more easily, and without being suspected, speak in secret to Brun∣chaut. Meroveus was loath to consent to this Proposition, because his love drew him with too much vio∣lence towards the Princess. But he was forced at length to yield to it, and durst not openly contra∣dict Bozon. Gailan went from the Prince, in hopes of doing him an important Service; In the mean time he did not foresee, that his ab∣sence would facilitate to the Assassi∣nates, the execution of their detesta∣ble enterprize. After that Meroveus had re∣freshed himself sometime, in a Country House, Bozon asked him,
if he would not go meet Gai∣lan. This Lover impatiently longing to see Brunchaut again, received this notice with joy. They all marched hastily towards Metor, and when they were come into a Wood which was but half a League from it, Bozon having given the signal, to those he had chosen for this hor∣rible Sacrifice, two of those perfidi∣ous Wretches stabbed that unfor∣tunate Prince with their Ponyards, and bathed them in his Blood. Bozon returned immediately to∣wards Paris, to give an account to Fredegonda, and the Assassinates according to the Order they had received, hid themselves in the Wood, waiting for Gailan, who came some moments after. When he perceived Meroveus in so fatal a condition, he was seized with
such an horrour, which made him make a great shriek. Meroveus at this noise opening his Eyes, and still knowing Gai∣lan, rallied all the Life he had left him, to ask him how the Queen did? Gailan saw that the Prince was upon the point of dying, and that all the help he endeavoured to give him would be useless; so that he thought of nothing, but satisfying his last desire. He drew a Letter out of his Pocket, that Brunchaut had given him, and put into Me∣roveus his hands. The Prince re-assumed as much as he could his languishing looks, he fixed them upon this Paper, and it seemed as if Love stopped the stroke of Death, to permit this Lo∣ver to enjoy this last delight. So
that he had strength enough to read the Letter; which is as fol∣lows. I Am extreamly grieved, Sir, to see that my Authority is not yet so well settled, as to go and receive you, with all the lustre that my Devoir and my Love require. Be pleased to come this Evening secretly to Court with your Confident, who can intro∣duce you to me, and We will advise together of the means to make you known to the People, without danger. Farewell. I impatiently long to im∣brace you. BRUNCHAUT. As soon as the Prince had read these last words, he glewed his mouth upon the Paper, and breath'd his last in a great sigh. At the same time the Murder∣ers
thundered out of the place they were concealed in, upon Gai∣lan, accused him of the Princes Death; and having seized him, re∣turned towards Paris, and present∣ed him to the King. It was to no purpose this unhappy Man called Heaven to Witness his in∣nocence, and to make Oaths that caused astonishment and pity in all those that heard him. Fredegonda upon the Deposition of her Crea∣tures, judged him Criminal, and even persuaded Chilperick, who caused his Nose and Ears, his Feet and Hands to be cut off. When Brunchaut had learn'd this Tragical Death, she did not at all doubt from what hand the Blows came. She would have in∣vaded Chilperick's Territories, but as the Publick Interest was more considerable than her own, her Council opposed this Design,
wherein there was more to be fear∣ed than hoped. Thus all the De∣voir she could practice towards Me∣roveus, was reduced to the giving him her Tears, and to nourish a long time desires, without power, to re∣venge his Death. FINIS.
Books Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes, in Russel-street in Covent-Garden. THe History of the Passions, in Octavo. Plato's Apology for Socrates, in Octavo. Dr. Whitby of Idolatry, in Octavo. Dr. Whitby of Host-Worship, in Octavo. Dr. Whitby's Answer to Mr. Cressey. Mr. Chamberlain's Poems, in Octavo. Moral Essays, in 2 Vol. in Twelves. A Prospect of Humane Misery, in Twelves. Vanity of Honour, in Twelves. Bishop Andrews Devotions, in Twelves. The Princess of Cleve, the most fa∣med Romance, in Octavo. Memoirs of Madam Maria Manchi∣ni, in Octavo. The Heroine Musqueteer, in 4 parts, in Twelves. The Happy Slave, in 3 parts, in Twelves.
The Disorders of Love, in Twelves. The Triumphs of Love, in Twelves. Zelinda, A Romance, in Twelves. Count Brion; or, the Cheating Gal∣lant, in Twelves. The Obliging Mistress, in Twelves. Fatal Prudence, in Twelves. Count Cabalis, in Twelves. Double Cuckold, in Twelves. Almanzor and Almanzaida, in Twelves. The Pilgrim, A Novel, in Twelves. The Princess of Monferrat, A Novel, in 2 parts. The Pilgrim, the 2d. Part. Homais Queen of Tunis, A Novel. Gallant Memoires; or the Amours of a Person of Quality, in Twelves. Amours of the French King, and Madam Lavalieur. Amours of Madam—and the Count de— Meroveus, A Novel. The Extravagant Poet, A Novel. Plays Written by John Dry∣den, Esq; Mr. Limberham, or the Kind-Keeper.
Oedipus, in part. Mistaken Husband, in part. Notes on Morocco, in part. Plays Written by Mr. Lee. Nero, A Tragedy. Glorian, a Tragedy. The Rival Queens a Tragedy. Mythridates, a Tragedy. Caesar Borgia, A Tragedy. Plays Written by Mr. Crown. Andromache, A Tragedy. Calisto, A Masque at Court. Country-Wit, A Comedy. Destruction of Jerusalem, in 2 parts. The Miseries of Civil-War. Plays Written by Mrs. Bhen. Forced Marriage, A Tragi-Comedy. Town-Fop, A Comedy. Abdellazar, A Tragedy. Madam Fickle, Comedies. Fond-Husband, Comedies. Virtuous Wife, Comedies. Plain-Dealer, A Comedy, By Mr. Wicherly. All Mistaken, By Mr. Howard. English Monsieur, By Mr. Howard. Generous Enemies, A Comedy, By Mr. Corey.
Tartuff, A Comedy; By Mr. Med∣burn. The Orphan, Or the Unhappy Mar∣riage. Theodosius, Or the Force of Love. Souldiers Fortune. Henry the Sixth, with the Murther of the good Duke of Glocester, in 2 parts. King Lear. Thyestes. Tamerlane the Great. Moor of Venice. Unhappy Favourite. French Books. La vie & les faicts memorables de l'Evesque de Munster. Le Pelerin: Nouvelle Curieuse. Histoire du Grand Tamerlan. Les Satyres de Boileau. Tamerlan: ou la mort de Bajazet. Tragedie. Bellorophon: Tragedie. Instruction moralle d'une Pere a son fils. Silvii, Opera Medica.
Les Commentaires de Caesar, par Al∣bancourt. La Noble Venitienne: Histoire gal∣lante. Memoires de Pontis. 2 Vol. Memoires sur l'origine des guerres. 2 Vol. Lacedemone antienne & nouvelle. 2 Vol. Merovee fils de France; Nouvelle historique. Memoires de Madam de Ravezan, en 4 part. Madamoiselle de Tournon. The third Volume of the Moral Es∣says, in Twelves. A Tragedy in Heroick Verse: Writ∣ten by two Ladies. The Rival-Mother, a Novel. A perfect School for the Officers of the Mouth. The Emperour and Empire betray∣ed, by whom and how, The Policy of the Clergie of France to destroy poor Protestants. Moral Essays, the fourth Volume, in the Press.
