M2215 99827407 31825
THE Miraculous Fasting OF THE NAKED-MAN; Being a Strange and True Account how Mr. Joseph Wright, (who, for Ten or Twelve Years last past, went Naked through the Streets of the City and Suburbs of London) has Liv'd in the Poultery-Compter Thirty Five Days without Eating or Drinking, notwithstanding he had lost Twelve Ounces of Blood the day before his Confinement. IT is not unknown to most of the Inhabitants in and about the City of London, how Mr. Joseph Wright has for Reasons (best known to himself) gone Naked, from the Waste upwards, and exposed himself to the tharpest and keenest Frosts, that have happen'd in so many Years, not regarding the Admonitions and Perswasions of his Friends to the contrary, who are known to be Persons of good Worth; so that 'tis believed his Obstinacy proceeded from a Resolution as unaccountable and irrevocable, as this which he has taken up of late, being resolved not to Eat nor Drink during his Confinement. About five Weeks ago, he being a little out of order, was Blooded, and there was taken from him Twelve Ounces of Blood; the next day walking Abroad, he was Arrested by a Serjeant, and carried to a Spunging-House in Grocers-Alley, where he seemed very much dissatisfied at the wrong they had done him, he being (as he said) a perfect Stranger to the Persons that caused his Arrest, insomuch that he would suffer no Company to come near him, except one Woman. The Landlady of the Spunging-House not caring for such a Guest as would neither Eat nor Drink, (he having vowed not to Eat nor Drink till he was at Liberty) sent him to the Poultry-Compter, where he took a Chamber, and immediately Lock'd himself up, not suffering any one willingly to come near him, except to make his Bed, and bring him an Apple in a Day, to chew on, and Spit out again; not allowing himself any other Sustenance to support Nature; Insomuch that he is worn to an Anoto∣my in his Body, yet his Face looks tollerably well. There have been several Persons to disswade him from so Obstinate a Humour, and not to be guilty of his own Death; but all of them are repulsed by his sharp Repartees, bid∣ding them mind their own Welfare, and not molest him; he being continual∣ly peevish, not caring to be ask'd any Questions. He hath fasted Thirty-five Days, which can be testified upon Oath, by several in the Poultry-Cimpter, if required, and particularly by a Sober Woman that attends him. It is mi∣raculous thar Flesh and Blood can subsist so long without Sustenance, and 'tis sapposed by his Appearance and hearty Speaking, he may live sometime longer; so great a Wonder hath not been known, especially by one who de∣signs more to affront the Deity by self-Murder, than out of any Zeal or good Intent. He not seeming otherwise Disturbed, or Distracted in Mind, but able to return a Rational Answer to those, to whom he will vouchsafe to speak. POSTSCRIPT. If any seem Diffident of this Wonderful Relation, they may be fully satisfied of the Truth thereof, by the Master Turnkey, and all the Prisoners in the Comp∣ter, where they may likewise see Mr. Wright himself, who still continues as Prisoner there. Poultery-Compter London, Octob. 8. 1700. Licensed according to Order. LONDON, Printed for J. H. in Fleet-street, 1700.
